CONSIDERATIONS UPON A Printed Sheet ENTITLED THE SPEECH Of the LATE Lord
Russel TO THE SHERIFFS: TOGETHER, With the PAPER delivered by Him to Them, at
the Place of Execution, on July 21. 1683.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Joanna Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

To the READER.
[ IT is better to Obey God, then Man] says the Text. [It is better to Obey the
Devil then God] says the Comment. And are not those People now in a Happy
State, do you think, that know not One Step of the Way to Heaven Themselves; and
have such Interpreters for their Guides? This is the True Form of Godliness
that Denies the Power of it; And This the Principle, that, wherever it takes
Root, loosens the Foundations of Civil Government, and Obedience; And makes way
for the Erecting of a Kingdom of Darkness upon Those Ruins. There Is a Great
Deal in That same Old Adage; [Where God has his Church, The Devil has his
Chapel;] for Religion is as well the Pretense of the Worst of Men, as it is
the Duty, and Business of the Best. Where Satan cannot prevail for Idolatry,
he will content himself with Heresy, and Schism; And with the dashing of One Altar
against Another. Where he cannot Overthrow the very Ground of our Faith, he will
Compound for Liberty of Conscience; And some Plausible ways of Disguising it.
Next to the setting up of a False God, is the Begetting a False Opinion of the
True One; Which is almost an Equivalent; Only the One's a Material; And the
Other's a Notional Idol: The One's the work of our Hands; And the Other of our
Imagination. At this rate, it is, that we Confound Realities, and Apperances;
Fancy, and Conscience.

This may look perhaps as if I were quite Running away, both from my Reader,
and from my Business: But I am, in truth, upon the very Point of my Subject.
What was it that Ruined that Unhappy Lord, (Whose Case is the Argument of this
Paper; And whose Unhappy Fate, I Lament from my Soul) but the being Bigoted
into This Principle? And what Kingdom, or Government, where it Obtains, is able
to stand against it? If Lucifer himself were let Loose, he would Preach upon
That Scripture of Mat. 10. 28. And Pervert the Text. This Doctrine of
Resistance in case of Religion, is the Source of all our Fears, and
Jealousies, Seditions and Conspiracies; Men that are Drunk, will Sleep
themselves Sober again. We have Bedlams for Lunaticks. Gibbets, Pillories,
Whipping-Posts, and Jayles for Common Criminals: But there is No Discipline, No
Cure for Enthusiasts. Is Religion at Stake? Bring in [ a Bill against the Duke
of York to disable him from Inheriting the Imperial Crown.] Is Popery the
Question? Come to a Resolution Immediately, [ That if his Majesty shall come by
any Violent Death, (No matter who kills him) it shall be Revenged upon the
Papists.] Is there a Popish Plott? It Is but the Bricoling of a True Protestant
Association, that upon the False Bound shall Play upon the Government. And then
we are to Consider again, that This Proposition is not only an Incentive to a
Rebellion, and a Justification of it; but it makes the Concealment of the
Conspirators as much a Point of Conscience, as the Treason it self. And how
Ridiculous then is the Pretense of Defending that by Force, which no Force can
reach? I never heard of any man's Religion yet that was taken away upon the Pad.

Upon This Maxim is Grounded all that is Mischievous, or Dangerous, in the
Subject of These Considerations; And I have done what I thought my Duty to Do
in the Exposing of it. These Papers had come out sooner, but that I was Tricked
into a Delay: But Julian is in the bottom on it; And I Will forgive any man that
stands up for his Author.

CONSIDERATIONS UPON A Printed Sheet, ENTITLED THE SPEECH Of the LATE Lord
Russel To the SHERIFFS, etc.
I Have not set Pen to Paper upon this Subject, without first consulting all
the Points of Decency and Duty, which I thought might properly fall within the
Limits of this Discourse: As the Honor of a Noble Family; the Quality and
Misfortune of an Eminent Person, together with matter of common Respect to
Truth, Justice, Christian Charity, Candor, and Good Manners: Having no other
end in these considerations, then to do a Fair and Necessary Right to the
Government, within that Compass; I call it a Right to the Government, because
there is not one sound Part in the whole Body of it, from Head to Foot; if this
Paper may be Credited: And as the business has been Managed and Improved, [ The
Cry of Innocent Blood against Oppression and Injustice,] would have been a
Title much more Suitable to the Air and Drift of it, then that which it now
bears. It carries the Face indeed of the Testimony of a Dying Man: But yet if a
Body considers either the Style, the Scope, the Declarative, or the Confessing
Part of it, there is nothing less in it: Not so much as one Period, without a
Starting-hole, where there lies any stress upon the Truth, either of the
Intention, or of the Fact in Question: Now for this Vein to run quite through
it in a Constant Course of Reserve, Mystery and Disguise, there needs no more
to Prove, that it was Designed for an Amusement: for Methods never come by
Chance; so that the Artifice is not wholly to be Neglected; and yet I shall not
lay more weight upon it than the Thing will bear.

The Two Points in Consideration are the Speech and the Paper. Now some will
have it, that though the Speech was certainly my Lord Russels, there may be
some doubt yet concerning the Paper that went along with it. And this
Conjecture they ground upon the Ambiguities that Occur, both in the Title, and
in the Speech it Self, which they Reason upon, after this manner. The Title,
they say, tells us barely of the Delivery of it by my Lord Russel: And then in
the Speech, there is not One Syllable more, concerning the Paper so Delivered
than These Numerical Words [Mr. Sheriff, I have set down in This Paper all that
I think fit to leave behind me.] My Lord does not first Read This Paper to the
Sheriff, and then Own it. My Lord does not say [ Mr. Sheriff, The Contents of
This Paper are True, in the whole, and in every part of it, So Help me God.] My
Lord does not say, [ Mr. Sheriff, I do here deliver this Paper to you upon my
Death, as the Truth, and the Full Truth of my Case.] But my Lord says, [ I have
Set down in This Paper.] which Setting down imports no more than the simple
Writing of it: And so goes forward [ All that I Think fit to leave behind me]
which might have been as well said, in this Case, if the Paper had been an Act
of Parliament, instead of the Testimony of a Dying Man. And what is the meaning
again of [ All that I think Fit] in This Place? These Words by a Scotch Figure,
may signify, as the Reader pleases; either Any Thing, or just Nothing at All;
But however at a venture, a Man may conclude that there is something More yet,
which he does Not think fit to set down; And That, for ought any Body knows,
may be All that is worth setting down; Or (which is the same thing) All that
the Reader will find missing in This Paper. And then, why [ Leave behind me?]
(they say) unless in the Literal Sense, That I do not Carry it with me; for
there is no Attestation, Annexed to it; No Solemnity of Acknowledgment or
Protestation to Accompany the Delivery of it; no Circumstance to make it a
Memorial of any thing more than the Transferring of the Paper out of One hand
into Another; insomuch, that the matter lies at Fast or Loose, whether this
Paper shall be Reputed my Lords Act or no.

My Answer is, that this Paper was Written by my Lord, Subscribed by my Lord
Delivered by my Lord; and that by these Visible Solemnities it became My Lords
Act.

It was Manifestly My Lords Intention that it should be Taken for His Act; And
it is but Common Justice to allow and to understand it so to be. It has been
likewise Published and made use of by some of my Lords nearest Relations, As my
Lords Act, and with Infinite Zeal for his Lordships Advantage and Behoof. Now
after all these Authoritative and Punctual Formalities of Proceeding, there is
not any Man that has a Tenderness for the Memory of That Unhappy Person, but
would rather Entitle him to this Paper, (how ill contrived soever) than charge
him, on the other hand, with double-dealing and mental Reservations at his Last
Hour; As if his dying Thoughts had been only taken up with Studying how to lead
People into the dark; and to amuse the World with a Riddle, never to be
unfolded, after the Closing of his Lordships Eyes, till the Day of Judgment;
But let every Man take it which way he pleases, it comes, in my Opinion, to the
same Issue at last; That is to say, Take the Speech and the Paper, Together; or
take them apart, it is much at one.

[God knows ( says the Speech) how far I was always from Designs against the
Kings Person, or of Altering the Government.]

This Passage now according to the sincerity of Popular Usage and Construction
is as much as to say, [ God knows it, I was ever against these ways;] but then
if a Man looks at it through a pair of Reformation-Spectacles, it is a mere
deceptio visus; and there is nothing at all to be seen; for a body may be up to
the Ears in a Design, and yet Cry out with a safe Conscience [God knows how far
I am against it.] But there follows another Clause that seems to come closer a
great deal, i. e.

[In the Words of a Dying Man, I Profess I know of no Plot, either against the
Kings Life, or the Government.]

These Words, in plain, honest English ought to pass for Current, and as good
as Sterling betwixt Man and Man; but he that reads them with a Kirk Comment,
will put them to All Touches and Tests, if he be wise, before he Receives them.
[I Never knew of any Plot] would have been much Fuller and much Homer to the
Indictment, than [I know of no Plot;] For the neck of it is now broken; and it
is no longer in Being. And then in the Restraining of that Disclaimer, to the
Kings Life, or the Government; There Is a Salvo left yet for the Seizing of the
Guards, and for the Imprisoning, Deposing, or doing any other Indignity to the
King, short of his Life. And All This without any Change of Government too; for
the Monarchy is the Same still, though the Crown perhaps may be Translated from
One Head to Another. Thus we see, Every Line's a Snare: But I can never
believe, that my Lord spoke These Words with the Intention of him that Penned
them, but rather that Unhappily he took the Paper by Content, and without much
Examining, either the Stamp, or the Mettle paid it out again as he Received
it. In One word, Somebodyelse Prepared the Poison, Put it into my Lords hand
for a Cordial, and his Lordship Delivered it over to the People: Not but that
upon the main of my Lords Trial, Sentence and Execution, as the Strictness of
the Method was Absolutely Necessary, so the Process was managed with all
possible Respect and Justice.

We come now to the Paper it Self, which in several Places looks liker the
Character of a Primitive Christian Exposed to the Lions in a Roman Theater; or
That of an Unfortunate Hero in the Field, than the Figure of a Person under
the double Calamity of such a Cause and such a Sentence.

[I reckon This as the Happiest Time of my Life, tho Others may look upon it as
the saddest.]

Can any Man living that has Flesh and Blood about him, understand This
Hyperbole according to the Letter, especially under the Circumstances of such
Mortal Mistakes and miserable Illusions? What could a Martyr at the Stake,
under a Guard of Angels have said Greater than This? And here is The Arrow drawn
to the Head again.

[The Importunity of my Friends, and particularly of the best and dearest Wife
in the World, prevailed with me to sign Petitions, and make an Address for my
Life; To which I was very Averse; For (I thank God) though in all Respects I
have lived One of the Happiest, and Contentedst Men of the World, (for now very
near Fourteen Years) yet I am so willing to leave all, that it was not without
Difficulty that I did any Thing for the Saving of my Life; that was Begging.]

How strangely has the Author of This Paragraph mistaken his Proportions! To
draw the Character of a Seraphical, Resigning Christian from the Copy of a
Stomackful, huffing Cavalier, and to talk of the Last Test of a Dying Man's
Religion and Profession, as if there were no more in it than a vain Punctilio,
upon a point of Honor in a Sword-man. Is it become a Shame for a Delinquent to
Acknowledge his Fault? For a Condemned Person to Pray for a stop to the
Execution of Justice? For a Subject that by his own Confession has done amiss,
to beg Pardon of his Sovereign? How long has it been a point of either Bravery,
or Conscience, for a man to be so Averse to the Saving of his Life, as to
oppose the only Proper and possible (nay the Lawful and Honorable) means of
preserving it? A Petition in This Case, is so far, methinks, from Needing,
either a Secondary Motive to the Inducing of it, or an Excuse for the doing of
it, That, without being wanting to Himself, his Family, and his Friends, I
cannot see how he could have Declined it. My Lords Signing of the Whole, has
made him become Answerable for every Part: But these High Flights were
Undoubtedly the Strokes of Another Pen, that took more Care to Advance and
Support the Credit of a Faction than to keep within the Bounds of Sobriety and
Decorum, in respect of his Lordships State and Condition. There are several
Dashes besides too, that seem to be Influenced by the same Genius; and Written
and Published with the same Design; and with no more Regard neither, to the
Case of the Person, or to the Pretense of the Paper.

[I wish with all my Soul ( says the Paper) All our Unhappy Differences were
Removed; and that All sincere Protestants would so far Consider the Danger of
Popery as to lay aside their Heats, and Agree against the Common Enemy; and
that the Churchmen would be less severe, and the Dissenters less scrupulous;
for I think Bitterness and Persecution are at all times Bad, but much more,
NOW.]

It Is true; My Lords Hand makes This Clause my Lords Act again: But He that
Penned it, thought of nothing less, upon the Drawing of it up, than my Lords
Business: For what is a public Reformation to a private Confession? Here Is a
Gentleman, Agonizing in Extremis, brought-in with an Expedient in his Mouth
against Popery. What Is Toleration, Comprehension, Association, (for that is his
Proposal) to a Man that is brought to his last Miserere; and upon the Critical
and Final Discharge of his Soul to Almighty God? Here Is a Christian under the
Instant, and the Indispensable Obligation of Forgiving all Mankind, brought in
(with his last Gasp betwixt his Teeth) Arraigning both Church and State, with
Cruelty and Persecution. And what is the Severity of the Churchmen that He
Complains of? And what is the Persecution; but the Executing of the Laws upon
Others: And living in a Dutiful Obedience to them, Themselves? Persecution (he
says) is ever Bad, but much more NOW.] What an Emphatical Note is it that This
Critical [NOW] should be pitched upon for the Season of Indulging the
Dissenters; which They have chosen out for the Season of taking Possession of
the Government? But the Humor is Carried on; and there is a great deal more of
the same Stuff still.

[For Popery, I look on it as an Idolatrous and bloody Religion; and therefore
thought my self bound [ in my Station] to do All I could against it; and by
that, I foresaw I should Procure such Great Enemies to my self; and so powerful
Ones; That I have been now for some time Expecting the worst; and blessed be
God, I fall by the Axe, and not by the Fiery Trial.]

The First Period has in it, the very Style, as well as the Doctrine of the Old
Covenant. There Is the Doctrine of Resistance in it; with an Allowance (nay and
an Obligation) for every man to be Seditious [ in his Station.] The Second
Period MEANS, That my Lord Russel fell under the Revenge of the Duke of York
for Promoting the Bill of Exclusion. This Clause had my Lords General Assent as
well as the Rest; but in Conscience and in Charity, I do firmly persuade my
self, That it was gained by a Surprise, when the Disorder of His Lordships
Thoughts, and the shortness of Time, perhaps would not bear much Deliberation;
For whereas the Death of This poor Gentleman is Invidiously Charged upon the
Duke, for his Opposing Popery; the Duke Himself was to have been Murdered (nay
and the King too) by the Pretending Anti-Papal Party; and it was my Lords heavy
Lot to Fall under the Fate of That Conspiracy. And the Bare Murder was not All
neither; for Those that call themselves the True Protestants, were to have Done
the horrid Fact: (And according to the Vote) to have revenged it upon the
Papists. The Penman after This, makes the Unhappy Gentleman to Bless God, That
he fell by the Axe not the Faggot; when yet at the same Time, so far was the
Faction from dreading the King, the Duke and the Government, that Those very
People that made the Greatest Noise with their Fears, Iealousies and
Apprehensions were themselves United in a Conspiracy to Blow up All, in one
common Ruin. Now for the matter of Foresight and Expectation of Mischief; it
is no wonder for Men that run desperate Courses to live in the Apprehension of
Dangerous Effects.

[I did believe ( says the Paper) and I Do still, That Popery is Breaking-in
upon the Nation; and that Those who Advance it, will stop at nothing to carry
on their Designs. I am heartily sorry, that so many Protestants give their
Helping-Hand to it.]

Was there ever such a Reckoning cast up betwixt the Great God and a miserable
Sinner, and not One Moment left to set things Right in, betwixt That, and his
Appearance at the last Tribunal? Here Is not so much as One Syllable all this
while, to my Lords Case, but only Clamours for fear of Popery; Invectives
against the Pretended Bringers of it in; Legal Protestants turned over into the
Popish Calendar; and all this while, the Persecuted Persons are the Aggressors.
God forgive the Man, whoever it was ( if he has not sinned unto Death) that
wrought upon my Lord to Own this Enflaming Paper. And I cannot but hope, in
Charity yet, that betwixt the Delivery of it and the Stroke, his Lordship
Repented of the Temerity, and found a Place for Mercy.

But to spell a little upon These Words [I Did Believe, and I Do still, etc.]
He does not say, upon what Grounds; He Propounds no Remedy; Offers no Proof: We
hear nothing by whom it is to be brought-in, or by what means: But it seems,
there are both Papists and Protestants in the Confederacy. Why does he not tell
us who they are, of Both Sorts? Or if it be only a bare Conjecture, methinks
the King and his Council should be able to see as far into This Business as the
Prevaricator: Or let it be as it will, I challenge the World to show any One
Colorable Reason for the Printing of it, that is Honest: To give the Adviser
his due, This Paper was never Calculated either for my Lords Cause or Service,
any further than to make use of his Name as a Vehicle, to convey the Spirits of
this Venom into all the Corners of his Majesty's Dominions. But he goes forward.

[I hope God will preserve the Protestant Religion, and This Nation: Though I
am afraid it will fall under very great Trials, and very Sharp sufferings. And
indeed the Impiety and Profaneness that abounds and appears so scandalously
Barefaced every where, gives too just Reason to fear the worst things which can
befall a People. I pray God prevent it, and give those who have showed concern
for the Public good, and who have appeared Hearty for the True Interest of the
Nation. and the Protestant Religion, Grace to live so, that they may not cast a
Reproach on that which they endeavor to Advance.]

God deliver me from a Confessor, at my last Hour, that when I have but one
Moment left to make my Peace with God in, shall put me upon employing that very
Instant in casting Fireballs into a Nation, to set Three-Kingdoms in a Flame:
And instead of shrifting my own Conscience, to be Raking in the Puddle of the
Iniquities of my Neighbors. What Is the End of these Terrifying Alarums, but to
Gall and Teize the People, without any hope of Remedy, unless by flying to that
Damned Principle of Conditional Obedience, to Embrue my hands in the Blood of
my Sovereign? What Is the English of this same [ Publick-Good] here; Appearing [
Hearty] The [ True Interest of the Nation] and the [ Protestant Religion?] What
is it, but the Old Cause in a New dress; And the direct Encouragement of a
Schism, and Sedition, against the Authority both of Church and State? And then
here is still the never-failing Topique at hand, of Impiety and Profaneness
with a Characteristical Note of the other Party; As men Concerned for the
Publick-Good, Hearty for the True Interest, and the Protestant Religion; under
which Notion, the Shammer of this Paper upon my Lord, did beyond all
controversy, Intend the Conspirators: For it does not only Answer his Ordinary
Description of them; but he would have told us in Plain Terms, if he had meant
otherwise, or at least he would have cast in as much Schism and Rebellion into
the other Scale as would have kept the Balance Even. Not but that the Sedition
and Profaneness are now (God be thanked for it) come to be both of a side. And
here again;

[What ever Apprehensions I had of Popery, and of my own severe and heavy share
I was like to have under it, when it should prevail; I never had a thought of
doing any thing against it Basely or Inhumanely; but what could well Consist
with the Christian Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom: And
thank God, I have Examined all my Actings in that matter with so great Care,
that I can appeal to God Almighty, who knows my Heart, that I went on
Syncerely, without being moved either by Passion, By-end, or Evil-Design.]

We are still upon the same Train of Uncertainties and Generals. Why should My
Lord have these Apprehensions, by reason of His opposing Popery? When the King,
the Church, and the Laws of the Land are against Introducing the Religion of
the Church of Rome, as much as His Lordship: But if the Paper means One Popery,
and the Law Another; (As it is clear by the Context of it, that the
Church-Protestants and the Papists are to be blown up into the Air Together)
the Pretext of Religion is Degenerated into a Point Blank Sedition: And every
man that Suffers for Treason, shall presently at this rate be made a Martyr for
the Reformation. And again, will the Composer of this Paper have my Lords
Suffering in this Case, to be an Argument that Popery prevails; because his
Lordship foresaw the Hard Measure he was likely to have, in Case it should
prevail? Neither will the Lawfulness of opposing Popery, in any sort, Excuse
the Doing of it by Unlawful means. There must be no Seizing of Guards in the
Case; The Fear of a False Religion is no Defense, either before God or Man, for
the Violence of an Actual Rebellion. How much more Forcible then is the
Condition of Our present Instance; where the very men that pretend to Fear
Popery, are so far from Fearing it Indeed, that it is one Branch of the
Conspiracy to say they Fear it: A Second, to give it out, that the Papists are
about to Kill the King; And at the same time, to Resolve to do it Themselves:
And the last Round of the Ladder, is, by Consent, so soon as ever they have
Executed the Villainy, to make Proclamation that the Papists did it. But now we
come to the Deplorable Nicety of my Poor Lords Case; which, in Appearance,
seems to be well nigh the Single Proposition, wherein the Confessor and the
Penitent agreed; And this was it, which cost both Himself and that Noble Family
so Dear.

Popery was to be Opposed it seems, but not Basely or Inhumanely; The Guards
were not to be Massacred or Killed in their Beds; But if the same thing in
Effect might have been done Bravely, and Sword in Hand, I see nothing in this
Paragraph to the contrary, but that in substance it might have been Justified;
for BASELY and INHUMANLY are the Two only Exceptions that I find to the doing
of it: And they do Tacitly Imply a kind of Approbation of the Thing, Provided
it might have been done in a way of Reputative Generosity and Honor; for
here is no Regard either Had or so much as Intimated in That Particular, to the
Laws either of God or of Man.

There follows indeed a kind of Restriction (by way of a Salvo) That the
Proceeding ought to hold a [ Consistence with the Christian Religion, and the
Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom.] And where are we then? If Julian the
First and the Second; If Apostates, and the Common Bretrayers of Kings, Masters
and People, shall be made the Judges of That Christian Religion: Or Hunt and
Ferguson, the Arbitrators of our Common Rights? Oh how I curse the First Minute
that ever gave Admittance to any of these Mutinous and Sanguinary Levites, any
of these Popular or Seditious Boutefeus, under the Roof of that Honorable
House! Hin^ ille Lachrimae! for That mistaken Principle was the Root of all
this Evil; And the Main Incentive, (I persuade my self) to the doing of Many
ill things by the Impulse of That Delusion: Had not a Man better have a Cloven
Foot in's House, then one of these Cloven Tongues? The Devil, Barefaced, puts a
Man to his Prayers; He Summons up his Resolutions, and Implores a Powerful and
a Merciful God for his Assistance, with a Horror all this while, for the
Character and the Company of his Seducer: But in the Other Case, a Man Abandons
himself to the Impostor; Consults no other Oracle, but takes his Enemy into his
Arms, and Opens his Heart for the Spirit of Error to Enter in, and take
Possession of him, Pins his Faith upon the Sleeve of his Guide, and Swallows
the Ruin both of Body, Soul and Estate, with Greediness. He takes the Broad Way
for the Narrow, etc. God Deliver all Honest Men out of the Clutches of these
Parasitical and Rapacious Hypocrites! The Dictator of this Paper says, that [
My Lord Examined all his Actings:] And truly so much the Worse, if they were
Examined by Applying them to False Rules and Measures: And then he Vouches for
the Syncerity of my Lords Heart, which Syncerity avails little too, if it be
founded upon a wrong Principle: And no Purgation at all, neither, of his
Innocence, in case of an Erroneous Judgment.

Now to Close this Remarque; the whole Paragraph is Mystery; and there may be
Wrapped under it, what Meaning soever the Reader shall find Reasonable to Impose
upon it: for a thing may be Contrary to the Laws both of Heaven and Earth; and
yet in His Sense neither Base nor Inhumane. Julian and Hunt, make that which
the Law calls Rebellion, to be Consistent with our Laws, Liberties and
Religion: And then for the [ Examining of his Actings] My Lords Monitor knows
that Ravillac did as much; and in his own Private Thoughts, Approved them too.
Our Regicides here at Home, did the same thing, and yet their Actions never the
Better, or the more Warrantable for having stood That Trial. We Will come now to
his Reflections upon the Bill of Exclusion.

[I cannot but give some Touch about the Bill of Exclusion, and show the
Reasons of my appearing in that business, which in short is this: That I
thought the Nation was in such danger of Popery, and that the Expectation of a
Popish Successor (as I have said in Parliament) put the Kings Life lik^wise in
such danger, That I saw no way so effectual to secure Both, as such a Bill. As
to the Limitations, which were proposed, if they were syncerely offered, and
had passed into a Law; the Duke then would have been Excluded from the Power of
a King, and the Government quite altered, and little more than the Name of a
King left. So I could not see either Sin or Fault in the One, when all people
were willing to admit of the other; but thought it better to have a King with his
Prerogative, and the Nation easy and safe under him, than a King without it,
which must have bred Perpetual Jealousies and a Continual Struggle. All this I
say, only to justify my self, and [ not to inflame Others,] though I cannot
but think, my Earnestness in That Matter has had no small Influence in my
present Sufferings.]

With Honor to my Lords Reasons for the Bill; the Best and the Truest Reason
that ever I met with for it, was This; That the Exclusion of the Duke would
certainly draw the Crown after it; and that the Suppressing of Monarchy and
Episcopacy was the Best Expedient, that ever was heard of, for the Preventing
of Tyranny and Popery; so that the Disease was expressly invented for the sake
of the Remedy: In the Parliament-Case, the Kings Life, it seems, was in danger
for the Successors sake: And in the Plot-Case, the Successors Life was in
danger, for the Kings sake: There were Limitations offered (he says) but
whether SYNCERELY offered or not, he makes a Question, (for which his Majesty
owes him a Thousand Thanks) but whether the One or the Other, they were however
very heartily Rejected; and he gives This Reason for it. They would have left
the Duke only the Name of a King, without the Power; But my Lords Prompter was
Resolved, that the Duke should either have All or None; and that the Heir
should be quite struck off rather than the Crown Maimed. Now upon This
Consideration; (and for the saving of the Prerogative, and for the Ease of the
People,) The Paper-Writer Absolves my Lord from either Sin or Fault, in the
business of the Bill; forgetting upon set Purpose on his Lordships behalf, That
my Lord had Promoted the Bill before ever these Limitations were thought of.
Touching the Influence that my Lords Earnestness in That matter might have upon
his After Sufferings; I shall easily Agree with the Supposer of it, That there
might be something in it; for the Pro^ect of Secluding the Duke, was a Limb of
that Design, which afterward grew up into a Formed Conspiracy, and Unhapp^ly
brought This mistaken Lord to his End. But to impute any part of my Lords
Sufferings to the Malice of a vindictive Spirit, for what he either said, or
did, in Parliament, would lie open to so many Disproofs and Contradictions,
that there is not place for any man in sound Sense so much as to imagine it. My
Lord most Unfortunately fell into a Cabal of Malcontents; frequented their
Meetings; joined with them in their Councils. There was a Conspiracy Carried on,
which, by the Mercy of God was seasonably Detected: My Lord, with others,
Apprehended upon it; brought to a Fair Trial, the Matter Legally Proved: And
his Lordship Himself, not able to Deny the Substance of the Charge. Upon This,
he was found Guilty, Sentenced and put to Death. And what is All This to any
Court-Influence of Revenge, for his Lordships Earnestness about the Bill? But
we have taken up an opinion in these late Times, as if the putting of an
Indignity upon The Heir of the Crown were enough to make a Man Shot-free, and
HARD, as they say, And that the 25 Edw. 3. could never Touch him after.

But as I was saying just now, The Faction had Two Capital Designs in
Contemplation; the One was the Destroying of the Duke and the King: And the
Other was the Destroying of the King and the Duke. The Former was to have been
Ex^cuted by Bill; and the Other by Gunshot. The Passing of the Bill had
absolutely done the Work; but in a way of Form, and by Wotes and Ordinances,
which we have found to be every jot as sure, as Protestant Flayles or
Blunderbusses. For One Disinherison opens a Gap to Another. And when they have
once got the Trick of Putting by a Successor, whom they do not like; it is Fifty
to One, the Humor will take them of liking no Successor at all; and so by
Degrees, there will follow a Transition from a Dislike of the Person to a
Dislike of the Government: And the Monarchy it self will be found as Great a
Grievance, as the next Heir. When they are once entered upon this Train of
Reformation, there will be care taken that we shall never want more work for
the Tinker; till the New State-Menders may come to have the stopping of Those
Holes that they made themselves: All Counselors shall be Popish, all Ministers
and Officers, the Guards, the Militia, and All Persons whatsoever in any
Station of Trust and Power, they shall be Papists or Popishly-affected, every
Man of 'em; saving such only as shall stand the Test of a Secret Committee. Now
by this time we are within One Remove of a True Protestant Commonwealth: There
is One Question that I have put at least half a dozen times already, without
Receiving so much as the least Pretense to an Answer: And I shall offer it once
again to the Consideration of the Exclusion-Men, Let any Man show me One
Argument, that strikes upon the Succession of the Duke, which does not equally
Operate upon the King in Possession too. For the same Popery that unqualifies
the Lawful Successor for the Inheritance of Sovereign Power, does as well
Unquallify the present Occupant for the Exercise of it: As it is an Equal Sin,
in the sight of God, the Destroying of a Child in the Womb, or the Squeezing of
the Brains out when it comes into the World.

Consider now again, that as the King was to be wounded through the Duke, so
long as matters were to be Carried on with a Countenance of Authority, Law and
Conscience; so the Duke was to be NOW wounded through the King, when they found
themselves driven upon a Forced Put, and to the making of an Attempt by
Violence: but still They were Both to be Destroyed, Both ways; only, vice
versa; the Duke to go first in a Parliamentary-way: And as Hone said) the King
to go first in an Assassinating way But wh^^'s All this still to the Case of a
Dying Man? I shall proceed now.

[From the time of Ch^sing Sh^riffs, I Concluded the Heat in That Matter would
prod^c something of This kind; and I am not much surprised to find it fall upon
Me; and I wish what is done to Me, may put a Stop, and satiate some Peoples
Revenge; and that no more innocent Blood be shed; for I must, and do still look
upon MINE as SUCH; since I know I was quilty of no Treason; and therefore I
would not Betray my Innocence by Flight, etc.]

It was well judged, that the City-Ryots would probably [ produce something of
this kind] that is to say, Conspiracies and Resolutions of Tumult and
Rebellion: And the Evil Genius at my Lords Elbow, does well enough Observe that
there was no great matter of Surprise in it; for my Lord that was Embarked in
the same Vessel, to take his Part in the same Storm. But how comes Legal
Justice to be called [ some Peoples Revenge?] Or why may not All Criminals
whatsoever, that fall under the dint of the Law, Arraign the Justice of the
Nation, upon the same Terms? It does no more hold, on the One side, that the
City-heats should make my Lord guilty, than on the Other, that they should make
him innocent; neither do Those Distempers, in any sort, fall within the
Prospect of This Question: Beside, That this way of Reasoning inverts the very
Nature, and Tendency of them: For they are here represented as a subservient
Medium toward the Advancing of a Popish Interest, when the Contrary is as clear
as Day: And that it was a Republican and a Phanatical Spirit that stirred up,
and Animated All those Broils; and that they did it upon such Grounds and
Principles too, as shook the very Monarchy it self. But if my Lord drew any Ill
Bodings to himself from Those Disorders, it was by a Prophetical Foresight of
the Fatal Miscarriages of the Sedition that was then a Brewing: and of his own
Unhappy share in the Misadventure. We have spoken already to the point of
Revenge, and we shall speak further to his Lordships Innocence in the due
Place; as to his [ Averseness to the betraying of his Innocence by Flight,]
either the Inference is not Good; or else, All Those that are Fled are Guilty.
The Paper says, that he was [ Guilty of no Treason,] but the Judges were of One
Opinion, and my Lords Council of Another.

[I know ( says the Author of the Paper) I said but little at the Trial, and I
suppose it looks more like Innocence than Guilt.]

Can it be imagined, that my Lord did not Defend himself as well as he could?
And it is the First Time perhaps, that ever saying little to an Accusation, was
made an Argument of a Man's Innocence: But of this hereafter, and so I shall go
forward.

[I pray God ( says the Paper) lay not this [ my Condemnation] to the Charge,
neither of the Kings Counsel, nor Judges, nor Sheriffs, nor Jury; and for the
Witnesses, I pity them, and wish them well; I shall not reckon up the
Particulars, wherein they did me wrong, I had rather their own Consciences
should do that; to which, and the Mercies of God I leave them.]

Here Is a most scandalous Defamation thrown out against the Kings Council, the
Judges, Sheriffs, Jury and Witnesses, all at a Cast; though the Manage was so
Fair in All Respects, that the Justice and Patience of the Court was
Acknowledged by the very Zelotes of the Party themselves: They could not but
Confess, that the Trials were Candid and Clear; they were heard at large; the
Proofs indubitable, and seconded by their Own Confessions. But I must Observe
again, that this Paper makes them Guilty, only by a Figure, and prays for them
without charging them. It Prays for the Witnesses, [wherein they did my Lord
wrong;] but he is not pleased to reckon up the Particulars: Nor is it said,
that they did him any Wrong at all. The Penman will not charge my Lords
Conscience with Averring any thing that is False; but he has Colored it so, as
to make the People Believe he had wrong done him, and that will do as well. He
leaves the Particulars, however, [to their own Consciences and Gods Mercys:] so
that, in short, This Paper is only a Scotch Mist from one End to the Other.
There Is a bold Insinuation of Injustice; but not One Syllable in Proof, or so
much as to Color it.

But we will put the Case now that my Lord had really suffered All the Wrong he
Complains of; it is true, it was the Part of a Generous Christian to close his
Eyes with St. Stephens Prayer; but then the printing of That Prayer stands in a
Direct Opposition to the seeming Piety and Resignation of it; for it lays
Innocent Blood to the Charge of the Government: And Exposes the Administrators
of it to the uttermost Rage and Fury of the Multitude, as the most Abominable
Monsters upon the Face of the Earth; and All this, without the least Thought,
Hope, or Possibility of any Other Benefit by it, than the Tearing of All to
pieces, and the making of This Paper to do the work of the Conspiracy. Can any
body think that his Lordship would not have laid his finger upon the wrong, if
he had suffered any? Or that if he could (as he says) have reckoned up any
Particulars, that he would not have done it? He says in another Place*

[I do freely forgive All the World, particularly those concerned in taking
away my Life; and I desire and Conjure my Friends to think of no Revenge.]

These Words are only the same Prayer with the Former, turned into Sin (as the
Prophet David says) but managed Another way: And the short English of this
Ejaculation is a Prayer to Almighty God to forgive his Murderers; with an
intent to cast the Guilt of shedding Innocent Blood now a Second Time upon the
Ministers of Justice? And what does the Artificial Hypocrite that Penned this
Paper, but in the very Act of Conjuring my Lords Friends to think of no
Revenge, Do all that is possible by This Printed Appeal, to draw on a public
Vengeance from the Irritated and Seditious Rabble And once again now.

[I never pretended to a Great Readiness in Speaking, I wish those Gentlemen of
the Law, who have it, would make more Conscience in the use of it, and not run
Men down by Strains and Fetches, Impose on Easi^ and willing Juries to the
Ruin of Innocent Men, for to kill by Forms and Subtleties of Law is the worst
Sort of Murder: But I wish the Rage of hot Men and the Partiality of Juries may
be stopped with my Blood, which I would offer up with so much the more JOY, if
I thought I should be the last were to suffer in such away.]

This is only a Strain and a Fetch (as the Paper says) for the running the same
Scandal over again, with a little Varying the Phrase. Who are those
Unconscionable Gentlemen of the Law? Whom do they run down? What are the
Strains and Fetches? Or where are the Easy and willing Juries? The Ruined
Innocents? Or the Murders according to Art? The Outrageous Men, and the Partial
Juries? The People are to understand this to be my Lords Case, though the
Author himself has not the Face to make it so, either on the One side, or on
the Other; and then he has wrought the Character too High, in the Expression of
my Lords Offering up his Blood [ with the more Ioy] instead of the less Trouble
or Affliction; and Concludes with the laying of Innocent Blood again to the
Charge of the Government. Upon the whole matter, this is only more and more
Calumny, and Iniquity added to Iniquity. Whoever suggested this Dictate to his
Lordship, might have minded him of those very Gownmen and Juries, that he
speaks of, within the Memory of Man: and of a Time, when People were Destroyed,
not only by Forms and Subtleties of Law, but by mere Noise and Tumult: and to
the End, that nothing may be wanting to the filling up the Measure of the
Scandal; the King Himself comes in for his share too, when he prays [ that He
may be [INDEED] the Defender of the Faith] implying That he is only so as yet
in show and Title. It may be another Question now, in what Creed we are to look
for That Faith, which the Contriver of this Paper would have his Majesty to
Defend: Or in what Part of Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation, a body may
be sure to find it.

[I have Lived ( he says) and now Dye of the Reformed Religion; A true and
sincere Protestant, and in the Communion of the Church of England, though I
could never yet comply with, or rise up to all the Heights of many People.]

That is to say, I am not of the Church of Rome in General, not a Papist, but a
Protestant, and a Church of England Protestant too; Baring, the [ Established
by Law] College Himself went thus far, and yet no body knew what to make of him
at last. We have a hundred and fifty several sorts of English Protestants, and
consequently in his Sense, so many Communions of the Church of England: For All
the several Sects have their several Churches, and when they are put to the
Touch, Every Sect Denominates it self of the Church of England: So that instead
of the Simplicity of a Declaration and Confession, we have not hitherto so much
as One Line, that is not wrapped up in Equivocation and Mystery: but the Only way
of Expounding his ^ntent in this Particular must be by a Collation of Parts and
Comparing as we do Scripture-Difficulties) One Text with Another. He Complains
in One Place of Bitterness and Persecution, and Charges the Churchmen with
Severity. He Reflects in Another Place upon [ many Protestants that give a
Helping Hand to Popery,] Now it cannot be Imagined, that the Shame Confessor
(whoever he be) reckons my Lord, either among the Persecuting, or among the
Popishly-affected-Protestants; So that there is no Church of England Communion
left him, but that of the Dissenters. And what does he mean again, now, by the
[ Heights of many People?] the Standard of a Legal Conformity is neither Higher
nor Lower, than the Established Rule and Measure: So that upon the Unriddling
of this Clause, the wondrous Difficulty terminates in a very plain Resolution:
i.e. That the Protestant hereby intended, is a Dissenting Member of the
Nonconforming Communion of the Church of England. Thus far we have had Nothing
but Doubling and Shifting: But after a Diligent and a Careful Search for One
Clear and Plain Dealing-Period or Two, that might in some Degree Atone for the
Oraculous Elusions of the Rest; this is the Only Point-blank-Assertion that I
find in the whole Paper*

[I shall Averr, that what I said of my not hearing Colonel Rumsey deliver any
Message from my Lord Shaftsbury, was TRUE, for I always Detested Lying, though
never so much to my Advantage; And I hope none will be so Unjust as to think I
would adventure on it, in These my last Words, for which I am so soon to give
an Account to the Great God, the Searcher of Hearts and Judge of all Things.]

I take this to be the most Remarkable Passage in the Paper, being the Only
Point that my Lord delivers upon his Death, to be a Truth, without power of
Revocation; And it is done too, with a Solemnity as Dreadful as the
Contemplation of Divine Justice, and a Judgment to come, can make it. All the
Rest is Loose and Dubious, and may be taken One way as well as Another: But in
this, the Asseveration is Positive and Precise, i. e. that [ What my Lord said
of his not hearing Colonel Rumsey Deliver any Message from my Lord Shaftsbury,
was True] We Will take it for granted now, that my Lord did Not hear the Delivery
of That Message: That is to say, a Message from the Earl of Shaftsbury, [That
it was High Time to come to some Resolution about the Rising It does not
therefore follow, that because My Lord did Not hear the Delivery of the
Message, he knew nothing therefore of the Contents of it? His Lordship heard
the Subject Matter of the Message Debated; And he Heard the Answer that was
Resolved upon in Return to that Message: Which was in Effect, [That Mr.
Trenchard was not Ready, and therefore they could not as yet go on.] Nay, My
Lord did not deny the Hearing of the Answer, but put the Question himself at
his Trial, [Whether or no he Consented to that Answer:] And Colonel Rumsey
delivered upon his Oath, that he did both Advise about it, Treat and Consent;
So that it is not the value of a Single-Hair, (if there were Twenty Thousand
Lives at Stake upon it) whether my Lord Heard that Message Delivered or Not.
What Is the Meaning then of laying the Stress of his Salvation upon it: He Purges
himself of no Part of his Charge by it, but rather by the Frankness of his
Protestation in a matter of Little or No Importance, and without leaving
himself any Room for an Evasion, he draws a Suspicion upon the Candor and
Clearness of all the rest, for it looks Odly to see a man so Wonderfully
solemn, and Particular in one single Case, where it is not a farthing matter
whether it be Cross or Pile: And yet at the same time so Dark and Doubtful in
twenty other Instances, where all that can be dear to a Man of Integrity and
Honor, is concerned. But the Paper it self gives the Reason of this Different
way of Proceeding, in saying that my Lord [ always detested Lying:] Upon which
consideration it has Distinguished betwixt things True and False, by the
Peremptory Strictness of the One, and the Ambiguities and Reservations of the
Other, which is the only Key that Opens the Meaning of this Paper. And there is
another thing to be observed, which is, that This very Truth was designed as a
means to lead the Reader into a Mistake, as if My Lords not hearing the
Delivery of the Message, were sufficient in Consequence, to Discharge him of
the Guilt and Danger of the Consultation. My Lords Adviser has showed himself a
great Master in the Doctrine of Probabilities, This Paper quite throughout.
There Is but One plain Truth in it, and yet as the matter is ordered, there is
hardly One Falsity neither, but it runs altogether in Appearance and Disguise,
like one of your Turning Pictures that shows you a Beast on the One Hand, and a
Man on the Other. It was Generally Noted, that my Lord had very little to
oppose in his own Defense at his Trial; and his Black Angel has found out a
Shift for That too.

[ I was Advised not to Confess Matter of Fact plainly; since that must
certainly have brought me within the Guilt of Misprission; and being thus
Restrained from dealing Franckly and Openly, I chose rather to say Little, then
to depart from That Ingenuity, that, by the Grace of God, I had carried along
with me in the former Parts of my Life: And so could Easier be silent, and
leave the whole matter to the Conscience of the Jury, then to make the Last,
and Solemnest Part of my Life so different from the Course of it, as the using
Little Tricks, and Evasions must have been.]

I cannot bring the several Parts of this Clause to a Consistence One with
Another. My Lord was Advised against Confessing PLAINLY, FRANCKLY, OPENLY. He
Followed That Advice; And in so doing, Minced the Matter, and Confessed NOT
PLAINLY Nor FRANCKLY, Not OPENLY. That is to say; he Confessed Misteriously,
and kept himself upon his Guard: which, how Prudent soever, was yet a Departure
from the Scrupulous Dignity of his Lordships Figure, in This Paragraph; and
falls within the Compass of the Little Tricks and Chasions which I find in the
very same Period, Condemned. But where is the Hurt now, of a Man's Employing All
the Honest Arts, and Methods, for the Defense of his Life that the Cause will
bear? As desiring to know the Panel, for the purpose; Time to Consider of it;
Liberty of Challenges, and the like. But to Descend now from This Elevated
Resolution to the very matter of Fact; I dare appeal to the most Partial, or
rather to the most Favorable Friend my Lord had in the world, whether he
thinks that his Lordship Abated any thing of the Defense that he could or would
otherwise have made, upon the reason here Alleged; of keeping up the Congruity
of his Character, to the end that in his Life and in his Death, he might be all
of a piece. I must take notice again, that it is a very Extraordinary way, for
a Prisoner at the Bar to be silent, where he has any thing to say for himself;
And so to clear the whole matter to the Conscience of a Jury, when in
Conscience they must Necessarily find him Guilty, if the proofs Reach him; and
that he has nothing to say, to the Contrary. And then there is Another foul Blot
too, in saying, that the [ Confession of the Fact, PLAINLY,] must [CERTAINLY
have brought my Lord within the Guilt of Misprision.] That same [CERTAINLY] has
showed the World the very Bottom of the Business; for what becomes of [ The
Words of a Dying Man] then, that my Lord knows of No Plot, either against the
Kings Life, or the Government] when here is a Plain Confession of the Knowledge
of a Conspiracy, and the Concealment of it? There can be no Dispute upon this
Contradiction, but the Denial must of Necessity be either False, or Double. The
One Pinches upon a Point of Honor; The Other looks only like a Trial of Skill:
And so we shall content our selves to cast it into the Heap of his other
Amphibologies. (I make use of a Hard Word for a very Ill Thing, because I would
not have the Common People understand the meaning of it.) And it is upon This
Condition, too, that the Reader shall be at liberty to take all his Other
Reservations by the same Handle; for upon the Solution of This Difficulty,
depends the very Issue of the Question. There Remains One Slip more yet,
wherein the Author seems to have Overshot himself. There Is a Reproach fastened
upon his Lordships Council, as if They had Trained him into a Snare, by
Misadvising him. It Is True, that the Paper does not say expressly, whether they
were Professed Gownmen, or Particular Friends that gave the Advice: But yet for
the Reputation of his Lordships Prudence, it must be understood of Lawyers; as
the Only Competent Directors that my Lord could make use of, in such an
Extremity. Who can Imagine, now, that any Lawyer, (though never so little
Skilled in his Profession) could Advise my Lord upon Fair Instructions, and a
Manifest Certainty of what would be Sworn against him, to Smother, or to
Extenuate the matter of Fact; least (as the Paper Insinuates) it should be
found Misprision of Treason? when Effectually, This Lawyer could have told my
Lord his Doom beforehand: And that it would undoubtedly have been found, not
only Misprision, but Treason it self. In which Condition; my Lords Council,
would rather have advised him to have thrown himself upon the Kings mercy. And
there is more then a Tacit Acknowledgment of my Lords Guilt, In several other
Parts of this Paper: But I Will take This following passage in my way to the rest.

[As I never had any Design against the Kings Life, or the Life of any Man
whatsoever; so I never was in any Contrivance of Altering the Government: What
the Heats, Wickedness, Passions, and Vanities of Other Men have Occasioned, I
ought not to be Answerable for; nor could I Repress them, though I now Suffer
for them: But the Will of the Lord be done, into whose Hands I commend my
Spirit, and trust that Thou, O most merciful Father, have forgiven me all my
Transgressions; the Sins of my Youth, and all the Errors of my past Life; and
that Thou will not lay my secret Sins and Ignorances to my Charge, etc.]

I shall here Recommend one special Note to the Reader: Which is, That in Five
several Places (i. e. Twice in the Speech, and Thrice afterward) this Paper
Restrains my Lords Endeavor to discharge himself from the Dint of the
Indictment, to the express Hints, of the Kings Life, and Altering or Changing
the Government. As for Example: [God knows how far I was always from Designs
upon the Kings Person, or Altering the Government: In the Words of a Dying Man,
I profess I know of no Plot, either against the Kings Life, or the Government.]
And then afterward; [ I never had any Design of Changing the Government, etc.]
I would have suffered any thing rather then have consented to any Design to
take away the Kings Life.] And so again in the Clause last abovementioned. The
Hammering of This Point over and over, so often, was, Undoubtedly, to strike
the Deeper Impression, and to create, in the short-sighted Multitude, a
Stronger Persuasion of my Lords Innocence. But why in the Same Words still? And
with so Cautious, and Particular a Limitation, to Those Two Articles; if it
were not to Accommodate That Popular Cover to some Hidden Meaning? But the
Fallacy that is Couched under [ The Kings Life] and [ Altering the Government]
is exposed already. It is said here, That my Lord had no Design against the
Life of any man whatsoever: It Is hard to imagine a War, and no body to be
Killed in it: But there is a Salvo for That too; That the Individual Person was
not thought of. Neither do I believe that my Lord ever Designed to take away
the Life of Dr. Hawkins, though he said in his Passion, that [ he hoped to live
to see him Flead and Hung up.] That which follows next, speaks my Lord Privy to
a Great many Ill Things; And it is not enough to say, that he could not Repress
them; For they were of such a Quality, that his Lordship was Bound, both by
Oath, and Duty to Discover them; Or at the least, In Honor, and in Conscience,
to have avoided a Conversation that carried on such Dangerous Designs.

And now to speak one word to that which passes for his Lordships last Prayer.
We have his own Acknowledgment of a Misprision of Treason, And yet not one
syllable upon that Subject, in his Parting Confession. But he that wrote this
Paper is a Professed Enemy I perceive, to the Christianity of a Clear
Confession.

I hope no body ( says the Paper) will imagine, that so mean a Thought could
enter into me, as to go about to save my self by accusing others* The Part that
some have Acted lately of that kind, has not been such as to invite me to love
Life at such a Rate.]

A Man shall not need to Guess twice, who was the Author of this Sentence; for
it is written with the very Spirit of a Carguelite that makes Treason, a Virtue,
and Repentance a Mortal Sin: And my Poor Lord, in the Anguish of his Thought,
is left here to Answer for the Lewdness of Another man, who, (Notwithstanding
the Justness of my Lords Sentence,) is Incomparably the Greater Criminal. If he
ever was, or Pretended to be a Minister of the Gospel, (For there are Julians
in Black-Coats, and more Julians then One too) what could be more Luciferian;
then to turn Penitence into a Scandal; And to Preach it for a Point of
Religious Honor, in a Christian, not to Discover his Accomplices in a Rebellion.
Surely the Author of this Paper was afraid of being Discovered himself; And
therefore Inculcates the Principle, and Recommends it. Is it such an Indignity,
for a man to [ Save himself by Accusing Others?] What is it then for a man
rather to Damn his Soul by the Perjurious Concealment of a Traitor; then by
Discharging his Duty, both to God and to his Prince, to lay down This Life in
hope of a Better, through the Merits and Intercession of a most Mercyful
Savior? The Pen-man's [ Savin of Himself, by Accusing Others,] is only the
False Gloss of a Reprobated Seducer upon the Text. And then the Instance of his
Reproach upon the Kings Witnesses, in this Matter, is a Farther Discovery of
the Venom of him that gave the Dictate. This is a way chalk'd-out, not only for
the Encouragement, but almost the Canonizing of Conspirators. Here is an
Acknowledgement however, that my Lord Could have Accused Others, if he Would.
We shall come now to the Matter of Fact.

[As to the Conspiring to seize the Guards, which is the Crime for which I am
Condemned, and which was made a Constructive Treason for taking away the Kings
Life, to bring it within the Statute of Edw. 3. I shall give this true and
Clear Account. I never was at Mr. Shepheard's with that Company but once, and
there was no undertaking then of Securing, or seizing the Guards; nor none
appointed to View, or Examine them; Some Discourse there was, of the
Feasibleness of it; And several times by Accident, in General Discourse,
elsewhere. I have heard it Mentioned as a thing might easily be done; but never
Consented to as Fit to be done, And I remember particularly, at my Lord
Shaftsburys, there being some General Discourse of this Kind, I immediately
flew out, and Exclaimed against it, And asked [ If the thing succeeded what
must be done next, but, Massacring the Guards, and killing them in Cold Blood?]
which I looked upon as so Detestable a thing, and so like a Popish Practice,
that I could not but abhor it: And at the same time, the Duke of Monmouth took
me by the Hand, and told me very kindly, My Lord, I see you and I are of a
temper. Did you ever hear so horrid a thing? And I must needs do him that
Justice, to Declare, that I never observed in him but an Abhorrence to All Base
Things.]

My Lord was charged by the Indictment of High Treason, for Conspiring,
Compassing, and Imagining the Death and Destruction of the King; And the
Raising of a Rebellion within the Kingdom. Now this was a Consultation in Order
to that end: And for that which is here called a Constructive Treason, It was
much a Plainer Act of Treason then any thing in the Articles against my Lord
Chief Justice Scroggs; And yet That passed for a very Current,
House-of-Commons-Treason. The Paper says, that my Lord was but once at Mr.
Shepherds with that Company: Mr. Shepherd swears it Twice, with the same
Company: But that Slip of Memory shall go for Nothing. There was [ No
Undertaking to seize the Guards,] it seems; nor any [ Appointment to View, or
Examine them.] That Is because it was not yet come to a Resolution: But here is
no Denial at all, of a Debate or Consultation toward it: The Exploit was found
[ Feisible, and several Discourses about it.] But said only to be in General,
and by Accident; Is it meant that they Met by Accident, and so fell upon
Discourse only by Accident; And that This Particular of [ Seizing the Guards]
fell in only as an Accidental Discourse? This way of Disguising the Truth is as
Clear to any man that has Eyes in his head, as if it were a Plain Confession of
it; for if it were meant Good Faith, the Author would have strained himself for
another Invocation of [ the Great God, the Searcher of Hearts, and Judge of All
Things,] to bear Witness to the Explicit Truth of the Case. But [ it was never
Consented to as Fit to be done.] Now That Fitness may referr to the Time; the
Means; the Ways, the Instruments. They had not yet Pitched upon a Safe, and
Effectual Way perhaps, for the doing of it: But there was [ More, General
Discourse now of the same Kind at my Lord Shaftsbury's] And This was a Terrible
General Discourse, for it made my Lord immediately Fly out, and Exclaim against
it. I wish the Paper had set forth what this General Discourse was; And what
the Other was too, that fell in by Accident; And whether that General Discourse
and This General Discourse, were not as good as all one: But in short; Such
General Discourse, it was, that it wanted but one step, of Massacring the
Guards; Or cutting their Throats in their Beds; which, the Paper says, [ My
Lord Abhorred it for, being so like a Popish Practice] A Presbyterian Practice
would not have done a miss neither in This Place, if a body had had the Murder
of the Late King; Montross; The Archbishop of St. Andrews etc. in his thought.
But shall any man at last be so Weak, as to swallow it, that [ Did you ever
hear so Horrid a Thing,] was only an Exclamation upon a General and Accidental
Discourse? All the Rest went down well enough, till it came to the
Cut-Throat-part of it. And that was the Point that Startled them: The Doing of
the Business, either in a Brave, Generous Way, Head to Head; or with Cap in
Hand; And a Complement of Loyalty, and Respect, to Desire his Majesty, in These
Dangerous Times, to sign a Demise of his Three Kingdoms, to the Use of the
Council of Six; Or to a Band of Associators, for the Security of his Sacred
Person, and the Protestant Religion; I do not find, (by any thing I see yet)
that the Men of Honor (if the Paper-Writer might have had his Will) would have
Boggl'd at such a way of Proceeding; But the doing of the Thing Basely, was the
Business; And the Scruple that was made, was upon a Point of Bravery, not
Conscience. But to Continue the Story.

[As to my going to Mr. Shepherds, I went with an Intention to taste Sherry;
for he had promised me to Reserve for me the next very good Piece he met with,
when I went out of Town; and if he recollects, he may remember I asked him about
it, and he went and fetched a Bottle: But when I tasted it, I said 'twas Hot in
the Mouth; and desired that whenever he met with a Choice Piece, he would keep
it for me which he Promised. I Enlarge the more upon This, because Sir George
Jefferies Insinuated to the Jury, as if I had made a Story about going thither;
but I never said, [ That was the Only Reason] And I will now Truly and Plainly
add the rest.]

By this Paragraph, the Reader is to be held in hand, that my Lords BUSINESS to
Mr. Shepherds was to taste Sherry: And the Paper goes about to Refresh Mr.
Shepheard's Memory, by such and such Tokens, the Word is [ with an Intention to
taste Sherry] which in common Speech, does fairly insinuate, as if the Tasting
of Sherry had been the chief End of his going; Whereas supposing that to be in
his Intention, it might be, nevertheless yet, the least part of his Business:
And further, the Author of this Paper has not thought fit to give us any Sort
of Light, what his Business was: Nay, Mr. Shepherd, on the other hand, swears
that it was a Meeting by Appointment, and that there was nothing of the
Sherry-Story in the Case. My Lord, however, made use of this Suggestion at his
Trial; and Sir George Jefferies Reflecting upon it to the Jury, this Paper
undertakes the Excusing of One shift with Another: The Tasting of Sherry was
One Reason, though not the only Reason. But we are now to Expect a True and
Plain Account of the rest.

[I was the day before this Meeting, come to Town, for two or three days, as I
had done, once or twice before; having a very Near and Dear Relation lying in a
very Languishing and Desperate Condition: And the Duke of Monmouth came to me,
and told me, he was extremely glad I was come to Town; for my Lord Shaftsbury
and some Hot men would undo us all: How so, My Lord, said I? Why ( answered he)
they will certainly do some Disorderly thing or other, if Great Care be not taken,
and therefore for God's sake; Use your Endeavors with your Friends to prevent
any thing of this kind. He told me, there would be company at Mr. Shepherds
that night, and desired me to be at home in the Evening, and he would call me,
which he did: And when I came into the Room, I saw Mr. Rumsey by the Chimney,
though he swears he came in after; and there were things said by some with much
more Heat than Judgment, which I did sufficiently Disapprove, and yet for these
Things I stand Condemned: But I thank God my Part was sincere and well meant:
It is, I know, inferred from hence, and was pressed to me, that I was
acquainted with those Heats and Ill Designs, and did not Discover them; but
this is but Misprision of Treason, at most. So I dye Innocent of the Crime I
stand Condemned for, etc.]

Here Is a short Account of my Lords coming twice or thrice to Town; and that he
had a Dear Relation lying sick here: But whether he came upon a Visit, or upon
the Business in Question, the Paper says Nothing. The Duke of Monmouth
Complains to him, as above, of my Lord Shaftsbury and Other Hot Headed Men that
would spoil all; this Implies my Lords being Antecedently privy to the matter
in hand; for he takes the hint immediately. [ How to my Lord?] (says he)
without needing to Enquire either What Men, or what Business? The Answer was no
more in Effect then This. There are a Company of mad Fellows, that will outrun
the Constable, they will be showing themselves too soon, and make some Bedlam
Attempt or other, before we are ready for'em, and then we are All ruined. So
that it was not the Design it self, but (as This Paper Represents it) the rash
and imprudent Manage, that was taken Check at; And now follows the Meeting at
Mr. Shepherds; which this Paper calls [ Company] as if it were a chance
Company, not a Meeting: But Mr Shepherd speaks of it as a Set- Company: And
Mr. Rumsey was likewise appointed to meet there. My Lords Contradicting Mr.
Rumsey in a Circumstance without any Exception to him upon the main, looks like
a tacit Admittance of the rest of his Evidence. The Paper speaks further, of [
things that were said by some, with more Heat than Judgment:] but neither says
who spoke them, nor what the things were; but it is Probable they were Treason,
by my Lords Disapproval of them: And it would have been well, if his Lordship
had at least told the things, though without naming the Persons. It is
Remarkable, that the words are [ with much more HEAT than JUDGMENT] If it had
been with much more Heat then Honesty; my Lords Disapproval would have
Reflected upon the Cause; but with much more Heat then Judgment, strikes only
upon the Indiscretion. The Paper thinks it hard, that My Lord should be
Condemned for the things which he Disapproved, whereas my Lord was Condemned
for Meeting, Consulting and Agreeing to Raise an Insurrection, etc. And it is
the Law that Pronounces the Sentence: My Lords Part, it seems, was Sincere, and
well meant. It Is a thousand pitties his Lordship was not better Informed, for
People under a Mistake may do the worst things in the world with Good Meaning.
And then methinks [ Heats and Ill Designs] are too soft a way of Expressing
such- Horrible Treasons. The Paper calls it Dying Innocent of the Crime my Lord
was Condemned for, and but Misprision of Treason at the most, in Concealing
what he was Privy to. Here is the Knowledge of Treason Employed, in the
Misprision of Treason Confessed; And there needs not much Concurrence with
Traitors, to make a man Guilty of Treason. It is to be wished My Lord would
have Declared, what sort of Treason it was that he was made Acquainted with;
whether the Imprisoning or Deposing of the King: And by what Means and
Instruments to be Executed. Once again now, and I have done.

[As for the Sentence of Death passed upon me, I cannot but think it a very
Hard One, for Nothing was sworn against me (whether true or false I will not
now Examine) but some Discourses about making some Stirs. And this is not
Levying War against the King, which is Treason by the Statute of Edward the
Third, and not the Consulting and Discoursing about it, which was all that was
Witnessed against me. But by a strange Fetch, the Design of Seizing the Guards,
was Construed a Design of Killing the King; and so I was* in that Cast.

And now I have Truly and Syncerely told what my part was, in that; which
cannot be more then a Bare Misprison; And yet I am Condemned as Guilty of a
Design of Killing the King.

Here Is an Insinuation of an Unjust Sentence, upon False Evidence, though this
Paper Confesses as much, on my Lords Part, as was Sworn against him. The Paper
calls it [Nothing but some Discourses about making some Stirs] and those Sitrs
are afterward Expounded, to be [Levying War against the King] And my Lord was
Condemned for Consulting about those Stirs. These Consultations, the Court
Pronounces to be Treason: My Lord Insists upon it, that they are only a Bare
Misprison: And that the Design of Seizing the Guards is wrongfully Interpreted
a Design of Killing the King. If this be so strange a Fetch, what was it in the
House of Commons to make the Charge against my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs to be
Treason?

The Law-Part has been Learnedly, and Copiously cleared already, in certain
Reflections upon This Paper, called the Antidote against Poison: The Ouvert Acts
toward the Accomplishing this Treason, were abundantly made out at the Trial;
and Undoubtedly That which was Good Law in the Case of my Lord Stafford holds
as Good in the Case of my Lord Russel: And Sir William Jones's Opinion in this
Point, will weigh certainly against the Opinion of the Author of this Paper.

[Will any man deny (says Sir William Jones) that the Meeting and Consulting of
several men together about Killing the King, and changing the Government is an
Ouvert Act? Lord Staffords Trial, p. 190.]

Here is enough said, to set forth the Inconsistencies of the Speech Spoken,
and of the Paper Delivered to the Sheriffs: And the Disagreements of that Pap^r
with it self in several Peremptory Denials, and Point Blank Confessions of the
same thing. That is to say, according to the Popular Acceptance of Words
Delivered with Simplicity and Candor: But then in the True Protestant Latitude
of Savings and Reservations; The Connection seems to be perfectly all of a
piece; And One Line serves to Expound Another; to the Readers Infinite
Satisfaction, that there is Nothing Intended upon the Whole, but Fallacy and
Illusion; bating only here and there a Stricture, where it Cuts upon the
Government. In few words; It is a Reproach in the form of a Vindication: the
Panegyrique of a Pedant, instead of the Confession of a Penitent. The Last
Prayer and Agonies of a Dying Christian, Dissolved into a Flood of Calumny and
Bitterness against the Church and State; and nothing but the Name, to Entitle
it to the thing it Pretends to be: After so Severe and Needful a Reflection
upon this Vagabond Paper, for it fills All Mouths and Places, I reckon it a
Duty to Accompany my Zeal for the Public, in this Particular, with all
Possible Justice and Respect to the Memory of the Dead. The Unhappy
Circumstances of his Deplorable Fate duly Considered.

That my Lords Charge was Proved, and his Sentence according to Law, his
Lordship has acknowledged under his own Hand (whatsoever this Ill-natured
Paper may Pretend to the Contrary.) In one Petition to his Majesty, My Lord
does [Solemnly Protest upon the Word of a Dying Man, that he never had any
Intention or Thought of doing hurt to his Majesty's Sacred Person, however by
Interpretation of Law it is imputed to him, And if his Majesty should be pleased
to Execute the Rigor of the Law upon him; he hoped that God would Enable him,
etc.] In a second Petition, His Lordship [Humbly and sorrowfully Confesses his
having been Present at those Meetings, which he is Convinced are Unlawful, and
justly Provoking to his Majesty, But being Betrayed by Ignorance and
Inadvertence, he did not Decline them as he ought to have done, etc.] I have
the Charity to Believe now, that really according to the Purport of these
Petitions. His Lordships Great Misfortune was rather an Error of Principle,
then a Factiousness of Malice: And it is no wonder, if he were somewhat deeper
Dyed then Ordinary, that had (but too frequently) most desperate Seducers at
his Elbow. What was that Treasonous and Atheistical Libel of [Julian the
Apostate] but the very Scheme of this Conspiracy, and Calculated for the Murder
of the King, and the Dissolution of the State? And it was the same Poisonous
Position that brought this Unhappy Lord to his Ruin.

As to this Pernicious Paper, I make no question but my Lord Signed it, and
that he made it his Own, by so Doing: But it holds so little Congruity with the
State and Exigence of his Lordships Case, that I am persuaded (under his
Anxious Circumstances) he would have Signed a Blank upon the same Terms, if the
same Person had Presented it: For there is not one Syllable in it that Avails
him to any purpose Imaginable: It Pretends to Truth and Plainness; and yet
scarce six Lines in it without a Riddle. It pretends to Discharge my Lord of the
whole Indictment: And yet in several Places, either Intricates, or Confesses
it. It pretends to Deliver the whole Truth of the Matter, and yet leaves out
the Meetings at his Own and Mr. Hamdens House, where the great Pinch of the
Charge lay. Nay the Faction had proceeded so far to the Captivating of this
Honorable Persons Judgment, that Mr. Montagues Letter to the LordTreasurer,
bearing date Jan. 18. 1678. St. N. that was Read in the House of Commons, takes
Notice how much the Court of France depended upon him, for the Crossing (as he
calls it) of the Court Measures. [Mr. Ruvigny's Instructions are by the Means
of Will. Russel and other Discontented People to give a Great deal of Money, and
cross all your Measures at Court.] But to come more particularly now to the
miserable Principle that led him to his Destruction.

Upon the Monday after my Lords Condemnation, the Reverend Dean of Canterbury,
Dr. Tillotson, gave his Lordship a pious and Friendly Visit: Expressing the
Extreme Affliction as well as Compassion that he had for his present Condition:
And not without Great Admiration at my Lords being Engaged in a Misfortune of
that Quality: But after a little Discourse upon that Subject, the Dr. was much
more troubled, to find that my Lord was not only Embarked in that Pernicious
and wicked Design, but Possessed with the Principle of his Chaplains [ Julian
the Apostate] that Resistance was Lawful in the Case of Religion, Liberties and
Properties being Invaded: whereupon the Dr. Applied himself by Argument and
Counsel to the setting of his Lordship right in that Particular, with all the
Freedom, Tenderness and Respect Imaginable: And not without Flattering himself
at last, that he had gained his point upon my Lords Judgment, who promised the
Dr. at parting, to bethink himself seriously of what he had said.

The next day Dr. Burnet tells the Dean, that his Discourse had wrought a very
good Effect upon my Lord, and that he was now Resolved to do All that might
become a man under his Circumstances, and to Discharge his Conscience both
toward God and Man. Hereupon the Dean applied himself forthwith to a Person of
Great Honor, with this Account of his Success, desiring that the matter might
be Represented to his Majesty, which was done accordingly, (and the best
Office, which in such a Case the Dr. could render to his Lordship.)

Upon Wednesday, the Dean gave my Lord another Visit, when taking for granted,
that his Lordship continued in his Late Resolution, he entertained him only
with Preparatory Discourses toward the fitting of him for a better Life.

Upon Friday Morning, the Dean Administered to my Lord the Holy Sacrament,
having previously Received such Satisfaction from him, as the Occasion and the
Duty Required. But afterward, Mr. Dean finding him wavering, went his way: And
about five or six in the Evening brought him a Letter, which was excellently
well Accommodated and very pertinently Applied to the point in Question. The
Dean Delivered the Letter to my Lord and Discoursed at large upon it, Earnestly
beseeching him to Bethink himself, how much it concerned him not to leave the
World under so dangerous a Mistake, but my Lord seemed much colder now, than
before, the Dean however pressing him to Enter into a strict and severe
Examination of himself, and so he departed, leaving the Letter in his
Lordship's hand.

The next Morning (being the Day of his Execution) the Dean waited upon my Lord
again, when he found him yet cooler, and utterly Declining any Occasion of
farther Discourse upon the Old Matter. Upon this, the Dr. Desisted, and
Attended him afterward, and Prayed with him on the Scaffold: Discharging
himself, from first to last in All the Parts of a Churchman, and of a Friend. A
True Copy both of the Letter, and of the Prayer hereafter follows,

July 20. 1683. My Lord,
I Was heartily glad to see your Lordship this Morning in that calm and devout
temper at Receiving the Sacrament, but Peace of mind unless it be well-grounded
will avail little: And because transient Discourse many times has little
effect for want of time to weigh and consider it, therefore in tender
compassion of your Lordships Case, and from all the good Will that one man can
b^ar to another, I do humbly offer to your Lordships deliberate thoughts these
following Considerations concerning the Points of Resi^^ance, if our Religion
and Rights should be invaded, as your Lordship puts the Case, concerning which
I understood by Dr. Burnet, that your Lordship had once received Satisfaction,
and am sorry to find a change.

First, That the Christian Religion does plainly forbid the Resistance of
Authority.

Secondly, That though our Religion be Established by Law, (which your Lordship
urges as a difference between our Case, and that of the Primitive Christians)
yet in the same Law, which Establishes our Religion it is declared, That it is
not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms, etc. Besides, That
there is a particular Law declaring the Power of the Militia to be solely in
the King. And this ties the hands of Subjects, though the Law of Nature and the
General Rules of Scripture h^d left us at liberty; which I believe they do not,
because the Government and Peace of Humane Society could not w^ll subsist upon
these Terms.

Thirdly, Your Lordships Opinion is contrary to the declared Doctrine of all
Protestant Churches: and though some particular Persons have taught otherwise,
yet they have been contradicted herein and condemned for it by the Generality
of Protestants: And I beg of your Lordship to consider how it will agree with
an avowed asserting of the Protestant Religion, to go contrary to the General
Doctrine of the Protestants* My End in this is to convince Your Lordship, that
You are in a very Great and Dangerous Mistake, and being so convinced, that
which before was a Sin of Ignorance, will appear of a much more heinous Nature,
as in Truth it is, and call for a very particular and deep Repentance; which if
Your Lordship sincerely exercise upon the sight of your Error, by a Penitent
Acknowledgment of it to God and Men, You will not only obtain Forgiveness of
God, but prevent a mighty Scandal to the Reformed Religion. I am very loath to
give Your Lordship any disquiet in the Distress You are in, which I commiserate
from my heart, but am much more concerned, that You do not leave the World in
a delusion and false Peace, to the hindrance of Your Eternal Happiness. I
heartily pray for You, and beseech Your Lordship to believe that I am with the
greatest Syncerity and Compassion in the World,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and Afflicted Servant, John Tillotson.


Dr. Tillotson's Prayer upon the Scaffold with the Late LORD RUSSEL.
O Almighty and Merciful God, with whom alone, live the Spirits of Just Men
made perfect, after they are delivered from these earthly Prisons, we humbly
commend the Soul of this our dear Brother into thy hands, as into the hands of
a Faithful Creator, and most merciful Savior; humbly beseeching thee that it
may be precious in thy sight, wash it, O Lord, from all it is guilt in the blood
of the immaculate Lamb that was slain to take away the Sins of the World; That
whatsoever Defilements it may have Contracted in the midst of this wicked
World, by the lusts of the flesh, or the wiles of Satan, being purged and done
away, by a sincere and unfeigned Repentance, through thy Infinite Mercy and
Goodness in our Lord Jesus Christ, it may be presented pure and holy, and
without spot, before thee; O Lord we humbly beseech thee to support thy Servant
and stand by him in this last and great Contest, deliver him from the pains of
Eternal Death, and save him, O Lord, for thy Mercies sake, and grant that all
we who survive, by this, and other Instances of thy Providence, may learn our
Duty to God and the King, and that by this and other like Spectacles of our
Mortality, we may see how frail and uncertain our Condition is in this World,
that it is all but vanity, and teach us so to number our days, that we may
seriously apply our hearts to that holy and heavenly Wisdom while we live,
which may bring us to Life Everlasting through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose
holy Name and Words we conclude our Prayers.

Our Father, etc.

Having done this Right to the Truth by an Impartial Report of the Matter of
Fact; And this Further Right to the Reverend Dean, to Publish the Right that he
has done to Himself in this Affair, I shall Super-add this Note, that he had
nothing to do in the Paper that has made all this Noise; but to Condemn so much
as he Heard of it. And in Truth it was Observed, that while my Lord and the
Dean were together, they had Neither Pen, Ink, nor Paper. Now though it is True
again, that when my Lord, and Doctror Burnet were together, there was Pen, Ink,
and Paper called for; It Concludes nothing yet as to the Writing of this Paper.
It is said indeed, that upon Captain Richardsons speaking to Dr. Burn^t about
my Lords making a Speech; he was answered by the Doctor, that My Lord only
intended to speak a Few Words upon the Scaffold; And that what he had to say
else, He would leave in a Paper he intended to deliver to the Sheriffs.

There is more then enough said in Reflection upon this Scandalous Paper; that
takes so much pains to possess the World that this Unhappy Execution was a
Murder. There was, Effectually, a Murder in the Case. It was in the Law an Act
of Justice: But it was in Him that Poyson^d this Unfortunate Gentleman with
that Seditious Maxim that brought him to the Block, and that afterward
Encouraged him to persist in it: It was in Him, I say, the Basest, and the most
Treacherous of Murders: And I look upon Julian, with a Respect to this
Conspiracy only as the Rule to the Example, the One Directs the Rebellion; and
the Other Proves it.

The End.

