THE Freeborn Subject: OR, THE Englishmans Birthright: Asserted against all
TYRANNICAL VSVRPATIONS EITHER IN CHURCH OR STATE.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, at the
West End, 1679.

THE FREEBORN SUBJECT; OR, The Englishmans Birthright: Asserted against all
Tyrannical Usurpations, either in RELIGION or STATE.
NOw to take my Text to pieces; By a Freeborn Subject, is meant a person that
is born under the Protection of the Law; and thereby entitled to certain known
Immunities and Privileges, as his Birthright. But then he is likewise tied up;
by the same Law, to certain Rules and Measures of Obedience to Government. So
that he seems to be Free in one respect; and Subject in another. Now how far he
is Enfranchised by this Liberty, and how far Limited by that Subjection, will
be the Question.

You shall seldom or never find this expression used, but as a kind of Popular
Challenge; and still in favor of the Freeborn, without any regard at all to
the Subject. Whereas we should as well consider the Authority of an Imperial
Prince on the one hand; as the Privileges of a Freeborn People on the other.
And not so far mistake, either the Force or the Intent of Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right; (by which we claim to these Liberties) as if by being
discharged of our Vassalage, we were also discharged of our Allegiance.

The Englishmans Birthright sounds much to the same purpose too, with the
Freeborn Subject: Only there lies a stronger Emphasis (in Common Speech) upon
the word Englishman. As when we speak of a Brave Man, that stands up for the
Honor and Defense of his Country; such a one, we cry is a Right Englishman, a
True Englishman.

Now* to the end that we may not be misled by the Sound and Jingle of Words;
into a false, and dangerous Notion of Things; let us repair to the Law, which
is the Known, and Common Standard of our Civil Actions: that we may not either
give up our Own just Rights on the One hand, or Encroach upon his Majesty's, on
the Other. For it is the Law that marquis out the Metes and Bounds both of King
and People: that shows how far we are to Go, and where to Stop; and teaches us
to distinguish betwixt Liberty and Sedition; betwixt a True, Right Old
Englishman, and a shuffling, double-hearted Moderm Impostor.

As we have our Legal Rights, so we lie under Legal Restrictions too: And the
King likewise has his Legal Prerogatives, which are also accompanied with
certain Legal Limitations. From whence it appears, that the Law serves as a
Common-Rule and lies as a Common Obligation both upon Prince and Subject.

And yet though there be a Duty Incumbent on both sides, there is a great
difference even in point of Law it self, betwixt the Kings Violation of the
Law, and the Peoples. The King breaks his Word, the People forfeit their Bond.
They are Both of them Bound alike in Conscience; but the People are over and
above engaged upon a Penalty. It makes a huge noise in the World, that Kings
are bound by the Laws as well as the People. And so they are, in Honor and
Conscience, but no further: And this arises from the very Nature of Government
it self: For wheresoever the Last Appeal lies, there rests the Government. And
there can be no Government at all, without the Establishment of a Final Result,
for otherwise the King shall Judge the People and the People Rejudge the King;
and so the Controversy shall run round World without end. Take notice now that
all Appeals move from a Lower Court, or Sentence, to a Superior; and consider
then, how ridiculous it were to Appeal Downward; or from Sovereign Princes, to
any other Power, than to the King of Kings, who alone is above them.

But let us put the Case now, that a Prince mis-governs: How shall he be tried?
It must be either By the Law or Without it. If the Former, where is the Law
that says, The People may call their Sovereign to account, in case he does not
Govern according to Law? Or if they cannot produce such a Law, the Assertion is
Treasonous. If the Latter, we are at our Old Salus Populi again: Which, in one
word, is no other then a direct Dissolution of the Law, and a Prostitution of
Authority to the Will of the Multitude.

Having already stated the Conditions, and Advantages of a Freeborn Subject,
and of our English Birthrights: we shall now proceed to the asserting of these
our Privileges, against all Tyrannical Usurpations, either in matter of
Religion or State. And first a word of Tyrannical Usurpations.

Under this Head may be comprised all sorts of Violence and Oppression; (by
what means, or Instruments soever exercised) contrary to Law and Justice. By
Tyranny, we do understand An Unjust Domination; or an Abuse of a Lawful Power,
to the injury of the People: as if a Prince should turn a Legal Government into
and Arbitrary. Now we commonly reckon That for an Usurpation, when One man
takes upon him the Right of another, without any Title to it at all: As our
late Oliver was called Usurper. And there are also Mixed Cases; (as was That
before mentioned) where Tyranny and Usurpation meet Both in One.

According to This Division we may be oppressed three several ways; either
Immediately by the Prince himself; or Mediately by his Ministers, as by special
Direction and Command; Or otherwise we may be simply oppressed, one Subject by
another. But still these Oppressions are Illegal every way; and the Question is
Now, what Legal Relief in the Case? For as the Law entitles us to the
Privileges we claim, and to the enjoyment of them: so does the Law likewise
appoint, and chalk us out the Methods of Asserting and Maintaining our Rights,
in case they be invaded. So that we must only Oppose Legal Remedies to Illegal
Wrongs; and not think to deliver our selves from one Violence by another. For
Popular Commotions are the most Criminal and Dangerous of all sorts of
Oppressions. Other Oppressions may lie Heavy upon particular Persons; but This
is an Oppression of Law and Government it self. And it is as Foolish as it is
Impious; For while we Fancy all things to be Lawful for us, because we suffer
many things against Law, we incur a Legal Forfeiture of all our Privileges, by
the unlawful manner of endeavoring to preserve them.

It is a Maxim in Law, but not in Morals, that the King can do no wrong; for he
may shed Innocent Blood with his own hand, which is the Greatest of Wrongs; but
it is not looked upon however as a Wrong in Law, because there is no Law to
question him for it. The Ordinary shift upon this Point is, That the King may
be sued, and that consequently he stands answerable to the Law. To which I say,
with a Distinction, that the King has a Twofold Right, a Right of Dominion,
and a Right of Propriety. In the Former (which is the point in Question) there
lies no Action of Law: In the other there may, for otherwise he might take away
any man's Freehold at pleasure. And were it not a wild thing to imagine
otherwise, when according to the very Style of the Law, all Writs, Trials, and
Forms of Justice run in the Kings name? So that admitting their Supposition,
the King sits Judge upon himself.

When the late Underminers of the Government found that they could not shake
the Royal Authority This way, (for it was attempted) they had recourse
afterward to the Fancy of a Coordinate Government; making the King, Lords,
and Commons, to be the Three Estates; in stead of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal; and the Commons represented in Parliament. Which mistake being
swallowed by the Undiscerning Multitude, proved the Foundation of our Common
Ruin. This Whimsie being now set on foot again, I shall bestow a Word or two
upon the Unmasking of that pernicious and senseless Pretense, and make it
appear, that the Position is Destructive, not only of the Three Estates, (as
some account them) but of the very Being of Parliaments.

Supposing the Government to be Coordinate, (as these People will have it) any
Tw^ Parts of the Three may Out the Third. The King lies at the Mercy of the
Lords and Commons; the Commons at the Mercy of the King and the Lords; and the
Lords as much at the Mercy of the King and Commons. So that at this rate no
body knows to day, what Government we shall have to morrow. This is the Just
Ratio of a Coordinate State; and then to color the Invention, they tell us
that the King is Singulis Major, Vniversis Minor; Greater then the Diffusive
Body of the People, but Inferior to the Collective. Which strikes at the very
Root of Parliaments; for if it be True, that a Prince by calling of a
Parliament dethrones himself; what Prince would ever call a Parliament?

As it is clear that Sovereign Power is Sacred, and not to be Touched; it is no
less Clear on the other side, that all the Executors of Illegal Powers and
Violences may be questioned; for that the Law puts no difference betwixt one
Subject and another, but provides for Common Justice betwixt man and man,
without any difference of regard to Dignities or Persons. And as it appoints us
such a Relief in such and such Cases; so does it likewise ordain and direct
such and such Punishments in other Cases, according as the wisdom of the
Lawmakers has found convenient. So that he is upon his Good behavior, either
for Redress, or Punishment.

But I hear many people say, that it is True, the Law provides well enough for
us; but what if Justice be overaw'd and obstructed? My answer is, that we are
to help our selves by Law, if we can; but if the Law will not relieve us, we
must be Patient; especially in a Case, where it is impossible to find a Remedy
that is not worse then the Disease. Let us but look a little into the
Consequences of passing That Line, and taking upon us to be our Own Carvers.
First; by Transgressing the Bounds of the Law, we cast our selves out of the
Protection of it. Secondly, by declining the Common Equity of it, we run into
Partialities and Factions, and every man makes himself both Judge and Party.
Thirdly, from a Certain and Infallible Provision for the Stating and
Determining of all Controversies; we transport our selves into an Absolute
Impossibility of ever Reconciling them, I might have said, of Understanding
them: For Fourthly; from matter of Fact, we betake our selves to Questions and
Propositions of Notion; as the Law of Nature, Self-preservation, etc. which
signify nothing more, then to puzzle the Multitude, and confound the Order of
Civil Administration. For there can be no Proof made of a Thought; but under
Countenance of These Blinds, the Ambitious, the Revengeful, the Necessitous,
the Factious, the Covetous, the Malicious, and the like, Stalk to their
Unrighteous and Self Ends. And what is the Issue of all This, but that, when by
Coveting more then did belong to us, we have lost what we had: when by
forsaking the Known, and the Safe ways of Peace and Justice, we have wandered
out our Lives in Pathless, Dangerous, and Uncomfortable Errors; without either
Light or Guide to set us right again: When we have been led by a False Show of
Liberty, as by an Ignis Fatuus, through Boggs and Ditches, and all in pursuit
of a Sluttish Vapor: When by breaking the Bond of Humane Society, we have
turned a Community into a Desert; and like Wild Beasts, torn one another to
pieces. What is the fruit at last of all our Wild Adventures? but Bondage,
Beggary, Shame, and Late Repentance? So that our Best and Surest Way will be,
for every man to look to his Own Province, without intermeddling in the
Jurisdiction of Another.

Having sufficiently discoursed upon the Quality of Tyrannical Usurpations, we
come now to Religion and State, as the Subject Matter they are to work upon:
Wherein we shall Distinguish betwixt Tyranny, as an Act of the Government; and
Usurpation, as a Claim of the People.

Touching the Power of Kings, and the Possibility of Tyranny, in the matter of
Religion; the Question falls into a very narrow Compass: for Conscience lies
out of the Reach of Law; And the Powers of Government are only exercised upon
Ouvert, and Sensible Acts. But the point in hand however is This: First, What
is intended by the Tyranny here spoken of? Secondly, How are we to behave our
selves, in Case of such Tyranny?

There may be Tyranny, either in forcing a man, (upon a Penalty) to Renounce
the Right Religion, or to Embrace a False One: Or in Prohibiting to any man,
the Freedom of Worship after his Own way. And all these Cases vary according to
the Constitution of the Government, and the Conscience of the Governor. For
the same thing may be Lawful in One place, and not in Another; and to One
Person too, and not to Another: And it may be more or less Excusable also,
according to These Circumstances. In short; It is a Tyranny, to press a man to
a False Worship; A Tyranny to punish him for adhering to a True one; A Tyranny
to hinder any man from Worshipping God as he Ought: And the Tyranny it self, is
yet farther aggravated, if it be done in Opposition to the Law of the Land; And
to the Conscience of the Ruler, as well as to Common Equity. But still when I
have lost Liberty, Estate, nay and Life it self, by reason of Religion; my
Religion it self is preserved Inviolate, even when my Body lies in Ashes. The
Prince that Acts all these Tyrannies, has undoubtedly a great deal to answer
for to Almighty God: But what Remedy is there for the Subject that Suffers
them? And let That be the next Point.

In Case of such Persecutions as aforesaid, I know no more then These Four ways
of Application, for Relief; Either by Prayer to Almighty God; By Recourse to
the Law, for Protection; By Petition to the Government, for Indulgence, and
Compassion; Or else, to try if we can deliver our selves by Direct Force.

The First, is a sure Expedient in all Cases: for where we are not Delivered
from our Afflictions, Our Afflictions are yet, by Gods Providence, turned into
Comforts. In the Second place, we may make the best of the Law, provided that
we do not make the Law Felo de se, and raise Inferences of Equitable
Supposition, in Contradiction to the Naked and Express Letter of it. As for
Example; By the Law, we have a Lawful Right to such and such Liberties; and
herein we have the Law to Friend. But if we make any attempt to compass these
Lawful Ends by Unlawful Means, the Law is point: blank against us.

Our Next Resort is, by Petition to the Government; which is a Course, Laudable
and Fair; provided we keep clear of Rancour and Clamor; and address to the
Magistrate not to the Multitude: For it is not the End of those Popular Papers
to Solicit Relief, but to Provoke Tumults; and under the Countenance of
begging Compassion toward the People, to stir up Sedition against the
Government. For Lewd Characters of Men breed Ill Thoughts of them; and Evil
Thoughts break out into Wicked Actions; and the readiest way in the World to a
Rebellion is, to startle the Vulgar with an Apprehension of Tyranny. If all
this will not do, there remains nothing more, but either Patience or Force. The
Former was of the Primitive, and the Later has been the practice of our Modern
Christians; but whether they do Well or Ill in it, shall be now examined.

It has done a great deal of Mischief in the World, the Misconstruction of
That Text that bids us Obey God rather then man. For the People are not well
aware, that, First, in Obeying of Magistrates in all Warrantable Cases, they
Obey God also, in That Civil Obedience. Secondly, Supposing the Command of the
Supreme Magistrate to be directly Opposite to the Express Will of God: I will
not Obey him in That Case, but I am not yet discharged of my Duty to him in
Other Cases: for he is never the less a Lawful Magistrate; (even for not being
a Christian) and I will not Resist him in Any: Thirdly, the Law of This Nation
makes all Motions and Insurrections whatsoever, without Legal Authority, to be
Riotous, Seditious, or Treasonous Assemblies. Fourthly, Allowing this Latitude
to the People, that they may Confederate, and Rise, for the Defense of
Religion; they may as well rise for the Subversion of it: for we have but their
bare Words, either for the One, or for the Other. Fifthly, It Authorizes every
man to set up a Church by himself, in his Own Fancy; and in stead of carrying
his Body to the Doctor for a Fit of the Spleen, he brings his Conscience,
forsooth, to the Government, to be cured of a Revelation. And this License, in
one word, sets up the Crotchet of every Sickly Brain, in Competition with
Christianity i^ self, and the Politic Peace.

What if I should say now, that there was never any War in the World undertaken
purely upon the Account of Religion, that was not utterly Unlawful; unless in
Cases of Gods Extraordinary and Peculiar Dispensations. For, First, What are
the Certain and Necessary Effects of War, but Blood, Rapine, Oppression; the
Multiplying of so many Widows and Orphans; Depopulating of Countries, and
Kingdoms; and the Violation of all Rights, Sacred and Profane? Are These now
the Works of the Gospel? And what is Religion the better for all this? These
are Sacrifices for Moloch; and This is a Religion, and an Oblation, fitter for
an Insensible and Implacable Idol, then for the God of Love and Peace.

Let us but consider now, what a Deluge of Impiety flows in upon Humane Nature
with This Opinion. The Papist falls foul upon the Protestant; the Protestant
upon the Papist; the Christian upon the Mahumetan, the Mahumetan upon the
Christian: It sets all People, and all Parties together by the Ears, only for
Diversity of Thoughts. It makes Authority Ridiculous, it frustrates the very
Laws of Nations, and lays the World again in Common. Now if This be so
Pestilent a Doctrine, taken only at Large; How much more Diabolical is it, for
Subjects, upon This Ungodly Pretext, to go about to Embroyl a Well Regulated
State; and to charge their Souls with Perjury, Schism, and Rebellion, over and
above the Common Crimes that accompany Hostile Invasions.

As the Law has been hitherto, so it must be henceforward the Rule and Measure
of all our Proceedings. In the Section of Tyranny, the Question was, How the
Subject should demean himself toward the Prince, in the Case of such and such
Oppressions in matter of Religion. But now, in Case of an Usurpation, the
Question is, How far the Government should comply with a Popular Importunity;
or how far the People should gratify one another. Of which we have spoken so
much at large elsewhere, that the less will serve in this place.

The Word Usurpation, implies the Affecting or Invading of Another Right;
which, in the point of Religion, must needs be very Dangerous; because the
People are so easily disposed to swallow That Deadly Pill. I do not reckon a
bare and simple Dissent from the Established Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church, to be an Usurpation: For possibly there may be a Real Scruple, or want
of due Information in the Case. But when That Dissent comes to be Practical;
when it comes to make Parties, to Divide into Sects, to Plead and to Challenge
the Law; it is no longer a Plea of Conscience, but a direct Conspiracy against
the Government. It is a Nursery of Heresies, over and above; And a Liberty,
utterly Inconsistent with the Measures of Political Justice and Prudence. For
First, They Agree among themselves in the single point only of Departing from
Us; And they are not, in Conjunction, more dissatisfied with our Ecclesiastical
Laws and Decrees, then they are severally, among themselves, one Sect with
another: So that it is, in this respect, impossible to please them. And
Secondly, It is no less dangerous to offer at it, in other Considerations. For
First, upon the Current of Long and Constant Experience, they have been always
found Insatiable: Never esteeming what they had, to be Enough, till they had
gotten All. The late King gave them still more and more; and the more he Gave,
the more they Craved; and turned his Bounty, at last, to his Destruction. He
did effectually, in favor of their Importunities, Strip himself, to his
Revenue, his Crown, and his Life; and all That, They took. Another danger is,
that the very men that ask a Toleration, are Principled against it. And I see
not the least shadow of a Reason, why they that will not Tolerate Others,
should be Tolerated Themselves. And truly as little Ground for the Asking of
it, as for the Granting of it. For First, Why should the Unity of the Church be
broken, and the Peace of it disturbed, in favor of the Enemies of it; and to
the Discouragement of the Churches Friends? Secondly, As the Act of Uniformity
has the Full and Solemn Complement of a Binding Law; why may they not as well
demand a Dispensation for Rebellion, as for Schism? And quarrel any other Law,
nay, one after another, the whole Body of the Law, as well as That? The Law is
the Established Rule of our Actions; and they will have every wandering Fancy
to be a Rule to the Law. They themselves fly from the Law, and their Complaint
is, that the Law does not follow them. This Method frustrates the very Order of
Providence, and makes all Provisions of Government to be Vain and Useless. They
cannot pretend to Charge this Law with any Defect, in regard either of the
Civil, or the Ecclesiastical Authority of it. Here is, First, The Judgment of
the Church duly Convened, touching the Meetness and Convenience of the Rites
and Forms therein Contained. Secondly, There is the Royal Sanction, Approving,
and Authorizing those Rites and Forms; and requiring our Exact Obedience to
them. Thirdly, The Matter of the Law here in question, is our Own Act; for that
we our selves are Concluded in the Vote of our Representatives. Against These
Usurpations we have Law enough: And so we have likewise against those that
follow in Matter of State: which may be reduced to Usurpations upon us, in
Matter of Life, Liberty, or Estate.

There is an Usurpation upon the Magistrate; and there is an Usurpation upon
the Subject: Upon the Former in respect either of Title, or of Power; both
which Cases are Determinable, and Relievable by the Law: And so also is any
Oppression upon the Subject: That is to say, where One Subject oppresses
Another. When I say Determinable and Relievable by Law, my meaning is, that the
Law has competently provided for the Freedom and Security both of King and
People: And the Remedy seldom fails, where it is Seasonably applied, and
Vigorously pursued.

But when the Dignity of Government may be vilified Gratis, the Kings Ministers
and Friends bespattered with Billingsgate Libels, and his professed Enemies
supported and encouraged: when his Majesty's Title as well as his Prerogative
and Reputation, shall come to be the subject of every Bawling Pamphlet; and the
Bounds of Sovereign Power to be debated by Porters and Carmen, over Pots of
Ale: when not only the Reverend and Lawful Ministers, and the Apostolical
Order of the Church, shall be Derided and Despised; but Religion it self pass
only for a Sham, a piece of Priestcraft, and be published in Print, for no
more in effect then a Political Art of getting a Hank upon the People: when
such Outrages, I say, as These come to be daily committed over and over, in the
very face of the Sun, and the Laws suffered to Sleep, that should repress, and
punish them: what can be the Event of This Inhumane License, but Confusion, and
Ruin? And if it comes to That once, it was our Own fault, for not putting a
Timely and a Legal Stop to These Audacious Usurpations.

The Positions and the Methods that brought on our late Troubles, are now
Revived and Practiced every day afresh: We have our Quaeries, our
Remonstrances, and all things, to the Old Tune of Curse ye Meroz, and To your
Tents, O Israel: most munifestly tending to the Unhinging of the Government;
and as certainly designing the Subversion of the Church and of the State. The
Boldness and the Impunity of these Libels, would be an Equal Wonder to me, if I
were not satisfied, that the One is clearly the Effect of the Other: For their
escaping punishment, looks as if the Government were afraid of the Rabble; and
then their passing without Answer, gives a kind of Credit to their Doctrine.

It is not a Work for a Gentleman to Rake a Dunghill, and to gather up the
Peoples Vomit: But yet out of a Foolish Zeal and Tenderness for a Duty that
has only given me Misery in This World, and the hope of Comfort in a Better;
I cannot but endeavor to possess others with the same sense of these
Indignities which I have my self; and to lay open this Spirit of Calumny and
Slander: These Vncoverers of their Fathers Nakedness, and Defilers of the
Honor of our Common Mother.

My Only Encouragement to This Undertaking, is the Title I have to be believed
in it. For I am so far from being Bribed into this Office, either by the Tie of
Past Obligations, or by the Prospect of Benefits to come, That (with Infinite
Acknowledgments of his Majesty's Grace and Goodness to me) I defy any man to
produce another Gentleman in the Kings Dominions, under my Circumstances, that
has suffered so many Illegal, Arbitrary, and Mean Injustices, from any of the
Abusers of the Kings Bounty, as I have done. Insomuch that after a Sentence of
Death, for his Majesty; betwixt Three and Four Years in Newgate; and a matter
of Seven and Thirty Years faithful Service to the Crown; the Bread has been
taken out of my Mouth, and in a large proportion, shared amongst some of those
very People that pursued the late King to the Block: Nor do I look for any more
Advantage for the Future. This Reflection (by the way) does not concern any man
that is now in Office at Court; and I hope there is enough said already, to
acquit me of any likelihood to be Partial in This matter. I must not slip This
Occasion of bringing in a Case of late date; a Case wherein all men of Letters
are concerned, and not impertinent in This place, and That being done, I will
proceed.

Being desirous to Inform my self very particularly concerning this late
Devilish Plot, I got the best Intelligence I could, as well by Short Notes
upon the Trials in Court, as by word of Mouth from Credible persons that were
there present. After this, upon perusal of the Printed Trials, I found several
Gross Incoherences; (especially in the Later of them) and very Material
Mistakes. As in that of Mr. Langhorn, Fol. 39, and 40. Mr. Lydcats name is used
no less then Nine times, as one of the St. Omers Witnesses, in stead of Mr.
Hall, to his very great prejudice.

Reflecting upon These Errors, together with the almost Inextricable Difficulty
of Retriving the Truth, out of such a Confusion of Tautologies, and Forms; the
Collection being so Bulky too, and the Particulars lying so scattered, that it
was next to the Work of a Resurrection to set every part in its right place. I
betook my self to my Friends, my Thoughts, and my Papers, and digested the
whole Transaction into an Historical Narrative. And not in Dialogue neither;
nor in the words, either of the Bench, the Witnesses, or the Prisoners; but in
my Own style and Way, and just in the same Fashion as I would tell the Story.
This Book I entitled, The History of the Plot, etc. made a Legal Assignment of
my Right to a Bookseller. I Authorized him to Print it, and he Imprinted it by
the Authority of the Author: Some of the Pretenders to the Formal Trials,
Arrest my Bookseller, as an Invader of their Propriety, and Threaten him most
wonderfully into the Bargain. He puts in Bail to the Action, and there the
Squabble rests. They do not complain of any Imitation of their Copy, but take
upon them, as if no man else were to write upon That Subject. At this rate, we
shall have all Sermons forfeited to the Kings Printers, for Descanting upon
Their Bibles; and all Books whatsoever, to the Company of Stationers, because
they are made out of the Four and Twenty Letters; and the ABC is Their Copy.
What a Scandal is this to the Commonwealth of Letters? What a Cramp to
Learning, and Industry? That if I have a mind to Compile a History, I must go
to Forty little Fellows for leave, forsooth, to Write the Narrative of the
Proceedings upon our Blessed King and Martyr, the Brave Earl of Strafford,
Archbishop of Canterbury; with a hundred more Instances of the like nature,
because some or other of them has lurched, perhaps, a Copy of Their Trials.

What if a man should write the Battle of Worcester, and the Kings miraculous
Escape, after the Defeat; must he not mention the Thousand Pound that was set
upon his Majesty's Head, without leave of the Printer that had the Propriety of
the Proclamation that offered it? Or if a Body would draw up a Systeme of
Treason and Sedition; must he go to the Publisher of Bacons Government, for a
License?

I am the larger, because it is a Public Case. And take notice, First, that
the whole Story is drawn into less than a Sixth part of Their Volume. Secondly,
That there is not so much as One Material Clause omitted in it. Thirdly, That
it is incomparably Plainer, and more Intelligible then the other; beside the
many Corrections in it. Fourthly, That it is Eleven Shillings saved; Theirs
being rated at Thirteen and Six pence, at the Lowest Penny, and This only at
Half a Crown. And so much for this.

I come now to an Examination of Two Libels; the most Audacious and Virulent
that have yet passed the Press. The One of them Entitled Omnia Comesta a Bello;
Or, Bell has devoured all. The Other is called, My Lord Lucas's Speech. But
take notice that my Exception lies to the Supplement or Appendix; not
concerning my self at all with the Speech.

The Former of these Papers is an Allusion to the Story of Bell and the Dragon:
where the Priests and their Wives came in at a Back-dore, and consume what was
offered to the Idol. It is Printed BELLO in stead of BELO; and the Mistake is a
great deal Righter then the Meaning: For it was, in Truth, the WAR that
Devoured all; and the Good Old Cause (which was the Foundation of That War)
was, in effect, no better than a CHRISTIAN IDOL. It comes forth, as an Answer
to the First of Five Pretended Questions; which he sets down at Length: and we
will speak of them in Order, as far as shall be needful.

Quaery 1. Whether the Great Cause of Impoverishing the Nation, Ruin of Trade,
and General Consumption of Comfort, Settlement, and Content, which has brought
the Land to a mere Anatomy, be not the Pomp, Pride, Luxury, Exaction, and
Oppression of the Prelates? Page 3. He Concludes in the Affirmative. And Page
4. The Trading Stock of the Nation (he says) is devoured in this Prelatical
Gulf.

But are we so Miserable then? And is the Hierarchy the Cause of all our
Miseries? Let us compare the Times a little, when we had Bishops, and when we
had None: For there is no Trial of the Truth and Reason of Things, like
Experience. From 1558. (when Q. Elizabeth came to the Crown) to 1641. we had a
Continued Succession of a Protestant (or rather, a Reformed) Prelacy. And so
from 1660. to this present 1679. which is upward of a hundred Years. And all
this while the Government stood firm upon its Ancient Basis. The Gospel
flourished, and the Subject enjoyed their Legal Liberties, under a Legal
Administration, both in Church and State. From 1641, to 1660. Episcopacy was
Out of Doors. Do but observe, now, what Havoc was made in the State, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil; in matter of our Religion, Liberties, and Properties,
in That Interval, of only Nineteen Years: when an Ordinance was of more force
then an Act of Parliament: And our Lives, Freedoms, and Estates, lay at the
Mercy of the Tyrants of Athens, in a Derby-house Committee. But let us yet come
closer to the Business.

I would fain know what these men would be at, that are so desperately
unsatisfied with the Condition they are in. Would they be in the days of Queen
Elizabeth again; or of King James; or of the Late King? If nothing of This will
content them; there is no other choice left, but That of Rebellion. For
whosoever Traces the History of these Malcontents, will find Deadness of
Trade and Persecution to have been their Constant Complaint, from the
Reformation it self, to this day.

After the Passing of a General Sentence upon the Bishops, as the Authors of
all our Calamities, he takes the whole to pieces. Treating First, of the
Revenues, Pomp, and State, of Prelates. And there he tells us of Two Provincial
Archbishops, with their Princely Retinue, Domestique Chaplains, Officers of
Temporal Tithes, Spiritual Officers, Vicar General, Guardian of the
Spiritualities, Dean of the Arches, with all their Under-officers and
Attendants.

To be as brief as possible: First, Where is the Crime, or the Iniquity of all
This Pomp and State? Or why should not an Ecclesiastical Body have its
Dignities and Dependences, as well as a Civil Community? There is no body
envies my Lord Mayor his Sword Bearer, his Mace-bearer, or any other Servant,
or Ensign of his Preeminence and Office. For beside that the very Splendour and
Magnificence, creates and preserves a Reverence for Authority. This
Multiplicity and Subordination of Officers, is of absolute Necessity also; as
subservient to Order, and to the very Discharge of his Function. The Second
Question is, Are these Officers established by Law, or not? If by Law; This
clamor is an Arraignment of King, Lords, and Commons. Thirdly, It is not only
a Legal Establishment, but an Establishment of many Ages, and continued without
Interruption, till both Church and Kingdom fell together. And then, in Lieu of
Bishops we had a Motly Synod of State-Pensioners; Hirelings, to poison the
Pulpits and the People; and to decoy the silly Multitude out of their Lives,
Fortunes, Liberties, Duties, and Religions: Men kept in Pay, to preach
Thanksgiving Sermons, and to help out at a Dead Lift, toward the bringing of
their Sovereign to the Scaffold. When they had preached and prayed the Kingdom
into Blood and Disobedience; and held the Rabble several Years agog, and gaping
after the Blessed Reformation so graciously promised them: Out comes at last
the False Conception of their Directory. (A kind of Spiritual Moon-Calf.) But
by this time, the King was as good as Lost; and so they fell presently to
sharing of the Public Revenues of Church and State. They Dispatch their
Prince, Enslave the People, and there is an end of That Reformation: And it is
the very Fellow of it, that they would have again. Was it not a Blessed
Exchange now, to be freed from the Prelatical Tyranny, and their Retinue, and
to have such Gospel Ministers? Generals, Majors, and Lieutenant Generals,
Plunderers, Sequestrators, Decimators, Regicides, and Sacrilegious Usurpers set
up in their stead? This Cuckoo-Song of Forty One, Forty One, Forty One, over
and over; were Ill-natured and Ridiculous, if the other Cuckoo-Song of Popery
and Tyranny, Popery and Tyranny, and accompanied with the Former Principlies,
over and over, had not made it absolutely Necessary.

His next Grievance is, The Ecclesiastical Courts: Court of Faculties, Court of
Audience, Prerogative Court, Delegates, 24 Bishops Diocesan, with their Trains,
Domestic Servants, Chaplains, Officers, and Courts; Chancellors, Registers,
Apparators, Proctors, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, Surrogates; Their
Lordly Palaces, Ecclesiastical Dignities, Baronies, etc. viis and modis
amounting to at least Four Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds a Year: Enriching
themselves (also) by Ordinations, Institution, and Induction; by making Rural
Deans, Licenses to Curates, Schoolmasters, Parish-Clerks, Physicians,
Midwives, Marriages, by Absolutions, by Commutation of Penance, Probates of
Wills, Letters of Administration, Presentment, etc. Page 4, 5.

There is enough said already to their Dignities and Officers; and so for their
Courts, Fees, and Privileges: They are all of them of Ancient Right and Custom.
If they envy the Bishops their Revenue, the Common People may as well set up a
Levelling Trade again; and fall upon All Estates and Conditions of men that are
better to live then themselves. Why should such a Lord, Gentleman, Merchant,
etc. have so many Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year amongst them; and the Poor
ready to sterve? Is not Money drawn into a few hands here, as well as there;
and Their abundance, consequently, the Cause of Our Want? Nay, the same Reason
reaches the King, as well as the Church. So that Gods Providence to Some, must
be rendered and Injustice to Others. One would think by the Outcry that all
This went immediately out of the Peoples Pockets: whereas the Patrimony of the
Church is Settled and Confirmed by the Great Charter, of the English Liberties;
as firmly as any Freehold we have. There has been always This Clamor against
their Courts; But how was it with us, when they were put down? We had our
Triers (in good time) Our Committees for Sequestration, Decimation; Money upon
the Propositions, the Sale of Irish Lands; Our Loans for our Brethren the
Scots; Our Committees for Crown and Church Lands: and a hundred other
Inventions for the Beggering and Enslaving of us, contrary to Law; by way of
Commuting for the Jurisdiction of These Courts, according to Law. In stead of
Licenses to Preach, or Teach School, we had Sequestrations and Imprisonments
for Preaching or Teaching; unless upon the Conditions of Renouncing both the
King, and the Church. In stead of Demanding Lawful Oaths, we were upon pain of
Plunder, Confiscation, and Imprisonment, pressed to Unlawful Ones; as
Covenants, Negative Oaths, Oaths of Abjuration; and not only so, but in direct
Contradiction to the Oaths of Allegiance and Canonical Obedience; to
Double-hatch the Perjury, in Defiance of both our Implicit and Explicit
Obligations. Here is the short of that Exchange.

Upon his Computation of the Value and Dependences of the Ecclesiastical State,
he reckons some Ten Thousand Persons, one way or other, belonging to the
Church: And at least 450000 l. per ann. First, In place of the Ten Thousand
Persons he speaks of, (who in another place (he says) bring nothing to the
Stock) what do ye think of an Army of 40000 men, wholly exempt from the Civil
Jurisdiction; and only Triable by Martial Law? Hist. Indepency, Page 68. Part.
1. Or in stead of the Churches spending four or five hundred Thousand Pound a
Year, of their Own; what do ye think of the Usurpers spending above Forty
Millions, in less then seven Years, of the Kingdoms money. Hist. Indep. Page 8.
But of this hereafter. We had Then no longer the Eyesore before us, of the
Prelates Lordly Palaces; The Kings Palaces were likewise seized by the same
hands: Our Churches turned into Stables; Our very Alters Robbed and Profaned.
And, to go thorough stitch, He whips up the Clergy for their Visitations, their
Paschal Rents and Procurations; Nay, their Canons, Vicars, Petty-Canons,
Singing-men and Boys, Choristers, Organists, Gospellers, Epistlers, and Virgers
too: And all this, as idly, as if he talked in his sleep.

Here he takes Breath, and at the Bottom of the 5. Page, promises a Catalogue
of more Families Ruined, more Persons Imprisoned, and an account of more Money
spent, by the Cruelty of the Prelates, then by all the Lawsuits of England, all
Payments and Taxes beside: Except upon the late Extraordinary Occasion. This
Libel was Printed, as I remember, before the Great Plague* and now of late
Reprinted over and over, and dated 1679. So that His late Extraordinary
Occasion, is only a Civiller way of Expressing Our late Extraordinary
Rebellion. Something shall be said to This By and By.

His 6. Page, and a good part of the 7. are a Rhapsody of Grievances. Upon the
Kings Restoration, and Purchasers of Church Lands were forced to Restore them,
without any Compensation. He makes it to be a hard Case, the Restoring of them
to the Right Owner, but says nothing of the Tyranny of Taking them from him. He
tells us that the Rusty Ecclesiastiques, that neither serve our Lord Jesus
Christ, nor their Country, but their Own Bellies, (this is the Complement he
bestows upon them) hord up the Money that they have extorted from the Subject by
Fines, and have brought the Nation to a Consumption. I wonder how
Church-Leases, that are commonly the best Penniworths should be a Greater
Grievance to the Nation, then Others that are set at higher Rates, which we
hear no Complaint of at all. And I do not see how it consists with his charge
of Luxury upon the Prelates, that upon so great Expense, there should be no
Circulation of the Treasure. I could tell him of the Turkish Slaves Redeemed;
Their Bounties to Ministers Widows; Their Public Works, as The Oxford
Theater, the Reparation of Litchfield Cathedral, and the Re-edifying of such of
their Palaces, as the Iniquity of the late Times had demolished, etc. To say
nothing of the Common Right they have to dispose of their Own: or to the Secret
Charities of many of our Eminent Churchmen, who have too much Honor and Piety,
to make Proclamation of it in the Market Place. But now comes a Lamentable
Story.

We have all our Able, Godly, Orthodox Ministers turned out, Ruined, and
Beggered, and no manner of Supply provided for the Maintenance of them and
their Families: And in Their Rooms (in many Places) a Company of Debauched,
Illiterate, Superstitious, Profane Priests; which Blind Guides must needs lead
them that follow them to Hell. Page 6.

Let the Reader observe the Pharisaical and Unmannerly Opposition betwixt his
Ejected Ministers, and those that were Introduced; and then let him consider
the Right, and the Condition, both of the One and of the Other. This was the
very Character the Schismatiques gave our Learned, Pious, and Canonical
Divines, when they turned them out of their Livings by Hundreds, contrary to
Law, Honesty, and Humanity it self; and the same Character with the Other, did
They take upon Themselves, that turned them out: The Incumbent Legally Invested
in the Benefice; and the Other, an Oppressing and Injurious Usurper. And what
came of it? The Shepherds were destroyed, and Wolves set to look to the Flock:
The Unity and Simplicity of Evangelical Truth was lost and confounded, in a
Compound of Carnal Policy and Schism. We had as many Religions as Pulpits; and
the Doctrine of Rebellion Delivered in them, in stead of the Doctrine of
Salvation.

He goes on, Damning all the Churchwardens for Persecutors of the Gospel, if
they Present according to their Oaths; and for Perjury, if they do not. If a
Minister Preach without his Canonical Garment: If any man goes from his Own
Parish Church to hear a Sermon, etc. or work upon a Romish Holyday; If he does
not stand up at the Creed; nor Bow at the Name of Jesus; Or does not keep off
his Hat all the while, he is Presentable.

Well, and what of all this? There is neither Life nor Limb, in the Case, if a
man be Presented. Here is for Decency sake, an Order; and That Order is
supported by Authority; and Obedience in Lawful Matters, deriving from a Lawful
Authority, is an Essential Duty both of a Subject, and a Christian. He seems
only to have Talked Idle all this while; but now he grows directly Outrageous.

We have gotten (says he) most of the sober Trading part of the Nation
discouraged by Citations, Excommunications, Writs to take them Excommunicated;
Imprisonments upon Ecclesiastical Accounts; By this means Thousands of Families
are already ruined, and many Hundreds are ready to leave the Land, and remove
into some other Country, where they may have Liberty of Conscience, and Freedom
from these devouring Harpies. And then he tell us of our Surplices, Copes,
Tippets, Cringings, out of the Romish Rituals, and a Service collected out of
the Romish Books, the Maess Breviary, etc.

Was not This the very Style of the Petitions and Admonitions to Q. Elizabeth?
and so down to this Instant. Pray what did we get by it; when to be cased of
This insupportable Tyranny, the Nation was at the charge of 114000 l. a Month
to an Army? Hist. Indep. 66. Above One half of the Revenue of the Kingdom under
Sequestration: 300000 l. a Year openly divided by the Faction among Themselves;
beside Private Jobs, and above 20 Millions that they never accounted for.
110000 l. a Year in Wages to Themselves; 100000 l. a Year more in Gratuities.
Beside Free Quarter at pleasure: Taxes Innumerable; and all Underhand
Corruptions. Above a Million and a half levied by Compositions; and then so
cheap and despicable Slaves, in our Persons, that Welsh Prisoners were sold
into Plantations at 2 pence a head. For the Truth of all This, I refer my self
to Mr. Walker in his History of Independency; a Knowing and a Well-read Person
in the whole Transaction, and a man of Credit.

As to the Pamphletters Liberty of Conscience: He would have the World believe
this Uniformity and Rule of Discipline to be New, and Singular, and the Work
only of the present Age, and Bishops. Whereas, whosoever will consult the
History of our Government, will find This Law to be a Moderation, which they
call a Persecution: Especially at a time when the strictness is not executed.
Under Edward the VI. the very Depraving of the Common Prayer, or Procuring the
Use of any other in Open Prayer, was 10 l. to his Majesty for the First
Offense; 20 l. for the Second: And a Forfeiture of all Goods and Chattels, with
Imprisonment during Life for the Third. And in the Fifth of the same King,
there was Authorized an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in these Cases. Q. Mary
repealed this Act: and in the First of Q. Elizabeth, Q. Mary's Act was
Repealed, and the Former Act Confirmed; which was afterward in the Five and
Thirtieth of That Queens Reign, Enforced with more Rigor; to which She was
necessitated, by the Turbulence of that Spirit of Schism which still to This
day is a working. King James handed it down to the late King, and he continued
it, till by a Torrent of Popular Violence, the King himself, and the Government
were Both overborn:

We have gotten ( says he) a Swarm of Ecclesiastical Officers, which the
Scriptures never knew, nor Reformed Churches ever owned: A sort of Proud
Prelates -- And all manner of Misery to Soul and Body. Plague, Fire, Sword,
Universal Beggary; and, without Seasonable Mercy, the Total Ruin of the whole
Kingdom.

I am sorry to hear that we have any Officers which the Reformed Churches never
owned: For these which we have in This Government at present, we have had for
several Ages: and when we had these Officers no longer, we had no longer any
Government: And Then it was that all his Plagues befell us. We have made but One
Trial of another way of Government, and it cost us Dear.

Upon a supposed Question over again, concerning the Rise of our Miseries; the
Libellers Answer is, that the manifold Provoking Sins of the Land; as Adultery,
Blasphemy Swearing, Idolatry, Perjury, and contempt of God and Godliness do
pull hard with Heaven to bring down desolating Judgments: But the nearest Cause
of our Impoverishments, arises from the Particulars before mentioned.] He
should have done well to have put in Rebellion too; which has all other Sins
in the Belly of it. But That is a Thing these people do not love to touch upon.
To the rest I have spoken more then enough already: and that which follows, is
only an Impertinent Citation of Reflections upon Ill Bishops, whence he would
draw an Inference that we are to have None at all.

The Second of the Five Quaeries before mentioned is This, [ Whether since all
other Reformed Churches in Europe did upon the First Reformation and Departure
from Popery cast out all Diocesan Bishops, Name and Thing, Root and Branch, as
an Office altogether Popish; together with all their Hierarchical
Appurtenances; and do this day esteem them no otherwise; why did not, or does
not England also do the like.] So that by Hook or by Crook, it seems, the
Bishops must down, either for Oppression, or for Popery; after the Example of
all other Reformed Churches. We may see by This, what kind of Reformation we
are to expect from Those People that account the Church of England to be
Popish. We should be presently a tearing down Altars again, demolishing of
Churches, Rifling of Colleges, and Murdering of Jesus Christ over again in
Essigie; which is no way to be effected but by another Rebellion. The Model of
the best Reformed Churches, was the Juggle of the Covenant; and the very
Condition of the Scots coming in the second time, was our Owning of their Kirk
for the best Reformed; and declaring for a Reformation of the English Church,
according to the Scottish Model. The Reformation doubtless was a Glorious Work;
but there have been very Ill Things done under that Pretext, and in the way to
it: And it is no New Thing for God to be in the End, and the Devil in the Man's.
Beside that, the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England is so pure,
and Apostolical already, that there is no need of Double Refining it.

His Third Quaery is a Frank Proposal, without any more ado, of taking all the
Church Lands into the Crown; and very Courteously he offers the Poor Cavaliers
a Snip in the Booty. Does he consider, that after This Violence, an Englishman
has nothing left him that is sure and sacred? And that as much as in him lies,
he destroys us in our Liberties, Consciences, and Estates, all at a Blow. The
Patrimony of the Church is First, a Gift to God, and appropriated to his
Service; and therefore not to be touched: (They have Robbed me, says God, in
the Prophet Malachy.) Or if it may, no man is sure of the Estate he possesses,
by the same Reason: For there is no better Title in Nature, then a Deed of
Gift. Secondly, it is settled and Confirmed by Magna Charta; which says, that
the Church of England shall be free; and shall have all her whole Rights and
Liberties inviolable, (for ever.) Thirdly, the King binds himself by his
Coronation Oath, to preserve unto the Bishops, and to the Churches committed to
their charge, all Cononical Privileges, and due Law and Justice; and to protect
and defend them, as every good King ought to be a Protector and Defender of the
Bishops and Churches under his Government. So that here is Sacrilege, Common
Right, and Perjury in the Case.

His Fourth Quaery is, [ Whether in those Kingdoms and States where Prelacy is
extirpated, and a Presbytery only retained, there be not as Godly, Able,
Orthodox Preachers, etc. and as good Subjects, as where Bishops are retained.
-- His Last Quary is only a Political Prospect upon the Power of France, and
nothing to the point in Question.] To which I answer First, That I know no such
Kingdoms as he speaks of. Secondly, What if under a Presbyterial Government,
any Subject of That State should move vise versa, for an Episcopal There, as he
does Here for a Presbyterial? How would it be taken? If there may be as good
Preachers and Subjects on the One side, as on the Other; why should we change
the Government, to be only where we were? Fourthly, If Two Archbishops, and 24
Bishops Diocesan be so great an Oppression; what would become of us in a
Presbytery, when we should have 9285 Popes, in stead of them? ( One in Every
Parish.) Fifthly, The Presbyterial Principles are purely Iesuitical; and that
would be but the settling of Popery under another Name. Sixthly, we have it upon
Experiment, that the People will never endure Them, nor They the Government.

To come now to That Libel, which bears the Title of my Lord Lucas's Speech:
The Name of that Noble Lord is only made use of for a Cover to those Scandals
upon the King, which, to have saved the last drop of blood in his Veins, he
would not have been guilty of. It is true, that Offense was taken to the
Liberty of the Speech it self, and a Censure passed upon it; but it is not
presently for every Mutinous Incendiary to Arraign a Proceeding of Parliament,
and to call it Barbarous Usage, with other rude, and very unmannerly
Expressions, in the Preface to the Reader. He says that God has taken him from
an Ungrateful Generation. And he says right in that; for undoubtedly there
never was the fellow of it upon the face of the Earth. The Kings Friends (who
are the only People Oppressed) they sit still, in Hope and Patience; while his
Enemies that enjoy both the Advantage of the others Losses, and the Reward of
their Services; Those are the people that Complain. This Faction, to whom the
King has forgiven his Fathers Blood and his Own. (His Own, (I say) for they
that shot at him and mist, are as Guilty, as if they had struck him to the
heart; and they that advised it, as those that did the Execution.) These are
the people, that in requital for their forfeited Lives, Liberties, and
Fortunes, which his Majesty frankly gave them, are now laying the same Train
for This King, by which They ruined the Last. The Bold Indignities of this
Pamphlet are such, as a Loyal Subject cannot Honestly so much as recite: It is
neither better nor worse then a Formal Charge upon the King in Five and Twenty
Articles, dispersed with all the Malice, and Industry imaginable. The Scope of
it is to possess the people with an Opinion, that the King designs the bringing
in of Popery, and an Arbitrary Power; with an Application of several
particulars, to those Ends. Now if these Affronts pass, without either
Punishment, or Reply, who can blame the simple multitude, that know nothing
more then what they read in a Pamphlet, for giving credit to them? And when
they are once tainted with that deadly Jealousy, who can blame them again, for
doing Ill Things, that know no better? The Time is almost come, when honest men
shall be put to death, and the very Murderers think that they do God good
Service. This was the mistaken Zeal of the late Times; and we are even ready
for it once again. The Two Calumnies whereupon these people lay the greatest
stress, are First, a Pretended Apprehension of an Arbitrary Power; and
Secondly, of an Inclination to favor Popery.

The Imputation of any Disposition, or Design in his Majesty that now is, in
favor of either Tyranny or Popery, is so groundless and incredible, to any man
that has but his Eyes in his head, that it would not be worth a Page of Paper,
to show the Error of it, were it not that we are delivered up to the Delusion
of believing things impossible, and discerning things Invisible; and yet as
Blind as Moles, to matters of clear and evident Demonstration.

With what Face can any man pretend an Apprehension of Tyranny from This
Prince, whose very Mercy and Bounty, by the Extreme abuse of it, has created
his Misfortune. Nay, the most spiteful of his Enemies cannot but acknowledge
that there does not live any man that has less of Gall and Rancour, in his
Nature: Beside the Experiment his greatest Adversaries have had of his Goodness
in Common with the rest of his Subjects, upon the Crists of his Restoration.
For when he might have made himself as absolute as he would; when he had his
Foes under his Feet; and some reasons of State, perhaps, to lay a firmer
Foundation of his Future Security; his Tenderness of Nature did yet so far
prevail upon him, above all other Considerations, that he quitted all those
Advantages; he Gave, and Forgave all that was possible; to show how much he
prized a Dominion over the Hearts of his People, above That of their Bodies and
Estates.

Touching his affection to the Religion of the Church of England; since it has
pleased God in his Infinite Wisdom to permit, that his Majesty should be
Calumniated upon That point; it is a singular Providence, that this should
happen in a Iuncture, when the plain matter of Fact, and the Naked History of
his Royal Proceedings, may suffice to the most prejudicate, and the most
obstinate of his Enemies, as an Unanswerable Confutation. It is every day more
and more artificially Insinuated and Improved; especially since the Discovery
of the late horrid Design, and particularly in the Libel last mentioned, as if
his Majesty were not so careful and zealous for the Suppressing and Preventing
of Popery, and for the Punishing of Delinquents, as is needful for the security
of his Government. Nay, there are some so daring, as to take upon them in Hint,
and Mystery, to intimate the very Countenancing of the Plot it self. If the
Proceeding be not altogether so quick and sanguinary as some would have it, we
shall only say This; that Those of all men, have the least Color to complain
of his Majesty's want of Rigor, that stand indebted already for their Heads,
and for their Fortunes, unto his Grace and Mercy.

As to his Opinion of the Church of Rome, his Majesty has given the World so
many and so ample Evidences of his dislike of That Communion; that every man's
Conscience as well as Reason, cannot but discharge him upon That point. It
cannot be imagined, that in his late Troubles and Exile, he wanted either
Arguments, or Solicitations, either in point of State or of Religion; and the
most plausible too, that could be found out, to work upon either his
Conscience, or his Necessities: And yet no Temptations, either on the One hand,
or on the Other, had any farther Operation upon his Majesty's Judgment, then by
causing a stricter Enquiry into the Subject in debate, to confirm him still
more and more in the Truth of his Profession. In so much, that in the Lowest
and most hopeless State of his Distresses, he chose rather to abide all
Extremities, then to depart, in any Tittle, from the Faith of the Reformed
Communion.

Now his Majesty having given this Earnest of his stedfastness to the Religion
of the Church of England during his Banishment; and showing that neither Fear
nor Despair could shake him in his Resolutions; it were a strange thing for him
now to relinquish That Cause in Opposition to his Interest; which when it might
have turned to his Temporal Advantage, no Persecution or Flattery could ever
prevail upon him to do. I might add to all This, that he has steered the same
Course in all his Devotions both Public and Private, and that the
Maintenance of This Church has been Undeniably the Scope of all his
Deliberations, and Councils, in all Religious Concernments, since his Blessed
Return.

But it is not enough, in all Cases, for a Prince to be Tender and Innocent, in
the matter of Religion; Witness the late Pious and yet Unfortunate Prince. For
wheresoever this Incantation takes place, the Sinews of Government are
Loosened, the Sacredness of Order Dissolved, and all Obligations cancelled, as
well Moral as Divine. And not only so; but the very Shadow and Imagination of
it, frights people into Lakes and Precipices, and transports them with Panique
Terrors, into the Execution of the very Mischiefs they fear. So that his
Majesty has two main Difficulties to encounter at once: The One to Master the
Plot it self; the Other to Temper and Sweeten the Passions of men, zealous in
the contrary Extreme: that no Inconvenience may arise from Their
Misapprehension of Things another way.

According to these Measures, his Majesty has governed his Course throughout
the whole Tract of This Affair; leaving no means unattempted, that might
probably give light to the Bottom of This Tragical Design: He has given all
sorts of Encouragement to Informations, by Countenance, Protection, and Reward:
The Depositions have been formally taken before his Majesty, and his Privy
Council; and the Evidences strictly weighed and examined; and from thence
afterward heartily recommended, and faithfully Transmitted to the Two Houses of
Parliament; as the most Rational Method, for the Common Satisfaction both of
King and People.

Neither has his Majesty been wanting on his Own part in a Vigorous
Concurrence with the Two Houses, to do all that in him lay, toward the
Suppressing of Popery, the seizing and securing of Popish Recusants; and
providing more effectually, by the best means that could be devised, for the
Maintenance and Establishment of our Religion: Having issued out diverse
Proclamations, and done several other Public Acts, upon the Motion and Advice
of his Two Houses of Parliament, to the Ends aforesaid; even to the taking away
from the Popish Lords their Ancient Right of Session in the House of Peers; and
disabling all Papists whatsoever, to all purposes whatsoever, from any
Advantages in the Government.

And if it be not yet enough, that in this Dangerous Juncture, his Majesty has
walked hand in hand, and kept pace with his Two Houses of Parliament; it may be
justly affirmed, that he has in some degree even supererogated in This matter;
and added an Excess of Affection to the Conscientious Discharge of his Princely
Care and Function. Of This, we might give several Instances; but one shall
serve for all, in his Majesty's Speech to both Houses of Parliament, on
Saturday Nov. 8. 1678. where he quickens the Two Houses themselves, in these
words; I do desire you (says his Majesty) to think on some ready means for
Conviction of Popish Recusants, and to expedite your Counsels, that the World
may see our Unanimity; and that I may have the Opportunity to let you see how
ready I am to do any thing that may give satisfaction.

After This demonstrative Clearness on his Majesty's side, let us cast an
Impartial Eye the Other way, and so conclude. Was not This the very Charge upon
the late King? and was there ever any Prince that lived more faultless? Was not
the Care of the Protestant Religion, pretended; and was not all Religion, in a
manner, subverted? Was not the Kings Honor, and Safety, the Pretext of a
Solemn Covenant? and was he not delivered up by the Same Covenant, to his very
Executioners? What a Clamor there was about Magna Charta, the English
Liberties; and a Reformation, only of some Excrescences (as they called them)
in the Church and State? And did not this specious Flourish conclude in a Total
Extinction of Law, Freedom, and Government? Were not the same Arguments used
Then as Now? Are not the same Artifices of Libelling Authority practiced Now,
which were Then? And are not the People poisoned the same way This Year, that
they were the Last? In short; Is not High-gate the way to St-Albans Still? So
certainly are we now running the same Stage over again. Was there not a Time
when St. Paul's was turned into a Garrison? When Apprentices cancelled their own
Indentures, and had them renewed again by an Ordinance? When for fear of
Redcoats in the Clouds, the Credulous Multitude brought them, like Egyptian
Plagues, into their very Pots and Dishes. Oh! but do you think (they cry) that
These Godly People will ever touch the King? How many well meaning People
thought the same thing before, and yet contributed to the destroying of their
Sovereign; not knowing what they did. Be not deluded.

Immediately after the sending of what is above-written, to the Press, comes
out a Pamphlet, entitled Englands Safety, Or the Two Unanimous Votes of the
last Good Parliament, concerning the D. of York being a Papist, etc.

I have so great a Reverence, as well for the Honor of the Constitution of
Parliaments, as for the Personal Loyalty of the Members of our late Great
Representative, that I cannot but take notice of the Abuse, which is First, put
upon That Illustrious Convention it self; and afterward, upon the People, in
This Libel. It makes the House of Commons to be the Parliament: But neither did
those worthy Gentlemen claim to themselves a Full Parliamentary Power, to the
Exclusion of any other Legal and Essential Concurrence: Nor will they take it
well to be so much Misrepresented. And then, it is as great an Abuse, on the
Other hand, to the whole Nation: For if This Opinion be swallowed once, the
People will be apt to take Ordinances again, for Laws. So that the Title is in
a great Mistake upon That Point: And now that the Reader may not incur almost
as Great a one, on the other hand, in another; Lei it be observed that the
Woman in whose Name this Pamphlet is published, is so far from being a
Well-Willer to the Kings Person, or Government, that from the time of his
Majesty's Restoration, it has been her Constant Business to promote all
Spiteful and Scandalous Books, and Papers, against both Church and State.

To these Pretended Votes, I can say nothing, whether True, or False; but This
I am sure of, that Debates of That Solemnity, and Importance, ought not to be
made Public; that nothing can be more Derogatory to the Dignity of that Great
Body; then (as the Fashion has been of late) for every Pedant, and Mechanique,
to set up the Trade of Teaching Parliament Men their Lessons.

The Subject of his Royal Highnesses's Succession to the Crown, is made the
Common Theme of the Press: And I do not presume to Reason the matter, either
Pro or Con, as it is a Case out of my Province: But still I am at Liberty to
assert the Duty of a Freeborn, and of a Faithful Subject; and to affirm, that
I have not found any one Argument in any of these Libels, which in a Natural
Consequence does not likewise reach the King: whom God preserve, and in Mercy
keep all his Subjects in Due Obedience.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe History of the Plot: Or a Brief and Historical Account of the Charge and
Defense of Edward Coleman Esquire: Of Ireland, Grove, and Pickering: Of Green,
Berry, and Hill: Of Whitebread, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gavan, and Turner: Of
Richard Langhorn Esquire: Of Sir George Wakeman, Marshal, Rumly, and Corker. Not
omitting any one Material Passage in the whole Proceeding. Compiled by Roger
L'Estrange: And Printed for Richard Tonson, within Grayes-Inn Gate, next the
Lane. Price 2 s. 6 d.


