THE History of the Plot Anatomised: OR THE Late Sham Fanatical-Plot, Briefly
and plainly laid open.

WHEREIN, Those Worthy Patriots who were charged therewith, are Vindicated from
the Malicious and False Aspersions cast upon them by a late Author.

In a Letter to a Friend.

Psalm 94. 20, 21. Shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee,
which frames Mischief by a Law? They gather themselves together against the
Soul of the Righteous; and condemn the Innocent Blood.

LONDON, Printed for M.R. in the Year 1689.

SIR,
HAving been several times importuned, to give you my sentiments as to the late
Presbyterian Plot (as it was called) against his late Majesty, and the then D.
of Yorks Lives, though I am sensible of my inability for so important a work, not
only as it is an undertaking vastly transcending my Talents, but also as being
wholly unacquainted with any of the Persons accused thereof: Yet lest I should
seem morose, I shall endeavor as briefly as may be, to communicate to you,
what I could collect, after a diligent perusal of the (pretended) true Account
of the late Horrid Conspiracy, and other Papers that have been published about
it, and what Information I could procure otherwise from persons who were more
or less acquainted with some of those that were charged therewith.

Who the Author of that true Account is, I never made it my business to
enquire, nor was I in this Kingdom for two years after publication thereof,
only if the old Proverb hold true, Ex ungue Leonem, I am ready to believe that
this Gentleman may possibly have been one of those who were so Instrumental in
carrying on Arbitrary and Despotick Power, and introducing Popery and Slavery.

But seeing I design to give it you in as few words as possible, I shall
forbear unnecessary digressions, only seeing the Author seems to look back a
little upon the Ingratitude of that Party, in exposing his late Majesty's most
Just and Merciful Government, unto contempt, etc. I judge it may not be
unnecessary to reflect upon some of the most remarkable passages since his late
Majesty's Restoration. And the first place let any one consider how much of
his Justice was extended to them in punctually performing the Treaty at Breda,
or of his Mercy, either in this or the Neighboring Kingdom; witness those
severe Acts that were passed here against them without the least remorse, upon
a pretended, and which was afterward proved a Sham-Plot, as appeared by the
Relation of it published several years ago, wherein the Publisher of it was so
particular as to mention the Names of several substantial Persons about this
City of undoubted Credit, with the places of their abode, who would avouch the
truth thereof) whereas when the Bill for Uniting of Protestants, and the ease
of Protestant Dissenters had past both Houses, it was put by that it might not
pass into an Act; which if it had, would both have prevented what designs they
might afterward have on foot, either for their own security in particular, or
of preserving their Liberty, and the Protestant Religion in general, and that
Inevitable Danger the whole Protestant Interest, not only in these three
Kingdoms, but even all Europe over was exposed to, had not God miraculously
inspired that Renowned Prince (whose Noble Progenitors have been signally
honored by God to be Instruments of bringing back the Captivity of his Sion,
and delivering them from the Insupportable Burdens laid upon their backs by
Idolatrous, and beyond all comparison, inhumanely Barbarous and Merciless
Papists:) I say, had it not pleased God to eat up as it were that Religious
Prince with the Zeal of his House to that height, that he resolved to hazard
not only his Estate, but even his Life it self, rather than not appear for the
Defense of the Protestant Religion at such a Juncture when Popery was coming in
like a Flood to overflow our Land, and to Crown him with Success suitable to so
Pious and Noble an Enterprise. This in short may satisfy the World how great
sharers the Dissenters in this Kingdom were either of his Justice or Mercy.

As for those of the Neighboring Kingdom, 'twould swell a Book to a Volume, to
recount the many Oppressions they groaned under, even before they could be
charged with any Rebellion, save that in the Reign of King Charles the First,
wherein the generality of both Nations were concerned: And I may truly say,
that the ground of that Association of the Nobility and Gentry, of that
Kingdom, and taking up Arms against their Sovereign, was the Imposing of the
Service Book without having the Concurrence of the Parliament thereto, with
some other Oppressions of the like nature. It Is well known that several Persons
were Executed in Scotland after the late King's Restoration, who could not
have been charged with any Crime more than what the generality of the People
there, might have been accused of, merely upon the account of being
Presbyterians. And how severely those in Galloway, and places adjacent, were
oppressed, having Soldiers quartered upon them, to whom they were not only
obliged to give Free Quarters, but likewise six pence a day to each Soldier;
all which they patiently lay under so long as they had wherewith to pacify
that barbarous Crew; but at last, all being eat up, their long continued
Oppression, which according to that of Solomon, makes even the wise man mad;
upon an accidental Engagement upon their own defense with some of the
Soldiers, wherein some few of them were killed, the Country People fearing
they should be severely punished, although they had only defended themselves
against the Outrage of the Soldiers, got to a Body, and took up Arms in the
year 1666. for their own defense; after which time, not only the Persons who
were actually concerned, who were but a very small number in comparison of the
rest, but the whole Body of the Presbyterians there were branded with the names
of Rebels and Enemies to the Government; and what Treatment many of them have
had since that time, was little inferior to that the French Protestants had
from the Dragoons. These things I only thought fit to mention in general, to
show that even before they had appeared in Arms, the Mercy that was extended to
them was not such as some men would make the World believe. But to proceed.

He tells you in the first place how his Majesty, When he had suffered such
Abuses, and personal Affronts from those seditious Persons, yet could have no
Redress here while by their packing the Juries, as in Colledge's case, etc. but
was forced to remove that Infamous Person into another County. How conformable
that was to the Laws of the Land, I will not determine; however this I may say,
that whatever that Person might be guilty of, it may be shrewdly suspected,
that several of his Evidence were no honester men than those who are so merely
by profession.

Another Instance he gives is the Earl of Shaftesbury, who whatever this
Gentleman may say in general of his Notorious Crimes for which he was
discarded, yet he does not, and without doubt could not, lay any thing in
particular to his charge, during his Discharge of that Office, and some of his
greatest Enemies have acknowledged him to have acquitted himself as well as any
that ever was in that Station, he having till that time behaved himself with
the height of Loyalty, even in the acception of those who under that sacred
name palliated their Arbitrary designs: Nor can he much stain his Memory by any
thing that he charges him with, when acquitted by the Ignoramus Jury,
especially if we consider what Captain Wilkinson declared as to his having been
tampered with, and that with such Temptations as might in all probability have
prevailed upon those who were not a great deal above the common size of
Honesty, and that the Persons that came to him among other things after such
large proffers as they made him, told him, that though they had several
Witnesses, yet they were such Fellows, (as honest men, as our Gentleman terms
them) that no Body would believe; and that it could enter into the mind of no
rational man, that the Earl of Shaftesbury, if either his Quality or Wisdom
were considered, would admit such Persons into his Company, much less join
Counsels with them; but that such a man as the Captain was, both in regard of
the Reputation he had in the World for Honesty, and of his having been known to
have been frequently admitted into the said Earls presence, about his Concerns
in Carolina, would be easily believed; and so could they have then perverted
this Honest Gentleman, they might have taken off this (for ought I could ever
yet hear then Innocent) Nobleman, merely because he was so indefatigably
Industrious in unravelling that Hellish Popish Conspiracy that had been a
hatching for the overthrowing the Protestant Religion in these Kingdoms; Nay,
his late Majesty himself was pleased to say to the Captain in Council (when he
was sent for before them upon his Emitting this Narrative) that if he would
really say upon his honest word that what he had published therein was true, he
would believe him, which he did: Yet the Accusers of that Nobleman, to salve
their Credit, were pleased to Indict him of High Treason, but we never yet
heard that they called him to answer to the Indictment. And besides, it cannot
but be fresh in the Memories of a great many, that the very same honest Men the
Witnesses, a little before the Trial, were drinking in a Tavern without or near
Temple Bar, and in their Cups quarrelled with one another, and saluted one
another with the names of Perjured Rogue, you had -- pounds for swearing
against College, etc. The Man of the house, and some that were with him having
over heard them, had them before a Justice, but the Justice either out of Fear,
or some other sinister Motive dismissed them. Now let our Author brand that
Jury with what Ignominious Names he pleases, I appeal to all the World,
whether, these particulars considered, that Ignoramus* Jury, as it was then
ignominiously called, could according to Conscience proceed otherwise than they
did. And besides, my Lord Howard himself, who was afterward one of the
Evidences, in all his Depositions mentions nothing of this, who undoubtedly had
the Earl of Shaftesbury been projecting any such design at that time, would
have had it readilier communicated to him, than any Irish Evidence, and was a
Person that could have contributed much more Assistance. So that I humbly
conceive our Author might have done himself and the Party he espoused much more
service had he omitted this Relation; for every reasonable man must needs
conclude this to have been a mere Sham; and if our Author commits such a grand
escape as this in the beginning of his History, he may run the risque of
forfeiting the Credit of the whole. But I perceive that he has been carried out
with such a precipitant Zeal in vindicating my Lord Mayor's Absolute
Prerogative in Choosing Sheriffs, and the Taking away the City Charter, that he
has a little forgot himself, and so verified the Old Proverb, Canis festinans
coecos parit catulos.

But seeing our Author glories so much in this Piece of Justice, that now
things were returned into their right Channel; I think, seeing we may say so
now from a much better ground, that as the Arbitrary Proceedings of several
Malicious Men are now like to be called in Question; it would not be amiss if
Sir John Moore, who introduced those Sheriffs contrary to the Vote and Election
of the Livery, be made give an Account of his then Proceedings; and that if he
can prove that as he was Mayor he had such a Power inherent in him, then he
shall satisfy the World that he has done nothing but what became a good
Patriot, though I will not say but he might have made choice of better Persons:
And if he has Usurped that Power at the Instigation of the Court, that then the
said Sir John Moore is as liable to punishment, if not more, than any Person
now in Custody, he having taken down the Hedge of our Security, and made the
first Breach for Tyranny and Arbitrary Power, for besides the introducing such
Sheriffs as furnished us with such Juries as were wholly at the devotion of the
Court, whereby originally, the Guilt of all Innocent Persons that were executed
since that time is to be laid to his door, so likewise the same action of his
made way for the turning out old Aldermen, taking away of the City Charter,
upon which ensued the taking away of all other Charters throughout the Kingdom,
which has proved of so fatal Consequence to us since.

He next proceeds to set forth the indirect ways used by the Factious Party in
Scotland, of whom he says the Earl of Argile, and President of the Session were
the Heads, against whom he vomits up his Gall for wording of the Test, and
adding thereto the very same Clauses that have since given any color of
scruple to themselves. But pray what were those Clauses? I doubt the Author was
afraid to name them, lest he should have discovered himself of what Kidney he
was. However for satisfaction to the World I shall here set them down; The said
Earl of Argile and President of the Session being two of the Lords of the
Articles, whose business it is to draw up all Bills that are to be presented to
the Parliament in order to be passed into Acts, upon mentioning of the Bill
made no Opposition against it, only the said Noble Patriots said, That as it
was very necessary to preserve the Succession in the right Line, so it was no
less requisite that at the same time a Clause should be inserted in it for the
maintaining of the Protestant Religion; which motion, though it galled some then
at Helm there, as being a great Obstruction in their way, yet could not be
refused, lest there designs should appear above-board, and then it would have
been wholly rejected. And this Action of the said Earls brought down that wrath
upon his Head which was afterward the cause of all his Troubles and
Misfortunes. For a little afterward he was Impeached of High Treason, and
illegally condemned, as all the most Eminent Lawyers in that place gave it
under their hand; which Paper the said Earl had with him at the time of his
Escape, otherwise could those in Power then have found it, they had been served
with the same sauce. As for the Jury that condemned him, though our Author
affirms them to have been most of his own Relations, yet it is well known that
the Marquess of Montrose (who was Foreman of the Jury) though his Cousin, yet
always bore a great hatred to him, there having been for above these hundred
years an irreconcilable Hatred betwixt these two Families, nor was there any
of the Jury that were well affected to him. And for the other Nobleman, he
being warned of his Danger by the Earls Treatment, thought it requisite for him
to withdraw himself, that he might not likewise become a Sacrifice to the rage
of his inveterate Enemies, and went into Holland, where he staid till of late;
in all which time he acquitted himself so well, that malice it self could not
charge him with any seditious practices. It is no less false, that his Life was
not intended to be taken away; for it is well known that the Gentleman who was
sent up in order to procure his Pardon, found it utterly impossible to be
obtained, and therefore dispatched an Express to his Friends, wherein he
acquainted them, that unless he could make his escape out of the Castle of
Edinburgh, where he was then Prisoner, he would certainly be Executed in a few
days; this Express arrived but four hours before the Post, and when the Post
was come, which among other things had the Warrant for his Execution, the
Captain of the said Castle being not to be found for an hour or two after, the
Earl in the mean while made his Escape. When the Captain came home, which was
about Nine or Ten a Clock at Night, he sent to the Earl of Argile's Apartment
to show that he must speak with his Lordship, they having been privy to his
Escape, answered, that he was not well, and was then asleep; notwithstanding he
came into his Chamber, in order to acquaint him with the day of his Execution,
and after search found no man there but his Page lying on his Bed.

But, to proceed to this Plot, as it was pretended to be managed here, the
Designs were said to be to Assassinate the King, particularly at the Rye-house,
as he was coming from New Market, and to raise a Rebellion. And these Bloody
Designs were said to have been carried on by two different Clubs, to wit, one
of several Commoners, and the other of a Council of six, whereof most were
Noblemen.

I shall first make a little scrutiny into the former; viz. that wherein
Keeling, West, etc. were concerned. And about the pretended Discovery of this
Plot (or rather Trapan) for to gain the further Credit to it, a great Noise was
made about the Fire that a little before was in New Market, which, said they,
had it not happened, His Majesty and the Duke had undoubtedly been cut off;
viz. if His Majesty had not by reason of that Fire been forced to come
unexpectedly to London, and that a fortnight before the time he used to part
thence at; and it is well known how many Pulpits resounded with this. And as,
after the best observation I could make of all the Passages that I heard of, I
always was, so I still am of opinion, that that Fire was set on purpose by some
of the Popish Party to gain Credit to this Plot.

For, had not this Fire consumed some of the King's Apartments, he would have
staid his usual time at New Market, and then having incurred no danger by the
way, this Plot would have lost all its Nerves and Sinews; for then few would
have believed they had any such design; seeing if they had, they would not have
neglected such an opportunity as that. Nor were the Preparations suitable to
such an undertaking made; and though there were some very foolish persons among
them, yet it is well known that Mr. Ferguson and some others were of greater
Policy than to undertake such a dangerous Enterprise, and not have all things
suitable for it prepared beforehand, and rather than sailed of it, would have
waited thereabouts a fortnight before, if not had some likewise at New Market
to give them certain notice of the day; But instead of that, no Preparations at
all; but West, as he said, had bought forty stand of Arms, for which he said he
had the money at last from Mr. Ferguson; though it is more probable, as will
appear afterward, that West might have this money some other way, may be from
some of the Popish Faction, to the end that those Arms being seized, might
prove a Confirmation to their Depositions, which so much stood in need of it.
Nor are their Depositions restricted to this only, at the Rye-House, for they
say that they would do it there, or at the Playhouse, or as he went to
Windsor, or at Whitehall, etc. A plain Demonstration that they had not fixed
upon that particular place; and that being the place in all probability they
could have most easily effected that design in, consequently they had not
agreed upon any such design.

In the next place, this may be confirmed by the concurring Testimony of all
the persons that were Executed, who denied their ever having given any consent
to any such design, as to Assassinate the King, ( Hone only excepted, who
talked more like a Madman than any thing else, he having declared that he was
for killing the King, and saving the Duke, and when both the Judges, and that
Gentleman D.C. since Bp. of C -- (who has lately been obliged to run his
Country) wondering thereat, asked him why he was for killing the King, and saving
the Duke, he at last replied, that he was a poor ignorant man. He likewise
declared that he was brought in by Keeling, who, he said, was more guilty than
any of them. So that what this Hone said signified not much as to the rest, for
he having been a person of so mean parts, might be easily brought to say any
thing Monsieurs the Witnesses pleased.

Captain Walcot at the place of his Execution, though he died with all the signs
of one that had a suitable impression of another World upon him, and so would
no doubt have cleared his Conscience by confession of so foul a Crime, and
begging pardon for it, had he been guilty of it, yet utterly denies his having
ever consented to such an horrid Design; besides that the said Captain is said
by Coll. Rumsey to have been a long time at least against it. And the said
Captain likewise declared that 'twas Col. Rumsey that first introduced him into
those Meetings, where, such dangerous things were discoursed of; and that he,
and West, and Keeling, were the forwardest to talk of such things.

Mr. Rouse likewise utterly denies his having ever assented to any such design;
and besides, that the words which were spoke by the Witnesses in their hearing
were made use of as Evidence against them.

And Mr. Holloway who was taken at Nevis, in his Answer to the many Questions
proposed to him by Sheriff Daniel, particularly as to this design of
Assassinating the King and Duke, confirms the same: For he utterly denied that
any such thing was agreed upon; nay on the contrary, that there were but very
few for it, to use his own words, not above four or five, of whom Rumsey, West
and Keeling were three, and that the rest looking upon it as a design which so
small a number could not accomplish without their Aid and Assistance, took no
further notice of it. And being asked in particular if Captain Walcot, Rouse,
and Ferguson were for that design of cutting off the King, he answered in the
negative. And it is worth the while to take notice how severe a check this
Sheriff had at Court, for his proposing so many Questions to this Prisoner,
which plainly shows that some there were afraid lest their Tricks should appear
to the World; and the truth is, by the sincerity of this person a great deal of
the Odium of this Plot was removed, the most heinous part of it then seeming in
in all probability to have been a Contrivance of their Adversaries.

And Mr. Rumbold himself, who is said by them to have been one of the deepest
in this Conspiracy, at his Execution in Scotland utterly denied his in the
least consenting to any such Barbarous Design.

And Mr. Nelthrope, at his Execution in the West of England in the year 1685.
protested that it was a thing highly against his Judgment, and which he always
detested, and that he never was in the least concerned in it, neither in purse
nor person, nor ever knew of any Arms bought for that intention, nor did
believe there was any such design, or that he ever heard of any disappointment
in such an Affair, or Arms, or Time, or Place, save what after the general
design, Mr. West spoke of as to Arms bought by him.

To conclude, Zachary Bourne, who was likewise one of the Evidence, and who had
the Plot communicated to him by Ferguson, in whose House he lodged never
mentions Mr. Ferguson's speaking any thing to him of that Assassination, though
he says that one Roe spoke to him of it, and West.

By all which it plainly appears that there was no design of Assassinating the
King and Duke; but that this horrid project of taking off the King, was at
first proposed by the Witnesses, on purpose to ensnare others, and that the
same, though some few were brought over, was absolutely upon proposal rejected by
most of them, and those who did reject it, being three times the number of the
others, knew that they could not effect it by themselves, and so took no
further notice of it. I say, it plainly appears to have been so, if we
consider, under what suitable apprehensions of Eternity all those that were
Executed, went off this World. And that they were so ingenuous as to confess
there had been some design on foot, which, how honest soever it might have
been, yet seeing it would be interpreted an Association against the Government,
could not excuse them, as matters then went, from being made Examples of
Justice. And it is well known that the Principles of the Protestant Religion do
not allow any man to go out of this World with a Lie in his Mouth, though those
of the Romish (if I may so call it) Church do. And I cannot but wonder when I
reflect how a great many Protestants should have been so lavish in their
Charity to Papists, as to conclude, because they all went off the World,
denying the Crimes for which they were justly condemned, (especially when they
know what Injunctions are laid upon them by their Priests; viz. that they may
confess nothing that may prejudice Mother Church under pain of Damnation) that
they were Innocent of the Crimes they were accused of, and yet have so little
to spare to those of their own Faith, who yet they know cannot die with any
Comfort, or hopes of Pardon, except they make a frank Confession of the Crimes
they are guilty of, much less if they persist in an obstinate Denial thereof.
But it is well known that the Papists not only went off the World with a Lie in
their Mouths as to their being guilty of the Horrid Crimes they were condemned
for, but likewise as to their having ever before their Trial been with any of
the Witnesses that appeared against them, when yet 'twas well known that they
had been very familiar with them. To mention only one of them, the late Lord
Stafford in his last Paper declared with great asseverations that he had never
seen Stephen Dugdale before his Trial, whereas a little after his Execution, it
was proved by the Depositions of above fifteen Witnesses, who all lived by his
Country House, that the said Stephen Dugdale was often familiarly entertained
by the said Lord Stafford, and that he has left the Company of several
considerable Gentlemen to discourse with the said Dugdale, and that they had
been observed discoursing several times above an hour together; which may fully
inform us what credit is to be given to any of that Persuasion, as to any thing
relating to the advancement of Mother Churches Interest.

I shall now proceed to the Plot said to be managed by that Council of Six;
viz. The Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of Essex, the Lord Russel, the Lord Howard,
Colonel Algernon Sidney, and Mr. John Hambden, Junior. Where we shall briefly
take notice of what is most Remarkable in the Trials of those of them who were
Arraigned, and what is observable as to others who were not.

I shall begin with my Lord Russel's Trial, and first in the Evidence of
Colonel Rumsey, I find this seeming contradiction; viz. That he being sent by
the Earl of Shaftesbury to the said Lord then at Mr. Sheppard's with the Duke
of Monmouth, Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Mr. Ferguson, to know if the
Rising in Taunton went on, and that they, or some of them returned answer that
it did not go on, and that yet they afterward had a discourse about viewing
the Guards, in order to seize them, when notwithstanding he says afterward that
they were only to seize the Guards, when the Rising went on. Besides, it is
more than probable that the Duke of Monmouth, or Sir Thomas Armstrong knew well
enough before what posture the Guards were in, and how to surprise them,
without all that debate which he says was held there. And this is all the
Evidence this Soldier of Fortune gives in, which yet might have been done
without any design against the Kings Person.

Another thing is in Mr. Sheppard's Evidence, who was at the same time at that
meeting in his own House, who, besides his saying in one place that my Lord
Russel was at two Meetings in his House, and afterward acknowledging that he
could not be positive whether or not, was of so unfaithful a Memory, as to
forget a remarkable passage which he had discovered before, to wit, that of
Ferguson's reading a Declaration, which he said nothing of till Sir George
Jefferies asked him about that Declaration, and then he returns, Yes now I
recollect my self, I remember one Paper was read. Now he could not have known
that, if he had not heard it of Sheppard before, for Rumsey declared he was not
there when it was read, though Sheppard seemed to be as positive in that, that he
was present then, till the other contradicted him, as he was in what he gave in
against my Lord Russel. Now I say the Loyal Scimus Jurymen might have taken
notice that the Evidence of a Person so forgetful as Sheppard seemed to be, in
forgetting so material a passage which he had given in Evidence but two or
three days before, should not have been accounted of so great weight in Case of
a Noblemans Life, as they reckoned it.

The next Evidence was my Lord Howard, who to prepossess the Jury with a belief
of this Plot, begins with such a base insinuation, that I think had any of the
Jury had the least common either honesty or discretion, they would have
suspected the Evidence of this Lord; for he first begins so low, that they
could not hear what he said, which did more argue a guilty Conscience than any
thing else, and when he was desired by my Lord Chief Justice to raise his
voice, he pretended that the news of my Lord Essex's Fatal End had sunk his
voice; whereas all that are acquainted with his Lordship, know very well that
he was not of that Temper; only this was said, to insinuate, as was afterward
sufficiently buzzed about, that the Earl of Essex to escape the hand of Justice
had cut his Throat, that the Jury might have a deeper impression upon them of
the reality of this Plot. As to the deplorable Murder of this Nobleman, I need
not say any thing of it here, there having been lately some Informations
published relating to that Noble Lord's Murder, of that weight, that few honest
men now doubt of the said Earls having been Assassinated and Murdered by
barbarous Russians; and I doubt not but in a little time those Bloody
Cannibals, the Horrid Actors thereof, shall be brought to condign punishment.
Only this I may say, that this was made use of to persuade the Jury of my Lord
Russel's guilt, that one who was engaged in the same Plot, out of a sense of
such unpardonable guilt, that he who had received such singular marks of his
Majesty's Grace and Favor should be so inhumane as to Embark in such a horrid
design against his Life, to evite that disgrace that must needs attend him
here, had laid violent hands on himself: And this very thing had such influence
on the Jury that they brought in my Lord Russel Guilty; some of them having
since declared that had it not been for this they had found him not Guilty. But
when men are forced to have recourse to such unheard of Villainies to carry on
their wicked and malicious designs, it is easy to imagine what shall be the
Fate of those Persons they have a Pique at. And this barbarous Murder of the
Earl of Essex in order to gain credit to their Plot, and to be an additional,
if not main Evidence against my Lord Russel, is sufficient with all thinking
men to invalidate this Plot. For they that employed those Russians knew well
enough that if any could expect a Pardon that Earl might, and that besides, his
Majesty having such a respect for him, and so firm a persuasion of his Honesty,
and consequently, that he would not be engaged in any such Design against his
Life, might have doubted of the reality of this Plot, which indeed he did at
first (as our Author well observes) having sufficiently known what
Counter-plots had been hatched before, and proved abortive, and therefore to
gain credit to it, they found themselves obliged to have redress to such
unchristian means; and the success did not deceive them, for after his having
been given out by the Inquest for Felo de se, his late Majesty did really
believe it.

The next thing remarkable in my Lord Howard's Evidence is, that he says in his
Hearsay Evidence, that the Duke of Monmouth told him, that my Lord Russel was
with Shaftesbury, being conveyed to him by Rumsey; who undoubtedly, had he
conveyed him to my Lord Shaftesbury, would have been admitted with him, he
being, as he pretended, so much in the said Earls Councils, and so might have
given some account in his Evidence either of what past between them, or at
least, that he conveyed the said Lord to my Lord Shaftesbury, which he does not
in the least make mention of. But my Lord Howard might say what he pleased,
there being no body to contradict him, as to this.

Another thing remarkable, is, that upon the Attorney Generals asking my Lord
Howard in these words; Did he sit there as a Cipher, what did my Lord say? The
said Lord Howard answered him in these; Every one knows my Lord Russel is a
person of great Judgment, and not very lavish in Discourse. And upon Sir George
Jefferies returning; But did he consent? My Lord Howard answered; We did not
put it to the Vote, but it went without contradiction, and I took it, that all
there gave their consent. Lord Russel's Trial, page 47. So that here was no
positive Evidence that my Lord Russel gave his consent, but only that my Lord
took it so; so that all that was Sworn here against my Lord Russel was, that he
was present when such Discourse was talked, and because he did not say any
thing, therefore my Lord Howard believed he consented to it. So that had those
Gentlemen of the Jury had the least Grain either of Conscience or common Sense,
they would not have brought in this Nobleman of High Treason upon such Evidence
as this, seeing (as the said Lord says in his last Speech) this could be termed
no more than Misprision.

Besides, the said Lord Howard declares, that there was no way condescended
upon for raising of Money, which yet must be the first step to Levying War, the
main point of his Indictment that what Evidence was given concerned.

And to conclude, what I could observe from this Trial, the Evidence that came
in for this Noble Lord were sufficient to have invalidated that of my Lord
Howard against him, for they declared that the said Lord H. in their hearing,
with hands lifted up to Heaven, and with great Asseverations protested that he
knew nothing against my Lord Russel. Now I appeal to all the World (how
strongly soever the Court carried it otherwise) whether a Man that dare
solemnly appeal to God as to any Man's Innocence, if he afterward Swear against
him, be not formally perjured. For pray what is it that constitutes Perjury?
Not the presence of the Judge I hope, for if a Judge merely asks a Man a
question, and he answer with a Lie, no Man can call him perjured; but his
adjuring him by God and all that is Sacred. Now that a Man can do this to
himself, is evident from the Holy Scripture, and has been ever acknowledged by
all Casuists, that whosoever privately takes Gods Name to a falshhood, is
equally Guilty of Perjury as if he did it before a Judge. Nor were any of the
Kings Council able to answer this Objection; for all that they say about it in
summing up the Evidence, is my Lords not revealing himself to them; whereas
here was more than a not granting of it, which he might easily have done as
effectually, and much more safely by waving it, and saying, How should he know?
or what did it concern him? or some such Expressions, by which he might have
been sufficiently secured from their informing against him; and not had
recourse to such an Expression as this, As I shall Answer to God, I know
nothing against him.

And thus much as to the Trial of this Noble Lord. By which the Reader may
sufficiently see what an honest Jury he had, who without any valid Evidence
could contrary both to the Law of God and Man condemn this Innocent Nobleman.

It may not be amiss in the next place to hint at some particulars in Colonel
Sidney's Trial, whose Jury though not the same Men, yet were of the same Loyal
Consciences; the Crimes laid to his Charge were Levying of War, and Conspiring
the Death of the King, and writing a Treasonable Book. Now it could not be said
that those were two Overt Acts in the same Treason, for he might have writ that
Book, and yet not conspire against the Life of the King; and besides, it is more
than probable that Book was writ long before there were any such Designs or
Discourses on foot, and therefore both particulars ought to have been proved by
two Witnesses; whereas for the former, though to prepossess the Jury there were
two or three Hearsay Evidence, yet my Lord Howard's Evidence only was
positive; and though there was Evidence enough to have invalidate his, yet the
Court was pleased not only not to take any notice of it, but even to discourage
and check them; there were besides those who appeared at my Lord Russel's Trial
several others brought, proving the above said Asseverations, one of L. H's
intimate Friends declaring, That if he had been upon his Oath before the King
he could not have more firmly believed him. The same Witness said that the
Reproof he had at my Lord Russel's Trial had made him forget some particulars
(which shows what Ingenuity was in the Gentlemen of the Court when any Person
was before them they had a mind to bring in Guilty.) And when the same
Gentleman in the Conclusion said according to his Conscience, That if he were
of that Gentleman's Jury he would not believe him, Mr. Attorney was pleased to
say, That he ought to be bound to good Behavior for it. Mr. Blake, another
Witness for Colonel Sidney deposed, that when he asked my Lord Howard Six Weeks
before his Trial why he had not his Pardon, his Lordship replied, I can ascribe
it to no other reason; but I must not have my Pardon till the drudgery of
Swearing is over. One would think the Jury might have considered that a Man
under so strong a Temptation as Swearing for Life is, might be easily induced
to stretch things to the utmost, if not to go beyond the Truth; and therefore
should not have laid so much stress upon his Evidence. Then Trace and Penwick
declared that my Lord Howard protested before God, Colonel Sidney knew nothing
of it; and the former declared, that he likewise said Colonel Sidney's Goods
might be sent to his House. And the latter, that he desired to have his Plate,
and promised to secure it for him. As for the other part of his Indictment, the
Book which was found in his Closet (though the same Book now would not be
accounted so Heretical, especially if it were not culled out in pieces here and
there, but read as continued with the rest of the Matter of the Book, that then
so much preached up Loyalty, which was nothing else but a Praeludium to Popery
and Slavery, whereof we have had sufficient experience since, being abated
several Degrees, Reason having got some more Ascendant over it) all the proof
of this was, that some Gentlemen deposed, that they believed it was his hand,
which is no full Evidence in Law (as has been admitted in other cases.) But
besides, one Mr. Wharton declared, that it was so easy a Hand, that if he had
but any of those Sheets of Paper for a small time, he would undertake to
imitate it so as they should not know which is which. But this was taken no
notice of. But this Labor of calling in Witnesses might have been well spared:
For it might have easily been foreseen that those who had confirmed the Belief
of their Plot by the Treacherous and (that wants a due name to express the
heinousness of it) Assassination of one Nobleman, and made that a means to take
off another by such Law as was dispensed then, would not let it suffer in its
Reputation by his being cleared, though they had had no other than Hearsay
Evidence. And had an Angel been sent from Heaven to give in Evidence for him,
they would have observed the same advice which St. Paul gave as to new
Doctrines, viz. Not received it. And well they might, for there was never a
Plot of such advantage to them as this was, which took off those who were for
stripping them of their Diana Madam Arbitrary.

As to Sir Thomas Armstrong, none will deny but he had very hard measure dealt
him; for when he pleaded the Statute of 6 Edward 6th. which allows that before
Sentence be pronounced upon an Outlawry, a year must expire, yet though the
year was not expired, he was condemned upon it. Nor was it to the purpose what
the then Chief Justice answered, to wit, that he had not delivered himself up;
for he ought to have had the full time allowed him that was mentioned in that
Statute, before Execution should be awarded. And when Sir Thomas desired the
benefit of the Law, he after a domineering manner insulted over this Gentleman
in his Misery, ordering him to be Executed on Friday next according to Law;
whereas I suppose there is no Gentleman in England deserves to have the full
benefit of the Law in his own sense more than his Lordship.

The last of the Persons Executed for this Plot, was Mr. Sheriff Cornish, of
whose Trial I need not say any thing, seeing the whole Nation is sufficiently
sensible of the hard measure he was served with; who making more solemn
Application to God for Vindication of his Innocence, has brought down the
Vengeance of God upon some of the Jury already, there being three our four of
them who have died sudden and unnatural deaths, the last of whom is very
remarkable; ( viz. the Vintner on Fish-street-Hill, the same person who in the
beginning of the last Summer (by his stingy covetous humor) occasioned the
Death of that worthy Gentleman Sir Charles Pynn) who having been present at the
late dreadful Fire in Thames Street, was, at the blowing up of a House, killed
by a piece of Timber, by Carpenters called the Cornish. It may not be amiss
here to insert a Passage of Sheriff Cornish and his Son, with my L. Howard; the
latter of whom encountered with my Lord at Guild Hall about the time the heat
was in choosing Sheriffs, and going into a Tavern with his Lordship, he
endeavored to inflame this Gentleman against the Government, with all the
specious pretexts he could, telling him the Citizens were Asses; that it was in
their own power to redress themselves, if they would; but the Gentleman
replied, that it was their business to mind their own private Affairs and
Trade, and not to meddle with matters of Government; he being wary, and not so
easily to be brought in as might be supposed. The Gentleman going home, gave
account of it to his Father, who forbid his Son the said Lord's company. The
other, of the Sheriff himself was thus; My Lord Howard a little after dined at
Sheriff Cornish's House; and after dinner my Lord desired to speak with him in
private, but Mr. Sheriff Cornish refused, telling his Lordship, if he had any
thing to say that was lawful, he might freely speak in presence of the company;
if any thing that was unlawful, he would not hear it; nor would he go into a
room with him, lesthis own friends might think that they had some business
betwixt them that might not be talked of before company; so that the said Lord
had at that time no private discourse with him; and suspecting him more, he
gave a Watch word to his Brethren the Aldermen that were for the preserving the
Privileges of the City, and were therefore hated at Court, to have a care of
coming into my Lord Howard's company, for that he was sure he had a design of
ensnaring some People. So that had it not been for Mr. Cornish, it is like we
should have had some of the Aldermen brought in as Actors in this Plot.

As to what our Author says as to the Duke of Monmouth's being privy to the
pretended Assassination of the King; herein he basely asperses him; for there
is no positive Evidence for this in his whole History. For Col. Rumsey in his
further Information, page 14. of the Copies of Informations, says, that when it
was asked by some present, whether the Duke of Monmouth would not revenge his
Fathers Death, that Ferguson undertook to have it under the Duke's hand against
the next Meeting, and that when they met again, he told them there was no
saying any such thing to the Duke: A plain Evidence that the Duke knew nothing
of that design. And whereas my Lord Howard in his Supplement to his former
Information, page 72. of the Informations (by the Title you may observe that,
as the Gentleman declared at Mr Sidney's Trial, this was part of his
Drudgery-work) has these words; About the 10th or 12th of October, after a stop
put to the then intended Insurrection, the Duke of Monmouth told me, that he
had seriously thought of it, meaning the Insurrection, and that after diverse
ways proposed and seriously considered of, he was clearly of opinion that there
was nothing so easy to be accomplished, nor so probable to do the Work so
effectually, as to fall in upon the King about New Market [ Observe, not the
Rye-House] with a smart Party of Horse, about forty or fifty, which he said he
could soon have in a readiness. To which I answered, That I was of the same
Opinion, but whether or not it would be decent for him to appear in person in
an Attack to be made when the King was in person, deserved his consideration.
Two days after I spoke to him of it again, and asked him what thoughts he had of
it; he answered me, that it could not be brought about soon enough. In his
Deposition at my Lord Russel's Trial, page 45 he has these words; And this had
carried it to the latter end of October. About the 17th or 18th Captain Walcot
came to me and told me, now they were resolved positively to Rise, and did
believe that a smart Party would meet with some Great Men. Thereupon I told the
Duke of it; I met him in the Street, and went out of my Coach into his, and
told him, That there was some dark Intimation, as if there might be some
Attempt upon the King's Person; with that he struck his Breast with a great
Emotion of Spirit, and said, God so, Kill the KING! I will never suffer that.
Then he went to the Playhouse to find Sir Thomas Armstrong, and sent him up
and down the City to put it off, as they did formerly; and it was done with
that success, that we were all quieted in our minds that at that time nothing
could be done. Now I desire the Reader to judge how these two Depositions can
be reconciled together: and yet betwixt the one passage and the other,
according to his Deposition, but four or five days intervene. I do not know if
any things so contradictory are to be found in Dr. Oats's Depositions, for
which he has been enjoined four years severe Penance. These are all the
Depositions I could meet with that relate as to the Duke of Monmouth's being
privy to the Assassination of His Majesty; and the former, to wit, that of
Coll. Rumsey, seems to acquit him from being privy thereto. And as for my Lord
Howard's, the one accuses him as guilty of it, and the other plainly acquits
him. So that had the Author of that History been at the pains to peruse my Lord
Russel's Trial, he would have had so much respect either to his own, or the
Credit of his History, as to have left out this passage in my Lord Howard's
Supplement.

As to the Depositions taken in Scotland, I cannot think any of them valid in
Law, nor will any reasonable Man, when he considers what Tortures two of them
were put to there, which were nothing inferior to those of the Spanish
Inquisition, viz. Mr. Carstairs and Mr. Spence; the latter of whom had first
his Leg put into the Boot (an Instrument there never much in use till of late,
wherein they put in their Leg, and drive in Wedges till the Bone is bruised)
afterward his two Thumbs were put in an Instrument they call Tomikins,
wherewith they squeezed them till the Bones were likewise bruised; which any
Body may know must needs cause exquisite pains, and then he was kept ten or
eleven days without sleep, there having constantly been by him day and night
two Sentinels with Iron pricks to keep him from sleeping, who, whenever he
began to slumber job'd him with those Iron pricks. Now a Gentleman tortured in
this manner you may be sure, though he endured so long a time that he extracted
Admiration even from his Enemies, though their cruel Hearts harbored no such
Guests as Pity and Compassion, yet he could not long subsist, and therefore was
necessitated to condescend to their Demands: Mr. Carstairs though he was
exempted from the Boot, as may be, supposing him none of the best of Horsemen,
yet his Thumbs severely paid of it, they having squeezed them thirteen or
fourteen times; the pain whereof did so torture him, that, as is reported his
shrieks might have been heard a quarter of a Mile off, and when he was wearied
out with their Cruelty, he promised to confess to them what he knew, provided
they would not make use of it against any man, which they did; and yet they
made use of it against Mr. Bailie of Jerviswood: And they not only broke their
promise to him, but also left out and put in sentences and words, (may be to
make it better sense, that our Author might have the less Trouble in composing
his History) which mightily altered the sense of his Deposition, and taught
them to speak more of a Plot than ever he did himself. And the said Mr.
Carstares, after having acquainted his Friends, as I have heard it of several
of their own Mouths (knowing that having been so Ingenuous as to tell his
Friends how he had been abused in this particular, he might have been brought
before my Lord's Inquisitors, to have been examined again) quickly withdrew
himself from that Kingdom. Now as to the rest of the Evidence there, you may
easily be persuaded, that they, seeing what treatment those two had, would take
what care they could to save themselves from the like; and so what pain might
extort from the former, fear might do the same from them. And if served in
their Evidence as Mr. Carstare's was, they durst not say any thing against it,
as remaining still there, and so further questionable for it.

By what has been above said, it plainly appears that there was no design of
taking off the King concluded upon in either of their Meetings, but that it was
first mentioned in discourse by the Evidence, as the most compendious way to
free themselves and the Nation from the Fears they at that time were possessed
with; but that very few of the rest ever assented to so barbarous a design, but
expressed their greatest detestation of it; nor can they be blamed so much for
not discovering of it, especially seeing they knew it could not be accomplished
without their Aid. Nor is it probable that either my Lord Russel, or any of
their Club, had it ever directly communicated to them, whatever my Lord Howard
would suggest to the contrary, in the words immediately following those last
mentioned in my Lord Russel's Trial; viz. that upon the day that the King came
from New Market they dined together, the Duke of Monmouth, and the Lord Gray,
with others being there, that a Notion was conveyed among them (by whom he does
not mention, and therefore it is most probable 'twas done by himself) that some
bold Action should be done that day, which, says he, comparing it with the
King's coming, they concluded it was designed upon the King, and that my Lord
Gray affirmed with an Oath, that if they attempted any such thing it could not
fail. That they were in great Anxiety of Mind till they heard the King's Coach
was come to Town, and that Sir Tho. Armstrong not being there, he was supposed
to be one of the Party. Now why such a Notion should be conveyed among them at
that time, I cannot understand; (especially when it was false, there having
been no preparation made thereto, except it was conveyed to ensnare them) and
that by his Lordship himself; and I am apt to think, that, to use his own words
in his Supplement, this might be the first time it was mentioned, and that when
his Lordship could not have such entertainment for it amongst those Lords as he
wished, he committed it to his Brethren the Evidences, to have the Notion
conveyed by them to the others, who he thought would entertain it more
favorably. One thing the Reader may take notice of, that his Lordships words
in the Relation of it, are very ambiguous, and may be taken in several senses,
particularly these words, We were in great Anxiety of Mind, till we heard the
King's Coach was come in, etc. But I shall not further trouble the Reader with
it, not doubting but that every honest English man is by this time satisfied of
the Innocence of all the Gentlemen that suffered, as to the pretended design of
taking off the late King.

As to the other part of the Accusation; viz. Levying War, with design to alter
the Government; if every thing be duly weighed, we shall find this nothing near
as it was represented to be, though there is not the least doubt but they have
had some Consultations among them as to the securing their Religion and
Properties, in a time when there were such apparent dangers hanging over their
Heads, and that in those Meetings many things might be proposed pro and con.
But that Noblemen of that Integrity and Religion, as the Earl of Essex, and my
Lord Russel were, should be concerned in any design to overturn the Government,
no man that was ever intimate with them will believe. It is too plain now that
those whom it most concerned to support the Government and Established
Religion, were the persons that made the greatest breaches therein, and that
their Illegal Proceedings gave just ground of fear and suspicion of a design on
foot by them to overturn the old Establishment, and to introduce Popery and
Slavery: For in the first place, the Popish Plot was endeavored by all means
to be stifled, and several attempts made to turn it upon Protestants; and though
it pleased God several times to bring to Light their hidden Contrivances, yet
were they still countenanced by Authority; and though there had been some of the
Branches lopt off, yet all persons that were not wholly blinded, might easily
have seen that the Body it self remained untouched, yea rather cherished. And
it is well known how those that were most active against it were
discountenanced. Parliaments were dissolved and laid aside, as finding that it
was impossible to support that Cause, and carry on their Designs so long as
that great Court fate. All underhand means were used to divide Protestants
among themselves, and to stir up Feuds and Animosities between them, which they
so far prevailed in, that one party of them used their utmost endeavor to
ruin another, never considering the common Enemy that was hovering over their
heads to devour both. Manifest Breaches were made upon their Privileges by
endeavoring to set up such public Ministers as would be wholly at the
Interest of the Court; issuing out Quo Warranto's against Cities and
Corporations, that they might become wholly in the Power, and at the Devotion
of the Court. And this once obtained 'twas easy to imagine what treatment
every Honest Protestant might expect. A party was employed, and others by their
Rewards allured, to cry up boundless Monarchy, to assert its absolute Power,
and that if Kings should Act the greatest Tyrannies, yea greater than ever yet
were perpetrated in the World, even against the whole Body of the People, yet
it was their bounden Duty to submit, and to hold out their Throats if they had
a mind to cut them; yea, that it was one of the most damnable sins that could
be committed, for people to use any means for their own preservation. And this,
as it was a great Temptation to Princes, while they hoped by this means to
carry on whatsoever designs they pleased, and made them assume the boldness to
Act things which otherwise they would never have hazarded upon, so it could not
but be very terrifying to all those who had not quite shut their Eyes. And this
Terror was increased while they considered, that if it was so with them, even
under one who was a professed Protestant Prince, what could they expect when one
should rule over them who was wholly abandoned to the Counsel of Priests and
Jesuits? I say, all these things considered, it is none of the greatest matter
of Admiration if those who had as lively an impression of the misery and
unspeakable danger of being left to the mercy of the Jesuits, as if they had
been already sprawling under their feet, were roused up to act some things they
had otherwise never thought of, much more be easily drawn into a snare by such
as were set on to trapan them. So that what designs some of those Honest
Noblemen and Gentlemen had, and the great Zeal they expressed toward their
Religion and Liberties, ought not to have been requited with that Ignominy and
Disgrace that their Memories have been loaded with by too many of late years.
We may easily imagine with our selves, that if it had pleased God to have
punished us so far for our sins (which undoubtedly have deserved greater
Judgments than were ever yet inflicted upon Mortals) as to have put a stop to
our late glorious Preservation, by blasting the Designs of those whom he made
use of as Instruments for the final Deliverance of his Church from the
Tyrannies and Idolatries of that Scarlet Whore, those Noble Lords and Gentlemen
who joined in so good and pious Designs, had been maligned and defamed in the
same manner; nay, and no doubt had been mete with the same measure they were;
and there would not have been wanting Court-Parasites who would have
represented them as the basest Miscreants. And yet I hope there is no sincere
Protestant, but does, and always did, from his first hearing of it, approve of
so glorious an undertaking, and sent up his most ardent Prayers to God Almighty
for his Success on so Just an Enterprise, whatever some wicked wretches, who
are a stain to Humane Nature, would have persuaded us to the contrary, that so
having stripped us of what God and the Laws of our Country had conferred upon us
for our defense, they might have satiated their barbarous Cruelty with our
Blood. And therefore seeing we have all the reason in the World to believe that
the Earl of Essex, my Lord Russel, and some other honest Patriots, had no
design either against the late King's Person or Government, nor any sinister
aim before them, but entered upon those Counsels merely for the Good of the King
and People in general, it would be the height of Uncharitableness as well as
Ingratitude, to suffer our selves any more to be imposed upon so far, as to
give heed to the undeserved Aspersions, the Writer of that History of the Plot,
or any other Court Historian has cast upon them. But I hope there are some now
here, who, both as being persons of known Abilities, and likewise such as can
give a more particular Account, as having been privy to all of it themselves,
will both do those Lords the Justice, and themselves the Favor, as to
vindicate their own Innocence, and expose the Falsehoods of that History.

Before I conclude, I shall only reflect a little on the carriage of some
hotheaded men of the Church of England since the pretended Discovery of this
Plot, who took occasion thence to inveigh afresh, with all the Raileries that
Malice it self could invent, against Protestant Dissenters, representing them
as the worst of Men, worse than Papists, yea even than Heathens; and by this
means they did so far prevail upon the ignoranter sort of common people, that
till this day many of them harbor most uncharitable Sentiments of them; so
that it is very usual for them to say, that they would rather be Papists than
Presbyterians. Which very expression is enough to render them Odious to all
good Christians, and shows how little they have of that Religion they profess;
while they thus malign persons who agree with them in all the Substantials of
Religion, merely because they cannot condescend to the use of some Ceremonies,
which all moderate men have acknowledged to be in themselves indifferent, and
which may be used or omitted as the Church shall see expedient, without any
sin; and yet have such a favorable Opinion of the Papists, though they are
guilty of gross Idolatry, and have so corrupted the Christian Religion, as in a
great measure to render it useless for that great end for which it was
instituted? viz. the Salvation of Souls. Nor did their Malice rest in traducing
of Dissenters, but they vomited up their Call against most of the Churches
abroad, particularly the Church of Holland and Geneva, as maintaining those
they call damnable Commonwealth Principles. They also cast Dirt in the Face of
the most renowned Reformers, such as Calvin, Beza, etc. and represented them as
the worst of men, merely because they had written against Arbitrary ^and
Boundless Power; and it is not long since, at the Instigation of those men,
(though to the great dissatisfaction of all Honest men, and Good Patriots of the
Church of England) some of their Works were publicly burnt at Oxford: Whereby
in effect they strengthened the hands of Papists, and joined with them in
aspersing the Memories of those whom God had made so instrumental in delivering
a great part of Europe from the Tyrannies and Idolatries of the Church of Rome*
and consequently in blemishing the Reformation it self. Yea it is too well
known how they hated and maligned the Learnedest and Gravest of the Clergy, and
the Body of the Discreet and Religious Laity of our own Church, (who, blessed
be God, were 3 times their number) and branded them with the Opprobrious name
of Trimmer, who in effect have under God preserved these Kingdoms from
Bloodshed and Confusion, which must needs have ensued, had those hot-heads had
the upper hand, so far as to have filled up the House of Commons in Parliament.
And these were the Men who were generally preferred at Court, as being the only
persons whose Principles and Interest led them to advance Arbitrary and
Despotick Designs. And I may justly say, that next to that Hellish Crew of
Jesuits, none have had a greater hand in all the Confusions and Distractions
that have been in these Kingdoms for a great many years past than these very
men.

I might have reflected on their Carriage since our late glorious Deliverance,
but since I designed to confine my self within these bounds I shall forbear,
and in the mean while am yours, etc.


FINIS.

