THE Character OF A PAPIST in MASQUERADE; Supported By Authority and Experience.

In Answer to the CHARACTER OF A POPISH SUCCESSOR.

By Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom at the Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1681.

The CHARACTER of a Papist in Masquerade.
THe Character of a Popish Successor were an excellent Piece in the kind, if
it had not too much Sublimate in it; For I have heard of some people, that,
with only holding their Noses over it, but one quarter of an hour, have run
stark mad upon it: And when This Fume has once taken the Brain, there is nothing
in the world, but the Powder of Experience, (the Remembrance of things past) to
set a man Right again. The Truth of it is, the Author has made the Figure of
his Successor too Frightful, and enormous; Sawcer-ey'd and Cloven ^ooted; and
when he has painted the Monster as black on the One side, as Ink and Words can
make him; he finishes his Masterpiece with a Paradox, on the Other; (Fol. 4.)
by the Supposal of a most Excellent Person, and yet making him the greater
Devil for his Virtues.

His Fortitude (he says) makes him only the more Daring in the Cause of Rome;
his Justice makes it a Point of Conscience to deliver us up to the Pope; his
Temperance, in the Government of his Passions, makes him the more close and
steady; and his Prudence crowns the Work, by the assistance it gives him in the
Menage of his Policies and Conduct: And so he goes on. Wbat booss it ( says he)
in a Popish Heir, to say, he is the Truest Friend, the Greatest of Hero, s, the
best of Masters, the Justest Judge, or the Honestest of Men? All mere
treacherous Quicksands for a people to repose the least glimpse of Safety in,
or build the least hopes upon.

This is fairly pushed, I must confess, but it is only a cast of his Rhetorique:
For every body knows, that all Christian Princes thus Qualified, and under
Articles of Treaty and Agreement, keep touch, even with Infidels; nay, and
Infidels with Christians.

Before I go any further, let me recommend to the Reader, one Remarque, as a
thing worthy of his Attention: He cuts all the way upon the Successor, as
presupposing him to be a Papist, and consequently `Dangerous, and Insufferable,
by reason of That Persuasion. And very magisterialy he gives us his own bare
word for the dangers of that Persuasion. Why does he not rather tell us in
express and particular Terms, These and These are the Principles of the Church
of Rome? and then make his Inference, from those Principles to the Dangers that
attend them; and so leave the unbiased part of the world to judge of the
Congruity and Proportion betwixt such Causes and such Effects? For His dilating
himself thus at random upon his Character, and striking so point blank at the
Rescinding of the Succession, makes men apt to imagine, that his Pique may be
rather to the Person, then the Religion.

It will behove me, in this place, to inform the Reader, that I do not charge
him for not producing the dangerous Principles of the Papists; as if I thought
there were no Instances of that Quality to be given: (For I am better
acquainted with their Ecclesiastical Politiques, then so.) But the true Intent
of my Quaere upon that Objection, was to show the Authors Prudence in
reserving himself upon those Particulars: For if he had said, Behold! Th^se are
the Positions of the Church of Rome, and they are not to be endured in any
Government; I should have asked him presently, How comes it then that you your
self, under the Color of Rooting out Popery One way, are Planting it Another;
and Erecting the very same Pestilent Positions that you condemn* Insomuch, that
while you would be thought zealous to Abolish the Name of Popery, you are no
less zealous* to Establish the Doctrine of it; Whereof, at leisure.

The sudden bolting out of this Phantome from behind the Hanging, may so far
serve a present turn, as to startle, and surprise the undiscerning Vulgar: Yet,
when, upon Second* and Recollected thoughts, this Mormo shall come to be
examined, and taken to pieces; the very multitude themselves, that were
affrighted at the Apparition, will be ashamed of the Imposture. The thing that
I would say, is this; that the Truth is somewhat too much Hyperboliz'd, in a
Declamatory Torrent of Words, and Exuberance of Phansy, without any one
Concluding and Convincing Period. If Apollo had been of Counsel with the
Author, he would have advised him to the Moderating of his Character, as he
does Olaus Magnus, in Boccalini, to moderate the Greatness of his Northern
Eagles, that preyed upon Elephants; as being a very Extraordinary thing for a
Bird to trusse an Elephant, and fly away with him. (which is, perhaps, the more
Venial Excess of the two.) It is one of the greatest Indignities that can be
put upon the simplicity of a Just Truth, the dawbing of it with Embrodery and
Flourish, and the over-doing of it. If Little Epictetus had been at his Elbow,
he would have minded him, that some things are in our our own Power, and others
are not so; and that the subject matter of his Discourse being wholly out of
His Cognizance, he might have done well to have left the business of the
Succession to the Ordering of Gods Providence.

This is a Subject (I know) that whoever touches upon it, treads upon Burning
Coals; and there must be great Caution, as well as Innocence, to carry a man
through this Ordeal: For who shall dare to Dispute the danger of a Popish
Successor? But so far am I from undertaking that Province, that I Will compound
the matter with him beforehand; and take all his suppositions of Difficulties
and Hazzards in the Case, for Granted. But then I must distinguish betwixt the
unhappy circumstance of being under the Allegiance of a Prince of that
Persuasion, who is actually in the Possession and Exercise of his Power, and
the remote Possibility only of that Danger; and a Possibility too of such a
condition, as a thousand things may intervene, to prevent it: As the
Contingences of Issue, Survivorship, etc. and at the Worst, this dismal
apprehension amounts, at last, but to the Contemplation of a Prince of That
Communion, in a Parenthesis, betwixt a Predecessor, and a Successor, of the
Reformed Religion.

Not but that I am as much against the Principles, and Practices of the Church
of Rome, wherein the Church of England has dep^rted from that Communion, as
any man living, that keeps himself within the compass of Christian Charity,
Humanity, and good Manners. And so far, I shall heartily join with the Compiler
of the Character, by a previous Concession of the Inconveniences (as I have
said already) that may arrive, by reason of that Religion. But then I must take
this Consideration along with me.

That First; there are many Dreadful Dangers, which we cannot avoid, but by
incurring Greater. As the Leaping of a Garret-window, when the Fire has taken
the Staircase; which is only a prudent Election (under a Calamitous Necessity)
of the less evil of the Two. Now the same Action, which would have been a
madness Without that necessity, becomes an Act of Prudence, With it; the great
danger of the Leap being warranted by the greater danger of the Fire: And there
must likewise precede a Deliberation upon the difficulties Both ways, to
justify the Resolution: For otherwise at the best, a man does well but by
chance. Now it would have been fair play, in the Character-writer, if he had
heartily Balanced the matter, and told us, This is the danger One way, and
That Another.

Secondly, It happens, many times, that we have no other Choice before us, but
either to suffer the Highest Degree of Misery, that can befall us in this
world; or else, to Prostitute our Souls, for the saving of our Skins, and
Fortunes. Now under such an Exigent as This, let the Prospect of things be
never so Terrible, we are to oppose, the Duties of Christians, of Subjects, and
of Honest men, to all hazzards whatsoever; and patiently to endure whatever we
cannot, with Conscience, and Honor, either Resist, or Decline: according to
the Practice of the Primitive Martyrs, who witnessed their Profession with
their Blood, as Christians; and Submitted, as Loyal Subjects, without
Resistance. So that we are not to govern our selves by a Naked Speculation of
the Perils that we are to encounter, and the Means of avoiding them; without
enquiring into the Consistency of those means with the Measures of Conscience
and Duty. But there is one Main point yet behind; which is in effect the very
Hinge of the Controversy. And this is it. If there shall be any thing sound in
this Character of a Popish Successor, that shall either operate upon the Legal
Constitution of the English Monarchy, or Reflect Personally upon the Honor, or
Justice of his Majesty now in Being; the Pretext of the Succession will be
looked upon only as a Stalking-Horse to Countenance an approach to some further
Design: In which Case, the Question will not be any longer the Religion of a
Successor, but the very Right it self of Kingly-Power. And here I must expound
my self once again; that I Speak only to the Anonymus Character of a Popish
Successor, without the least Reference to any Public, and Authoritative
Debates, or Counsels. And so I shall proceed, (in the First place) to the
Character of a Papist in Masquerade.

The Church of England, and the Members of it, are beset with two Sorts of
Papists; the One, Barefaced, the Other dressed up in several shapes of
Disguise: And we pass for Heretics, on the One hand; and Papists in
Masquerade, on the Other. By this Opposite Conjunction of two Interests,
(which, (however Divided in Name, and Pretense) are yet United against us in a
Common Principle of Contradiction and Aversion:) The Church of England is both
Weakened, and Defamed; the Glory of the Reformation blasted; and the great
Support of the truly Apostolical Cause, Undermined. Betwixt These Two Enemies,
our Persecuted Church is crushed almost to Pieces; and well-nigh brought to the
Agony of her Last Convulsions. And this Calamity is not wrought so much by the
Barefaced Papists, that march Publicly under the Popes Banner, owning their
Cause, and making their Attacks in View; not so much by Th^se, (I say) as by
the Papists in Masquerade, that work underground, like Moles; and, fall in
upon our Quarters, under the Semblance of Friends, with our own Word and
Colors. It has been a great part of the business of the Press, to set forth
the Barefaced Papist to the Life, and to affect us with a Just Indignation for
the Principles of the Jesuits: So that I shall not cloy the Reader with
Redun^ances; especially since the Composer of the Character has been pleased to
Harangue so copiously upon that Subject: But rather apply my self to the
Counter-Part of these Jesuits; and to obviate the Practices of our False
Friends, as well as of our Professed Enemies.

The Kings Witnesses have abundantly manifested to the World, the Restless
Endeavors of Rome, and its Emissaryes, for the Subversion of our Religion, and
Government; and how far they contributed to the Rebellion of Forty One; and to
the carrying of it forward thorough all the Succeeding changes, and
Revolutions, even to the bringing of his Sacred Majesty to the Scaffold. They
have further also Deposed to the Contrivances of the same Party, for the
prosecuting of the same Design upon the Person of his Sacred Majesty that now
is; and upon our Government and Religion, as by Law established: And laid open
to the world, both the Method of their Proceedings, by masquing themselves
under the Appearance of Presbyterians, Independents, Quakers, Millenaryes, and
the like; as also the very Names of several of their Missionaryes, that have
been expressly employed upon the disposing of the People to Tumult and Sedition.

This is so certain a Truth, that it will not bear a Dispute; beside that it
stands with Reason too; for they do all cover themselves under an Alias; and a
Presbyterian, an Independent, etc. alias a Papist, Sounds every jot as well, as
Captain Williams, alias Captain Bedloe. I am not willing to charge my Paper, in
a Case so Clear, and Confessed, with unnecessary Instances: Wherefore I shall
content my self with only Two out of many. (the Former out of Ravillac
Redivivus (Page 41.) If Father Brown the Jesuit, ( says the Author) that
Preached so many years among the Field-Conven^iclers in Scotland, had Penned
Mitchel's Justification of himself, upon his Execution, for an Attempt upon the
Person of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, it could not have savored stronger
of the Society of Jesus, or become such an Author better then it does. This
same Brown ^oasted upon his Deathbed, at Ingeston briggs, that he had Preached
as Downright Popery in the Field Conventicles, as ever he had Preached in Rome
it self. The Other Instance is, of one Faithful Commin, a Dominican Friar in
the 9th. of Queen Elizabeth; who was a Person generally reputed a Zealous
Protestant, and much admired and followed by the People, for his seeming Piety;
but more particularly, for inveighing in his Pulpit against Pius Quintus Then
Pope. He was accused upon Oath; before the Queen and Council for an Impostor,
and a Sower of Sedition; and Arch Bishop Parker took his Examination, ( Foxes
and Firebrarnds, Pa. 7.) Commin insisting much upon his Bitterness expressed
against the Pope, for his Justification. He got out of England afterward by a
Trick; and, with one Farewell Sermon, 130 l. for a Viaticum. Not long after, he
was clapped up at Rome for Reviling the Pope, and the Catholic Church. But he
Pleaded for himself, that he had done his Holiness, and the Church considerable
Service; for, by Preaching against Set-Forms of Prayer, and calling the English
Prayers, English Mass, he put them upon the Humor of Extemporary Prayer;
which took so much with the People, that they were come to hate the Church of
England as much as the Church it self hated the Mass. Whereupon, the Pope gave
him a Reward of Two Thousand Duccats for his Pains.

The matter of Fact is sufficiently cleared, and the Practice too Notorious to
be denied; As to the Influence that these Papists have (under the notion of
Dissenting Protestants) upon the Unity of the Church, and the Peace of the
State. But the Craft (as they say) lies in the Catching of them: For the Test
of Oaths will never do the Business, as we have found by their Swearing to so
many Contrary, and Inconsistent Purposes, and Interests, throughout the whole
Course of our Late Troubles.

So that we have no other way left that I can Imagine, of knowing a Disguised
Jesuit from one that calls himself a Dissenting Protestant, but by comparing
their Principles; which would infinitely conduce to the Credit, and Advantage
of the Conscientious sort of the Divided Party. And without such a Test of
Discrimination the Project of Uniting Dissenters seems to be utterly
Impracticable; unless to the Extreme Hazard of Authorizing the most pernicious
sort of Popery, and Incorporating a Jesuitical Leaven into our very
Constitution; according to the Method which Mr. Coleman himself had projected,
as the most probable Expedient for the Introducing of Popery into this Kingdom.
The Removal of this Difficulty will open a way to a General Accommodation; to
the Common Security both of our Religion, and Government. And this is only to
be done by applying the Maxims of those that we suspect here for Jesuits, to
the Standard of those Detestable Principles which we so much abominate in the
Church of Rome. And where ever we find any Party, of what Denomination soever,
that pretends either to Erect an Interest, or to support a Claim, upon the same
Foundation; it is but matter of Common Equity, to presume, and to conclude that
Party to be acted and directed by a Jesuitical Spirit. These Positions I shall
Confront with a Counter-Part; of which further in its proper place. But in my
way to it, I shall now pass to the Character it self.

The CHARACTER, etc.
IT has been my Fortune to be a Subject and a Native of that part of the World,
Character.
where almost three years last past I have scarce heard any thing, but the
continual Noise of Poper^ and Plots; with all the clamorous Fears of a Jealous
Kingdom about my ^ars: And truly, I must plainly confess, I am not so Ill a
Common-Wealths-ma^* but that I am glad to see my Countrymen disturbed in a
Cause, where Religion, Liberty, and Property, are at Stake. Fol. 1.

Here^s the very Bourdon already of that Fatal Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom, Dec. 15. 42. and only a short Paraphrase of the Preface to it. God
bless us from the Omen. The malicious D^signs of the Popish Party, the hazard
of Religion and great prejudice and Oppression of the Laws of the Kingdom, and
just Liberty of the People. Exact Collections Page 2. That which followed upon
this Popular Introduction did sufficiently evidence the Design. You shall see
now how Pat this Prologue runs Another way; Mutatis Mutandis.

It has been my Fortune ( let Me say too) to be a Subject, and a Native where
the Noise of Popery and Plots; Jealousies and Fears; and Affrights about
Religion, Liberty and Property, as if All lay at Stake; brought a pious and a
Protestant Prince to the Block; prostituted the Honor, Dignity, and Revenue of
the Government, Ecclesiastical and Civil, to a Band of Seditious and
Sacrilegious Usurpers. Our Temples were Demolished; our Al^ars Profaned; the
Priestly Office Invaded by Mechaniques; Swarms of Heresies,, and a Scandalous
Schism, in Exchange for Purity and Unity of Religion. Of a Freeborn People we
became worse then Turkish Slaves; Our Common-Wealths-men were glad also to see
us Disturbed; and who but our Pretended Advocates, and Patriots, to be our
Tyrants, and Tormentors?

Char. But if their Jealousyes are Just and their Fears Prophetique, in Gods
name let them talk. Every man ought to be so far from silencing any Reasonable
Murmurs, that it is rather his Duty to bear a Part in a Choire so Universal. And
if we s^e the Great and Wisemen of our Nation, like True English Patriots,
struggling, and toyling to prevent our Threatening Calamities, let us take
delight to behold them Restless, and Uneasy; Rolling about our Troubled Sea
like Porpoises against a Tempest, to forewarn us of an Approaching Destruction.
Ibid.

Let them talk on; (says he) just to the Tune of Forty Two again. God forbid
(says Mr. Pym) that We should dishearten our Friends, who come to assist us.
And this was, when Ven and Manwaring forced the Passing of the Bill of
Attainder in the Lords House, by Tumults, against the Earl of Strafford; and
his Sacred Majesty little better then Besieged in his own Palace, by the
Rabble. What a blessed Harmony was there then among the Porters, Car-men, and
Well affected Brethren in the Lobbyes, crying out with one Voice, no Bishops;
no Rotten Peers; no Common Prayer; while the great and wise men, in their
Generation were Struggling, and Toyling, to Pack Parties, Contrive Invectives
against Authority; perplexing the Multitude with Scruples, enflaming of
Passions, and rolling about like State Porpoises, not as a Forewarning, but the
Foreboding of a Tempest.

Char. But amids our Evident Danger, we see another sort of People daily
flattering and deluding us into a False and Fatal Security. And sure none are
so little our Friends, or indeed so void even of Humanity it self, as those who
would lull us asleep when Ruin is in View. Ibid.

There are some indeed, that after Open Rebellions in Scotland, horrid
Assassinates, Anathema's Denounced against his Majesty, Declarations point
blank against his Person and Government; with an Indissoluble Confederacy of
Brotherly Union in our own Bowels too, by virtue of that Magical Seal of
Reprobation, the Diabolical Covenant; there are some I sa^, that after all
these Acts and Demonstrations of Violence, and Conspiracy, will yet bear the
World down that the believing of our eyes is the shamming of the Plot; and that
there is no Fear at all of a Storm from that Quarter. As if a Jesuitical
Practice or Principle, were Consecrated in the Heart, or Shape of a
Presbyterian.

But ( says he) since Zeal and Hypocrisy, Naked Truth, and Artificial
Falsehood, have oftentimes alike Faces; I cannot but think it the Duty both of a
Christian, and an Englishman, to unravel the Treachery of those Arguments
which they raise to destroy us.

But since Zeal, and Hypocrisy, etc. are so alike, that we have seen
Sacrilege, and Heresy pass upon the People for Reformation; Rebellion for
Loyalty; Perjury, Blasphemy, and Murth^r, for Religion; Regicide for the way to
make a Glorious King, Bondage for Freedom, Rapine for ^ropriety; the King's,
the Churches, and the Peoples Enemies, for their Friends: what can a man do
better then to Unmask this white Devil, and expose the Cloven-Foot of this
Angel of Light to the View of the Nation?

Char. As First, ( Says my Author) why should we stand in fear of Popery, when
in the present Temper of England it is impossible for any Successor whatever to
introduce it.

And First, (say I too) what fear of Phanaticism, and a Commonwealth, under the
present Settlement of Episcopacy and Kingly Government?

Char. And next, amids our groundless Fears, ( says the Anthor of the
Character, by way of supposal) let us consider what that Prince is that appears
so dreadful a Gorgon to England. A Prince that upon all Accounts has so
Signally ventured his Life for his King and Country; a Hero of that faithful,
and matchless Courage, and Loyalty: A Prince of that Unshaken Honor and
Resolution, that his Word has ever been known to be his Oracle, and his
Friendship a Bu^wark wherever he vouchsafes ^o place it; with such an infinite
Mass of all the Bravery and Gallantry that can adorn a Prince. Why must the
Change of his Religion destroy his Humanity; or the advance to a Crown, render
his Word or Honor less Sacred; or make him a Tyrant to that very people whom
he has so often, and so cheerfully Defended? Why may there not be a Popish
King with all these Accomplishments, that whatever his own Private Devotions
shall be, yet shall Publicly maintain the Protestant Worship, with all the
Present Constitution of Government, Vnalter'd?

And next, (say I) let us consider those Covenanting, and Republican Spirits
that appear so dreadful to us; a Party that so signally ventured their Lives
^or the King^ Authority in the Two Houses against his Person in the Field; nay
of that matchless Courage and Loyalty, that they hazzarded their Souls, as
well as their Bodies, to make him a Glorious Prince, by sending him to Heaven
before his time: A Party of that unshaken Honor, and Resolution, that their
words were Oracles, their Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants ever bearing a
double and an equivocal meaning; their Friendship a Bulwark, only the Guns were
turned upon all that ever Trusted them: And of so great Bravery, that they
charged thorough Heaven and Hell* without Fear either of God or Devil; and
trampled under foot all Laws both Divine and Humane, for the Accomplishing of
their Ends. It Is true, that of Papal, they are become Phanatical Jesuits, and
why should the Change of their Profession, now, destroy their Nature? Or their
word and Honor be less Sacred, if they get the Power into their Hands once
again, then we have formerly found it? They eased us of our Laws, Lives,
Liberties, and Estates; and why should they become Tyrants Now, that were so
Merciful to us before? Why may they not be such Covenanters and
Common-wealths-men, as, whatever they be in Private, will yet in Public
maintain the Monarchy, and Episcopacy, unaltered? Especially after that famous
Instance of their Indulgence to his Majesty at Holdenby, when they kept him a
Prisoner, without Allowing him the Benefit so much as of a Chaplain or a
Common Prayer Book. And now he proceeds.

Char. But alas! what signify all the great past Actions of a Princes Life,
when Popery has at last got the Ascendent? All Virtues must truckle to
Religion; and how little an Impression will all his Recorded ^lorys leave
behind them, when Rome has once Stamped him Her Proselyte? But since unlikely
things may come to pass, let us seriously examine how far the Notion of such a
Popish Successor consists with Reason. ( Fol. 2.)

Alas, Alas! What are the Good-Old-Cause-men the better for their Crown and
Church Lands, Sequestrations, Plunders, Decimations, Directories, Classical and
Congregational Presbyterys, when Monarchy and Episcopacy have at last got the
Ascendent? All Virtues must Truckle to Religion; as they did, when Rebellion,
Sacrilege, Oppression, and Murder, were hallowed and Authorized in the
Pulpit, for the Propagation of the Gospel. But since unlikely things may come
to pass, ^^t us see how far the Notion of a Phanatical Popery consists with the
Discipline and Government by Law established.

Char. (Fol. 2.) If to maintain, and defend our Religion (...) any more then a
Name; it is in possible for any man to act the true Defensive Part, without the
Offensive too: And he that would effectually uphold the Protestant Worship,
Peace and Interest, is bound to suppress all those potent and dangerous Enemies
that would destroy them; for all other Defense is but Disguise, and Counterfeit.

The Statesmen of Forty One that defended the Protestant Religion with Sword
and Cannon; and our Liberties, Properties, and Persons, at the same rate; were
extremely well read in this Offensive way of Defense. And our Author is much
in the Right, that the way to uphold it, is to suppress those that would
destroy it. That is to say, to suppress those that enter into Protestations,
Oaths, and Covenants, against Episcopacy, Root and Branch. All other Defense
(as he says) is but Disguise and Counterfeit. The Remonstrants of Forty Two
declared it to be far from Their purpose to let loose the golden Reins of
Discipline, and Government in the Church; which was only a Political Cheat; (as
it is here expounded) for our Churches were turned into Stables, our Clergy
hunted like Partridges in the Mountains, our Pulpits Stuffed with Blasphemy,
and Blew Aprons; and in the Conclusion, a hundred Heresies let loose among us,
for one Orthodox Religion.

Char. Fol. 2. If then the Wisdom of several Successive Monarchs, with the
whole Nations Unanimous Prudence, and indefatigable Care for the Protestant
Preservation, has determined that those Papist Priests who have sworn Fealty to
the Sea of Rome, and taken Orders in Foreign Seminarys, are the greatest
Seducers of the Kings liege People, and the most notorious. Incendiaries, and
subverters of the Protestant Christianity and Loyalty; and for that Cause their
several Laws declare them Traitors; by Consequence, these are the Potent and
dangerous Enemies, which in defense of the Protestant Cause, this Popish King
is obliged to suppress and Punish; and these the very Laws he is bound to
Execute. Fol. 2.

As the Wisdom of Successive Monarchs has provided for the Protestant
Preservation, by necessary Severitys against known Priests and Jesuits, on the
One hand; so have they likewise on the Other hand, against Separatists of
another Denomination, where we find the same Principles couched under other
Names. And these are a kind of Protestant Jesuit. The Pope Deposes Heretical
Princes; the Fanatique Deposes Popish; And as Ill manners produce Good Laws;
the Lewd Practices on Both hands put the State upon Provisions that look both
Ways. The Schism here among us brake loose but once since the Reformation. And
what a Deluge of Hypocrisy, Bloodshed, Oppression, Athiesm, and Profaneness
flowed in upon it? But that we may not Cavil upon the Word Protestant; let the
Law expound it; which does expressly provide for the securing of Conforming
Protestants against the danger of Dissenters. So that we have Potent Enemies
(it seems) on both sides. Now if a Phanatique Interest should get Head, it is
as improbable on this side, as it is on the Other; that they should agree to
Suppress Phanaticism, in Favor of Episcopacy, and put the Laws in Execution
against themselves. Or would they not rather (...) us over again with Plunders,
Imprisonments, Vows, Negative Oaths, Abjurations, as they did before?

Char. And though perhaps, till the Discovery of the late Plot, for several
Ages, we have not seen that Severity inflicted on Popish Priests, as the Laws
against them require: And why? Because the flourishing Tranquillity of the
English Church under this King, and his Fathers Reign, rendered them so
inconsiderable an Adversary, that the natural Tenderness of the Protestant
People of England not delighting in Blood, did not think it worth their while,
either to detect, or prosecute them; and therefore has not made them the Common
marque of Justice. Fol. 2.

It Is True, that, till the Discovery of the Late Plot, the Laws against Priests
and Jesuits have not been put in Execution to the Utmost Rigor. But he is much
mistaken certainly in the Reasons he gives for that Lenity, and Moderation.
Does he call it the Tranquillity of the English Church, etc. when for eighteen
years together the very Form, Discipline, and members of it Suffered a more
then Pagan Persecution? And then, does he make the Popish Party so
Inconsiderable, that was able to move such Broyls and Confusions; (which the
Kings Witnesses declare with one mouth to have been the work of the Jesuits.)
and Finally, to accomplish their Devilish End in the Blood of the best of
Kings, and the most Faithful of Subjects; the ens^aring of the ^reest and the
Happyest of People; and the total Subversion of a most glorious Church and
State? And we are now again at this Instant upon the very Steps of the Preface
to our Late Troubles, and in a fair way to that blessed Condition of
Tranquillity, whereupon the Penner of the Character passes so notable a
Remarque. This was the Tenderness; and the Protestant People he speaks of, were
the Instruments of our Desolation. Which; (as the Oracles of our Age, do
abundantly enform us) were only Jesuits of another Color. It is worth a note,
that still as the barefaced Papist has attaqu'd us one way, the Papist in
Disguise falls to Sapping and undermining of us Another; and both of them
equally contributing to our Destruction.

Char. But under the Reign of an English Papist, when the Fraternity of
Religion shall encourage the Pope to make his working Emissaryes ten times more
Numerous; when, if not the hope of public Patronage, yet at least their
Considence of Private Indulgence, Connivence, and Mercy, emboldens the Missive
Obedience of his Jesuitical Instruments, whilst the very name of a Popish
Monarch has the Influence of the Sun in Egypt, and daily warms our Mud into
Monsters; till they are become our most threatening and most formidable Enemies.
And if ever the Protestant Religion wanted a Defender, it is then. If the Word,
Honor, or Coronation Oath of a King be more then a Name, it is Then, or never,
he is obliged to uphold the Protestant Interest, and actually suppress its
most apparent and most notorious Enemies. Ibid.

I do here make this public Profession to the world, that I have as little
mind to be under the Reign of an English Papist, as any mortal; and I would do
all that I could justify, as a Christian, and an Honest man, to avoid it. But
since so it is, that I can no more choose my Governor then my Father, and that
I may as well renounce the One, upon the score of Religion, as the Other; I am
resolved to pay the Duty of a Subject to what Prince soever Almighty God, in
his Overruling Providence, shall be pleased to set over me; and, at the worst,
patiently to suffer, where I cannot conscienciously Obey. It is a remarkable
Chapter, that of the Prophet Jeremy, where God does not only style
Nebuchadnezzar (the King of Babylon) his Servant, but over and over inculcates
Obedience to him. Hearken not you (says the Text, v. 9. and 10.) to your
Prophets, nor to your Diviners, nor to your Dreamers, nor to your Inchanters,
nor to your Sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, you shall not serve the
King of Babylon; For they Prophecy a Lie unto you: to remove you from your
Land, and that I should drive you out, and you should perist. And then, v. 15.
I have not sent them, says the Lord, yet they Prophecy a Lie in my Name, etc.

Now to proceed. I shall not dispute the Consequences of his Supposition, the
One way, if he will but allow the same Consequences to lie as fair for my
purpose, the Other. Will not a Scottish Fraternity of Papists endanger England,
as well as a Romish? Have they not already given proof of their Conspiracy by
their Actions? (But I hope God will preserve his Majesty from an Axe, on the
One hand, as well as from a Dagger, on the Other.) And have not the
Kirk-Iesuits their Emissaries, as well as the Society? See The Spirit of Popery
(a Book written with great Judgment, Sobriety, and Caution; and Addressed to
the English Dissenters) Fol. 7.

There was a Project of a Jesuitical Nature, attempted by some of your
Principals, about four or five years ago, when some of your Ministers, and
Others, Caball'd together a^out reducing the Presbyterians (whether over
England only, or over all the Three Nations, I do not well remember) into the
same sort of Policy by which the Jesuits are governed over all the World. The
Nation was to be Divided into Districts or Provinces; every District was to
have its Provincial; and over all the Provinces was to be appointed one
General, to reside constantly (as I remember) in London; and the First who was
to have the Honor of that Office (like the Founder of the Jesuits) had been a
Soldier, and a great Malefactor, and is also fit to be a General of an Army,
and presided in that Consult. He is a Gentleman whom you all know, and makes a
great part of a late Narrative, wherein the Impudent Narrator Implicitly calls
you the most sober and considerable Protestants of the Land. The Provincials,
in their several Districts, were to take an account of the Growth or Decay of
the Party; to note their Friends and Enemies; to receive their Contributions,
and give an Account of all to the General; who was to supervise for the good of
the whole. This account, with which I am confident I do not surprise some of
you, was told me upon condition of Secrecy, by a very honest and peaceable,
but rigid Presbyterian Minister, our Countryman, who having got notice of the
Consult, brake it in the beginning, by telling the Projectors how he abhorred
it, and threateni^g to discover it, if they did not desist; [observe here, that
this Presbyterian Minister, though a Rigid one, refused to join in so
Jesuitical a Project.] He told me also, that he believed the Project came first
from the Designed General, who intended by that means to raise his broken
Fortunes; which, if he had accomplished* he might easily have done. And to do
his Memory Justice, he told me this Story with very great In^^ignation; the
Substance of which, as I shall answer for it to God at the day of Judgment) I
have faithfully related (to the best of my memory) upon the Faith of a
Christian man.

Now to (...) his Point; will not the very Name of a Republican R^formation,
which is at Present become the Theme of every Pamphlet, warm Our Mud into
Monsters again; and raise Cobblers and Tinkers to Colonels; Draymen, and
Thimble-makers to be Kings Judges? Wherefore Now or Never is his Majesty
obliged, if his Word, Honor, or Coronation Oath be more then a Name, (if I may
be pardoned for speaking my Authors words after him) to uphold the Protestant
Interest, which now lies a bleeding in this Cause of the Church; One Branch of
the Coronation Oath being as follows.

I will preserve and maintain to You ( the Bishops) and the Churches committed
to your charge, all Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice; and I will
be your Protector and Defender, to my Power, by the Assistance of God, as every
good King in his Kingdom, ^n right ought to protect and defend the Bishops and
Churches under the^r Government.

Then the King arises and is led to the Communion Table, where he makes a
Solemn Oath, in sight of all the People, to observe the Premises; and laying
his hand upon the Book, says,

The Oath.
The things which I have before promised, I shall perform and keep: So help me
God, and the Contents of this Book.

Char. But let us suppose we may have such a Roman Catholic King, as shall
discountenance Pope, and Popery; Cherish Protestantism, and effectually deterr
and punish all those that shall endeavor to undermine and supplant it: And
then let us examine what This King thus qualified must do. Fol. 2.

Here is a Supposition fairly propounded, in appearance; but yet, without
Expounding himself upon the World Protestantism, there is no coming to an Issue
upon it. If he means by Protestantism the Opions of the Outlyers that have leapt
the pale, and which are rather Phansies, then Persuasions; the Law it self
animadverts upon those people, as the Underminers of our Ecclesiastical
Establishment; And his Discountenancing of Separatists will amount to no more
then a Legal Discharge of his Office. But if by Protestantism he intends a
practical Conformity to the Orders of the Church, the Law provides as well for
the upholding of the One, as the suppressing of the Other. And it would be a
strange Oversight for any Prince that should mount the English Throne under the
disadvantages of that Persuasion, to put his Perogative upon the stretch of
Enacting, or Abrogating Laws, without the Consent of his Parliament.

Char. First then, In continuing the Ecclesiastique Jurisdiction, Honors and
Preferments, in the hands of the Protestant Clergy; he must confer his Favors
and Smiles, on those very men, whom (by the Fundamentals of his own
Uncharitable Persuasion, which dooms all that die out of the Bosom of the Romish
Church, to a certain State of Damnation) he cordially believes, do preach and
teach, and lead his Subjects in the direct way to Hell. And next, at the same
time he must not only punish and persecute, but perhaps emprison and hang,
those very only Righteous men, whom from the bottom of his Soul he believes can
only open them the Gates of Paradise: whilst in so doing he cannot but accuse
himself of coppying the Old Jewish Cruelty. Nay in One respect, he outgoes
their Crime; for he acts that Knowingly, which they committed Ignorantly. For
by the Dictates of Religion he must be Convinced, that in effect he does little
less then save a Barabbas, and Crucify a Jesus. Fol. 3.

Here is First, presented a dismal Prospect of a Popish Successor, in the Life
of a Protestant Prince; and the present Government of that Protestant Prince
troubled and distracted with Clamours and Jealousies, for fear of a Popish one
to come. If Religion were really the business, they would rather bless God for
the Peace and Happiness they enjoy; and wait his further Pleasure with
Thankfullness, and Resignation, then with Murmuring, and Distrust, to
anticipate Future Evils, and Prejudge Providence to come. Or if Religion were
All; what is the meaning of their hammering so much of late upon the Subject of
Arbitrary Power, and so many Models and Projects of a Common Wealth; which were
the very Method of our late Usurpers? as to matter of Arbitrary Power; the King
has passed away so many Concessions already for the gratifying of his Subjects,
that if he had it in his Will, his Majesty has not left it in his Power to be
guilty of that which is so ungratefully Charged upon him. Which makes it look
liker a mockery, then an Accusation.

And then for the Newfangled Device of a Free Common Wealth, our Republican
Agitators should do well to mind the People of England, of the blessed
condition they were in under the pretended Keepers of an Liberties. The Sound
of Freedom, and Liberty brings the Multitude like Larks to the Glass, but not
a word of the Net. They say nothing of the Standing Army that must be kept
afoot to support it; nor of the bloody Taxes that must be raised to maintain
those Troops, and Martial Law to make good all those Violences. Why do they not
tell them of their Charters, Franchises, Privileges, and Tenures, which are
all swallowed up in that Gulf of Popular Tyranny? And so are all other
advantageous Dependences upon the Crown. The Body of the Law must be new
garbled, and a Civil War, with all the Miseries and Contingences of it, must be
the Prologue to the Opening of this Tragical Scene. And if the Sedition fails
of success, they bring themselves into the state again of a Conquered Nation.
And upon these Terms it is at best, that they are to exchange a Condition of
Peace, Freedom and plenty, for ^eggery, Bondage, and Confusion. It was very
well said of Grotius upon the NetherLanders delivering themselves from the
(...) of Spain. We Fought (says he) to save the Tenth part of our Estates; and
now that we have got the day, we have Compounded (...) the other Nine.

Here is a Criminal, and a Dangerous, but (I hope) an Impracticable Proposal
set afoot; But brought in, God knows, by Head and shoulders, under the
Countenance of Religion, and Succession. It is possible there may be no more in
it then a Well-meaning mistake. But there must be an Infinite. Tenderness of
Conscience, and a most untainted Loyalty to justify the Author. But to return
to my Character.

As to the Influence which a Popish Successor may have upon Ecclesiastical
matters, (as in the Character) there needs no more to be said in it then this;
that the King has been graciously pleased to offer the Passing of any Bill for
securing the Protestant Religion* without barring, or diverting the Succession.
And such Expedients have been also framed to that effect, as have been by great
Authority judged Competent for the Obviating of that Difficulty.

As to the Rest, I will not deny but that it is a hard thing for a Prince to
^eize and persecute a People of his own Religion, purely eo nomine for their
being so: And it is very Probable too that he will connive at men of that
Persuasion, in many Cases, where the Law directs a Punishment. And what is
there more in this the^ what has been done already more or less from the Date
of the Statutes themselves to This very day: and what is done by the Government
it self toward the Non-Conformists, at this Instant? where is the great hurt
now (upon this Admittance) in not punishing the Papists; so long as the
Protestants are not Persecuted? Whereas the Fanatical Papists did not only in
defiance both of Law, and Gospel, engross all Offices, Benefits and Privileges
to themselves, but without Mercy or Distinction destroyed the rest of their
Brethren.

Char. A very pretty Chimaera! Which is as much as to make this Popish King the
greatest Barbarian in the Creation; a Barbarian that shall cherish and maintain
the Dissenters from Truth, and punish and condemn the Pillars of Christianity,
and Proselites of Heaven: Which is no other then to speak him the basest of
Men, and little less then a Monster. Beside, at the same time that we suppose
that King, that dares not uphold nor encourage his own Religion, we render him
the most deplorable of Cowards; a Coward so abject, that he dares not be a
Champion even for his God. And how consistent this is with the Glory of a
Crowned Head, and what hope England has of such a Successor, I leave all men
of sense to judge. Fol. 3.

Behold here is the upshot of this high-flown Paragraph. [A Popish Prince that
puts the Laws in Execution for the punishing of Papists, and for the protecting
and countenancing of Protestants, is little less then the basest of Monsters.]
How comes it then that the Crown of France has not treated the Protestant
Subjects there, as this Picture-drawer pronounces, that a Popish Successor
would treat his Protestant Subjects here? The Protestants have now and then
been severely handled I know in France; as the Papists, upon some Junctures
have been in England; And now of late worse then usual. All which has been
Influenced well by Reasons of State, as by Impulse of Religion. But shall we
Pronounce the most Christian King the greater Monster, for his better usage of
us? If a potent Aversion to us in matter of Religion had transported the French
King's into so mortal a Detestation of us to all other purposes, they would
never have committed so many Eminent Charges both in Counsels and in Arms, to
the Honor and Trust of Protestant Officers and Commanders. But the Convenience
and Utility of the State preponderated against Disagreements in Religion. The
Barbarisms of the Holy League were the Results of a Sanguinary Faction as well
in Civil Government, as Religion. And one Egg is not Liker another then the
League of these Dissenting Papists to the Covenant of our Jesuitical and
Dissenting Pseudo-Protestants.

To come now to the Reason and Conscience of this Elaborate Padox. Taking His
Position for granted, that a Popish Prince is bound by his Religion, contrary
to Oaths and Promises, Honor and Justice, the Dictates of Nature, the Laws of
Nations, and the Bonds of Humane Society; contrary to all This (I say) and to
his Interest also; to break Faith with Protestants; and those Protestants, his
Subjects too. He must be unmanned, as well as Unchristian'd; an Excomunicate to
Humane Nature, and excluded from all the Benefits and Offices of Mankind. And
yet, we are not without many Instances, in the French League, and the Scottish
Covenant, of an abandoned Perfidy even to this degree. It must be a strange
Digestion sure, that can put over all other Impieties, and turn the violation
of all that is Sacred in Nature into a meritorious Virtue.

Char. Besides what mismatch'd incongruous Ingredients must go to make up this
Composition a King! His Hand and Heart must be of no Kin to one another: He
must be so Inhumane to those very darling Jesuits, that, like Mahomets
Pidgeon, infused and whispered all his Heavenly Dreams into his Ears, that he
must not only clip their wings, but fairly Cage 'em too, even for the Charming
Oracles they breathed him: And at the same Minute he must leave the wide and
open Air to those very Ravens that daily croak Abhorrence, and Confusion to
them, and all their Holy Dreams, and their false Oracles. Thus, whilst he acts
quite contrary to all his Inclinations, against the whole Bent of his Soul,
what does he but publicly put in force those Laws for the Protestant Service;
till in fine, for his Nations Peace he ruins his own, and is a whole Scene of
War within himself? Whilst his Conscience accusing his sloth on one side, the
Pope on the other, Rome's continual Bulls bellowing against him as an
undutifull Son of Holy Mother Church, a Scandal to her Glory, a Traitor to her
Interest; and a Deserter of her Cause; one day accusing the Lukewarmnesse of
his Religion; another, the Pusillanimity of his Nature; all Roman Catholic
Princes deriding the Feebleness of his Spirit, and the Tamenesse of his Arm;
till, at long run, to spare a Faggot in Smithfield, he does little less then
walk on hot Irons himself. Thus all the pleasure he relishes on a Throne is but
a kind of Good-Fryday-Entertainment: Instead of Royal Festival, his Rioting
in all the Luxury of his Heart, to see Rome's Dagon worshipped; Rome's Altars
smoke; Rome's Standard set up; Rome's Enemies defeated, and his victorious
Mother Church Triumphant; his abject, and poor-spirited Submission denies
himself the only thing he thirsts for: and whilst the Principles he suck from
Rome do in effect, in the Prophets. Words, bid him Rise, Slay, and Eat; his
fear, his unkingly, nay, unmanly fear makes him fast and starve. Fol. 3.

This Passage is only the same thing over again, in a diversity of Words and
Phrase. But it is well enough to answer the Ends it was intended for; the
tickling of the Phansy, and the moving of a Popular Passion, without one
syllable of weight to strike the Judgment. My Reply upon the Last Paragraph
shall serve for This too; which I have not here Recited, as requiring any
Answer; but to show what pains he has taken with the Ornaments of his
Rhetorique, to supply the Defect of Argument. I cannot liken it to any thing
better then the Gaudy Glittering Vapor that Children are used to Phansy in a
Cloud. They Will Phansy Lions, Peacocks, in it, or what other Figures they Please;
but the first Breath of Air scatters the Phantastique Images, and resolves the
whole into its original Nothing. And just so it is with this Character. There
are many things in it finely enough said, to work upon a partial and an Easy
Imagination; and to mislead a body at first fight into an Opinion that there
may be something of weight and Substance in it; but upon a second Thought it
seems to be only a plausible Strain of Words, which the Author has as well
Colored yet, as the matter will bear.

It serves however in English well enough for an Incentive and Appeal to the
Multitude: But if it should happen to be turned into French or Latin, it would
become as ill as Office to the Protestants abroad, as it is here to the
Government. For what could be of a more pernicious Consequence, from an unknown
and private Pen, then for one of the Reformed Communion to tell the French
King, that if he suffers one Protestant Subject to live in his Dominions, he is
all those Vile, Impious, and Abject things that the Author has here bundled up
in the Character of his Popish Successor.

But for this Popish Successor of his, which is a Figure that has no Being in
Nature, but in his own Brain; what if I should match it now, in Flesh and
Blood? But it must be then among the Jesuite^ Successor of Knox, and Buchanan;
and the Spawn of that King-killing Race. There are mismatch'd Ingredients in
abundance, Christ upon his Tribunal, (as they profanely ascribe to their
General Assembly) authorizing Bloodshed, Schism, and Disobedience; a Treaty
with the King at Breda, and the Murder of the Brave M^ntrosse, both in a
breath. Were ever hand and heart less Akin, then when they subscribed Loyalty
and Obedience with the One, and at the same time meditated and Resolved Treason
with the Other? Then when they Extirpated what they Swore they would only
Reform; and utterly destroyed that Freedom and Property, which they Pretended
to preserve? Then when instead of advancing Purtity of Doctrine, and the
Kingdom of Christ, they filled the Pulpits with Jugglers, that imposed upon the
People the directions of their Standing Tables, or the Close Committee, as the
Dictates of the Holy Ghost; and in place of the Prophets words, Rise, Slay and
Eat, cried out, Cursed be They that keep back their Sword in this Cause. You
know the Story of Gods Message unto Ahab for letting Benhadad go upon
Composition, Stricklands Thanksgiving Sermon. Nov. 5. 1643. De Justice to the
Greatest, says Herle before the Commons, Nov. 5. 1644. Saul's Sons are not
spared; no nor may Agag, or Benhaded, though themselves Kings. Zimri and Cozbi
( through Princes of the People,) must be persu'd into their Tents. This is the
way to Consecrate your selves to God. And what was the Ground of all this
Fierceness; but a Popish King, ( though the Glory of the Reformation) for want
of a Popish Successor?

The Kings Counsels and Resolutions are so engaged to the Popish Party ( they
say) for the Suppression and Extirpation of the True Religion, that all Hopes
of Peace and Protection are Excluded; and it is fully intended to give
satisfaction to the Papists, by alteration of Religion; and to the Cavaliers
and other Soldiers, by exposing the Wealth of the Good Subjects, Declarat. and
Prot. of Lords and Commons, to the Kingdom, and the whole world. October. 22.
1642. Exact Coll. page 664.
especially of This City of London, to be Sacked, Plundered, and Spoiled by
them. And then again, His Majesty endeavored to keep off all Jealousies and
Suspicions, by many fearful Oaths and Imprecations, concerning his purpose of
maintaining the Protestant Religion, etc. Ib. pa. 665.

This is enough to convince the world that the very Sound of Popery will do the
business, as well Without a Ground, as With it: And whoever goes about to
allarm the People upon This Desperate point, had need give very good Security
for his Allegiance. But if it should prove to be the work of some
Good-Old-Gaus^^^n, the very fact it self is not Clearer then the Design. But
however it is, the Author has endeavored to prevent any such Conjeeture, by a
Complement upon the Memory of the Father, to make the better way to the venting
of his spleen against the Successor here in question.

If there can be a Son of that Royal Martyr Charles the First ( says he) a
Prince so truly pious, that his very Enemies dare not asperse his Memory or
Life, with the least Blemish of Irreligion; A Prince that Sealed the Protestant
Faith with his Blood; who in his deplorable Fate, and Ignominious Death, bore
so near a resemblance to That of the Saviors of the world, that his Sufferings
can do no less then Seat him at the Right hand of Heaven. If ( I say) there
can be a Son of that Royal Protestant of that Uncharitable Faith, who by the
very Tenets of his Religion dooms (for deems I suppose) all that die without
the Bosom of their Church irreparably damned: Then Consequently he must
barbarously tear up his Fathers Sacred Monument, brand his Blessed Memory with
the Name of Heretic; and to complete the horrid Anathema, he most impiously
execrates the very Majesty that gave him Being. Fol. 11.

The Author has wrought up This Phansy to a high Pitch, as well in respect of
the Father, as of the Son; and he has showed his skill in it too, for the more
he advances the Reputation of the One, the more scope he has, upon the
Opposition, to depresse the Esteem of the Other. I would charitably believe
that he means good Faith in the Honorable Mention he makes of that Venerable
Martyr: But yet there are some passages in this Discourse that would make a man
half suspect This Flourish upon the Last King to be intended as a Blind, to
give him Opportunity of getting a fairer Marque at This. For he^s here upon a
subject where it is a Common thing to have the Heart and the Hand as far as
Heaven and Earth asunder. Witness the Close of the Declaration
beforementioned, Page 666. We do here Protest before the Ever-Living God, that
the Chief End of all our Councels and Resolutions, is to secure the Persons,
Estates, and Liberties of all that join with us, and to procure and establish
the Safety of Religion, and Fruition of our Laws and Libertyes, in This and all
Other his Majesty's Dominions, without any Intention or desire to hurt or
injure his Majesty, either in his Person, or JUST Power.

Let any man consider, that at This very time, they were destroying the Church;
In Arms against the King; Plundring and Imprisoning those that would not join
with them; and lastly, that they ordered this Declaration to be forthwith
Printed, and Read in all Churches and Chapels in England and Wales: calling
Heaven and Earth to Witness the Integrity of their Souls, under all these
Gross, and Scandalous Contradictions.

Now to the Latter part of his Paragraph, First, he lays down a false
Supposition, and then he raises out of it a most uncharitable Consequence. For
the very Position that there is no Salvation out of the Church; is qualifyed
yet with an Exception, in case of an Invincible Persuasion; But if this be so
lewd a Principle, in One Religion, why is it not so in Another? There is not a
fouler Character in Hell, then he has drawn here of a Popish Successor. and he
founds it upon the Irresistible Impulses and Dictates of the Religion. which
being admitted, involves every Individual member of the Church of Rome, in the
same Condemnation. So that he himself damns all the Papists, as well as he
makes Them Damn all the Protestants.

So much for the Son of that Royal Protestant, as he expresses it. But he says
nothing all this while of the undutifull Subjects of that blessed Martyr: Those
that actually divided his Sacred Head from his Body, and then gloried in it as
an Acceptable Sacrifice unto the Lord.

But was This Prince so pious, does he say, that his very Enemies dare not
asperse his Memory? etc. What if I should show him now (to convince him of his
Mistake) three or four of the Fiercest Sticklers we have for the Phanatical
Interest, that have passed their Approbation upon that Execrable Murder?

Char. However ( says he) if there be such a King in Nature, as will not Defend
his Own Religion, because he dares not; but Sneaks upon a Throne, and in
Obedience to his Fear shrinks from the Dictates of his Conscience: If like
Jupiters Logg, Such a King can be; and Fate has ordained us for a Popish
Prince; Pray Heaven shroud the Imperial Lion in this Innocent Lamb-Skin. ( Fol.
3.)

He does well enough to pray for Jupiters Logg, considering what Havoc the
Republican Storks have made with us Already. But is it so Base a things (says
he) for a Prince to shrink from the Dictates of his Conscience? What if his
Majesty himself should make it a point of Conscience not to entertein any
Project for the Uniting, as they call it, of Protestant Dissenters; in regard
both of the Public Peace, and the Heretical Opinions that must be indulged
under that Denomination? Would not the Kings concessions in that point bring
him within the Equity of this Successors Character?

Char. But I have heard ( says he) a great many say, it cannot enter into their
Thoughts that a Popish Successor will ever take such an Inhumane, and so
unnatural a Course to Establish Popery, it being so absolutely against the
English Constitution, that it can never be introduced with less then a Deluge
of Blood. Surely his very Glory should withhold him from so much Cruelty, etc.
Fol. 5.

The Glory of a Papist! ( says he, in Reply upon himself,) a pretty Aerie
Notion. How shall we ever expect that Glory shall steer the Action, of a Popish
Successor, when there is not that thing so Abject, that he shall refuse to do,
or That Shape or Hypocrisy so Scandalous, he shall not assume, when Rome or
Rome's Interest shall Command; nay, when his own petulant Stubbornness shall
but sway him? As for Example; for One Fit he shall come to the Protestant
Church, and be a member of their Communion, notwithstanding at the same time
his Face belies his Heart, and in his Soul he is a Romanist. Nay, he shall vary
his Disguises as often as an Algerine his Colors, and change his Flag to
conceal the Pyrat. As for Instance, Another fit, for whole years together, he
shall come neither to One Church nor the other, and participate of neither
Communion, till ignoble he plays the Unprincely, nay the unmanly Hypocrite, so
long, that he shelters himself under the Face of an Atheist to shroud a Papist;
a Visor more fit for a Banditto then a Prince. And This methinks is so Wretched
and despicable a Disguise, that it looks like being ashamed of his God. Fol. 5.

If a Popish Successor will do any thing, though never so Abject, he will
comply then, and make his Religion Truckle to his Interest: But how comes he to
be so Abject, and Yielding in One Line, and so Stubborn in the Next: If it be
True that he will so Scandalously play the Hypocrite as to Change his Shape,
and Act any part for his Advantage, which Rome, or Romes Interest shall Impose
upon him; what should hinder him from making himself a Protestant to the Law,
though he continue a Papist still in his Heart? And where is the Outcry then,
against the Popish Successor? If he will do This, the Exception is Removed;
For he is no longer, in Construction of Law, a Papist: And if he will not do it,
he has great Wrong done him in the Character. The Policy, or in Truth the
Probability of his running from One Communion to Another, I must Confess I do
not understand. For if he can dispense with shuffling and shifting; his way
would be to shift once for all into the shape of a Protestant; (For That Is a
Turn would gain him his Point) and not to wander thus from One Church to
Another, to no manner of Purpose. Upon the whole Matter, the Author methinks
might have treated the Brother of his Sovereign with a little more regard to
the Terms of Decency, and Respect, and kept himself to the Cause, without
betraying so great an Animosity to the Person. But having to do with a Prince
of his own Creating, he thinks he may deal with him at what rate he pleases.

Char. Besides, If Glory could have any Ascendant over a Popish Successor, one
would think the word of a King, and the Solemn Protestations of Majesty ought
to be Sacred and Inviolable. But how many Presidents have we in Popish Princes
to convince us that their strongest Engagements and Promises, are lighter then
the very Breath that Vtters them. As for Examples sake, How did their Saint
Mary of England promise the Norfok and Suffolk Inhabitants the unmolested
Continuation of the Protestant Worship; calling her God (that God that saw the
Falsenesse of her Heart) to witness, That though her own Persuasion was of the
Romish Faith, yet she would content her self with the Private Exercise of her
own Devotion, and preserve the then Protestant Government, with all her
Subjects Rights and Privileges, un-injur'd. Upon which, those poor, credulous,
honest, deluded Believers, on the Security of such Prevalent Conjurations, led
by the mistaken Reverence they paid to a Protesting Majesty, laid their Lives
at her Feet, and were the very men that in That Contest of the Succession
placed her on a Throne: But immediately when her Sovereign Power was securely
established, and his pious Holiness had bid her safely pull the Vizor off, no
sooner did Smithfield glow in the Piles of Blazing Heretics; But Chronicles more
particularly observe, that no people in her whole Kingdom felt so signal marks
of her Vengeance, as those very Men that raised her to the Throne. Her Princely
Gratitude for their Crowning her with a Diadem, Crowned Them with their
Martyrdoms.

But since we have mentioned her Princely Gratitude, 'twill not be amiss to
recollect one Instance more of so Exemplary a Virtue. In the Dispute betwixt
Here Is and the Lady Jane Grey's Title to the Crown, it was remarkable, that all
the Judges of England gave their Unanimous Opinions for the Lady Jane's
Succession, except one of them only, that asserted the Right of Mary: But it so
fell out, that This man proving a Protestant (notwithstanding of all the whole
Scarlet-Robe he had been her only Champion) was so barbarously persecuted by
her, that being first degraded, then imprisoned and tortured for his Religion,
the Cruelty of his Torments was so savage, that with his own hand he made
himself a way to escape 'em. And well might the violence of his Despair
testify his Sufferings were Intolerable, when he fled to so sad a Refuge as
Self-murder, for Deliverance. Fol. 5. and 6.

See how he Confounds himself here in his way of Reasoning: Because Q. Mary was
not so good as her Word; therefore No Popish Prince values himself upon his
Honor. It Is true, she brake her Promise with Norfolk, and Suffolk (as he
Reports it) that gave her the First Lift toward the Crown: But it is more then
he can justify to make it a premeditate Perfidy; as he renders it. For it is
the Opinion of our best Writers, that she was rather wrought upon, ex post
facto, to that Violation; But a Violation it was however; and there is no Excuse
for it. And it was a mean Ingratitude to the Generous Loyalty of those People,
whom (under favor) she did not treat worse then Others, but she did ill in not
using them better.

As to what concerns the matter of Title, the Lady Mary, claiming to the Crown
upon a Statute of 35. Hen. 8. and Edward the Sixth, being prevailed upon
afterward in his Death-sicknesse, contrary to the Intent and direction of that
Statute, to transfer the Succession, by Will, to the Lady Jane Gray, in favor
of a Faction that labored the Disinheriting of the Ladies Mary and Elizabeth;
all the Judges subscribed to the Disinherison of the Sisters, save only Sr.
James Hales; (Justice of the Common Pleas) who refused, upon a Conscience of
the Right, without any regard to the Person of the Lady Mary. This same Sr.
James Hales, for giving a Charge afterward, Derogatory to the Supremacy of the
Pope, was committed to Prison; but received Good Words and fair usage, some time
after. He Fell however into a deep melancholy, and in the Conclusion Drowned
himself. But I see no warrantable Authority for the Report of his being put to
the Torture; only the Author of the Character finds it convenient to have it
so, for the better grace of his Story. But we need not trouble our selves to
look so far back for Instances of Breach of Faith; this Last Age having made us
Famous for Perjurious Practices, beyond all that ever went before it. Witness
the whole Tract of our Late Troubles. But now comes Another Objection of his
own, with His Reply upon it.

Char. Suppose ( says he) that the Conservation of a Nations Peace, the
Dictates of a Princes Glory, and all the Bonds of Morality, cannot have any
Influence upon a Popish Successor; yet why may there not be that Prince, who
in veneration of his Coronation Oath, shall defend the Protestant Religion,
notwithstanding all his Private regret and inclinations to the Contrary? When,
rather then incur the infamous Brand of Perjury, he shall ty himself to the
Performance of That which not the force of Religion it self shall violate. And
Then, how can there be That Infidel of a Subject, after so Solemn an Oath, that
shall not believe him?

Why, truly, I am afraid there are a great many of those Infidells, ( says he)
and some that will give smart Reasons for their Infidelity: For, if he keeps
his Oath, we must allow, that the only Motive that Prompts him to keep it, is
some Obligation that he believes is in an Oath. But considering he is of a
Religion that can absolve Subjects from their Allegiance, to an Heretical,
Excommunicated Prince, nay Depose him, and take his very Crown away: Why may it
not much more release a King from his Faith to an Excommunicated, Heretical
People; by so much as the Ties of Vassals to Monarchs are greater then those of
Monarchs to Vassals.

By the Obligation of an Oath, I presume he means the Religious Obligation of
it; because he speaks of That Obligation from which the Pope pretends a power
to absolve him. Now if this be his Mind; That Obligation is not (as he says)
the only Motive to the keeping of his Oath; but there is a Super-Additional
Reason of State, and Political Contemplations, over and above. Take that for
granted once, that there is no Trusting to the Oath of a Roman Catholic
Prince; and ye cut the very Ligaments of Society, and Commerce. There Is an End
of All Treatyes, and Alliances; amicable and mutual Offices betwixt Christian
Princes, and States: Nay, in One word, erect but This Maxim; you turn Europe
into a Shambles, and put Christendom, without any more ado, into a State of
War. For where there is no Trust, there can be no Security: And then we know
upon Experience, that the Outrages of Jelousy, for the Preventing of Imaginary
Evils, are actually the most dreadful of Real ones themselves. This Opinion
makes us a Scorn and a Prey to Infidels, and Strips us of all that is Divine,
and Reasonable in us, together.

I am nor ignorant yet, either of the Doctrine, or of the Practice of several
Profligate Wretches of the Roman Communion, in This Impious Particular. But
they are such then as are wholly lost in Brutality and Blindness, and I
neither do, nor can believe all Papists to be equally susceptible of That
Unchristian Impression. It is a Position that may be made use of at a Dead
Lift, to serve a Political Turn. And the Trick will not pass neither, but upon
some Enthusiastique Sickheaded Zealot, that takes all his Dreams for Visions,
and the Vapors of his Distemper for Revelations. We have had of these Romish
Dispensations and Absolutions in abundance, among our Own Fanatical Jesuits,
and not only the Doctrie asserted, but the Duty also of abjuring our Oaths of
Allegiance and Canonical Obedience inculcated, and pressed upon the pain of
Imprisonment, Plunder and Damnation. Yet God forbid that the Acts of the
Conclave of a Close Committee, and the Determinations of an Ignatian Assembly
of Divines (the True Counter-Part of the Holy Society;) the Lord forbid (I say)
that This Cabal of audacious Extravagants, that took upon them to Discharge us
from the Obligations of the Ten Commandments, as well as of the Laws of the
Land, should reflect a Scandal upon the whole Body of our Communion, as if
Their Warrant were a Legitimation of Perjury and Rebellion, and the Doctrine of
King-killing, and Violence, were the Dictate of our Profession.

He touches a little lower upon the French Kings breaking in upon Flanders,
contrary to his Oath. [All the Motives (says he) that could provoke him to the
Breach of his Oath, were only his Ambition, a Lust of being Great, etc. Fol.
6.] So that he has now found out a Popish Prince, it seems, that sacrifices his
Conscience to his Glory, though but a little before he made it the Character of
a Popish Successor to sacrifice his Glory to his Religion. Now by the way, I
look upon Majesty as a Sacred Character, and not to be handled but with
Veneration: Wherefore whether his Assumption be True of False, I shall speak to
it only as a Supposition. He proceeds now to the ballancing of the matter.

If ( says he) a Roman Catholic can break an Oath only for the Pleasure of
Conquering, which he knows is doing Ill; Shall not a Popish Prince in England
have ten times more Inclination to break an Oath for the Propagation of his own
Faith, which his Conscience tells him is meritorious?

I Answer, that the breaking of an Oath, out of a Lust of being Great, is the
Crime properly of an Ambitious Prince, not of a Popish: For he does not consult
his Religion, but only his Glory, in the Committing of it. And the same Thirst
of Dominion, with the same degree of Indifference, as to the Business of Right
or wrong, in concurrence with the same Advantages of Power and Opportunity,
would have produced the very same essects in a Prince of any other Judgment.
Well, but he does an Ill thing knowingly; and so are most of the Ill things
that are done in the World, without any regard to the difference of Protestant
or Papist. But Then his Application of This Ill thing done to another Prince of
the same Persuasion is only the cutting of One Diamond with another; and
nothing at all to our Case.

But much more will a Popish Prince in England (says he) etc. -- Does it follow
Here that because a man would rather forswear himself to bring a Good thing to
pass, then a Bad one, (though we are to do no evil at all that Good may come
of it) that therefore for the compassing of a good end a man will forswear
himself? Neither have I ever as yer heard of the Merit of propagating any
Religion, by Perjury: Or that the Consciences of any sort of Christians could
justify them in a Crime which even Infidels themselves by the mere instinct of
Nature have in extreme abhorrence. And he follows the point yet further.

Char. He has Religion ( says he) to drive the Royal Jehu on; Religion that
from the beginning of the world, through all Ags, has set all Nations in a
Flame; yet never confessed it self in the Wrong.

These are strange words to come from the mouth of a pretender to Scruples, and
a Protestant Advocate. His Quarrel is not now so much to a Popish, as to a
Religious Successor. Nor is it any longer Popery, but Religion it self, that
he strikes at, as the dangerous and Obstinate Incendiary. Nay and since
Religion was in the world, it was never otherwise he says. So that here is a
very fair expedient hinted, for the good of Christendom, to exterminate this
Spirit of Discord (RELIGION) from off the face of the Earth. If he had said
only the Pretext of Religion, he might have Appealed, either to the Clamor of
his Brethren, or to his own Papers. For it is the Pretext that both Furnishes
the Fuel, and blows the Coal: while Religion lies burning in the Furnace.

Char. Beside ( says he) how can a Popish Prince, in attempting to Establish
his own Religion, believe he does his Subjects an Injustice, in that very thing
in which he does God Justice; or think he Injures Them, when he does their
Souls Right? Fol. 6.

This Pretense of doing God Justice, and the Souls of men Right; will entitle a
Prince, with a much more plausible Color, and a better Grace, to the breaking
in upon the Territories and Subjects of other Princes and States, under
Countenance of the same Design: For in that case, there is no Bar of an Oath
upon him; whereas the same Violence upon his own Subjects renders him Guilty of
a manifest Perjury.

But what does he mean by an Attempt to establish his own Religion? If it be by
way of Argument; it is well. But if he makes use of any compulsive act of
Authority, contrary to his Oath, he stands accountable to God for breach of
Faith; and does no Justice to God in it neither, nor Right to the Souls of his
People. For where is the justice to God, in making use of his Name to an
Imposture? and in rendering him not only a Witness, but in some sort, a Party to
a Cheat? And where is the Right to his Peoples Souls, in forcing them to the
Profession of a Religion with their Lips, which they abhor in their Hearts?
Or, in fine, how can a Popish Prince so much as pretend, either to the one, or
the other, against so clear a Light, both of Scripture and Nature? In short,
either he is indispensably bound to do the thing, or at liberty whether he will
do it or no: If the former, his Oath must be either a Nullity or a Fraud; and
if the other, his antecedent Obligation has determined that liberty. [But
Religious Phrenzy (says he, Fol. 7.) leaves that eternal intoxication behind
it, that where it commits all the Cruelties in the World, it is never sober
after to be sorry for it.] How truly, and how severely is this said? Witness the
impenitent Ends and Courses of all the Kings Murderers, both Dead and Living.
And now again [Thus (says he) Whilst a Popish King sets his whole Kingdom in a
Combustion; how little does he think he plays a Second Nero? Good
Conscienti-Man, not he; Alas! He does not Tune his Joys to the Tyrannick Nero's
Harp, but to David's milder and more sacred Lyre; whilst, in the height of his
pious Ecstasy, he sings Te Deum, at the Conflagration. ib.] Turn but Popish King
here, into Popish, Phanatical Faction, and what an admirable illustration is
this of the Brethrens Exultations and Thanksgivings, for the Ruin of their
Sovereign, the Holy Church, and Three Kingdoms? Nay, and the florid humor goes
on with him still. [Thus (says he) with an Arbitrary, unbounded Power, what
does his Licentious holy Thirst of blood do less, than make his Kingdoms a
larger Slaughterhouse, and his Smithfield an Original Shambles? Thus the Old
Moloch, once again revives, to feast and riot on his dear, human Sacrifice: And
whilst his fiery Iron hands, crush the poor Victim dead, the PROPAGATION of
RELIGION, and the GLORY of GOD (as he calls it) are the very Trumpets that
deafen all the feeble Cries of blood, and drown the dying Groans of what he
Murders. Ibid.] Can any Man read this Pathetical Figure of Tyranny and
Desolation, without turning the OLD MOLOCH into the GOOD-OLD-CAVSE; and calling
to mind the Glorious Sacrifices that were offered at White-Hall-Gate; upon
Tower Hill; Cheap Side; Charing Cross; and in a word, in all the Quarters of
His Majesty's Dominions, to that Mercyless and Insatiable Idol? To say nothing
of those Wholesale Carnages, at Edgehill, Newbury, Marston-Moor, Navesby,
etc. where the blood of loyal Subjects, and true Protestants, was spilt like
Water, and the Priests of Baal, all this while, with the PROPAGATION of
RELIGION, and the GLORY of GOD in their Mouths, celebrating, in their Pulpits
and Festivals, these Barbarous Triumphs. And yet again;

Char. Thus ( says he) whilst the bonds of Faith, Vows, Oaths and Sacraments
cannot hold a Popish Successor; what is that in an Imperial Head, but what in a
private Man we punish with a Jail and Pillory? whilst the Perjured Wretch
stands the Universal Marque of Infamy, and then is driven from all
Conversation, and like a Monster hooted from Light and Day.] Pray'e correct the
Errata' s of this passage, thus: For Popish Successor read Jesuitical
Covenanter; and for an Imperial Head read a Committee of Safety: And then ye
have the Mystery uncipher'd. [But the Pope (he says) and a Royal Hand, may do
any thing; there is a Crown in the case, to guild the deeds his Royal Engines
act.] This Pope and Royal Hand should have been their General Assembly; and
their (Pretended) Christ upon his Throne; and then Gods Cause, and according to
the Covenant hallows the Sedition -- Et quod.
Turpe est Cerdoni, Volesos, Brutosque decebit.
One Verse more would have expounded the whole business.
Ille Crucem sceleris Pretium, tulit, Hic, Diadema.


Char. They are still ( says he) that adorable Sovereign Greatness we must
kneel to, and obey. What if a little Perjured Villain has sworn a poor
Neighbor out of a Cow or a Cottage! Hang him, inconsiderable Rogue! His Ears
deserve a Pillory. But to VOW and COVENANT and FORSWEAR THREE KINGDOMS OVT OF
THEIR LIBERTIES AND LIVES; that is Illustrious and Heroique. There Is Glory in
great Atchievments, and Virtue in Success. Alas! a vast Imperial Nimro^ hunts
for Nobler Spoils; flies at a whole Nations Property and Inheritance. A Game
w^rthy a Son of Rome, and Heir of Paradise. And to lay the mighty scene of
ruin secure, he makes his Coronation Oath, and all his Royal Protestations
(those splendid Baits of premeditated Perjury) the Cover and Skreen to the
hidden fatal Toil, laid to ensnare a Nation. fol. 7.

Never were those Illustrious and He^oick Vowers and Covenanters, that for
swore three Kingdoms out of their Liberties and Lives, drawn so to the Life;
and five hundred Nimrods too upon the chase of our Property and Inheritance.
And it was a Game worthy of the Sons of Buchanan; and (if they may be their own
Godfathers) the Children of the Lord too, under the Cover of their ambiguous
Protestations; and their Holy League-Bands of Confederacy; they c^nceal'd the
Snare of that premeditated Perjnry, which was followed with so many dreadful
judgments upon the Nation.

He prosecutes his Subject with a Reply to the Objection, that 'its impossible
for a Popish Successor to introduce Popery into England. That the Jesuits, had
such a design; and that the whole Party believed it practicable, he evinces
from the Plot; and the prospect of a presumptive Popish Heir, rendered them
more confident of succeeding in it, fol. 7. and 8. And yet four or five Lines
further, he represents the difficulties of restoring Popery into England to be
almost insuperable: and so with just reflections upon the Paris, and Irish
Massacres; Villainies of Gunpowder Treasons, Conflagratiens, and Plots against
Kings and Kingdoms. He finishes that Paragraph.

I shall easily agree here to all the Ill that he says of the Seditious and
pragmatical Papists, without disputing one syllable of it. And yet I think it
very well worth our care, to distinguish betwixt zeal and clamor; and not
over-hastily to give credit to That Sort of People, whose method it is; first,
to make Papists odious; and then to make the Church of England Popish. And this
is not said neither to divert any man from a reasonable apprehension of the
other danger. There never was a greater noise of Popery, than in the Prologue
to the misfortunes of the late King. And what was the Ground, or what the Issue
of it? There was a Conspiracy to undermine the Government, and no way but that
to put the People out of their Wits, and out of their Duties together; and the
Project succeeded, to the actual subversion of the Government. And when the
Zelots had possessed themselves of the Quarry, they shared both public and
private Revenues among themselves, and fell afterward to the cutting of one
another's Throats, for the Booty; without one word more of Popery. In Brief, to
join in an Outcry against Papists, with those that Reckon Episcopacy to be
Popery, is to assist our Enemies toward the putting on of our own Shackles. And
it is gone so far too, that the Libellers, and their Dictators range them hand
in hand already; and you shall seldom see a Blow made at the Pope, without a
Lick at the Bishops. But the Project begins now to open.

Char. Let us now rightly consider how far the first Foundations of Popery
(vix. Arbitrary Power) may be laid in England. First, then, if a Papist Reign;
the Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all the Judiciary Officers are
of the King's Creation: and as such, how far may the influence of Preferment;
on baser Constitutions, culled out for his purpose, prevail even to deprave the
very Throne of Justice her self; and make our Judges use even our Protestant
Laws themselves to open the first Gate to Slavery.

We are just now upon a Preliminary to the Nineteen Old Propositions over
again. For fear of an Arbitrary Power, the King was not to be trusted with the
Choice of his own Officers. But no though taken for the securing of the
Government from Popular Tumults and Insurrections; in case of lodging that
trust in any other hand. Beside the putting of the King into an incapacity of
providing for the justice, and security of the Government. But he is so far
however in the right; that the perverting of that power may endanger the State.
And for that consideration, it is a Trust not to be parted with, lest it should
once more be re-apply'd to the destruction of the King and People, as it was
before. It is a certain Truth, that a Prince, by the abuse of his Power may
prove a Tyrant. But it is as certain again, that there is not any form, or
temperament of Sovereignty imaginable, that is not liable to the same
possibility. For Tyranny it self, is only the straining of the Essential and
necessary powers of Government beyond their pitch. We have experimented the
worst effects of Usurpation, and Corruption; and of turning the Equity of the
Law against the Letter of it; nay of setting up the Laws themselves against the
very authority that made them. And all this would never have done the work
neither, if the faction had not supplied the want of Laws for their purpose in
some cases, and superseded others that were against them, by an Arbitrary
Device of Votes, and Ordinances. So that the hazard is nothing so great as he
represents it, in the hand of a Prince, for want of that power of Enacting and
Repealing, which the Faction possessed themselves of by an Usurpation. But
alas! (says he, Page 8.) The Laws in corrupted Judges hands have been too often
used as barbarously as the Guests of Procrustes, who had a Bed for all
Travelers; but then he either cut them shorter, or stretched them longer, to
fit them to it,

And is not this very charitably done now; to imagine the worst things that
either ever were or can be done; Of a Prince, (admitting my Author's
supposition) whose Empire, Safety; Donions; and the welfare of whose People,
are all dependent upon his good behavior, and justice? So that he ventures his
All on the one side, to get nothing on the other, Here is the fancy of remote
and uncertain difficulties, oppo'sd to our present security and well-being! and
after a Capital Sentence, pronounced with a formality of Law, upon an Imperial
Prince, as a Traitor to the Sovereignty of the People; We are now opening the
way to bring another Prince to the Scaffold. For that is the Scope of several
Virulent Libels, both printed and written, that have at present, their free
course without control? These are the Incendiaries I speak of, and no other.
[Well (says he again) but if the public Ministers of Justice betray the
Liberty of the Subject; The Subject may Petition for a Parliament to punish 'em
for it. But what if he will neither hear one, nor call the other? who shall
compel him?] This is a very artificial way of getting a shoot at the King
through the Duke; and to intimate the Exercise of an Arbitrary Power, by this
manner of supposing it. It was by these very steps of accusing evil
Councillors; crying out for justice against them; and for a Parliament to
punish them; that the Faction mounted the Government, and stripped his Majesty;
first of his Friends; then of his Revenue; next of his Liberty; and lastly of
his Life, and all this was actually done, for fear of no body knew what. There Is
no doubt (says the Character) but he will find sufficient assistance from the
Pope, English Papists, and Foreign Princes; beside the Revenues of the Crown.
And then having but a prudent eye, and a tenacious hand to manage his
Exchequer; we shall find he will never call that People he shall never have need
of, fol. 8.] He supposes here an assistance for a Prince in possession of his
Crown. But an assistance for what, unless in case of a Rebellion? Or is it an
assistance to enable him to live without Parliaments? As if Foreign Princes
would be at that charge, to be never the better sor't. Or if he means a
Military Assistance toward the settling of him in the Possession of an Absolute
Power; his Interest undoubtedly will be much greater in the supporting of him
as an Heir, than in advancing him as a Tyrant; beside, that for one English Man
to serve him in such an unwarrantable design, he will have an hundred, in case
of any unjust delusion, to stand by him in the defense or recovery of an
nndoubted Right. This is only the quitting of one Pamphlet with another; and to
make use of that liberty my self which is allowed to others. [But all this
while (says he) the Pope is not Absolute. There wants a Standing Army to Crown
the Work: And he shall have it, for who shall hinder him? Nay, all his
Commanders shall be present qualified, even by our Protestant Test, for the
employment.] We have not forgot the Time when one standing Army was Raised for
fear of another; and between Thirty and Forty Thousand Men kept in Pay for a
matter of thirteen or fourteen years together, when the War was over, and not
one Enemy left in the Field; one King imprisoned, and another in Banishment;
Taxes multiplied; The People peeled to the very Bones; and the Persons and
Estates of Freeborn English Men subjected to the most Scandalous Tyranny that
ever was inflicted upon reasonable Creatures. And what was the Ground and
Foundation of this Calamity? The Multitude were Buzzed in the Head, that the
King was Popishly inclined, and governed by Jesuitical Councels; nothing but
Papists about him, and two or three Antichristian Bishops (a Pack of Tories,
and Tantvies) and a mighty noise there was of German Horse, and the bringing of
an Army up to Town to awe the City, and the Parliament: and the very fear alone
of these shadows Transported them into the uttermost extremities of rage and
confusion. It Is true, there was no Plot afoot then, as there is now; but they
made sufficient shift, without it, to do their own, and the Kingdoms business.
You shall now see the Composition of his Popish Successor's Standing-Army. He
shall have enough Men of the Blade out of one half of the Gaming Houses in
Town, to Officer twice as many Forces as he shall want: It Is true, they shall
be men of no Estates, nor Princples, etc.] He should even have gone on, when
his hands were in, and quartered his new Leveys in Lambeth House, or Paul's, as
in the days of his Forefathers. But is not this better yet, than Spiriting away
of Apprentices from their Masters; decoying the poor Wenches out of their
Bodkins and Thimbles, and squeezing a Rebellion out of the Gospel? We have seen
an Army of pretended Saints, to the value of Twenty or Thirty Thousand in a
Body; and as many Religions, as Men: every Article of the Creed called in
question; and the Lord's Prayer exploded as a stinting of the Spirit. This and
a great deal more, and worse, is true, to the very Letter. But forward [And
that this Army may be more quietly raised; how many honorable pretenses may be
found, fol. 9.] Very right. As the fetching of the King home to his Parliament;
the delivering of him out of the hands of Papists. The defense of his person,
and just rights, in the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion; and all
this, in the Style of his Majesty's most humble, and obedient Subjects.
[Perhaps (says he) the greatest and most importunate preservation of the
Kingdom shall call for it and then upon second thoughts, instead of defeating
some Foreign Enemy, they are opportunuely ready to cut our Throats at home; if
we do not submit, and give all that this King shall ask, bid.] This ingenuous
Author has directly Translated the true History of the Rise and Advance of the
late Rebellion, into a Prophetical Computation of the Methods and Proceedings
which the World is to expect from a Popish King. Did not they seize those very
Arms that the King had provided for the Relief of Ireland? and employ them
against his Majesty's very Person at Edg-hil? And were not those very Troops
that were Raised, as they swore, for the defense of the City of London,
Quartered upon the Citizens, to Ruin, and Enslave them.

Char. Thus far ( says he) we have given the Pourtraicture of a Popish King:
And now, let us take a draught of his Features in his Minority; that is, while
he is only a Popish Heir Apparent, I.d.

After the Preamble of an Imaginary Prince, elevated to the height of a
Generous and a glorious Character; with a Supposal of a People too not unworthy
of the blessing of such a Sovereign; and a smooth Reproach in the end of it, to
intimate how much he is beholden to them; he advances as follows.

Char. Now ( says he) let suppose, after a long Tranquillity of this matchless
Monarchs R^ign, that the immediate Heir to his Crown, and a part of his Blood,
by the Sorceries of Rome is cankered into a Papist.] His meaning is easily
supposed, by stabbing of the very Paper, whenever he comes near him. [And to
pursue this Land^hape, suppose we see this once happy Flourishing Kingdom (so
far as in all Duty and Reason bound) concerned for themselves, their Heirs and
their whole Countries Safety; till with an honest, cautious, prudent Fear they
begin to inspect a Kingdoms Universal Health; till weighing all the Symptoms of
its State, they plainly descry those Pestilential Vapors fermenting, that may
one day infect their Air, and sicken their World, and see that rising Eastern
Storm engendring, that will once bring in those more then Egyptian Locusts,
that will not only fill their Houses, and their Temples, but devour their
Labors their Harvests, and their Vintages] Here Is a Period for an Apothecary.
The Inspectors (I suppose) of our Body politic may be Three or Four of our
Anabaptistical Protestant Intelligencing Water Casters of the State. And these
are the men that so plainly descry the pestilential vapors, he speaks of,
which in effect are no other then the Breath of their own Lungs. But is it an
Eastern Storm that they see engendring? why then the wind is turned, I
perceive, for the Locusts of 40 and 43 came out of the North; and did us all
the mischiefs too, of his Egyptian Locusts. And now he has given us the State
of our Disorder; he is so kind as to pr^scribe toward our Relief, which is in a
few words, That the Nation [like true Patriots do anticipate their woes, with a
present sense of the future miseries they foresee, fol. 9.] which is as much as
to say: Up. and be dring, Now again

Char. What is This Popish Heir in the Eye of England, but perhaps the
greatest, and only Grievance of the Nation; the Universal Object of their Hate
and Fear, and the Subject of their Clamours and Curses? ( methinks he might
afford the Kings Brother a little better Language) at whose door, ly^their
Discontents and Murmurs; but it is murmurs so violent, that they thrust in
amongst their very Prayers ( So did Curse ye Meroz) and become almost a part of
their Devotions.

(The Prophet David's Curse is fallen upon them, Their Prayer is turned into Sin)
Murmurs so bold, that they dare approach the very Palace, nay Throne and Ear of
Majesty, fol. 10.] Here Is a large step advanced upon the King himself; but you
shall see him come closer by and by, [Whenever (says he*) the People of England
reflect on this Heir as their King in reversion, they have reason to look upon
him as no better than Jupiter' s Stork amongst the Froggs. Yes, notwithstanding
all his former Glories and Conquests, his whole Stock of Fame is so lost, and
buried in his Apostasy from the Religion; and conseqnently, the Interest of
these Protestant Kingdoms, that all his Services are Cancelled, and his whole
Mass of Glory corrupted, ibid.] I find some People of Opinion, that this King
in reversion is of the same Persuasion at this day; that he was, when he
acquired all those Glories: But let that pass, and see now what is the sum of
all this Flourish, but a labored Piece of spiteful Art, to render the Brother
of his Sacred Majesty as odious as the soulest Character, and Calumny can make
him You shall fee presently that This Venom against the Duke will terminate in
the King; and that instead of a Christian, and pious Zeal for Religion, the end
of it is to inflame a desperate Distemper in the State. It is, in short, a
Character of the worst of men, adapted to a suitable Religion: And exposed to
the World, in an uncharitable account of things, which he cannot possibly
foreknow. His next supposal is a Rhetorical Speculation; and not without
Reflections bold enough, upon the unchangeable affection of his Majesty to his
Royal Brother.

What (says he) can the consequence of this unhappy Friendship be; but that
the very Souls and Loyalties of almost a whole Kingdom are staggered at this
fatal Conjunction; till I am afraid there are too many, who in detestation of
that one Gangreen'd Branch of Royalty can scarce forbear (how undutifully
soever) to murmur and revile even at that Imperial Root that cherishes it?
Ibid.] What a strange Usurpation is this, not only upon Majesty, but Human
Nature; not to allow a Prince the freedom of those affections which he can no
more put off than his Reasonable Being? But this is the Loyalty of the Old
Stamp, that still gives the Sign with a Hail Master, and a Kiss. But how comes
this Pamphlet to undertake for the sense of the whole Kingdom? It is not that
he finds them so much disaffected, but he endeavors to make them so; by
teaching and animating the Sedition that he would be thought to fear. Nay, so
far is he from being afraid of the undutiful murmurs he seems to apprehend;
that it is scarce possible to do more toward the creating of them. And look now
how he grows upon His Majesty. [ Those very Knees (says he) that but now, would
have bowed into their very Graves to serve him, grow daily and hourly so far
from bending (as they ought) to a Crowned Head, till they are almost as
stubborn as their Petitions and Prayers have been ineffectual.] What is this to
say, but in his way of intimation to insinuate -- what the Reader will easily
understand, though more than I am willing to express.

Char. Thus (says he) whilst a Popish Heirs extravagant Zeal for Rome, makes
him shake the very Throne that upholds him, by working and encroaching on the
affections of His Majesty, for that Protection and Indulgence that gives birth
and life to the Heart-burnings of a Nation; what does he otherwise than in a
manner stabb his King, his Patron, and his Friend, in his tenderest part, his
Loyal Subjects hearts? which certainly is little less than to play the more
lingering sort of Parricide; a part so strangely unnatural, that even Salvages
would blush at, yet this Religion, ncorrigible remorseless Religion never
shrinks at. Folio 10.

It is worth observing, that throughout this whole Character of a Popish
Successor, the Author of it lays more load upon the Heir than upon the
Religion; for he treats the Latter still in the terms of a fair and generous
enemy; but when he comes to the Other, he shoots Poisoned Arrows, Parricide,
Gangreen'd, and the like, without any respect either to Modesty or Honor. And
what is the whole Tract indeed, but an artificial Declamation, without so much
as one ill thing in it, bating the Persuasion, that is either liable to a proof,
or possible for him to know: And yet he does as boldly pronounce upon things to
come, as if he had the Book of Fate in his Pocket. He charges the Successor
here, with encroaching upon the Kings Affections.

It was a little while ago, only the invincible tenderness of His Majesty; but
it is now turned into the working and insinuation of his Brother: who stabbs
the King (says the Character-Writer) in the Hearts of his Loyal Subjects. But
what if it should happen that the King should be here stabbed thorough the
Duke? It was at this rate, that Laud and Strafford stabbed the late King too.
And what was the end on it; but that when the Kings Friends were removed, under
the Character of his Enemies; his Sacred Majesty left naked and defenseless,
those Hypocrites that had nothing in their Mouths, but Loyalty and Religion;
those were the very Men that stabbed him themselves. This is the plain
Historical Fact, without either amplifications or colors.

But if you will see a figure upon the Stretch; observe his next fancy; where he
makes the Duke a Parricide for killing the King in the hearts of his People, by
his applications and respects to His Majesty. And a Parricide (as he phrases
it) so strangely unnatural too, that even Pagans would blush at it. Is this
Jest or Earnest now? is it a pang of Duty and Conscience? Or is it not rather
the Luxuriancy of a high-flown thought? How comes it to be so flagitious a
crime, for one brother to love another, that Humane Nature must be startled at
it? Or that a Prince may not presume to venture upon the Duties of
Christianity, Natural Affection, Friendship, Honor and Humanity, for fear of
being called to account for it in a Pamphlet? Well! but he tells us of the
Heart-burnings of the Nation at this conjunction; and for that reason, he
expects, it seems, that His Majesty shall relinquish his Brother. But what if a
Man should ask him, First, How he knows this to be the sense of the Nation?
Secondly, What Commission he has to tell the World so? And Thirdly, How he
comes so positively to assert that it is so; when it is clear, on the contrary
that it is not so? For the Peoples quarrel is to the Religion only, whereas the
Authors is principally to the Duke. But let us give him these Heart-burnings
for granted; and see how far a concession upon that point will carry us at
last. First, The Duke Marches off; and then the Kings Ministers back after him;
and then goes the Militia: and so in course, the Bishops, the Revenue, etc. To
the end of the Chapter of Forty Eight: and all this, to gratify one longing
after another, till, in the conclusion, another Government turns up Trump.
Plato Redivivus has the whole Scheme of the Project ready cut and dried. This
was the very Method of our Ruin; and the name of Religion led the way to it. A
Covenanted, and, in his own Words, an incorrigible, re^orseless Religion. But
why these Heartburnings, now the Duke is out of the Kingdom? unless they would
him out of the World too? And that would not serve neither; for so long as
there is a Service Book, a Surplice, or a Canonical Habit in the Kingdom, and
this Humor kept a foot, there shall never want Popery to work upon. The next
clause speaks the plainest English we have had yet.

Char. The Nation in studying to prevent Tyranny grew jealous of Monarchy, and
for fear of their Moneys going the wrong way they will give none at all, but
rather triumph in His Majesty's greatest wants, even when his glory, nay
possibly when his nearest safety calls for their assistance. Fol. 11. This way
of saying that they will not give Money, (which is more yet than he knows)
carries the force of an Advice that they should not; which is the thing that
this passage manifestly intends and designs. So that is the rest of the Nation
were of his mind, the French King might have this Kingdom for the asking; for
both King and People upon these terms are manifestly abandoned as a sacrifice
to this jealousy.

Toward the bottom of the same page he brings in a Deliberation to this effect:
This Popish Prince cannot either help his Persuaasion or relinquish it; nor is
it a thing to be exacted from him that he should. The Grievances of the Kingdom
may be his unhappiness and not his fault; for he is only passive, and lives to
himself, without meddling to encourage or favor Popery in the least. But how
does it follow (says he Fol. 12.) that if we do not plainly see him act, that
he does not act. But how does it follow on the other side, say I, that he does
act if no body can prove it? It is the rule of Christian Charity in doubtful
cases ever to judge the best, but the Author of this Character does not think
fit to walk by this rule; for first he casts with himself what is the worst
that can happen, and then he improves the far-fetched possibility of that worst
of Events into a Prediction, that certainly that thing shall come to pass. And
then he considers how mean and wicked it is possible for Flesh and Blood to be,
and those Vices and Imperfections jumbled together are the Ingredients that
make up his Character.

Char. But to the Objection ( says he) the Grievance of a Nation may be his
unhappiness, and not his Fault, etc. That is in short; He cannot help it. Very
right. And so when This Popish Heir comes to the Crown, and promotes the Romish
Interest with all the severity, Injustice and Tyranny that Religious Cruelty
can invent. His Answer will be, He cannot help it; or at least cannot withstand
those irresistible Motives that prompt him to their Execution; which is the
same thing.

Will he have it then that our Actions and our Thoughts are bound up alike,
under a determinate, and insuparable necessity, of our doing this or that, as
well as of thinking so or so? Or will he call those motives, irresistible, that
do only prompt, and invite us to the doing of any thing? He has screwed up
Tyranny and injustice here, to the highest degree of cruelty and terror. And
now if this barbarous rigor be so inseparable from the Genius of the Religion;
how comes it that a French Popish King should be better natured to his Subjects
of the Reformed Religion, then he will allow an English Popish King capable of
being toward his Protestant Subjects. [The same impulse of Conscience (he
says) that makes a man a Roman Catholic, will make him Act like one, when
opportunity serves. Ibid. That Is very Right; but I cannot yet think that any
Party of men will pretend explicitly to authorize the putting of Christians to
death, purely upon a Consideration of Religion, and Conscience, in order to the
propagation of the Gospel. And yet I know, the Jesuits, of both Churches have
gone a great way toward it. Cursed be he (says Case, in the late Rebellion)
that witholdeth his Sword from Blo^d; that spares when God says strike, etc.
[The Papist (he says) is of a Religion that makes humane merit the Path of
Salvation:] and so he passes into a very florid descant upon the Abuses, in the
Church of Rome, of this wonder-working merit. And our dissenting Papists, in
the late times, came not one jote behind them, in making it the daily Theme of
the Pulpit, to Preach Salvation to all that di'd in the Cause.

Char. And then again, Popery is a Religion that does not go altogether in the
Old Fashion Apostolical way of Preaching and Praying, and teaching all Nations,
etc. But scourging, and racking, and broiling 'em into the fear of God. A
Religion that for its own propagation, will at any time authorize its Champions
to divest themselves of their Humanity, and act worse than Devils to be Saints.

These are dreadful Cruelties; but if this fierceness arise from any principle
of rigor in the System of their Faith, methinks they should treat all alike;
for if it be upon an Impulse of Conscience, it becomes a Duty. The Jesuits here
in our Covenant Pers^cution were pretty good at this way of Discipline too.
There was no scou^ging, racking, and broiling, it is true; but there was
plundering, sequestering, starving, imprisoning, poisoning in Gaols, and
refusing the Holy Communion to Anti-Covenanters upon their Death bed. There was
a general Massacre propounded of all the Cavaliers that had been in arms, which
I am well assured was carried but by one voice in the negative. There were
upward of a hundred sequestered Ministers crowded into a prison, where they
knew there was a raging Plague; and, as I am credibly informed, there was not a
thirtieth part of them came off alive. And for these Diabolical Actions the
Persecutors were enrolled into the number of the Saints.

Char. Nay (says he) the very outrage of Thefts, Murders, Adulteries, and
Rebellions are nothing to the pious Barbarities of a Popish King. The Murderer
and Adulterer, may in time be reclaimed by the Precepts of Morality, and the
Terrors of Conscience. The Thief, by the dread of a Gallows, may become honest.
Nay, the greatest Traitor, either by the fear of Death or the Apprehensions of
Hell may at last Repent: But a Papist on a Throne has an unconsutable
Vindication for all his Proceedings, Challenges his Commission, even from
Heaven, for all his Cruelty he dares Act; and when all the Enchantments of Rome
have touched his Tongue with a Coal from Her Altars, what do his Enthusiasms
make him believe, but that the most savage, and most hellish Dooms his blinded
Zeal can pronounce, are the Immediate Oracles of God: fol. 13.]

If it had not been for Popish King, Papist, and Rome, I should have taken this
last Paragraph for the Picture of a Kirk-Conclave. For first, though there was
Theft, Murder, and Rebellion, abundantly in their proceedings; yet so
Transcendent was the wickedness of their blasphemous Bands and Associations; so
horrid the Forms of their Calling the Searcher of all hearts; with hands lifted
up to the most high God, etc. to witness the joining of themselves in a holy
Covenant unto the Lord; (which holy Covenant was yet in the very first
conception and intent of it, a premeditate Complottery to destroy That in
Effect, which in Terms they swore to defend) All other sins (I say) were as
nothing, in the Balance against this Catilinary, and bloody Sacrament. And so
remarkable was the Reprobated Impenitence that followed upon it, as if the
Devil himself had come in, to the Signing and Sealing of that Religious
Mockery, both upon God and Man; and turned the Hypocritical Covenant into a
Magical Contract.

As for those that took it with good meaning, or perhaps out of weakness, and
surprise; (though I my self was none of the number) I make no doubt, but that
God has given to many of them a true sense of their mistake; but for those
that designingly, and frankly leagued themselves in that Combination; I am at a
loss, even according to the largest allowances of Christian Charity, where to
find three Converts; the Living persisting still in the obligation of that
Oath; and those that were taken off by the hand of justice, asserting it to the
Death. I bear my Testimony, (says Kid, that was Executed in Scotland, as a
Rebel; Spirit of Popery, fol. 7. to the Solemn League and Covenant, as it was
professed and sworn in Scotland, England and Ireland, in 1643. etc. And again,
Ibid) Prelacy, as it is now Established by a pretended Law, is destructive
downrightly to the sworn Covenants; yea, not only Prelacy, Popery, Malignancy,
and Heresy, but Supremacy; and every thing Originally upon, and derivate from
it. And further (fol. 17.) The Three Kingdoms are Married Lands; so I die in
the faith of it, that there will be a Resurrection of Christ's Name, Cause, and
Covenant. And so likewse King, that was Executed in Scotland too, ( Id. fol.
42.) I bear my witness and Testimony to our Covenants National, and Solemn
League betwixt the Three Kingdoms; which Sacred and Solemn Oath I believe
cannot be dispensed with, nor loosed by any Person, or party upon Earth; ( And
fol. 43.) I bear witness against the Ancient Christian Prelacy, etc. and
against all Oaths and Bonds contrary to our Covenant, and Engagement,
especially that Oath of Suprem^cy, etc. And so Mitchel, Weir, etc. See Ravillac
Redivivus. They do all of them sing the same Note.

Now take all together; the deliberate wickedness of their first Resolve upon
the Covenant; their profane and daring Hypocrisy in the very Frame, and
wording of it; the counterfeiting of Gods Authority for Sacrilege, and
Rebellion in pursuance of it: and lastly, the maintaining and defending of all
their impieties, to the last Gasp. A man may defy all the Story of the world,
sacred and profane, to show any other Party of Men that we^e ever lost under
so dreadful a der^liction. But yet there is something of a perverse Bravery in
renouncing it at last, and after all their ^ndignities put upon the G^d of
Truth, in making some conscience yet of keeping Touch with the Spirit of
Delusion. And now to finish the Parallel betwixt our Dissenting Papists, and
his Jesuitcal: We have our Enthusiasts too, that vent their Dreams and Vapors
for Oracles. But to shorten the matter; Bayli'es Disswasive will abundantly
satisfy the Reader upon this Subject.

He passes from hence to a reply upon a supposition, [that such Laws may be
made beforehand, as will make it impossible for a Popish King to set up Popery
in England] But that ( says he) would be like hedging in the Cuckoo, etc. for
who shall call this King to question for breaking these Laws, if he has the
power and will to do it? This Question ( fol. 13.) might serve for a piece of
an Answer to a Contradiction he puts upon himself, fol. 20. which we shall
handle in course.

If the Law has put it out of his power; there is no longer any place for the
supposal of a power; unless by Foreign Force, which would presently improve a
private Jealousy of Religion into the public Rupture of a National Quarrel, to
the almost inevitable, and irreparable Loss of his Reputation, his Friends, and
his Dominions together* Now the other way, in case of his being injuriously
excluded, it would be forty times more easy for Him to recover his Pretensions
from abroad, by a Foreign Assistance, in concurrence with such an English
Interest, as a generons Compassion to his Wrong, a Respect for his Person, and
the Justice of his Title would certainly create him, than to erect an absolute
Power against the Wills and Hearts of his People: and contrary to all the
measures of Equity and Prudence. And to do all this too, while he might live
and reign easily and comfortably to himself and his Subjects, within the limits
of a Legal Administration.

And if he can never expect to gain this point, by calling in Auxillaries from
beyond the Seas: much less will he be able to do it, upon the bottom of his own
Interest, and within himself: For there must go a great many more hands than
his own to such a work. And to say that he may do it, by his Officers or
Ministers, by the force of Gratifications, Pensions, or the Promises and Hopes
of Preferment and Advantage: That Objection may be easily obviated: For it is a
thing of clear and easy prospect: the Forming of such a Scheme of Laws for
securing the Bounds of the Government, as no man that has either a Neck, or a
Fortune to lose, will dare to violate.

But the bare Power, if he had it, would signify nothing neither: unless the
Will as he says goes along with it. Now if he may WILL he may NILL too: So
that he is left at Liberty to make his Election either of the One, or of the
Other, which has, in a great measure, discharged him of the pretended Impulse
of Religion, and translated the Exception from the Papist to the Person:
Founding the apprehension upon a pretended Foresight of Tyranny and double
Dealing, in That Princes Character? which being a thing that is only to be seen
with His Spectacles, and a Prognostic Peculiar to His way of Calculation,
we will go to the next.

I will not deny ( says he ibid.) but a Popish King may be totally restrein'd
from all Power of Introducing Popery, by the Force of such Laws as may be made
to tie up his hands: but then they must be such as must ruin his Prerogative,
and put the Executive Power of the Laws into the hands of the People.] This
shift does not at all either weaken, or avoid my Assertion, for the Kings hands
are sufficiently tied, in holding the hands of his Ministers: And This may be
done (so far as is necessary for This purpose) without any Diminution to his
Royal Dignity. If the transferring of the Executive Power to the People, that
is to say Deposing of him, would do the Job, the Character will show us by and
by, how That may be done, without need of New Laws, and in spite of Old Ones.

But what Monarch ( says he) will be so unnatural to his blood: So ill a
Defender, and so weak a Champion for the Royal Dignity he wears, as to sign and
ratify such Laws as shall entail That Effeminancy, and that Servility on a
Crown as shall render the Imperial Majesty of England but a Pageant, a mere
Puppet upon a wire?] He does well to presume that a Prince will not Unking
himself: but he would do better yet to keep himself clear from such
Propositions and Principles as lead to that D^posing End. For whatsoever
strikes at the Crown, in a Papist, falls, upon the Rebound, on the Royal
Authority in a Protestant. ( But (says he, ib.) If no King will assent to make
Laws to do it this way, and no Laws can do it the other, all Laws against Popery,
in case of a Popish Successor, are as I told you before, but building the
Hedge, etc] This Author seems to scrupulize more then needs upon the fear (...)
Cramping the Prerogative: For he himself will show us by and by how to do that
without a Law, which he despairs of ever seeing done by one. If he had thought
of what the King has lately parted with out of his Prerogative, for the
begeting of a Plenary Trust and Confidence in his People, he would not have
despaired of any Condescension from his Majesty, for the securing of his
Subjects in their Properties and Religion, after so much more done for them
already than that, which is here propounded, amounts to. He tells us ( fol.
14.) of the danger of the Pop^s Supremacy; and I must tell him, that within the
Kings Dominions, the Supremacy of the Kirk is every jote as dangerous.
Wherefore let us look to our selves both ways; as well against those Papists
that did murder the Last King, as those other Papists that are in the Plot to
destroy This. No doubt (Says he) but the Fire that burns the Heretic
Lawmakers, shall give their Laws the same Martyrdom.] If they have power, it is
probable enough that they will: But their's a great difference in the case,
betwixt a Prince and his own Subjects, and the Pope, and Stranger Hetiques: The
one destroys his Enemies, the other, his Friends: The Pope is in One Barque,
the Heaetiques in ^onother, and the one may Sink, and the other Swim; now the
King being in the same bottom with his People, if he runs the Vessel upon a
Rock, they are all cast away together.

Ch^r. With this certain prospect, both of the ruin of their Estates, Lives
and Liberties, where lies the Sin in the Commons of England, to stand upon
their Guard against a Popish Successor? Aye, a Gods name let them stand upon
their Gaurds, and use all expedients to keep out Popery and Tyranny; provided
still that we preserve the sacred Succession in its right line, for that we are
told, both King and People a^e obliged in conscience to defend and uphold.

This clause has both more and less in it, than a body would imagine; and a man
hardly knows either how to meddle with it, or how to let it alone. He begins
with the assumption of a thing certainly proved; though without any color,
that I can find, of making it out to be so much as probable; and barely
possible, is the mos^ that I can make on it. Nay, and it is not that neither,
without imputing more of Ranc^ur and Implacable Virulency of Nature to his
Popish Successor, than ever any Man yet discovered, either before, ^r beside
the Author of this Character. But however, upon that substratum, he takes up
the Quarrel (as he would have it understood) of the Commons of England. Where
lies the sin (says he) in the Commons of England, to stand upon their Guard
against a Popish Successor] This is only a Gin set for a Woodcock, under the
Equivoque of the Commons of England; so that if a Man speaks only to the
Multitude, and he applys it to the Representative, there may be matter picked
out of it for an Enformation; Why, who says there is any sin in it? And then
there is Guard and Guard. People are said one way to be upon their Guard with
their Swords in their hands; and another way, with their eyes in their heads.
But I presume he speaks to the multitude; and he speaks too in the Style of
Authority. Let them stand upon their Guard (says he) as if he were giving
Orders. He might as well have said, Let them stand to their Arms: and his
expression (of all expedients) expounds it so, even allowing him to be his own
Interpreter; for the business is to keep out Popery and Tyranny. And he makes
it one expedient, ( fol. 2.) and an essential one too, to act the Offensive
part as well as the Defensive; Provided still (says he) that we preserve the
Sacred Succession in its right Line; for that we are TOLD, both King and People
are obliged in Conscience to defend and uphold.] That same little word TOLD, is
a most Emphatical Mockery: and then, provided that the Succession be secured,
all other expedients are pronounced lawful. Methinks he might have thought of a
Proviso too for the securing of the Kings Honor, Dignity, Person, Government,
and the Peace of his Dominions: which are, at the rate of his latitude of
allowance, all of them equally concerned in the danger with the Succession.

He proceeds now to debate the matter of Conscience: And if we find him as
Tender as he is Zealous; as good a Christian on the Subjects side, as on the
Patriots; as careful to uphold the Sacred Character of Majesty, as to prevent
the Excesses of Tyranny; and finally, as clear a Casuist, as he is a powerful
Orator, there will be no contesting any further with him.

Char. First then (says he) let us fancy we see this Popish Heir on his
Throne, and by all the most illegal and Arbitrary Means contrary to the whole
Frame and Hinges of the English Government, introducing Popery with that Zeal
and Vigor till his in^atuated^ Conscience has perverted the King into a
Tyrant.

What a fancy of a fancy is here! that for want of fact and argument is fain
to have recourse to Imaginations and Dreams. And to what end is all this, but
by disgusting of the People at the ways of Providence, set them a hankering
after State-Wizzards again, and Strange-Gods, for the knowledge of things to
come? wherefore let me once again inculcate that of 27 Jer. Hearken not ye to
your Prophets, nor to your Diviners, nor to your Dreamers, (which is the same
with phansiers) nor to your Inchanters, nor to your Sorcerers, which speak to
you saying, you shall not serve the King of Babylon. For they Prophecy a Ly
unto you; to remove you far from your Land. Let us, for the Honor of our kind,
either live and act and reason like Men, or else down upon all four, and away
into the Woods and Rocks, and hunt and growl'd and tear one another to pieces
like Beasts. But we'll discourse the matter a little.

Well! The English are certainly the Freest and the Happiest People upon the
Face of the Earth. Ay; but we shall be all Slaves e're't be long. When Is that?
When the Popish Heir comes to the Crown. Ay; but when is that again? When the
King is dead. Well, but when is the King to Die? Nay, I cannot tell that. How
long has the Popish Heir to live? I cannot tell that neither. Will the Queen
have any Children? Nor that neither. How long will the Queen live? How should I
know that? Will the King survive her or not? I cannot tell. Will he Marry again
if he does? I cannot tell that neither. Will he have any Children if he Marrys
again? Who knows? But what if the Heir should not live to come to the Crown?
but it may be he may though. And it may be he may not. Ay, but I PHANSY that he
will.

Well! But suppose he should come to the Crown. What then? Why then he will set
up Popery and Tyranny. Not whether he can or no. Why, how did Queen Mary? She
had the odds on her side; for the Papists were then, in a manner, as the
Protestants are now. And yet, coming in betwixt two Protestants, Popery, ye
see, went off as it came on. But still there was a Persecution. It Is true,
there was; but all Princes are not alike. Q. Mary Persecuted the Protestants;
Henry the Fourth of France did not so. And it is as good an inference from the
instance of Henry IV. that the Popish Heir will not be a Persecutor, as from
that of Queen Mary that he will. But where the Popes Authority intervenes, both
King and People are bound to obey. And yet you see that for all the Power of
the Pope, and the Covenant of the Holy League to boot, the People of France,
though Roman Catholics, would not submit to the Dis-possessing of a
Protestant Successor; neither did that generous Prince, upon the Reconciling of
himself afterward to the Church of Rome, exercise any one act of Tyranny over
his Protestant Subjects; which is enough said upon this point. Well, but I
PHANSY it will be Popery and Tyranny yet, for all this.

Well! but to go a little further with you, now suppose it should come to a
down right Persecution? Aye, but we must stand upon our Guards to prevent it.
That would be more than ever the Primitive Christians did under the Ten
Persecutions: And we have not only their Example, but their Express Doctrine
against it. And we are never the better Protestants for being the worse
Christians: So that here is only Phansy set up in opposition to Religion, Reason
and Experience. And That Is enough in all Conscience too: For there needs no
more then the Flames of a distempered Spleen to cause an Earthquake in the
Government: What are Fears but Phansies? What are Jealousies but Phansies? What
Original had they? Phansies again. And what was the Consequence of them? Sum up
the Sins and the Calamities of the worst of People, and of Times; Those Crimes
and Those Miseries, were the effect of Those Phansies. They were Hag-ridden and
Night-mar'd with Goblins and Apparitions; and haunted in their Beds with the
Images of those Visions and illusions which they had taken down from the Press
and Pulpit waking. The brave Strafford was a Sacrifice to the Phansy of
Arbitrary Power, and the Venerable Laud; a Victim to the Phansy of Popery. They
Phansy'd AntiChrist in the Hierarchy; the Rags of the Whore of Babylon in a
Surplice; Popery in the Common Prayer; the Sacrament of Baptism they phansy'd
little better than an Exorcism; the Lords Prayer well enough for a Christian
Primer, a Schoolboy Form that might do so so, till People came to be better
gifted. When they had Phansy'd the Heads of these great men off their
Shoulders; the Bishops out of the House of Peers; they went on Phansying still;
They Phansy'd Episcopacy out of the Nation, and their Scottish Presbytery into
it; the Clergy out of their Living^* the King himself and his Loyal Subjects
out of their Lives, Liberties and Estates; the Crowns, Churches, and the
Peoples Moneys into their own ^ockets; the House of Peers into a Cipher or
Nullity; the House of Commons into a Secret Committee; the Monarchy into a
Republic; the Laws into Votes and Ordinances; their Commit into a
Rump-Assembly; That Rump into a Protector, and that Protector again into a
Committee of Safety. And all this was done by the Power of Imagination, and a
strong phansy of Tyranny and Popery. And why may not all this he phansy'd over
again? But pray let me Phansy a little on the other side.

Let us Phansy his Majesty to Survive his Brother; Let us Phansy an Heir
Apparent either by her Majesty in being, or by the providence of a Second
Marriage; or the Successor to be a person of Honor, Conscience or Prudence,
whatever his Religion be: And that in Honor and Conscience he will govern
himself by the Ties of his Word and his Duty; and that in Prudence he will not
venture upon a Project so impracticable as an attempt of Subverting the
Religion and Government, when every man's Neck shall lie at stake, that shall
but dare to assist him in it; which might be sufficiently provided for by some
previous Act that (saving the Kings Prerogative in the Case) might secure their
not being pardoned in That particular. We shall now Counterpoise Dangers to
Dangers.

Here is a present opposed to a future; a Certainty to a Possibility; a Greater
to a Less; and a Protestant King to a Papist.

The Present danger is the probable Effect of these Intoxicating Methods to the
People. If Phansy was Poison to the Multitude, under the late King; the same
Phansy in a larger Dose, and with less Corrective to it, will be at least as
strong a Poison to the People under This. If the Fact on the one side be true;
the Reason, on the other side is not to be denied. The dismal Calamities that
ensued upon it I have ^et forth already.

Now what is there in the future, to weight against the Life of the King, the
Safety of the Church, the Law and the Government, the Peace of the Kingdom?
There may possibly be a Popish King; and there may probably not. And that King
may Possibly have a Will to change the Government; but probably not; in respect
of the very Immorality of Inclining to such a Violation of his Trust and Word:
But all most certainly not, in regard of so manifest an Inability to bring it
to pass.

When I say a Certainty, I mean only a Natural Train of Events in the
Application of Actives to Passives; which, in a high degree has taken place
already: For the People are almost Raving mad at the apprehensions of these
Stories; the Fever increases upon them; and they grow every day Hotter and
Lighter-headed than other. So that we are in Forty times a greater danger of a
Sedition at hand, than of a Popish Successor at a Distance. As to the Balance
of a greater danger, and a Less, we will even take the matter as they suppose it.
A King upon the Throne, that is Principled for Arbitrary Government and Popery;
But so clogged and shackl'd with Popular and Protestant Laws, that if he had
never so great a mind to it, there is not a Subject in his Dominions that would
dare to serve him in his Design. But, on the other hand, there is no King at
all, no Church, no Law, no Government, no Magna Charta, no Petition of Right,
no Property, no Liberty, etc. PROBATVM. Beside that the Phansy comes to no more
in Effect, than if the sky fall we shall catch Larks.

But once again yet. Here Is a Protestant Prince exposed for fear of a Popish
one. Is the Chimera of a future danger of more value to us then the Conscience
of an incumbant and indispensable Duty? shall we take pet at God Almighties
providence; and not go to Heaven at all, unless we may go our own way. Shall we
Level a shot at the Duke, at a distance; if there be no coming at him but
through the Heart of our Sovereign? shall we actually break in upon the
Protestant profession, which stands or falls with the Church of England,
because the Author of the Character phansies the hazard of a Popish Religion in
the Moon; and by the unavoidable Consequence of a Misgovernment under this
apprehension, draws the very plague upon us that we pretend to fear: While we
thus go on, exposing both our Temporal and Eternal peace for shadows,.

The Writer of the Character had most Rhetorically amplifi'd, in his
Calculations upon his Popish Successor; but so Oversiz'd the figure that when
ever the people come to their wits again, they will look upon the story of
Garagantua, as not much the less Credible of the Two: For his dangers are all
out of Ken; his Thunder^s in the Clouds; and the Multitude are all turned
Star-Gazers, and gaping after ill-boding Conjunctions, and malevolent
influences, while with him in the Fable, They are tumbling into a Precipice as
deep as Hell, and take no notice of it. Here is a danger suggested; and such a
means intimated for the prevention of it, as makes the Remedy worse than the
Disease; for the very Expedient undermines the Government. But first, a word of
the dangers on the other side.

There are several ways started for the disappointing of this inconvenience One
by Attainder, upon 23. and 13. of Eliz. Another, by a Bill in Parliament for
diverting the Succession. And some of the Libellers fall down right upon a
Third Proposal of the peoples preventing the Succession, though without or
against Law. And Fourthly, either to expel the Successor, or to keep him out,
in case of Survivorship.

To the first, of these ways I shall speak, when the point comes on. As to the
second, which is matter of Parliamentary Cognizance, I reckon it my duty to
acquiesce in the Legal Issue of their Debates; as an Authority to which I have
ever paid a Duty, and a Veneration. This only I shall take the freedom to say,
that there is a vast difference betwixt their Deliberations that purely regard
the prospect and interest of both Church and State, in what concerns the Popish
and Protestant Religion; and the passionate excursions of private men on the
wrong side of the Parliament Door^, that thrust themselves into the
Controversy rather out of envy to the Person and fame of the Successor, than
to promote the more important cause of Religion; (like men that crow'd into a
Church for company to pick a pocket) and this to, without any respect to the
King himself, in the person of his Brother; or to the measures of duty to the
Government. Now as to the two last ways of proposal, which are eiher for
prevention or exclusion; I have this to say;

If there be danger from a popish Successor, during his expectancy, within the
Kingdom; the danger is infinitely greater, if he be driven out of it. For,
first, (as supposing it to be the peoples Act) There must be an illegal and
popular violence to accomplish it; and there is the peace of the Government
broken already. Beside, that the Authors of that Violence can never be secure,
but by following it with more and greater. And this comes presently to be a
natural transition from a murmur against the Successor, to a Tumult in the
State: In which Case, the King has only this Choice before him, either to part
with every thing for the asking, or to stand the shock or a Rebellion. Now take
it either way; here is much a greater mischief incurred, than that we feared;
beside, a Sanding-Army, Taxes, and Oaths that follow in course; and a new Set
of Liberty-keepers, and Major-Generals to preserve the peace. I speak this in
the contemplation of a violence without a lawful Authority to back it; which is
the thing that some people have in prospect.

This is the Scene of things at home and abroad, we shall undoubtedly see the
Successors Interest and Reputation, e^creasing daily, in regard of his
Sufferings, his Title, and his Religion: having Scotland to friend, over and
above: and probably, (as it is at present) the place of his Residence. But
these are, as yet, all dormant Interests, and not to be employed, till either
his duty to his Majesty, or Justice to his own pretensions shall require their
Aid.

Take it the other way now: In the case of a Pop^sh King, who is either kept
out (as I said before) or d^iven out from the exercise of his right, by the
tumultuary license of the Rabble; an Oath of Abjuration in case of any fair
opportunity for him to assert his Claim with his Sword in his hand, will be so
far from engaging any man against him, that yielded contrary to his conscience
to swallow it for the saving of his stake, that he will find no firmer Friends
to his Cause and Interest, than those men that are stimulated both by Honor
and Revenge to the execution of their Duties. For there is no hatred so fell
and deadly, as that which has for the object of it the Authors or Contrivers of
our damnation; and the hazard is so much the greater, in regard of the
difficulty to discover either the persons or the strength of their Enemies. And
whether that King makes any attempt or no, the Nation must be at the charge, at
least of a defensive war, and of Impositions to maintain it. And this will be
the inconvenience even in the bare prospect of the state of the Nation without
a blow striking. But from Scotland at least, if not from Ireland too, they must
expect to be plied with continual Alarms, till the insupportable expense of
guarding the Borders and the Coasts; shall make them as sick of their new
Patriots as ever they were of their old ones; and force them at last (or
perhaps sooner than they are aware) to render themselves and their Spoil to
their irresistible conjunction of so many Powers, as will be then Confederate
to their destruction.

And then comes in the Popery in earnest, that was dreaded but in fancy before.
When this new King shall by the proper act and forfeiture of a seduced and
unforeseeing people, be delivered from the Fetters of both Honor and Laws; who
brings in Popery then, but they that discharged him from those sacred Bonds by
the solly and con^umacy of their own inconsiderate Undertakings? Compare now
the dangers of a Popish King bounded by Protestant Laws, and ruling over a
Protestant People, where he may be as happy as an Imperial Crown, and the
Affections of his Subjects, can make him. Compare (I say) a Popish King under
these gracious and obliging Circumstances, in the quiet administration of his
Government, with a Prince that is forced to make his way with his Sword for the
recovery of his own, and is not only pricked on by the impulses of justice and
vengeance, but animated by the Pope himself, and provoked by indignation to
take the utmost advantage of that foolish forfeiture, (the people themselves
having cancelled the Bonds of Authority and Obedience.) Let any man compare
these two cases, and then speak his opinion.

There is one p^int yet behind, that goes further (I think) than any of the
rest. If it be reasonable to believe (as we are often told, and no Mortal can
deny it) that our Religion is an Eye sore to the Church of Rome, and that this
Island would make a considerable addition to our victorious Neighbors late
Conquests; what way in the world could be propounded more to the advantage,
both of the Crown of France and the Court of Rome, than the bringing of matters
to the issue here in question, when in the powerful and liberal Assistances to
this supposed King for the regaining of his own, the one and the other are but
doing of their own business? This Prince in the mean while being led to the one
by inclination, and overborn upon the other by Necessity.

Here Is enough said to lay open the miserable effects of popular motions in
matters of this high importance; and so I shall pass forward, submitting what I
have said upon this occasion to the judgment and determination of my
Superiors. The remainder of the last Paragraph above cited is fully answered
already, bate only the Clause that I am now about to proceed upon.

Char. Whilst we are thus enslaved (says he) by a medly Government, betwixt
Tyranny and Usurpation, by establishing a Papist on a Throne, we are so far
from preserving the Crown, that is, the Imperial Dignity in a right Line of
Succession, that we do not preserve it at all; but on the contrary, extirpate
and destroy it, whilst by Enthroning a Papist, we totally Subvert and Depose
the very Monarchy it self. And can it be the Duty of either Englishmen or
Christians, to have that Zeal for a Corrupted, Leprous Branch of Royalty, that
we must ruin both Religion, Government and Majesty it self to support him?

It is a strange way this of showing a Man's Honor for his Prince, by blasting
the very Blood of his Brother; or of expressing his love to Monarchy, by
treating Majesty, tho but in reversion, at so course a rate. But it is upon a
Principle that may be supported by Imperiousness and Heat; in regard that it
will not bear the Test of a modest Debate; and a corrupted, Leprous Branch of
Royalty is the dint of the Argument. But what does he mean to confound Civil
Power and Religion thus, and impose upon the World a Paradox, that for want of
rightly dividing, endangers both?

Government is matter of Public and External Order; and a Divine Provision
for the Peace, Comfort and Security of Mankind: wherein all the several parts
are bound up in one Community, to attend the Interest and Conservation of the
whole. Whereas Religion is the business of every individual apart, and only so
far cognizable in a State, as it affects the Civil Power. What can be more
gross than to talk of fighting for Religion? or to pretend to the maintaining
of that by Arms, that is not liable to Violence? Did ever any Man hear of a
Religion that was either shot or cut? Nor can there be any Confederacy or
Association purely upon the score of Religion, for how shall People agree to
defend they know not what? which is the very case when one Man undertakes for
the Religion of another. If our Religion be assaulted by Argument, we may
assert it by Redargution: But when the Opposition advances into any over act,
the case is no longer Religion, but Political Safety. Beside that Government is
Gods Ordinance for the common benefit of Human Society, and of Pagans, as well
as of Christians, without any regard to this or that Religion: for Bedies
Politic have no Consciences; but every particular indeed, stands or falls to
his own Master.

I cannot but observe through what degrees the Character has advanced the
Popish Successor. First, From the possibility of a good Man, and then from bad
to worse; till he has made him ( fol. 14.) a Corrupted, Leprous Branch of
Royalty; and, at next word, a downright Traitor, upon the Statutes of 23 and 13
of Queen Eliz. and another of Hen. 8. (Fol. 15.)

This matter being, (as I am informed) at present coram Judice, I shall say no
more to it than this, that there are two Provisoes in the 5th of the Queen,
that make the Case somewhat different from what he has stated it: As for
Instance:

Provided always, that forasmuch as the Queens Majesty is otherwise sufficiently
assured of the Faith and Loyalty of the Temporal Lords of Her High Court of
Parliament; Therefore this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to compel any Temporal Person, of or above the degree of a Baron of this
Realm, to take or pronounce the Oath abovesaid, (viz. of Supremacy) nor to
incur any Penalty, limited by this Act for not taking or refusing the same, etc.

II. Provided also, that if any Peer of this Realm shall hereafter offend
contrary to this Act, or any Branch or Article thereof, that, in that and all
such Case and Cases, they shall be tried by their Peers, in such manner and
form as in other Cases of Treasons they have used to be Tried, and by no other
means.

It would be well if every Man that presses, with this un-precedented rigor,
upon the Person here in question, would lay his hand upon his heart, and say,
if the King has pardoned me Te^ Thousand times more than this comes to, with
what Reason or Conscience can I importune His Majesty thus bitterly against His
Brother?

After all these Clamours about a Popish Successor, I would fain know how it is
possible for any Man to be other than a Papist, in our present condition of
Affairs. A Church-of England-Man is a Papist to the Dissenters; a Presbyterian
and an Independent so one to another; a Quaker to both; and among the Eight
Score several Sects of Heretics and Schismatiques that Paget and others, have
reckoned up since Liberty of Conscience came in Fashion; there are just so many
sorts of Papists among them, in the Opinion of one Sect or another.

He has a Paragraph ( fol. 15.) where, under the People of England, he expounds
himself to mean their Representatives; which is a point I am not to touch upon:
Only, I must confess, he has drawn the Arrow to the Head, in one expression in
it. Why should not they (says he) the House of Commons) be as active and
vigorous for their own Royal Inheritance, and Sacred Succession of Power, as a
King for His. What he means by this Royal inheritance, and Sacred Succession of
Power, I shall remit to the Consideration of the Learned. ( Bradshaw indeed
passed a Sentence upon the Late King, as a Traitor to the ROYALTY of the
People.) But the strongest Argument for himself that I find in the whole Book,
is five or six Lines lower. If ever a Papist m^unts this Throne (says he) then
all their Murmurs, their Petitions, Protesting and Associating-Votes will be
remembered to the purpose. Now what can be a greater indignity to the Justice
and Resolution of that Illustrious Body, than to imagine that so narrow a
thought could any way influence the Candor and Solemnity of their Debates?

He spends his sixteenth Page upon Instances out of Hen. VIII. to prove the
Succession of the English Crown to be wholly subjected to the Disposal,
Determinations and Limitations of Parliament. How far his Assertion is right or
wrong, I shall not concern my self. But however, as he has ordered the matter,
it makes nothing at all for his purpose.

The Parliament (he says) 25 Hen. 8.) settled the Crown upon the Heirs of that
Kings body by Queen Ann; and in the 28th. Repealed that Act, and Entailed the
Succession upon the Heirs of his body by Queen Jane; Mary and Elizabeth being
declared Illegitimate. And in Case he Died without Issue, then the Parliament
empowered him by the same Act, to dispose of the Succession by his own Letters
Patents, or his Last Will. In the 35th Year of his Reign the Parliament granted
the Succession to Edward; and for want of Heirs of his Body, to the Lady Mary,
and the Heirs of her body; and for want of such Heirs, to the Lady Elizabeth,
under certain Limitations and Conditions contained in that Act.

From hence he infers, that a Parliament may order and dispose of the
Succession. But whether they may, or not; here is little or nothing proved from
these Citations. First, under the ambiguity of the Word Parliament, he would
have this thought to be the single Act of the Lords and Commons, when the
Enacting Authority of it was solely in the King. And yet he says expressly that
Henry 8. was so far from submitting to Parliaments, that he would never have
complemented them with a power that was not their due. If that power did belong
to the Parliament, what needed they the King's authority for the making of it
good; or to divest themselves of that power, by transferring it to the King, to
dispose of the Reversion, or Remainder of the Crown, by his Will, or Letters,
Patents, to such person as he pleased?

Secondly, These Statutes do not so properly transfer a Right as declare and
notify the persons; for the prevention of disputes, and competitions; as
appears by the Preamble to that of the 28th.

Wherefore, We your most humble and obedient Subjects, in this present
Parliament Assembled, calling to Our Remembrance the great Divisions which in
Times past have been in this Realm; by reason of several Titles pretended to
the Imperial Crown of this Realm, which some times, and for the most part
ensued, by occasion of ambiguity and doubts, then not so perfectly declared,
but that men might upon froward intents expound them to every man's sinister
appetite and affection, and posterity of the Lawful kings and Emperors of this
Realm; whereof has ensued great effusion and destruction of Man's Blood, as
well of a great number of the Nobles, as of other the Subjects, and especially
Inheritours in the same. And the greatest occasion thereof has been, because
no perfect and substantial provision by Law has been made within this Realm of
it self; when doubts and questions have been moved and proponed of the
certainty and legallty of the Succession, and Posterity of the Crown, etc.

Now, so far is the intent of this Act from diverting the Succession, that the
express end of it was the setting of it right, by the avoidance of a former
Settlement upon the nullity of the Marriage. And afterward, 26th of the same
King, cap. 2. the Act here before mentioned is called, The Act for the
Establishment of the Succession of the Heirs of the King's Highness in the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. Now there is a great deal of difference betwixt
translating the Succession from the wrong to the right, and the diverting of it
from the right to the wrong.

Thirdly, this change and disposition of Settlement, tho it passed all the
formalities of Bill and Debate, yet the first spring of it was from the certain
knowledge of the Kings pleasure to have it so, without which they durst never
have ventured upon such a Proposition.

Fourthly, Matter of Fact in this case is no proof of Right, and especially a
Fact accompanied with so many circumstances of Cross-Capers and Contradictions,
as the pronouncing of the same persons to be both illegitimate and legitimate,
etc. And a man cannot imagine, without a scandal to that grave and wise
Assembly, that the levity of those Counsels, and that humor of Swearing and
Counterswearing, could be any other than the caprice of their new Head and
Governor.

Fifthly, with reverence to the Utility and Constitution of good and wholesome
Laws, it is not presently to cite a Statute and say, There Is a Precedent; for
those Laws that are repugnant to the light of Nature and common Right, are
N^llities in themselves.

Lastly, he brings instances here to prove, that a Parliament may divert the
Succession; but he shows withal, that there can be no security even in that
exclusion, in showing that what one Parliament does, another may undo. So that
we are now upon equal terms of security or hazard, either in the exclusion of
the Successor, or in the restraining of him. For if he be tied up by one
Parliament, another may set him at liberty; and if he be excluded by one
Parliament, another may take him in again. But he that shapes his own Premises,
may cut out what Conclusions he pleases.

Char. If then (says he, which no man in his right wits can deny) our Religion,
Lives. and Liberties, are only held by a Protestant Tenure; and the Majesty of
Englfnd not only by the force of his Coronation Oath, but by all the Ties
whatever, ought to be the Pillars and Bulwark of the Protestant Faith; and at
the same time granting, that we have a Popish Prince to inherit the Imperial
Crown of England; he ought certainly in all justice as little to ascend this
Throne, as Nebuchadnezzar ought to have kept his, when the immediate Blast of
Heaven had made him so incapable of Ruling as a King, that he was only a
Companion fit for Brutes and Savages. fol. 17.

It is true, that we hold the exercise of our Religion by a Protestant Tenure,
with a respect to a political union: but every man holds the Religion it self
that he ventures his Soul upon; not on the Tenure of Laws and Constitutions
Humane, but on the Tenure of the divine will and pleasure: Providence having
dealt so graciously with Mankind, that, albeit in our Bodies and Estates, which
are only corruptible, and temporary, we lie exposed to Torments, Persecutions,
Violence, and the Iniquities of Times and Seasons; Our Nobler Part is yet
exempt from the Outrages, either of Men or Beasts; and our faith, hope and
charity, treasured up, where neither Rust nor Moth does corrupt, and where
Thieves do not break through and steal.

As for our Lives and Liberties; we hold them by the Common Tenure of
Government; the Common Right of men bound up in a Civil Society; and under the
Protection of such and such Laws and Provisions, for the Common Benefit and
Security of the Whole, and Every part: And all this, clearly abstracted from
this or that Religion. In the cases of Treasons, Felonies, Riots, false Oaths,
Forgeries, Scandals, and other Misdemeanors, that endanger the Public peace;
I do not find that the Law puts any Difference betwixt Criminals, because they
are of several Religions; The Protestant Tenure of the King's Judges signified
no more in the eye of the Law, than if they had been Powder Plot Jesuits.

But to come now to his Protestant Tenure; and to close with him upon it too.
(But as a Supposal not to be supposed.) If he means by this Protestant Tenure,
the Protestant Religion of the Church of England as Established by Law; and
that it is by this Tenure, that we hold our Religion, Lives and Libertiers; it
will concern us to support this Tenure; but in such manner yet, as the Law
directs: For to set up a Tenure without a Law, or to assert a Tenure against a
Law, will not be for the credit of our Authors Pretensions. If he means the
Dissenting Protestant Tenure; He removes the Very Basis of all our Laws and
sets up the Title of the Multiude against that of the Government.

And further; this Protestant Tenure of his, cannot be understood barely of the
Doctrine of the Church of England; (as in Our Nine and Thirty Articles) for
first, there are several points of them that are opposed and rejected by the
Men that value themselves upon this Character; And Secondly, Our Laws fall not
shorter in any thing perhaps, of so great Importance, than in the point of
Competent Provisions for the Suppressing and Punishing of Heretical, and
Blasphemous Doctrines. So that this Protestant Tenure must of Necessity have a
Regard to the Uniformity of worship, according to the Forms, Rights, and
Ceremonies by the Law in that case provided: And in this sense I must confess
that our Lives, Liberties, and the Religion of the Government (though not
directly, yet in a most Rational Consecution of dangerous Probabilities) lie
all at stake. Wherefore again and again I say* let us join with our Author in
the maintaining of this Protestant Tenure. For though the intent of it be only to
intimate a Jelousy of Popery to the multitude; we shall yet find it, upon
Examination, to have a Loyal Aspect toward the Government.

Here is an Uniformity prescribed; which is neither a New thing to us, nor an
Unnecessary. Not a New one; for it has descended to us from the time of Edward
the Sixth; and it was the only Expedient that Queen Elizabeth could find out,
for the safety of her Person, and Dominions: That Excellent Queen Elizabeth,
(as our Author says, fol. 17) Under whose long and gracious Reign, England was
so highly blessed. Nay, and so sacred is the Providence of Order, that
Notwithstanding all the fulminations of the Pope, and the Numbers, as well as
the dangerous Practices, of the Papists, on the one hand; and the Impetuous
Clamours and Importunities of dissenting Protestants on the other, Charging
both her self and her Ministers with Popish practices and designs. This steady
Queen did yet (I say) preserve her Princely dignity, and the Reputation of her
People, both at home and abroad* and at the same time, maintain her ground
against two potent Factions; by standing firm to the Rules, and Methods of her
Ecclesiastical Discipline, And it is Remarkable, that the state has still been
more or less at ease in measure, as That Discipline has been either upheld, or
Relaxed.

In Forty and Forty one this fence was thrown down; and I need not say, after
the overturning of that Bank, what Monsters were bred out of the Mud, upon that
Innuundation. In the 14th. of his Majesty's Reign, and after his blessed
Restoration, This Uniformity was re-inforc'd; and in the 16th. followed an Act
for supp^^ssing Sedicious Conventicles. And now you shall see how much it
behooves us to stand by our Protestant Tenure, and how far our Religion, Lives,
and Liberties are concerned in so doing.

The Reformed, or Protestant Religion, both in Doctrine and Discipline, as it
is settled by Law; is the Protestant Tenure here in question: And what Party
soever enterprises upon the worship here Established, usui^ps upon this
Protestant Tenure. It has been the wisdom of the Government, from time to time
to require an Uniformity, in the manner and circumstances of our Worship; and
upon what motives and apprehensions they were induced to observe those
measures, will best appear from the Acts themselves.

To begin with the Act of 1 Ed. 6. it was intended for the gaining of an
Uniform, godly and quiet Order. 35. Eliz. There was a Provision made for the
preventing and avoiding such great inconveniences and perils as might happen,
and grow by the wicked and dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries, and
Disloyal Persons, etc. Where it was made penal so much as to be present at a
Conventicle. In the same year of the Queen, there was an Act against wicked and
seditious persons, who termed themselves Catholics, and being indeed Spies and
Intelligencers, not only for her Majesty's foreign Enemies, but also for
Rebellious and Traiterous Subjects born within her Highnesses Realms and
Dominions; and hiding their most detestable, and devilish purposes, under a
fair pretext of Liberty of Conscience, do secretly wander and shift from place
to place within this Realm, to corrupt and s^ouce her Sajesties Subjects, and
to stir them to Sedition and Rebellion, etc. 3 Jac. An Act for discovering and
repressing Popish Recusants, 14 Car. 2. The intent of this Act was the settling
the Peace of the Church and allaying the present distempers which the
indisposition of time had contracted. Many People in the late Troubles having
been led into Factions and Schisms, to the great decay and scandal of the
Reformed Religion of the Chnrch of England, and to the hazard of many Souls.
And lastly, 16 Car. 2. An Act for suppressing Conventicles, providing for
further and more speedy Remedies against the growing and dangerous Practices of
seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal persons, who under pretense of tender
Consciences, do at their Meeting contrive Insurrections, as late Experience
has showed, etc..

From these Citations we may collect both the intent and the necessity of an
Uniform Worship, and upon what Considerations these Acts were made; and it
appears undenyably from those Outrages that followed upon the Peoples breaking
loose from this restraint, that the Lawmakers were not deceived in their
foresight. Nor could any other be expected, but a liberty of practice after a
license of profession, and that after a dissolution of the Law there should be
no longer any regard had to Religion or Manners.

But what do we talk of Religion in a Tune? The sounds of things and empty
words, when they come once to be followed with flagitious actions and execrable
effects? Was the Venom of the Covenant ever the less Diabolical for the holy
Style of it? Will [Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subjects] atone for
the robbing and the murdering of their Sovereign? Christ and his Truths is
every jot as good a Claim as a Protestant Tenure. And yet I Will show you here
the Contumacy of Lucifer himself under that Mask, and the very Soul of their
Hands-up-lifting Covenant; which tho under the name of Cargils Covenant, is the
Old Covenant still, only a little rank with keeping.

The last Speech and Testimony of WILL. GOGOR, one of the three desperate and
incorrigible Traitors executed at the Grass Market in Edinburgh, March 11.
1681, for disowning His Sacred Majesty's Authority, and owning and adhering to
these bloody and murdering Principles, contained in that execrable Declaration
at Sanquhat, Cargils Traitorous Covenant, and Sacrilegious Excommunicating of
the KING, by that Arch Traitor Cargil, and avowing of themselves to be bound in
Conscience, and by their Covenant, to murder the KING, and all that serve under
him; being Armed (the time they were appreh^nded) for that purpose.
Men and Brethren,
THese are to show you, that I am come here this day to lay down my Life for
owning Christ and his Truths; and in so much as we are caluminiated and
reproached by lying upon our Names, and dreadful upbraiding of us, with saying,
That we are not led by the Scriptures; and say, We have taken other Rules to
walk by: I take the Great God to be witness against all and every one of them,
that I take the Word of God to be my Rule, and I never designed any thing but
honesty and faithfulness to Christ; and for owning of Christ and the Scriptures
this day I am murdered, for adhering to the born-down Truths I am condemned to
die; and I also leave my Testimony, and bear witness against all the Apostate
Ministers this day, that have taken favor at the Enemies hands, The only
thing they take away my Life for is, because I disowned all those bloody
Traitors not to be Magistrates, which the Word of God casts off, and we are
bound in Conscience and Covenant to God, to disown all such as are Enemies to
God, and which they are avowed and open Enemies to Christ; And they have made
void my word, says the Lord. Say what ye will Devils, say Wretches, say
Enemies, say what ye will, we are owning the Truth of Christ and his written
Word; and condemn me in my Judgment who will, I leave my Blood on one and all
that say we are not led by the Scripture; I leave my Blood upon you again to be
a Witness against you, and a Condemnation in the great day of Judgment. I have
no more to say, I think this may mitigate all your rage; and so forth. I leave
his Enemies to his Curse, to be unished into everlasting wrath for now and
ever. Amen.

Sic subscribitur Will. Gogor.

Methinks this Specimen of an Enthusiastic Zeal should make men wary how they
deal with these gilded Pills after so damned an operation. And it is not to
say, that this is the transport of a mad man; but it is the effort of the very
Principle, and the whole strain of them that has been taken off by the hand of
Justice, (not for treasonous words neither, but actual rebellions) have so
behaved themselves at the last cast, as if the whole Schism were upon a vie who
should damn bravest. These stories are no Meal^tub Shams; Death and Damnation
are past ^oolling.

But how comes it that we that wear Christ in our Foreheads should carry
Antichrist in our Hearts? and under the name of Christians walk so contrary
both to the Doctrine, and to the Example of our suffering Savior? As if the
mere Profession of the Gospel did not only make void the Scope and Precepts of
it, but extinguish in us the very Dictates of right nature; and then as
Protestants under the pretended abomination of Popery to set it up; that is to
say, upon impulse of Religion to do in any sort whatsoever a manifest wrong.
Let the end be never so good, it must yet upon the score of Conscience be
warranted by lawful means, and with such a regard to Prudence too, that the
means we make use of toward a good end, may not be employed to a bad one. One
man wishes a Reformation in the Government, another skrews himself in under the
same Pretense, but to destroy it.

It would be endless and nauseous to farce up a Pamphlet with Citations, in a
case where the whole Story of the World is so full of Precedents. How came it
that Hen. 8 when he was suspected to be more than half a Protestant, proceeded
so quietly and without Opposition, in Declaring and Limiting the Succession?
and then that the Lady Elizabeth (his Daughter) being a professed Protestant
and the Major Party of the People Papists, came to the Crown, without any
considerable Objection to her Religion? We do not find, notwithstanding the
Branded Apostasy of Jeroboam, that made Israel to Sin, that his People yet laid
hold of any pretense to Rebel against him. We do not read in the Story of
Ethelbert King of Kent, upon his being Converted to Christianity by Angustin
the Monk, that his Subjects, though Pagans, ever took up Arms against him
for it. Nor that the Pagan Subjects of any of the Other Saxon Kings in their
Heptarchy, opposed their Sovereigns, for Change of Religion; neither was there
any Persecution on the King's Side, for matter of Religion. Bonos principes
(says Tacit. Hist. Lib. 4.) Voto expetere debemus, etc. We are to pray to God
for Good Kings, but to submit to them whatever they are. Tertullian ( Apolog.
30.) Christianus nullius est hostis, etc. The Christian (says he) is no Man's
Enemy, much less the Emperors: for knowing that he Governs by Gods Appointment,
he cannot but Love, Reverence, Honor and Wish him well, with all that belong
to him, and therefore we pay that Veneration to him that belongs to him, as
being next immediately under God; what he has is from God, and God is only his
Superior, etc. And so far were the Primitive Christians from opposing their
Superiors, that they would not allow so much as a dis-respectful word to be
given them. There was no turning of Princes in those days, a grazing with
Nebuchadnezzar among the Beasts; no calling of them Gangreen'd, and Corrupted,
Leprous Branches of Royalty. But the very Apostles Canons provided against
those rude indecencies that reflect not only upon his Popish Successor, but
upon all the Crowned Heads of Christendom of that Persuasion. Quisquis
Imperatorem, etc. (says the Canon) Whosoever shall speak ill of the Emperor, or
of the Magistrate, let him be punsh'd. If a Clergyman, Deposed; if a Layman,
Excommunicated.

But what needs this recourse to the Examples and Judgments of Antiquity for
the clearing of Christianity in a case where the common Principles of Human
Nature are sufficient to set us right?

First, There is the violation of a Gospel-Precept, in doing evil that good may
come of it, As certainly the divesting of a Prince of his right, in an
unwarrantable way of doing it, is a very ill thing. I speak all this while to
the Character of a Popish Successor; which pushes on the People, hand over
head, to the end, without that regard to the Means, which the Cause, I think,
does require: But after this, when a lawful Authority intervenes, the state of
the Question is quite another thing; for it is no longer Religion, but Policy
that will be the Subject then in consideration.

Secondly, The admittance of this Position does in a Complement to
Christianity, overthrow all Religion, and puts all Christians into a state of
Hostility: for there are some particulars, undoubtedly, of all Persuasions that
do firmly believe themselves to be in the Right. And then consequently, every
divided Party is that to the other which a Popish Successor is to the Author of
the Character. And at this rate Christians are in the worst condition of all
Mortals, by making it a point of Conscience to Enter worry one another. To say
nothing of the Scandal they bring upon the Gospel, by erecting this Rigorous
and Sanguinary Doctrine upon the Foundations of Meekness, Charity and Peace.

And this Position does not only confound the Harmony that ought to be among
the Disciples of Jesus Christ; but superinduces an utter Subversion of the
Fundamentals of Government and Obedience. For to say that a Prince of another
Faith may be Deposed, or Secluded for his Religion, does not only Authorize,
but provoke a Prince of another Persuasion to render the same measure to his
People; and it absolves both the One and the Other from the obligation of that
mutual Correspondence which is necessary betwixt them for the conservation of
the Community.

Nor is it all, that the Maxim it self is pernicious, (which many times is the
ill hap of a fair intention;) but there is so gross a Partiality in the Conduct
of this Character, that a Man must have a great deal more Charity than appears
in the Author of it, to allow it so much as the possibility of a good meaning.

Here Is a Clamor advanced in the Name of the English Protestants, against a
Popish Successor. But upon what ground? Because it is a Persecuting Religion.
Well! and what Religion is it in a Successor that would please them? The
Protestant Religion. But the Religion of the Church Protestants will not please
the DISSENTING PROTESTANTS; and then, it is impossible for the Dissenting
Protestants to please one another; and as impossible for a Successor of any one
Religion to please them all. But now which of these Protestant Religions must
he be of? for there are a matter of Two Hundred Divided Sects that list
themselves under that denomination. Well! but if they be True Protestants
they will Unite against Popery. Yes, As the Fellow united his Ratts, he put them
all into a Tub together, and then they eat up one another. View them well, and
you shall not find above three of four of them that have any consistence one
with another. And which are they? nay, that is a Secret. But if Popery be so
dreadful, because it is a Persecuting Religion; why is not the Writer of this
Character as sensible of 150 Persecuting Religions on the one side, as of One
Persecuting Religion on the other? God preserve the Church of England, I say,
from both. Or if that bitter Cup be our Lot, the Lord in his Mercy grant that
we may not add Sedition to Persecution. It were no Ill Emblem of the Original
of our Late Troubles, to fancy a Man in a Fright, and leaping from a painted
Lion upon a Wall into a Bed of Vipers. And no better are the pragmatical part
of the Revolters from our Communion, while in the mean time, Thousands and
Thousands of the Credulous and Well meaning Multitude are by them inveigled to
their destruction.

About the middle of the 17th Page, the Character-Man is either laid down to
take a Nap, while some other less skilful hand supplys his place; or else he
writes on in his Sleep. And it would have been well, if all the rest too had
been no more than a Dream. There is a Finical Marchpane Spark here about the
Town, that takes a huge deal of pains to get himself suspected for the Author
of this Book; he makes me think of a little Gentleman in a Yellow Coat, that
would still be talking how rarely he played of the Organ; and this poor Wretch
phancied that he made all the Music, when it was his part only to draw the
Bellows. He has done some very pretty things, they say, upon Touzer. But for
this Character, I dare venture to be his Compurgator; at least to the middle of
the 17th Page. But further I dare not undertake; for the next two rages and a
half, a Man may trace them upon the Hoof to the very Ink-pot. His Story of
Paris's Mother, (some body should have told him that it was Hecuba) that
dreamed she was delivered of a Firebrand. His Debate upon the Parallel betwixt
the dis-inheriting a Private Popish Heir, and a Popish Successor. His Proposal
of the Successors following Curtius into the Gulf; the Third-bare Story of
Damocles's Sword. And then his Argumentum a fortiori: These fragments might
possibly be the Fruit of his own Minerva. But now, toward the bottom of the
19th Page we have the First Hand again.

Char. But to Sum up all; ( says he) if no reason must or shall prevail; and
that right or wrong a Papist must succeed: when all the inseparable Cruelties
of Pope and Popery shall surround us; suppose the worst that may be, that the
dreadful approach of certain Slavery, so opposite to the Freeborn Genius of
England, has exasperated them into a Spirit of Rebellion: What is it but the
Pestilential Air of Reigning Popery, that bloats and swells them into that
Contagion? And if this Popish King Summons all his Thunder to punish them
for it, what can the greatest Favourer of Rome make more on it, than that he
warps them crooked, and then breaks them to pieces because they are not
straight. [Just as he serves his Popish Successor; he draws ye the Picture of a
Tyrant, and then Deposes him] And what is the whole Sum of a Revolting Nation
under a Popish Tyrant? but using a violent Cure to expel an Universal Poison.
Fol. 19.

This Clause is only Buchanan, Janius. Brutus, etc. Translated into English,
and for brevity sake, a fair hint toward a Rebellion, and an Apology for it,
both in one. As who should say, If it must come to a Popish Successor the
English Genius would never brook it, and there is no remedy but one, that is to
say, a Revolt; which they may even thank themselves for. And then, up goes
Forty One again ^ the Factions dismount the Government, set up for themselves,
and so go on, plucking down him still that is uppermost till they come from
Reforming to Levelling; and there is an end on it. I would he had not been so
positive upon the Free born Genius of England; for we have been inveigled
actually into a slavery under Cobblers, and Tinkers. We that with so much
Indignation at present, oppose ourselves to the bare Possibility of a Royal
Successor. And that have Sacrificed three Kingdoms already to those degenerate
fears.

Char. But here (says he) will some pretended, Pious, Objector say; How shall
we dare to Revolt? Remember we are Christians, and we must Obey; or at least
yield a Passive Obedience to our King; be his Religion, Principles, or
Government, never so Tyrannique, He is still the Lords Anointed, and our Native
Sovereign.

I would ask ( says he) what this Lords Anointed is. And who it is is our Native
Sovereign. When instead of being free-Subjects, Pope and Tyranny shall rule
Over us; and we are made slaves, and Papists?

That Person is the Lords Anointed who by Gods Providence, and a Legal
Succession of right to the Crown, is the Supreme Magistrate; whom, if we may
cast off for Popery and Tyranny, we may depose at any time, by saying That Is
the Case: For it is but saying so, to make it so. Nay, and he goes further yet.
For here is a Prince Deposed, for fear he should be so; without any allowance
for intervening Contingences. Or any Limits to the Extent of the Prospect. So
that it is but the carrying on of our Jealousies to future times, and without
any more to do, dissolve the Monarchy upon the self-same Contemplation. It
would be as pertinent a question now, what are those Free Subjects, as what is
This Lords anointed? If by this Freedom he would intimate an Exemption from the
Law; His Free-Subject is a palpable contradiction* For in This Case he makes
the Lords Anointed the Subject; and his Free Subject the Lords Anointed.

Char. We are bound indeed ( says he) by our Oaths of Allegiance to a constant
Loyalty to the King and his lawful Successors. Very Right. By that Oath we are
bound to be his lawful Successors Loyal Subjects; but why his Loyal Slaves? Or
how is an Arbitrary, Absolute Popish Tyrant any longer a Lawful Successor to a
Protestant Established, and bounded Government? When lawfuly Succeeding to this
limited Monarchy, he afterward violently, unlawfully, and Tyrannically
overruns the due b^unds of Power, dissolves the whole Royal Constitution of the
Three Free-States of England, and the Subjects Petition of Right? whilst wholly
abandoning those Reins of Government, which were his Lawful Birthright, and
making New ones of his own Illegal Creation, he makes us neither those
Freeborn Subjects we were, when we took that Oath, nor himself That King we
swore to be Loyal to.

What have we here but a Jesuitical Dispensation for the breaking of an Oath,
and slipping our Necks out of the Collar of our Allegiance by a Mental
Reservation? First, We swear in this Oath (as in all others) to the Sense of
the Authority that imposes it. And can any body imagine that the Government
imposed this Test of Allegiance upon the People, to leave them still at Liberty
to play fast and loose with Reserves and Qualifications of their own: And so to
frustrate the main intent of the Oath, by accommodating the Exposition of it
for the serving of a Turn, or a Faction? The Oath binds them to Subjection; and
they absolve themselves of That Subjection by giving it the Name of Slavery.
And so every man is left at pleasure to take off his own Shackles. But what if
it were Slavery it self? The Prince were to blame for straining his Authority,
but the Subjects nevertheless Criminal, on the other side for withdrawing their
Duty.

He has found a Loop-hole to evade This Oath, by turning SVBIECTS into SLAVES.
But That will not do his business, without turning a Lawful Successor to a
Protestant Established and bounded Government into an arbitrary, absolute,
Popish Tyrant. In which supposition he holds forth This Doctrine to the People;
that in This Case, there is a Forfeiture of the Government; and that this is
the very Case which we have now before us; wherein, contrary to Law, Reason and
the Fundamental Essentials of all Government, he does, as much as in him lies,
authorize and incite the Multitude to a Sedition.

I answer, that the Law is clearly against him; for tho the Prerogative is
bounded, the Duty of the Subject is yet left unconditional, there being no Law,
nor so much as the color of any, incase of the Kings passing his legal Limits,
to absolve the People of their Allegiance. And it is not the Plea of
Provocation, or the exercise of a Tyrannical Power, that will save the Subject
from the Sentence o^ the Law, in case of any disloyal act of Assault or
Resistance.

It is against Reason likewise, that the Inferior shall overrule the
Superior, and invert the last Resort of Decision and Judgment from the Prince
to the Subject.

It is, lastly, destructive of Government it self, to suppose such a Reserve in
a Political Constitution, as carries the last Appreal to the People, which is
the case in this Proposition. The King as a Trustee that abuses his power
incurrs a Forfeiture, (as our Author will have it) of that Trust; and so all
subordinate Trustees may incurr the like Forfeiture, till all Communities are
melted down again into the ridiculous conceit of the Original Sovereignty of
the Multitude, which is only a Chaos of Anarchy and Confusion.

He is over again here with the Royal Constitution of the three free States of
England; which must be understood either of the Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and
Commons; or of the King, Lords, and Commons, reckoning His Majesty to be one of
the three Estates. Take it the former way, and instead of Your Majesty's Loyal
Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament, ( which was the style even of the
last Rebellion it self) the Petition should run the other way, and say, The
humble Petition of Charles the second, to your Majesty's the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons ^ssembled in Parliament. Now take it as
accounting the King to be one of the three Estates, that Imaginary C^ordination
leaves him at the mercy of the other two whenever they please. The Learned
and the Right Reverened Bishop of Lincoln, in his Discourse of Popery, page 4.
England ( says he) is a Monarchy, the Crown Imp^rial, and our Kings Supreme
Governors, and sole Supreme Governors of this Realm, and all other their
Dominions, etc. In our Oath of Supremacy we swea^, That the King is the Only
Supreme Governor, Supreme, so none (not the Pope) above him* and Only Supreme,
so none Coordinate or equal to him.

The Character brings in the Subjects Petition of Right for a further
countenance to his pretension; but what noise soever it makes in the cars of
the people, there is not one syllable in it that appears in his favor. And yet
once again upon the presumptions ascresaid he grounds this Assertion, That in
such a case neither is he the same King that we swore to, nor we the same
Subjects that took the Oath. If this be not Rome against Rome, and Popery
against Popery, I know not what is. But at the worst it is but paraphrazing
upon the Oath of Allegiance as they did upon the Covenant. Give me leave now to
retort the Argument. His Popish Success^r will be a Tyrant, (he says) for it is
a Tyrannical Religion. But after all the stress of ^rreverent Language upon his
R. H. he cannot charge any thing in the worldupon him, that looks that way, in
his inclination. But yet here is enough (says he) to conclude the Reason and the
Necessity of his Seclusion. The Compiler of this Character would take it ill
now, on the other side, if a man should say that his very argument against the
Duke, holds as true against the Author of the Character. For that Dominion is
founded in Grace, is the Principle both for which, and by which he pretends to
Supplant the Successor. Now why may we not apprehend Sedition from the one, as
well as Tyranny from the other? Nay and with more Justice too; considering that
there is but a bare Contemplation the One way, and the Practice of an enflaming
Discourse over and above that Contemplation, the other.

Char. But alas! ( says he) that Bugbear, Passive obedeience, is a Notion
crept into the world, and most Zealously, and perhaps as ignorantly defended.
Fol. 20.

This Period brings him well nigh to his Journeys end: For, till now, he
contented himself with only opposing the primitive Practices, and the Common
Principles of Christianity, in justifying a Violence, upon an Impulse of
Religion: But the making of Passive Obedience only a Bugbear, and the Defense
of it an effect of Ignorance, brings it home to the very person of our Savior,
and to the Doctrine that was delivered by those Holy Lips. So far ( says the
Learned Prelate above mentioned, Page 55.) was St. Paul from believing those
Popish Rebellious Principles, ( Denying the Superiority of the Civil power) and
from Dissoyalty or Disobedience to that Imperial (though Pagan) Power under which
he Lived; that he publicly acknowledged, and humbly submitted to it. Nor was
he only in his own Person Obedient, and a Loyal Subject to the Emperor, but
(writing to the Romans) he did, as an Apostle of Jesus Christ, command them
also to be Loyal and Obedient. Let every Soul (every man) be Subject to the
Higher (the Supreme) Powers, etc. And then he adds, that they should render to
them Tribute, Custom, Fear, Honor, and all their Duties. By Supreme Power
there, he means men possessing Supreme power, and the Supreme power, under
which He and the Romans then were, was Nero, a most Impious Pagan, and
Persecutor of Christ, and Christians; and yet every Soulq within his Empire, (
even Peter as well as Paul) was (by the Law of God, and the Gospel) to be
Subject to Him, to Fear, Honor, pay him Tribute, and Legally obey him. Nay the
same reverend Prelate, (Page 54) in confirmation of this Doctrine, cites the
Precept of our blessed Savior himself, as well as St. Paul. Our blessed
Savior (Says he, whose Vicar the Pope pretends to be) does himself pay Tribute
to Caesar, (Though a Pagan, and Idolat^r) leaving us an Admirable, and most Pious
Example of that obedience, and Loyalty due, even to Impious and Pagan Princes:
N^r is this all; for he further gives express Command, that all should render
to Caesar the things which are Cesars. He acknowledges the Imperial rights of
C^sar, of which his Impiety and Idolatry did not deprive him.

Our Author said but just now, that Passive Obedience was no more then a
Bugbear, and a Doctrine groundless, and only slipped into the world as by the
By. But he tells us now (Fol. 20. toward the bottom) that in case of a Vowed
Allegiance to an Absolute and Arbitrary King, a Passive Obedience was due: But
what is this (says he) to a King of England? With his leave I take it to be the
same thing as to the Peoples Obedience or Submission; though in respect of the
assuming, and Exercising that Power, the Case, on the Kings side, is greatly
differing, for the question is not whether the King does Well or Ill in forcing
his Authority beyond the due hounds, but whether the Tyranny, on the one side,
will justify an undutiful behavior, on the other? And the Law it self will
easily determine. This Controversy. If the Subject be tied up by the Law to an
Allegiance unconditional, (as aforesaid) and without any Exception, or
qualification, to discharge him of that Duty, in any Case whatsoever, the Cause
is clear against him. And this is enough said to show, that under the Masque of
a zeal to crush one Sort of Popery, there is a design Carried on for the
introducing of another. See now what he says of Monarchy.

Monarchy ( says he fol. 21.) can be acquired but by two ways. First, By the
Choice of the People, who frequently, in the beginning of the World, out of a
natural desire of Safety, for the securing of a Peaceful Community and
Conversation, chose a Single Person to be their Head, as a Proper, Supreme
Moderator in all Differences that might arise to disquiet that Community: Thus
were Kings made for the People, and not the People for Kings

This Principle of Popular Liberty, and placing the Original of Government in
the People, is highly derogatory to the Providence of God; contrary to the
express Letter of the Text, and destructive of the very Being of Human Society,
First, By implying Mankind to be cast into the World unprovided for. Secondly,
It makes Magistracy, which the Apostle tells us; ( Romans 13. 2.) is the
Ordinance of God, to be of Human Institution, or at best, Nature's second
Thought; but in truth, an effect either of Tumult or Chance, according as Men
were led to it either by Choice or Necessity. Thirdly, in supposing Power to be
radically in the People, and the grant of it to be only an act of conveyance by
common Consent, and with a power of Revocation, upon certain equitable
Conditions, either expressed or implied; there goes no more than the Peoples
recalling of their Power, to the dissolving of all Commu^ities; and Humane
Society, at this rate, lies at the Mercy of the Multitude. But how this
Revocation shall be notify'd, unless by way of Advertisement in one of the True
Protestant-Anabaptist-Mercurys, I cannot imagine.

But then consider again, That this Grant and Revocation must Pass with a
Nemine Contradicente; nay, and a Nemine Absente too: for one single Diss^^^, or
the want of one single Vote, spoils all; and makes, void both the Original
Grant, and all that was done subsequent upon it: for by reason of that defect,
it is no longer the act of the People.

It may put a Man in admiration, to see what Credit this Phantastique and
Impracticable Conceit has got in the World, if he does not observe the Address
in the Application of it, and the use that is made of it. All violent Motions
of State (we see) are wrought and brought about by the Favor and Assistance of
the People. And there can be no readier way in the World to make them sure,
then either to calumniate, or otherwise to lay open the Nakedness of the
Government, and to tell them that Princes are only Trustees for the Peoples
good; the Sovereignty in themselves; and that if Governors break their Trust,
the People may resume their Power. When the Multitude has once imbibed this
Doctrine, the next work will be to set up for the recovery of their
inheritance: and when it comes to that once, we need but look behind us to see
the end on it.

Our Author has already admitted, (upon this mistake of the Fountain of Power)
that the People may yet pass away their Original Right, without power of
Revocation. Here indeed, (says he, speaking of a Concession of Absolute Power)
a passive Obedience was due; but what is this to a King of England? Now though
the Doctrine of this Passage ( fol. 20.) seems to clash with an Equity of
Resumption, reserved to the People in the last Paragraph above-recited, ( fol.
21.) I shall yet lay no hold of that implication, but turn the force of his own
allowance against himself. If the Peoples alienation of their Power to a
Prince, without conditions, shall stand good against them; so shall the
alienation of their Power also to a Prince, under conditions, stand every jote
as good, within the limits of those conditions. And where shall we find those
conditions, but in the Established Law, which marks out the bounds, both of
King and People? Now if the Law Pronounces the King to be Supreme in all
Causes, and over all Persons, etc. and yet with some Limitations and Restraints
upon his Prerogative: Suppose he passes those Terms, who shall judge him, but
God if he be Supreme, and has no other Power above him? Or if the People have
reserved, in such a case, any controuling Power to themselves, how comes it
that the Law takes no notice of it; but on the contrary, makes the Subjects
accountable for any act of Disobedience or Violence to, or upon the Person, or
Authority of the King, upon what pretense soever? So that under the color of
opposing or preventing an Arbitrary Power; the Law is subverted (here) at a
b^ow; and a Foundation laid of the most pernicious and shameful sort of Tyranny.

He says that Kings were made for the People, and not People for the Kings,
which is well enough, if he means that Kings were made for the Government of
the People, which is the great Blessing of Mankind; and not People for the
Government of the King; which turns Society into Confusion.

But after all these words, to show that Government Originally was not Popular;
I shall add a few more, to prove the Institution of it to be purely Divine:
which opinion, in truth, needs not any other Support, than the Authority of the
Holy Scriptures. By me Kings Reign, etc. I have made the Earth, the Man, and
the Beasts that are upon the Ground by my great Power, and my Outstretched arm,
and have given it to whom it seemed meet unto me, Jer. 27. 5.

That which we now call Kingly Government was at first called Paternel, and
after that Patriarchal, etc. And we find, by the Powers they exercised (as Life
and Death, War and Peace, etc.) that their Paternal Power did Then extend to
all the Acts of our Regal Power; The Objection is, could there be a King
without a People? Which is all one with the Supposal of a Father without a Son.
But This does not at all conclude that Adam had not both a Regal and a Paternal
Power, before he had either People or Children, actually to govern, and
exercise it upon: It being a thing so consonant also, to the Methods of the
Divine Wisdom, to supply him previously with all needful Abilities and
Authorities for the Discharge of his Fatherly and Governing Office: The whole
Race of his Posterity, lying open, even before they had any Existency in
Nature, to the Omniscience of God, with whom there is no PAST or FUTVRE, but
all things, always PRESENT.

Again, if Adam did not bring his Authority into the World with him, when did
he receive his Commission? Or, if he had none at all, how could he justify the
Arbitrary Rule he exercised over those People that were only his Fellow
Subjects, under the same God, and without any Subordinate Ruler over them? Or
if Adam was vested with a Right of exerting the Power he exercised; how came
our Authors Imaginary Multitude to choose a Governor of their own, in opposition
to the appointment of Providence? Or who absolved them from the Bonds of their
filial and primary Duty and Obedience?

What he says afterward of Conquest, (which he calls his Other Acquisition of
Monarchy) serves only for an occasion to tell us, that our Last Norman Conquest
was little more than a Composition: which is an error and nothing at all to the
point here in hand, which refers only to the constitution, and Settlement of
the Government, as now it stands, without any respect to the manner of
acquiring it. But he is now drawing to a conclusion.

Char. If now at last, ( says he) Popery must and shall come in, (as by law it
cannot) and consequently must be restored by Arbitrary Power. If a new
Monarchy, then a new Conquest, and if a Conquest, Heaven forbid we should be
subdued like less than Englishmen; or be debarred the Common Right of all
Nations, which is, to Resist, and Repel an Invader, if we can, fol. 21.

This is spoken upon the supposition of a Popish Successors coming to the
Crown, whom he calls an Invader; (though qualifyed with a Legal Title) and he
incourages Violence against him, though in this case the Law pronounces him a
King: and this Resistance to be made like Englishmen too, that is to say
Englishmen of the late stamp. So that there goes no more (I perceive) to the
destruction of a Lawful Prince, but to say that he either is or will be this or
tha^: And the King himself stands in as much danger, upon the admittance of
this Principle, as his Royal Brother.

But before Subjects proceed to these terms, which without a legal Authority
are criminal in any case whatsoever, Malice it sel^ will not deny, but that
there ought to be an infallible certainty of the Inconvenience: whereas (as I
have said before) this is a case liable to many disappointments; the prospect
of it remote, the expedient unwarrantable, and the danger it self at last not
so mortal as it is represented. He supports his presumption upon this ground
for granted, that a Popish King must do whatsoever the Pope will have him do,
and subject his people to the Tyranny as well as the Religion of the Church of
Rome. What does he say to the French Kings Pyramid then, and the vindication of
himself and his people in diverse other cases, from the Insults of Rome; and to
several other instances already given in this particular?

Char. But to sum up all this (says he) I must say, the most vehement
Disputants against the Peoples right of defending themselves, must at length
ac^nowledge thus much, that whenever a Papist King shall by Tyranny establish
the Popes Jurisdiction in England, undoubtedly in the eye of God he is guilty
of a greater sin than that People can be, that with open Arms oppose that
Tyranny.; Fol. 22.

This is a clause of double consolation: First, to the Author, that this Popish
King shall be damned the deeper of the two. And, Secondly, to the People, that
they shall go to the Devil in good company.

Char. The very Essence (he says) of a Popish Successor is the greatest Plot
upon England since the Creation; a Plot of God himself to scourge a Nation, and
make three Kingdoms miserable.

This must be a very great Plot, if it be the greatest Plot that we have seen
even in our days: a Plot upon our Laws, and it subverted them; upon the Church,
and it destroyed it root and branch; upon our Estates, and it took them away by
violence; upon our Liberties, and it enslaved us; upon our Lives, and it was
made death to do our Duties. It was a Plot that left us no other choice in many
cases but Death or Damnation.

If I had asked my revenues ( says the late King, (...)* sect. 24.) my power of
the Militia, or any one of my Kingdoms, it had been no wonder to have been
denied in those things, where the evil policy of men forbids all Restitution,
lest they should confess an injurious Usurpation. But to deny me the Ghostly
comfort of Chaplains, seems a greater rigor and barbarity then is ever used by
Christians to the meanest Prisoners, and greatest Malefactors, whom, though the
Justice of the Law, deprives of worldly Comforts, yet the Mercy of Religion
allows them the benefit of their Clergy: as not aiming at once to destroy their
Body^, and to Damn their Souls. But My Agony must not be Relieved with the
Presence of any one Good Angel; ( for such ^account a Learned, Godly and
Discreet Divine^ and such I would have all Mine to be;) They that envy my being
a King, are loath I should be a Christian, while they Seck to deprive Me of all
things else; they are a^^a^d I should save my soul.

Has the Author of the Character heard of this Un-Christian Barbarity toward a
Prince of the most Exemplary Goodness and Piety (one of them) that ever lived:
And how he was yet, after all this, Murdered on a Scaffold, in the Name, and
under the pretended Sovereignty of the People of England? How has he then the
hardness of Heart to set up that Regicidal Principle afresh; and to pronounce
the Government of a Popish Successor to be a greater Plot upon England, than
the Execrable Bloodshed of that Protestant Prince? And yet he carries it one
step higher. A Plot of God (he calls it) and at the same time lays the
Foundation of it in Hell, and most Heroically opposes it. From hence to the end
both of the Page and Book, there is only more variety of flourish to the same
purpose.

MY pretending to Answer this Discourse, looks methink, as if a Man should
Reply upon an Alman^ck (for several Years to come) it runs altogether upon
Phansys, Suppositions, Predict^ons, etc. And there is no dis-proving of a
Prognostication; nor hardly any reasoning against it; but so far as it is
Calculated according to Rules of Art: And wheresoever I have found any thing
that looks like a Logical Connection, I have spoken to those Passages what I
thought convenient. But for the rest; my business has been to encounter the
drift of it, and to expound the danger of these present Iealousies, by
referring People to the miserable effects of the same Jealousy in the Late
Times. It is an easy thing for People to foretell Calamities and Judgments of
their own Contriving.

There is not any Man Living that more passionately desires the Ripping up of
this Dam^'d, Hellish Plot to the bottom, than my self; but I must confess
withal, that I am for Suppressing the Malice of Pope^y, as well as the Name;
and utterly against the Damning of any Position in a Papist, that I practice my
self. The best way to discover a Jesuit, is by his Principle; for it is the
Doctrine, and not the Order, or D^n^mination, that creates the Danger. So that
we are never the nearer for rocting out the One, unless we purge our selves
also from the Leagen of the Other. Which will be the only safe way of
faci^itating a Comprehensive Union of those Conscientious Dissent^rs that wish
well to the King and his Government. And in Order to this Discrimination, I
shall give the Reader here a Taste of the Harmony and Agreement betwixt the
Jesuits of the Society, and those of the Covenant. That is to say, such other
Jesuits, as, under the Cover of Dissenting Protestants take advantage of the
Credulity and Weakness of the Common People, toward the working of Distempers
in the Nation.

Popish and Jesuitical PRINCIPLES.
DOminion is founded in Grace; ( says the Romish Jesuit) and upon That
Principle, Deposes Protestant Princes. But the Covenanting Jesuit is even with
him, and upon the same Principle deposes Popish Princes: as Knox and those of
the Congregation in Scotland deposed the Queen Regent (Cambden' s Eliz. An.
1559) Penry told the Lord President of Wales, That without advancing the
Presbyterian Discipline he could have no Commission to Rule there; for having
rejected Christ, he was but the Lieutenant of Satan. And our Character does
pretty well too, in ranking a Popish Prince with Nebuchadnezzar, fol. 17.

The Pope may deprive a King of his Royal Dignity for Heresy, Schism, etc. (B.
of Lincoln's Popish Principles, page 20.) and after Excommunication (says
Mariana) in case of Obstinacy, the People may take away his Life. Now says the
Covenanting Jesuit; All men as well Magistrates, as Inferiors, ought to be
Subject to the Judgment of General Assemblies (See Bishop Bramhal page 501.)
Ministers (says Buchanan de Jur. Reg. page 70.) may excommunicate Princes; and
when they have cast them into Hell, they are not worthy to live any longer upon
Earth.

Pius Quintus absolved the Subjects of Q. Eliz. from all their Oaths of
Allegiance to her for ever. And now (says Knox to England and Scotland) If
Princes be Tyrants against God and his Truth, their Subjects are Free from
their Oath of Obedience. And our Jesuitical Covenanters did the same thing too,
with a Penalty, in abolishing the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and
setting up their Covenant.

We command (says the same Pius Quintus) all the Peers, People and Subjects of
England not to pay any Obedieuce to the Queen, her Commands, or Laws. And was
not this the same thing that our Covenanting Jesuits did, in commanding upon
pain of Imprisonment, and Sequestration, not to obey the Kings Proclamations,
and in making it Death without mercy for any man that had taken the Covenant to
go, without a Pass into the Kings Quarters?

Pope PAVL 3d. Interdicted all public Prayers for Henry 8. or his Adherents,
after his Denial of the Popes Supremacy, to the whole Nation. And did not our
Scottish Jesuits the same thing in refusing to to pray for the Mother of King
James, when she was in her Distress though the King desired it? and did not our
English Covenanting Jesuits make it Malignancy and Sequestration, to pray for
the King in their Churches?

If a Clergyman Rebel against the King, it is no Treason* ( says Em^nuel Sa)
because Clergymen art not the Kings Subjects. The Jesuits of the Kirk told
King James, That He was an incompetont Judge of Matters in the Pulpit, which
ought to be exempted from the Judgment and Correction of Princes. And the
Assembly brought off Gibson and Blake, for Cursing and Railing at the King in
the Pulpit, upon the same Plea. And the Late King had as little Remedy for
Treason delivered in the Pulpits here.

The Papal Power ( says Sciopptus) is Supreme, and the Pope has a Right to
Direct and C^mpel, and a Power of Life and Death. And did not Our Jesuits in
the Assembly, and the Two Houses Practice the same Usurpations in 1642? Does
not the Kirk, in the Cases of Blood, Adultery, Blasphemy, etc. take the
Pardoning-Power out of the King's Hand? Did not the Scottish Jesuits in 1638.
Prote^t against Proclamations, make void Acts of Parliament, Levy M^n, Moneys
and Arms, for the Glory of God, and preservation of Religion? Kings
Declaration. Page 415. Do they not claim Power to Abrogate and Abolish what
Statutes and Ordinances they please, concerning Ecclesiastical Matters? See
Bishop Brambal, Fol. 497. etc. And in short, in ordine ad Spiritualia, take
into their Cognizance all matters whatsoever.

Snarez, approves of a Subjects killing his Prince in his own defense; and much
more, if it be in defense of the Public. Buchanad Seconds him, and would have
him rewarded for it, as if he had killed a Wolf or a Bear. For (says he, in his
de jure Regni) the People are as much above the King, as he is above any one
Person. Which Our Jesuits have Translated into Singulis Major, Vniversis Minor.
Does not our Assembly set up for Infallible, as well as the Pope. And have not
Our Jesuits their pious Frauds as well as those of the Church of Rome; their
Dreams, Visions and Revelations? Where was there ever more Equivocation, or
mental Reservation, then in their swearing to preserve the King, with a Design
to destroy him? Where did the Pope himself ever take more upon him, as to the
Indicting of Assemblies, abrogating Acts of Parliament, and in the Exercise of
all other the Ensigns of Royalty? Does not our Assembly expect to be submitted
to with as implicit a Faith, and as blind an Obedience as the Pope himself? We
must ^^sign up our Judgments (says the Church of Rome) our Will, and our
Understanding in a deference to our Superiors. To which purpose (as I find it
in Lysimachus N^canor page 48.) Andrew Cant when he found he could give no
reasons for subscribing the Covenant, told his Congregation at Glascow, that
they must deny Learning and Reason, and help Christ at a Lift: and told them
further, upon the same occasion, that he was sent to them with a Commission
from Christ to bid them subscribe the Covenant, which was Christ's Contract, and
that he himself was come at a Wooer to them for the Bridegroom; and called upon
them to come to be Hand-fasted by Subscribing That Contract: and told them
plainly, that he would not leave the Town till he had all their Names that
refused to Subscribe; and that he would complain on it to his Master.

It would be endless to run out the Parallel at length, so far as This Argument
would carry a man. But this will suffice, I hope, in some measure for a
Caution, that while we are running down of One Sort of Jesuits we do not
Incorporate our Religion with Another.

The End.

