A DISCOURSE OF THE FISHERY.

Briefly laying open, not only the ADVANTAGES, and FACILITY of the Undertaking,
but likewise the Absolute NECESSITY of it; in Order to the WELL-BEING, both of
KING, and PEOPLE.

ASSERTED, and VINDICATED from all Material OBJECTIONS.

By R. L' ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Pauls-Church-yard, at the
West End, 1674.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE FISHERY.
BEing to treat of the Fishery, and more particularly of the Herring-Fishing
though I reckon upon the Cod and Ling-Fishing also in the Gross, I have
diligently perused, extracted, and digested whatever I could meet with upon
that Subject, and I find that my Discourse will fall under these 3.
Propositions.

I. That it is of Great, and Certain Advantage.

II. That it lies fairer for the Subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain,
then for the Hollanders.

III. That if it be Encouraged, and Established, it will prove the Foundation
of an ample, and lasting Revenue to the Crown, and ofWealth, andProsperity to
the Nation.

Nay, if it should turn to Loss, in stead of Profit, it wonld still abundantly
answer theExpence, in the Consequences; being an undertaking, not only of
Common Benefit, but (as the Case stands) of Absolute Necessity, to the Safety,
and well-being both of King andPeople;

. 1. The Fishery is of Great, and Certain Advantage.
Touching the Advantages of the Fishery; I presume there will be no dispute,
since it is granted on all hands, that the Dutch are beholding to it for the
Rise, and Support of their Greatness; for their Reputation abroad, and for
their Strength at Home: Insomuch that the Herring, Cod, and Ling taken in his
Majesty's Seas, by the Dutch, and other Strangers, are valued Communibus annis,
at no less then Ten Millions of Pounds sterling; which Computation has been
often Published, and constantly received for current, without contradiction.

. 2. The Fishery lies fairer for the Subjects of his Majesty of Great Britain,
then for the Hollanders.
As the Fishery is very Considerable, so it lies much fairer for Us, then for
Them, in regard that we have many advantages toward it, which the Dutch want,
and that we hardly want any thing which they have; save only Industry, which
may be easily Promoted by good Order, and Discipline.

First, We have the Fish upon our Coasts, (I might have said upon our Shoars)
where in case of Storm, Vnlading, taking in Provisions, or the like; it is
seldom above 4 or 5 hours work (and most commonly not so much) to Recover a
Harbor, and without any loss of time, to refitt, and put to Sea again;
whereas the Dutch have usually some 200 Leagues to sail before they come to
their Fishing; and there they lie at the mercy of the winds, for want of a Port
to friend: and in Case of unlading, they have as far back again; which takes up
a great deal of time, hinders their business, and endangers the loss of their
Markets. It is true, that they have their Yagers many times, to take off their
Fish at Sea, and refurnish them with Cask, and other necessaryes; but if it
happens to be a Rolling sea, they must ly still, and wait for a Calm; whereas
with us that are in Harbor, the work of unlading, Repacking, and sending our
Fish away to the first Market, goes on in all weathers. So that in respect of
the nearness of the Fishing, we have much the Better of them: And no less, in
the Commodiousnesse of our Ports and Crecks to Receive the Busses upon all
Occasions.

As to the Charge of a Fishing Vessel, with her Furniture, Tackle, Salt, Cask
and Victuals; there is hardly any thing that belongs to it, except Pitch and
Tarr, which We have not of our own Growth, whereas the Dutch have little of
the^r own toward it, but Cheese and Butter, which is cheaper with Us too then
with Them.

Now if the Fishery be so Profitable, and lie so open to Us, that we may master
it with less Expense, Difficulty, or Hazard then the Dutch, It is our own
fault if We do not improve it to the Greatest Temporal Blessing (perchance)
that Providence ever bestowed upon any People.

Some indeed will have it that We want Men; Others, that our men will never
take to it.

To the First, I answer (under favor) that we have Men enough, but they are
idle, and live upon the Public (to the shame of the Government) without any
Return of Labor and Industry for their Bread; let but these People be set at
work upon the Fishery, and We shall have hands to spare.

The Second Exception is a Contemplation at large, viz. That the Genius of this
Nation will never endure the hardships of that Employment*

To which I Reply, That the English do daily run greater hazards, and suffer
greater hardships in other Voyages, then they do in This; And that they are, in
very many Cases, inured to harder Labor: For certainly the working of a Mine
is incomparably beyond that of a Busse. But to come to the very Point it self,
so far are the English from an Aversion to the Fishery, that they do apply
themselves to it; as Yarmouth, and Scarborough, and indeed the whole Coast will
bear me Witness; For so soon as ever harvest is over (where the Herring-season
comes on) the Boys, and Country Fellows presently flock to the Coast, to be
hired into the Fishing, and upon trial, find it so much to their liking, that
after the second Voyage there is not one of Twenty of them but takes up at Sea
for good and all, without ever returning to his former Condition.

To make it yet Clearer, it will not be amiss to take this General Objection
to pieces, and distinctly to Examine the several difficultyes that occurr
under the notion of hardships. For to say that the English will never do any
thing but where they may ly warm, and dry; fill their Bellyes, and take their
Ease; and that the Hollanders will endure. Hardships better then the English,
will never Carry the Question: but I would fain know what sort of hardship it
is (conducing to this affair) wherein the Dutch go beyond Us.

Are they Hardyer to encounter the Dangers of the Seas?

In this point, we may appeal to every days Experience, and leave the whole
world to judge betwixt us.

Is it the Hardship of Lying exposed to Cold Blasts, and Storms?

Herein lies a Mistake, which I must confess has gained some Credit, and it is
worth the while to set it Right. Be it known then, that the Herring-sishing in
his Majesty's Seas, begins in June, and goes out in November: and that for the
first 4. Months, (which is the best time both for Profit and* Fair Weather) we
never so much as look after it, but fall in upon the Winter Fishing, from
September, to the end of November, which is the most Tempe^tuous season of the
whole year. And then in January, we fit out for the North-Seas, and spend the
remainder of the Winter in all extremities of cold and hardship. This is enough
to satisfy any man, that Our skins are as good proof against wind and weather
as Theirs.

But I will put it yet further, by supposing that the Winter-Fishing would be
too hard for us; What excuse have we now for not making our best of the
Summer-Fishing, which is far the more gainful of the two?

And truly the Hardship of Course-Feeding, does not amount to much neither,
though I know great stresse is laid upon it, how pitifully their People Fare;
and that an English Body will never be able to live upon a Dutch Diet.

If so it were, that an English Diet could not be had, and that a Dutch one
would not serve the turn; it were something; but that is not Our Case; for
here, he that cannot feed upon the One, may have the Other: and I am persuaded,
that the work will go on with Pease and Bacon, every jot as well as with Roots
and Cabbidge; Not but that the English can bring their stomachs down too upon
any Honorable Occasion, to the Grossest Food Imaginable; as has been often
seen among the Besieged in our late Troubles: but they are too generous, to
mortify their Carcases, purely to save their Purses; which in this particular,
is the only ground of Exception; It will augment the Charge that is to say,
whereas a Holland-Buss, after their way of Victualling, clears about a 1000l. a
year, an English Buss will not clear above 990l. according to Ours: which 10l.
difference I do only admit for quiet sake, and to shorten the dispute; as being
the most that any man can pretend to; and more too, in plain terms, then the
matter will bear. For the Dutch-Victualling is the same with ours, so far as to
Beer, Biscuyte, Butter and Cheese; all which We can lay in much cheaper then
They: so that it is but adding the Charge of Pease and Bacon, which (to take it
at the worst) comes but to some 15 or 16l. more, and then discounting for the
other victuals which it saves; for the difference of Prizes; and for the
Brandy, which their People drink more then ours, and there is the Account.

Besides that the very supposall of passing from a good Diet to a bad, is a
great Error, for the Contrymen that put themselves into the Fishing, fare
Incomparably better at Sea, then ever they did at Land; for beside the Ordinary
Provision which they carry to Sea, they feed upon the Fish they Catch; which
for variety and Delicacy, (being fresh taken) is a Treat, beyond what is to be
had at any Noblemans Table ashore: and improves them at such a Rate, that of
Pitiful weaklings at Land, they come in a voyage or two to be hearty, stout,
and healthful persons.

There is another Objection raised from the strictness of the States
Government; (where People must either work, or starve)which says, that the
hardshipps of the Fishery are so great, that if it were not barely to keep life
and soul together, no body would meddle with it, and that their Fishery is
merely Supplied cut of such a sort of People.

My Answer is, First, that the Foundation is a mistake, for it is already made
plain, that there are no such terrible hardshipps. Secondly, for Argument sake,
I will take all for Granted, as well the hardshipps themselves, as the
necessiryes that make people undergo them; let it but be agreed, that by the
force of those necessities, the thing is done at last. For then, by a stronger
reason it may be done by Us, who have Ten men for their One, that have nothing
to live upon but their Labor: Persons that are ready to starve for want of
work, when the Nation is almost undone for want of People.

There are yet two Lions more in the way; 1st. Our Herrings are in no esteem
abroad, because we have not the right way of Curing them. 2ly, we shall never
make any thing on it, for the Dutch will under-sell us, by freighting cheaper;
and consequently beat us ont of the Trade, for want of Vent. To which in Order.

1st. There are two ways of Cuting Herring; The One, at Sea; where they are
Gipp'd, Immediately upon the taking, and so Barrel'd up: The Other, at Land,
where they are Gipp'd, and Packed, some days after they are Taken, These we
call shore-made Herrings and we know before hand, that one Barrel of the
Other, (for Goodness) is worth a hundred of These; and that they will never
take their Pickle kindly, unless their Throtes be cut as soon as they are
Caught. So that it is a great Error, to take a shore-made Herring for a trial
of our Skill of Curing. But for those we make at Sea, they are as good, and as
well esteemed abroad, as any Dutch Herrings whatsoever: and this very year,
above 200 Barrells were sold into the East-Countrey out of one small vessel of
ours at near 4l. a Barrel. I wish we were not more to blame for not taking
them, then for not Curing them. But what if Really we could not Cure them? Is
it Impossible to Learn?

2ly The other suggestion, that the Dutch will beat us out of our Trade, is
either of no force at all against the Fishery, or it is much more forcible
against the Merchant, and the Collier; for this Trade lies under our Noses, and
more in our Power then any other: And to discourage our Fishing upon this
Consideration, is all one, as to bid us quitt all Navigation whatsoever, and
leave our selves at the Hollanders Mercy; or in Effect, for a Prey to all
Comers. And then to fear the want of Vent, is to Imagine that people will leave
Eating: for a great part of the Trading World lies yet unserv'd: neither can
any man show me that ever our Herring lay upon our Hands, for want of a Market.

Enough is said 1st. to show the Advantages of the Fishery. And 2ly. that we
may easily Master it, if we please. It remains now that we take possession of
it, and apply the Profit to our selves.

. 3. If the Fishery be Encouraged, and Established, it will prove the
Foundation of an ample, and lasting Revenue to the Crown, and of Wealth and
Prosperity to the Nation.
Nay, if it should turn to Loss, instead of Profit, it would still abundantly
answer the Expense, in the Consequences; being an undertaking, not only of
Common Benefit, but (as the Case stands) of Absolute Necessity, to the Safety,
and well-being both of King and People;
It is but reason, that Public works should receive Public Encouragement;
and that where both Prince and People are to partake of the Benefit; they
should likewise join in the furtherance of the thing. Of such a Quality is this
work. No sickly Project upon a Ramble we know not whither, to hunt for we know
not what; but a sober and simple Plot upon a Treasure that lies at our very
Feet: a Treasure, of more Value to Us then both the Indies, and yet we will not
so much as stoop to take it up.

The Encouragement here intended, is the raising of a Sum of money for a Fond,
as a necessary Preparatory toward the perfecting of the work: which may be done
either by Lone, Contribution, or Tax.

Hitchcock computes upon 80000. l. to be furnished by 40. persons out of every
County, at 50. l. a man, reckoning South Wales for one County, and North Wales
for another, (which is no great matter.) And many other contrivances there are;
but this point may be cut short: for, upon good security there will be no
difficulty of Procuring Money.

Contribution would be an easy way; and certainly do a great deal in the
business; if the People might but be secured from the fate of their Last
Benevolence in this kind, which never came to any thing, and there is a good
part of it remaining in the Collectors hands to this very day, unaccounted for.
Many ways might be found out for their satisfaction, but none perhaps more
agreeable then Depositing of the stock in the Chamber of London.

A General Tax would do the Deed at a blow; Nay a Particular Imposition, to
Introduce it by degrees; (as in case of the Algier Duty for the Redemtion of
slaves; the Cole-Tax, for the Rebuilding of Churches) would sufficiently answer
my purpose.

Monyes being raised and deposited toward a Stock, we come now to consider
where, and how to Employ them.

The first thing to be done may be the Resolving upon so many staples; and then
to fall to work upon Creeks, Wharfs, Docks, Storehouses, Tan-houses,
Workhouses, Granaryes, Brew-houses, and other Conveniences for the service:
And at the same time, the Poor may be set to work upon Spinning, making of
Nets, and Ropes, and the Like; that the Fishing Tew, and the other Provisions,
may go on hand in hand together.

By this Method, the design may be very fairly advanced with a matter of Forty
or Fifty Thousand pounds, leaving the Charge of the Vessels to come after,
when there shall be Accommodations fit to Entertain and receive them, The
reasons of my proposing it thus by halves, are these; 1st. There is no need of
buying Vessels till we know how to dispose of them, (though an eye may be had
in the Interim, to the saving, and setting apart for this use, of such Ships as
may possibly fall in by the By,) 2ly. The Expense will be lighter, and so more
easily Compassed. And Lastly, (which is the main point of all) It will be a
great Encouragement to a Further supply toward the Charge of the Vessels
themselves (which is next to be Considered) when the people shall see that we
are in Earnest, and half through the work already.

The Charge of a Herring-Busse, of 80. Tun, new from the Stocks, and furnished
at all points for the Fishery; together with Victuals, and Wages for one whole
Year; may be rated at 900l. which being divided into 2 parts. I make account
that the Vessel her self with her Cock-Boat, Mastes, Sail, Yards, Cables,
Anchors, and other Trim to fit her for the Sea, will make about one Moiety: So
that 200 New Busses, rigged and fitted as aforesaid, will come to about 90000l.
(or at second hand perhaps, 30000l. Cheaper;) which Expense, with ordinary
success, will be Cleared the first year; and money toward a stock over and
above. It were better if there were more, but rather then fail, I would content
my self for a Beginning, even with a fourth part of these: But be they more, or
sewer, I would have all the Vessels advanced upon the Kings Account; and have
the Remaining Charge of Netts, Rope, Line, Cask, Salt, Victuals (and in short,
of all Fishing-Tew, and Provisions) to be born upon Adventure, according to
common Practice in those cases, for the Ease of his Majesty and the
Encouragement of the People. This will be better understood by a word or two
concerning the Methodes in the menage of the Fishery.

The Profit of a Herring-Busse is divided into so many shares, whereof there go
about 2 Thirds to the Adventures, and the rest to the Vessel. The Netts, and
Fishing-Geare; the Master, and his Mate, with the Sailors, Fishermen, and the
vessel it self, are in upon the Adventure of No Purchase, no Pay. The Ships
Provisions of victual, Salt and Cask, are furnished upon Adventure too, with
the advantage it may be, of 12 per Cent for their Commodities in peace, and
twice as much in times of war, above the price of the Market, but with this
difference, that this last adventure is to be paid off upon the Return, before
the dividend: without pretending to any other Intereit in the profit of the
voyage. So that his Majesty shall not need to be one penny more out of Purse,
then for the Vessel; as aforesaid: save only the Ships part toward the wages
of 6 or 7 Land-men; which is so inconsiderable, that after two Voyages, they
themselves will deal no longer for wages, but serve upon Adventure.

This is the very Track of the Affayr, and by this method is Retrenched almost
the one half of the Present Charge of the Fishery; the work made easy, and
Profitable, in common, both to King, and People.

The Proportion of Sailors, and Fishers, for 200 Busses will be 1800, or 2000
men, which will be supplied from our Coasts without any difficulty: and these
200 Busses will train up yearly, at least 1200 Landmen for Sea ^ervice.

And then for Money, certainly it will never be wanting; when so small a matter
may advance so great a work.

What were it for the Clergy to make his Majesty, a Present of 50. Busses in
kind; and delivered without any further Trouble, into his own Ports? which
undoubtedly they would never stick at.

A Matter of 50 or 100. of those Noble Persons, upon Whom his Majesty has
showred down his Graces, and Bountyes; what were it for them to furnish as many
more (which in pure Honor, and Gratitude, they would never Refuse?

The City of London would undoubtedly come in for their Quota too; not only in
Acknowledgment of the Honors, and Privileges they have received from the
Crown, but in pursuance of their wonted munificence in favor of all Public
undertakings.

So that there remains but 50 Busses more to be furnished from the whole Nation
beside, to make up the Number; which comes to little more, then a Vessel a
Country, one County with another.

This way would carry the business through, and leave no Objection behind, of
any Possibility of ill-husbanding, or misapplying the Monyes; when, the
Respective Contributers themselves shall have the manage, and ordering of their
own Proportions.

This may suffice for an Encouragement to the Fishery; and there wants little
now toward the Establishment of it, but the settling, and setting apart, by Act
of Parliament, of a certain Revenue for the Repairing of Creeks, Wharfs,
Houses, and Vessels, belonging thereunto; to be vested in the King, and his
Heirs for ever; to the ends and purposes aforesaid.

In persuance of my Assertion, I am now to make good, that the Fishery being
duly Encouraged, and Established, will prove the Foundation of an Ample, and
Lasting Revenue to the Crown, and of Wealth, and Prosperity to the Nation.

Upon the Kings providing Busses, and the settling of a matter of 20000l. a
year for Reparations, and Supplies, in manner as is heretofore expressed; there
will accrue to his Majesty a Third part of the Profits of the Fishery, in the
Right of the Vessels; which, upon a very Reasonable and hopeful Improvement,
will amount to a Million and a half, yearly; and remain to the Cr^wn for ever.
This is it which I call the Foundation of an Ample, and Lasting Revenue; and
which I look upon as a Treasury, that will much more then Answer all His
Majesty's Navall Expenses whatsoever. To say nothing of what will be advanced
in his Customs, by Commedities. Imported for our Fish, in Return.

And I may very well reckon upon it also, as a Foundation of Wealth, and
Prosperity to the Nation; for I cannot Cast my Eye upon any sort or Condition
of People, that is not the better for it, and the Community most of all.

1st. It will bring all other Commodities in upon the Truck; which we now pay
ready money for; to an Inestimable value.

2ly. It will ease this Kingdom at least 300000l. a year, in the very Tax to
the Poor, by Employing all sorts of People, and turning the Great Burden of
this Land, into an equal Benefit: which will be in some measure a repeopling
of us too, by adding so many lost hands to the service of the Public.

3ly. A full Fishery, in this one year; would have saved the City of London,
and the Dependencyes upon the River of Thames, near half a Million perchance,
in the price of Cole; for there would never have wanted ^eamen, to carry on the
War, and the Colliery together.

It would be endless to run through all the Particulars; How it begets
Commerce; Fills His Majesty's Coffers; Peoples his Dominions; and consequently
raises the price of Land; Enriches the Merchant, both by Expertation, and
Importation; and the Tradesman, by setting all hands to work: for it is
remarkable, that 10000l. adventure in the Fishery, Employs more people, then
50000l. in any other Trade whatsoever, Clothing Excepted. It Excites Industry,
and Clears us of Loyterers, and Beggars. Insomuch, that Ordinary Servants make
themselves fortunes, by working of Netts, at spare hours, and adventuring them
in the Fishery.

Let it not be Imagined that I speak all this without book, for I have my
Calculation of the profit of it, and other advantages, from Sir Walter
Rawleigh, Sr. John Burrowes, and many other learned, and Experienced Authors,
who computed the yearly value, at above ten millions, when the Dutch had not
half the number of Busses which now they have.

Bur be the profit more or less, rather then differ upon that point, we will cast
all our Millions into the Sea again, and yet set up the Fishery, though we
should trade to Loss: for it seems to me, of so absolute a Necessity to this
Nation, that (humanely speaking) we cannot well, or long subsist without it.

If we let our Navigation fall, we are Lost; and how to support, and supply it,
without the Fishery, I do not Comprehend; The Man of War, and Merchant-man,
consume* Seamen, and I^reed. none. The Collier brings up, now and then an:
Apprentice, but still spends more then he makes. The only (and the Common)
Nursery of Seamen is the Fishery; where every Busse brings up (it may be) 6. 8.
or. 10. new men every Year; so that our Fishery is just as Necessary to our
Navigation, as our Navigation. is to our safety, and well-being. And it is well
enough observed, that All Princes and States, are stronger or Weaker, at Sea,
according to the Measures of their Fishery.

Nor is it only for the Number of Seamen that we are indebted to the Fishery,
but for the value of them also, for there never were braver Officers in the
world, then those that have been Trayn'd up in That School, as any man that
desires to be better informed, may easily satisfy himself.

Nay, if they were only to be Employed as Pilots, their services would more
then Countervail the Charge: for their business lies where our Dangenlyes:
They know all the Rocks and shelves; and there is no Coasting without them. How
many brave ships have we stranded, for want of a pittyfull Fisherman abord, to
forewarn us of the Danger? yes, and I have heard it. Confidently said, that
even since this last War with the Dutch, a great part of His Majestyes Fleet
Royal had like to have perished upon the same score. Neither can we pretend so
much as to Pilot a great shipp out of the River, without a Fisherman.

As we can do nothing at Sea without the Fishery, so I am afraid we shall make
as ill shift at Land, For we have a bold Coast, and for want of people upon it,
to defend it, we ly open to a thousand Mischiefs. The Fishery will relieve us
in This too; by planting a Trade there, which will draw on Commerce, and
Consequently repeople and strengthen us. If it be asked me, how we have done
for Seamen all this while? I answer, that we have done for Seamen, as some
people do for money; that have but a Thousand Pound in the world, and play away
five Hundred of it in a Night: we spend upon the Main stock, and it will never
hold out. It has been our Fishery (even poor as it is) that has supported us
all this while, and when That dies, a man may foretell without the help of an
Oracle, that the Glory of England will not long outlive it.

When I speak of the Fishery, I desire to be understood of the Fishery in
General, and of God, and Ling, as well as Herring; which is Esteemed to be well
nigh as Gainful too as the other. There is not any subject perhaps that has
been more Labored, and to less purpose then this, and the Reason possibly may
be, that we have only taken a prospect of the Pecuniary advantages of it, which
we may live without, and given no heed at all to that Consideration of State,
which makes it of Absolute Necessity to our Preservation.

To Contract all in a word; If any man shall say, that I have over-rated the
Fishery, and the Influence it would have upon the prosperity of this Kingdom,
let them reply upon Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir John Burrowes, and other persons
of Note, who have studied the point and made a particular deduction of the
Value of it.

Or If I have not sufficiently proved, that it lies fayrer for Us, then for the
Dutch; or not fully answered all Material Objections to the Contrary, I shall
be Glad to be better Instructed.

Or (the Profit apart) If we can ever be either Happy, or safe, without
Navigation: Or Maintain that Navigation without a Fishery; and manage it
without Pilots. If this may be done, I say, All Is well: But if not; I may then
conclude that the Fishery is of an Absolute, and Undispensable Necessity, to
the well-being, both of King, and People.

FINIS.

