Lawyer Outlawed; Or a BRIEF ANSWER To Mr. HUNTS Defense of the CHARTER. With
some Useful REMARKS ON THE Commons Proceedings IN THE LAST PARLIAMENT At
WESTMINSTER.

In a Letter to a Friend.

Printed by N. T. for the Author, MDCLXXXIII.

SIR,
YOur importunities have at last prevailed, and since abler Pens have hitherto
declined to espouse the quarrel, I will for once force my own inclination to
silence and reservedness, and briefly give you my thoughts on that unlucky
Pamphlet, called, A Defense of the Charter and Municipal Rights of London.

The Author, I find, is a Gentleman of the long Robe, a person so well known of
late for his unwearied diligence, and extraordinary faculty in scribbling* that
I need not give you any other Character of him, but that some three years ago
he writ a Book in vindication of the Bishops Right of Judicature in Parliament;
and for this piece of service expected no less than to be made Lord-Chief-Baron
of the Exchequer in Ireland. But missing of that Preferment, he grows peevish
and angry with the Court and Clergy, and to be even with both, and perhaps to
appease his angry Brethren of the Separation for his former Mercenary
undertaking, he adds a Baboons Tail to his Picture, a Postscript to his Book,
the most virulent and malicious, that has yet escaped the hands of Justice.
Ever since, he has continued firm to the Cause, laid aside his useless Law, and
zealously employed his better Talent against the Church and State, in favor of
the Faction; and this about the Charter is the last effort of that wise
Headpiece, which he has stuffed with such a miscellany of wild Paradoxes,
interwoven with some impertinent Truths, that it is far more difficult to digest
them into method, than to answer and confute them.

First, to lay a solid foundation for his great design, he tells us, That
Monarchs, as well as Republics, have often erected Municipal Cities, and by
their Charters bestowed upon them several Franchises and Privileges, as to
choose their own Magistrates, and governby their own Laws, while subservient to
the public Laws of the Sovereign Authority, page 1. This is certainly very
true; but how far it makes for the Charter of London, against the Quo Warranto,
is a Mystery not to be comprehended by every vulgar capacity: for it is no less
plain in History, that not only Tyrants and Usurpers, as he mentions, but just
and lawful Sovereigns, have diverse times suppressed such Municipal Cities, for
good and necessary causes, as for being disloyal to their Prince, or factious
and seditious against the Government; and then the main Question will be, How
far the City of London has of late been guilty of such Crimes, as by Law
deserve the like Punishment?

This, in short, is the plain state of the Question; for it is most unreasonable
to think, that any King or Republic ever gave their Municipal Cities any such
Liberties or Immunities, as were not forfeitable upon their abusing the Power
they received; when otherwise, neither Prince nor People could be secure from
the insolence of such uncontrollable Citizens, without a standing Army to keep
them in awe. But our Gentleman, it seems, is unwilling to touch upon this
critical point of speculation; and as the Defense of the Charter is the least
part of his Pamphlet, so now he runs quite from the purpose, to tell the King
like a dutiful Subject, He may, if He please, take His Quietusest, and let His
people govern themselves; For it is impossible (says he) that mankind should
miscarry in their own hands, page 2. Now, since they have often miscarried in
the hands of Princes, is it not more expedient for the public good, if this
Maxim will hold, that the Prince should mind his own private business, and not
trouble himself with the Government, which the People can do better without Him?

This is Mr. Hunt's new Model of Government, who out of pure love and kindness
to the Monarchy, chalks out a ready way for his Sovereign to ease Himself of
all the thorns and prickles of His Crown, and become a glorious King like His
Father; And therefore seems very angry, that the Court, (i. e. the King) should
be troubled with the Power of appointing Officers in any City or Corporation in
the Kingdom, though it be found of absolute necessity for the keeping His Crown
upon His Head, and protecting His best Subjects from a Band of Associators and
Ignoramus-Juries.

Oh! But by this new form of Corporations, it will be in the power of a Popish
Successor to put the Government of all Corporated Towns in England into the
hands of Papists* p 5. And without it, I say, it will be no less in the power
of the Faction, to put the same Government into the hands of Fanatics. What a
Bugbear is this Popish Successor! whose very Name turns the brains of a Whig
into a Magnifying-glass, that will transform Ants into Giants, and Mole-hills
into Mountains! We have as good Laws as the wit of man can devise, to secure us
from the encroachments of Popery, and to disable Papists from bearing any
Office, Civil or Military, either in or out of Corporations: and yet this
Popish Successor, who possibly may never succeed, this great Goliath, can break
through all those Laws, and will certainly do it, to curry favor with a
handful of Papists, and make himself a Slave to the Pope.

This is not all; For this mode (says he) of incorporating Cities and Towns,
does ipso facto change the Government; for that One of the Three States, an
essential part of the Government, which is made up of the Representatives of
the People, and ought to be chosen by the People, will by this means have five
sixth parts of such Representatives, upon the matter, of the Courts nomination,
and not of the Peoples choice; -- and at the next turn we shall have a
Parliament of Papists and Red-coats, page 6. O profound Politician! has not our
Government been Regal and Monarchical from the beginning? how then can the
House of Commons, in comparison but a late Institution, necessary not for the
Being, but for the Well-being of the Monarchy, be an Essential part of it? Or
how can any Rul^r be termed a Monarch, that has 500 Demagogues Joynt-Governours
with Him? These, and such other Republican Maxims, have been in a great measure
the main foundation of all the miseries and confusions we suffered under the
late Tyranny of the Rump-Parliament; and after our sad experience of those
Tragical times, surely we have reason to think, that none but such as would
bring us back to the same calamities, and sing the second part to the same
Tune, would now endeavor to assert or maintain them: yet they are so very
familiar to our Irish Chief-Baron, that there is hardly a page in most of his
Pamphlets, but has a strong tincture of them. In his great and weighty
Considerations considered, he says, The Parliament derive Their Authority from
the same Original the King derives His* The King has not His Power from Them,
nor They theirs from the King: They Both derive their Authority from the
consent of the People, either tacit or express, in the first institution of the
Government, or in the subsequent alterations of it, page 16. Is not this a rare
Assertor of the Monarchy, that makes both Houses thus coordinate with the
Prince, and all the Three subordinate to the People; turns the Governed into
Govornours, and leaves to the King the Title only, but to His Subjects the
Power and Dominion? The Law tells us, That all Authority and Jurisdiction,
Spiritual and Temporal, is derived from the King, 1 Ed. 6. c. 2.. 3. And
Plowden, as great a Lawyer perhaps as Mr. Hunt, says, That the King has the
sole Government of His Subjects, fol. 234, a. How then can Mr. Hunt make the
People the Original of Power, since all is derived from the Prince? or how can
either or both Houses of Parliament pretend of themselves to have any share in
the Government, which is wholly in the King? or claim any Authority or
Jurisdiction over the People, but as derived from the Sovereign?

Let us therefore explode these Republican Notions, that have cost us so dear,
and cannot in the least avail either Parliament or People, but will always make
the Prince jealous of their proceedings, who can better hear the complaints and
humble Petitions of his dutiful Subjects, the constant In making our ancient
Laws, (says the great Antiquary Mr Seldom) the Commons did petere, the Lords
assentire, and the King concludere: in his Judicature in Parliament, page 132.
style of our ancient Acts of Parliament, than the Imperious dictates of his
fellow-Governours; for, experience confirms what Lucan long since has told us,
Nulla fides Regni sociis, omnisque potestas Impatiens consortis erit.

But how should this new form of Corporations make their Representatives in
Parliament, not of the Peoples choice, but of the Courts nomination, is not
very intellig^ble in my apprehension: since every Cobbler can tell, the Freemen
of Corporations, and not their Officers, have the sole power of electing their
Representatives. Where then is the danger of a Parliament of Papists and
Red-coats, (though there had been no Law to disable the former from sitting in
the House, till they forswear themselves, or abjure their principles) unless
the major part of the Freemen of England, which I hope shall never happen, be
supposed to embrace the Popish Religion? We have seen, to our cost and to our
shame, a pretended Parliament of Red-coats and Roundheads, which like the
Egyptian Locusts devoured all the fruit of the Land, and turned Europes
Paradise into a Field of Blood; and this blessing we owe to Mr. Hunt's poor
harmless Dissenters; which I hope will make us so wise for the future, as never
to give them the like opportunities.

It were endless to follow this lawless Scribler through every page and
paragraph, or severally to take notice of all his incoherences, and impertinent
digressions. To come therefore close to the business of the Charter, we must
turn over many pages, and step from the beginning almost to the end of his
Pamphlet, to find out something that may seem to the purpose. Three points he
offers at last in defense of the Charter, which he says to the Londoners, he
comes to defend against theirs, and he might add as well, his own, reason and
understanding, p. 31. For if he has a grain of Law or sense left, he knows that
of these points the first is impertinent to what he undertakes, and the rest
but fallacious cavillings, to impose upon the Vulgar, and make them obstinate
to their cost.

First, he says, That the Dissenters, though Excommunicate, have a vote in the
Election of their Officers. 2ly. That the Common Council cannot destroy or
surrender the Charter. 3ly. That the Sherivalties of London and Middlesex are
in the City by Common or Statute Law; and consequently not to be displaced, but
by Act of Parliament, though with the consent of every individual Citizen, p. 32.
For the first, he takes a world of pains to prove, that the Excommunication of
Dissenters does not render them incapable of giving their Vote in the Election
of the City-Officers. And what then? Is the Charter never to be forfeited,
while the Dissenters have a Vote or Suffrage in such Elections? or are they so
numerous in the Common Council, as to out-vote the Members of the Church of
England? are their tender consciences still so pliable, as to receive the
Sacrament in their Parish Church to serve a turn, and run to a Conventicle all
the year after? to take Tests and Oaths to get into Employments, and break all
with a breath to promote the Good Old Cause? nay, venture to forfeit their Ears
to the Pillory, and their Souls to the Devil, to help off an active Brother
caught by the Tongue? These are the harmless Clients of our Irish-Chief-Baron,
of whom we may well say with the Poet, -- Mill add catenas,
Effugiet tamen hac sceleratus vincula Proteus.


These, I mean, not the misled or seduced, but the Heads and Ringleaders of
the Faction, who always hold with the Hare, and run with the Hound, and make
conscience of nothing but Conformity, and yet conform for Preferment. To these
their deluded followers owe all the severities of late used against them, and
the City this so-much-talk'd-of Quo Warranto, with all the unlucky
consequences, which Mr. Hunt says are like to attend it: there being no other
way to rescue the Government out of their hands, or secure His Majesty's Crown
and Dignity, and the Lives of his good Subjects, from packed Juries, and
perjured Ignoramus's.

But they have (says our Lawyer) an utter abhorrence against Popery and the
Plot, and join forwardly and zealously against it, p. 16. It Is true, they make
a great noise and bussle about that horrid Conspiracy, but in reality they have
done more than the Papists were able to do, to stifle and confound it. They
attaqu'd the Church of England, whilst in the heat of prosecuting the
Conspirators, and labored under the Umbrage of the Popish-Plot, to carry on
another of their own, to subvert the established Government, and insensibly to
decoy us into Presbytery, and their darling Commonwealth; as the Trial and
Condemnation of their Proto-Martyr College; their Green-ribbon-Clubs, and
Ignoramus-Juries; their Vox Patriae's, and Vox Populi's; their Appeal from the
Country to the City; the Speech of their Noble Peer; and in short, the
tendency of all their Seditious Libels, backed with the Depositions of several
Witnesses* do as plainly demonstrate, as Coleman's Letters and Execution prove
the wicked designs of the Papists. They inveigl'd some of the principal
Discoverers of the Popish-Plot to espouse their Party, and vilify the Church;
which frightn'd many a Loyal Gentleman, that could not forget the Contrivances
of the late times, where Popery was the First, but Monarchy the Last Act of the
Tragedy, and made them suspect these same persons, now their hand was in, might
at last be wrought upon, to turn against the obedient Sons of the Church, whom
they had already stigmatized with the ignominious Names of Tories,
Masqueraders, and Church-Papists. In short, they contrived so many shams and
silly stories, as made the very truth questionable; and when they saw the
English Plot was not like to embroil the Nation, they invited a number of
profligate wretches out of Ireland, gave them Clothes and Money in abundance,
and took so much pains to set up these unmanageable Tools, that in fine they
dashed both Plots to pieces, one against the other.

Are we not then beholding to our true-blew-Protestants, after all these fine
exploits, for their abhorrence against Popery and the Plot, and to Mr; Hunt,
for his zealous vindication of their Proceedings? He was formerly suspected to
be a man of no Religion; but now, like a generous Soul, he owns his Party in
their greatest distress, and openly declares against the Church of England, as
Betrayers of God's Cause, and the Peoples Liberties. Some of little
understanding among you (says he) that thus behave your selves, are excusable,
as misguided by some of your Ministers, who are in good earnest begging
Preferments, Dignities and Benefices for themselves, by offering and betraying
our Church to a voluntary Martyrdom, p. 12. I need not comment upon this
scurrilous Reflection, it is enough to say, it is the product of Mr. Hunt's own
Brains, who, according to his Fee, though against his conscience, spoke for his
Clyents; for Lawyers, he tells us, (and who more fit to know?) have Opinions to
sell at any time, though they have not the least color of Reason to support
them, p. 19. If this Confounder both of Law and Gospel, be thus for fouling his
own Nest, we need not wonder at his frequent snarlings at the Loyal and
Christian Resolutions of our Reverend Clergy, or expect better usage from a man
that openly sides with the Enemies of our Church.

I come now to his second point, which is so wild and so extravagant a paradox,
as deserves rather to be laughed at by men of sense, than to be answered or
confuted: since, besides several that have done it within these two years past,
there are not many Corporations in England, whose Charters have not been
surrendered by their Common Council, without so much as consulting their
Common-halls; and yet were never questioned for it, as Betrayers of their
Trust, or of the Liberties of the People.

But he drives home the Nail in his 3d. assertion, where he says, that the
Sherivalties of London and Middlesex, or the right of choosing their Sheriffs,
(the main point now in dispute, and what most concerns the King, after our late
experience, to have in His own disposal) cannot be parted with, without an Act
of Parliament, though with the consent of every individual Citizen. But sure the
Gentleman is not in earnest; for I hope he will allow us, that though alone they
cannot, yet with the consent and approbation of the Common Hall, or of every
Citizen, the Common Council may surrender the Charter: who then, the Charter
being thus surrendered, has the power of choosing the Sheriffs, when the
Corporation, the City and the County is dissolved, neither Mayor nor Alderman,
Citizen nor Free man to found? The Inhabitants in general cannot choose them,
for they have no right now to do it, neither do they receive any new power by
the surrender of the Charter; and yet the Freemen cannot, when there is no
such thing in being, no more in London than in Westminster, or any other
Dissolved Corporation.

But to be short in a Case so plain, since the Gentleman requires an Act of
Parliament for displacing the Citizens Right of choosing their Sheriffs, here
is One ready to his hand, for taking away, upon their neglect or misgovernment,
all their Franchises and Liberties, and consequently this power of electing
their own Officers and Magistrates; an Act found by the prudence of our
Ancestors, so necessary for to maintain the public Peace, and keep that
overgrown City within the bounds of duty, that Henry IV. though he sought
occasions to ingratiate himself with the People of London, the better to secure
his Usurpation, yet could not be wrought upon by their entreaties to have any
material part of it altered, much less annulled or repealed. The Act take as
follows.

280. Edwardi 3i. cap. 10o.

BEcause that the Errors, Defaults and Misprisions, which be notoriously used
in the City of London, for default of good Governance of the Mayor, of the
Sheriffs, and the Aldermen, cannot be enquired nor found by people of the same
City: it is ordained and established, That the said Mayor, Sheriffs and
Aldermen, which have the Governance of the same City, shall cause to be
redressed and correated the Defaults, Errors, and Misprisions abovenamed, and
the same duly punish from time to time upon a certain pain; that is to say, at
the first Default a Thousand Marks to the King, and at the second Default two
Thousand Marks, and at the third default, that the Franchise and Liberty of the
City be taken into the King's hand. And be it begun to enquire upon them at St.
Michael next coming, so that if* they do not cause to be made due redress, as
before is said, it shall be enquired of their Defaults by Enquests of people of
Foreign. Counties; that is to say, of Kent, Essex, Sussex, Hertford,
Buckingham, and Berk, as well at the King's Suit, as others that will complain.

And if the Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen, be by such Enquests thereto assigned,
Indiaed, they shall be caused to come by due Process before the King's
Justices, which shall be to the same* assigned out of the said City, before
whom they shall have their. Answer, as well to the King as to the Party. And if
they put them in Enquests, such Enquests shall be taken by Foreign People, as
before is said. And if they be Attainsed, the said pain shall incurr and be
levied of the said Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen, for default of their
Governance. And nevertheless, the Plaintiffs shall recover the treble Damages
against the said Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen. And because that the Sheriffs
of London be Parties to this business, the Constable of the Tower, or his
Lieutenant, shall serve in the place of the Sheriffs, to receive the Writs, as
well Originals of the Chancery as Judicials, under the Seal of the Justices, to
do thereof execution in the said City. And Process shall be made by Attachment,
and Distress, and by Exigent, if need be: so that at the King's Suit the
Exigent shall be awarded after the first Capias returned, and at the third
Capias returned at the Suit of the Party. And if the Mayor, Sheriffs and
Aldermen have Lands or Tenements out of the City, Process shall be made against
them by Attachments and Distresses, in the same Counties where the Lands or
Tenements be. And that every of the said Mayors, Sheriffs and Aldermen, which
do appear before the said Justices, shall answer particularly for himself, as
well at the peril of other which be absent, as of himself. And this Ordinance
shall be holden firm and stable, notwithstanding any manner Franchise,
Privileges or Customs. And this Ordinance shall extend to all Cities and
Boroughs of the Realm, where such Defaults or Misprisions be used, and not duly
corrected nor redressed: saving that the Enquests shall be taken by Foreign
people of the same County where such Cities or Boroughs be. And that the pain
of those of the said Boroughs and Tolws, which shall be thereof Attainted,
shall be judged by the Discretion of the Justices, which shall be thereto
assigned.

This Act was a great Curb to the people of London, and kept them for many
years after, very obsequious and dutiful to their Sovereign; but in process of
time, finding it was not duly put in execution, they began to forget it at
last, and would now and then break out into some extravagance, which afterward
cost them very dear. Finding therefore themselves very uneasy under this
restraint, though neither in Edward III. nor his Successor's Reign they durst
motion to have that Statute repeal*d, yet when the Usurper Henry IV. came to
the Crown, they labored hard to get themselves rid of it, but could gain no
more than the following Clause; which many in London, who always think ill of
the King and His Ministers, will think of no great advantage to the Defense of
the Charter.

OUR Lord the king considering the good and lawful Behavior of the Mayor,
Sheriffs and Aldermen, and of all the Commonalty of the same City of London
toward him, and therefore willing to ease and mitigate the Penalty aforesaid,
by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons
aforesaid, has Ordained and Established, That the Penalty aforesaid, as well
of the Thousand Marks, and of the two Thousand Marks, and of the seizure of the
Franchise comprised in the said Statute, shall not be limited in a certainty,
but that the Penalties in this case be by the advice and discretion of the
Justices thereto assigned, as other Cities and Boroughs be within the Realm;
And that the Remnant of the same Statute, and the Process thereof, stand in
their force, 1 H. 4. cap. 15.

Now, I appeal to Mr. Hunt's own Judgment, provided he has so much moral
honesty, to speak nothing of his skill in the Laws, as will qualify him for an
Irish Chief-Baron, Whether or no these two Statutes be not as plain against the
Charter, supposing the Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen to have been negligent in
their duty, and a fortiori if they and the Common Council be found guilty of
the Crimes laid to their charge, as Magna Charta or the Petition of Right is
for the Liberty and Property of the Subject; For, that it is neither Treason nor
Felony, nor yet the Subversion of the Government, but Crimes of a far inferior
nature, that are meant by the Errors and Misdemeanors mentioned in the said
Acts, is apparent by another Statute made some three years after, by the same
King Edward III. where it is Enacted, That the Mayor and Aldermen of London
shall rule and redress the defaults of Fishers, Butchers, and Poulters, and put
the same in execution, upon the pain late ordained touching the City of London,
31 Ed. 3. cap. 10. Now, if the whole City, for a bare neglect of duty in their
Officers, as for omitting to punish the Misdemeanors of silly Tradesmen, were
by these Acts of Edward III. so grievously punishable, as for the first Offense
to forfeit a Thousand (...) no less in the (...) value than 2000 l of our now
(...) so much in the (...) use and price of things) (...) for the second
offense, and for the third to forfeit their Franchise and Liberties to the
King: what shall be thought of others, if they are found not only to have laid
an Illegal Arbitrary Tax upon their Fellow Subjects, and in a tumultuous manner
invaded their Properties; but winked at, if not encouraged, the publishing of
Treasonable Papers and Pamphlets; and instead of suppressing others, presented
their Prince with a most Scurrilous one of their own, by way of Petition, to
tax His Majesty with misgovernment, and endeavor to bring Him into hatred and
contempt with his People?

As for the aforesaid Clause of 1 H. 4. though intended for (as really it was) a
great favor to the City, that they should not for every trisling fault be
obliged to pay such a vast Fine as a Thousand Marks, twenty times greater than
that sum now; yet if their Crimes had been found of a transcendent nature,
striking at the very Root and Life of the Government, we may be sure the
Justices, by virtue of this very Clause, would have immediately seized their
Charter, without bringing them to any further Trial. So that this Clause, though
in small inferior misdemeanors it be a great advantage to the City, yet in
Crimes of State, where the Crown and the Monarchy are concerned, it is no less
an advantage to the King.

Thus, Sir, you have seen how well Mr. Hunt has defended the Charter against
all the Power both of Law and Reason, and you will find him altogether as happy
in the rest of his undertakings. I omit his impertinence on the Play, called,
The Duke of Guise, his unmannerly application of the Characters, and his
framing of Parallels where little or no similitude can be found: Yet en passent
I cannot but pity the condition our Lawyers INNOCENT and GENTLE PRINCE is
reduced to, page 27.
by the sly insinuations and bewitching flatteries of this and such other
Sycophants of the Faction, who puffed him up, and possessed him with such
chymerical hopes of a Crown, as made him forget his Obedidence to his Princes
will, and the positive command of his Natural Father; Natural, I say, because
in our Laws the Maxim is, Qui ex damnato coitu nascuntur, inter liberos non
computantur, i.e. Bastards are not counted amongst Sons, Coke 1 Instit. f. 3.
or as Littleton says, A Bastard is quasi nullius filius, because he cannot be
Heir to any, apud Coke 2 Instit.. 188. Now, if by Law this Prince can be Heir
to none, what a madness it was to advise him to aspire to Three Hereditary
Kingdoms, or think to carry them tamely by Popular Applause, when nothing but
the Sword can establish a cracked Title?

But the best people of England (says this non-sensical Scribler) have no other
way left to show their Loyalty to the King, and love to their Religion and
Government, in the long intervals of Parliament, than by Prosecuting His Son,
for the sake of the King, and his own Merit, with all the demonstrations of the
highest esteem, p. 28. They are certainly very hard put to it, if this (not to
PROSECUTE his silly Latinism) be the only shift they can make to express their
Loyalty, when Children can tell, they might, if they had any, better show it,
by prostrating themselves at His Majesty's feet, and declaring their readiness
to venture their Lives and Fortunes in defense of His Sacred Person, and the
Rights of His Crown, against all the attempts of the Popish Plotters and
Whiggish Associators. It Is true, some of the best People in England have had,
for the King's sake, and in some measure for his own Merits, sufficient
kindness for his Grace, and still wish him more Grace and consideration, than
to continue obstinately disobedient, contrary to common Prudence, and to all
the ties and obligations of Nature, of Duty, and of Gratitude: But as for Mr.
Hunt's best People of England, though pretended his only Friends, they have been
upon all occasions his real Enemies, made a Property and a Tool of him, to set
him up, like another Perkin Warbeck, in opposition to the Royal Line; and if
that succeeded, to kick him down again, as they did Richard Cromwell, to make
room for Themselves and their darling Commonwealth.

But to return from this digression, and examine what is left yet unanswered of
this idle Pamphlet: I find our Chief-Baron wou^d-be has stumbl'd at last on
those two famous Statutes of Edward III 4 Ed. 3. 14. 36 Ed. 3. 10.
to prove, that Parliaments must be held once every year; which (says he) is
confirmed by an Act of this King, called, the Trienial Act, p. 21. But by his
Lordships good leave* these Statutes, if well considered, will be found to have
been made rather to oblige the Commons (who then grumbl'd no less at the
frequent calling, than the Factious do now at the long intermission of
Parliaments) to send their Representatives to the King's Great Council, than to
bind the King to summon them when there was no occasion for their meeting; and
therefore, to make the case more plain, the conditional Clause, If need be,
which may aptly refer to the whole period, is expressly provided in the said
Statutes. For to affirm, it was absolutely enacted that a Parliament should be
held once every year, whether there was any, or no need of their meeting, when
the choosing of Members was so troublesome, and their expenses eundo morando and
ad propria redeundo so chargeable to the people, besides the great Taxes they
usually granted, is altogether unreasonable. As for the Triennial Act of this
16*Car. 2. 1.
King, it makes more against than for his Lordships design; since it requires
but to have a Parliament once in three years, and not sooner, without some
extraordinary occasion; which, I doubt not, but His Majesty, according to His
late most Gracious Declaration, will see punctually observed, as He has been
pleased to do in the whole course of His Reign.

And the Statute of Provisors, 25 Ed 3. is no less impertinent to his purpose;
for though it be the Right of the Crown of England, and that the Law of the said
Realm is such, that upon the mischiefs and damages which happen to His Realm,
the King ought, and is bound by Oath, with the accord of His People in
Parliament, to make remedy and Law, in removing the mischiefs and damages which
thereof ensue: Yet if His People in Parliament prove peevish and obstinate, and
will not accept of His Majesty's gracious Condescensions, nor of the expedients
by Him proposed; who then is to be blamed, the King or His People? How many
Proposals and Overtures of accommodation have been made by His Majesty to His
last Parliament at Westminster? and how undutifully they were rejected by some
Leading-Members in the House of Commons? How often did he offer to consent to
any reasonable expedient they could find out, for securing the established
Religion, in case of a Popish Successor? But all was slighted, as if nothing
but the Subversion of the Monarchy was able to secure some Gentlemen in their
Religion, that were shrewdly suspected to have none to lose:

This discourse, I know, will not relish with our Irish Chief-Baron, who seems
already very angry, that a Cabal (as he calls the Loyal Addressers of the
Nation) should take upon themselves to arraign the Proceedings of our latest
Parliaments, p. 8. And yet his unmannerly Worship, because he thinks it is a
Privilege peculiar to the Godly to speak evil of Dignities, scruples not to
rail at the best Parliament that ever met in his time, which really was (what
he scoffingly calls it) a Parliament of famous Loyalty; though in their latter
days, when by the Death of several good Members, too many of the old Leaven had
crept in, that vigor was much abated, which they always expressed in their
former resolutions; and for which this Factious Lawyer presumes to say, that
obliquely they gave the Papists many assistances, p. 14. and in plain terms
calls them, the corrupt Villains of the late Long-Parliament. Considerations
considered. p. 19. But to clear this point, without insisting upon retortions
and recriminations; I say, to arraign the Proceedings of the Parliament, in its
true and legal sense, that is, of King, Lords, and Commons, is a very great and
a very heinous Crime, not to be connived at, or endured in any Subject
whatsoever; because it tends to the vilifying, and consequently to the
subverting the Government; for as Seneca well observed, Nihil valet Regum
potestas, nisi prius valeat authorit as: If Princes lose their Authority, the
awe and reverence due to them from the People, they have lost their Power and
Command, and are in effect more than half Deposed. But to arraign the
Proceedings of the Parliament, when this Name is abusively appropriated to the
House of Commons, to whom this lawless Scribler attributes a high and
uncontrollable Power, (p. 9.) as if the King and Lords were only Ciphers, the
Crime is not near so unpardonable as some people would have us believe. I am
sure Mr. Justice Hutton in his Argument against Ship Money, (which so pleased
even that Rebellious Conventicle of Forty-One, who swallowed up the King's
Prerogative and the Peoples Liberties in their Parliament-Priviledges, that
they gave express Orders to get it printed) thought it no such Crime to say, I
know not whether the last meeting in Parliament, either by ill choice of the
Members of the House, or by the great increase of the number, or by the
ambitious humor of some Members of that House, who aimed more at their own
ends and designs, than the good of the Commonwealth, things were so carried,
not as was used in ancient times, but so disastrously that it has wrought such
a distaste of this course of Parliaments, as we and all that love the
Commonwealth have just cause to be sorry for it. p. 33. Nevertheless, I must
confess, that even in this sense it is not becoming every private Pen to censure
or condemn them, upon every slight occasion; and the motives must be very
extraordinary, when such practices are allowable. Yet when we consider, that
matters have been so carried on for some years past, that of necessity we must
e^ther mislike our Princes Wisdom and Councils, for Proroguing and Dissolving
so many Parliaments; or conclude, as undoubtedly we must, that the unseasonable
heat of the Leading-Members in the House of Commons, necessitated His Majesty
to take such unwelcom resolutions: And withal, when we find, not only the King,
but the generality of the Nation in their repeated Addresses, express their
dislike to the Proceedings of a prevailing Party in that House; all Loyal
Subjects, I think, concerned in the election of such Members, ought to be so
just to Themselves and the Public as to declare their own Integrity, and their
constant affection to the King, that the world may see they are no Abettors of
the unwarrantable resolutions of their Representatives; who perhaps ran into
such unusual extravagancies, in hopes to be seconded by their Principals. But
though the occasion be never so extraordinary, it must nevertheless be granted
for an undeniable Maxim, that whatsoever misdemeanors any Members of that
Honorable House happen to commit* it ought not to reflection the House in
general, nor yet the errors of the whole House at any time, put either Prince
or People out of love with that wholesome and excellent Constitution. For such is
the instability of Mundan affairs, that (as the Poet said) Nihil est ab omni
part beatum; there is nothing upon Earth but has its failings, and even the
best of Governments has sometimes its own inconveniences: Thus Princes are now
and then apt to give too much credit to their flattering Favorites, and be led
for a while by their evil Counsels till time and experience convince them of
their error; and it is pla^n, the wisest Assembly that ever sat ^n the House of
Commons cannot be always free free from the like mistakes, but are sometimes
mpos'd upon, by the plausible pretenses of some designing Politicians, and
cunningly decoyed in, to act contrary to their inclination to their interest,
and their duty. Of this kind we have several remarkable passages in the
Intestine-Troubles of Forty-One, where a few Factious Members in both Houses
insensibly inveigl'd the rest, and inflamed the whole Nation into a general
combustion; And these four years past can sufficiently furnish us with fresh
instances almost of the like nature, but that through the great Prudence of our
Sovereign and His Most Honorable House of Lords, mindful of their Fathers
miscarriages, all these endeavors proved abortive and unsuccessful.

If we ser^ously consider what measures some persons of greater parts than
honesty made use of at that time, as well in as out of Parliament, we shall
find cause enough to admire how people that pretend so much Religion and
Loyalty, so much affection to their King and Countr^y, could be wrought upon to
run headlong into such extravagant courses, so destructive of the
Prerogative-Royal, and of the Peace and Settlement of the Three Kingdoms. The
horrid Popish-Plot, which has already cost us so many Millions in our Trade and
Commerce, and, I am afraid, a great deal more in our Credit and Reputation
abroad, was made a stalking-horse by the ambitious to attain to their expected
Greatness, of being chief Ministers, if not chief Magistrates of all the K's
Dominions: And because His Majesty, wisely considering it was impossible to
make a just and impartial enquiry into that hellish Conspiracy, while the
people were so far transported with heat and passion, Ne frena animo permit
calenti; da spacium. tenuemque moram; male cuncta ministrat impetus.
which nothing but time could cure; and withal discovering what use some
designing Demagogues intended to make of this Plot against the Monarchy,
thought it convenient, or rather necessary, sometimes to Prorogue, sometimes to
Dissolve his Parliament, and call another, in hopes to meet with one of a
better temper, and more moderation; Our cunning Machiavellians took hold of
this opportunity, to inflame the unthinking multitude, and make them believe
their All was betrayed, without a speedy Parliament, to enquire into the
Popish-Plot, and redress the Grievances of the Nation; and therefore they
clamoured, it was absolutely necessary they should all join in a Petition to
His Majesty for that purpose: whereby they were sure, either to gain their
point, and get the Parliament to sit, which they might model and influence, as
they pleased; or at least know the strength of their party by the number of
Subscribers, and lessen His Majesty's credit in the hearts of his People. To
this end Agents are sent about* and the Petition is signed by many Legions of
the Goaly Party. None so forward to subscribe this Petition to the Son, as they
who petitioned for Justice against the Father. There you might see
Presbyterians, Independents, Quakers, Brownists, and Anabaptists, all in a
string, to petition His Majesty for a speedy Parliament. A mysterious Riddle to
all sober and understanding men, that Fanatics, who always but in Forty-One
dreaded the face of that August Assembly, should now be more zealous for their
sitting, than the True-Protestants of the Church of England. It was certainly
an Omen that could portend no good either to Church or State; and therefore, as
the King had reason to mistrust there lay a Snake in the Grass, the Brethrens
zealous petitioning to that purpose, did rather hinder than forward their
meeting.

At last, when it could not be thought the effect of the Fanatics importunity,
but of His Majesty's grace and goodness, the Parliament met on the 23 of October*
1680, and the King having solemnly renewed them His former promises of
complying with any thing they could in reason propose, desired them to wave all
unseasonable disputes, and hasten to settle the affairs of the Nation, and
bring their meeting to a happy conclusion. The People were generally big with
expectation, to see the issue of this famous Session, and doubted not but all
their jealousies and distractions would now be fully removed, the Three Nations
settled and composed, and the Popish Plot speedily shifted to the bottom.
Parturiunt montes. They sat almost for three entire months without any let or
interruption: and what have they done all this while toward the effecting
these weighty matters that lay before them? what great progress have they made
toward the suppressing of Popery, or putting a period to that hellish
Conspiracy? They spent nine or ten days about my Lord Stafford's Trial; and
when all expected the other Lords should immediately follow, our charitable
Patriots, tender it seems of shedding more Popish-Blood, sat down to breath
themselves, and not a word more of the Papists to the end of the Chapter.

The truth is, the Leading-Members, that governed all in the House of Commons,
had other fish to fry. They were ferreting out Papists in Masquerade, or
half-reform'd Protestants, now thought more dangerous than the professed
Romanists. A Reformation they intended both in Church and State, and God knows
where it should have ended It was enough they fixed the Popish-Plot by the
conviction of my Lord Stafford; but it seems it was their interest to keep it
on foot for other purposes, perhaps in imitation of the wise Romans; who
thought it impolitick to demolish their great Rival Carthage, which, while
standing, might serve to keep them from idleness and exercise their Valor. The
Papists therefore must have a time to breath, and the Fanatics are the great
favorites of the House, while known Protestants of the Church of England,
under the odious names of Abhorrers, are forced to bear the brunt, and suffer
as Betrayers of the peoples Rights and Liberties, for obeying their Sovereigns
Proclamation, though not repugnant to any known Law or Statute, but approved of
by the Judges, and other Sages of the Law, and conformable to an express Act of
Parliament in the like case provided. 13 Car. 2. c. 5.

It Is the peoples Right, I know, or to speak more properly, it is their Duty, to
petition their Prince for relief and redress of their Grievances; but still
it is the undoubted Prerogative of the Sovereign to judge whether such
Grievances be real or pretended; fit to be granted, or necessary to be
rejected: And when upon weighty considerations, as the Subject ought in duty to
suppose, the Prince openly expresses his dislike to such Petitions, to
importune him any further is very unmannerly, and plainly tending to Sedition.
It Is an undutiful part in Subjects (says our British Solomon) to press their
King, wherein they know beforehand he will refuse them. In his Speech to the
Parliament. anno 1609.

The evil consequences of these tumultuous Petitions are too well known to
those that remember our late unhappy Confusions, to be dwelt upon, or described
in so small a Treatise. It Is enough, that the wisdom of the Nation, both King
and Parliament, after His Majesty's miraculous Restoration, have declared, It
has been found by sad experience, that tumultuous and other disorderly
soliciting and procuring of hands by private persons to Petitions, Complaints,
Remonstrances, Declarations, and other Addresses to the King, or to both or
either Houses of Parliament, for alteration of matters established by Law,
redress of pretended Grievances in Church or State, or other public
Concernments, have been made use of, to serve the ends of Factious and
Seditious persons gotten into power, to the violation of the public Peace, and
have been a great men's of the late unhappy Wars, Confusions and Calamities in
this Nation. 13 Car. 2. c. 5.

Besides, our Lawyers tell us, and King James declares in his Speech to the
Parliament, on the last of March 1607, You all know, that Rex e Lex loquens;
and you often heard me say, that the King's will and intention being the
speaking Law, ought to be Luce clarius. And again; In any Case, wherein no
positive Law is resolute, Rex e Judex; for he is Lex loquens, and is to supply
the Law* where the Law wants.
That Rex est Lex loquens; and where the Law is silent, the King's will is a
temporary Law. Upon what account then were the Abhorrers of the late tumultuous
Petitions, so exactly resembling those of Forty, and so contrary to His
Majesty's express Orders and Proclamation, censured or imprisoned? what Crime
have they committed, or Law have they violated? or can there be any
transgression, where there is no Law; or Punishment, where there is no
Transgression? Oh! (say they) though there be no positive Law directly against
Abhorrers, yet it is the great Fundamental Law, Lex and consuetudo Parliamenti,
and the Privilege of Parliament, that they may judge what Crimes are
punishable ex post facto, and by their arbitrary Power punish any man for what
they please. This, I must confess, is a pretty knack to help us off at a dead
lift, and will serve as well to vindicate the most exorbitant proceed^ngs of a
mad Parliament, as self-preservation is generally wrested to justify the
horrid Conspiracies of Rebellious Subjects. It proves the great Earl of
Strafford has been lawfully Executed, though his very Enemies then gave us reason
to believe, and both King and Parliament since have declared, him Innocent; And
the known Laws of the Land are at this rate very defective, since they are not
the entire Rule of the peoples Civil Obedience, but are further liable to be
tried by that mysterious Riddle, Lex and, consuetudo Parliamenti; which neither
our Fathers, nor We, were able to understand.

It Is an undoubted Maxim both in Law and Reason, that promulgation is
absolutely necessary to the obligation of all positive constitutions, insomuch
that the immediate Laws even of the Almighty, are not obligatory, where they
were never preached, or made known. How then comes it to pass, that so many
Loyal Subjects and good Protestants have been troubled upon the account of
those mystical Riddles, Lex and consuetudo Parliamenti, and the Privileges of
Parliament, which were never published or made known to the people, but lie
dormant in the House of Commons, till started up as occasion requires? It were
to be wished, that Honorable Senate would so far oblige the Nation, as to give
them a true description of this Law and Custom of Parliament, and an exact
account of their Privileges; that people might in some measure for the future
be able to shun those dangerous rocks, and not be surpised or shipwrack'd on
such hidden shelves. Till then all those loud pretenses of securing the Subject
from Slavery and Arbitrary Government, must seem very ridiculous to the sober
and judicious, who as they cannot be easily imposed upon by outward
appearances, to believe peoples words not suitable to their actions, will be
apt to mistrust, that what these Gentlemen so stiffly oppose in others, they
design wholly for themselves.

But to come closer to the purpose, let us suppose the Parliament has this
Arbitrary Prerogative, to turn our most innocent actions into misdemeanors, and
make what they please a breach of Privilege: yet by what Authority can the
House of Commons alone pretend to execute that Power; or take upon them to be
sole Judges, that cannot act as Justices of the Peace? Our Ancestors, it seems,
have brought their Hogs to a fair Market, who have struggled for many Ages to
preserve themselves and Posterity from the unbounded rule of Arbitrary
pleasure, and having wrested that Power from their Sovereign, like wise
Politicians, have left it in the hands of their Fellow Subjects, nay, of their
Attorneys and Servants, to whom as such, they always allowed their daily wages
for their attendance in Parliament. It Is certainly an odd kind of Liberty, that
the people can neither be Fined nor Imprisoned by their Sovereign, unless for
transgressing some known penal Law of the Land; but their Deputies and Trustees
may uncontroulably punish them for any thing they are pleased to call Criminal.

Is this the great happiness of Freeborn Subjects, instead of one to have five
hundred Masters, and see the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, Magna Charta, and
all the good Statutes confirming and explaining the same, thus eluded and made
useless by a pretended Custom of Parliament? What are we the better at this
rate, that by the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, c. 29 it is
declared, That no Freeman shall be taken or Imprisoned, or be disseiz'd of his
Freehold or Liberties, or his Free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or in
any manner destroyed, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law
of the Land? Or that 28 Edw. 3. c 3. it is enacted, That no man of what estate
or condition he be, shall be put out of his Land or Tenements, nor taken, nor
Imprisoned, nor disinherited, nor put to death, without being brought to Answer
by due Process of Law. Or, to omit many others, that 42 Ed. 3. c. 3. It is
assented and accorded for the good governance of the Commons, that no man be
put to answer without Presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by
due Process and Writ Original, according to the Old Law of the Land; and if any
thing be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, and holden for error.
What are we the better, I say, to have these and several other Statutes to the
same purpose, if they are not of force to secure us on all sides from the
slavish yoke of Arbitrary Power? If a breach be once made in these great
Bulwarks of our Liberties, and that even by those Sentinels appointed to guard
us from all Illegal Encroachments, where is our Security? What will it avail
the flock, that they are safe from Wolves, if they are in danger to be devoured
by the very Dogs that should defend them? Or to what purpose should people
struggle to avoid Scylla, if at the same time they suffer themselves to be
swallowed up in Charybdis? It Is an old saying* Infeliciter aegrotat, cui plus
mali venit a medico ^uam a morbo; and we have found this too true by a
dear-bought experience. God preserve us from receiving any further
confirmations of it from those State-Empyricks, that labor to make us exchange
the reality for the name, and the substance for the shadow, or Liberty.

It Is plain by the foregoing Statutes, that no man ought to be taken or
Imprisoned, without being brought to Answer by due course of Law; and that none
can be brought thus to answer, without Presen^ment before Justices, or matter
of Record, or by due Process and Writ Original, according to the old Law of the
Land. What pretense then have the House of Commons, who can bring none to
Answer in this manner, to any right or legal power to take or Imprison any
Criminal whatsoever? It Is true, the Common, and generally all men in Authority,
are inclined to enlarge their own Jurisdiction, and stretch it as far as
possible; but sure a bare Vote of that House in favor of themselves, or a late
practice never heard of in former Ages, shall not be of force enough in any
Court of Justice to elude the solemn Acts of King and Parliament.

Besides these Statutes, too plain to admit of any comment, even by the Common
Law of this Realm no Subject can Imprison another, but our Ancient Courts of
Record, and such as have the Kings express Commission for so doing. I say
Courts of Record, because (as appears by diverse adjudg'd Cases in our Law
Reports) no other Court can Fine or Imprison the Subject: Courts (says Coke)
which are not of Record, cannot impose a Fine, or commit any to Prison, lib. 8.
f. 38. And again, Nulla Curia, quae Recordum non habet, potest imponere finem,
neque aliquem mandare carceri; quia ista tantummodo spectant ad Curias de Ib.
f. 60. Beechers Case. The like he has fol. 120. Bonham's Case, and lib. 11. f.
43. Godfrey's Case, and in several other places.
Recordo. Now our best Lawyers will tell us, that the House of Commons is no
Court of Record, nay properly speaking is no Court at all. 1. Because there is
no Court, but what is establish*d by the Kings Patent, by Act of Parliament, or
by the Common Law, i.e. the constant immemorial custom of former Ages. Plowdens
Comment. fol. 319. and Coke 1 Instit. f. 260. But the House of Commons cannot
pretend to have any Patent or Act of Parliament to be a Court, and yet the
Common Law makes nothing for their purpose: For they were never owned as such,
nor ever had as much as a Journal Book, much less Records, till Ed. 6's. time:
And moreover, it was never heard before Sir Edward Cokes fancy, there were two
distinct Courts in the same Parliament; since therefore the House of Lords is
undoubtedly the Supreme Court of all England, they are properly the High Court
of Parliament, and consequently the House of Commons is no Court in Law.
Secondly, There is no Court without a power of Trial; but the House of Commons
have no power to try any Crime or Offense; for they cannot; nor ever pretended
to examine upon Oath: And therefore since there can be no legal trial without
Witnesses, nor are Witnesses of any force in Law, unless examined upon Oath,
the House of Commons not claiming the power to administer Oaths, cannot bring
any matter to a Trial, and consequently can be no Court. I must confess Sir
Edward Coke (who in his latter days thinking himself disobliged, was no friend
to the Monarchy, and therefore took a great deal of pains to extol the Power of
the Commons, in opposition to the Kings Prerogative and the Jurisdiction of the
Lords) is, or at least pretends to be, of another opinion. In the 4th. part of
his Institutes he tells us, That the House of Commons is to many purposes a
distinct Court, p 28. which he very Learnedly proves by this rare
Demonstration, That upon signification of the Kings pleasure to the Speaker,
they do and may Prorogue or Adjourn themselves, and are not Prorogued or
Adjourned by the House of Lords, ib. Whereas (to say nothing of Commissioners
for examining Witnesses, or regulating any public business, of Arbitrators,
Referees and the like) every Committee of Lords and Commons, tho never so few
in number, must upon this account be a distinct Court, because they may thus
Adjourn and Prorogue themselves, without their respective Houses. But he goes
on, and to prove the House of Commons, is not only a Court, but a Court of
Judicature and Record, he says p. 23. That the Clerks Book of the House of
Commons is a Record, and so declared by Act of Parliament, 6 H. 8. c. 16.
Whereas that House, as I have already hinted, had no such Book as a Journal,
much less any Authentic Record, before the first year of Edward the sixth; all
their material Proceedings till then being drawn in Minutes by a Clerk
appointed to attend them for that purpose, and by him entr'd of Record in the
House of Lords: And therefore the words of the Statute are, That the Speakers
License for Members going into the Country, be entered of Record in the Book of
the Clerk of the Parliament, appointed for the Commons House: Which undoubtedly
must be meant, not of the Commons, tho ordered now and then to wait upon them,
but of the Lords Clerk, who alone is styled Clerk of the Parliament. I omit,
that although the Act had expressly called the Commons Book, a Record, yet this
could no more make it so, than the words of the Common Law, Recordari facias
loquelam in Curia Comitatus vel Baronis tui -- and Recordum illud habere coram
Justiciari^s nostris, etc. used in the Writ for removing a Plaint out of the
Court Baron, or County Court to the Common Pleas, can prove the County Court
and Court Baron; to be Courts of Record; which yet Coke himself denies in
several places of his Institutes. See 1 Inst. f. 117. and 260. and Rolls in his
Abridg. f. 527.

This is not all, the Lords and Commons must be made all Fellows at Football,
and of equal Authority, in point of Judicature: The Lords (says he) in their
House have Power of Judicature, and the Commons in their House have Power of
Judicature, and both together have Power of Judicature, p 23: But I wish, since
the Lords Judicial Power, as well with as without the Commons, is beyond all
dispute, this great Lawyer had so far obliged Posterity, as to have left us
some convincing Argument to make the World believe the like of the House of
Commons; or at least given us some Instances of their using this Power in
former Ages, as the Lords have done time out of mind. In the mean time, it is a
shrewd Argument against his Assertion, that in H. 4. time the Commons
themselves in their Petition to the King, declared, That the Judgments of
Parliament appertained only to the King and Lords, and not to the Commons; and
therefore they prayed the King out of his special Grace to show unto them the
said Judgments and the cause of them; that so no Record might be made in
Parliament against the said Commons, without their privity. To which the Bishop
of Canterbury answered by the Kings command, That the Commons are Petitioners
and Demanders, and that the King and Lords always had, and of right shall have
the Judgments in Parliament, even as the Commons themselves have showed; saving
that in Statutes to be made, or Grants and Subsidies, or such things as are to
be done for the public profit of the Realm, the King will have especially
their advice and assent, 1 H. 4. Roll. Parl n. 79. Who now is to be believed,
Sir Edward Coke attributing to the Commons, or the Commons themselves wholly
disclaiming all Power of Judicature? Or shall a single Lawyers Ipse dixit, or
proofless assertion, be of greater weight, than so solemn a Declaration upon
Record, approved off by King, Lords, and Commons?

But to be short, and to argue ad hominem against our late Demagogues at
Wesminster, if they thought themselves a Court of Judicature and Record, as Sir
Edward Coke is pleased to make them, it is strange what could be their motive
(unless to show their Arbitrary Power to the World) to Imprison so many of His
Majesty's Loyal Subjects, and after a long and chargeable Confinement, release
them, without offering to bring them to any legal Trial: For if these Gentlemen
were reputed Criminal, they ought to have been tried according to Law; if
Innocent, they should not have been Imprisoned. And to say their Confinement
was by the House designed for a punishment of their supposed Misdemeanors, it is
contrary to common sense and to all Laws both humane and divine. For at this
rate, people will be condemn^d before they are heard, and punished before they
are convicted; nay, which is worse than Abington-Law, to hang a man first, and
try him after, they shall be punished at will, and never brought to a trial.
What can be safe, if this be admitted? or who can be secure either of Life or
Liberty, if a prevailing Faction in the House of Commons may toss him thus in a
Blanket without any Rhyme or Reason, contrary to the undoubted Right of the
Subject, and the Fundamental Laws of the Nation?

But we are told, the Commons have often Imprisoned people for misdemeanors,
and released them again at their own Discretion. I wish they had showed us
withal by what Authority or Law they committed them; for a facto ad jus is no
good argument with any man of sense or judgment. How many Appeals have been
made to Rome, and provisions of Benefices procured from thence, during the
Papal Usurpation? Yet these being contrary to Law, the Authors were still
punishable, and it was no excuse for any, that others had done the like before.
The Commons have been a constituent part of the Great Council of the Kingdom,
either since the 16th. of Henry I. as some Historians write, or since the 49th.
of H. 3. in the year 1364. as most Authors agree; and yet all this while we
cannot find, that by their own Authority they imprisoned any Criminal, till in
the 4th. of Ed. 6. about the year 1550 they committed Criketost to the Tower,
when the King was an Infant, and all governed by the ambitious Duke of
Somerset: who to be sure would not expostulate with the House of Commons about
such a trifle, as he thought it, whilst they forbore to question him for his
more illegal and arbitrary Proceedings.

Now, if there be no other argument to justify the Commons imprisoning
Delinquents, but the practice of their House since the 4th. of Ed. 6. it is
plain, the commitment of Criketost was illegal, because not justifiable by any
former practice of that House; and consequently, could be no fit Precedent to
be imitated in succeeding Parliaments. And if their first Essays of this kind
were unwarrantable by Law, their subsequent Commitments could be no better;
for, Quod ab initio non valuit, tractu temporis non convalescit. To what
purpose then are such unwarrantable Examples alleged to justify the late
proceedings of the Commons, if not to prove one absurdity by another? since
they can hardly think of any thing, how wild and unreasonable soever; but they
may find one instance or another, to offer as a Precedent, in some of our
former Parliaments. For experience tells us, this Great Council, much less the
Dyer f. 60. a. says, the Parliament consists of three parts, viz. the KING, as
chief Head; the LORDS, the chief and principal Members of the Body; and the
COMMONS, the inferior Members.
meanest of the three Estates, (though our modern Republicans would fain snatch
the great Privilege of Infallibility from the Pope's Cushion, and place it in
the Speakers Chair) has not been always free from mistakes, but is found to
have often deviated from Justice, Truth, and Loyalty. We must therefore, with
Seneca, look, non qua^itur, sed qua eundum, not what is, but what ought to be
done; and consider, that it is not the example of frail men, imposed upon
through ignorance, or led by passion, or private interest, but the approved
Laws of the Land, ought to be the Rule both of the Magistrates Government, and
of the Subjects Obedience.

What! says a factious Petitioner, cannot the House of Commons imprison any
Criminal? Have they no authority to chastise their own Members, or punish the
Invaders of their Privileges? Have they not often exerciz'd this Power; and is
it possible the King and Lords would have so long connived at their
proceedings, had they been illegal or unjust? Does not the House of Peers
punish the Breakers of their Privileges; why then may not the House of Commons
be allowed to do the like?

These are the mighty arguments our great Champions for the House of Commons
always insist upon; but how weak and insignificant they are, is very obvious to
any, though but meanly versed in our Laws, and the constitution of our
Government. For my part, I have always been, and still am, as much for
maintaining the just Privileges of that House, as any man whatsoever; it is my
interest to do it, and nothing but Truth and Loyalty shall ever induce me to
speak against any of their Pretensions: yet I must say, the power they claim
nowadays, to punish all sorts of misdemeanors, and what they please to term a
breach of Privilege, is not to be endured by any freeborn Subject; For,
besides that it is needless, because such offenses may, and by Law ought to be
tried in the ordinary Courts of Justice, it is very dangerous to the Public,
least the Grand Inquest of the Nation, appointed to represent the Peoples
Grievances, and pray redress, should upon this account be diverted from
pursuing those weighty affairs, by every saucy Footman belonging to the meanest
Burgess in their House.

I confess, it were somewhat tolerable in the Commons to imprison and punish
their own Members, for words by them spoken, or misdemeanors committed in the
House: 1. Because by 4 H. 8. c. 8. they are not punishable elsewhere for any
rashness in Parliament, that does not amount to Treason Felony, or breach of
the Peace, which the Commons neither Coke 4. Inst. p. 25. and 31 H. 6. n. 26,
27.
can, nor I hope will, as in Forty-One, endeavor to protect. 2ly. Because it is
supposed, the Members upon their entering into that Assembly, unanimously agreed
the lesser number should always submit to the greater, and the major Vote be
observed as the Act and Sense of the whole House; if therefore by consent and
original compact every single Member submits himself to the rest, he cannot
complain, though otherwise they had no authority, if they imprison him for his
misdemeanors, because scienti and volenti non fit injuria, provided always they
exceed not the common Rules of Justice, nor the bounds of our established Laws;
for then no private Act can bind a Subject, though made with his own free
consent; as appears by Clark's Case against the Mayor and Burgesses of St.
Albans; Coke lib. 5. p. 64. I cannot therefore but think the power assumed of
late years by the House of Commons over their Fellow Members, to expel them the
House, when and for what they please, without any legal Trial, (which the Lords
never practiced against any of their Peers) is in it self most unreasonable,
and of very dangerous consequence; as Mr. Prynne, though otherwise a great
Champion for the Privileges of Parliament, proves at large in diverse of his
Treatises* The practice (says he) of sequestring and expelling Commons by
their fellow-Commons only, is a late, dangerous, unparliamentary Usurpation,
unknown to our Ancestors, destructive to the Privileges and Freedom of
Parliaments, and injurious to those Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, whose
Trustees are secluded: the House of Commons being no Court of Justice, to give
either Oath or final Sentence, and having no more authority to dismember their
Fellow Members, than any Judges, Justices of the Peace, or Committees, have to
Dis-judge, Dis-justice, or Dis-committee their fellow Judges, Justices, or
Committee Men, being all of equal Authority, and made Members only by the
King's Writ, and the Peoples Election, not by the Houses, or other Members
Votes; who yet now presume both to make and unmake, seclude and recall, expel
and restore their Fellow Members at their pleasure, contrary to the practice
and resolution of former Ages, to patch up a Factious Conventicle, instead of
an English Parliament. In his legal Vindication of the Liberties of England* p.
10.

But whatever Power the Commons can pretend to have over their own Members, to
say they can lawfully punish others, tho for a breach of Privilege, much less
for any other Crime, seems to me a very groundless Assertion, not warrantable
by the Ancient Law and Custom of Parliament, but rather contrary to the
Fundamental Constitutions of our Government: First, because it is impossible to
make out from whom this Power is derived; From the King? The Factious will not
own it, and none can prove it: For they have neither Patent nor Statute to show
for it, nor yet any Legal Prescription, which is a constant immemorial Custom,
such as the Lords have in point of Judicature, to warrant it; the Ancientest
President they can allege, being that of 4 Ed. 6. or the Case of Ferrers
referred to them by the Lords in the 34 H. 8 about sevenscore years ago. Do
they deri^e it then from the People, from the Freeholders and Freemen, their
Electors? These have no such Power of themselves, they can Imprison none
without His Majesty's Commission; and what they have not, sure they cannot
give: Nemo dat, quod non habet. As for the Power given by the Electors to their
chosen Members, who are ordered by the Writ of Summons to have from the persons
they represent, Plenam and sufficientem potestatem, it is no Judicial Power, nor
Political Jurisdiction, which the People have not, and consequently cannot
give, but only a Power of consenting as well for their Principals, as for
themselves, to the Kings Laws and Ordinances. And certainly, if the King be the
Suprem, and the only Suprem Governor of this Realm, as we affirm in the Oath
of Supremacy; and if all Authority and Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal be
derived and deducted from the Kings Majesty, as it is expressly declar^d 1 Ed. 6.
c. 2. 3. Or as Old Bracton says, Ea quae sunt Jurisdictionis and pacis, ad
nullum pertinent nisi ad regiam dignitatem. lib. 3. c. 24. Unless the Commons
can make out they have their Power from the King, they can have no manner of
Jurisdiction, and by consequence cannot lawfully Punish or Imprison any
Criminal, if not perchance their own Members in the Cases aforesaid: Besides,
in the first Parliament of Queen Mary it is declared, That the most Ancient
Statutes of this Kingdom do give, assign, and appoint the correction and
punishment of all Offenders against the Regality and Dignity of the Crown, and
the Laws of this Realm, unto the King 1 Mar. Sess. 3. c. What then are the
breakers of the Commons Privileges; are they Offenders against the Dignity of
the Crown, or the Laws of the Realm? If so, they ought according to this Act to
be punished by the King; if not, they are not punishable at all: for to trouble
any, that does not offend against the Crown, or the Law of the Land, is very
Illegal and Arbitrary, and a high breach of the Liberty of the Subject.

Secondly, because the Law has expressly provided where and how breaches of
Privilege ought to be punished, and gives the House of Commons no power to
take any cognizance of them; for by several Statutes it appears, that if a
Parliament Man, or his Menial-servant, be Assaulted, Beaten or Wounded, in
Parliament-time, Proclamation shall be made where the deed is done, that the
Offender shall render himself to the King's Bench within half a year after,
there to be tried; and if the Offender will not appear, he shall be Attainted
of the Deed, and pay to the Party grieved his double Damages, to be taxed by
the discretion of the Judges of the said Bench for the time being, or by
Inquest, if need be, and also make Fine and Ransom at the Kings will. Moreover,
it is accorded in the same Parliamenti, that likewise it be done in time to
come in like Case, 5 H. 4. c. 6. and 11 H. 6. c. 11.

As for the Commons freedom from Arrests* it is certainly a very Ancient
Privilege, granted by our Kings to that House, the better to enable them to
attend the public service, to which they were summoned; as appears by Edward
the first's Answer to the Templars, who having some Tenants in the Parliament,
that were behind with their Rents, Petitioned the King to have leave to
Distrain for the said Arrears in Parliament-time; which he utterly refused,
saying, Non videtur honestum quod Rex concedat quod illi de Consilio suo
distring antur tempore Parliament. 18 Ed. 1. Rot. 7. in Thesaur. Receptoris
Scaccar. Yet that it was not formerly held so sacred, nor did extend near so
far, as some people now imagine, is plain from the Case of Thorpe 31 H. 6. Who,
tho Speaker of the House of Commons at that time, was Imprisoned in the Fleet
during the Prorogation of the Parliament, for a 1000. Marks Damages given
against him for a Trespass done to the Duke of York. And the Parliament being
Re-assembled, the Commons earnestly desired to have their Speaker discharged,
but it was adjudg'd by the Lords, that he should remain in Prison according to
his Sentence, and they choose another Speaker: whereupon they elected Sir
Thomas Charlton, and made no further clamours, as some now would do, that their
Privileges were invaded, 31 H. 6 Rot. Parliam. n. 25, 26, etc. Seldens
Baronage fol. 115.

Now for the Trial of a breach of this Privilege, tho I find no positive or
express Statute, that orders it to be decided in the ordinary Courts of
Justice, yet that they may lawfully do it, is a plain consequence of the
foregoing Acts of Parliament: For to argue a majori ad minus, since Assaults
upon Parliament Men are far more Criminal than Arrests, if the ordinary Courts
of Justice can try the greater, they may certainly try the lesser Crime. And
accordingly they have often taken cognizance as well of this as other
Privileges of Parliament; as appears in the Case of Done against Mich. 12. Ed.
4. Rot. 20. in the Exchequer.
Welsh, and of Hill. 14 E. 4. Rot. 7.
River against Cosyn, Dyer fol. 59.
Skewish against Trewynnard, and many others. But the most usual practice of
former times was, to make application to the King and Lords for redress in this
particular, for as Sir Edward Coke himself confesses, The determination and
knowledge of this Privilege belongs to the Lords of Parliament, in his select
Cases 63. And therefore the House of Commons, upon the restraint of any of
their Members or Menial Servants, of which themselves took no cognizance till
of very late days, always made their humble request to the King and Lords for
his enlargement. Thus when William Lake Servant to William Milred, a Member of
the House, was taken in Execution of Debt, and Committed to the Fleet, the 8 H.
6. Rot. Parl. n. 57.
Commons Petitioned the King and Lords for his Liberty. The like they did in
Walter 39 H. 6. n. 9.
Clarks Case; and in the Case of William 14 Ed. 4. n. 55.
Hide: And to omit several other Precedents, even in the 43 Eliz. when a Bill
was preferred in the Star Chamber against Belgrave a Member of that House, the
Parliament then sitting, for Misdemeanors by him committed against the Earl of
Huntington; the Commons well knowing they had no Authority of themselves to
protect their Member, made their earnest, but ineffectual, Application to the
Lords for relief. Sir Simon D' Ewes Journals p. 612 And in the same Parliament
a great asserter of Privileges, upon a debate about Subpaena's, said openly in
the House, Our use at this day is not warranted by Ancient course of
Precedents; for if a man had been Arrested upon a Subpaena, upon notice given,
he should have had a Writ of Privilege, which of course Her Majesty must have
allowed: D'ewes Journals page 655. which is conformable to the Report made 18
Eliz. by Mr. Attorney of the Duchy upon a Committee appointed for setting Mr.
Halls man at Liberty; That the Committee found no Precedent for setting at
large by the Mace any person in Arrest, but only by The Lords themselves cannot
by Privilege of Parliament set any at Liberty by their immediate Orders to the
Gentleman usher, or Sergeant at Arms, but only by a Writ of Privilege from the
Lord Keeper; as appears 43 Elizab. D'ewes Journals, p. 608.
Writ; and that by diverse Precedents of Records perused by the said Committee,
it appears that every Knight, Citizen or Burgess, which does require
Privilege, has used in that Case to take a Corporal Oath before the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper, that the Party for whom such Writ is prayed, came up
with him, and was his Servant at the time of the Arrest made, D'ewes p. 249.

The famous Case of Ferrers, Burgess of Plymouth 34 H. 8. tho often alleged
in favor of the Commons, is so far from making any thing for their purpose,
that it plainly shows they never offered till then to punish any breach of
Privilege, for although they found, not only that the Sheriffs of London denied
to deliver their Burgess, but that the Officers of the Counter beat their
Sergeant and broke his Mace; yet knowing they had no coactive Power of
themselves, they were forced to repair to the upper House, (which they would
never have done, had their own Authority been sufficient) and complain to the
Lords of the injury they received; who judging the contempt to be very high,
for the Commons greater satisfaction referred the punishment thereof wholly to
themselves: which condescension, it seems, gave such encouragement to that
House, in succeeding Parliaments, who have been always sure never to loose, but
still to gain ground upon the Prerogative and the House of Peers, that now and
then they made bold, even without any Warrant or direction from the Lords, to
punish some breaches of Privilege, and at last other misdemeanors. For King
Edward the sixth, because of his Minority, and his two Sisters by reason of
their Sex, being not so active, nor so fit for business, as their Predecessors,
the Commons took hold on this opportunity to get themselves into Power, and
endeavored by punishing Offenders to render themselves the more formidable to
the People.

From hence they proceeded to regulate Elections, and tho the Law is very plain
and positive in this Case also; yet the Commons have taken upon them of late
days, not only to decide who is duly chosen, and who unduly returned; but have
further assumed the Power to punish the Offenders, contrary to diverse Acts of
Parliament in that Case provided: For by several Statutes it appears, That if
the Sheriff makes an undue Return, his punishment is 200 l. one to the King,
and the other to the party duly Elected; besides a years Imprisonment without
Bail or Mainprise: And the person unduely returned is to continue a Member of
the House, but at his own Charges, without any allowance from the place, for
which he serves. As for the return, if any makes complaint thereof, It ought to
be tried, not by a Committee of Elections, but before the Justices of Assizes
in the proper County, or by Action of Debt in any Court of Record; as appears
11 H. 4. c. 1. and 8 H. 6. c. 7. and 23 H. 6. c. 15. These are the Laws for
regulating Elections, and pursuant to them Queen Elizabeth, in whose time the
Commons busi'd themselves too much in that matter, sent a notable check to the
House in the 28 year of her Reign, for their meddling with choosing and
returning Knights of the Shire for Norfolk; a thing (said she) impertinent for
the House to deal withal, and only belonging to the Office and charge of the
Lord Chancellor, from whom the Writs Issue and are returned, D'ewes Journal, p.
393. Which Message wrought then so far upon the House, that for some years
after they forbore to meddle much in any thing of that nature, but applied
themselves, when occasion required, to the Lord Chancellor or Keeper, who
proceeded therein as the Law directed, without taking any great notice of the
Commons Votes or Resolves; as we find by a remarkable Instance in the 35 of
this Queen, when Sir Edward Coke then Speaker, was ordered by the House to
attend upon my Lord Keeper, to move his Lordship to direct a New Writ for
choosing a Burgess for Southwark instead of Richard Hutton, supposed to have
been unduly elected; and another for allowing Sir George Carew, who was duly
elected, but not returned, to be Burgess for Camelsford in Cornwall; and a
third for changing the name of John Dudley, returned Burgess for New-Town in
the County of Southampton, into the Name of Thomas Dudley, alleged to be the
same person, but his Name mistaken. My Lord Keeper answered, that the Returns
for Southwark and Camelsford should stand good, but as for the said John
Dudley, he would direct a new Writ for choosing another Burgess in his stead
for Newtown, D'ewes Journals, p. 494. Now if this was the legal way of
Proceeding in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, warranted by the Statutes lately quoted,
and allowed by the great Lawyer Sir Edward Coke, and the whole House of Commons
at that time, by what Authority could it be altered in succeeding Parliaments?
or is it just that the Ancient Precedents of former Ages should be avoided by
unwarrantable new-ones of later times? Without question, had the House of
Commons then known, they had any Power to mend the said Returns, or punish the
Offenders, they would never have sent their Speaker to wait on the Lord
Keeper's pleasure about it; and if that House had no such Authority, it is
strange how can their Successors pretend to have any.

Thus we see the House of Commons was not in former times allowed to regulate
the Election of their own Members, nor to Imprison any for undue Elections or
Returns, nor yet for a breach of Privilege, much less for any other Crime or
Misdemeanor. Nothing was heard in those better days of that terrible Sentence,
Take him Topham; not a word of the Subjects Imprisonment during the Will and
Pleasure of the House of Commons. The sitting of Parliaments then was See
Prynn's Remarks on Coke's 4 Inst. p. 42.
short and sweet, dispatching more business in three days, than of late they
have done in so many months. Their Study was, to Redress, not Create
Grievances, and preserve or procure a good understanding betwixt the King and
His People; and not like Banbury-Tinkers, instead of mending one hole, make a
great many.

Oh! but (say some) the Connivance of King and Lords is a strong Argument that
the Commons have done nothing herein contrary to Law. I Answer, it is rather a
very weak and frivolous Plea; first, because tho the King be obliged by His
Coronation Oath to govern by Law, yet all knowing men will allow He has a
Prudential Power to suspend the Execution of such Laws, as he thinks
prejudicial to the public Interest; and consequently may, when he sees
occasion, wink at some illegal attempts of His Subjects, to avoid a great
Inconvenience. If thefore of late times the King, and if you will, the House of
Lords, did connive at some unwarrantable resolutions of the Commons, rather
than exasperate the whole House, too Jealous of their own Privileges, and
thereby frustrate the chief end of Calling His Parliament, the Security of the
Public; it was Policy and great Prudence to wave it at that time, tho now it is
the height of Folly to make this a warrant for doing the like again, contrary
to so many legal Presidents, and express Acts of Parliament. Secondly, because
the gathering of Peter Pence in this Kingdom, has been connived at by King,
Lords and Commons, for diverse Centuries of years; yet it was an Illegal Tax
upon the Subject, contrary to Magna Charta and the Fundamental Laws of the
Nation, 25 H. 8. c. 21. Likewise the Clergy made diverse Canons and
Constitutions, which have been connived at for several Ages both by King and
Parliament; yet are declared by 25 H. 8. c. 19 To be much prejudicial to the
Kings Prerogative Royal, and repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.
The same may be said of the Ancient Custom of Archbishops and Bishops, declared
by 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. to be contrary to the Common Law of of the Land, tho
practiced and connived at, time out of mind. And to omit several other
Instances, Cardinal Wolsey for exercising his Legantine Power, and the whole
Clergy for receiving it, tho connived at for many years as well in as out of
Parliament, were nevertheless found guilty in a Praemunire in His Majesty's
Court of King's Bench. Connivance therefore is no good Argument of any things
being legal, and the tolerating of a Custom, tho never so long, cannot warrant
its continuance, while the Law is against it. Presidents indeed of former Ages,
when legal and just from the beginning, are of great force in Judicial
Proceedings; but no new President of late days can have that weight in any
Court of Justice, and to be sure will never be allowed, if contrary to Law and
the Authentic Records of Antiquity.

But the House of Lords (say they) use to punish the Breaches of their
Privileges, and several other Misdemeanors; why then may not the House of
Commons do the like? A most ridiculous parity; for they might argue as well,
the Court of King's Bench Fines and Imprisons Delinquents, therefore the
Grand Jury may do the like when they please. For the Commons in Parliament are
really the Grand Jury of the Nation, appointed to enquire after Briberyes,
Extortions, Monopolies, and other public Oppressions, and complain thereof to
the King and Lords, and humbly pray redress; yet they are no Judges in any Case
themselves, but are None can be Judge and Party, Coke's 8 Reports, Dr. Bouham's
Case. f. 118. b.
Parties, as being the Attorneys and Representatives of those that are injured.
So far they are from having any Judicial Power, that they cannot as much as
administer an Oath upon any occasion whatsoever; which undoubtedly the Law
would not have denied them, but that they were never designed for The constant
Custom of the Commons, even to this day, to stand bare with their Hats in their
hands, while the Lords sit covered, at all Conferences and Trials, is a plain
Argument they are not Fellows or Colleagues in Judgment.
Judges or punishers of any Criminal; because qui negat Medium, negat and
finem. But the House of Lords is not only a Court of Judicature, but the
Supreme Court of the whole Kingdom; they are looked upon by our Laws as persons
of no less Integrity, than Honor, in the distribution of Justice; and besides,
are assisted by all the Judges of England, by the 12 Masters of Chancery, by
the Kings Learned Council, and by His Attorney and Solicitor General; in
consideration whereof the same Laws have reposed that extraordinary trust in
this August Assembly, that to them alone it belongs to redress delays, and
reform the erroneous Judgments of other Courts of Justice, and give a final
decision to all manner of Appeals. Now by the Laws of other Nations, as well as
ours, it is the nature of Superior Courts, that they may determine matters
tryable by an Inferior; and therefore it must be allowed, that tho the House of
Commons cannot, because no Court of Judicature, yet the House of Lords, the
dernier resort of all Suits and Actions, may, if they please, punish the
Invaders of their Privileges, notwithstanding that the Law directs them to be
tried in Inferior Courts.

Having thus sufficiently demonstrated, that the House of Commons have neither
Common nor Statute Law, nor yet any legal Precedents to warrant their Fining or
Imprisoning the meanest of their Fellow Subjects, it is high time, I think, tho
a great deal more might be said on this subject very useful to be known, to
give you a brief account of other Particulars, and examine whether the Remedies
proposed in Parliament by our late Mountebanks of State be not equally
dangerous, if not really worse, than our Disease. But to expose the designs of
some ill men there, and the unwarrantable Votes and Resolves they got passed in
the Lower House, is a task no less tedious than difficult for me to undertake.
I will therefore tell you in short, that notwithstanding all the noise and
clamor they made about the Protestant Religion and the Liberty of the Subject,
the Nation had too much reason to believe, they minded more their own ends,
than the common good of the People. The Kings best Subjects, who having so many
years experience of His Majesty's most happy Government, declared themselves
satisfied with His prudent management of Affairs, and in Obedience to His Royal
Proclamation, expressed their aversion to all Tumultuous Petitions, were no
more run down on the one side, than the Factious Fanatics, even such as
signalized themselves in the late Rebellion, were countenanced and favored on
the other; insomuch that many were of opinion, people had no surer way to
ingratiate themselves with some of the Leading Memberr, than openly to asperse
the Government, and reflect upon the King and His Ministers as Favorers of
Popery, and Designers of Arbitrary Power. It Is almost incredible what pains
they took to get the Notorious Anabaptist Ben. Harris discharged out of Prison,
for no other reason that I find, but because a Dissenter, who with a great deal
of favor was condemned only to the Pillory instead of Tyburn, for publishing
that Treasonable Pamphlet, The Appeal. Neither is this all; the main Bulwark of
our Church must be broke down, the Penal Laws against the Non-conformists
Repealed, to let in a Deluge of Sectaries, the scandal of the Reformation, who
have nothing of Christianity but the Name, to Profane the Temple of God: And
because this Project luckily miscarried, their Friends in the House endeavored
to leave them a new kind of Dispensation, and the very last 10 Jan. 1681/80;.
day of their sitting, that with their dying breath they might testify to the
World their great zeal for the Dissenters in general, of what sect or
persuasion soever, to the admiration of most men, they passed the following
Vote.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that the Prosecution of
Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the
Subject, a weakening of the Protestant Interest, an encouragement to Popery,
and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

I need not comment upon this unwarrantable Resolve, by which our worthy
Patriots, even without the King and House of Lords, once more were pleased to
assume to themselves a Power of suspending, and consequently of making, Acts of
Parliament. The encouragement this gave to the Republicans to pursue their
wicked Designs against the Crown and the Church, like to have proved fatal to
both, is enough to convince the World, they could hardly do the Nation a
greater mischief; and that their confining several Gentlemen, tho contrary to
Law and Reason, was not near so dangerous to the Government, as their breaking
down the Rails of the Church, to let a swarm of Sectaries creep in at the
Windows.

It was observed with some admiration, how during this Session of Parliament,
there was not one Fanatic Imprisoned, nor so much as questioned by the Commons
for any Crime or Insolence whatsoever, very few Papists molested; but the true
Sons of the Church of England daily Prosecuted in vast numbers, to their great
loss and vexation, tho it proved at last the eternal shame and confusion of the
Authors.

I could not but smile to see the perplexity they were in, when one of the
Judges, to his never-dying fame, for giving the first Precedent of that kind,
made application to the House of Commons about the Execution of his Trust, and
desired their Opinion whether he should do Justice to one of their Prisoners,
by granting the Writ of Habeas Corpus to Mr. Sheridan, then in the Custody of
Sergeant Topham. Three several days the Case was stiffly debated in the House,
the Act read twice or thrice over, and yet no resolution taken. The Warrant of
Committment, which ordered the Gentleman to be confined, without any Cause
shown, During the Will and Pleasure of the House of Commons, was looked upon so
Illegal and Arbitrary a Procedure, even by several Members of the House, that
Sergeant M. till he heard it was already made public, would have them
immediately recall the Old, and grant a New Warrant more conformable to Law.
Besides, the words of the Statute were so full, as admitted of no Comment, and
so plain for the Liberty of the Subject, as made it undeniable, that Prisoners,
unless for Treason or Felony, were still Bailable, by what Person or Persons
soever Committed, not excepting the King and Council, much less the House of
Commons, who had no Legal Power to Commit any Criminal. But still the point was
very nice, and the Leading Members no less uncertain what resolution to take;
for if they openly declared against the Habeas Corpus, the Nation would be much
alarmed, and suspect these Gentleman, instead of securing, intended to invade,
the Subjects Liberty; but if they allowed the Writ, the delicious power of
Imprisoning such as they had a picque to, was utterly lost, and all persons
referred to the ordinary Courts of Justice, or upon their failure, to the House
of Lords, the suprem Tribunal of England. At last Sir William Jones, like an
Imperious Dictator, starts up to decide the matter, and having made a bawling
Harangue concerning the Power of the House, and their Intention of not binding
themselves by that Act, which yet must bind the King, tho it might as well be
alleged He did not intend it, he boldly concludes with threatening and daring
the Judges to do their duty; Precibusque minas regaliter addit: The same
reasons (says he) which may be given for discharging such as are not Committed
for breach of Privilege, if it be grounded on the Act for the Habeas Corpus,
will hold as strong for discharging of Persons Committed for breach of
Privilege; and so consequently deprive this House of all its Power and
Dignity, and make it insignificant. This is so plain and obvious, that all the
Judges ought to know it; and I think it below you to make any Resolve therein,
but rather leave the Judges to do otherwise at their Peril; and let the Debate
fall without any question, See the Debates of the House, page 217. Was not this
a rare Assertor of our Liberties, who instead of allowing us the benefit of the
Laws, would have us all made Beasts of burden to maintain the Grandeur of some
Arbitrary Demagogues in the House of Commons; and be content to turn
Gally-Slaves, rather than their Power should become useless or insignificant?
But I find this daring Speech did not frighten all the Judges; for Baron
Weston, to his immortal Renown, had still the courage to grant the Habeas
Corpus, and rather expose himself to the malice of the Faction, than deny or
delay Justice, contrary to his Oath.

Our Religion and Liberty being thus secured, have we not reason to be fond of
these worthy Patriots, who tugged so hard against Popery, the better to bring
in Presbytery; and to make sure that the Prince should not use Arbitrary Power,
took all possible care to keep it in their own possession. It was the Kings
Prerogative in the days of yore to have the Power of making War and Peace, and
declaring who should be counted Friends, and who reputed Enemies to the
Kingdom. But now the Tribunes of the People are willing to ease him of that
trouble, and take upon themselves by the following 7 Jan. 1680.
Vote, to declare some of His Majesty's best Subjects and most Faithful
Friends, Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Resolved, That all persons who advised His Majesty in His last Message to this
House, to insist upon an Opinion against the Bill for excluding the Duke of
York, have given pernicious Council to His Majesty, and are promoters of
Popery, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom:

And this extravagant Vote they are pleased particularly to apply to four Noble
Peers of the Realm, exposing them to the Rabble, without the least color of
proof, for Promoters of Popery, and Enemies to their Sovereign; for no other
reason, but because they were truly Loyal, and free from the contagious leaven
of the Faction. What a happiness it is, to live within the Walls of the House
of Commons, where the Knave becomes Honest, and the Fool a Politician? where
People are sure never to be in the wrong, but always impeccable, and may freely
rail and reflect upon their Betters, which without doors would cost them very
dear. Yet I cannot but wonder, why these Noblemen (unless they, as well as many
others, took that Character for a mark of Honor from the givers) have taken no
course, at least with the Printer and Bookseller, if not with the then Speaker,
for ordering such Scandalous Votes to be published, contrary to express 2 R. 2.
5. 11 R. 2. 11. etc. de Scandalis Magnatum.
Acts of Parliament. For if the Kings immediate Command cannot be allowed as a
good excuse in Law for any Illegal Act, so that although the Prince be
unaccountable, yet the Minister is to suffer for his Obedience; sure a Vote of
the House of Commons shall not be thought of force, at least out of
Parliament-time, to Protect any Offender from Justice; because whatever Title
the Members, within the sacred Walls of the House, may claim in some Cases to
impunity, their Officers and Servants, who execute their Illegal Commands
abroad, cannot in the least pretend to have any.

But how should these Noblemen be enemies to the King and Kingdom, for their
advising His Majesty against the Bill of Exclusion, when the whole House of
Peers, (few discontented Lords Dissenting, who by their Lives and Conversation
never showed themselves the truest Protestants, nor the best Subjects) openly
declared against it, and upon the first reading threw it out of doors, is a
Mystery not easily to be understood. His Majesty in His Message to the Commons,
declared, He was confirmed in His Opinion against that Bill by the Judgment of
the House of Lords, who rejected it; why then are four Lords singl'd out, and
not the whole House declared Promoters of Popery, and Enemies to the King and
Kingdom? The reason some will guess, that the Leading Members saw matters were
not yet ripe, to show themselves barefaced, or discover the bottom of their
Designs, and once more to Vote the House of Lords dangerous and useless, and
therefore to be laid aside. But why the Opposers of the Bill of Exclusion
enemies to the King and Kingdom? When it is made plain even to Demonstration in
several Treatises published these four years past about the Succession, that
the Promoters of that Bill, tho some perhaps meant otherwise, were in fact
Enemies to the Monarchy, and no Friends to the King nor to the True Protestant
Religion. It Is strange that such as loudly exclaim against Popery, should have
the face at the same time to practice the worst of Popish, or rather Jesuitical
Principles, and endeavor to force their Sovereign to disinherit His only
Brother, upon a bare suspicion of his being of another Religion; which Henry
the 3. of France, being tender of the Monarchy, and of the Hereditary Right of
Succession, was so far from offering to the King of Navarre, tho a known
Protestant and but a remote Kinsman, that he could never be persuaded to give
the Royal Assent to the Bill, which the powerful influence of the Factious Duke
of Guise got passed by the three Estates, for his Exclusion.

Oh! but (say they) Popery and Slavery will break in upon us, if the Duke
succeeds. And I am sure, Anarchy and Presbytery, and an Intestine Civil War,
will undoubtedly follow, if he be excluded, the King exposed to danger, and the
Kingdom to ruin. How fatal it proved to Henry 6. that he suffered the good
Duke of Gloucester to be made away by his Prosecutors, which made way for his
own Deposition, and consequently for his untimely end, Historians do abundantly
testify; and Baker tells us, how the great Duke of Somerset, then Protector, by
Sacrificing his Brother the Lord Admiral to the malice of his Enemies, in hopes
to stop their mouths by yielding to their demands, cleared the way for himself
to the Scaffold. A Warrant (says this Historian) was sent, under the hand of
his Brother the Protector, to cut off his Head; wherein (as afterward it
proved) he did as much, as if he had laid his own Head upon the Block: For
whilst these Brothers lived and held together, they were as a strong Fortress
one to the other; the Admirals Courage supporting the Protectors Authority, and
the Protectors Authority maintaining the Admirals Stoutness; but the Admiral
once gone, the Protectors Authority as wanting support, began to totter, and
fell at last to utter ruin. Besides, there was at this time, amongst the
Nobility, a kind of Faction; Protestants, who favored the Protector for his
own sake; and other of the Papal inclination, who favored him for his Brothers
sake: But his Brother being gone, both sides forsook him; even his own side, as
thinking they could expect little assistance from him, who gave no more
assistance to his own Brother, Bakers Chronicle p. 307.

What a noise they make about these terrible Bugbears, Popery and Slavery, as
if both were inseparable, and actually breaking in upon the Nation, or rather
come as far as the Lobby of the House of Commons? For my part, tho I have no
reason to be fond of either, the one being no less contrary to my Nature, than
the other to my Principles, yet I cannot be startled at every shadow, nor
believe that the Duke, having already spent the Prime of his days, let him
succeed never so soon, will be able to introduce amongst us any new, much less
the Popish Religion. Neither can I be persuaded, contrary to common sense and
the experience of so many Ages, but that the Papists are as fond of their
Liberty and Property, and consequently as great enemies to Slavery, as any
Protestant whatsoever. For, to them we owe the unparalled Common Law of this
Realm, Magna Charta and all those wholesome Statutes grounded thereupon; to them
we are obliged for the incomparable Frame of our well-tempered Monarchy, which
affords very much to the Industry and Happiness of the Subject, yet preserves
enough for the Majesty and Prerogative of any King, that will own his People as
Subjects, and not as Slaves or Villains. Who then but a Fool or a Madman,
would think Slavery the unavoidable consequence of that Religion, the
Professors whereof, even in the time of their blindest zeal and greatest
darkness, (for since then they are much refined) made such impregnable Bulwarks
against it, and provided such wholesome Laws to defend themselves from all the
encroachments of Arbitrary Power: Insomuch that the high and mighty Pope
himself, who often endeavored to enslave this Kingdom, and make it Tributary
to his avarice, found to his great grief, that tho some ignorant Bigots would
contribute to fill his Coffers, yet the generality of the Nation were so tender
of their own and their Princes Rights, that they always opposed him with true
English Courage; as appears not only by hundreds of adjudg'd Cases reported in
our Law Books, but by diverse Records and Acts of Parliament. For 25 Ed. 3.
Stat. of Provisors, it is enacted, That such persons as obtain Provisions, or
collation of Benefices from Rome, and thereupon disturb the Presentees of the
King, or of other Patrons of Holy Church, or of their Advowees, The said
Provisors, their Procurators, Executors and Notaries, shall be attached by
their body, and brought in to Answer: And if they be convict, they shall abide
in Prison without being let to Mainprise or Bail, or otherwise delivered, till
they have made Fine and Ransom to the King at his Will, and gree to the Party
that shall feel himself grieved: And nevertheless before they be delivered,
they shall make full renunciation, and find Surety, that they shall not attempt
such things in time to come, nor sue any Process by them, nor by other against
any man in the Court of Rome, nor in any part elsewhere, for any such
Imprisonments, or Renunciations, nor any other thing depending of them. And in
the same year it was Enacted, that he that purchased a Provision in Rome for an
Abbey, should be out of the Kings Protection, and any man might do with him, as
with the Kings Enemy, 25 Ed. 3. c. 22.

2^ Ed. 3. c. 1. upon the grievous Complaints of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, It was ordained, that all People of the Kings L^geance, of what
condition that they be, which shall draw any out of the Realm in Plea, whereof
the cognizance pertains to the Kings Court, or of things whereof Judgments
be given in the Kings Court; or which do Sue in any other Court to defeat or
impeach the Judgments given in the Kings Court, if they appear not within two
months after warning given, shall be put out of the Kings Protection, and their
Lands, Goods and Chattles forfeit to the King, and their Bodies wheresoever
they may be found, shall be taken and Imprisoned, and Ransomed at the Kings
will.

13 R. c. 2. It Is Enacted, That if any do accept of a Benefice of Holy Church
contrary to this 25 Ed. 3. Statute of Provisors.
Statute, and that duly proved, he shall within six Weeks next after such
acceptance, be exiled and banished out of the Realm for ever, and his Lands
and Tenements, Goods and Chattles shall be forfeit to the King. And if any
Receive any such person banished, coming from beyond the Sea, or being within
the Realm after the said six Weeks, knowing thereof, he shall be also exiled
and banished, and incurr such forfeiture as before is said. And their
Procurators, Notaries, Executors, and Summoners shall have the pain and
forfeiture aforesaid. And c. 3 It is ordained and established, That if any man
bring or send within the Realm or the King's power, any Summons, Sentence, or
Excommunication against any person, of what condition that he be, for the cause
of making motion, assent, or execution of the said Statute of Provisors, he
shall be taken, arrested and put in Prison, and forfeit all his Lands and
Tenements, Goods and Chattels for ever, and incur the pain of life and of
member. And if a Prelate make execution of such Summons, Sentences or
Excommunications, that his Temporalties be taken and abide in the Kings hands,
till due redress and correction thereof be made. And if any person of less
Estate than a Prelate, of what condition that he be, make such execution, he
shall be taken, arrested, and put in Prison, and have Imprisonment, and make
fine and ransom by the discretion of the Kings Council.

16 R. 2. it is declared, That the Crown of England, which has been so free at
all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but immediately subject
to God in all things touching the Regalty of the same Crown, ought not to be
submitted to the Pope, nor the Laws and Statutes of the Realm by him defeated
and avoided at his will, in perpetual destruction of the Sovereignty of the
King our Lord, His Crown, His Regalty, and of all His Realm. And moreover, the
Commons affirmed, That the things attempted by the Pope, be clearly against the
King's Crown and His Regality, used and approved of in the time of all his
Progenitors: Wherefore they and all the Leige-Commons of the same Realm, will
stand by the King, and His Crown, and His Regalty, in the cases aforesaid, and
in all other cases attempted against Him, His Crown, and His Regalty, in all
points, to live and to die.

These, and several other 38 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. c. 1. 2 H. c. 4. 7. H. 4. c. 6. 3
H. 5. c. 4.
Statutes, too tedious (...) to be inserted, have been provided in former ages
when the Pope's power was at the highest, and provided even by Popish Kings and
Popish Parliaments, to secure themselves and the Nation from all Papal
encroachments. Neither have our Judges been less severe against the Popes
unwarrantable pretensions, who in pursuance of the Common Law of the Land, though
no Statute had been made to that purpose, judged it a very heinous Crime in any
Subject of England to obey, or put them in execution. In the Reign of King
Edward I; when a Subject brought a Bull of Excommunication from Rome, against
another Subject of this Realm, and published it to the Lord Treasurer of
England: this was by the Common Law of the Land adjudg'd Treason against the
King, his Crown and Dignity, 30 lib. Ass. pla. 19. Brook tit. Praemunire, pl^
10.

An Excommunication by the Archbishop, albeit it be disallowed by the Pope or
his Legate, is to be allowed; neither ought the Judges give any allowance of
any such Sentence of the Pope or his Legate, 16 E. 3. tit. Excom. 4.

An The same is resolved, 12 H. 4. f. 16. 14 H. 4. f. 14. 8 H. 6. f. 3. 20 H.
6. 1. 35 H. 6. 42. 7 E. 4. 14. 12 E. 4. 16.
Excommunication under the Popes Bull is of no force to disable any man in
England. And the Judges said, That he that pleads such Bulls, tho they
concern the Excommunication of a Subject, were in a hard Case, if the King
would extend his Justice against him 30 E. 3. lib. Ass. pl. 19.

The King presented to a Benefice, and his Presentee was disturbed by one that
had obtained Bulls from Rome; for which offense he was confined to perpetual
Imprisonment, 21 Ed. 3. f. 40.

One Morris being elected Abbot of Waltham, sent to Rome for a Bull of
confirmation; But it was resolved by all the Judges, that this Bull was against
the Laws of England, and that the Abbot, for obtaining the same, was fallen
into the King's mercy; whereupon all his Possessions were seized into the
King's hands, 46 Ed. 3. tit. Praemunire, 6.

In the Reign of Ed. 4. the Pope granted to the Prior of St. John's to have
Sanctuary within his Priory; But it was resolved by the Judges, that the Pope
had no power to grant Sanctuary within this Realm; and therefore by judgment of
the Law the same was disallowed* 1 H. 7. f 20.

In the same King's Reign, a Legate from the Pope came to Callis, to have come
into England; But the King and his Council would not suffer him to come within
the Kingdom, until he had taken an Oath, that he should attempt nothing against
the King or his Crown, 1 H. 7. f. 10.

And in the Reign of H. 7. the Pope had excommunicated all such persons
whatsoever as had bought Allom of the Florentines; But it was resolved by all
the Judges of England, that the Popes Excommunication ought not to be obeyed,
or to be put in execution within the Realm of England, 1 H. 7. f. 10. These,
and many other such Cases, you may see in the first part of Coke's 5th. Reports.

Now, if not only the Judges, but the Representative-wisdom of the Nation, even
King, Lords, and Commons, in the thickest mist of Popish ignorance, were so
resolute against the Bishop of Rome, and so careful to preserve their own
Rights and Liberties inviolable: who can be so silly, as to believe, that a
Popish Prince in this Kingdom, and at this time of the day, when Popery it self
is much refined, and the whole Nation irreconcilably bent against it, will ever
submit to any Papal Usurpation, much less make himself or his People Slaves to
the Court of Rome?

Alas! says one, but our sweet Abbey-Lands are in danger to be lost, and
reassumed by the Popish Clergy, what course then shall we take to secure them?
Believe me, if the Law will not do it, I know no other way, but a project I
hear shortly to be set on foot for Insuring all the Church Lands in the Kingdom
these 40 years to come. The parties concerned will propose very reasonable
terms, and will undertake, the squinting Trimmer, who maliciously whispers
about, he would take seven years purchase for his Church Lands, in case of a
Popish Successor, shall have fourteen well secured, whenever the Duke succeeds.
But why our Abbey-Lands more in danger, than any other part of our Estates?
since we have the same security for the one as for the other, and both as
firmly secured, as the Law can make them, or the wit of man devise. It Is well
known, that the Popish 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 8. number. 32.
Clergy in Queen Mary's time, the better to forward the peoples reconciliation
with the Church of Rome, by their Petition to the Queen, consented that all the
Church Lands disposed of to Laymen, should be settled on the Possessors and
their Heirs for ever, without any danger of revocation; And this was approved
of by the Pope's Legate a latere Cardinal Pool, Volentes ac decernentes, quod
dictorum bonorum Ecclesiasticorum ram mobilium quam immobilium possessores
praefati non possiut in praesenti nec in posterum, seu per Conciliorum
Generalium vel Provincialium dispositiones, seu Decretales Romans Pontificum
Epistolas, seu aliam quamconque censuram. Ecclesiasticam in dictis bonis, seu
eorundem possessione molestari vel inquietari, 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 8.
number. 33.
willing and ordaining, (as he says) that the present possessors of
Ecclesiastical Goods, as well movable as immovable, shall not at this time, nor
in time to come, be disquieted nor molested in the possession of the said
Goods, either by the disposal or order of any General or Provincial Councils,
or by the Decretal Epistles of the Bishop of Rome, or by any other
Ecclesiastical Censure whatsoever. And besides this, to crown the work beyond
all exception, and bind it with a triple Cord which is not easily broken, all
is confirmed in full Parliament, by the Queen, by the Cardinal and Clergy, and
by the Lords and Commons; by whom it is enacted, That all and every Article,
Clause, Sentence and Proviso contained or specified in any Act or Acts of
Parliament, concerning or touching the assurance or conveyance of any the said
Monasteries, Priories, Nunneries, Commandries, Deanries, Prebends, Colleges,
Chantries, Hospitals, Houses of Friars, Rectories, Vicarages, Churches,
Chapels, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and other Religious and Ecclesiastical
houses and places, or any of them, or in any ways concerning any Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Profits, Commodities, Hereditaments, or other the things before
specified to the said K. H. 8. or K. Ed. 6. or either of them, or any other
person or persons, or Body-politick or Corporate, and every of them; and all
and every Writing, Deed, and Instrument concerning the assurance of any the
same, shall stand, remain, and be in as good force, effect and strength, and
shall be pleaded, and taken advantage of, to all intents, constructions, and
purposes, as the same should, might or could have been by the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, in case this present Act had never been had or made, 1. and 2
Phil. and Mar. c. 8. 39. And it is further enacted, That whosoever shall by any
Process obtained out of any Ecclesiastical Court within this Realm or without,
or by pretense of any spiritual Jurisdiction, or otherwise contrary to the Laws
of this Realm, inquiet or molest any person or persons, or body-politick for
any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, or things above-specified,
contrary to the words, sentences and meaning of this Act, shall incur the
danger of the Act of Praemunire, ib.. 41.

What could the wit of man contrive or devise more firm in Law, or more
satisfactory to all parties concerned in Church or Abbey-Lands, than these and
several other paragraphs provided in the same Act of Parliament? Why then are
people by groundless and imaginary fears discomposed, or frightn'd out of their
wits, and made tools to drive on the Designs of some ill men, against the
Monarchy and the Church, who will have nothing sufficient to secure them in the
Religion they have not, but what will unavoidably shake the very foundation of
the Government? It Is true, our State-Mountebanks in their Address presented in
the Name of the House of Commons, are so dutiful to their Sovereign, as humbly
to threaten, this may possibly happen, if the Duke succeeds: We further humbly
beseech Your Majesty (say they) in Your great Wisdom to consider, whether, in
case the Imperial Crown of this Protestant Kingdom should descend to the Duke
of York, the opposition, which may possibly be made to his possessing it, may
not only endanger the farther descent in the Royal Line, but even Monarchy it
self, 21 Dec. 1680. But that season, I hope, is over, and the Nation now
thoroughly sensible of the fatal consequences of such resolutions, and can never
forget the unparalleled Tyranny of the Rump, nor the doleful Tragedies that
ensued the Quarrel between York and Lancaster, which made England a Field of
Blood.

But what has this great Prince, once the peoples darling, done to deserve so
severe a treatment, or be thought so dangerous a person to the Public? Has he
defrauded any of an Ox or an Ass; or was he ever found worse than his word, or
unjust in his dealings? If he has changed his opinion, which yet is improbable,
about the modes and circumstances of Religion, it is plain he has not changed
his moral Principles, nor his natural affection to his Country. I need not
instance how often he exposed his Person to danger, like a common Seaman, to
fight our Battles; nor how zealously he always studied the true Interest of the
English Nation, in opposition to French Designs; a truth too well known even to
his most inveterate Enemies, but ill rewarded with ingratitude. It Is
prodigious, what tricks and arts have been used of late to incense the
unthinking multitude against His Highness, and set them a-madding with the
apprehension of Stakes and Faggots, and all the Chymoera's of a crack-brain'd
fancy: when it is palpably evident, it is not in the power of any Prince, though
the greatest Bigot of Papists, to force this Nation in point of Conscience, or
alter the established Religion; since the Laws de Haeretico comb^rendo, (which
in Queen Mary's time were in force, and warranted the Cruelties then committed
upon the Protestants, as the Statutes made by Queen Elizabeth, do the executing
of Priests and Jesuits as Traitors, both uncharitable and ill-becoming a
Christian-Magistrate) are now happily repealed and abolished. Why then should
people be bugbear'd out of their senses, with imaginary fears of
Smithfield-Faggots; or think that the Duke, who never advised his own Children
to become Papists, would offer, though able, to compel any other to renounce his
Religion? If He has expressed some kindness for such Romanists* as had
signalized their Loyalty to His FATHER here, or to His BROTHER Abroad, when
those that now call themselves true Protestants, openly absurd his Title, it is
an instance of his gratitude and good nature, but no Argument of his approving
the Opinions of that Party. And yet we have no better proof, than such
groundless whispers and surmises, unless we believe the ridiculous Salamunca
Doctor's peeping through the Keyhole, of his being a Papist, or any way
inclined to the Popish Communion. How false then is the Preamble (and therefore
justly rejected, had there been no other reason, by the House of Lords) of the
intended Bill of Exclusion, That the Duke of York is notoriously known to have
been perverted from the Protestant to the Popish Religion? Or the extravagant
Vote, whereon they grounded this Abortive Bill?

Resolved, That the Duke of York's being a Papist, and the hopes of his coming
such to the Crown, has given the greatest countenance and encouragement to the
present designs and conspiracies against the King and the Protestant Religion.
-- 2 Nov. 1680. Whereas it might with greater Truth and Justice be

Resolved, That the late endeavors of some Leading men in the House of Commons
in favor of the Fanatics, and their declaring, That if His Majesty should
come by any Violent Death, they would revenge it to the utmost upon the
Papists; has given the greatest countenance and encouragement to College and
his Accomplices to conspire against the King and the Church; and has openly
exposed His Majesty's sacred Life to the blind zeal of the Faction; to whom,
besides the prospect of destroying their enemies, it was a great temptation to
commit the villainy, that they could safely leave it at another door.

Thus, Sir, I have given you in short my Opinion on Mr. Hunts Defense of the
Charter; and for your further satisfaction have added some Remarks on the
Proceedings of our worthy Patriots (so much commended by that Gentleman) in the
last Parliament at Westminster. There remains a great deal more to be said as
well of this, as of the other that followed at Oxford; but some earnest
business requiring my attendance, I will at present give you no further
trouble, only speak a word or two to the general Calumny cast by the Factions
on all that dare oppose their Designs, and which I cannot well expect to
escape, viz. That we are no Friends to Parliaments. But I appeal to any man of
Sense, whether I, who would have the Commons freely enjoy their Privileges,
yet confined within their Ancient and Legal bounds, or the Fanatic that
labors to make their Power absolute and uncontrollable, be a greater friend to
that Honorable Assembly? And whether they can possibly have more pernicious
enemies, than such as make them Controullers, instead of Counselors, to their
Sovereign, and Competitors with him in the Government; when their Being wholly
depends on his Will and Pleasure, and can expect to fit no longer than during
their good Behavior? How Fatal the Insolences of the 3d. Estate in France,
Anno 1614. proved to that Nation in general, who never since had the like
Assembly, is particularly observed by several Historians. It Is true, we have no
reason to mistrust any such thing, having so good and so gracious a Prince, as
has solemnly engaged His Royal word, That no Irregularities in Parliament shall
ever make Him out of Love with Parliaments, Declar. p. 9. Besides that our
Constitution is such, that we cannot reasonably fear it. Nevertheless, Policy
as well as Duty requires, that the Commons give no such distaste for the future,
as will justly occasion even any long intermission of their meeting; since
Parliaments, provided they behave themselves with Prudence and Moderation, Are
the best method (as His Majesty says) for healing the Distempers of the
Kingdom, and the only means to preserve the Monarchy in that due credit and
respect, which it ought to have both at hom and abroad. Ibid.

FINIS.

