THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN.


THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN. Originally written, By the Sieur DE LA CHAMBER,
Counselor to His Majesty of France, and Physician in Ordinary. Rendered into
English By JOHN DAVIES of Kidwelly.

Licensed, March 2. 1664/5. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by T.R. for Thomas Dring at the George in Fleetstreet, near
Cliffords-Inn. M. DC. LXV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES EARL of CARLISLE, Vicount HOWARD of Morpeth,
Baron Dacre of Gilsland, Lord Lieutenant of Westmerland and Cumberland, and one
of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
IF the Present your Lordship here receives be considered only according to its
bulk, I must, no doubt, lie open to the reproach of offering so mean a
Sacrifice, at the Shrine of so noble a Name. But if the excellency of the
Subject treated of be put into the other Scale, with this allowance, that
whatever is offered derives its merit from the sincerity and devotion of the
Offerer, I may more rationally hope the acceptance, than fear the rejection of
it.

Your Lordship will find, in this small Treatise, the Frontispiece, or first
Draught, of the boldest design that, happily, was ^ver undertaken in the Empire
of Learning, to wit, THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN; an Art, comprehending what ever
contributes to the discovery of their most secret Inclinations, the Motions of
their Souls, their Virtues and their Vices; an Art, which, if well studied,
will bring to those who shall attain it, answerably to their several
qualifications, the greatest satisfaction and advantages imaginable.

For what greater can any one man frame to himself, than those, which accrue
from his knowledge of another, even though they move in the meanest station of
Affairs? But if those are so considerable, how much more must they be, which
are made by persons entrusted with the management of Embassies, and the most
important Transactions of Crowns and Scepters, and consequently, obliged to
treat with People of different Tempers and Climates? In these last it suffices
not, to be guided by those common observations and characters of men, which are
obvious to the Populace, and commonly masked and disguised; but the grand
secret is, to penetrate into the Closets, and insinuate into the very bosoms,
of Princes and Favorites.

And this consideration it was, which the more inclined me, to make a
particular dedication of this Labor of mine to your Lordships patronage. For
whom could I expect more favorable to the ART HOW TO KNOW MEN, than One, who
had so lately satisfied the world, how well he had studied it before? From whom
could that Art look for a kinder reception, than from one who had shown himself
so much a Master of it, in carrying on a Negotiation, which led him, from the
most, to the least-civiliz'd extremities of Christendom?

Your Lordship might here expect I should give some account of my Author, the
Advancer of this so excellent and beneficial an Art; but I refer what I have to
say of him to another place, concluding here, after I have begged your
Lordship's pardon for the rudeness of this Address, with an assurance, that it
is made with the greatest respects and submissions, and, consequently, that I
am,

Right Honorable, Your Lordship's most humble, and most obedient Servant, J.
DAVIES.

AN Account of the AUTHOR, taken out of the History of the French Academy,
Printed at London, in the year M. DC. LVII. Page 229.
THe Author of that History, being to give an account of the first settling and
advancement of the Academy, to that time, thought fit, toward the end of his
Work, to set down a Catalogue of the Members of it, of which number our Author
being one, I find this said of him, being the sixth named in the Catalogue.

MARIN CVREAV DE LA CHAMBER, Counselor to the King in his Councils, and his
Physician in Ordinary, born at Man's. His Works in Print are, New Conjectures
about Digestion. New Conjectures concerning the Causes of Light; the
Overflowing of the Nile; and the Love of Inclination. The Characters of the
Passions, in two Volumes. A Treatise of the Understanding of Beasts. New
Observations and Conjectures about the Rainbow. If he perfect what he has
begun, we shall have a Continuation of the Characters of the Passions; A
Treatise of Man's Beauty; Another, Of the Nature and Dispositions of Nations,
and THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN. He has translated into French, the Eight Books of
ARISTOTLE's Physics, which are not Printed; and he gives us hopes, ere long,
of a Commentary on the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, which he calls Usus
Aphorismorum; his design is, after he has set down Hippocrates's meaning in
each Aphorism, to apply it to other Subjects, and show all the Uses which may
be made of it. Thus far the Author of the History. It is very probable, that,
not only those Pieces here mentioned of his, but also diverse others are since
Printed, in several Languages. Of which we shall forbear to give any further,
since we cannot give an exact, account.

TO The very Worthy Translator of this Exquisite Piece, THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN.
THere are various kinds of KNOWLEDGE that belong to Man, The chiefest of all
is, To know his Creator; The second, to know Himself; The third, to know his
Fellow Creatures, especially, for Man to know Man.

Touching the first, It Is so sublime, and transcendent a Speculation, that,
though the greatest Theorists have scru'd up their Wits to the highest Pin,
yet, the further they soared, the more they were at a loss; For there is no
Finite Intellect can frame a Quidditative apprehension of God; There may be
Negative conceptions of Him, as to think he is Immense, Infinite, Immortal,
etc. Or there may be Relative Expressions of Him, as when we call Him Creator,
King, and Conservator of all things, etc. Or, He may be described by an
accumulation of Epithets, as Almighty, Merciful, Just, and by the Abstracts
thereof, etc. But for a comprehensive Quiddity of His Essence, it cannot fall
under the capacity of any created power; In so much that the Dedication
inscribed upon the Greek Altar, (...), To the Unknown God, may, in a sane
sense, carry with it a holy kind of Admiration and Modesty, rather than
Ignorance.

Concerning the second, It was the Motto, which the greatest Philosopher fixed
upon the portal of his School, (...), Know thy self; And one would think that
every one is near enough to attain this knowledge, yet it is observed, that not
one Physician among twenty, will venture to minister himself Physic, when he
is dangerously sick; And touching the Mind, every Man commonly looks upon
himself through a Magnifying-glass, so that he cannot behold his true
proportion.

Touching the last, viz. for knowing our Fellow Creatures, we have been near
upon six thousand years in study of it, yet, if what we know all this while
were cast in to counterballance with what we know not, it is thought the scale
of Ignorance would outweigh that of Knowledge.

But for Man to know Man, which is the Subject of this Treatise, it is an Art
as full of incertitude as any; The lineaments of the Face, and lines of the
Hands, are not straight enough to lead us unto it, though Vultus be Index
Animi, though the Eyes be as the Casements of the Soul, yet, many times they
prove false Glasses; though (as the Turk believes) every Man's Fate and Fancy
be written in his Forehead, yet the letters are so obscure, that we cannot read
them; and the Poet tells us Fronti nulla fid es. --

Indeed, the probablest way to get this Art, is by Conversation, and Discourse,
according to the Italian Proverb, A Roma ti viddi, a Venetia ti conobbi, I saw
thee at Rome, I knew thee at Venice; which made the Philosopher say to a man
who had a promising Face of Wisdom, I thought thee wise, till I heard thee
speak.

This Sagacious and sharp-sighted Author, has gone very far in this Art, as
appears in this Discourse, and in other acute Notions that I have read of His,
which show him to be full of pensees desliees: Moreover, I had the good hap,
and occasion to know Him, and converse with Him in Paris; and truly I believe,
He may well be ranked among the Philosophers of the Upper House which this Age
affords; Therefore Sir, besides your great Ingenuity, you discover also much
Judgment in the Election of your Authors, who are much obliged to you, for your
exact fidelity in rendering them; And consequently, it may well be said, that
You have attained the Art of knowing Men, by penetrating the true sense, and
every Souls of those Authors you deal withal.

JAM. HOWEL.

THE PREFACE. Wherein is treated of the Excellency of the ART HOW TO KNOW MEN,
and of the Author's Design.
IT was a groundless complaint of him, who wished Nature had placed a window
before men's hearts, that their thoughts and secret designs might be seen. There
was, I say, no reason for that complaint, not only, in regard those are not
things which fall under the Senses, and that though the eyes saw the very
bottom, and all the windings and turnings of the heart, yet could they not
observe any thing therein, from whence they might derive the least knowledge of
it: but also, in as much as Nature has made other provision for this
discovery, and found out more certain means to make it, then would have been
that strange openness, which Momus imagined to himself.

For she has not only bestowed on Man voice and tongue, to be the interpreters
of his thoughts; But out of a certain distrust she conceived, that he might
abuse them, she has contrived a language in his forehead and eyes, to give the
others the Lie, in case they should not prove faithful. In a word, she has
exposed his soul, to be observed on the outside, so that there is no necessity
of any window, to see his Motions, Inclinations, and Habits, since they are
apparent in his face, and are there written in such visible and manifest
characters.

From these characters, it is our design to frame the greatest and most
advantageous work, that happily was ever undertaken; a work, wherein the Noblest
and most necessary discoveries of knowledge, which Man can arrive unto, are
contained; in fine, a work, wherein may be found the secret and perfection of
Wisdom and humane Prudence.

These great promises will be thought the more attainable, when it shall be
known, that what we undertake is THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN, an Art whereby every
man is taught to know himself, wherein consists the highest point of Wisdom;
and withal to know others, which is the Masterpiece of Prudence.

The secret of Wisdom consists in this, that a man knows what he is himself,
what he may do, and what he ought to do; and that of Prudence, in knowing also
what others are, what they may do, and what they are desirous to do. Can any
knowledge be more delightful or more profitable then these? And may not he, who
has acquired them, justly pretend to the acquisition of the greatest
advantages of this life.

Now the Art of Knowing Man teaches all these things: For though it seems to
have no other end, then to discover the Inclinations, the Motions of the Soul,
the Virtues and Vices, which are observable in others; yet does it, with the
same labor, teach every one to find them out in himself, and to deduce more
rational and more impartial judgments thereof, then if he first considered them
in his own person.

For it is most certain, that we cannot by our selves come to a perfect
knowledge of our selves: and our Souls may, in that respect, be compared to our
Faces, inasmuch as the former, as well as the latter, can only view themselves
in Mirrours. If she attempts the beholding of herself, the trouble she is at in
that self-reflection distracts and wearies her, and self-love corrupts, and
poisons, all the judgments she makes of her-self.

For instance, a person transported with Anger cannot make any just judgment of
his passion, which, how furious soever it may be, still thinks that all the
reason and justice is of its side. A covetous person thinks his most sordid
cares the effects of Prudence and Necessity. In a word, all our Inclinations
and Habits please and humor us, all our Passions seem rational to us. Who
therefore could be sensible of them, much less condemn them, having the
recommendation of pleasure, and being maintained by an appearance of Reason,
which are the two greatest corrupters of our sentiments? To apprehend therefore
their imperfections, it is requisite we saw them in another, that being a glass
which flatters not; and though those we make use of do represent such Images as
are immediately blotted out of the memory, the case is not the same with this,
which makes constant and permanent draughts, the remembrance whereof is not
easily lost. In fine, it is a thing out of all dispute, that there is no better
way for a man to come to the knowledge of himself, then by studying that
knowledge in others.

Thus is it then, that the Art, weteach, is able to bring a man to the knowledge
of himself. But inasmuch as there are two kinds thereof, one Physical and
Natural, which examines the composition of Man, the nature of the Soul's
faculties, and the admirable Economy observable in their functions; the other,
Moral, which relates to Morality, and makes a discovery of the Inclinations,
Passions, and Vices: it must be acknowledged that it undertakes not to give an
account of the former, to the utmost extent it is capable of, but leaves the
absolute and exact disquisition thereof, to Medicine and Philosophy. But being
obliged to make the strictest examination of things relating to Manners, it is
impossible, but that, enquiring into their causes, and the manner whereby they
are framed in the Soul, there falls within its design the noblest and most
intricate part of Physic or natural Philosophy, and, treating of the
conformation of parts, the temperaments Spirits, Humors, Inclinations,
Passions, and Habits, It should not discover what is most secret, in Body and
Soul.

Nay, I have this further to affirm, that by all these discoveries of Knowledge,
it elevates the spirit of Man, to the Sovereign Creator of the Universe. For,
acquainting it with the infinite miracles remarkable in Man, it insensibly
inclines him to glorify the Author of so many wonders, and, by that means,
directs him to the end, whereto he is designed.

For should he consider only the structure of Man's body, how can he forbear
being ravished with astonishment, to see the order and symmetry of all the
springs and Ressorts, from which this admirable Machine derives its motion? And
the unimitable Art which is concealed therein, would it not discover to him the
hand that was employed about it, and the understanding and design of the great
Master, whose work it is?

But if he would raise his thoughts yet a little higher, and make a
privy-search into the secrets of the Soul, to find out, there, the manner
whereby she comes to the knowledge of things, how she moves, and how many
several motions she assigns her-self; What excess of ravishment would not the
knowledge of so many miraculous operations cause in him? What sentiments would
he not have of the Goodness and Wisdom of God, who has lodged so many virtues,
in so small a space, and not only epitomized all the creatures in Man, but
would also make in him an abbreviation of himself?

For, not to enter into any discourse of our ineffable Mysteries, and keep
within the bounds of Nature, the Inclination he has infused into him toward
all sorts of good things, the Light, wherewith he has illuminated him, in
order to the knowledge of all things, are they not the effusions of his
infinite Goodness and Wisdom? But what is yet more astonishing, has he not
enclosed within the spirit of Man, which has its limits and boundaries, the
whole extent and infinity of his Power? And by a miracle which is hardly
conceivable, has he not invested him with a power of creating all things as
himself? For if the understanding produces, and, in a manner, creates the
images and representations of those things which it knows, it must needs
follow, since it has the power to know them all, that it also, according to
its manner, creates them all, and consequently that it is the Creator of a new
world, or at least the Copist, or after-drawer of all the works of God. It must
be so, inasmuch as when it thinks on the Sun, it cannot do so without making,
at the same time, another Sun in it self. By the same rule it makes also
Stars, Heaven, Elements, in a word, whatsoever is in the Universe.

But if God has wrought one miracle by bestowing an infinite power on a
limited thing he has also done another, in joining greatness and power, with
misery and weakness. For it is certain, that of all the Creatures, there is not
any subject to such a multitude of miseries and infirmities as Man: Nay, these
are rais^d even out of his advantages, and if he had not that pregnancy of wit,
and the delicate composure of body which he has, he would not be so
unfortunate and miserable, as he is. So that it may be said, by instancing him
alone, we may decide that famous Problem, which has been so often proposed,
to wit, What thing is that in the world, which is, at the same time, both the
greatest and least?

He therefore is only to contemplate himself who would enter into the knowledge
he ought to have of the Divinity, and there he will find eternal subjects of
the praises, and respects, and thanksgivings, which he is oblig^d to render
upon all occasions, and at all times*

These are the high Lessons which may be learned by the ART HOW TO KNOW MEN.
But when it shall be advanced to those, whereby it would discover the
inclinations, manners and designs of others, there will be a necessity of
making this general acknowledgment, that it is the surest guide can be taken
for a man's conduct in civil life, and that he who shall make use of it, will
avoid thousands of dangers and inconveniences, into which, from time to time,
he runs the hazard of falling. There need no reasons to prove a thing so clear,
since it is certain that if the ART is able to perform what it promises, there
are few actions wherein it is not necessary; as for instance, the Education of
children, the choice of Servants, Friends, Company, and most others, which
cannot be well done without it. It shows the opportunities, and favorable
conjunctures of time, wherein a man ought to act or speak a thing, and teaches
him the manner, how he ought to do it. And if it be requisite to suggest an
advice, to inspire a passion, or design, it knows all the passages, through
which they are to be derived into the Soul. In fine, if we may rely on the
advice of the Wiseman, who forbids our conversing with an angry or envious
person, and going into the company of the wicked; What can rescue us from those
unhappy accidents, but the ART we treat of? For the account commonly given of
Man is deceitful, if a man go only according to the reputation they have; and
dangerous, if their acquaintance be gotten by conversation: but that, which our
ART promises, is only without fraud or hazard.

Yet is it not to be imagined, as some at first sight are apt to do, that this
ART is no other then PHYSIOGNOMY, and that its power reaches no further, then
to make a discovery of the present inclinations, and thence draw some light
conjectures, in relation to Virtues and Vices. For, besides that it does all
this, as well as the other, but with greater exactness, as shall be seen
hereafter; it goes much further, since it promises to show, what were, or will
be, the inclinations and passions, past and to come, the strength and weakness
of men's minds, the dispositions they have to certain Arts and Sciences, the
Habits they have acquired: and what is most important, it teaches the way, to
discover secret designs, private actions, and the unknown Authors of known
actions. In a word, there is no dissimulation so deep, into which it does not
penetrate, and which, in all likelihood, it will not deprive of the best part
of those veils, under which it lurks.

Now, forasmuch as all these things may be reduced to four principal heads, to
wit, the INCLINATIONS, the MOTIONS OF THE SOUL, VERTVES and VICES, it is
obliged, ere we pass any further, to tell us in the first place, What
Inclination is, what are the causes of it, and how it is framed in the Soul. 2.
How the Soul is Moved, nay how and why it causes the heart and spirits to move
in the passions: In fine, 3. Wherein Virtue and Vice consist, and what is the
number of the Species of both, whereof it may make its judgment.

Besides, since it ought to denote the Excesses and Defects of all things, and
show those that are, and are not, consonant to the nature of Man in general,
but also to the different sexes, ages, nations, and kinds of life; it is
necessary, above all things, that it give us a Model, and Idaea of that
perfection, which is consonant to the nature of Man, that it may be the rule
and measure of all the good and evil, which may happen to every one in
particular. For it is certain, that the excess and defect cannot be known,
without a praevious knowledge of the perfection, from which both decline and
recede; and, to judge of the distance of the Extremities, a man ought to know
the Mean to which they relate.

Having made an examination of all these things, we are further to be shown,
what MEANS it uses, to perform what it promises; what SIGNS it ought to employ
therein, and what is their Nature, Strength, and Weakness. It is also to tell
us, what Use it makes of the Rules of PHYSIOGNOMY, and whether CHIROMANCY and
METOPOSCOPY are serviceable to its design, whereof we ought to have a general
Draught or Platform.

These are the Praeliminaries, which serve for an Introduction to the whole
Science, and are contained in this Part, which shall be divided into Two Books;
the former whereof shall treat of the matters, which are the Object of the ART
HOW TO KNOW MEN, to wit, the Inclinations, Motions of the Soul, Virtues and
Vices: The second shall examine the Means, whereby it ought to discover all
these things.

THE ART How to know MEN.
The First BOOK.
CHAP. I. An Idaea of the natural Perfection of Man.
EVERY thing is perfect to which there is nothing wanting, and which has
whatsoever is necessary for the accomplishment of its Nature. It is therefore
requisite, that Man, who consists of Body and Soul, should, to be absolutely
perfect, have whatever is necessary for the accomplishment and perfection of
these two parts. Now the natural Perfection of the Soul consists in its having
all the faculties and powers, which are necessary, in order to the performing
of those functions, whereto she is designed. The perfection of the Body
consists in the dispositions, which those faculties require therein, to serve
for Organs to their functions.

But since some of the faculties are nobler then others, and that in the order
of things, unequal, the more excellent are the rule of the others; it follows,
that the Understanding, which is the noblest faculty in Man; should be the rule
and measure of all those that are inferior to it, and that these last should
be so disposed, as that, as much as possibly, they may be conformable to that
superior faculty, to the end they should not obstruct the actions it ought to
do.

So that the Understanding, being of its own nature indifferent and
indeterminate, in order to the judgment it is to make of all things, and
consequently, that it is all things, in potentia, that is, potentially, as not
being determined to any one in particular, it is requisite, that the faculties
subordinate to it, should, as much as may be, comply with that indifference.
Which indifference since they cannot have in the same degree of perfection as
the Understanding, in regard they are material, and consequently determinate,
they ought nevertheless to have it so far, as they are capable thereof. Now all
the indifference they are capable of is reduced to that which consists in a
mediocrity, for the mean is less determinate then the extremities, as being
indifferent, in respect to both. Those faculties therefore which consist of the
mean or mediocrity, are more conformable to the Understanding then those, in
the excess, or defect.

But forasmuch as the Instruments ought to be proportioned to the powers, by
which they are employed, it follows that the Conformation of the parts and the
Temperament, which are the instruments of the Soul's faculties, should have the
same mediocrity as they have. So that the parts ought to be neither too big nor
too little, nor the qualities, whereof the Temperament consists, be predominant
one over another, but all ought to be in a just aequilibrium and mediocrity.

Article 1. That only Man has the Sense of Touching in perfection.
ANd that this is according to the design of Nature, may be deduced hence, that
she has bestowed this perfect Temperament only on Man; for there is always
some excess in that of other Creatures, one being too hot, or too cold, another
too dry, or too moist. But in man all these qualities are united in a just
moderation; and therefore the Senses, which follow this Temperament, as the
Touching, and Tasting, which is a kind of Touching, as Aristotle affirms, are
more perfect in him, then in any other Animal. For these Senses, and especially
the Touching, require an exact Temperature in their Organs; it being requisite,
that what ought to judge should be in the mean, that it may judge without any
pre-occupation. Now as there are two sorts of means one, consisting in the
absolute privation of the Objects, and the other, in their equal participation,
only the Touch judges by this latter. For all the others are destitute or
deprived of the qualities whereof they judge; as the Ey, which judges of
colors, ought to be without any color. But in regard the Touching judges of
the first qualities, whereof its Organ cannot be deprived, it is requisite, for
its more perfect knowledge thereof, that it should have them united in a just
mediocrity, that it may judge of their extremities, which it has not, and of
their moderation, by not assigning any excess therein.

But howere it be, Nature has no other motive in enduing man with this perfect
Temperature, then to make conformable to the noblest faculty of the Soul, the
general instrument of its functions, and to place it in the mean, that it might
be less determinate, and that it, as well as the faculty, should have all the
indifference, whereof it is capable, which was not necessary for other Animals,
all whose faculties are determinated.

Art. 2. All in Man should be in a mediocrity.
FRom this truth, thus established, there may be drawn a consequence, which
confirms what we have said, concerning the mediocrity, which ought to be in the
powers of the Soul, not only in those which are subalternate, but also in the
superior, such as are, the Understanding and the Will. For since the
Temperament moderates all the faculties, rendering them more or less strong,
according to the degrees it has, and that if it be hot, for instance, it
strengthens the Imagination, and weakens the Judgment; and that, on the
contrary, if it be cold, it assists the Judgment, and injures the Imagination,
and so of the rest: It follows, that, if there be an equality required, to
render the man perfect, it is also requisite, that all the faculties of the
Soul should participate of that equality, and that they should observe the same
moderation, which is in the Temperament.

So that the natural perfection of man, requires not an excessive vivacity of
Imagination, nor an overcircumspect Judgment, nor a too happy memory: Nay, it
cannot bear with these sublime Spirits, which are always fixed on the
contemplation of things high and difficult, not only upon this account, that,
having designed man for society, it expects, he should equally apply himself to
Contemplation and Action; but principally, in regard that it is impossible, the
body should have its natural perfection, when it has the dispositions
requisite to sublimity of Spirit. For the Body must needs be weak, when the
Spirit is too strong, as the overgreat strength of Body lessens and weakens
the Spirits, as we shall show more at large hereafter.

The case is the same with all the other faculties; for if the Appetite be too
apt to move, if the Senses too subtle, if the Concoctive virtue, the
evacuative, or retentive, be too strong, they are so many defects and
irregularities: they should all be proportionate to the equality of the
Temperament, which does not admit of these vicious perfections.

Art. 3. That all the Faculties ought to be in a Mean.
ANd that this is true, even in those faculties, which are spiritual, may be
deduced hence, That the action and the power ought to be conformable one to the
other, in as much as the action is only a progress, and effusion of the active
power. If therefore actions cannot be perfect but so far as they are moderate,
it is necessary, that the faculties should derive their perfection from their
moderation. But it is a received maxim in morality, That actions, to be
virtuous, ought to be in a mediocrity, and consequently, the faculties, from
which they proceed, should also be in the same mediocrity. Now the first spring
of this mediocrity is the Indifference, which is natural to the rational Soul:
for since the Action is conformable to the power, the actions should be as
indifferent as the other is, and though it be determined by the action it does,
yet does it nevertheless preserve its indifference, by the mediocrity, which
the action receives from it. The reason is, that what is in the mean is
indifferent, in respect of the extremities, and that what is in the extremity
is less indifferent, and more determinated, then what is in the mean, as we
have shown already.

And thence proceeds the necessity there is, of moderating the passions. For
though, in other animals, they are the more perfect, the greater and stronger
they are, and that the more fearful a Hare is, and the more cruel a Tigre, the
more perfect is each of them in its kind: yet is not so in those of man, in as
much as they ought to be in a mean, between excess and defect, that they may be
the more conformable to the indifference of the superior part.

Art. 4. That all natural Inclinations are defects.
I Conceive it will be no hard matter to apprehend, and subscribe unto all
these truths, because they are maintained by reason and experience. But there
is yet another may be deduced from the same principles, which I question not
will be thought very strange, though it be no less certain. It is this, That,
though there be some Inclinations which are good in themselves, and deserve
commendation, such as those men have for the virtues; yet are they defects, and
alter the natural perfection which is conformable to humane nature. And
certainly, this will occur upon common observation and experience, that those
who have from their birth, some excellent virtues, have had them attended by
greater vices, for a man must needs fall into defects and imperfections, so far
as he is at a distance from perfection. Now the perfection of man is, to be
indifferent, and, not determinated to any particular virtue, he should be
capable of all. For the Virtues that come along with the birth are not real
virtues, they are only the initiatios of them, or rather, they are but
inclinations which a man has for them. In a word, they are bounds and limits,
confining the capacity of the Soul, which is universal, to a particular habit.
The Soul, of its own nature, is not determinated, and ought to be capable of
all humane actions; And, as it may know all things, so is it requisite, that
the Appetite, which follows her knowledge, should have also the freedom to
incline it self to all things. And this universal capacity is at the same time
an effect of the spirituality of her nature, and the cause of the liberty she
has: For if she were material, she would be determinated, and if she were not
indifferent, she should not be free.

The Inclinations therefore, which man may have, though they might be for the
most excellent virtues, are imperfections; he ought not to have any for any one
in particular, but for all together. And this is that, which the Angel of the
Schools has so judiciously delivered, when he affirmed, That there is no
Animal, but has some inclination, to a Passion conformable to his nature; but
that man only is the mean of all, and that it is requisite, he should be
equally susceptible thereof, in as much as he is, of his own nature,
indifferent and indeterminate.

To conclude, since the Temperament and the Conformation of the parts are the
two principal causes of natural Inclinations, as we shall show hereafter, and
that they make the Soul incline to those actions which are conformable to them,
it is not to be doubted, but that the mediocrity, and the mean, which they
ought to be guided by in man, does also invest the Soul with an equal bent
toward both the extremities.

Art. 5. That every species has its proper Temperament.
BUt it is to be observed, that in the distribution of the Temperament, made by
Nature to Animals, she has in the first place considered their species, and
has appointed every one, that which was most convenient for it. For example;
she has assigned a hot and dry Temperament for the species of the Lion; a hot
and moist, for that of a Horse; a cold and dry for that of an Ass, and so all
the rest. But, as she has been careful of the conservation of these species,
and, to that end, has bestowed on them the two Sexes, which were to receive
different qualities, she has been obliged to divide this first Temperament,
and to give one part of it to the male, and the other to the Female. For
though, in the species of the Lion, the male and female are hot and dry, yet is
it certain that the female is such, in a lower degree then the male, and the
same thing is to be said of all the rest.

It is therefore to be granted, that the just and equal Temperament, we have
spoken of before, is that which is most convenient to humane Nature. But in as
much as it was also requisite, that the man and Woman should have different
qualities, that just Temperament was divided between them, and without straying
too much from that perfect Temperature, the man has received a little more
heat and drought, and the Woman a little more cold and moisture.

And this is the true interpretation that ^^e must give to the Fable of
Androgyne, when Plato says, that Man and Woman at the beginning made up but
one body, which was of a round figure; that they were afterward divided into
two, and that the Love they have one for the other, is only the desire they
have to be reunited, and a means of their perpetuation. For, this first union
of Man and Woman, is nothing else but humane nature comprehending both Sexes,
and having, for its body, that just temperament, which may be compared to a
round figure, whereof all the parts are equal and uniform. But in the
distinction, which was made of this nature, into two Sexes, that Temperament
was divided into two parts, and thence were framed two bodies, unlike one to
the other, in respect of the different qualities, which they received in order
to the conservation of the species.

Art. 6. Why Sexes were bestowed on Animals, and why the Male is hot and dry,
and the Female cold and moist.
THe bestowing of Sexes on Animals, was only in order to Generation, and where
there is no generation to be made, there are no Sexes, as in Angels. But in
regard this action, as all others whatsoever, stands in need of two principal
causes, to wit, the Efficient and the Material, there was a necessity, that
every species of Animals should be divided into two Sexes, to execute the
function of these two causes. And that is also the reason there are but two
Sexes, for as much as ^hese two causes are sufficient for any action whatsoever.

But whereas there is not any virtue or power, which stands not in need of
certain dispositions, to execute the function, whereto it is designed, and that
among the corporeal dispositions, the first qualities are most efficacious and
most necessary; it must follow, that heat and drought, as being the most
active, should be bestowed on the Sex which executes the function of the
Efficient cause, and that cold and moisture, as being the most passive, should
be most observable in that Sex, which represents the Material cause. And this
is the original reason, why Man is hot and dry, and Woman cold and moist, for
that Man has the virtues and qualities of the Efficient cause, and the Woman
those of the Passive cause.

For, though there be some dispute among the Philosophers, concerning the
function of the Female in the business of generation, and that it is maintained
by some, that she is concurrent to the production of the Animal, as well as the
male; yet not thinking it necessary to produce the reasons and experiences
which destroy that opinion, this at least is certain, that if the said
assertion should be granted, it must be acknowledged, that the active virtue,
which the Female may have, is much weaker in it, and that the Passive cause is
the more predominant. Which is enough to prove, that the passive qualities are
also the more prevalent in the same work.

And certainly, to make this truth the more clear, we need only consider the
natural constitution of the Woman. For her weakness, as to body; a smaller
conformation of the parts; the fearfulness, which is natural to her; the
delicacy and softness of the skin and flesh, and the many humors wherewith she
abounds, are infallible demonstrations of the cold and moist temperament she is
of.

Art. 7. Wherein the Beauty of Sexes consists. That there are two sorts of
general effects (...).
IT being therefore granted, that the Temperament of Man is hot and dry, and
that of the Woman cold and moist, we are now to consider, what dispositions
these Temperaments raise in the Soul, and what constitution the whole body
receivs from them. For, the Perfection and Beauty of each Sex consists on these
two things, for as much as the intellectual Beauty which ought to be in them,
is nothing else than a combination or concurrence of all the faculties which
are necessary to them, for the execution of those functions, whereto they are
designed; and that the corporeal Beauty is also nothing else, than a concourse
and compliance of all the dispositions which these faculties require in the
parts, to become organs subservient to their functions. For that part is
beautiful, which has the largeness, figure, and all the other dispositions,
necessary for the performance of the action it ought to do: and if all these
are not in it, or that it have any dispositions which are not requisite, it
must needs appear ugly and deformed.

Howere it be, we are here to observe one thing, which is very considerable in
this matter, and in all the effects of Nature, which is, that there are two
kinds of these effects, some wrought for a certain end, which Nature proposes
to her self; others wrought out of pure necessity, so as that Nature had not
any design in the working of them. That a man should have hair on the chin, the
eyelids, and eye brows, is for some particular end, which Nature proposes to
her self, wherein she never fails of her purpose, she disposing the matter of
the hair, and directing it her self into those parts. But, that he should have
any on his breast, is not an effect proceeding from the design of Nature, for
if it were, all men would have some there, and therefore, abundance of matter
is only the cause thereof, it being the property of that, to make us way where
ever it can.

This is also most evidently apparent in the Passions; for that a man*
transported with anger, should keep a stir; that he should threaten; that he
should strike; all these are actions whereby he pretends to revenge himself,
which is the end of that Passion. But that his countenance should be enflamed;
that his forehead should be wrinckled; that his words should fall from him with
certain interruptions; these are effects wrought by necessity, so as that the
Soul had no design in the production of them, in regard they do not contribute
to the revenge, whereto she is inclined.

Art. 8. That there are some Faculties and Inclinations, which it is Nature's
design to bestow on the Sexes, others not.
UPon these grounds, we may affirm, that there are some Faculties and
Inclinations, which Nature has, out of a formal design, bestowed on the
several Sexes: such as are the faculties of the Soul considered in themselves,
and in their origin, excluding all modification by the Temperament, as the
rational, the sensitive, the vegetative Faculties, and consequently the
Inclinations, which accompany them; for every Animal power leaves in the
Appetite, an inclination to perform its proper actions. But as to the powers
and inclinations which proceed from the Temperament, as the strength or
weakness of those first faculties, the Inclination to confidence or
fearfulness, to liberality or avarice, etc. Nature has not any design to
bestow them on either Sex, in as much as the natural perfection of the humane
species does not admit of any in particular, as obliged to be equally capable
of all, by reason of its being indeterminate and indifferent, as we have shown
before. It is therefore out of pure necessity that they are raised in the Soul,
and by the connection and unavoidable consequence there is between the effects
and their causes.

True it is indeed, that Nature has proposed to her self to bestow on Man,
besides the Faculties convenient for his species* those also which are proper
to his Sex, to wit, the active virtue in order to generation, and heat and
drought to serve as instruments to that virtue, as she has bestowed on the
Woman the passive power, and cold and moisture, to perform the function of the
material cause. But all the Inclinations consequent to those qualities, as
confidence or fearfulness, liberality or avarice, etc. are only dispositions
framed in the Soul, without her knowedge, and beside, or against her intention.
It must be confessed they are natural, because they are by accident in the
order of Nature, and follow the causes which depend on the matter. Nay, they
are allowed to be perfections, and if they should be wanting, there would be a
defect, in as much as the causes, from which they proceed, necessarily require
that consequence and concatenation which is between them. For, a Man who should
not be courageous, or a Woman who should not be timorous, would be guilty of
the same imperfection, as a Lion that should be fearful, and a Hare that
should be courageous.

Art. 9. That there are some parts framed by Nature out of design, others not.
THE same thing may be said of the Conformation of the parts; for Nature has,
in her Idaeas, that figure which is most convenient to every species, and which
she would bestow on every individual, were she not prevented by the particular
causes, such as is the Temperament. And though she gives each Sex a different
structure of body, yet does she, as much as lies in her power, always preserve
the character of the figure, which is proper to the species. For, though the
Conformation of the Woman's parts be different from that of the Man's, yet is
there a greater resemblance between her and Man, than any other Animal
whatsoever.

Now, it is certain, there are some parts which are proper to each Sex, and
such as Nature has a design to frame after such and such a fashion; as those
that serve for organs to perform the functions, whereto each of them is
ordered: But for the rest, as height of stature, largeness of head, a square
figure of the face, etc. which are to be observed in Man, or lowness of
stature, littleness of head, and roundness of face, etc. which are proper to
the Woman, all this variety, I say, proceeds not from the design of Nature, but
pure necessity, consequently to the Temperament, which is proper to either,
though it contributes to the perfection and beauty of the body, for the reasons
we have given already.

SECT. 2. Wherein the Perfection of the Male consists.
Art. 1. Of the Inclinations proper to Man.
THis presupposed, we now come to observe the Inclinations, consequent to the
Temperament of Man. Nature has made him hot and dry, for the end we have
already assigned, But according to the proportion of his being hot, he must
necessarily be strong, and consequently thereto, that he should be naturally
Courageous, desirous of Fame, Magnanimous, Sincere, Liberal, Merciful, Just,
Grateful; and consequent to his being dry, he should be Resolved, Constant,
Patient, Modest, Faithful, Judicious.

The reasons of all these effects are easily found. For, as the Soul makes use
of these qualities, knows what she is able to perform by their means, and is
inclined to the actions conformable to their virtue: So upon he^ being sensible
of the heat, which is the principle of strength and courage, she takes a
confidence in her self; and, upon that, she would command, she courageously
undertakes, and slights small dangers: And being courageous, she is forward,
free, and without artifice. She is also liberal, not only upon this account,
that it is the property of heat to dilate it self, but also for this reason,
that the confidence she has of her self, takes away the apprehension of
wanting those things that shall be necessary for her. She easily pardons,
because she thinks she cannot be injured: She is just, because she desires
little, as being satisfied with her self; in fine, she is grateful, because
she is just and liberal.

On the other side, as drought obliges things to keep within their bounds, and
hinders them from spreading and dispersing themselves; so she accommodates her
self to this virtue, and is fortified within her self, not easily changing the
resolutions she has taken, patiently enduring the inconveniences which happen
to her, constantly endeavoring to perform the promises she has made, and not
suffering her self to be carried away with the vanity of those honors, which
she deserves not. In a word, drought contributes to the purity of the Spirits,
and checks the impetuous sallies of the Imagination, allowing the time,
required by the understanding, for the consideration of things, whence proceed
prudence and soundness of judgment

Art. 2. That the Temperament of Man is hot and dry in the first degree.
BUt it is her to be observed, that all these natural virtues are not
consistent with these two qualities if they be excessive. For, if the heat be
too great, instead of Courage, it will raise Temerity; the desire of Fame will
be changed into Pride; Magnanimity, into Insolence; Liberality, into
Prodegality; Justice, into Severity; Clemency, into Induigence; and Gratitude
into Ostentation and Vanity. In like manner, if drought be predominant, the
Constancy of the Soul degenerates into Obstinacy, Harshness, Insensibility,
Austerity. The perfection therefore of the Temperament convenient to Man, in
respect of his Sex, should come as near as may be to the exact Temperature,
proper to humane Nature, as we have shown; And so it may be affirmed, that it
ought not to be hot and dry, but in the first degree, whatever goes beyond it
leading to excess and imperfection. The reason this, that Nature, which always
endeavors to give the several Sexes the Temperament convenient to the species,
recedes no further from that* Temperament, than is necessary for the disposing
of them into the order of those causes, whereof they are to perform the
function. Whence it may be inferred, that the least degree of heat and drought
which Man may have beyond the exact Temperature, is sufficient to give him the
virtue and efficacy of the efficient cause.

The same thing is to be advanced, concerning the Conformation of the parts;
for there is one conformation which is convenient to the species, and is a mean
between those which are proper to the several Sexes. For, as all things should
aim at a certain mediocrity in humane nature, for the reasons before alleged;
so ought the conformation of the body to be in the mean, between the excess and
defect, which may be found therein. But, in regard the Temperament qualifies
the formative virtue, and forces it to give the parts that greatness and figure
which are proper for them, it was requisite, that those of Man should be
answerable to the two qualities, which were to be predominant in him, and that
they should be larger, not only than those of the Woman, but also than those
which were designed to the humane species.

Art. 3. A Model of Man's figure.
ARistotle has designed the figure of Man according to that of the Lion, as if
there were no other Animal, in which the form of the male Sex were more
perfect, and that it ought to be the Model, according to which that of Man
should be represented. But, not to urge that Man is the most perfect of all
Animals, and consequently, that he ought to be the measure of the rest, the
Lion is more proper to frame an Idaea of the strength, than of the perfection
of the Sex, for as much as that quality requires more heat and drought than is
necessary to the male Sex. And accordingly the Lion is one of the least
fruitful creatures of any, and consequently has not always the virtue and
efficacy, convenient for that Sex: besides that his Temperament recedes too
much from the mediocrity most befitting humane nature, and, whoever shall
compare it to that of Man, which is hot and dry but in the first degree, will
find that the Lion's reaches to the third.

Add to this, that the atra bilis, or black choler is predominant in the Lion,
as also in a strong and robust man; and* therefore they have both large mouths,
a harsh and thick hair, the forehead sull of folds and contractions, between
the Eyebrows, the extremities large and tough, the flesh hard and musculous,
the voice bigg, and resounding, as it were, out of the throat, the gate grave,
with a certain weighing from one side to the other; all which are the
significations of an excessive heat and drought, as we shall show elsewhere.

And it is probable, that Aristotle did not, in that place, consider Man
simply, according to the virtue of his Sex, but according to the quality which
was most considerable in the opinions of men, to wit, Heroic Fortitude, which
is the source of Valor, which has the prerogative of commanding, and for
which men always reserved the greatest honors, and the noblest rewards.
Accordingly, when he proposes the Panther for the Idaea of the Female Sex, it
is easily perceived, that his consideration runs more upon the strength of the
Sexes, than their natural perfection, since that is a creature, which is indeed
very stout and courageous, but has not the docility, the fearfulness, and
other qualities proper to the Woman

Art. 4. Of the Figure of Man's parts.
BUt for our parts, who follow not the opinions of Men, but the designs and
orders of Nature, we cannot represent a figure of Man convenient to his Sex,
but according to a draught of those qualities, which are natural to him, with
reference to the comparison to be made between them and those of the Woman,
there being not among Animals, any that has a greater resemblance to the Man,
than She.

We are therefore to affirm, that as to his stature, it is of a greater height,
and more unbounded than that of the Woman.

That his head is bigger.

That his hair is stronger, and inclining to a certain curle toward the
extremities.

That his Forehead is less round, less smooth, and almost of a square figure.

That his Eyebrows are bigger and stronger.

That his Eyes are more lively.

That the Nose, descending in a straight line from the forehead, is somewhat
bigger at the extremity.

That the Nostrils are a little more open.

That the Mouth is larger.

The Lips thinner.

The Voice bigger.

The Chin less round.

And the whole Face inclining to a square figure.

The Neck should be thicker.

The Shoulders and Breast larger and stronger.

The Buttocks and Thighs less fleshy.

All the Junctures more free.

The Extremities larger and stronger.

The Flesh harder and more musculous.

The Mien more majestic.

The Carriage and Deportment of the body more noble.

The Gate more sprightly and vigorous.

Art. 5. The Reasons of the figure of Man's parts.
NOw, whosoever shall seriously consider the whole business of this
Conformation of the parts, shall find, that it proceeds from the moderation of
the two aforesaid qualities, as we have shown. For height of stature, greatness
of the head and mouth, the openness of the nostrills, the thickness of the
neck, the largeness and breadth of the shoulders and, b^east, the sprightliness
of the eyes, the bigness of the voice, the freedom and activity of the
junctures, the majesty and nobleness of the mien, carriage and gate, are the
effects of heat, which dilates the parts, and renders the motion of them more
active and more vigorous.

On the other side, the harshness of the hair, the hardness of the flesh, the
solidity of the junctures, the ruggedness of the forehead, and its figure less
round, the thinness of the Lips, the more obtuse figure of the chin, and that
of the whole face inclining to a square, are the effects of drought, which
hardens the parts, and resists the motions of the humors, not permitting them
to assume the round figure, which is proper and natural to them, as we shall
hereafter take occasion to show more particularly.

Art. 6. That the figure of the parts denotes the inclinations.
BUt what calls upon our further observation in all these parts, is, that they
have a certain rapport to and dependency on the faculties and inclinations,
which the Sex bestows on the Soul, so that they serve for marks and signs to
discover them: whether it proceeds hence, that they are the Instruments of
those powers, and that the knowledge of the instrument discovers the cause, to
which it is subservient; or that both the inclinations and signs proceed from
the Temperament, as their common principle, and that the Conformation of the
parts bewraying the Temperament, the Temperament afterward bewrayes the
inclination and faculties, whereof it is the cause.

Accordingly the largeness of the breast and shoulders, the nimbleness and
strength of the junctures, the openness of the nostrills, and the greatness, or
wideness of the mouth are marks of Courage. A thick neck, the flesh hard and
musculous, the extremities large, are signs of Strength, as well of Body as
Soul.

The square forehead, the nose somewhat big, the lips thin, the chin somewhat
large, denote magnanimity, and greatness of courage.

The stature high and straight, the ey-brows elevated, a majestic gate, and
sprightly eyes, signify Glory, or a desire of Fame.

The forehead and face of a square figure, and the head of a convenient
bigness, are marks of Wisdom, Constancy and Justice; and so of the rest, as we
shall further show in its proper place. Whence it may be affirmed, that, of all
the parts, which make up the Male Beauty, or which is beseeming a Man, there is
not any but denotes an inclination to some particular virtue.

Thus have we discovered wherein consists the natural Perfection of a Man, as
well in reference to the powers of the Soul, as to the Conformation of the
body, which is convenient for his Sex.

SECT. III. Showing wherein consists the natural perfection of the Woman.
WE come now to the examination of the Woman's perfection. But what a
difficult, what a dangerous enterprise do we undertake! Since it cannot be
attempted without engaging against the greatest and most formidable power in
the world. For, to make short work of it, we must unthrone that Beauty, which
commands Kings and Monarchs, which forces obedience from Philosophers, and
which has caused the greatest alterations, that ever happened upon earth. From
that high pitch of glory and perfection, whereto it is now advanced, it must be
pulled down, and degraded into the order of vicious things, and we are to show,
that all those attractions, and charming graces, wherewith she is adorned, is
nothing but a deceitful mask, hiding an infinite number of defects and
imperfections. It Is neither better nor worse; for if there be any certainty in
humane ratiocination; if the principles, which Nature has scattered into our
Souls, in order to the discovery of truth, have any thing of solidity, it will
necessarily follow, that there is not any one of all the parts, requisite to
the framing of the Woman's Beauty, but is the mark of an inclination to some
Vice.

But what? Is there any necessity we should discover things, which Nature has
made it so much her business to conceal? Why should we be so forward to condemn
those, who innocently force the adorations and respects of all the world? This
only we have to allege, that our case is much like that of a Judge, who, out
of his obligation to Justice, is fo^c'd to pass Sentence against his friend.
Who can forbear falling in love with Beauty? But who is it also that can oppose
Truth* which is stronger than Beauty? It is Truth then that forces us to
condemn that Beauty, and to pass judgment against her, which, though severe, is
yet just and necessary. For, if it may be deduced, that it is only a fair
appearance, which hides an infinite multitude of defects, and so far from
being the flower of Goodness (as it has been sometimes flattered) that we may
as well affirm it to be the ba^k, which covers the vices of Nature; it is
impossible, but it must abate much of the pride, whereby it is attended, and
somewhat raise their spirits, who adore it with so much slavery.

But all considered, it is possible, we may represent the mischief greater then
it is, and we are ready to acknowledge as much. For we speak only of the
Inclinations, that is, the first seeds of the Soul's affections which may be
smothered and weeded out, before they have fully taken root. And to speak more
precisely, the Inclination is only a secret weight, which gives the Soul a
bent to certain actions, and which is easily balanced by some other advantages,
such as may be example, education, and contrary habits. As to which, we must
make this acknowledgment, for the honor of the Women, that these means have a
greater influence over them, then over the Men, and that commonly, we find the
practice of the virtues more exemplary and exact in this Sex, than in the other.

With this precaution, we may presume to affirm, upon the principle we have
laid down, that the Woman is cold and moist, in order to the end, which Nature
has proposed to her self, and that from her being cold, it follows, she should
be Weak, and consequently Fearful, Pusillanimous, Jealous, Distrustful,
Crafty, apt to Dissemble, Flatter, Lie, easily Offended, Revengefull, Cruel in
her revenge, Unjust, Covetous, Ungrateful, Superstitious. And from her being
moist, it follows that she should be Unconstant, Light, Unfaithful, Impatient,
easily Persuaded, Compassionate, Talkative.

Art. 1. The Reasons of these Incilinations.
THe reasons of all these Inclinations are evident and necessary. For since
heat is the principle of strength, courage and confidence; cold, on the other
side, must be the principle of weakness, lowness of spirit, and fearfulness.
And from these three proceed all the rest, which are the attendants of a cold
Temperament: for distrust and jealousy are the issue of weakness and fear;
whence it is, that strong and courageous men are neither distrustful, nor apt
to suspect. Artifice and craft are also the attendants of weakness, in as much
as they supply the want of strength; and we find most of those creatures which
are weak, to be more cunning than the others; on the contrary, all of great
bulk are not malicious, in regard commonly strength goes along with bulk.
Dissimulation follows artifice and distrust, as flattery and lying follow
dissimulation. Besides, weakness, in as much as it is exposed to all manner of
injuries, is easily offended; And thence it comes, that she is revengefull, for
that revenge, which has no other end than to prevent the continuance of the
injury, is commonly found in those who are weak; and therefore old people,
children, and sick persons, are more testy and angry than others. But a Woman's
revenge is cruel; for as much as cruelty proceeds from weakness and fear; for a
generous person is satisfied with the victory, whereas a Coward having his
enemy at mercy, revenges himself to the utmost extremity, out of a fear he may
recover himself, and retort the revenge upon him. Superstition follows from the
same spring; for weakness, being ever more fearful than it should be, imagines
Heaven hard to be pleased, and that all endeavors are to be used to gain its
favor. Nor does Avarice proceed from any other principle; for the fear of
falling nto want, raises a desire of preserving what one has, and acquiring
what one has not; whence it comes, that old men, and persons addicted to
melancholy, are inclined to this vice. Now, it is impossible that these desires
should be without injustice, or that they should easily admit of gratitude, and
acknowledgments.

On the other side, the Soul, complying with the nature of humidity, which is,
as it were, its organ, and which is unconstant, changeable and susceptible of
all the impressions may be given it, is also apt to receive an inclination to
the vices which are correspondent to those qualities; such as are Lightness,
Inconstancy, Impatience, Unfaithfulness, and Loquacity, which are the effects
of Fickleness; as Credulity and Compassion are the consequences of a weak
resistance, and the easy impression, which things make upon her.

Art. 2. That the Inclinations of the Woman are not defects.
BUt whereas the Inclinations may be either strong or weak and the vices,
whereto they are inclined, may have several degrees, it is certain, that those
which are consonant to the Woman, with reference to the perfection of her Sex,
are the weakest that may be, in regard her Temperament recedes very little from
the just temperature, as we have shown. So that the fearfulness, distrust,
avarice, and the rest, are, in her, in the lowest and weakest degree they can
be. Nay, there are some of them, which, in that condition, may pass for so many
natural virtues. For Distrust and Dissimulation may deserve the name of
Prudence; a moderate Avarice, may fall under the notion of Frugality; a light
Superstition may pass for Piety; moderate Revenge may assume the name of
Justice; and that Timidity, which begets shame-fastness, is the greatest
ornament and commendation of the Woman, and the bridle which is most likely to
give her a check, in the bent she might have to all the greatest vices. But it
is also to be inferred, that, when the coldness and moisture exceed the degree
of that moderation, all the Inclinations we have mentioned, are proportionably
heightened, and become as vicious as their names imply them to be.

Moreover, those Inclinations, which go under the name of vices, are not, to
speak exactly, so many defects, but rather, on the contrary, so many natural
perfections, as being correspondent and conformable to the feminine Sex. For,
as it is no imperfection in a Hare to be fearful, nor in a Tygre, to be cruel,
for as much as their natures require those qualities in them; so can it not be
said, that Timidity, Distrust, Inconstancy, etc. are defects or imperfections
in a Woman, in regard they are natural to her Sex, which would be defective, if
it were deprived thereof.

Yet is it to be granted, that, comparing them with the Inclinations of Man,
they seem to be vicious; but the comparison which is made between diverse
things, may not be the rule and measure of their natural perfection, in as much
as it transferrs to one subject what appertains to the other, and there is not
any thing, wherein some excess or defect may not be found, when it is so
compared. Accordingly, the strength of a Man, compared to that of a Lion, is
weakness; and all the Inclinations, which are insur'd into him, upon the
account of his Sex, though they seem virtuous, are nevertheless defects, in
respect of the humane species, which ougth to be indifferent, as we have shown
elsewhere. Nay, mediocrity it self, which is so perfect in reference to things
humane is a defect, as admitting any comparison between them and the
supernatural and divine.

The Inclinations then, which the Woman derives from her Sex, whatever they may
be in themselves, are to be accounted perfections, when they are confined
within the moderation, correspondent to the first degree of cold and moisture,
of which Temperament she ought to be. If they exceed it, they are defects,
declining from the perfection requisite in her Sex; and the excess of that
Temperament causes no less deformity in the Soul, than it does in all the parts
of the Body.

Art. 3. That the Inclinations of Man are defects in the Woman.
BUt what? Is it impossible that a Woman should be of the same Temperament as a
man, and consequently that she may have the same inclinations, and be
courageous, magnanimous, liberal, etc. as we experimentally find many of them,
who have all those qualities? It must be acknowledged; but what is a perfection
in one subject, may be a defect in another: as for instance, courage in a Lion,
is a virtue, in a Hare, a vice; and so what is a perfection in the man, is a
default, and imperfection in the Woman, because it makes her recede from the
natural perfection of her Sex. And if these Inclinations proceed not from
instruction, education, example, or some rational habit, they are indeed such
qualities as seem virtuous, but have withal the attendance of far greater
vices. And those Women, who are born with that confidence and audacity, which
are proper only to man, are commonly rash, impudent, unthrifty, etc. there
being a necessity, that whatever recedes from perfection, should fall into
defects; and the greater the recession is, so much the more remarkable are the
vices. Whence it proceeds, that no body wonders so much to see a Woman very
fearful, very covetous, and very light and unconstant, as to find her
courageous, prodigal, obstinate; in regard these last qualities proceed from a
Temperament which is absolutely opposite to that of the Woman, whereas the
former are consonant to that which is proper to her, though it exceeds the
moderation it should have. In like manner, to be cowardly, penurious,
fickle-minded, are far greater imperfections in a man, than if he were
hare-brain'd, prodigal, self-willed, in as much as the latter are the effects
of the hot and dry Temperament, proper to him; the former of the cold and
moist, which is perfectly contrary to him.

Art. 4. Wherein the Beauty of the Woman consists.
WE come now to examine the Conformation of the parts, which is consequent to
the Temperament of the Woman, and to consider, wherein the Beauty, which is
proper and natural to her, consists.

In the first place, as to her Stature, she is lower, and smaller than the man.

The Head is less and rounder, and the whole face inclining to the same figure.

She has a great quantity of hair, and that very long, small, and soft to the
Touch.

Her Forehead is even, smooth, higher, and rounder toward the Temples.

The Eyebrows are slender, soft, at a little distance one from the other, and
gently twining about the Eyes.

The Eyes are large, black, betraying a certain mildness and modesty.

The Nose, of a middle size, descending in a straight line upon the Lips, and
gently inclining to a roundness toward the Extremity.

The Nostrils narrow, and not opening much.

The Cheeks round.

The Mouth little.

The Lips red, somewhat bigg, or plump, not shutting close together, nor
moving, unless it be when she speaks or laughs.

The Teeth are small, white, and orderly disposed.

The Chin should be round, smooth, not admitting the appearance of the least
hair.

The Ears little, soft, and of a convenient compass.

The Neck round, somewhat long, small, smooth, and even all about

The upper part of the Breast plump, and fleshy; and the Breast it self, or
Dugg, firm, and somewhat hard, round, and of a middle-size.

The Shoulders little, and close.

The Back straight, and weak.

The Thighs round, and fleshy.

The Knees round, and so as there be not in them the appearance of any juncture.

The Feet little, round, and fleshy.

The Arms short, and of a proportionable roundness.

The Hands long, little, and fleshy.

The Fingers long, small, and round.

The Skin, in all parts, soft delicate, and of an exquisite whiteness, save
only in those places, which admit a mixture of carnation, as in the Cheeks,
the Chin, and the Ears.

Lastly, Weakness ought to appear in her voice, and all her motions;
bashfulness and a reserved modesty in her countenance, her gestures, carriage,
and behavior.

Art. 5. The Causes assigned of this figuration of parts in the Woman.
OF all these parts, the little, short, and slender, are the effects of the
cold Temperament, which confines the matter, and hinders it from spreading and
dilating it self. The fleshy and soft parts are the productions of the
moisture, for they denote abundance of phlegmatic blood. But of the round, some
have their dependence on the cold, others on the moisture: for they either
proceed from the fat, which fills the vacant places of the muscles, as in the
arms, cheeks, thighs; or from the cold, which contracts the figure of the
parts, and presses them of all sides; whereas the heat, always spreading it
self forward, causes unevenness and angles, which prevent the roundness of
them. Hence it comes that the forehead and face of the Man are of a square
figure, and those who are inclined to Melancholy, have corners of the forehead
ending in a sharp point, and long faces, contrary to the ^legmatick, who have
them almost of a round figure. The mildness, modesty, and the bashfulness which
appear in the countenance and actions of the Woman, are also effects of the
cold, which abates the courage, and checks, or remits the motion of the parts.
To the same principle is also to be attributed the smalness and weakness of the
voice, by contracting the throat, in which it is framed, and weakening the vital
faculty. But all these things fall more particularly under consideration* in
the Treatise of Beauty; it shall suffice here to observe in the main* that the
natural conformation of the Woman follows the Temperament of cold and moist, in
that degree, which Nature has prescribed for the perfection of her Sex.

Art. 6. That all these parts denote the Inclinations which are proper to the
Woman.
OUr next work must be, to show, that all these parts have a dertain ce^ation
to the qualities of the mind, whereof we have given an account; that they are
the signs which discover them, how secret soever they may be; and lastly, that,
of all the figures and lineaments which contribute to the Beauty of the Woman,
there is not any one but denotes a vicious inclination.

We need produce no other proof of this truth than the natural weakness, which
is remarkable in the ^ody of the Woman, and the conformation of all her parts,
whereof there is not any one, but is the effect, either of the coldness of her
Temperament, or the moisture predominant in her, as we have shown already. For,
since the weakness of the body, and of natural heat, is ever attended by an
inclination to fearfulness, distrust, avarice, etc. and that the superabundance
of moisture accompanying it, causes softness of nature, effeminacy,
inconstancy, and fickleness, etc. it follows, that she has not any part, which
does not discover some one of the Inclinations beforementioned. But, for the
further clearing up of a Proposition that seems so strange, we must fall into a
more particular consideration of things, and make it appear, by those rules of
Physiognomy, which Aristotle, and other great Persons among the Ancients, have
left us, that there is no truth so well established as this.

Aristotle has given us this observation, That a little face is a sign of
pusillanimity, and lowness of spirit. By that character, he designs those who
are not abe to bear good or bad fortune, who, upon the least smile of
prosperity, become insolent; upon the least frown of adversity, are utterly
cast down and discouraged; who entertain the least delay or denial, as a great
misfortune; a small negligence for a great injury; continually complaining,
distrustful of all they have to do with, full of suspense in the taking of any
resolution, etc. as we shall show more at large, when we come to the particular
characters of this vice.

The round face denotes maliciousness, and an easy inclination to anger.

The narrow forehead is an argument of a fickle and incorrigible disposition.

The round forehead is a sign of testiness, and weakness of mind.

The high forehead, and very smooth, signifies flattery and dis^imulation.

Black eyes denote fearfulness; the large eye argues inconstancy.

Thick and soft lips are marks of Loquacity, an overbusie enquiry into the
affairs of other people, and a negligence of their own. Some affirm, that they
are the significators of avarice and lying; which two vices are commonly
observable in the Moors, whose lips are of that making.

The little mouth is a sign of weakness and lying.

The round chin denotes envy.

The long and small neck denotes a timorous disposition, and a person inclined
to loquacity.

When the upper part of the breast is smooth and fleshy, it is an argument of
credulity, and weakness of judgment.

The shoulders little and close together, are signs of avarice.

When the thighs, feet and hands are fleshy, the back straight and weak, the
hands little, all these are signs of a soft and effeminate constitution, that
is, they denote a delicate and voluptuous person, one who is not able to endure
any hardship, or pains-taking, to whom the slightest inconveniences are
insupportable, and one that impatiently bears the want of the least pleasures
and enjoyments of life.

Art. 7. Wherein perfect Beauty consists.
THis is all the account we have to give of the Beauty as well of the Man as
the Woman. There remains yet only one difficulty, which, no doubt, will occurr
to all those who shall read this Discourse, and may, if not resolved, bring the
truth we have established, into some dispute: It is this, that the Beauty,
whereof we have given a description, is proper and correspondent only to our
climats, and not to be accommodated to others: for there is no Country but
admits a diversity of judgments and opinions, concerning this point; nay, there
are some Nations that are so much at a distance from the sentiments we have of
Beauty, that they account beautiful, such persons, as in our apprehensions,
are little removed from deformity it self.

If the case stand thus, how can any one frame to himself a certain and
determinate Idaea of Beauty, which is so indeterminate, and full of diversity,
and restrain, to the designs of Nature, a thing which seems wholly to depend on
the opinions of men? Nay, it being supposed, that it is a natural perfection,
what Judge shall be able to decide, which is the most perfect and accomplished,
since every People and Nation, will imagine, it has good grounds to bestow the
prize on that which is proper to it self?

We answer then, that Reason only is that sovereign Judge of all Nations, who
is able to pronounce a final sentence, in a business so nice, and prosecuted
with so much partiality. Yet is it not paricular Reason that shall have this
prerogative, but the general Reason, which is grounded on common notions, and
principles not admitting of any dispute.

This Reason it is which teaches us, that the Body is the Instrument of the
Soul, and the greater number of faculties and different powers this latter
has, so much the greater diversity of parts must the former have, to be
employed as the organs thereof: for the Instrument ought to be proportionate,
both to the cause by which it is used, and to the action which it is, by its
means, to perform. And whereas every power has some, action proper thereto, it
is accordingly requisite, that it should have an Instrument, particular to it
self, that is, such as may have the consistence and figure proper to that very
action. For, if the Saw had not the hardness and figure which are convenient
for it, 'twould not be of any use to the workman, who has any thing to do with
it. Now, when an Instrument has the qualities and dispositions requisite in
order to the performance of its action, we may affirm it has its perfection,
in regard there is nothing wanting to it.

Moreover, it is certain, that in every order of things, there is but one only
perfection, in as much as there is but one principal end, whereto every one is
designed, and perfection consists in the end. Whence it may be inferred, that
every power of the Soul has but one perfection, and that the Instrument,
whereof it makes use, can also have but one. So that Beauty, which is the
perfection of the parts, and consists in the just Conformation they ought to
have, can be but only one, and that all those, which have not that
conformation, have not the exact and perfect beauty, which is consonant to the
nature of Man.

Now, the question is, to know, wherein this perfect and complete beauty is to
be found. To do that, let us proceed according to the principles which we have
laid down before, and affirm, that the natural perfection of Man's body
consists in the mediocrity, or aequilibrium of the Temperament, and the
conformation of the parts, for the reasons we have already alleged; and that
the Sexes, which could not retain it, by reason of the different qualities it
was requisite they should have, recede but very little from it. For it follows
thence, that the Climate wherein perfect beauty is to be found, is that which
is least opposite to that mediocrity, and which, by its exact temperature,
preserves it, and alters it not. Now, it is out of all dispute, that those
Countries, where the Elevation is about forty five degrees, are the most
temperate, as being in the midst of all the extremities, and consequently, if
we are to search after perfect Beauty, in one place rather than another, it is
in those Countries, and the parts adjacent, that it may be found.

I know there are some Countries so situated, where it is not to be met with,
as in those parts of China and America, which are under the same degree. But we
are not here to consider only the Position of the Heavens; we must also
examine the nature of the Soil, the origin, policy and government of the
Inhabitants. For that of China is too moist, by reason of the many Lakes and
Rivers that are thereabouts: and that which is in America is too cold, by
reason of the Woods and Mountains, as New-France is. Add to this, that there
are some Nations, which are seated in very temperate places, but are not the
original Inhabitants of them, and yet have preserved the conformation which
they received from their first habitations. In fine, these Nations are
barbarous, and destitute of policy, and it is not to be doubted, but that the
disorders and imperfections of the Soul are communicated to the Body, and, in
time, alter its Temperament, and many times distort its figure. So that we are
not to look after true Beauty out of Europe, and that, of the Countries,
comprehended within this part of the World, France is the likeliest seat of it,
as being situated just in the midst of the extremities of hot and cold, dry
and moist; in a word, of South and North.

Thence it is, that we have taken our Model of the Beauty which is convenient
for Man and Woman. It Is true, we have made but a rude draught* or rather but
drawn the first lines of it; but we shall fully finish, and give it its
absolute perfection, in the Treatise we have puposely designed for so noble a
Subject.

CHAP. II. Of the Inclinations.
SECT. 1. Of the Nature of Inclination.
TO understand what is meant by Inclination, methinks there needs no more than
to consider the very word it self, for it sufficiently discovers, either that
it is a Motion causing the Soul to incline or berd her self toward some
Object, or that it is a Disposition to move toward it, since it cannot be
imagined, that a thing may have a bent, or to bow it self, toward some place
or part, without suffering any motion. Now, whereas it may be said that a man
is inclined to Choler, without being stirred or moved thereby, and without
feeling the effects of it, the consequence is, that Inclination is not a
Motion, and that it is only a disposition to move. But, in regard there are
some dispositions transient, and others that are constant and permanent, and
that it is commonly said, a man is inclined to a Passion, when he is only
disposed thereto, by some extraordinary accident; it is expected, that the
Inclination should be a constant disposition, by process of time deeply rooted
in the Soul.

Moreover, since it makes the Soul bend toward certain objects, it is
requisite, they should have the appearance of good, for she is never bent
toward that which is evil; on the contrary, she eschews it. And though those
objects may, in effect, be evil, yet is it necessary, that, to her, they should
seem to be good, to raise in her the bent and inclination she has toward
them. So, a Person inclined to Choler, finds a pleasure in revenging himself;
and accordingly, all the Passions, how troublesome soever they may be, give a
certain satisfaction to Nature, who, by them, provides for her own
preservation. For, though it be the judgment of Reason, that the Passion is
evil, yet the sensitive part of the Soul finds in it a certain content, as in
an action advantageous to it, in order to the end she proposes to her self.

Art. 1. The Object of the Inclination.
THe objects of the Inclination are of two kinds, Things and Actions, for a man
has an inclination for persons, books, pictures, etc. There may also be an
inclination to Passions, Virtues and Vices. But there is this difference, that
it may be said people are inclined to actions, but it is not in like manner
said of Things; for though it may be said of one, that he has an inclination
for a certain person, yet it is not said that he is inclined to that person.
Whence it may be easily apprehended, that there are two kinds of Inclination in
general, one justly and properly so called, the other improperly and
figuratively.

That kind which communicates its form and name to the subject wherein it is,
ought to pass for the proper and true Inclination, whereas the other is rather
the effect of the Inclination, then the inclination it self; since it is the
very motion, which the Appetite suffers, in loving and desiring something, and
the other kind of Inclination is not the motion, but the disposition to move.
So that, when it is said of some body, that he has an inclination for such a
person, it is meant of the friendship he has toward him, or the disposition
he has to love him. This is the true inclination, the other only the effect
of this.

Art. 2. The distinction of Inclinations.
HAving nothing to say here of that kind of inclination which is improperly so
called, we shall speak only of that which truly deserves that name. Of this
also there are two kinds; one Natural, and proceeding from Nature; the osher
acquired, and proceeding from habit and custom. There are some men naturally
inclined to Love, Anger, Justice, etc. others acquire an inclination to
Virtues, Vices, and Passions, whereto they were not naturally inclined.

Art. 3. The Seat of the Inclinations.
BUt the kinds before mentioned reside in the Soul as their true and proper
seat. For besides that, of the Inclinations, some are wholly Spiritual, as
those which Arts and Sciences leave in the mind, others are Corporeal; as for
example, the ease and facility, wherewith a Tradesman works, when he has good
tools; for this facility is not in the tools, though it proceeds from them. In
like manner, the inclination which a man has to be angry, is not in the
organs, though it proceeds from the constitution of the organs; in as much as
the disposition, which a thing has to move, as well as the motion, whereby it
is afterward agitated, ought to be in the thing it self, and not in the
causes, from which it receives that disposition and motion. It follows
therefore, since it is the Soul which ought to move, that the disposition to
move should be in the Soul.

From hence it may be easily inferred, that the Appetite is the seat of the
Inclinations, in regard that is the only part of the Soul, which may be moved.
And whereas there are three sorts of Appetite, the Will, the Sensitive
appetite, and the Natural appetite, each of them has such inclinations as are
suitable and conformable thereto: that is to say, the spiritual are in the
Will, as those which Arts and Sciences leave in the mind; the Sensible are in
the Sensitive appetite, as those which a man has to the passions of the
sensitive Soul; and those which are purely corporeal make their abode in the
Natural appetite, such as are those which Nature has for certain motions of
the humors in diseases, and for all the actions, for which the organs are
designed. For, even before the parts are in a capacity and condition to act,
the Soul has an inclination to the functions, which they ought to perform.
Whence it comes, that a young Ramm runs his head against things before his
horns are in sight; a young wild Boar will offer to bite, before his tusks are
grown out; and Birds endeavor to fly, though though they are not fully
fledged. Yet are we to make this observation by the way, that the inclinations
of one Appetite are many times communicated to another: For the Inclination a
man has to passions is at last entertained into the Will, and those of the
Natural appetite commonly spread themselves into the Sensitive, as the examples
we have alleged sufficiently evince.

Art. 4. How Inclination is to be defined.
FRom all these considerations, me thinks it were no hard matter to frame an
exact definition of Inclination, which may be this. Inclination is a certain
disposition deeply rooted in the Appetite, which receives from it a bent
toward certain objects acceptable thereto. But to speak more significantly, we
are to acknowledge that these Metaphorical kinds of expression are not proper
to define things, and the words of bending, or bowing, or weighing, whereby
Inclination is commonly defined, cannot be properly said of any thing, but
bodies, and are not to be attributed to the Soul. Let us endeavor then to find
out some other expedient, to clear up this matter, and to look after some other
notions and terms, which may be more proper to the thing, now under our
examination.

Art. 5. Whence proceeds the Disposition, wherein the Inclination consists.
OUt of all controversy then it is, that the Appetite has certain motions,
whereto it is commonly more inclined then to others, and it may be said, that
it has a disposition to perform them, and that the said disposition consists
in the facility, which it meets with, in the performance of them. The question
then is, to know, whence it receives this disposition and facility: for it
cannot proceed from the weight, situation, figure, or any other circumstances
of that kind, which cause, in Bodies, a disposition and facility to move
themselves.

To discover this secret, it is to be laid down as granted, that the
Inclination is a disposition, and a fixed and permanent facility, that happens
to the Appetite; and consequently it is necessary, that the cause which
produces it, should also be durable and permanent. Now all the causes of that
order which may be imagined, as to the present enquiry, are reducible either to
the disposition of the organ of the appetite, or to the habit, which it may
have acquired, or to the images which are preserved in the memory, and frame
the knowledge precedent to its motion: for these things only are permanent,
and may cause that disposition and constant facility, wherein the inclination
consists. It might then be affirmed, that, if the Spirits are the organs, and
immediate seat of the Appetite, as we shall have occasion to show hereafter, it
must follow, that according as they are more subtle or more gross, they are
the more or the less ^asily moved, and that the Appetite, which moves along
with them, receives its motion with greater slowness or activity. And that
hence it proceeds, there are some constitutions which are so changeable, love
with so much facility, and desire things with so much earnestness; and on the
contrary, there are others, whose Souls are so heavy, that it is almost
impossible to stir them, and prosecute the attainment of their desires with a
lethargick supinity and negligence.

But this reason is not general for all the Inclinations; for, besides that
there are some which proceed from the instinct, and have no dependence on the
qualities of the spirits, there are some also in the Will, which is not engaged
to any organ; nay, we acknowledge, that there are such even in Angels, in whom
it is out of all dispute, that neither that cause, nor any other corporeal
disposition, can have any place. The same thing is to be said concerning the
habit, which the Appetite may have contracted, since the habit is a quality
acquired by many act^ons, and that there are some natural inclinations, which
are derived from the very birth.

If these things be as they are laid down, there remain only the Images,
preserved in the memory, which may be the general and immediate cause of this
disposition and facility, wherein the Inclination consists.

Art. 6. How the motions of the Appetite are wrought.
TO understand how this is done, we are to observe, that the Appetite, what
order soever it be of, is a blind power, which, of it self, has not any
knowledge, but suffers it self to be guided by another faculty, that has the
privilege of discerning, whether the things are good or evil, and afterward
to command the Appetite, to move conformably to the judgment it has passed of
them. This Faculty is called the Practick Understanding, in the Superior part;
and in the Sensitive, it has the name of the Estimative faculty. And there is
not any motion wrought in these two parts of the Soul, which is not preceded by
the judgment of one of these two faculties.

The said faculties have also this further property, that they do not pass
their judgment according to the nature of the things, but according to the
Sentiment they have of them. For it sometimes happens, that those things may be
profitable, which they judge evil, and, on the contrary, those may be evil,
which, according to their judgment, seem good. Nor is this to be wondered at at
all, in as much as Good and Evil are of things relative, which yet are not
known to be such, but according to the comparison made by the Soul between
them; things which have no particular species to smite the Senses, as all
sensible qualities have; and which are not known, but only by the Images which
these faculties frame of themselves, without borrowing of them elsewhere.
Whence it comes, that it is said in the Schools, the knowledge of them is
attained, per species non sensatas. In a word, what is good to one, is not such
to another, nay, one and the same person thinks that delightful to him now,
which, a little before, he had thought troublesome; whence it may be easily
seen, that Good and Evil depend on the opinion conceived thereof.

To find out now whence the opinion may derive this knowledge, and what obliges
it to judge that things are good or evil, is a business that requires a more
particular consideration, than to be fully determined here. Let it then
suffice, that we give this satisfaction at present, That it is the Instinct,
experience, and the true or false ratiocination which it makes of things. For,
upon the knowledge it has of the Temperament, and the parts organically
subservient thereto; upon that which it receives from the conceit of its own
strength or weakness; and lastly, upon that, which proceeds from the defect or
abundance wherein it is it judges, that the things are conformable, or contrary
to it, advantageous or hurtful, in a word, good, or bad.

Art. 7. Of the Judgments of the said Faculties.
AS soon then as either of these two Faculties has thus framed to it self an
Idaea of Good and Evil, it ordinarily makes two judgments; according to the
former whereof, it is convinced, that the Good ought to be persu'd, and the
Evil avoided, and this is that which is simply called Practick. By the second,
it effectually commands the Appetite to pursue, or to avoid* and accordingly it
is called in the Schools actually Pratick, Practice practicum. Thereupon the
Appetite moves, commanding the motive virtue, which is in the members to
perform the motions necessary, either to attain the Good, or avoid the Evil.

All these actions are performed consequently, and commonly wrought in a
moment; but sometimes they are also distinct and separate, and that especially
in Man. For the understanding may know a thing to be good, yet without judging
that it ought to be persu'd; and many times it judges that a thing is to be
persu'd, and yet does not order the will to do it. Nay, it often happens, that,
after all these judgments, the Will, which is at liberty, follows not those
orders, and may remain immovable, or make a contrary motion. But in other
Animals, the Practick Judgment, and the motion of the Appetite, cannot be
separated, and as soon as the Estimative faculty has known a thing to be good,
there is a necessity, that, in the same moment, it should judge, and command
the Appetite to pursue it; and this latter punctually obeys, and never fails
moving, conformably to those judgments.

There remains then only the command, which the Appetite lays on the motive
virtue of the members, that may be suspended. For we commonly find, that a
Beast desires some thing, which it dares not take, by reason of the awe it is
in. In which case, the Appetite moves and frames the desire, but it proceeds no
further, suspending the concurrent action of the members.

However it be then, it may be easily inferred, from all we have already
delivered, not only, that the Appetite moves conformably to the Practick
Judgment, that is to say, that its motions are strong or weak, according as the
Estimative faculty does strongly or weakly command it to perform them; but
also, that the Practick Judgment answers the Notion which the Estimavite
faculty has framed to it self of the good or evil, and that the command is
more or less pressing, according to the imagination it frames to it self of
higher or lower degrees of goodness or evil in the things. For a greater good
requires a more imperious command then a lesser, and such a command raises a
passion so much the more violent.

Art. 8. That the Images which are in the memory, are the causes of Inclination.
NOw, if the motions of the Appetite have this dependence on the judgments of
the Estimative faculty, it must follow, that the dispositions, which make it
inclinable to those motions, should also have some relation to the said
judgments. Yet shall not this relation be to those, which the estimative
faculty frames to it self when it knows; for they are transient, and the
Inclination is a permanent disposition; but it shall be to those, which are
preserved in the memory, as we said before. Of these, there are two kinds; for
they are either Natural, or Accidental. The natural consist in the Images which
Nature imprints in the Souls of Animals at their coming into the World, and
this is that which is called Instinct, as we have shown in our Treatise,
concerning the Knowledge of Animals. The acquired or accidental consist also in
the Images, which remain in the memory, after the action of the Estimative
faculty. Under this name I comprehend also the Practick Understanding.

Now, as these two sorts of Images serve for Models to the estimative faculty,
in order to the framing of its Judgments, according as they shall be more
expressive, and have a greater representation of the goodness or evil of the
objects; so will they be more proper to raise, in the Estimative faculty, such
commands as shall be more pressing, and in the Appetite, greater motions.

In the mean time, it is certain, that the Natural are perfectly
representative, in as much as they are of Nature's own framing, in order to the
conservation of the Animal, and that they are the more deeply graven in the
Soul, to the end they might not be blotted out. But the acquired are but
superficial, and if they be not often renewed, they are so lost or weakened,
that they cannot make a perfect representation of things. It Is true, there are
certain objects, which upon the first sight make so strong an impression in the
Soul, that the species thereof are preserved a long time in the memory, and
that the first apprehension, which is had of them, has as great an influence
upon him, as many several apprehensions often reiterated would have, upon some
other occasion. Hence it comes, that the first sight of a very beautiful
person, many times, raises a Love which continues many years. Upon this
account, it is said commonly in the Schools, that there are certain acts,
which, alone, and upon the first performance of them, may produce habits. But
otherwise, that is, those only excepted, there is a necessity, that the
Images, which the Soul frames, and continues in the memory, should be often
renewed, and, as it were, receive a second touch, by several subsequent
reflections, that they may be perfectly expressive and representative. For as
often as ever the Soul makes an apprehension, or a commemoration of some
object, so often does she frame an Image thereof to her self; in regard that,
by apprehending or remembering, she acts, and that she can have no other action,
then the production of Images; which Images, joined with those that are in the
memory, render them stronger, and more lively, much after the same manner, as
the colors, which are often touched over; as we have shown in the place before
alleged.

Art. 9. That the disposition and facility of the Appetite's motion proceeds
from the same Images.
THese Images therefore which are in the memory, and are accordingly perfectly
expressive, are those, from which, the disposition and facility, which the
Appetite has to motion toward certain objects, does proceed.

And certainly, it may be affirmed, that the Soul, which finds her self stored
with these Images, and sees her self in a condition to produce the
apprehensions necessary to her, is raised up to a certain confidence in her
self; and, without any reflection of hers thereupon, she is sensible of her own
strength and courage. And as a man who has a vigorons body, much wealth, or is
of noble extraction, assumes a confidence in himself, and is at all times in a
condition to undertake things conformably to his power, though he thinks not of
it: in like manner, the Soul does the same, when she has the Images in a
readiness, in order to the making of her judgments; she has all her faculties
in a disposition fit to act; and, when she is in action, it may be easily
perceived she was prepared thereto.

And thence it will not be hard to judge, that the Instinct, the Temperament,
the Habits, etc. cause the inclinations, because all these things presuppose
Images perfectly expressive. For those of the Instinct are strong and deep, as
we have already shown; those of the Habits ought to be often reiterated: and
the Temperament, the Conformation of the parts, kind of life, etc. which the
Soul knows, and is sensible of, have the same effect on the Images, as the
Habit. Whence it may be inferred, that, in all these the Images are perfectly
representative, the Appetite is in a condition to move, as soon as the Practick
understanding, or the Estimative faculty, shall present them to it. And here
does consist the facility which it has to be inclined thereto, as the
Inclination consists in that facility, as we have already affirmed. These
things thus laid down, we may define the Inclination, by proper notions and
terms, thus: The Inclination is a permanent disposition, and a facility,
attained by a long progress of time, which the Appetite has to move toward
certain objects, which are acceptable and delightful thereto.

SECT. 2. What are the Causes of the Inclinations.
Art. 1. The several distinctions of the said causes.
THus far have we discoursed concerning the nature, object, and seat of the
Inclinations; we now come to an examination of the causes thereof. For, though
we have already spoken of the principal cause, and that which is the immediate
source of them, to wit, the Images, which are preserved in the memory, yet are
there yet remaining some others, which, albeit not so nearly adjacent to the
Inclination, are nevertheless, in a certain degree, necessary thereto; nay,
they are such, as, being better known, and more manifest, will accordingly give
a greater light to a thing so obscure as this is.

Besides therefore that secret and immediate Cause we have treated of before,
there are two other kinds, to wit, Next causes and Remote, and both of them are
either Natural, or Moral.

Of the Natural, the Next are, the Instinct, the Temperament, and the
Conformation of the parts. The Remote are, the Stars, the Climate, difference
of Age, of Sustenance, and indispositions of the body.

The Moral are, nobleness, or meanness, of Extraction, Riches and Poverty,
Power and Subjection, good and bad Fortune, and kind of Life, which comprehends
Arts, Sciences, Habits, and Counsels, Examples, Punishments, and Rewards. For
all these things raise particular inclinations, by disposing the Soul, to
judge, whether the things are good, and givng her a bent toward them. We are
now to consider how this is done.

Art. 2. That the Instinct is one of the causes of the Inclinations.
AS to the Instinct, there is no doubt, but that it must be numbered among the
said Causes, when it shall be found, that it consists in the Images, which have
their birth with the Animal, in order to its apprehension of those things,
which are necessary for its conservation, and whereof he cannot come to the
knowledge by the Senses. For as these Images are perfectly expressive, as being
perfectly present to the Soul; so, upon all occasions, they are the
Sollicitours and remembrancers of the Estimative faculty, that it would propose
them to the Appetite, and raise, in that, as we said before, the inclination it
has to the action, which they command should be done.

Thus is it, that the Soul apprehends, and is inclined to the functions,
whereto she is designed, and to a search after most of those things, which are
necessary for her. For thence proceeds the inclination which Birds have to
fly, Fish to swim, Men to discourse; and which all living Creatures have, to
seek out the sustenance and remedies, which they know are naturally fit and
profitable for them.

Art. 3. That the Temperament is one of the causes of the Inclinations.
AS concerning the Temperament, it is unanimously acknowledged by all, to be
the most general, and most eminent cause of the Inclinations; that, according
to that quality of the humors which is predominant in the body, men are
inclined to such and such passions, that such as are subject to Melancholy are
naturally sad, and ingenious; the Choleric, active and angry; the Sanguine,
jovial and affable; the Phlegmatic, stupid and slothful. As to Climates, there
are some, in which men are more ingenious, and more civilized; in others, more
dull and savage, according to the quality of the air they breath, and which
produces that effect, by the impression it makes upon the Temperament. Lastly,
that the very Animals themselves are fearful, or venturous, docile or
untractable, proportionably to the coldness or heat, the thickness or subtility
of their blood.

The reason, for which the Temperament is the cause of all these effects, is
deduced from the secret knowledge which the soul has of the instruments
whereof she makes use in her actions; for being so nearly united or joined to
them, she knows the weakness or strength thereof, and consequently is soon
satisfied what she may, and what she may not do by their means.

Now though this knowledge be secret, yet does it not proceed from the
instinct, for the instinct is a clear and distinct knowledge, which is bestowed
only on the species, and consequently ought to be common to all the individuals
that are under it, whereas this knowledge is different in every one of them,
and is withal obscure and confused. For the Soul has but a confused knowledge
of choler: and thence it comes, that she represents it to her self in dreams,
by certain Images, which do not absolutely resemble it, but have only a certain
conformity to it, such as are those of fire, fighting, bright colors, etc. She
does the same thing in Melancholy, which she figures to her self by specter,
obscurity, and inextricable disturbances; and so proportionably of the others,
as we shall press more particularly in the Treatise of the TEMPERAMENTS.

Now this knowledge, how confused soever it may be, is sufficient to instruct
the soul, how far she may be able to act, or not to act, by the assistance of
these humors. For it teaches her, by the experience she makes of it ever and
anon, that choler is an active and unconstant humor, and that it may be
serviceable to her, in assaulting, fighting with, and destroying whatever
injures her: That, on the contrary, Melancholy is not easily stirred,
troublesome, and opposite to the principles of life; and so of the rest. And
upon this knowledge, the Estimative faculty frames its judgment, conformably to
the effects produced by these humors, which it keeps in the memory, and every
foot, refreshes by new apprehensions, by that means rendering them perfectly
representative, and capable of producing the inclinati^ns, which we commonly
observe therein.

Art. 4. That the Conformation of the parts is a cause of the Inclination.
AS to the Conformation of the parts, I do not think any body doubts, but that
it is a certain sign of many Inclinations, in as much as it is observable,
that, without any art, but only, by the bare inspection of the lineaments of
the face, the humor and thoughts of some persons may be, in some measure,
discovered; That those men, in whom there is a certain resemblance to certain
other Animals, are inclinable to the same passions as they are; That such as
deal in Horses, and Huntsmen, consult it very exactly, that they may thereby
judge of the docility and tractability of Horses and Dogs; And lastly, that it
is come into a Proverb, affirming, that those are not to be trusted, who are
guilty of any strange default or miscarriage of Nature.

But I am further to add, that this Conformation of the parts is not only the
sign, but is also the cause of those inclinations, for it gives the soul a bent
to certain actions, as the Temperament does. Yet is it not to be said, that the
Conformation is the effect of the Temperament, and consequently, that it does
not denote the inclinations upon any other ground, then that it denotes the
Temperament, which is the true cause thereof, and not it. For though this may
be true, in many occasions, and that it is certain also, that ordinarily the
parts are lengthned, contracted, and assume several figures, according to the
quality of the predominant humor; yet does it very often happen, that the
Conformation agrees not with the Temperament, and that, for instance, a cold
complexion may be consistent with a Conformation, which seems to denote heat.
Accordingly the heart and brain are sometimes too great or too little in the
same Temperament; which must needs cause a notable difference in the passions,
over which those two parts have any power. Add to this, how many choleric
persons are there who have thick and short noses; and how many subject to
melancholy have them long and sharp, contrary to the nature of those humors?
Who would affirm, that all the Tartars and all the Chinese are of the same
Temperament, because all the former have large faces, and that the latter are
all flat-nos'd? Are there not some creatures of different species, that have
the same Temperament, and yet the figure of their parts is wholly different?

To be short, it is not the Temperament which penetrates the veins and
arteries which makes the articulation of the bones, divides the fingers; and
builds up that admirable structure of the parts of every animal. But it is the
formative virtue is the Architect, which the soul imployes to build up a body,
such as may be fit to perform the actions, whereto it is designed; and whereas
this virtue always endeavors to make the Animal it frames, like unto that
which produces it, if this latter have parts of such a largness and figure the
aforesaid virtue, which bears the character of it, always frames the like, if
it be not obstructed. It is true, that many times the Temperament opposes its
design, and hinders the parts from receiving that figure, which the formative
virtue had designed to give them: but many times also, it does not oppose, but
leaves it to act, according to the measures it has taken. Hence it comes, that
the imagination of Women with child causes it to change the figure of the
Embryo's parts, so as that the Temperament makes no opposition: Thus the Stars
imprint on the body such marks as are not correspondent to the natural
complexion thereof, etc.

Art. 5. How Figure acts.
ALl this presupposed, the next question is, to know, how Figure, which is a
barren quality, and does not act at all, may cause inclinations. Nor is it to
be imagined* that it produces them by an active virtue: for the Temperament it
self, though it have that virtue, yet does not employ it upon the soul, which
is not susceptible of material qualities: there being not any thing, that can
really either warm or cool the soul. So that both the Temperament and
Conformation of the parts, are only occasional causes and motives, which excite
her to the performance of her actions. When she has taken cognizance of the
heat which is predominant in the body; she frames her judgments conformably to
the effects, which she is able to produce, and afterward disposes her self to
set the organs on work, according to the design she has taken. The same thing
is to be said of Figure, she knows which is, which is not proper for certain
functions, she afterward makes her judgment of them, and lastly sollicits the
Appetite to move conformably to the resolution she has taken.

Now as there are some figures, which are fit for the motion of natural bodies;
others, opposite thereto; so is it certain, that every organicall function has
a certain figure, that is suitable to it, and without which it cannot be
otherwise then imperfectly performed. Thence it comes, that every part, nay
every species of living creature, has a different figure, because the
functions of it are different. And as the body, which should have been square,
and was consequently designed for rest, receives a property and aptitude to
motion, when it is reduced to a round figure; in like manner, when any one of
the organical parts, which should have been of such a figure, receives some
other, it is deprived of the disposition it had for the function, for which it
was designed, and acquires that which has some correspondence with the
extraordinary figure it has received.

The case is the same, as when an Artisan makes use of an Instrument, which is
not convenient and fit for the design he had proposed to himself; for instead
of doing what he intended, he does the quite contrary; he cuts off that which
he should have bored, he makes uneven, what he should have smoothed, and
whereas his design was to cast the statue of a man, he does that of a Lion, if
the mold he makes use of be such as may represent that creature.

Such is the procedure of the soul, when she has such organs as have not the
natural figure they ought to have. For there is nothing more certain, then that
man, as well as all other Animals, has a proper and peculiar figure, designed
by nature to every one of his parts. And therefore as the soul has an
inclination to perform the actions, which are proper to the organs, she ought
to have, so must it needs follow, that that inclination will be changed, when
the organ is changed.

But there remains yet a difficulty which seems nor easily resolvable. It is
this, that the soul knows, by the instinct, the action, which the organs ought
to perform, when they have the conformation proper and natural to them. On the
contrary, this cannot be said, when the organ has not the figure it ought to
have, because the Instinct gives her not the apprehension of the action, which
is not proper to her, since it is a particular default, and that the Instinct
is a general apprehension bestowed on the whole species.

To rid our hands of this difficulty, we are to observe, that the figure of the
parts is the effect of the formative virtue, and that the said virtue follows
the Temperament, or the impression, and image it has received from the animal
engendring. If it follow the Temperament, the figure is not the cause of the
inclination, it is only the sign of it, in regard the Temperament is the true
cause thereof, and in that case, the soul knows the action of the part by means
of the Temperament, as we have said before. But if it follow the impression, or
the image of the animal which engenders, the formative virtue is the cause of
the inclination, inasmuch as it is a faculty, which brings along with it, not
only the character of the parts of the animal engendring, but also the
disposition which it had to act conformably to their figure. And this is so
unquestionable, that, many times, the child betrays the same inclinations as
his parents had done before him, though he do not resemble them, the
Temperament having opposed the figure of the parts, yet not had strength enough
to deface the disposition to the inclination, which they had. Now it is
certain, that it is only the formative virtue which brings the character of
these inclinations, there being not any thing which the animal engendring
communicates to that which is engendered, but only that virtue, as several
modern experiences have made apparent.

Now as the formative virtue, which is in the organs of the animal engendring,
moves with those organs, so it acquires the same bent, and the same disposition
to move, which those organs have; so that, coming to frame another animal, it
carries along with it that very same disposition, which it has acquired, and
communicates it thereto. And whereas this disposition is as it were a weight,
continually pressing and soliciting the soul to move; the soul sensible of
that solicitation, at last frames the judgment conformable to the impression
she has received from it, and afterward derives it to the Appetite, which
entertains the same bent: and this bent is the true Inclination, in regard the
Inclination cannot be any where but in the appetite.

Art. 6. How Inclinations are produced by the remote Causes.
THus far have we discoursed of the Natural and Next causes of the
Inclinations. As to the Remote, they are all in a manner reducible to the
Temperament. For the Stars, the Climate, Age, Aliment, and the Indispositions
of body, have no other influence on the inclinations, then what is caused by
the alteration they make in the temperament. True it is, there are some
diseases, which alter them, by destroying the Conformation of the parts, as a
man, who is maimed in the hand or leg, looses the inclination he had to play on
the Lute, or dance.

As concerning the Moral Causes, they dispose the Estimative faculty to make
its judgments, according to the apprehension it receives from them, of the
strength or weakness they have: as Nobleness of birth, Wealth, good Fortune,
raise in men an inclination to Ambition, Pride, and Courage, in regard they are
persuaded, by the power they derive from them, that they deserve honors, and
that there is not any thing, which they may not attempt; whereas, on the
contrary, the inclinations arising from meanness of birth, poverty, and ill
fortune, are opposite to the other. All the rest, as course of Life, Arts,
Sciences, Virtues, and Vices, are grounded on Custom, which renders things
easy and agreeable, upon the recommendation of the profit or pleasure, that
may be reaped thereby. For all this being frequently represented to the
Estimative faculty, it makes favorable judgments thereof, which are preserved
in the memory, and at last cause the Appetite to incline, as we have shown
elsewhere.

But we must not in this place omit one advertisement, which is absolutely
necessary in reference to the subject we treat of. It is this, that, when we
speak of the Temperament, we do not understand only* by that word, the
conjunction and mixture of the first qualities, but our meaning is, to add
thereto the second qualities. And therefore we do not speak only of the hot,
cold, dry, or moist Temperament, but also of the Sanguine, Choleric,
Plegmatick, and Melancholic Temperament, in regard the humors, which give the
denominations to these Temperaments, comprehend these two sorts of qualities.
But, of all the second qualities, there are not any so considerable, in
reference to the Inclinations, as subtilty and grossness, for every humor may
be either subtle or gross, and a subtle Melancholy is more different from a
gross, then it is from choler. Accordingly, the effects of it are promptitude,
inconstancy, anger, as they are of choler; whereas the productions of the gross
melancholy are slothfulness, stupidity, obstinacy. And it is upon this
particular, that medicine has not sufficiently explicated it self, in the
division of the Temperaments; for it has set down but nine, one temperate, and
the other eight in excess, which might have been multiplied, by addition of
subtilty and grossness, and by the interchangeable mixtures, which may be
assigned in men; as the Cholerick-Sanguine; the Melancholick-Sanguine, etc. as
we shall show more exactly in the Treatise of the Temperaments.

Art. 7. Of the nature of Aversion.
Thus have we given an account of all we could discover in a business, which
happily is the most obscure, and most abstruse, of any relating to Animals. I
must, for my part, ingenuously confess, that I never met with any thing, more
hard to conceive, then the nature of the inclination, the manner after which it
is framed in the soul, and how it causes the Appetite to move. But if I have
performed what I aimed at in this disquisition, I may say, that I have made two
discoveries for one; for the reasons I have used to clear up these
difficulties, may also serve for those that may occur in the knowledge of
Aversion, and are in all respects like unto them.

Accordingly the term Aversion is not here taken for that motion of the
Appetite, which frames Hatred, but only for a Disposition and facility that it
has to assume that motion, the account we have to give of this, as to our
meaning thereby, being the same we have already given of the word Inclination.

Suitably to this explication, we are to affirm, that as the Inclinations are
either Natural or Acquired, so are there the same divisions of Aversion. The
Appetite also is the seat of both. All the same causes, whether Natural, or
Moral, or Next, or Remote, act therein after the same manner, and equally
dispose the soul to move. All the difference is, that they have contrary
objects, and that they always tend to contrary motions. For the inclination
looks only after things agreeable, and gives the soul a bent toward them; but
Aversion is for those that are unpleasant, and disposes the Appetite to avoid
them.

So that it may be thus defined, Aversion is a permanent Disposition, and a
facility attained by a long progress of time, which the Appetite has to recede
from certain objects, which are disagreeable thereto.

There is no necessity of any further explication, how the soul comes to attain
and contract this facility; for whatever we have said concerning that which is
in the Inclination is common to both.

CHAP. III. Of the Motions of the Soul.
SECT. I. That the Soul moves.
ALL people talk of the motions of the Soul; it is generally said, that she is
inclined toward the good, and avoids evil; that she grows resolute, or is
discouraged, at the meeting of difficulties; and there is no language but has
certain terms, whereby to express the agitations she gives her self: so that it
is a thing manifest, and such as ought not to be admitted into dispute, that
the soul can move, and that she effectually has such motions as are proper and
peculiar to her.

And certainly, as it is to be granted, that she ought to know the things that
are good and evil, and that this knowledge were of no advantage, nay would be
prejudicial to her, if she had not the means to enjoy the good, and shun the
evil; In like manner, is it necessary, that, with the said knowledge, she
should have the virtue of moving, that so she may approach the good, and recede
from the evil, which she knows.

Art. 1. What part of the Soul moves.
FOr this reason therefore has the Soul two principal flaculties; one, in
reference to her knowledge, the other, to her motion; which faculties are in
all the orders of the soul. For in the Intellectual Soul, the Understanding
knows, and the Will moves; in the Sensitive, the Imagination supplies the place
of the knowing faculty, and the sensitive Appetite frames the motions: And in
the Natural, there is also a certain virtue, which, after its manner, knows
what is good or bad for it; and an appetite which causes all the motions that
we observe therein.

Art. 2. That the motions of the Soul are not metaphorical.
THe greatest difficulty of all, is, to know, of what nature these motions are,
and whether the soul does effectually move, or that this is a figurative manner
of speaking, representing the actions of the soul, according to a certain
conformity, which may be between them and the motions of the body. For my part,
I am fully satisfied as to the question, and therefore affirm, (though contrary
to the Tenants of all Philosophy and the Schools, maintaining that they are
only metaphorical motions) that they are true and real motions, whereby the
Soul changes place, and puts her self into diverse situations.

Art. 3. That the rational Soul has a real motion, as the Angels have.
TO establish therefore this doctrine, which must serve to explicate the nature
of the Passions, we are, in the first place, to consider the motions of the
rational Soul. For if it can be shown, that, being wholly spiritual, as she is,
she nevertheless moves, it will be a great presumption for the others, which
are fastened and chained to matter.

Now to do this would be no hard task, could we but comply so far with
Theology, as to grant that Angels really move, that they pass from one place to
another, that they dilate and contract themselves, taking up a greater or
lesser space. For this verity presupposed, it may be inferred, that the
rational soul, which is of the same nature with them, ought to have the same
advantage.

But what, is not the soul dilated when a child grows bigger? Is she not
contracted, and restrained into a less space, when some members are cut off?
And when one dies, does she not depart out of the body, and remove into some
other place? Which, if it is not to be doubted, that she is susceptible of a
real motion, since that in all these, there is a change of situation and
place, as in the Angels.

And certainly it cannot well enter into a man's imagination, that being Noble,
as she is, she should be deprived of a virtue, which is common to all things
created. For there is not any body, but has the power to move it self, either
by the weight or lightness it has; all things having life grow and diminish;
all animals move of themselves; and if, to all this, we add the motion of
Angelical substances, it is not probable, the soul should be the only thing in
the Universe, that has not any motion, and should, of its own nature, be
immovable.

Art. 4. That the motions of the Will are real motions.
I imagine to my self there are few persons will oppose this kind of motion,
but they will happily object, that it is not in this the knot of the difficulty
consists; and that the question is, to know, whether the internal motions of
the Will, as Love, Hate, etc. are of the same kind with the forementioned.

To make our way into this deep and subtle part of Philosophy, we are to
presuppose, that all the intellectual substances, which are created, have
certain bounds and limits, in regard Immensity is one of the incommunicable
attributes of the Creator. Now, that which has limits, must of necessity have
extension, and that extension ought to have parts; for a man cannot conceive
limits without extension, nor any extension without parts, at least virtual and
assignab1e, as they are called in the Schools. True it is indeed, that this
extension, and these parts, are of another kind then those of bodies; for they
are spiritual, indivisible, and may be penetrated, without being subject to any
place, whereby they should be limited or confined: whereas those of bodies are
material, divisible, and impenetrable, and really take up place, which limits
and contains them. Upon this ground we may affirm, that the Rational Soul has
extension, and the parts that are proper to substances separated from matter,
that is to say, such as are spiritual, indivisible and penetrable, and that, by
their means, she takes up some certain space, wherein she is.

If the Soul moves then, as we have shown she does, as being movable in all its
substance, it is in her power, not only to pass from one part to another, and
take up another space, then that which she had before; but she may also,
without changing the place, or part where she is, cause her parts to move in
her self, after the same manner, as the water, contained in a Vessel, may be
agitated in its parts, without changing its place. For since she has parts,
and that those parts are movable, as her self, she may move such as she
pleases, and as she thinks fit. And thence it is consequent, that one appetite
may be moved, while the other rests, or suffers a contrary motion; as it is
said, that an Angel may have some parts that move, while others rest. When
therefore the Soul changes place, she makes that kind of motion, which is
called transient, which is like that which the Angels make, when they remove
from one place to another. But when she changes not, and is only moved within
her self, she makes the interior motions of the Will: for, according as she
either sends forth, or calls in her parts within her self; according as she
dilates or contracts them, she frames all the Passions, as we shall show
hereafter.

And certainly the Soul may, with just grounds, be compared to a great abyss,
which, without exceeding its bounds, suffers all the motion, which the tempest
can raise therein: one while it is violently forced against the banks, and then
immediately to recede again; another, it seems to be forced out of its
profundities, and then again to enter into them; but how impetuous soever the
tempest be, the other never exceeds its bounds.

The case is much the same with the Will, when it makes after the good, or
shuns the evil, it makes place for it self; if it go forward, or retreat, it
neither gains nor loses any thing of the space, which it took up, in so much
that it may be said, that it is already where it would go, and that it still
continues in the same place whence it went. For, in fine, we must necessarily
acknowledge, that there are in this vast and profound power many, and those
different, parts, which like waves follow one in the neck of the other, and
keep in motion the current, into which it suffers it self to be carried away.
When one is advanced to the highest pitch, another that follows takes its
place, which it as soon resigns to another, and so successively, till such time
as the Soul gives over moving!

True it is, that the agitation, which the Will raises in the spirits, and
humors, makes its motion last much longer then it intended it should: for when
they are gross and dense, the impetuosity, which they have received, cannot be
so soon calmed, as when they are rare and subtle, and the Soul suffers her
self to be carried away by the motion, whereby they are agitated. Thus is it,
that the Passions continue longer in Men then Children: for these latter pass
in a moment from joy to sadness, nay, when they give over laughing, we see the
lines and lineaments of the precedent laughter immediately vanished: whereas in
Men, they pass away slowly, and leave in the face, for the space of some
minutes, the impression they have made therein. For all this difference
proceeds hence, that the spirits of Children are more delicate and subtle, and
consequently, as all other things of the like nature, do not long retain the
violence of the motion, which is imprinted in them, and that those of Men,
being more gross, preserve them a long time.

How ere it be, according to the principle we have laid down, it may be easily
conceived how the Soul is moved in the passions, and the mind remains much more
satisfied with this manner of acting, which is conformable to that of corporeal
motions, then when it is affirmed, that there are no real motions in the Soul,
and that they are only Metaphorical, For, if by that word, it be not
understood, that they are not absolutely like the motions of the body, the
thing it self remains as obscure as it was before.

Art. 5. The Objections made against the motions of the Soul considered.
I Know very well, what Objections Aristotle made against Plato, who
maintained, as we do, that the Soul really moves I have also looked on those,
which the Schools have added unto Aristole. But there is but one answer to be
made to them all which, is this, that taking away the motion of the Soul, they
take away that of angels, upon which the same inconveniences, which are
attributed to the other, must necessarily fall, though, that Angels do move, be
a truth, not to be brought into dispute.

It is argued further, that whatsoever moves ought to take up some places, and,
as place, to have quantity; that the Soul has no quantity, since she is
indivisible, and wholly in every part of the body, and consequently that she
cannot move. Moreover, it is requisite that in all motion, what moves should be
different from that which is moved; and that the Soul, which is simple and
indivisible, cannot have things separate and different, and consequently, that
it is impossible she should move. But does not all this reflect on the Angels as
well as on the Soul, who, notwithstanding these reasons, are yet granted to
move of themselves? But when all is done, these maxims are proper only to
corporeal motions, and not to those of spiritual substances, as we learn in the
Metaphysics.

What might be objected of greatest weight, is, that Motion is, of its own
nature, successive, and that succession implies time, wherereas most part of
the Souls motions are instantaneous, that is, made in an instant. But we have
shown in our Treatise, Of Light, that there are real motions of those taht are
momentany; That those of Light, and those of Angels, which after they have been
contracted, resume their former dilation or extent, are so wrought; And
consequently, that the motions of the Will, being eminent, are of that order,
since it is a thing affirmed by many eminent Philosophers, that those Motions
of immaterial substances, which are transient, are made in an instant.

It is therefore a thing to be maintained as manifest, that the rational Soul
moves; That, being a limited substance, she has some extension, without which,
we cannot conceive any limits; That the said extension cannot be without parts,
and that those parts are movable, as well as the whole; That accordingly she
may move within her self, by moving her parts, and that thence proceed all the
interior motions of the Will.

Art. 6. The Motions of the Appetites.
NOw, if this be true of the Rational Soul, which is spiritual, it will be much
more easily comprehended to be so in the others, which are fastened to matter,
and there will be no question made, but that they are susceptible of the same
motions, in as much as motion belongs principally to things material.
Accordingly therefore, the sensitive and natural Appetites, suffer the same
agitations as the Will, when it loves, when it hates, etc. and these motions
are interior and immanent, and are framed in a moment* as those of the Will.

But what? will some body say, If these two Appetites are chained to matter,
there is a necessity the matter should move along with them; and how can matter
move in an instant? It may be said in the first place, that we are not to
imagine the matter, whereto the Appetite is chained, to be gross and weighty,
as most of the parts of the body are, but it is requisite that the power have a
subject proportionable to it self, and that the Appetite, which is the most
movable part of the Soul, should have a subject the most movable of any. Thus,
though the Appetite have its seat in the heart, yet it is not to be inferred,
that the whole heart is its first and principal seat. No, that seat is the
spirits, and that moist heat, which is the source of life, and ever in motion,
as Hippocrates affirms. So that it is not to be admired, the matter whereto it
is fastened, should so easily and so readily follow the agitation, which it
gives it self.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that matter does not always hinder things from
moving in an instant, in regard there are massy bodies, that do move so. For
it is not to be doubted, but that a weighty body, sustained in the air, makes
some effort to descend, that it presses upon the hand that stays it there, and
that a man feels every moment the impulsion which it makes therein, which
impulsion is, no doubt, a real motion.

Moreover, Light, which is a material quality, and requires a subject to
support it, does nevertheless move in an instant, as we have shown in its
proper place. Now, these two examples do not only make it manifest, that
material things are moved instantaneously; but they also give us a certain
apprehension of the manner, whereby the Appetite moves the Soul, and whereby it
moves it self in the body. For it may be said, that it is like a weight, which
thrusts the Soul to that whereto it would have her to go. And it moves in the
heart, as Light does in a transparent body; that is, it enters into it; it
comes out of it; it dilates it self in it; it also contracts it self; yet so as
the diaphanous body has no sense of all those motions, though it be the
subject, whereto the light is annexed.

The case is the same with the Appetite which, though fastened to its subject,
may dilate it self in joy, contract it self in grief, issue out of, and return
into, it self in love and hatred, and all, so as that the body suffers nothing
of all these motions. True it is, that the heart and spirits are agitated and
stirred in great passions; but, not to urge that they are effects which follow
and come after the emotion of the Soul, it is to be observed, that there are
some passions, which continue in the Appetite, without making any impression on
those parts. And this may suffice, to show, that the Appetite may move, so as
that the body be not changed thereby.

SECT. 2. How Good and Evil move the Appetite.
BUt in order to a more exact knowledge of all these motions, we are yet to
find out, what it is that engages and excites the Appetite to make them, which
is one of the most abstruse things, of any in the nature of the Soul, and the
most hard to be conceived, according to the maxims of the Schools, For, though
it be out of all controversy, that Good and Evil are the only objects, which
cause all the motions of the Appetite, yet is it not easy, to express the
manner, how it is done, since Good and Evil make no impression on the Soul,
otherwise then by the Images, which the knowing Faculties frame thereof, of,
and that those Images have not any other virtue, then to represent.

For, if that representation be not subservient to the knowledge of things, it
will not be any way useful to the Appetite, which is a blind power, and, as it
is affirmed, not capable of any knowledge. I am content that the Practick
Understanding, and the Estimative faculty should judge, whether things are Good
or Evil; that they should present them to the Appetite, and command it to move,
in order either to its union with them, or recession from them. But how does
the Appetite see? How does it know, when it neither sees nor knows any thing
but those Images, those judgments and commands being framed in the said
faculties? What is it that teaches the Appetite, that it ought, at that time,
to move after such or such a manner, in order to its union with the Good, and,
after another manner, to recede from the Evil, when it knows not whether the
Good or Evil have been presented to the Soul?

All these difficulties are the brood of two principles, which some have
brought into the Schools. One is, that the Images, which are framed in the
Soul, depart not out of the faculty, whereby they are produced: the other, that
the Appetite, of what order soever it be, has no^ any knowledge. And upon
these two foundations, they imagined that this inference must necessarily be
built, that the faculties act one after another, by a certain sympathy there is
between them, or by the direction of the Soul, in the substance, unto which
they are reunited. Now, we shall elsewhere make it appear, that these two means
cannot be maintained; and therefore some other must be found, to take away the
difficulties proposed, without destroying those principles.

We must then subscribe unto, as certain, That the Image, Idaea, and Conceit,
which the knowing faculty frames, goes not out of it; and that the Appetite, of
what order soever it be, has not any Animal knowledge, which it may frame by
Images, as the Understanding and Imagination. But it is as certain also, that
the Image, which the Understanding and the Imagination frame, produces another*
which is spread into all the parts of the Soul; And that the Appetite has a
natural knowledge, which is common to all things, by which knowledge they know
what is good, what evil, for them, as also the actions whereto they are
desig'nd.

Art. 1. How Knowledge is wrought.
TO make an absolute establishment of this Doctrine, it is to be presupposed,
that Knowledge is an action, and that, without doubt, the noblest of all those
that are performed in Nature, and that the Soul acts and does something, when
she knows. Now, in regard we cannot make any other conceit of Knowledge, then
as the representation of things, which is made in the Soul, it follows, that
the Soul, which acts, while she knows the things, must her self make this
representation, that is, frame the Pourtraiture and Image of the things. For
there is no other action then that, that the Soul can do in knowing, and so to
know, signifies as much as to frame the Image of the Objects, as we have shown
at large in our Treatise, Of the Knowledge of Animals.

Now, whereas there are several faculties that know, it is requisite, for the
reasons by us before alleged, that every one of them frame its image. For my
part, who acknowledge but three principal ones in the sensitive soul, to wit
the Sense, the Imagination, and the Estimative faculty, and two in the
Intellectual, to wit, the Speculative Understanding and the Practick, I must
accordingly allow, that there may be framed but five sorts of Images in
general. And though they all represent the same thing, yet are they different
one from another, not only by reason of the subtilty which they acquire by so
many different examinations, but also by that of the several circumstances,
which each of the faculties add thereto.

For the external Sense frames its Image, according to the model of the
sensible species, which come from without, and represents the object, with the
circumstances of Time, Place, etc. as a Whole, whereof it distinguishes not the
parts. From this first Image, the Imagination afterward produces, that which
is proper to it; but it distinguishes the circumstances, and the parts of the
object; it separates, or unites them; and so frames its judgments, which may be
called, in some sort, speculative, because the Animal makes no advantage of
them, in order to action, but only in order to knowledge. Then the Estimative
faculty makes its Image, according to the model of that of the Senses and
Imagination; but it adds thereto the notions of Good and Evil, which it also
unites, and which it separates, that so it may make the Practick judgment,
which is to move the Sensitive Appetite.

But if, after all this, there be a necessity, that the understanding should
take cognizance of the same object, according to all the precedent material
Images, it also frames its own, which is wholly spiritual, which it separates
from all material accidents, and whereof it considers all the parts, and the
relations it may have, uniting, or dividing them, in order to the making of
speculative propositions: And then it adds thereto, the notions of conformity,
or contrariety, goodness or evil, from which it frames the practick Judgment,
which excites the Will and Sensitive Appetite. All this would require a long,
elucidation; But it would not be proper for this place; and therefore let it
suffice, that we have given an account, in general, of the progress made, in
the business of Knowledge.

Art. 2. That the Images are multiplied.
BUt however the case may stand, this Image, so framed as before shown, of what
order soever it may be, is a quality, which, after it is once produced, is
multiplied, and diffused into the parts of the Soul, as was said before. For,
since there is not any sensible quality, which has not the virtue of
multiplying it self, and diffusing it se;lf into the air, and other bodies
susceptible thereof, as may be observed in light, color, sound, scent, etc. it
is not likely, that this, which is the noblest of all, as being the term and
effect of the most perfect action of all, should be deprived of an advantage,
common to all the rest. Besides, were it not for this multiplication, it would
be impossible, to give any reason, for most things that happen in Animals.

For example, we should not be able to comprehend, how the formative faculty
does sometimes change the order, which Nature has prescribed it, in the
Conformation of the parts, to follow the designs which the Imagination proposes
to it, without judging whether it ought to participate of the Images, which the
latter has framed, since there is so great a resemblance between its work and
the imagination. And as these images cannot get out of the Imagination, so is
it necessary, they should produce others like themselves, which should descend
to the lower part of the Soul, to design to her the figure which it is then
giving to the organs.

Moreover, if the Memory be a power, different from the Imagination, it is
necessary, that all the species, which it has in keeping, should be of this
nature, and the effects, and, as it were, the copies of those first Images,
which were produced by Knowledge, and which can no more pass from one power to
another, then any of all the other accidents.

In fine, there will be no ground to make any doubt of this truth, if it may be
shown, that after the ^mages of the Imagination are blotted out, there are
still found some remainders thereof in the other powers, and subsist there a
long time, after the others are lost. Now, besides that the proof of it is
clear in the Memory, which so preserves its images, is prejudiced by a too
intentive application of spirit, and grows less faithful, when the Imagination
would relieve it. It may be also drawn, from those marks, which Mothers give
their children, during their being with child; From that kind of Reminiscency
which remains in the fingers of a Lutinist, even after he has forgotten the
Lessons he could have played; And from those deep impressions and inclinations,
which certain objects leave in the Appetite and Will. For it is impossible all
this should happen, as it does, but that there must remain some Character of
these first Images, which the Understanding or Imagination frame, and are
preserved in those other faculties, a long time after the former are vanished.

Yet it is not to be imagined, that the faculties, into which thsee Images are
diffused, should be of the rank of the knowing faculties, because they have the
Instruments of knowledge, for we have shown in the place alleged, that a
faculty cannot know, but it must withal produce in it self the images of the
things. So that these, not producing the images which they have, and only
receiving them, as an effect of the first image, framed by the Imagination,
they cannot know it by a clear and perfect knowledge, but only, according to
that which is competent to all natural things, which, if we may use an odd kind
expression, Know without knowing, what is conformable or contrary to them. Thus
is it, that the Magnetic virtue, which is communicated to Iron, makes it know,
and sensible of, the presence of the Lodestone, and afterward excites it to
move, and make toward it.

When therefore there is an image framed, in any one of the knowing faculties,
it is, as it were, a Light, which is multiplied, and diffuses it self into all
parts of the Soul susceptible thereof Our meaning is, that that which is
spiritual is communicated to the spirial faculties, and that which is material,
to the corporeal faculties, and both kinds act therein according to the nature
of the faculty, into which they are entertained. For, if it be movable, as the
Appetite, that Image moves: if it has no action, as the Memory, it produces
nothing, but is only preserved in it: if it be alterative, as the formative
virtue, it serves for a model for the alteration, which it causes in the
members; and so of the rest. The case is the same with it, as with that
Magnetic virtue we spoke of before, which, though equally communicated to all
bodies, does not equally act upon them; it alters and moves the Lodestone,
Iron, and glazed Tiles, yet without causing any alteration or motion in all the
rest

If it be so, it will be no hard matter to affirm, how the Appetite, blind as
it is, may know Good and Evil, and move conformably to the nature of either.
For since the Im^ge, which the Estimative faculty, or Practick Understanding,
has framed thereof; is multiplied, and diffused through all the parts of the
Soul; the Appetite receives it, feels it, and afterward moves, as it ought, in
order to its union with the Good, or recession from the Evil, to its
assaulting, or opposing of it, according to the instruction received from the
Instinct, and the knowledge which all natural things have, either to be united
to that which is conformable, or to avoid and resist that which is contrary to
them.

SECT. 3. What are Motions of the Soul.
TO resume the Discourse we have interrupted, we say further, that, of what
kind soever the motions of the ^ppetite are, whether real, or metaphorical,
they are those which frame the Passions of the Soul. For though the Schools
have restrained that name, to the Motions of the sensitive Appetite, either by
reason of the violence they do Reason, or that the body sensibly suffers
thereby; yet, if we consider the agitation, which the Soul endures, we shall
find, that not only that which is made in the Will, but also that in the
natural Appetite, is like that, which the Sensitive Appetite suffers. For the
Will loves and hates, rejoices and is sad, as well a^ the other: and there are
in the natural Appetite, such motions as are answerable to those others, since
Nature seeks that, which is behovefull, and shuns what is prejudicial to it, is
satisfied, or troubled, at the occurrence thereof, is heightened or discouraged,
as we shall show more particularly hereafter. And as to the violence which the
Sensitive Passions do Reason, and the alteration they cause in the body, they
are the effects which they produce, yet enter not into their essence, but are
common to all the motions of the Appetite, of what order soever it be, and do
not always accompany the emotions of the sensitive Appetite.

Accordingly, as the Appetite is the principle of all corporeal motions, so is
it requisite, that it should be moved, before any Part of the body can be; and
consequently the agitation of the Spirits, which is observed in the Passions,
and causes all the changes, that happen in the body, is not wrought, till after
the Soul is moved. Moreover, the Motions of the Will are, many times, contrary
to reason, as well as those of the sensitive Appetite, and in the most
spiritual Passions, such as Ambition, Envy, etc. it alters the body, as well
as the other. Nay, it may be affirmed, that, in the motions of the natural
Appetite, the body sometimes endures a greater alterat^on, then in those of the
sensitive Appetite, as it appears in a Fever, which is the choler of the
natural faculty. To be short, neither does that violence, nor that alteration
always follow the emotions of the sensitive Appetite. Of these, there are some
conformable to Reason; there are some that remain in the Soul, and do not
descend to the corporeal faculties, as being raised up and dispersed so of a
sudden, that they have not the time to spread themselves into them. Whereto may
be added, that Angels are susceptible of love, hatred, joy, sadness, etc. as
Theology teaches.

Whence it may be inferred, that there is no ground, for the taking away of the
name of Passions, from the motions of the Will and natural Appetite, and
consequently, it may be affirmed, that all the motions of every Appetite are
Passions, since the agitation, which the Soul endures thereby, is equal in them
all, and that the end, which she proposes to her self therein, is, as to them,
also alike: for by them all she is agitated and moved, either toward the
enjoyment of Good, or the eschewing of Evil.

True it is, that these motions are called by diverse names, according as they
are more or less vehement. For, as we call those winds which are more then
ordinarily violent, by the name of Storms and Tempests; so, when the Passions
are great and extraordinary, they are called Perturbations. And certainly, it
may, with some ground, be affirmed, that the Passions are, as it were, the
winds of the Soul. For, as the Air, which continues in a constant calmness and
tranquillity, is unwholesom; and yet is purified by moderate winds, but if they
are too violent, they raise tempests in it: in like manner, the Soul, which is
not stirred by any passion, must needs be heavy, and of an unhealthy
constitution; and therefore it is requisite, it should be moderately agitated,
that it may be the more pure and more susceptible of virtue. But if it happen
that the passions become too violent, they raise in her such tempests, as
disturb Reason, confound the humors, and alter the whole constitution of the
body.

SECT. 4. Of the Number of the Passions.
THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN, Having promised to discover the motions of the Soul,
we now come to examine, how many ways it may be moved, and what number there
may be of the Passions, whereby it may be so moved. In order to the prosecution
of that design, it is to be presupposed, that every Appetite has two parts,
the Concupiscible, and the Irascible; by the former, it persues Good, and shuns
Evil; by the latter, it either opposes, or complies with, the difficulties,
which present themselves. For, as the Universe consists, and is full of things
contrary and opposite one to another; so is there not any thing can continue in
it, without meeting with enemies, which assault and endeavor to destroy it. So
that it was the work of the providence of Nature, to bestow on every thing, not
only the virtues, which were necessary for the execution of its ordinary, and,
as it were, domestic Functions, but also those, which should secure it against
the attempts of others, and prevent the violences which it might be exposed to
abroad. Upon this account it is, that all things have some qualities, conducing
to the preservation of their being; and others, enabling them to oppose what is
contrary thereto; and that the Animals, wherein these virtues are more
distinct, have bestowed on them two different Appetites; the Concupiscible, to
seek out what is convenient for them, and avoid what is hurtful; and the
Irascible, to resist Evil, to engage against, and destroy it, if there be a
necessity. In fine, the Irascible is that part of the Soul, which governs the
forces of the Animal, and manages them, according as the Evil seems to require
a weak or powerful resistance.

Now, these two parts of the Appetite may move either together, or distinctly:
for, in Grief, only the Co^cupiscible part is moved; in Courage, only the
Irascible; but in Anger, both are moved at the same time, in as much as Anger
is a combination of Grief and Courage. When they move distinctly, they frame
Simple Passions; when they move together, they make mixed Passions.

Art. 1. What the Simple Passions, and how many there are.
THe Schools set down eleven Simple Passions; i^ the Concupiscible Appetite,
six; to wit, Love, Hate, Desire, Aversion, Pleasure and Grief: and in the
Irascible, five to wit, Hope, Despair, Confidence, or Audacity, Fear, and Anger.

But we are to observe, that, in this division, Constancy is forgotten, which
is a real Passion, and serves for matter to the virtue of CONSTANCY, Patience,
and Perseverance, Obstinacy and Hardness; of heart; as also, that among the
Simple pasions, Anger and Hope are numbered, which, no doubt, are mixed passions;
the former, consisting of Grief and Courage; and Hope being framed of Desire
and Constancy. Moreover, Aversion is proposed, as a Passion distinct from Hate,
though it be the same thing. Nay indeed, Desire ought not to have been put into
the number, as being a species of love, and having not any motion, different
from that of the other.

Art. 2. That there aro but eight simple Passions.
HAving therefore taken off these four passions* and established Constancy in
their stead, there remain but eight simple Passions; four in the Concupiscible
Appetite, to wit Love, Hate, Pleasure and Grief; and four more in the
Irascible; that is to say, Audacity, Fear, Constancy, and Consternation, under
which Despair is comprehended,

Art. 3. Why there are but eight simple Passions.
THis is the natural division of the Passions, as being grounded on the several
kinds of motions, whereby the Soul is stirred: for since the Passions are the
motions of the Soul, it is according to the diversity of the motions, that the
Passions ought principally to be distingish'd. It is also easy to be
comprehended, by the consideration of the motions, which the Spirits suffer in
the Passions; for being like those of the soul, which communicates to them the
agitation that she endures, it is manifest, after how many fashions soever the
Spirits are moved, so many several ways is the Soul also moved.

Now the Spirits are susceptible of four motions, which are common to all
natural bodies, and are the first and simplest of all motions; to wit, those of
Ascent, Descent, Rarefaction, and Condensation. For when they issue out of the
heart, to spread themselves into the exterior parts, the motion is from the
center to the circumference, and that is, to ascend; and when they make their
retreat into the heart, it is the contrary motion, from the circumference to the
center, that is, descent: they are rarefied, when they spread and are dilated;
and lastly, they are condensed, when they are contracted in themselves.

The Appetite suffers proportionably the same motions; for though it changes
not place, as they do, and that its motions are interior and immanent, yet
does it nevertheless cause those parts to move, which are in the extension of
the Soul; so that, one while, it forces them to issue out; another, it makes
them retreat in again; one while, it dilates; another, it contracts them,

When therefore chese four motions are made in the concupiscible Appetite, they
frame the four first Passions, of that Appetite, to wit, Love, Hate, Pleasure
and Grief. For the Soul does as it were issue out of her self in Love; she
retires into her self in Hate; she dilates her self in Pleasure, and she
contracts her self in Grief.

But when the same motions are made in the Irascible Appetite, which is that
part, which has a respect to the difficulties that encompass Good and Evil,
they frame the four first Passions of that Appetite, to wit, Audacity, Fear,
Constancy, and Consternation. For in Audacity, the Soul issues out, as in Love,
in Fear, she retires, as in Hate, in Constancy, she contracts her self, and is
confirmed, as in Grief; and in Consternation, she dilates herself, and is
enlarged, as in Joy.

So that there is a resemblance, between the motions of both Appetites, and
they differ only in reference to the power, whereby they are excited, and the
end, which the Soul proposes to herself therein. For, in Love, the Soul issues
out of her self in order to the embracing of the Good she persues; but in
Audacity, she issues out of her self, to engage the Evil she would oppose; and
so of the rest, as we shall show more particularly in the Discourse of every
Passion, and as may be observed in the several definitions we shall give of
them, in the subsequent Article.

Art 4. The Definitions of the Simple Passions.
THere are therefore, according to the precedent deduction, four Simple
Passions in the Concupiscible Appetite; to wit,

Love, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul is inclined toward
the Good, in order to its union thereto.

Hate, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul separates her self,
and recedes from the Evil.

Pleasure, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul is dilated, and
spreads her self into the Good, in order to her more absolute possession
thereof.

Grief, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul contracts her self,
to shun the Evil that presses upon her.

The four other Passions, which belong to the Irascible Appetite, are,

Constancy, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the soul is fortified,
and grows resolute, in order to the resistance of those Evils which set upon
her.

Consternation, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul is weakened,
and gives way to the violence of the Evil.

Audacity, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul violently
bestirs her self against the Evil, to overcome it.

Fear, which is a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul retreats, and with a
certain precipitation, shuns the Evil, which she perceives coming upon her.

Art. 5. The definitions of the mixed Passions.
AS concerning the mixed Passions, which are made up of the Simple, and are
framed, when both the Appetites are moved at the same time, the most
considerable of them are these: 1. Hope. 2. Arrogance. 3. Impudence. 4.
Emulation. 5. Anger. 6. Repentance. 7. Shame. 8. Jealousy. 9. Compassion. 10.
Envy. 11. Agony.


Hope is a mixture of the desire of the Good, and the Constancy a man
expresses, in opposing the difficulties, whereby it is encompassed.

Arrogance proceeds from Self love, and the Audacity a man has to surpass
others.

Impudence is framed of the Pleasure and Confidence a man has to do unhansome
things.

Emulation is a mixture of Grief which a man is apt to be subject to, that he
is not master of those perfections, of which he imagines another to be, and the
Hope of being able to acquire them.

Anger consists of the Grief, which a man endures for an injury received, and
the Audacity he has to retort it.

Repentance proceeds from the Grief, which a man conceives for the evil he has
committed, attended by a Detestation of it; which may be termed a kind of
Audacity, as we shall show in its proper place.

Shame proceeds from a mixture of Grief, and Fear of infamy.

Jealousy is a confusion of Love, Hate, Fear and Despair.

Compassion consists of the Grief, which other men's misfortunes raise in us,
and a Fear lest we our selves may fall into the like inconveniences.

Envy, is a mixture of Grief, and a certain Despair of coming to the enjoyment
of that Good, which we see happens to others.

Agony is a mixture of Grief, Fear, and Audacity.

Art. 6. The Natural order of the Passions.
THe order, which all these Passions ought, naturally, to observe among
themselves; requires that the Simple should be ranked before the mixed, since
these last are but so many compositions of the others; as also that the
Passions of the Concupiscible part should have precedence of those of the
Irascible, in regard the Concupiscible Appetite, being employed about the
simple consideration of Good and Evil, and the Irascible considering the same
with the difficulties whereby they are encompassed, the said difficulties are
only subsequent circumstances.

But if we compare them, according to their particular kinds, Love and Hate
ought to have precedence of all the rest. For there is not any one of those,
which have the Good for their Object, but it is preceded, and accompanied by
Love, as all those that have Evil for their Object are the same, by Hate.
Accordingly, he, who is sensible of the Evil, or opposes it, who engages
against it, or shuns it, does infallibly hate it: in like manner, Love is the
first motion which the Appetite makes toward the Good as Hate is the first it
makes, in reference to Evil.

But what Love and Hate are in respect of all the Passions, the same is
Constancy, and Consternation, in respect of all the Passions of the Irascible
Appetite, whether they be simple, or mixed. For it is requisite, that the Soul
should be fortified, in Audacity, Hope, Arrogance, Impudence, Emulation, Anger
and Repentance: on the contrary, in Fear, Shame, Jealousy, Compassion and
Envy, it is expected she should be enlarged, or admit of some relaxation.

Love also has the precedence of Hate, because Good ought naturally to have it
of Evil, as the form precedes privation. Pleasure should also go before Grief,
in as much as the former proceeds from the presence of the Good, the latter,
from the presence of Evil. The same thing is to be affirmed proportionably of
Constancy and Audacity, in reference to Consternation and Fear. And according
to these rules, the mixed Passions ought to be ranked, as we have done it: for
Hope ought to be the first, because it consists of Love and Constancy, which
are the first Passions of both the Appetites. Arrogance has the next place, as
being a mixture of Love and Audacity; and so of the rest.

Art 7. That there are three Orders of the Passions.
NOw all these Passions, as well the Simple as the mixed, are of three Orders,
or Classes; for they are framed, either in the Will, or in the sensitive
Appetite, or the natural Appetite, each whereof has its distinct concupiscible
and irascible parts. But there is nevertheless this difference between them,
that those parts are more distinct, and more complete in the Will, then they
are in the Sensitive Appetite, and more perfect yet in this latter, then in the
natural Appetite. For there are some, especially of the mixed passions, which
can hardly be observed in the sensitive Appetite, and in case they be framed
therein, they are (if we may use that expression) but shadows and rude images
of those, which are raised in the Will. Accordingly, though Anger, Hope,
Arrogance, Jealousy, Emulation, and Envy are apparent in Beasts, yet are all
the rest but tricked and rudely drawn* and therefore it is not easy, to make,
in them, any observation of Shame, Impudence, Compassion, and Remorse, though
they may discover certain obscure lines and tracks thereof. But all, even the
Simple passions themselves, are so obscure in the natural Appetite, that never
any body yet gave them the name of Passions, though they be really such, and
ought to be so called, as we said before.

We are however to observe, that those Passions which belong to the Irascible
Appetite, are more apparent in the natural Appetite then the others: for it is
certain, that Nature opposes Evils, that she engages against them, that
sometimes she is discouraged, and quits the field, and there is not any thing
so common in Medicine, as to say, that she is stirred and provoked; nay, we
have shown elsewhere, that a Fever is the anger of the natural faculty, so that
it is not to be doubted, but that Audacity and Anger, Constancy, and
Consternation, are framed in that inferior part of the Soul. But as to those
of the concupiscible Appetite, they are not so manifest in it; neither are
Love, Hate, Pleasure and Grief, to be observed in it so sensibly as the others:
and yet there is a necessity they should be framed therein. For it is not to be
imagined, that the evil can be shunned, unless it be first hated, since Hate is
the first motion, which Evil excites in the Appetite. Neither can Anger be
without Grief, since it is part thereof. So that the natural Appetite is
susceptible of Hate and Grief, and consequently of Love and Pleasure, since
they are contraries compatible to the same subject.

Moreover, if nature knows and shuns what is hurtful to her, it is requisite
that she should also know and pursue that which is good for her; and this
cannot be done unless she have a love to it, since Love is the first motion
framed by the Appetite, in order to the pursuit of Good: and as the presence of
evil procures Grief to her so is it necessary, that the presence of Good
should cause pleasure to her.

But, as we said before, these passions are so weak and obscure, that the
senses cannot easily take notice of them; and indeed they are not easily
discoverable, otherwise then by reason and discourse.

The cause of this diversity proceeds not only hence, that these Appetites are
more inclined to motion, one then another. For the Will, being disengaged from
matter, moves more easily then the sensitive Appetite, and this more easily
then the natural, in regard it has, for its subject, a more subtle matter,
and consequently more inclinable to motion then it. But it proceeds also from
the more or less perfect knowledge, which directs them. For as the
Understanding knows more perfectly, and more things, then the Imagination, so
does it withal inspire the Will with a greater variety of motions, then the
other does; and this latter also, having a greater and more exact knowledge,
then the natural faculty, does accordingly frame more Passions in the sensitive
Appetite than there are in the Natural Appetite.

SECT. 5. How the Passions of one Appetite are communicated to another.
THere is yet another thing to be considered, which is of very great
importance, to wit, that the Passions, framed in either of the three Appetites,
are ordinarily communicated from one to another; so that those of the Will
descend into the sensitive Appetite, and the natural Appetite, as theirs do
ascend into the Will. For it is certain, that the Will does many times suffer
it self to be transported with the Love, Pleasure, and Grief, by which the
sensitive Appetite is stirred, in the same manner as Love, and the gladness and
sadness of the mind spread themselves into the body, and cause conformable
emotions therein.

But the difficulty is, to know how this communication is wrought. For it might
seem, since things material can have no action upon the spiritual, that neither
sensible goods nor sensible evils can touch the Spirit; nor consequenly, be
acceptable or delightful objects thereto. On the other side, though the
Understanding may heighten the Phantasmes of the Imagination, and render them
spiritual, yet is it not in the power of the Imagination, to change the Idaea's
of the Understanding, which are spiritual, into corporeal Phantasms: consequent
whereto it is, that the goods and evils of the mind cannot touch the sensitive
Soul, nor raise any Passion therein.

To answer these reasons, and resolve this great difficulty, we might affirm,
with the Schools, that there is a Sympathy between the faculties of the Soul,
and that they are so strictly combined together, that it is impossible, one
should not have a sentiment of what passes in the other; or happily, that, being
all reunited in the substance of the Soul, which is the Center and principle
thereof, and, as it were, the main wheel, which keeps them all in their several
motions; It is the Soul her self that causes them to act, one after another,
conformably to the actions that are to be done. So that, for example, the
Appetite moves, after the knowledge of Imagination, and the members move after
the emotion of the Appetite, in regard there is a certain sympathy betwixt
these faculties, or that the Soul excites them, and disposes them to act in
that order.

This being so, it would be no hard matter to tell how the Passions of one
Appetite pass into another, in as much as these powers acting one after
another, according to the sympathy there is between them* or by the particular
direction of the Soul, it is necessary, not only that the Soul should move,
after she has been enlightened by the Understanding, but it is also requisite,
that the Sensitive Appetite should stir after her; in the same manner as we
apprehend, that the Will is obliged to move, as soon as the Imagination has
excited some motion in the Sensitive Appetite.

But to deal ingenuously, we must acknowledge, that these opinions do not fully
satisfy the mind. For, besides that the word Sympathy is one of those terms
that serve to elude difficulties, and flatter our ignorance; it may be farther
pressed, that if, by it only, the rational Soul and the sensitive communicate
their passions to each other, it will be requisite, that there should not be
any passion in the latter, which does not ascend into the Will, and that all
kinds of sadness should be attended by grief, and in like manner all grief by
sadness. But this is not true; since they are only the greatest sadnesses
whereof the body has any resentment, and that light griefs reach not the mind,
and cast it not into sadness.

Besides, this Sympathy does not exclude that manner of acting, which is
natural to the faculties: it is an order established by Nature, that the
Sensitive Appetite should be enlightened by the ^magination, and that the
Imagination should take cognizance only of things sensible. How comes it then
to pass, that it should know the object of a spiritual passion? On the other
side, how are we to conceive, that the Understanding and Will, which are
spiritual powers, suffer themselves to be moved by corporeal objects? And how
can Grief, for example, be said to excite sadness in the mind, what Sympathy
soever may be imagined between these powers? In fine, Sympathy does always
presuppose some knowledge; for the Iron ought to feel the presence of the
Lodestone, that it may move toward it. And consequently it is requisite, that
every Appetite should know the judgment of the faculty, which enlightens it;
whereas, in the mean time, the Appetite is a blind-power, and such as has not
any knowledge.

Again, if it be said, that it is the substance of the Soul which sets these
faculties in action, which yet cannot be done without her having a knowledge of
the order they ought to observe in their actions, and a particular cognizance
of the manner, after which the Appetite ought to move in every passion; it will
follow, that the Soul ought to have in her self the knowledge of an infinity of
things, and that she should know them by her own proper substance, without the
assistance of any faculty; an excellency not to be found in any created Being,
and to be attributed only to Divine Nature.

Let us therefore endeavor to find out some other plausible means, whereby the
Body and Soul may be said to communicate one to the other, the good and evil
they resent. To do that, we are to observe, that the Mind, which is the
noblest, and most excellent part of Man, is also, as it were, King of that
little Monarchy, taking notice of whatsoever passes therein, that is worth the
consideration, and having a particular care of the Body, as being the
instrument of most of its actions, and, together with it, making up a Whole, in
the subsistence and preservation whereof it is no less concerned, then in its
own. In so much that it is not to be admired, that it should have a certain
sentiment of the good or evil things which happen to the other, and that it
should frame the same passions, which they raise in the Sensitive Appetite. And
this is no hard matter for it to do, in as much as it sees the phantasms, which
the imgination has made thereof, upon which, it frames its idaeas and
judgments, and afterward presents them to the Will.

By this means is it then, that the passions of the Body are ordinarily
communicated to the Mind. But the case is not the same with those of the Mind,
in reference to the Body, in as much as it is not by knowledge that the
Understanding communicates them to the Sensitive Soul, for the reason by us
before alleged; but it is immediately done by the motion, which the Will
imprints in the sensitive Appetite. For there is no inconvenience in affirming,
that the Will moves the Appetite, because motion is common as well to things
spiritual as corporeal; but in maintaining, that the thoughts of the
Understanding are communicated to the Imagination, there is, in regard
spiritual things cannot ever become corporeal.

To clear up this Proposition a little further, we are to observe, that the
Will has an immediate command and superintendency, over all the parts of the
Soul and Body, which are moved voluntarily. For it is in its power to move the
members, without any interposition of the Sensitive Appetite; it being
unlikely, for example, that, in a resolution which the Understanding has made
to stretch forth the hand, it should be requisite, that that motion be made by
the directions of the sensitive Soul, which has not any apprehension of the
object, or the motive of that action. Now, if it has this power over the
members, with much more reason shall it have the same over the Appetite, which
being nearer, and more apt to move, then they are, ought accordingly to be the
more subject thereto; and consequently, the Will may stir it, and imprint in
it the same motions which it has given it self.

Hence it also follows, that all those things which are in motion, as well the
corporeal as the spiritual, produce, in those others whereto they are applied,
a certain motive quality, which may be called Impetuosity, and that is, as it
were, an impression and communication of their motion. For, it is by this
communication, that the bodies, which are forced or darted, continue the motion
they have received from the hand, though they be at a distance from it. By the
same communication is it also, that Angels do enforce bodies, and chase away
evil Spirits, in regard they have not any virtue or means to act really and
physically on things, other then the motion they imprint in them.

This being certain, it follows, that the Will, which moves, should imprint its
motion in the sensitive Appetite, and that it should stir, yet so, as that the
latter stand not in need of any precedent knowledge of the imagination. For,
though it be true, that the sensitive Appetite cannot move, but it must receive
a previous illumination from that Faculty, yet is this to be understood only
when it moves of it self, and suffers no violence, by any other strange cause,
as it is here.

Now, as the Will imprints in this Appetite the emotion it gives it self; in
like manner, when this latter is stirred, it communicates its motion to the
Will, in regard that, whatsoever moves may imprint its motion on the things
which are near it, if they do not oppose it either by the weight, or some
contrary motion. For the Will and Appetite do many times oppose one the other,
by their contrary agitations; Nor do the members, and other bodies, always obey
them, by reason of their weight, which is stronger then the motion imprinted in
them by the Will and Appetite.

All that may be said hereupon, amounts only to this, that, in this case, the
motions of the Will and Appetite would not be vital actions, which cannot be
forced, nor proceed from without, but ought to issue from the ground of that
power, by which they are performed. But it may be answered, that the Will and
Appetite, having received that external motion, move themselves, and produce
their own, proper, immanent and vital actions, after the same manner, that a
man, who is thrust forward, moves afterward and goes of himself; or as he who
is forced to do something against his will: For his Will is immediately shaken,
by the violence that had been done him; but at last it consents thereto, and
moves it self, in order to the performance of the action. So that those
external motions which the Appetite and Will reciprocally give and receive, one
from the other, are not real Passions, while those powers move not of
themselves. But as there are some springs, or resorts, which immediately move
upon the least touch; in like manner, these faculties have such an aptitude to
motion, that as soon as ever they have received the impression one from
another, they are stirred, and produce real Passions. Not but that it happens
very often, they are shaken, yet do not move themselves; and no doubt, when the
Will, which would not be transported with any Passion of the sensitive
Appetite, does nevertheless feel a sweet violence, which gives her a certain
bent toward it, it may be said, that the Will then suffers the impression of
the motion, which it receives from the Appetite; but not that it does stir, or
that any emotion can be attributed thereto.

Now the difference there is between the Passions, which are thus excited,
consists in this, that the Understanding has an immediate sight of the object,
whereby the sensitive Appetite has been moved; But the Imagination, which
cannot know the object of the Will, observing the motion excited by this latter
in the Appetite, frames to it self an object and motive conformable to that
motion, and so renders the Passion complete, just as it does in dreams, in that
kind of Love which proceeds purely from Inclination, and in those Passions,
which Music inspires, as we have said elsewhere. For we have shown, that, when
the Soul observes, in the Appetite or Spirits, some motion, which is proper to
Passion, though she be ignorant of the object, which raises that motion, frames
to her self another of it, which is proportionable to that Passion. Hence it
comes to pass, that a man, who falls asleep upon his anger, represents to
himself, in his dreams, enemies and fighting, in regard the disturbance raised
in the Spirits is observed by the Imagination, which afterward frames to its
self objects, conformable to that motion.

The same thing may be said of Music, and the forementioned Love of
Inclination; for both of these imprint in the Spirits such motions, as being
like those of the Passions, cause the Soul, which takes notice of them, to
represent to her self such objects, as are proper to those Passions, and so to
frame the Passions themselves.

However it be, this is deducible hence, that when the Imagination has felt
the emotion excited by the Will in the Appetite, it frames to its self such an
object, as is requisite, for the producing of that Passion. But it is an
uncertain, and confused object, which does not precisely determine it; and
therefore it many times happens, that in such a case, a man cannot give any
reason why he is sad or merry, and though he be sensible of the Good or Evil,
yet can he not specify which it is.

SECT. 6. What is the Seat and first Subject of the Appetite.
BY all we have hitherto said, it is sufficiently apparent, that the Appetite
is the first Subject of the Passions, because they are motions, and that the
Appetite is the only part of the Soul, which moves. But as the Soul is the Form
of the Body, and the faculties have certain proper Organs, wherein they reside,
and where they act, we are now to examine, what part of the Body it is, which
serves for a Seat to the Appetite, and where it frames its first motions; for
this examination is necessary to our design, since we shall be ever and anon
obliged, to speak of the place, whence the Passions have their first rise.

We are then in the first place to suppose, that the Faculties of the Soul are
inseparable from its substance, and that wherever she is, they also are. But
in regard that, of these, there are some, which stand in need of Organs, in
order to action, though they are in all places where the Soul is, yet they act
only in their own Organs.

Those Faculties which are Spiritual, being not confined to matter, do not
stand in need of Organs, and consequently, they are, and act, in all places,
where the Soul is, as the Understanding and Will. For though the actions of the
Understanding are more apparent in the Head, and those of the Will, in the
Heart, then they are any where else, yet is it not to be conceived, that these
two parts are the Organs thereof; but, because the faculties, subservient to
them, are in those places, and that we commonly attribute, to those high
powers, the actions of those faculties which are subservient thereto, as we
attribute to the Prince, what is done by his Ministers.

But the case is otherwise in the Corporeal Faculties, for it is requisite,
that they should be restrained to some part of the Body, which serves them for
a subject, and instrument, in order to the performance of their functions. And
it is out of all doubt, that the Sensitive and Natural Appetites are of that
order; but there is a great dispute among Philosophers, to know, which is the
proper seat of either of them.

Art. 1. What is the Seat of the Sensitive Appetite.
AS to the Sensitive Appetite, we find by experience, that, in any Passion
whatsoever, the Heart is troubled and moved, and that there are very few, how
secret soever they may be, which may not be discovered, by the beating of the
Arteries. The ordinary manner of speaking, nay indeed Religion it self, will
have it, that this part should not only be a source of all the Passions, which
cause any alteration in the Body, but also, of all the affections and motions
of the Soul; so that we may affirm it to be the Seat, Subject, and principal
Organ of the sensitive Appetite.

But we see further, that in Insects and Serpents, the parts, after separation
from the Heart, discover sense and motion, when they are touched. Nay some have
observed, that, in the more perfect Animals, the Members move for a certain
time, after this part has been taken away from them. And we are assured, by
our late observations, that, before the formation of the Heart and Brain, there
is motion and sentiment in the Embryo. To be short, Hunger and Thirst are two
sensitive Appetites, and it is generally acknowledged, that the mouth of the
Stomach, and not the Heart, is the real subject thereof. Nay, there is no
sensible part can be so slightly wounded, as not to move at the same instant,
and yet it cannot be said, that the Heart is the cause of that motion. And
therefore, it seems probable, that the Appetite ought to be wherever there is
sentiment, since the Sense enlightens the Appetite, and that the latter cannot
move without it. And thence some have imagined, that the Brain, which is the
principle of sentiment, and the Organ of the Imagination, should also have the
same relation to the sensitive Appetite.

From all these observations it may be concluded, that there are two kinds of
sensitive Appetite; one, which is general and common, regarding the
conservation of the whole Animal, such as is that which frames the ordinary
Passions of Love, Hate, etc. the other, particular and proper to every part.
The first, no doubt, is placed in the Heart, which is the spring of Life, and
the Center, from which do proceed all the powers, whereby the Animal is
governed. The second has its seat in every part, as Hunger and Thirst, in the
Stomach.

But considering further, that these two Appetites are of one and the same
nature, having the same motions, the same objects, and the same end, and that
they differ one from the other, but as homogenial parts of the same whole, it
is accordingly requisite, that they should have one subject, which ought also
to be of the same nature; And consequently, it is necessary, that there should
be in the Heart, and in every part, some Organ, which may be common, in order
to its being the chief Subject of that Faculty, which is common to them.

To discover this, we are to remember, and reflect on what we said before, to
wit, that all the powers of the Soul are inseparable from her substance, and
that, nevertheless, they do not act wherever she is, but only in certain
parts. Now, this cannot proceed from any thing, but the particular disposition,
which those parts have, to be assistant to their actions, whether they be more
proper to receive the Impression of the objects, as for instance the Eye, which
ought to be transparent, that it might give passage to Light, and the visible
Species, and so of the other Senses; or that they are more proper to execute
the motion, which the Soul ought to make; as the Muscles are the instruments of
voluntary motions, in regard they consist of tendons and flesh, which are
capable of contraction, without which these motions cannot be made.

This presupposed, as a truth not to be brought into dispute, it is requisite,
that the part, wherein the Appetite has its immediate residence, should be
proper to the action it ought to do; and whereas there is no other action then
motion, it is also necessary, that the said part should have the dispositions
proper to motion. Now there is not any disposition more proper to motion then
Levity and Rarity, and consequently, it is requisite, that the Organ, and first
Subject of the Appetite, should be of a rare and light matter, and that it
should be present in all those places, where all the motions of the Appetite
are made. So that there not being any part, whereto this may be attributed, but
only the Spirits, it follows, that the Appetite has its residence in them, as
its first and chiefest subject.

But in regard there are two kinds of Spirits in general, those that are fixed
and restrained to some part, which are the first Bonds, whereby the Soul and
Body are joined together* and those, which are errant and unconfined, which
distribute to all the members, the heat particularly assigned them by the
heart: it is requisite, that they should be the fixed Spirits, that have the
Prerogative, of being the first subject of the Appetite, for it is the part the
most apt to motion, of any that enter into the composition of the Members; one
that has a durable and permanent consistence, as the Appetite, and is without
dispute animate; it being certain, that the faculties of the Soul cannot be in
a subject, which is not animate. For it is not to be imagined, that the errant
Spirits, which are not only deprived of Soul, and Life, as it is commonly held,
but also have not any durable subsistence, no more then the Flame, which as soon
as lighted is thence-forward continually decaying, can support a Faculty of the
Soul, which is fixed and permanent, as the Appetite is.

Whence it may be concluded, that the Heart is indeed the Seat of the general
Appetite, but it is, by reason of the fixed Spirits, which enter into its
composition; and the case is the same of every Member, in reference to the
particular Appetite.

Art. 2. The Seat of the natural Appetite.
ALl that we have said of the Sensitive Appetite may be applied to the Natural
Appetite. For of this also there are two kinds; one General, which has a care
of the whole Body, and is accordingly placed in the heart; and this is the same
with that which disperses the Spirits and humors into all the parts, which
shakes them in Fevers, and makes the Crises, and such like motions, which
regard the whole Body. The other is Particular, and has its Seat in every
part; it attracts what is good for it, it drives away what is hurtful, it
causes the contraction of the Fibers, the convulsion of the Nerves, etc.

But whereas the Sensitive Appetite is not placed in the Heart and other parts,
but upon the account of the fixed Spirits, which enter into their composition,
the case is the same with the Natural Appetite; they are also the same
Spirits, which serve it for a first subject, and first Organ, upon the same
grounds as they are so of the other. For since that part is the most apt to
motion, of any of the Vegetative Soul, it should accordingly have a Subject,
furnished with the dispositions proper to make its motions, and there are not
any other then these Spirits, as we said before.

I question not but some will make this Objection against what has been
delivered, That diverse Faculties require diverse Organs, and that these two
Appetites, being different, not only in the Species, but also in the Genus, as
belonging to several orders of the Soul, cannot have for their subject the same
Spirits. But it is easily answered, since we have experience on our side, and
opposite to these maxims: for the same animal Spirits dispose of sentiment and
motion; the same Substance of the Brain becomes the subject of all the
superior powers of the Sensitive Soul; and the flesh, as simple as it is, has
both the sensitive and vegetative virtue.

But after all, the motion of the sensitive Appetite is not different from that
of the natural Appetite, as to the nature and species of motion; it is made
after the same manner in both, and all the diversity found therein is
accidental, and not relating to the motion. For it proceeds only from the cause
and condition of the object that moves it, which are things not relating to the
motion. In the one, it is the Sensitive faculty, that moves for the sensible
good or evil; in the other, the natural faculty moves, for the natural good or
evil: but both move after the same manner, and frame the same Passions; as we
have shown, and consequently, there is not any inconvenience, that these two
powers should have the same Subject, in order to the same action.

We have not any thing to add hereto, save that, according as the parts have a
greater or lesser portion of these fixed Spirits, they have proportionably one
or the other Appetite more strong and vigorous. As also, that the general
Appetite and particular Appetite, do many times assist one the other, and many
times also they act distinctly. But we shall ever and anon have occasion to
hint at these matters, when we come to treat of the Passions in particular.

Art. 3. How the Passions are completed.
NOw to put a period to that which appertains to the general discourse of the
Passions we are to consider all the passes in the body, after the emotion of
the Soul, and the fixed Spirits. For though the nature of every Passion consists
in this emotion, yet may it be said, that it is not complete, if there be not
joined thereto the agitation, which the Heart endures, and the alteration which
is occasioned in the whole body.

We are therefore to observe, that, after the Soul has been moved, the Heart
and vital Spirits follow her motion; and if she would execute without, what she
has proposed in her self, she at last causes the Muscles to move, in the
Passions of the Will and sensitive Appetite, and the Fibers, in those of the
natural Appetite; in regard the Muscles are the instruments of voluntary
motion, as the Fibers are of that which is made by the natural Appetite. But
how these motions are made, we shall treat more at large in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of the Motion of the Heart, and Spirits, in the Passions.
THe motion of the Heart is made for the Spirits, and that of the Spirits, for
the whole Body. For the Heart is moved in order to the production and
conservation of the Spirits, and these are also moved, for the communication of
the vital heat to all the parts, to bring into them the aliment, whereby they
are to be nourished, and to transport the humors from one place to another, as
the Soul thinks it necessary; as it happens in the Passions, as also in Crises,
and upon other occasions.

That this may be the better comprehended, it is requisite, that we ascend to a
higher disquisition of things, and since there is so much spoken of the
Spirits, our next examination must be, to find out, what they are, of what
matter they are composed, and how they are framed. And indeed, it may be
affirmed, that neither Philosophy nor Medicine have sufficiently explained
themselves, upon this Subject, and the difficulties they have left therein give
every man the liberty, to propose his conjectures, in order to the clearing up
of a thing so obscure, and so intricate.

Art. 1. Of the Nature of the Spirits.
WIthout engaging our selves upon an exact disquisition of the Elements,
whereof bodies are composed, it is a thing both certain, and sensibly
acknowledged, that there are three sorts of parts, which enter into the
composition of all mixed bodies. Of those parts some are subtle, active and
volatile; others gross, passive, and heavy; and the third are moist, as being
designed to join together those two so opposite extremes. For they have
somewhat of the subtilty of the first, and of the grossness of the others; and
when these are resolved, the whole mixed body is destroyed, in regard they are
the cement, whereby all the parts are united together.

Those subtle parts are called Spirits; inasmuch as they have so little
matter, and so much activity, that they seem not fit to be ranked among bodies;
and while they are united with the others, they serve for principal Organs to
the forms, as being the most active parts; and they are as it were the bond,
which keeps them within the body. The reason whereof is, that Nature, which
ever joins the extremes by a certain mean, that has some rapport thereto,
employs the subtle parts, which have little of matter, to join and unite the
forms, which have not any, to the grosser parts, that have much.

True it is, that they may be separated, and yet be afterward conserved, as we
find by experience, in distillations; for so it is, that the Spirit of Wine,
Sulphur, etc. is extracted. And being so extracted, though they lose the use
they had when they were united to their natural forms, yet do they not lose any
thing of their substance, or subtilty.

Art. 2. Of the matter of the Spirits.
NOw as Plants are nourished by the juices which they draw out of the Earth, so
have these juices their subtle and spirituous parts, as well as all the other
Mixed bodies: which parts, not being lost, as we said before, pass into the
Animals, which feed on those Plants as those of the Animals pass into such, as
they become nourishment to. So that it is not to be doubted but that the blood
is full of these subtle essences, which the natural heat afterward digests
and refines in the veins, to be made the instruments of the Soul: and that they
are the matter used by Nature to frame, and entertain the vital Spirits; since
subtle things are to be made of those which are of the same nature with them.

Art. 3. How the Spirits are framed.
BUt to find out the secret of all this Economy, we are to represent to our
selves, that the blood, which is in the Hollow Vein, enters into the right
ventricle of the Heart, where it is warmed, by the heat and motion of that
part, which is the hottest of any about the body. After its being warmed there,
it issues out boiling and reeking, and enters into the Lungs, where it meets
with the air, attracted in by respiration, which by its coolness thickens the
fumes, which it exhales from all parts, which fumes are no other then the
spirituous parts, wherewith it is filled, and which, upon the accession of the
least heat, are separated and evaporated. So that Nature does, in this, what
commonly happens in the distilling of Aqua-Vitae, in which work, there is cold
water cast about the Recipient, as it were, to gather together, and reduce into
a body the spirits of the wine, then changed into vapor, and to promote their
passage along with the others. Thence it comes, that the vein, which carries
this reeking blood into the Lungs, is as big as an Artery, as it were to
prevent the dissipation, which might be made thereof, before it be so cooled.
On the contrary, the Artery which receives it, after it has been cooled, is as
small as any vein; there being not then any fear of dissipation. And it is not
unlikely, that this is the reason, why that Artery has but two valvula,
whereas the other Vessels which enter into the Heart have three. For as these
valvulae, whatever some others may be pleased to say, were made only to prevent
the impetuosity of the blood, which is to enter into the heart, and afterward
to come out of it; so was there not any necessity that the veiny Artery should
have so many obstacles, to retain the impetuosity of the blood it carries, in
regard it must needs have left much thereof, after it has been cooled, and
temperated, by the air, which is in the Lungs.

But however it be, hence proceeds the indispensable necessity of respiration;
for if those parts of the blood, which are so reduced into fumes, should not be
condensed, and reassume a kind of body, they would be immediately dissipated:
And whereas this must be the matter of the Spirits, as being the most subtle,
and most pure portion thereof, there would not be made any new generation, if
nature had not found out a means to condense these vapors, by the coolness of
the air, which is continually attracted by the Lungs. Thence it comes, that
there is no possibility of continuing long without respiration, in regard that,
all parts of the body standing in need of the continual influence of the
Spirits, it is requisite, the Heart should continually repair them, and that
cannot be done without respiration, for the reason we gave before.

Art 4. An Objection against the precedent Doctrine answered.
I Know well enough that the common Doctrine would have the Air to enter into
the composition of the Spirits, and that natural heat, nay indeed fire it self,
stands in need of air to moderate them, as not being able to conserve
themselves without it; And that this is the reason why respiration is
necessary, in regard it conducts air to the Heart, and moderates the excessive
heat thereof. But we are taught by Anatomical observations, that there is not
any vessel, which conducts the air into that part, and that the veiny Artery,
which was heretofore conceived to serve for that use, is always full of blood,
and does undoubtedly convey, to the Heart, all that which is entered into the
Lungs. Besides, it may be urged, that Fishes have their vital Spirits, though
there be not any air, which may contribute to their production. True it is,
they have the motion of the Gills, as also of the holes, at which they sprout
out the water, and that is answerable to that of the Lungs, and causes the same
effect, with the water, which they ever and anon attract, as the Lungs do, with
the air they respire.

Yet is there not any thing to be deduced hence, which may imply my not being
of opinion, that the air respir'd, which is all full of these spirituous parts
exhaled by all bodies, do not furnish the vital Spirits, with some portion of
themselves, which being mixed therewith passes and insinuates it self into the
Heart and Arteries, through the Pores of the Vessels. Hence it comes, that
Animals are sensible of the qualities of the air, which they respire; and
Hippocrates affirms, that the most sudden nourishment is wrought by odors. But
this is a thing happens by chance, and is not to be admitted into the design of
Nature And as to the cooling or refreshment, which is caused by the air, it is
not intended to moderate the excess of the heat; but for the reason given by us
before, which is common to fire and the spirits: For the coldness of the air
condenses the exhalations which should be enflamed, it gathers them together,
and hinders their rarefaction and dispersion. And therefore, when it is very
cold, the fire is the more violent and scorching, in regard the matter of the
flame suffers a greater contraction; And the light of the Sun diminishes the
heat of the fire, in regard it rarifies and disperses the exhalation, which
feeds it. Not but that the air does moderate the heat of the Heart, when it is
violent; but that is not the main end, at which Nature aims; it is only a
slender service, and convenience, which she derives, by the by, from her
principal design.

But howere it be, this is certain, that after the blood, which came out of the
right ventricle, has traversed the Lungs, it is discharged into the left,
where, it may be said, it is returned into the furnace, and is stirred and
agitated afresh, and where its more subtle parts are so refined, that they
acquire all the dispositions, necessary to Spirits, to make them vital, and
then they are endu'd with the form and virtue thereof, and assume the place and
function of those, which have been distributed to the parts.

Art. 5. Why the heart moves.
FRom what has been delivered, it may be inferred, that the motion of the
Heart serves for the generation of Spirits; But that that should be the
principal motive, which obliged Nature to give it that motion, is what cannot
be easily affirmed. For, in a word, all Animals have those sorts of spirits,
but all have not that motion; so that this may be stood upon, that it is not
absolutely necessary to their generation.

For my part, I am of opinion, that, in this, Nature had a greater regard to
the conservation of the Spirits, then to their production For whereas chings
are conserved by that which is conformable and natural thereto, and that motion
is natural to the Spirits, which are of a fiery nature, and proportioned to the
Element of the Stars, as Aristotle speaks; it is accordingly requisite, that
they should be in perpetual motion, as those bodies are. And in effect, we
cannot stop the motion of fire without quenching it, and all those things,
which hinder the Spirits from moving, as Narcoticks, and fullness, deprave them,
and destroy the Animal. It therefore concerned the providence of Nature to find
out some artifice, whereby the vital Spirits should be continually stirred, to
the end they might be conserved by that which is most proper and natural to
them. And there could not be a more commodious way found, then the motion of
the Heart and Arteries, which ever and anon excites and awakens the Spirits,
which are intermixed with the blood. For that humor being gross and heavy,
there would have been some danger of its smothering them by its weight, if that
miraculous ressort, which gives a continual motion to the arterial blood,
should not hinder that disorder. Hence it comes, that the arteries always
accompany the greater veins, that their agitation might excite the Spi^its,
which are mixed with the blood; the lesser veins standing not in need of that
attendance, by reason of the small quantity of humor which they contain, as
such as is not capable of hindering their motion. And in those Animals, which
have no blood, that motion is neither so sensible nor so necessary, in regard
the humors there are more subtle, and for the most part are only serosities,
which are in a more easy subjection to the Spirits.

It was therefore the principal intention of Nature, to bestow motion on the
Heart, in order to the conservation of the Spirits; yet with this precaution,
that it hinder not, but that she may employ it to other uses. For, as a frugal
and provident Housewife, she makes that which is necessary to her main design,
to be subservient also to other conveniences, which, were it not for that, she
might have been without: Upon this account is it, that she employes the motion
of the Heart, to subtilize the matter of the Spirits, to force away the
impurities that are therein, to moderate the heat thereof, which might become
excessive, and to force the Spirits to the extremities of the Arteries, so to
disperse the heat and vital virtue into all parts. Now of all these employments
there are certain advantages, yet are they not absolutely necessary, since all
this is done in many Animals, without any motion of the Heart.

Art. 6. That the Spirits are moved for three ends.
TO resume our discourse of the motion of the Spirits, we said before, that it
was designed for the communication of the vital heat to all the parts, to
convey into them the blood, whereby they are to be nourished, and to translate
the humors from one place to another, as it happens in the Passions, in
Crises, and upon such other occasions.

As to the first it will be no hard matter to prove it; for it is generally
acknowledged, and sense and reason teach us, that all the heat and vigor of
the parts proceeds from the vital Spirits, which are produced by the Heart, and
as soon as this influence ceases, they become cold and languishing.

Art. 7. That the Spirits convey the blood into the parts.
BUt for the conveyance of the blood into the several parts, there are not any
Philosophers that have made it the employment of the Spirits, but it is
generally attributed by them, either to the impulsion which it receives from
the beating of the Heart, or to some attractive virtue, which draws it forth
into every part. It is therefore requisite we make it appear, that these
opinions cannot be maintained, and that it is the proper work of the Spirits,
to dispose it into the veins. For there is a necessity, that it should be
either forced out, or attracted, or conveyed; so that when it shall have been
shown, that there is not any thing whereby it is either forced out, or
attracted, it will follow, that there must be something to convey it, and that
only the Spirits can be capable of the employment.

Most of those, who maintain the circulation of the blood, do not admit of the
Spirits, at least as bodies distinct from the blood, and affi^m, that it is not
moved in the veins, but only by the impulsion which it receives from the
beating of the Heart, and that it admits not of any motion, but that which
proceeds from the effort of that part. We shall not make it our business to
oppose this circulation, and, though it be accompanied with great difficulties,
yet may it nevertheless be affirmed that it is true, and that it is effectually
wrought, though happily not after the same manner, as is held by the maintainers
thereof. It is sufficient, for the prosecution of our design, to show, that the
beating of the Heart is not the cause of the blood's motion, especially that
which comes into the veins. For, that done, it will be easy to make it appear,
that they are only the Spirits, which can transport it to the places whither it
goes, and consequenlty, that they are bodies distinct from the humors, which
follow the motions of the Soul, and not that of the Heart, and may be moved by
an agitation different from that of the latter.

Art. 8. The heating of the Heart forces not the Blood into all the Parts.
IT being supposed then, as the Patrons of this opinion would have it, that the
Heart, by a certain compression, or contraction of it self, drives out, into
the arteries, the blood, which it has received into its ventricles, and that,
by the violence of that motion, it forces it even to their extremities, so to
make its passage into the small veins which are near them, and thence into the
hollow vein, and at last to the Heart, whence it afterward passes back again
into the arteries, and then into the veins, perpetually running out of one into
another, by a continual circulation:

This, I say, being s^ppos'd, it might be said, that there is some probability,
that this impulsion, which it receives from the Heart, may cause it to flow
along into the arteries, but it can never be conceived, how this impulsion
should be continued even into the veins, after that its force has been checked
and broken, by so many windings, and so many obstructions which the blood must
needs meet with in its way.

What! it shall open the mo^ths of the vessels; it shall force its passage
through the fleshy parts, as they pretend; it shall surmount the impressions
which the air and other external causes every moment make in the parts; and
after all this, by virtue of that first impulsion, it shall reascend to the
Heart with the same agility that it descended thence? But this is a thing
cannot enter into a man's imagination. I am content, that, as it passes through
the small vessels, the compression it suffers therein may continue the
impetuosity of its motion; but that it should be so when it flows into the
greater veins, and the spaciousness of their channels gives it more liberty, is
a thing which cannot be affirmed, without a defiance of experience and reason;
and there is a necessity, it should have the same fate, as rivers and torrents,
which, flowing out of a narrow into a broad channel, abate much of the
impetuosity of their course.

And certainly, if the beating of the Heart and arteries causes the blood to be
thus moved, Nature has forgot her self extremely, that she gave not the same
agitation to the veins, especially those in the lower parts, where the blood is
more gross and heavy, and has so great a way to get up to the Heart. For there
it is, that the cause and instruments of this miraculous transportation ought
to be the more powerful, having a greater and heavier weight to conduct, nay
indeed to force upward, then is the arterial blood, which is more subtle, more
susceptible of motion, and, at that time, only descends downwards.

It may then be conceived, that those, who first advanced this opinion, never
considered, that fluid bodies cannot long conserve the virtue and impulsion, if
it be not extremely strong, and that that which is made in the Heart is too
weak, to maintain the motion of the blood in so long a course, and through so
many obstacles; That if it were forced out, as they pretend, it would so much
swell the veins, that they would always seem full and stretched out,
especially when it should be forced to ascend: And, in fine, that, opening the
veins, it should issue out by certain sallies and reiterations, as that which
comes out of the arteries, since it is the same impulsion that makes both move,
and that we find in Water-Engines, that the water always flows proportionably
to the violent shocks it received at the entrance of its channel.

But why should there be imagined in the veins a motion of the blood,
different, not only from that which is made in the bones, into the depth
whereof it penetrates, in order to their nourishment, but also from that which
conveys the sap of plants to all their parts? For this sap, and the blood, we
speak of, is the last Aliment, whereby they are sustein'd, and therefore it is
but one and the same Faculty, that has the direction and conveyance thereof;
and Nature, who loves uniformity in all her operations, will not easily change
this, since it may, and ought to be performed, after the same manner.

Moreover, if the impulsion be the only cause of the motion of the blood, it
must be also the same of all the natural motions, whereby it is agitated. And
yet that transportation of the humors, which Nature makes in Crises, and the
regularity punctually observed by her, when she conveys them from one place to
another, depends on another principle. For the violence done in the Heart,
ought to be equally communicated to all the vessels, and cannot determine the
blood to flow toward one part rather then another. How shall it then cause it
to ascend to the left nostril, in Inflammations of the Spleen, rather then to
the right? Shall it be also the impulsion that shall force choler to the
Intestines, in Fluxes without inflammation? And convey the serosities to the
skin, in critical sweats? For all these sorts of motions proceed from nature,
and are made, or at least begun in the veins, though the beating and impulsion
of the Heart and Arteries contribute nothing thereto.

To conclude, since Nature multiplies not the ways of acting, in those
operations, which are of the same kind it is necessary, that she cause the
blood to ascend by the same virtue, whereby she causes the chylus to do so,
making it to pass out of the Intestines into the Vessels, and afterward
conducting it, to those places, where it is necessary. Now, I do not think
there is any body will affirm, that the beating of the Heart contributes ought
to this motion, as having no communication with the Intestines, at least so
great as to force the chylus upwards; and consequently, it may be said, that
the blood is no more moved then it, by that impulsion.

We must therefore find out some other cause then that, whereto we may referr
not only the ordinary transportation of the blood, and all its other motions,
which, though they seem extraordinary, are nevertheless natural thereto, as
those which happen in the Passions; but also those of the chylus, and the other
humors which are moved in the body. Now after we have thoroughly examined all
the ressorts and instruments which Nature may make use of, to that purpose, it
will be found, that she cannot employ any other then the Spirits.

Art. 9. That the blood is not attracted by the Fibers.
WE shall not here bring any thing upon the stage, concerning Attraction,
though it were the only means, whereby the Ancients were of opinion, that the
motion of the blood was to be wrought, inasmuch as it is an imaginary motion,
which opposes reason and experience.

Nor indeed can it be conceived to be done but two ways, to wit, either by
some Boay, which, touching the blood, brings and draws it to it, or by some
Magnetic virtue, which may be in the parts, and spreading it self into the
vessels, seizes on, and drags it toward them, much after the same manner, as
the quality of the Loadstone draws iron, and causes it to approach it. And
these two ways of attraction have bred two opinions, which ever since the
birth of Medicine, even to the present age, have been followed by some or other.

For some have imagined that the straight Fibers; which enter into the
structure of the veins, had the power of attraction, and that it was by their
means the blood was conveyed to the several parts. But they never considered,
that when some body is to attract a fluid and slippery thing, there is a
necessity it should touch it, that it should seize on it, and retain it in all
its parts; otherwise those which shall be at liberty will escape, and will not
be attracted. Of this we have an experiment, when we would take any liquor with
our hand; for those parts which shall not be comprehended within the hand will
get away and not be gathered in with the rest. Now it is certain that the
Fibers touch only the superficies of the humor which is in the vein, and so
whatsoever is in the bottom of the vessel will slip away, notwithstanding all
their endeavor to retain it.

To this we may add, that the Fibers have no other way of attraction, then by
straining and compressing the veins; and if so, then would the senses perceive
something of that motion, as they do of that of the Intestines, which is made
after that manner. Whence it follows, that, since we do not see any sign
thereof, how strong soever that contraction and compression of the veins might
be, for the making of that motion, there is just ground to imagine, that it is
not made after that manner.

But what absolutely decides this question, is, that the aliment of Plants is
conveyed by their channels after the same manner, and by the same virtue as the
blood may be in Animals, and yet their Fibers suffer no such contraction as is
imagined in the veins. It is requisite therefore, that we find out some other
means, whereby the moisture, which nourishes them, may ascend into the
branches, and withal such as may be found also in Animals, to convey the blood
into all the parts.

I add further, that the bones attract (as the common expression has it) their
nourish^^nt, without any assistance of the Fibers, and that sometimes the blood
is so violently moved in the Passions, that this pretended motion of the Fibers
cannot be any way answerable to that swiftness, as being made but slowly, and
by successive contractions, which require much time, in so long a
transportation and conveyance, as that of the blood is.

Art. 10. That the blood is not attracted by any Magnetic virtue.
AS to the other opinion, which admits a Magnetic virtue, though it has been
more generally received, yet is it not confirmed by any other reason then the
weakness of the precedent, and the impossibility it imagined to it self, of
finding any other means then these two to make the blood flow into the veins.
So that it is maintained only upon the account of certain examples and
instances, as that of the Loadstone, which draws iron to it, and those of some
purgative Medicines, which attrract the humors, and some others of the like
kind. But this is a very weak proof, and such as the very ground thereof is of
little certainty; since we pretend to make it apparent, that neither the
Loadstone, nor purgatives, nor any other thing whatsoever, have any attractive
virtue.

But whether it be maintainable or not, the Patrons of this opinion ought to
suppose, as they have done, that this virtue is in every particular part, since
there is not any but does, as they affirm, attract blood for its nourishment.
The case being thus laid down, they may be asked, Whether all parts have this
virtue equally or not? For if it be equal in all, there being superior and
inferior parts, it is impossible the blood should march up into the superior
parts, in regard the inferior have as powerful an attraction as the other;
there being no reason, why they should follow the impression of the one rather
then that of the other. On the other side, if there be any parts have this
virtue in a higher degree then others, they will attract all the blood to
themselves, and that just distribution, which ought to be made thereof all over
the body, will never be perfected and completed, since it must needs be
obstructed, where that Magnetic virtue is most vigorous. For, to explain it by
the example, it must be done in the same manner, as is observed in the iron,
which being placed near several Loadstones will always make toward that which
is most attractive. Besides, if it be true, that the influence of natural
virtues is performed by direct lines. How is it to be imagined, that the
Attractive virtue shall observe that regularity in the innumerable turnings and
windings of the veins and arteries? What intermixture, or, to say better, what
confusion will there not be in the vessels, wherein every part will spread its
Magnetic virtue?

To conclude, if the conformity of substance be the groundwork of this
Attraction, as is affirmed by the maintainers of the foresaid opinion, how is
it to be conceived, that the blood, which is altered and corrupted, shall be
able to flow into the veins? By what means shall the mineral waters, which
admit not coction, and are incapable of receiving the form of blood, be able to
pass wholly pure into the vessels? What conformity or sympathy can we imagine
between all these substances, which are so different among themselves, and the
Liver, or the Heart, or any other part, which attracts them to it self? And
lastly, why should the blood ever go out of the body, since that quality
attracts it inwards, and that it should be like the powder of steel, which the
Loadstone holds fast and suffers not to fall?

Art. 11. That there are not any Attractive virtues.
BUt I shall proceed further, and affirm, that it is an error to imagine,
there are, in Nature, any of these Attractive virtues; she acknowledges not any
other then that which is wrought by the motion of the body, and so all those
things which are said to be attracted by these qualities, are moved by another
kind of motion, then that of Attraction. And indeed, who can easily conceive,
that a simple quality should be able so of a sudden, and so powerfully to offer
violence, to things solid and weighty? What motion can have an incorporeal
virtue, to go, and find out, and bring away massy bodies? How is it to be
apprehended, that, contrary to all other qualities, which advance forward, this
only should return back? Would there not be a necessity, that, while it brings
back the bodies, which it draws after it, it should quit the space where it
found them, which yet continues still full of the same quality?

True it is, and must be acknowledged, that the Loadstone has a magnetic
virtue, which it diffuses out of it self. But this virtue is not attractive, it
only causes in the iron a certain feeling of its presence, and thereupon, the
iron makes toward it of it self, as it is in like manner inclined toward the
iron. For if they be both set on the water, so as that they may freely swim on
it, they will approach one another, if they be of equal force; and if the iron
be the more weighty, or that it be stopped, the Loadstone only will move
toward it. So that it is clear they draw one another no otherwise, then as it
is said the Sun draws the vapors, which, by reason of their lightness, ascend
of themselves, after they have felt the heat.

Art. 12. That there is not any attractive virtue in Purgative Medicines.
NOr is it by Attraction that purgative Medicaments do operate. For, of these,
these are some, which cause vomiting, being applied to the soals of the feet,
and other inferior parts; then which there cannot be a more certain argument
of their not attracting the humors, since that, instead of obliging them to
come to themselves, they cause them to make a contrary motion. Besides, the
purgative virtue, being a natural Faculty, should attract the humors which are
conformable and consonant to it self, in what subject soever they are found;
whereas, far from that, it attracts them not at all in bodies which are weak or
deprived of life. And indeed those, who have more exactly examined the manner
how purgation is wrought, have shown, that purgatives have no other virtue then
that of dissolving and separating the humors, as the Rennet does the parts of
the Milk; And that the separation being made. Nature, being incensed thereat,
expels and drives them out; So that the evacuation thereof is wrought, not by
Attraction, but Impulsion.

Art. 13. That Grief and Heat are not attractive.
THere are yet others who affirm, that grief and heat are attractive; but they
are only the Spirits, which Nature sends with the blood, into the parts, for
their support and assistance: And this is no true attraction, no more then that
which is made by a vacuum. For a privation, which, in effect, is nothing,
cannot have any virtue. But in this case, the bodies put themselves forward, to
prevent a disorder, which Nature cannot bear withal.

There are not therefore any Attractive virtues, and consequently, we are not
to look for any in Animals, in order to the causing of any conveyance of the
blood into the veins.

But there remains this yet to be urged, to the particular in dispute, that it
is true, the Blood is not attracted, but that it moves of it self, as does the
iron, which is sensible of the magnetic virtue of the Loadstone, and that
having in like manner a certain feeling of the sympathetical virtue, inspired
by the parts, it is, of it self, inclined toward them. It must be acknowledged
this expedient would do pretty well, if this sympathetical virtue could be well
established. But how shall we imagine it can subsist in such different
subjects, as Plants and Animals are, or members of a different constitution and
temperament, such as are those of sound and unsound or diseased parts? Nay,
though it should be granted in them, What alliance can there be imagined
between that virtue, and the blood, which is often altered or corrupted;
between it, and the mineral waters which are drunk; in fine, between it, and
the poisons, which are dispersed all over the body?

Nay, when all is done, neither this means, nor any of the others that have
been proposed, does satisfy the regularity which Nature observes in the
motions of the blood, nor most of the agitations it suffers in the Passions of
the Soul; nor yet the transportation of the chylus and other humors, which is
wrought in the body: So that there is a necessity of having recourse to the
Spirits, as the general cause of all these effects.

And certainly, whereas the Blood moves not of it self, and that whatsoever is
moved by another must be either forced, or attracted, or inclined; neither
impulsion nor attraction having any place here, it is accordingly necessary,
that some Body, which has the virtue of moving it self, should combine with
it, and convey it wherever it goes. Now, since we know that the Spirits are
the chief instrmments of the Soul, sent by Nature to all the parts, to dispose
them to action, mixed by her with the blood to render it fluid, and which she
insinuates even into the humors against Nature, as well to concoct, as force
them away; there is no question to be made, of their being the transporters of
the moisture which is in the Vessels, since they are beforehand in them to keep
them fluid, and that there are not any other substances, which may be mixed with
them, to convey them to the places, whereto they ought to go* And consequently,
that they are bodies most susceptible of motion, which, being animated, or
immediately moved by the Soul, are the only instruments that can move the
blood, in all the differences of situation, which we observe therein.

Art. 14. That the Blood is conveyed to the parts only by the Spirits.
FRom what has been delivered, it is apparent, that in the ordinary course of
the Blood, the Spirits are the only instruments, which cause it to ascend
without trouble, descend without precipitation, and direct and convey it into
all the parts, nay even to the depth of the Bones, for their nourishment. By
the same Spirits it is diversely stirred in the Passions, according to the
different designs, which the Soul proposes to her self; they convey it to the
wounded parts to relieve them, and confine it to an exact observance of that
rectitude and regularity which is remarkable in all its motions. In a word,
Nature is the principle and source of all these operations, and that Nature is
no other then the Soul and her Faculties, all which stand in need of Organs, in
order to their action, and can have no other then the Spirits, whereto all
these effects may be referred.

They are therefore intermixed with the Blood; and as the Air, being stirred,
carries along with it the vapors that are got into it; or as the exhalations
of the Earth raise up the matters that are joined with them; so the Spirits,
having received the motion and direction of the Soul, carry away the blood and
humors to all those places which they have orders to convey them. For it is
not to be doubted, but that an economy so just, and so regular in the variety
of its operations, is guided and governed by some power which has a
pre-eminence above the elementary, virtues, and participates of that secret
intelligence, which God has been pleased to entrust the Soul withal, for the
conservation of the Animal. It is therefore she alone that causes the Spirits
to move, and gives them orders for the conduct of the humors.

SECT 1. Of the animation of the Spirits.
THe difficulty now remaining is, to know, how the Soul causes the Spirits to
move; whether it be, as instruments, separated from the Body, or as Organs,
animated by her. In a word, the question is, to know whether they are animated
or not. The common opinion is for the Negative, and maintains, that they are
only distinct instruments, which communicate the virtue of the Soul to the
parts, and are themselves guided by the direction they receive from her, as the
Arrow, which is shot by the Archer, and flies toward the mark, at which he
took his aim. But if we consider this Direction a little more narrowly, as also
the manner whereby it may be made, we shall find all this to amount to no more
then fair words, which do not explain the thing, but leave in the mind a
thousand difficulties inducing it to affirm the contrary.

Now, if this Motion and Direction ought to be given to the Spirits, as to
distinct instruments, it is necessary it should be done in the Heart, which is
the place where they have their birth, and from which they derive all their
force and virtue. Nay, it is further requisite, that the whole mass of Spirits,
which issue thence, should receive the same impression, in as much as they are
not divided one from the other.

If it be so, this question will arise, How it comes to pass, that some of them
go to one place rather then another? As also these others, How comes it, that
in one Passion they are directed to the forehead, as in Love? How in another to
the eyes, as in Anger? How in others, to the lower part of the cheeks, and the
ears, as in Shame? How happens there a greater confluence of them on the
ind^spos'd parts, then on those which are sound and well? For as in the
springs, the impetuosity of the water is equally communicated, to all the
channels or rivulets, and that the art of the Designer cannot make the water
flow into one rather then another, if they be all equally open; so can it not
be conceived, that the Spirits should rather go to one part then another, since
the several branches of the Arteries, through which they are to flow, are all
equally open.

Moreover, he who shall consider, how that, in Anger, they choose out the
venom, which is in the veins, that it may be conveyed to the teeth of Animals;
how that in diseases, they discern the humors, from which they have proceeded,
to the end they might be forced out; will easily find, that there is not any
direction of the Soul, which can satisfy all these effects, and there is
requisite a vital knowledge and discernment, such as cannot proceed from any
other then an animated instrument. For if any should affirm, that the soul
makes this discernment and choice, there will follow a necessity, that she
should be mixed with those humors, that so she may be able to separate them,
and they will be forced to acknowledge, that the Soul is in those humors,
which will be a far greater inconvenience then to maintain the animation of the
Spirits. Now, we have already shown, that it is by their means these motions
are wrought.

We may add further, that the Direction of things forced or thrust forward
does only regulate their motion toward the mark, whereto they are to tend; it
does not diminish ought of the impetuosity which has been imprinted on them
and it is necessary their motion should persist to the end, with all the force
the mover has given them. And yet the Spirits go many times to other places,
then those whereto the Soul had ordered them to repair, when they received her
first impulsion; And sometimes, in their course, they move more vigorously, or
more faintly, then the impetuosity they had received might require. For
example, in Shame, they have order to spread the blood over the whole face, as
it were to cover and conceal the Soul from the infamy ready to fall on her: and
yet they cast themselves on the extremities of the ears, and the lower part of
the cheeks, contrary to her first design. Many times they begin a Crisis of
sweats, which they end by Urins, and some times they grow faint and retreat, in
the conflict wherein Nature had engaged them.

It may be more closely urged, that the Soul does not only cause the Spirits to
advance, but she also makes them retreat; she dilates them, and contracts them.
And if so, what shall this pretended Direction do upon all these occasions? How
shall it cause them to rally about the heart, when they have straggled from it?
There must then be supposed some Attractive virtue, whose work it shall be to
seize on them at the extremities of the Body, and bring them back to their
first rendezvous. But we have made it clear, that this virtue is but an
imaginary one, and that, however the case stands, there must be some subject to
convey it to the place, where it ought to do its operation; which is not to be
imagined.

There is yet a greater difficulty, in assigning the manner, how the soul is
able to dilate and contract them, when they are at some distance from the
heart. For there is not in nature any impulsion or direction whereby these
motions may be communicated. There is is only Heat and Cold that can do it; and
whereas these qualities require a considerable time, for the performance of
their action, it follows that they cannot be causes of that dilatation and
contraction of the Spirits, which are wrought of a sudden. Add to this, that
there is a necessity, the Soul should send these qualities into the vessels, to
produce that effect; and that in Fear, for example, she should cause Cold to
rise, to make a contraction of the Spirits; which can neither be said, nor
imagined, without absurdity. For if the Cold be discovered in some Passions, it
is not a cause of the contraction of the Spirits, but the effect of it.

In fine, it is generally acknowledged, by all the great masters of Medicine,
that the vital, sensitive, and motive faculties are conveyed to the parts by
the Spirits. And Experience confirms this truth, in as much as life, motion, and
sentiment cease in them, when they have not a free passage into them. How can
this be done, unless they be animate? for the faculties of the Soul are not
separated from her. Some indeed have maintained, that they conveyed not the
faculties, but only a certain quality, which put them into the exercise, and
without which they could not act. But they do not make it out, of what nature
that quality is, and there is no great probability, that one single quality
should relate to so many different faculties and functions.

But how ere it be, the greatest Philosophers, who have examined these matters
to the bottom, have found themselves so much at a loss, to give a reason of
the motion of the Spirits, according to the common opinion; have ingenuously
acknowledged, that it is one of the hardest things to comprehend of any in
Nature; and all they have said thereof has neither satisfied themselves, nor
those who would have followed their sentiments.

What inconvenience then is there, in maintaining, that the Spirits are
animate, since that position takes away the difficulties which arise in others,
and that there is a necessity, the Organs, which act with so much discernment,
and move in all situations, and perform so many different actions, should have
in themselves a principle of life?

Art 1. Objections answered.
ALl this presupposed, there remain yet two things which hold the mind in
suspense, and keep it from giving an absolute consent to this truth. One is,
that there is no likelihood, that bodies, which are in perpetual motion, and
disperse themselves every moment, can be animate. The other, that life, which
ought to be common to all the parts, cannot be found in those that are
separated from their whole; and that the Spirits are of that rank, as having
not any union or continuity with the solid parts.

As to the former, it is not certain, that they always disperse themselves, so
suddenly as is affirmed* Those Spirits, which conduct the blood through the
veins, are conserved a long time, and make the same circulation as the other
does; and it is frequently observed, that after they have applied themselves to
some part, and there acted, according to the orders of the Soul, they fall
back, and return to their source. But be it granted that they should so
disperse themselves, why may they not be nevertheless animate? The long
continuance is not a disposition necessary to life, and there are some parts,
as the softest pieces of the Flesh, which, in a short time after they have been
animated, may be resolved and dispersed by a violent heat. As soon as the
Spirits have acquired the dispositions necessary for their being instruments of
the Soul, she insinuates her self among them, and animates them. When they are
dispersed, or have lost the continuity which they ought to have with their
principle, she leaves them, after the same manner, as she does other parts that
are separated from the Body.

But what! Can the Soul animate such a simple and homogenious body as the
Spirits are? Why not, since she animates the radical moisture, the Flesh, the
Fibers, and all the other similar parts? When it is said, that the Soul
requires an organical Body, it is meant of the whole Body, which she is to
animate, and not of its parts, which ought to be simple. Nay, indeed there was
a necessity, that, as most of these parts are fixed and solid, so there should
be some apt to motion and subtle, to perform the several functions, for which
it is designed; and since the Soul is always in action, it was requisite she
had an Organ that should continually move.

Art. 2. The union between the Spirits and the Parts.
AS concerning the union there is between the Spirits and the other parts,
there is no doubt to be made of it, since the least interruption that happens
therein causes an immediate cessation of the actions of life. For hence proceed
faintings and swoundings, and Syncopes, in the excess of joy and grief, the
Spirits being forced with such impetuosity, that they lose the continuity,
which they ought to have with the Heart. Hence also proceed Apoplexies, by the
interception of the veins, as Hippocrates speaks, the matters which are therein
contained obstructing the fluxion of the Spirits, and interrupting the union
which was between them and the others.

But with what can they be united so as to participate of the union which is
common to the whole body? It is no doubt with the spirituous parts, which enter
into the composition of the Heart: it is with the fixed Spirits, which are of
the same nature with them. And it is possible this may be the end for which the
beating of the Heart serves. For by the agitation it gives them, it makes them
penetrate one into another, it binds, and soders, and cements them together, if
we may use such expressions of things so subtle.

Art. 3. How the foresaid union is consistent with the intermixture of the
Spirits, with the blood and humors.
ALl that is now left to give occasion of doubt, is, that the Spirits are
intermixed with the blood and humors, and that it is a hard matter to
comprehend, how, in this intermixture, they can conserve the union which ought
to be between them. But to take away this, we are only to represent to our
selves the light which passes through the clouds, for it has certain beams,
which cannot pass through them, and those that make their way through, appear
at certain distances one from another, yet so as that not any one of them loses
the continuity which it has with the luminous body. Or, not to go out of the
order of Bodies, the case is the same, as in those exhalations, which are
intermixed with the Air; they have several lines which are diffused of all
sides, but those lines have commonly a continuity with the matter, from which
the exhalation proceeds.

The same thing is to be imagined in the Spirits; for they issue out of the
heart as a mass of beams and spirituous lines, which scatter themselves on all
sides, and penetrate into the humors, yet without any division from their
principle And this is the more easily imagined, in that, besides the difficulty
which things of the same nature find to be separated one from the other, the
Soul, who knows, that this interpretation of the Spirits must cause a cessation
of all actions, does all that lies in her power to pr^vent it.

But whether the Spirits be animate or not, certain it is that they move, and
that it is the Soul which gives them their motion. For though it may be said
that they derive their agitations in the Passions from the Heart, by reason it
opens, shuts, dilates and contracts it self, as they do, and that it is most
likely, that it, being the principle both of life and the Spirits themselves,
should also be the same principle of a^l their motions: yet we know by
experience, that there are many Passions raised in the Soul, so as that there
can be no change observed in the beating of the Heart and Arteries, though no
doubt but the Spirits are therein agitated. And indeed they are bodies so
light, and susceptible of motion, that the least agitation of the Soul must
needs stir them. Which thing cannot be said of the Heart, which is massy and
heavy of it self, and has a function so necessary to life, that it ought not,
without great necessity, or a great effort, to interrupt or disturb it.

In light Passions therefore the Spirits only are agitated and stirred; but
when they become strong, not only the Spirits, but the Heart also follows the
emotion and disturbance of the Soul.

SECT. 2. Why the Heart and Spirits move in the Passions.
BUt what end does the Soul propose to her self in all these motions? What
advantages can she receive thereby? It is not to be doubted, but that as she
has a design to be united to the good, and to shun or oppose the evil, so does
she employ these Organs to attain those ends, and believes, that the motions
she puts them upon are absolutely necessary thereto. And it is true, there are
some which produce the effect she expects from them; but there are also some,
that contribute nothing to the obtaining of her desires. For example, when, in
Anger, the Spirits separate the venom and the choler, and convey them into the
teeth and tusks of animals, it is certain, they are so many offensive arms fit
to assault and destroy the enemy. When, in Love, and Joy, the Spirits stir the
purest and gentlest part of the blood, that is conformable to the condition the
Soul is in, which then requires only agreeable objects, and would not be
disturbed by the agitation of choler and melancholy, which are troublesome and
malignant humors. And so it may be affirmed, that, in all the other Passions,
the Spirits are put upon such motions as are conducible to the designs of the
Soul, as we shall make it appear, when we come to discourse of every one of
them in particular.

But, for one of this nature, there are a thousand others which are no way
advantageous, and which rather serve to discover the precipitation and
blindness the Soul is in, then to obtain what she proposes to her self. For,
that the Heart opens and dilates it self in Love and Joy, that it shuts and
contracts it self in Fear and Sadness: That the Spirits should diffuse
themselves, and issue out in the former, and that they should retreat and draw
up together, in the latter; all this contributes nothing toward the attainment
of her end. I know, her persuasion is, that opening the heart, she makes a
freer passage for the Good to enter in; that, shutting it, she excludes the
Evil; that, commanding the Spirits to march out, she imagines, that she comes
nearer the objects, and ordering them to retreat to the Heart, she is at so
much the greater distance from them.

But the troth on it is, that neither Good nor Evil enter into the Heart; and
the motion of the Spirits causes not a greater or a lesser distance between the
Soul and them, then there was before. For, it being acknowledged, that she is
spread over the whole Body, she is already where the Spirits conduct her, and
quits not those places, from which they endeavor to remove her.

Yet are we not much to wonder at the error she falls into upon those
occasions; for having not an exact knowledge of all things that concern her,
she is surprised, by the unexpected arrival of the Good and Evil, which present
themselves to her, and in the distraction they put her into, she does all that
lies in her power, she bestirs her self, and sets her organs in motion,
according to the aim she takes; and, among many things which contribute to her
design, she does an hundred others, that are of no advantage thereto, nay may
be prejudicial. In the actions which are ordinary to her, and have been
ascribed her by Nature, she is very seldom deceived; for she regularly commands
the Spirits into the parts, to inspire them with vital heat, to supply them
with the blood whereby they are to be nourished, to make the evacuations which
are necessary; it being the instinct which guids her, and justly appoints her
what she ought to do. But when this assistance fails her, she does as a man who
punctually executes what he finds in his Instructions, but is extremely at a
loss, when he is to do something which he finds not in his papers. He then
regulates himself, according to what he had done before upon the like
occasions, and being in have, he hazards the success of the affair, which
sometimes comes to a good period, but most commonly happens otherwise then the
man had imagined,

The case is the same with the Soul, when Good and Evil surprise her. For she,
not finding, in the instructions of the Instinct, what she ought to do, upon
such occasions, proceeds according to her ordinary manner of action; she causes
the Spirits to advance forwards or retreat, as she is wont to do, in the
necessary actions of life; and considering the precipitation she is in, and the
little knowledge she has, she has neither the time nor discernment, to see
whether they will be advantageous or disadvantageous to her design.

SECT. 3. What Faculty it is that moves the Spirits.
IT is therefore manifest, that the Soul causes the Spirits to move, to the end
they should communicate the vital heat to all the parts, that they should
supply them with the blood, whereby they are to be nourished, and that they
should transport the humors from one place to another, when she thinks it
necessary, as it happens in the Passions, in Crises, and others. The question
now is, to know, what part of the Soul gives them their motions, whether the
Vegetative or the Sensitive? As to the distribution of the vital heat, and
aliment, as also, for the transportation of the humors in diseases, it is most
certain, that the Vegetative soul is the principle of all these actions. But
the difficulty still remains, concerning the motions of the Spirits in
Passions. For, on the one side, it seems, that the sensitive Soul ought to move
them, since she it is that excites the Passions, that they move in effect, with
a respect to the sensible Good and Evil, and that they propose to themselves
the same end as she does. On the other side, the motions of the sensitive Soul
are voluntary, and may, or may not, be made, at the pleasure of the animal, as
may be seen in the motion of the Members. In the mean time, that which the
Spirits suffer is necessarily made, and the Soul can neither excite nor hinder
it, when she pleases. So that it seems, that belongs to the jurisdiction of the
Vegetative Soul, and that in the association there is between the faculties,
and the mutual assistance they give each other, this latter is joined with the
Sensitive, to promote its possession of the good, or recession from the evil,
which presents it self to her.

Notwithstanding these last reasons, whereto it is no hard matter to answer, we
must stick to the former, which prove, that it is the Sensitive Soul that
causes the Spirits to move in the Passions. True it is, that the motions of the
Vegetative are many times joined with hers, as we find by experience, in
extraordinary Griefs: but it is, when the Good and Evil are considerable, and
make so deep an impression, that they force their way quite to her: for when
they are light, she is not moved thereat, and leaves the Sensitive part to act
alone, which yet fails not to stir the Spirits.

In effect, they are the general Organs of all the functions of the Soul, and
all the faculties, what order soever they are of, equally employ them in their
service. They are serviceable as to life, sentiment, motion, nay reason it
self, and in the highest meditations, they are stirred, as well as in natural
actions. They are like an Instrument, whereof diverse Artizans make use, in
several works. For as the same pair of Compasses, wherewith a Mason has taken
his measures, serves the Geometrician, to draw his figures; and the Astronomer,
to measure the Heavens and the Stars. So the Spirits, which have served the
natural faculty, for the meanest actions of life, are employed, by the
sensitive Soul, in the animal functions, and the Understanding it self makes
use of them, in operations of the highest consequence.

But what! their motion is not free in the Passions, as it might seem it ought
to be, if the sensitive Appetite were Director thereof, as it is of voluntary
motions. It matters not, since even the Animal Spirits, which flow through the
nerves, to make those motions, and no doubt are moved by the sensitive
Appetite, have not their motion more free, then that which is made in the Veins
and Arteries. The necessity of motion is many times found in the sensitive
faculty, as well as in the natural; and though the Muscles be the Organs of
free motion, yet we find, that respiration, which is wrought by their means, is
necessary; that the motion of the Heart, which is as it were a composure of
several Muscles, and receives a Nerve from the Brain, to give it sentiment and
motion, is not to be ranked among those that are voluntary. Nay the Will it
self, notwithstanding that Sovereign liberty which it has, is not free in its
first sallies, and what time soever it may take to consider of the Good and
Evil, yet is it not in its power, to hate the Good, and love the Evil.

Whence then proceeds this diversity? Doubtless from the Instinct, which is a
Law that forces the Soul to do what it commands for the welfare of the Animal.
It is this Law that guids all the actions of the Natural faculty, that assigns
the sensitive Soul the motions which she ought to make, not only those that are
not to be balked, as those of the Heart and Lungs, and those of the Animal
Spirits; but also all those that are done casually, wherein the knowledge of
the Senses is of no advantage. For though the motion of the Spirits in the
Passions be not made precisely by it, yet does the Soul cause them to do it,
according to the copy which the Instinct gives her upon other occasions, as we
have shown elsewhere.

Art. 1. Of what kind the motion of the Heart and Spirits is in the other
Passions.
THus far as to what concerns the motion of the Heart and Spirits in the
Passions of the sensitive Appetite; we now come to examine, whether it be
performed after the manner, in those of the Will and natural Appetite.

We may in the first place affirm, that there are many Passions raised in the
Will, so as that neither the Heart, nor Spirits are thereby stirred, in regard
it is a spiritual Faculty, which may act of it self without the assistance of
any Organ. But it is to be observed, that they must be very slight ones; for
when they come to be of any force, they fail not both of them to be moved
thereby, as well as in the Passions of the sensitive Appetite.

Not but that the Will, considered in it self, might be able alone, to excite
the most violent Passions, as we know it does in Angels. But in Man, in whom
there is an union between the Corporeal and Spiritual faculties, it is
impossible, but that one must assist and relieve the other, when any
considerable Good or Evil presents it self to either of them. Which happens
either hence, that there is a necessary communication of their motions one to
the other, as we have declared; or that the Soul, upon such occasions; is
distrustful of her own strength, and would rally together all the forces she
has. Thence it comes, that she thinks it not enough to move the sensitive
Appetite, in extraordinary Griefs, to shun the Evil that presses hard upon her,
but she also excites sadness, in the superior part, in order to the same
design: and as if all that were not sufficient, she many times raises a Fever
in the natural Faculty, to force away and destroy that enemy.

As to the Passions of that inferior part of the Soul, there is not any one,
wherein the Spirits are not stirred* but it is requisite, they should be
violent ere they can move the Heart. For the case is not the same in them, as
in those of the other Appetites, which, though ever so much inclining to
mediocrity, are nevertheless capable of altering her motion. Accordingly, we
find, that, in wounds and swellings, the Spirits have their recourse thither,
with a certain impetuosity, yet so as there happens not any change in the
beating of the Heart and Arteries; and there are considerable evacuations made
in Crises, without any alteration in those motions. But, in a Fever, which is
the choler of the natural Appetite, in the Consternation, which Nature is
sometimes subject to, in malignant diseases, and in the agonies immediately
preceding death, there may be observed a remarkable alteration in the Pulse.

The reason of this difference proceeds from the nature of the Vegetative
Faculty, which is more material, and consequently more heavy, then the
Sensitive. For as a slothful person engages himself only in those things, that
are most easily done, and never undertakes the more difficult, but when he is
thereto constrained by necessity: So that faculty, which is moved with some
trouble, thinks it enough, in the lighter Passions to stir the Spirits,
because they are easily moved; but it attempts not therein the moving of the
Heart, by reason that is an Engine stirred with greater difficulty, unless it
be when the Evil seems considerable, and that it thinks it requisite to employ
all its organs, and all its force, toward the resistance thereof.

SECT. 4. How the Soul causes the Body to move.
BUt we are not yet come to the most difficult point of any, in this whole
matter, to wit, how the Soul gives motion to the Heart and Spirits, and, to
express it in a word, how she causes all the parts to move. For it is hard
enough to conceive how a thing, which has no body, is able to move a Body, and
yet much more, to imagine, that, what is it self immovable, as it may be
thought the Soul is, can cause the members of the Animal to move. It is indeed
easily seen, that they move, by the means of the Muscles, and that the Muscles
act by the contraction of the Fibers, which enter into their composition. But
the question is, how the Soul causes that contraction of the Fibers.

Let not any one think to urge here, that the Appetite commands the motive
virtue, which is in the members, and that the said virtue executes what
commands it has received from the other. These are but words, which, instead
of clearing up the thing, render it more obscure and hard to be comprehended:
And he who shall narrowly consider the nature of that command, and the manner
how it may be made by the Appetite, as also, that, whereby it ought to be
received by the motive virtue, will be no further instructed in what we enquite
after, then he was before, and shall not find how the Fibers meet together and
are contracted.

To express our selves therefore clearly, and in few words, in order to the
clearing up of these difficulties, we affirm, that all the parts are moved, in
regard the Soul, between whom and them there is a strict union, moves her self,
and that she forces them to follow the same motion which she has given
herself: So that the Fibers are contracted, because the Soul, by whom they are
animated, closes and reinforces her self first, and afterward causes them to
contract.

The same thing is to be said of the Spirits for when they go from one place to
another, when they dilate or contract themselves in the Passions, it is the
Soul that gives them these motions, consequently to her giving of them to her
self.

This will not be hard to conceive, it we reflect on what was said in the
fourth Chapter of this work, where we have shown, that the Soul was movable in
all her substance, and, having a proper extension she had also some parts,
which she might move as she pleased. For, this presupposed, it is certain, that
being united with the members, it is impossible she should give her self any
motion, but she must also give the like to them.

But it may be said, that, if the case stands thus, there is no necessity, the
Animal Spirits should flow into the Muscles, to cause them to move, in as much
as the Soul, being wholly in every part, has no need that those Spirits should
convey into it that virtue, which it is already possessed of. We have already
touched at this difficulty, which has put all the Schools into so much
distraction. For some would have the Animal Spirits carry the motive faculty
along with them; and others affirm, that what they do so carry with them, is
only a certain quality, which is not animal, and serves only for a disposition,
to set the motive faculty, residing in the parts, upon action.

But the maintainers of both these opinions are, no doubt, mistaken, though it
were only in this, that they suppose, as they do, the Spirits not to be
animate; the former, in that they assign animal virtues to Bodies, which they
conceive have no life; the latter, in that they advance an imaginary quality,
whereof they make no explication, and which leaves the thing as doubtful at is
was before.

We must therefore affirm, that the Animal Spirits do not convey the motive
virtue to the parts, but that the command of the Estimative faculty does it,
without which there can no motion be made.

That this may be the better understood, we are to remember, what has been
delivered in the precedent discourses; to wit, That the Appetite moves not but
upon the command of the Estimative faculty, which orders what things are to be
done; That the said command consists in the Image, or Idaea which that faculty
frames in it self; And that after such an Image has been therein produced, it
is multiplicable and diffusive, as a light, into all the parts of the Soul.

Now it is by the Spirits that this communication is wrought. For, as corporeal
actions are done by means of the Organs that are proper thereto, so knowledge
ought to be made in the Brain, in which are all the Organs necessary for that
action. And whereas the parts, which ought to execute what the Estimative
Faculty commands, are remote from it, there is a necessity, the Soul should
have certain ministers, whose work it is, to carry about the resolutions she
has taken in her Privy-councel, without which, as in a well-governed
Commonwealth, nothing either ought or can be done.

And this is the proper employment of the Animal Spirits, which communicate the
orders and decrees of the Estimative Faculty to the parts, which, upon receipt
thereof, move, as we said before.

CHAP V. Of the Virtues and Vices, whereof the Art how to know men may judge.
SInce The Art how to kn^w Men pretends to the discovery of Virtues, and Vices,
how secret soever they may be, it may be also expected from it, that it would
acquaint us, what Virtues and Vices are thereby meant; and withal, whether it
has that prerogative as to all in general, or only as to some of them. In
order to the prosecution of that design, it ought to make an enumeration
thereof, that it nay afterward give us a particular account of those which are
within its jurisdiction, and falls under its cognizance.

But before we come to that, this is to be premised, as of necessary knowledge,
that the Virtues and Vices are certain Habits, framed in the Soul, by several
Moral actions, which, often reiterated, leave in her an inclination and
facility to do the like.

Art. 1. What Moral actions are.
FOr the clearing up of this doctrine, we are to observe, that our Souls may do
two kinds of actions, whereof some are necessary the others free. The former
are called in the Schools the Actions of Man; and those which are free, Humane
Actions, in regard they are proper to man, as he is Rational, he only, of all
Animals, having liberty.

There are some who confound the latter with the Moral Actions, which have a
reference to good and evil manners, which deserve praise or dispraise, reward
or punishment. But if among the free actions, there are such as may be called
indifferent, which are neither good nor bad, as many Philosophers are of
opinion, it is necessary there should be some difference between Humane Actions
and Moral Actions, and that the former should be as it were the Genus of the
latter; so as that all Moral Actions may be Humane, in regard they are free,
and that all Humane Actions may not be Moral, in regard there be some, which
are neither good nor bad.

Art. 2. What Right Reason is.
BUt howere the case stand, as to the distinction of Actions, it is to be
noted, that the Moral are good or bad, according to their conformity or
contrariety to Right Reason. Now Right Reason is a just knowledge of the end
and means, which Man ought to have, to arrive to his perfection. And his
perfection consists in two points; that of the Understanding, to know the
Truth, and that of the Will, to attain the Sovereign Good, for which he is
designed. In a word, it is said, that Art is a habit of the Understanding,
causing a man to operate according to Right Reason; and that Virtue is a habit
of the Will, which makes a man act according to Right Reason. So that there is
one Right Reason for the Understanding, and another for the Will; one, leading
to Truth; the other, tending to Good.

This Right Reason, or Knowledge, proceeds either from God, or from Nature, or
from Ratiocination. For God makes Men to know what he desires they should do;
and that knowledge is the Sovereign rule of our thoughts and actions. Nature
also does inspire men with a general knowledge, which is as it were the first
guide she gives us, to conduct our mind whither it ought to go. Under this
knowledge do fall the common Notions, which contribute to the attainment of the
Speculative Sciences; as also those natural Laws, whereby our manners are
regulated. In fine, Ratiocination, assisted by these first apprehensions and
experience, has found out Rules for Arts and Sciences, civil Laws, for the
maintenance of society among men, and Maxims, for the conduct of every one in
particular: And he, who acts according to any one of these lights, acts
according to Right Reason. But to keep as close as may be to our subject, we
are, from all we have said, to conclude, that Moral Actions are conformable to
Right Reason, when they are regulated either by divine Law, or by natural and
civil Laws, or by the Ratiocination of Moral Philosophy.

Art. 3. Why the Virtues are in the mean.
NOw, among the many rules, which this part of Philosophy does furnish us
withal, there is one that has an influence almost over the whole matter
whereof we treat. This is, that the actions of the Will and sensitive Appetite,
and the Virtues themselves, which they produce, ought to consist in a
mediocrity, not inclining to either excess or defect. Hence it is that Virtue
always keeps the mean between two Vices, which are opposite one to the other.
And though there are some, which seem to be exempted out of this rule, as for
example, Justice and Charity, and some others; yet is there a certain
mediocrity which even those ought to observe, as we are taught by the Schools.

The reason upon which this mediocrity is grounded is hard enough to be found.
For that which is commonly alleged, to wit, that the conformity of actions to
Right Reason, consists in this, that there is neither more nor less in the
actions, then ought to be, and that the disconformity observable therein
proceeds from the addition of some thing or some circumstance, which is not
suitable thereto, or the substraction of those that are; and that this Addition
and Substraction makes the excess and defect of the actions: This reason, I
say, presupposes what is in the Question; for it may be asked why these things
and these circumstances are or are not suitable thereto; and a man may maintain
which side he pleases.

I conceive it therefore much more pertinent, to affirm, that the mediocrity of
actions is grounded on the Indifference, which is proper and natural to the
Soul. For an action being nothing but a progression, and as it were an efflux
or effusion of the Active power, ought accordingly to be conformable to that
power; And consequently the humane Soul being indifferent and indeterminate, in
regard that, in power, she is all things, it is requisite that her actions
should be so too: and thence does proceed, not only the liberty she has to do
them, or not do them, but also the mediocrity, which she gives them, when they
are done by her. For though she be then determined by the action, whereto she
applies herself, yet does she therein preserve her indifference by the
mediocrity, wherein she disposes it, in as much as what is in the midst is
indifferent, as to the extremities, and what is in the extremity, is more
determined then what is in the midst. Hence it comes, that the motions of the
sensitive Appetite, which, in all other Animals, are the more perfect, the more
they are inclined to the excess and defect which is natural thereto, ought to
be moderate in Man, in regard that he being subject to Reason, it is requisite
they should be conformable thereto as we said before.

Those Moral Actions therefore, which are disposed according to tha^
mediocrity, which is prescribed by Right Reason, are good and commendable, and
those that are chargable with any excess or defect, are evil, and destitute of
moral honesty and cannot pretend to commendation. They are called Virtuous and
Vicious, yet so as that they do not communicate that denomination to the
persons, by whom they are done. For a man is not called virtuous or vicious,
upon his doing of a good or bad action; but, to gain that name, it is
requisite, he should do many, and that he should acquire the Habit thereof; in
as much as he he cannot be so called, but upon his having of Virtue or Vice,
which, as we said before, are Habits.

Art 4. Of the Seat of Moral Habits.
BUt where shall we find these Habits, and in what part of the Soul are they
framed? The difficulty lies not, in reference to the Understanding, nor the
Will, in regard it is necessary that the Habits should have their rise in those
Faculties, whereby the actions are done, since the actions produce the habits.
And there is no doubt to be made, but that those Moral Actions, which ought to
be done with liberty and election, proceed from the Understanding and the Will,
which are free powers, and consequently, that Virtues and Vices are in those
Faculties, as in their true and proper subject. The Question then is only in
reference to the sensitive Appetite, to wit, whether it be capable of Virtues
and Vices, since it is such a faculty as is not free, nor can take cognizance
of Right Reason, which is the rule of all Moral actions? And what breeds the
difficulty as to this point, is, that the sensitive Appetite is subject to the
Superior faculties, and that its motions enter into Virtuous or Vicious
actions, according as it moderates them, or permits them to be chargeable with
excess or defect. So that if these motions, often reiterated, do leave therein
an inclination and facility to do the like, it shall be a Habit, which, as it
seems, can be no other then a Virtue or Vice. And thus the sensitive Appetite
shall be sussceptible of either of them, as well as the Will.

Now it is certain, that there are habits framed in the sensitive Appetite, as
may be deduced from the instruction given to beasts, as also from the facility,
wherewith our Appetite is inclined to certain actions after it has done them
several times. To this may be added, that, being a power, which is not
determinated to one peculiar manner of acting, and has its motions sometimes
stronger, sometimes weaker, toward the same object, it is impossible, but that
it should be capable of some habits, and that the actions, it often reiterates,
should leave in it the same facility, which all the other faculties, acting
after the same manner, are acknowledged to have.

To rid our hands of these doubts, we are to lay it down as a certain ground,
that the Habits, which Beasts acquire, cannot be ranked among Virtues and
Vices, and consequently, that the sensitive Appetite of man, which is of the
same order with that of Beasts, is not, of it self, capable of having any other
habits then they are.

But if it be further considered, that in Moral actions, the Will ever acts
along with it, there is framed, at the same time, one habit in the Will, and
another in the sensitive Appetite. The former is really virtuous or vicious;
the latter, indifferent, as being neither good nor bad. And in regard they are
not distinguished, there is attributed to the sensitive Appetite what belongs
only to the Will. So that all may be said of these last habits, amounts only to
this, that they serve for matter and body to the virtues and vices, whereof the
form and essence is in the Will; And that the virtues, which are in the Will,
are living and animate virtues, and the productions of them are, merit, esteem
and praise, whereas those of the sensitive Appetite are (if we may be permited
so to express our selves) but ^ude draughts and pictures, without life and
soul, having not the vigor to produce any of those things, unless it be when
they are accompanied by the other.

For, when any person is naturally inclined to Temperance, he may acquire the
habit thereof, but it shall not be a virtue, deserving either praise or reward,
if the Will do not contribute somewhat thereto. Nay it is further requisite,
that the Will be illuminated by Right Reason, otherwise the habit, which it
shall have contracted, shall be of the same order with those of the sensitive
Appetite. Whereto this may be added, that the said Habit shall be vicious,
since it is conceived, the Will has not made the advantages it ougth of the
illumination, whereby it should have been guided. It is not sufficient that it
should do good actions, but requisite that it should do them well. And thence
comes it to be commonly said, that Virtue consists rather in Adverbs, then
Adjectives, and that to deserve the name of just, it is not only expected, that
the things be just, but also that they be justly done.

Now in order to their being so done, there is a necessity of having knowledge,
of making choice of the means and circumstances; in a word, of following the
directions of Right Reason, which are actions, whereto the sensitive faculty
cannot attain, unless it be indirectly. For it is to be observed, that Right
Reason being a knowledge, framed by intellectual Images, cannot have any
connection or reference to the sensitive Appetite, and cannot excite it to
motion, in regard it is not susceptible of those kinds of Images, as the Will,
upon the account of its spirituality, is. But when this latter has been
thereby illuminated, it moves, and afterward imprints its motion on the
sensitive Appetite, which implicitly suffers it self to be carried away
whithersoever it is driven. So that if it happen, that its motions then prove
conformable to Right Reason the Appetite is not the cause thereof* but it is
the Will which forces it: and its procedure may be compared to the motions of a
Clock, which ow all their measures and regularity to the Art, which is in the
mind of the Maker.

Art. 5. That there are four powers which may be regulated by Right Reason.
BUt after what manner soever the sensitive Appetite be moved, certain it is,
that it may be regulated by Right Reason, either directly or indirectly, and
consequently, it may be affirmed, that, since it is twofold, and has its
concupiscible and irascible parts, there are, in Man, four Powers, which ought
to be regulated by Right Reason, to wit, the Understanding, the Will, and these
two Appetites. And as Virtue is the settled and constant rule of Right Reason,
so is it requisite, that every one of these powers should have its particular
Virtue, as well to guide, as prevent it from falling into evil, which is
against Right Reason. Thus there shall be four general virtues; to wit,
Prudence, for the conduct of the Understanding; Justice, to direct the Actions
of the the Will; Temperance, to regulate the Passions of the Concupiscible
Appetite; and Fortitude, for the regulation of those of the Irascible; whether
these or any of them be raised in the sensitive Appetite, or in the Will. For
the Will has two sorts of actions, whereof some are referrable to the Good and
Evil of the person who acts, and these have appropriated to themselves the name
of Passions; and the others relate to the Good and Evil which may be done to
others, and these are simply called Actions or Operations, that is, just and
unjust actions.

To these four Virtues are referred not only all those others, which are as it
were species of them, but also the Vices, which are opposite thereto. We shall
therefore divide the ensuing discourse into four parts, or Sections, in each
whereof we shall treat of one of these Virtues, of all the several species of
it, and lastly of the Vices contrary thereto.

SECT. 1. Of PRVDENCE.
PRudence and Synderisis, or Remorse of Conscience, are two habits of the
Understanding, whereby Moral Actions are regulated. But they are different in
this particular, that the Synderesis prescribes to all the virtues the end
which they ought to have; and Prudence treats only of the means whereof they
ought to make use, in order to their arrival thereto.

Now, all the employment which the latter has in this business may be reduced
to three general actions; the first whereof is to find out the means; the
second, to make choice of that which is best; and the third, to prescribe: And
this is properly to deliberate, or consult; to judge, or conclude; to enjoin,
or prescribe. And these things are so different one from the other, that, many
times, there are some men fit for one of them, who are not for the others. Some
will propose all the expedients imaginable in a business, and yet will not be
able to judge, which is the best; and another will do his work well enough as
to that, but will come short of the ingenuity to put it in execution.

This difference proceeds from the defect of some one of the intellectual
faculties, which has not the dispositions requisite to produce those actions.
For, to deliberate well, a man should have a vivacity of Spirit to find out
expedients; and Docility, to understand and follow good counsels. To judge
well, a man must dive into the bottom, and unravel the intricacy of affairs,
which requires a smartness of Apprehension and soundness of Judgment; and to
see, at a distance, the successes, which things may have, and that is
Perspicacity, or Foresight. To enjoin well, he must examine all the
circumstances of the actions, and that is Circumspection; he must consider the
inconveniences and obstructions, which may happen; and that is Precaution. In
fine, all three make their advantages of Ratiocination and Memory; for nothing
is to be said without reason, and that, which is grounded on experience, is the
most certain.

But in regard it is not sufficient to have consulted well, judged well, and
enjoyed well, if things be not speedily put in execution, we must add, to all
these qualities, Diligence, which is the final perfection and accomplishment of
Prudence.

Moreover, if these actions be applied to the conduct of a man's Person, Family,
the Country wherein he lives, or that of War, they spread into those
particular Species of Prudence, which are called Monastical, Oeconomical,
Political and Military. And these are the true Species of Prudence, the rest
may rather be called the integral parts thereof.

Now though it be commonly affirmed, that Virtue lies between two vicious
extremities, yet is it not easy to set them down here. For there are some,
whereto there cannot any thing be opposite, but the defect, as for example,
Memory. Nay there are some, which have for their contraries the same vices that
are opposite to others.

He therefore, who is endu'd with a vivacity of Spirit, has for his extremes
the Extravagant person and the Stupid. He who is Docile, the Credulous, and the
Obstinate. He who is Judicious has the same extremes as the Ingenious. The
Foreseeing or perspicacious person has the Distrustful and the Stupid. The
Circumspect has the Inconsiderate and the Negligent. The Well-advis'd has the
Subtle and the Simple, he who has a good memory has, for opposite, only him
that has a bad one; as also he who has the experience of things, only him who
has it not. The Diligent has the Precipitate and the sloathful.

These are the Virtues and Vices which have some relation to Prudence,
according to the distribution which Moral Philosophy has made thereof, and
which the Art we treat of promises to discover. But it considers them not as
they lie in that division, nor under the same names. For it makes no difference
between the Circumspect, the Perspicacious, and the well-Advis'd person. And
whatever appertains to Ingenuity, Judgment, and Memory, it comprehends under
the name of Fortunate birth, which ought to bring along with it vivacity of
Spirit, soundness or strength of Judgment, and goodness of Memory; it being
requisite that he who is called (...), well, or fortunately born, should have
all these qualities together. True it is, that it particularly examines those
who have only one of these endowments, as we shall show anon. Now the reason
why this our Art does not always follow the order of Moral Philosophy, is,
that all its knowledge is grounded upon signs, and that there are not such for
all these habits, so exactly distinguished. For there being some of them, which
are diversified only by certain external circumstances they give not any
precise marks, whereby they may be distinguished one from the other, it being
sufficient, that the Principle, on which they depend, should be known. And when
it shall be known that a man is Judicious, it will be easy to conclude, that
he is well Advised, Circumspect, and Provident, which are the effects of
Judgment, which considers both present and future circumstances.

The order therefore, which our Art shall observe in this matter, stands thus:
A person well or fortunately born has for his opposites The Extravagant. The
Stupid.
The Ingenious, and the Judicious, have The same opposites. He who has a good
memory Him who has none. The Wise or Considerate person The Heedless. The
Sottish.
The Prudent or well-Advis'd The Crafty or Subtle. The Simple.
The Docile. The Credulous. The Obstinate.
The Diligent. The Overhasty. The Sloathfull.



SECT 2. Of JUSTICE.
JUSTICE is a Virtue which renders every one what belongs to him. For, as we
are not born of our selves, nor only for our selves, so must we be obliged to
those, from whom we derive our Being, and also to those, for whose sake we have
received it. And therefore both these have a certain right over us, and we
ought, in Justice, to render them that which belongs to them.

As therefore there are two Causes, to whom we are obliged for our Being, God
and our Parents, so is it requisite there should be two kinds of Justice,
whereby we ought to render what we ow them, and these are Religion and Piety.

Now, in regard we are born in order to Society, and that Society is considered
as a Whole, whereof every one makes a Part, it is accordingly requisite, that
every one should have that reference to Society it self, and all those, who
contribute to the composition thereof, which ought to be between the part and
the whole, and all the parts taken together: otherwise the connection and order,
which ought to be therein, would be wanting, and there will be nothing but
disorder and confusion. Whence it comes, that the common Concernment, and that
of every one in particular, oblige us to render them, what we ow them, upon
this relation and union. That Justice, which regards the public concernment,
is called Policy, whereby we render to the Community, what we ow it.

As to that which concerns particular persons, there being some who are
designed to govern and command, either upon the account of their dignity, or by
reason of the Excellence they have, the Justice we ow them is, Obedience and
Respect

In all others we are to consider what we may ow them upon a rigorous account
of Justice, or merely upon a pure Moral obligation. The former consists in
Distributive and Commutative Justice; of the other, there are six Species; to
wit, Friendship and Gratitude; Affability and Truth; Fidelity and Liberality;
whereof the two first are answerable to the Heart; the two subsequent, to the
Words; and the two last to Actions; whatsoever we ow being to be derived from
the Heart, Words, and Effects.

Thus it is that our Art makes use of these Maxims. In the first place it
considers the Honest, Just, or Upright person, under whom is particularly
comprehended whatsoever appertains to Political, Commutative, and Distributive
Justice. And to the Just person it opposes the Simple and Mischievous; but it
examines not the Simple person upon the same account, as he makes one of the
extremes of Prudence. In the next place comes Religion, which we call Piety,
for now that word is reduced to the business of Religion: and the Justice we ow
to our Parents is comprehended under Goodness. The opposites to Piety, are the
Superstitious, and the Impious person. As to Obedience, it does not assign any
marks of it, since those of Docility may serve instead thereof. Respect may
also have a certain reference to Prudence, or the other Species of Justice: for
he who does not pay the Respect he ows, is either foolish or proud. So that it
places the Friend in the third Classis, to whom it opposes the Flatterer and
the Enemy. Next follows the Grateful person, who has, for his opposite, only
the Ungrateful. The Affable comes in the first rank, who has for opposites,
the Cajoler and the Rustic. In the sixth, comes the Tell-troth, or Sincere
person, who has for his opposite the Liar. But in regard Lying may be referred
to words, actions, a man's own affairs, and another; thence it comes that there
are five kinds of Liars, the Vain person, the Dissembler, the Arrogant, the
Hypocrite, and the Evil-speaker. Then follows Fidelity, whereto there cannot
any excess be opposed, but only the defect, which is Perfidiousness. In fine,
the last of all is the Liberal person, who has for opposites the Prodigal and
the Covetous. But in regard Compassion and Clemency come somewhat near
Liberality, the former relieving those that are in want, and the other
remitting the punishment which was due, our Art adds the Merciful and the
Charitable, to the former whereof there is but one opposite, to wit, the
Unmerciful; and of Clemency, the excessive Vice is Indulgency, or Fondness, and
the defective, Cruelty. Magnificence has also some relation to Liberality; for
it seems to be a sumptuous and excelling Liberality; and that has for its
opposites, superfluous Expense, and Misership.

These, reduced into the order observed in the precedent Section, will stand
thus.

The Honest and Just person has for Oppositor The Simple. The Unjust, or
mischievous person.
The Pious, or devout The Superstitious. The Impious.
The Friend The Flatterer. The Enemy.
The Grateful person The Ungrateful. The Affable The Cajoller. The Rustic.
The Telltroth The Liar In Words The Vain person. The Dissembler. The
Evil-speaker.
In Actions The Arrogant. The Hypocrite.

The Faithful person The Perfidious. The Liberal The Prodigal. The Covetous.
The Magnificent The superfluously Expensive. The Miser.
The Compassionate The Unmerciful, or Vncompassionate. The Clement The
Indulgent. The Cruel.

SECT. 3. Of TEMPERANCE.
THe perfection of every power consists in the force of its action, so that the
Passions, how violent soever they may be, are so many perfections, respect
being had to the Appetite, whereby they are produced. But in regard the
Appetite was bestowed on the Animal, for its conservation, and that, in Man, it
ought to be subject to the superior Faculties, the actions of it should not be
defective, since perfection consists in the force of the action; nor should
they on the other side be excessive, because they would destroy health, and
disturb the noblest actions of the Soul. And therefore it is requisite, they
should be moderate, that so they may be conformable to Reason; for, to be
conformable to Reason, amounts to no more, then to be convenient for Man, that
is, for his Nature. Nay, those very Passions, which are excited in the Will,
ought to admit the same temperament or moderation: for though they cannot
always cause an alteration in the Health, yet may they find the Soul work
about objects, which ought not to move her, or keep her too long engaged about
such as are not bad. Thence it comes, that over-earnestness of study is
vicious, in regard it employes the Spirit too much in Contemplation, and
diverts it from that Activity, and those lawful cares of Life, which justly
pretend to a share in the actions of man. Howere it be, all the Passions are
regulated by two Virtues, those of the Concupiscible Appetite by Temperance,
and those of the Irascible, by Fortitude.

As for Temperance, there are but two kinds of Passions about which it is
employed, and which constitute the Species thereof, to wit, Pleasure and
Desire. For though Love be the first, and most powerful of them all, yet is it
impossible to make any conceit or apprehension thereof, otherwise then as it is
inclined to some Good, which is either present or absent. If it be present, it
causes Pleasure; if it be absent, it frames Desire: so that Love is, as it
were, involved and confined within these two Passions, and that Virtue, whose
business it is to moderate them, does also at the same time regulate the
Passion of Love. Nay if things be narrowly examined, we shall find, that
Pleasure comprehends the two others, and that, in effect, Temperance has no
other design then to moderate the Pleasures, derivable from the Goods of the
Soul the Body, ^ot External things. But in regard, that, of these Goods, there
are some, which are considered rather as Absent then Present, and others on the
contrary: accordingly, Desire is more manifest in some, and Pleasure ^n others,
and therefore we have though to separate them.

For there are three things in general, wherein our Desire may be vicious, to
wit, Knowledge, Wealth and Honors: and there are two others which contribute
to immoderate Pleasures, that is, the Senses, and Divertisements.

As to Knowledge there being some things evil and unprofitable which may be
learnt, and that too much or too little time may be spent about such as are
good and profitable, the Virtue which regulates our desires in the pursuit
thereof may be called Study, or a commendable Curiosity.

For Wealth, if we regard the disposal, which is to be made thereof to others,
the Virtue employed to that purpose is called Liberality, and belongs to
Justice: But if it be desired for a man's private use, the Virtue which
moderates the cares, which a man takes in the acquisition and use thereof, is
called Frugality.

The Desire of Honor is regulated by Humility, Modesty, and Magnanimity.
Humility keeps a man from falling too low in the pursuit thereof; Magnanimity,
from attempting things too high; And Modesty moderates the desires a man may
have for meaner honors.

Pleasure does principally regard the Senses, especially those of the Tasting
and Touching, in as much as the irregularity of those two is most prejudicial to
Health, and the Functions of the Understanding. The Pleasure of Eating and
Drinking is moderated by Sobriety, and Chastity gives a check to the enjoyments
of the flesh.

Now whereas there is a necessity of Divertisement, for the relaxation of Mind
and Body, and for the recruiting of them with new forces, and that some abuse
may be made of the Pleasure found therein; there is a particular Virtue
designed for the regulation of them, to wit, Eutrapelii, whereof there are
several Species, according to the diversity of the objects, wherein diversion
may be found; such as are Conversation, Gaming, Music, Hunting, Walking, and
others, whereto there have not yet any names been given, unless it be to that
which moderates the pleasure taken in Raillery.

THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN is not, as to this particular, more exact then Moral
Philosophy, which has not been able to make a discovery of all the Species of
Temperance. For there are many Passions of the Concupiscible Appetite, whereto
it has not assigned particular Virtues, for their regulation, as for example,
Hatred, Aversion, and Sadness. Nay it has not expressed all the differences of
Desires and Pleasure (...) wherein here may be some failing, as well as in what
concerns the use of the superior ^enses, since the same excesses which happen
in the Tasting and Touching, do also occur in the Sight, Hearing, and Smelling.
But as Moral Philosophy has, by the general term of Temperance, made
provision for all the particular Virtues requisite for that purpose: So our Art
has assumed the freedom, to comprehend, under moderation, all that concerns
the ordering and direction of these Passions.

We therefore place the Moderate person between the Voluptuous, and the
Insensible. The Studious is comprehended under the Curious, the extremes
whereof are, the Overcurious and the Negligent. The Frugal person lies between
the same opposite Vices as the Liberal; those two being distinguished only by
the different ends which they have in the disposal of Wealth. The Humble, the
Modest and the Magnanimous, have in a manner the same extremes. There be only
the Proud and the Ambitious which are different. That Modesty* which consists
in the Gesture, is confounded with the character of the Wise, or Discreet
person: That which relates to Clothes is called Handsomness, which has for
opposites the Gaudy, and the Slovenly. But our Art considers not that Virtue,
which is only in the external part, as being easily perceived of it self. The
Sober person is attended by two Vices, both which are in the excess, and has
not any defect at all. The rest may be seen by the ensuing Table.

The Moderate person has for opposites The Voluptuous. The Insensible.
The Curious The over-Inquisitive. The Negligent.
The Frugal The Prodigal. The Covetous.
The Humble The Proud. The Abject.
The Magnanimous The Presumptuous. The Pusillanimous.
The Modest The Ambitious. The Over-bashful.
The Sober or Temperate The Glutton. The Drunkard.
The Chaste The Unchaste. The Impotent.
The Cheerful The Ridiculous. The Austere.
To these may be added The excessive Gamster. The excessive Huntsman

SECT. 4. Of FORTITVDE.
FORTITVDE moderates the Passions of the Irascible Appetite; for this is the
Virtue, which regulates the Soul, upon the occurrence of things troublesome and
difficult. Now, though there be three kinds of Passion in this Appetite, to
wit, Hope, Audacity, and Anger, yet are the two latter the more violent, and
the least tractable; so that this Virtue is more apparent, in Anger and
Audacity, then it is in Hope. And whereas Audacity relates to Dangers, and
particularly that which is most to be feared of any, to wit, Death; thence it
proceeds, that most of the Philosophers assign this Virtue to moderate that
Passion alone. But following the Order we have proposed to our selves, it is to
be extended to all those Passions. Nevertheless; before we come to treat of the
Species of it, this observation is to be premised, to wit, that there are three
sorts of Fortitude, that of the Body, that of the Mind, and that of the
Appetite. The first is purely natural; the last is acquired by Study and
Reason; the other is partly natural, partly acquired, All these three have two
principal functions, which are, to assault or set upon, and oppose.

Now as Anger is the strongest, and most ordinary Passion of this Appetite,
Meekness is accordingly put in the first place, as being the Virtue, by which
this Passion is moderated. There are several Species of Audacity, according to
the several objects which oblige it to attack or oppose. For, in attacking the
Evil, if it be done in Arms, it makes Valor; in all other cases, it is
Audacity, or Confidence. But if it slight and contemn great Dangers, it is
termed Magnanimity, or Greatness of Courage. On the contrary, in opposing, it
is Constancy and Patience.

As concerning Hope, it is regulated by Patience and Perseverance. The latter
has a respect to the delay, the former considers all the other difficulties,
which may occur in the expectation of Good.

According to this Order, our Art ought in the first place to examine the
Strength and Weakness of the Body and Mind; then speak of Meekness, which has
for its opposites, Anger and Insensibility, and so of the rest, as may be seen
in the ensuing Table.

A Person of a strong Constitution of Body has but one contrary, which is The
Weak of Body A strong Constitution of Mind has also but one, which is Weakness
of Mind The Meek or Courteous The Angry. The Insensible.
The Valiant The Rash. The Coward.
The Bold The Impudent. The Timorous.
The Magnanimous The Presumptuous The Pusillanimous.
The Constant The Unconstant. The Obstinate.
The Patient The Impatient. The Stupid.
The Perseverant The Self-willed. The Faint-hearted.

The End of the First Book.
THE ART How to know MEN.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Means whereby Men may be known.
HAving, in the precedent Book, explicated the Nature of the Inclinations, the
Motions of the Soul, and the Habits, which THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN pretends it
self able to discover; our design call upon us now, to an examination of the
Means, whereby this Knowledge is to be attained.

Now, whereas it is impossible to come to the knowledge of things obscure,
otherwise then by that of those which are already known to us, there is a
necessity, that if there be an Art, whereby may be taught what lies hid in men,
it ought to make use of some manifest and known means, between which and the
things it would know, there should be such a rapport and connection, as that
some certain consequences might be drawn from the one to the other. And whereas
there is not any rapport of this nature, other then what is between the cause
and its effect, or the effect and its cause, or between one effect and another,
upon this account that both of them proceed from the same source, it follows,
that there are three means whereof this Art may make use, to arrive at the end,
which it proposes to it self, and that it may discover a secret effect, by the
cause which is known to it, or an obscure cause by a manifest effect, and an
unknown effect by another which is evident. And these means are called Signs,
because they denote, signify, and design the things that are obscure.

Thus, when we know a man to be of a Temperament subject to Melancholy, it may
be said, that he has an inclination to Sadness, in as much as that Temperament
is the cause of such an Inclination; and then the cause is the sign of the
effect. On the contrary, by the natural inclination which some man may have to
Sadness, it is presumed, that he is of a Melancholic Temperament; and in that
case, the effect is the sign of the cause. In fine, by the Timorousness, which
may be observed in both these persons, it may be judged that they are
Dissemblers, in regard that both Timorousness and Dissimulation proceed from
the weakness which attends the melancholic Temperament, and then it is, that
the effect is sign of an effect. Now, since causes and effects serve for Signs
to the Art we treat of, the next thing to be known is, what these causes and
effects are.

Art. 1. What Causes they are which serve for Signs.
IT is not to be doubted but that the Causes, which contribute to the discovery
of men, must be such as have an influence over Man, and are in him; that is,
such as cause some alteration in the Body and Soul, and promote and change the
actions of both. Of these there are two Orders; some are Internal, some
External.

The Internal causes are the Faculties of the Soul, the Temperament, the
Conformation of the parts, Age, Nobleness or meanness of Birth, the Habits, as
well Intellectual, as Moral, and the Passions. The External are Parents, the
Celestial Bodies, the Climate, the Seasons, Aliment, prosperous or adverse
Fortune, Example, Advice, Punishments, and Rewards. For all these Causes make
different impressions upon Man, and according to the strength they have, they
produce in him different effects, and dispose him to such and such actions. So
that every Faculty of the Soul, every Temperament, every Age, every several
kind of Birth, has its proper actions, its particular dispositions, its
inclinations, and aversions.

Parents do many times derive to their children those qualities of body and
mind, which are natural to themselves; the Climate, Health and Sickness, course
of Life, Prosperity and Adversity, Good and Bad Example; in fine, the different
aspects of the Celestial Bodies cause an alteration in the Body and Soul,
imprinting in them diverse qualities, and making them inclinable to certain
Actions.

Art. 2. What the Effects are which serve for Signs.
THe Effects which proceed from these Causes are also of two kinds; for some
are Corporeal; others, Spiritual.

The Spiritual are the qualities of the mind; the Inclinations, the Habits, all
the actions and motions of the Soul: for, that they have been numbered among the
Causes, was in consideration of the Effects which they produce; as here they
are ranked among the Effects* by reason of the Causes from which they proceed.
For instance, the Inclination which a man has to Anger, is the cause of the
Anger; but it is also the effect of the choleric Temperament, which gives
birth to that Inclination

The Corporeal Effects consist in the Bulk of the Figure of the parts* in the
first and second Qualities, in the Air of the Countenance, in the Carriage and
motion of the Body, as we shall show more particularly hereafter.

So that upon cognizance taken of these Causes, and a knowledge of the power
they have, some judgment may be made of their present or future effects; And on
the other side, upon an observation of the Effects, and a knowledge of that
whereto they ought to be referred, the present or past causes may be ghess'd
at. Thus are they Signs one of the other, and THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN, has a
privilege to make its advantage of them, in order to the performance of what
it promises.

But in regard all these Signs create not an equal knowledge of the things
whereto they are referred, and that some of them denote the same with more
certainty then others, it is requisite there should be a careful examination
taken of their Strength and Weakness, since that is the chiefest and most solid
ground of this Art.

CHAP. 2. Of the Strength and Weakness of Signs.
Art 1. What Judgment is made by the Causes.
GEnerally speaking, the judgment which is made by the Causes, is more
uncertain then that which is made by the Effects, in regard that from the
knowledge of the cause of some thing, it does not follow, that it should
produce the effect it is imagined to do, by reason of diverse obstructions,
which may happen in the production thereof: But when an effect is seen, it must
of necessity be, that the cause did precede. Thence it comes, that the
knowledge which is had of the Temperaments, by the marks they leave upon the
Body, is more certain then that which is had of the inclinations by the
Temperament, in as much as these marks are the effects of the Temperament, and
that the Temperament is the cause of the Inclinations.

Art. 2. Of the next Causes.
MOreover the causes are of two kinds; some are termed the Next Causes, others
are Remote. From the former, a more certain judgment may be deduced, in regard
they have a stricter connection with their effects. Accordingly, the knowledge
which is had of the Temperament, better discovers the inclinations, then any
thing that can be inferred from Birth, Age, or the Climate, etc. But there is
not any Cause, from which there may be a more certain judgment deduced of a
man's actions, then the Habit: For he who shall know one to be a just person,
will be the more apt to affirm, that upon such or such an occasion, he will do
an act of justice.

Into this rank may also be reduced the Passions themselves, in reference to
those others which are wont to accompany them; for the Passions never march
alone, and there is not any of them but produces some others which either
appear with it, or follow it very closely. Thus Arrogance, Impatience,
Indiscretion, accompany Anger; and therefore he who knows a man to be sometimes
transported with the latter, may affirm that he is apt to fall into the others.
And this observation is so considerable, that it makes way for the Noblest rule
of all Physiognomy, whereof Aristotle is the author, and which he calls
Syllogistick; and of which we shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

The Qualities or Endowments of the mind do also give a certain judgment of the
good and bad productions, which shall proceed from them. And it may be
affirmed, that when some man shall conceive himself obliged, out of the bent of
his own inclination, to embrace some opinion, or to speak to some business, he
will judge and discourse of it, answerable to the opinion the world has of his
capacity and endowments.

Art. 3. Of the Remote Causes.
AS to the remote Causes, if there were so great certainty in Astrology as some
imagine to themselves, no question but the judgments, which might be made upon
consideration of the Celestial Bodies, would be the most certain of any. But we
do not acknowledge so great a power in those Bodies, as is attributed to them,
and we can grant them, at most, but some small advantage over the Climate,
which gives some ground to judge of the Inclinations, upon the account of the
Temperament, whereof it is a Remote cause as well as they. Age and Sickness may
be put in the some rank. But good and bad Fortune, Nobleness or meanness of
Birth, Examples (under which I comprehend Counsels, Advice, Rewards, and
Punishments) afford but very doubtful conjectures. Lastly, the Seasons and
Aliment make the most uncertain judgments of any.

Art. 4. What Judgment that is which is made by the Effects.
AS to what concerns the discovery which may be of the Causes by the Effects,
we are to presuppose the distinction we have already made thereof, that is,
that of these latter, there are some Spiritual, some Corporeal. For, generally
speaking, the judgment which is made by the Corporeal, is more certain then
that deduced from the Spiritual, in as much as the former immediately proceed
from the Temperament, and the Conformation of the parts, which are the Next
Causes of the Inclinations; or they (viz the effects) proceed from the Passion
it self, which produces them on the Body, when the Soul is stirred thereby.

And as to the Spiritual, which are the Qualities or Endowments of the mind,
the Inclinations, the Actions and Motions of the Soul, and the Habits; as there
are many several Causes, whereby each of them may be produced, so the judgment
made thereof is the more indeterminate and uncertain. For the Passion may be
caused by diverse objects, by the Weakness of the Mind, by the Inclination, etc.
In like manner, the Inclination may be the product of the Instinct, to the
Temperament, and of Custom. The Habits also have diverse Principles as well as
the Qualities of the mind, so that it is no easy matter precisely to assign
the Cause, from which each of these Effects proceeds.

Now, since there may be a more exact knowledge deduced from the Corporeal
Effects, and that it is of them only that Physiognomy makes use, in order to
the discovery of the Inclinations, it concerns us to engage upon a more careful
examination of them, and to see what their number may be, what the causes
thereof are, and what Strength and Weakness they have, that so we may judge,
not only of the Inclinations, as Physiognomy does, but also of the Qualities of
the mind, the Passions and Habits, which THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN pretends it
self able to discover by them.

CHAP. III. Of the Natural Signs.
IN the first place, we are here to presuppose, that there are two kinds of
Effects, or Signs, which are imprinted on the Body. Of these, one is the
Natural, which proceeds from the constitution of the Body, and the other
Elementary Causes: the other, the Astrological, which proceeds from the Stars
or Celestial Bodies, whereof Metoposcopy and Chiromancy make use. We shall
hereafter examine, whether there be any certainty in those Sciences, and
whether the Signs, upon which they have framed their Rules, may contribute any
knowledge of the Inclinations, the Passions, and the Habits, as they pretend to
do.

As to the Natural Signs, Aristotle has reduced them to nine Heads or
Articles, which are these: 1. The Motion of the Body, as the Cate, the Gesture,
and Carriage of it. 2. Beauty, and Deformity. 3. Color. 4. The Air of the
Countenance, 5. The quality of the Skin. 6. The Voice. 7. The Fleshiness of the
Body. 8. The Figure and Of the Parts. 9. The Largness Of the Parts.


All these Signs proceed from Internal or External Causes. And this distinction
is so necessary, that it makes in a manner, the whole difference there is
between those which are advantageous and those that are otherwise, as we shall
make appear.

The Internal Causes are, the Conformation of the Parts, the Temperament and
the Motive Virtue; the External are all those things, which come from without,
and work some alteration in the Body. Thus a man may go slowly, either out of
his natural Inclination, or out of Design, or through Weakness, Beauty and
Deformity proceed from Nature, Artifice, or Accident. The Color ought to be
consonant to the Temperament; but the Air, and such other things may alter it.
The Air of the Countenance, and the Voice, the Skin, and the Fleshiness of the
parts, may receive alteration upon the same account. In fine, the Figure of the
Parts ^s either Natural or Accidental, for a man may become crooked, and
crump-shoulder'd, either by a Fluxion, or by a Fall, or by Nature. True it is,
that, of these Signs, some are not so easily changed by the External Causes, as
the Figure, the Air of the Countenance, and Motion; but the Color, the Skin,
and the Voice, do easily receive the impressions thereof.

But it being supposed, as it is certain, that the Internal causes are those
which produce the most certain Signs, we make this further observation, That
the Figure and Largness of the Parts proceed from the Conformation; the
Temperament gives the Color, the quality of the Skin, and the Fleshiness of
the Parts; The particular kind of Gate, and the other Motions proceed from the
Motive Virtue: But Beauty, the Voice, and the Air of the Countenance proceed
from all these three Causes joined together. For Beauty consisting in a
symmetry, and just proportion of the Members, as to color and grace, the
proportion proceeds from the Conformation; Color, from the Temperament; and
the grace, from Motion. The Voice is answerable to the Conformation of the
Organs, their Temperament, and the motion of the Muscles. In fine, the Air of
the Countenance, and the Carriage of the Body, have their principal dependence
on the Motion: for in the disturbance of the Passions, the Air, which
accompanies them, is nothing else then a certain proportion of the parts,
resulting from the diverse motions they make in pursuit of Good and Evil, which
moves the Appetite. But that disturbance of the Passion being calmed, and taken
away, the Air, which remains fixed on the Countenance, relates to the
Conformation and the Temperament, as may be observed in those, who naturally
have the same constitution and disposition of the Parts, with those, which the
Passion is wont to cause.

Art. 1. Of the Difference of Signs.
OF the Signs beforementioned some are Common, others Proper. The Common Signs
are not determinated to any one quality, but may signify many; on the
contrary, the Proper are determinated only to one.

Moreover, there are some Signs, which, in a manner, never change, as the
Conformation; all the rest may be changed. And among these last, some are
Stable and Permanent, others are Transient, and continue but a short time. Thus
those which proceed from Age and the Climate, are Stable; but such as proceed
from Sickness and the Passions, are of small continuance.

From these Distinctions, something may be deduced, which may contribute to the
discovery of the Strength and Weakness of the Signs; for those which proceed
from external causes do not denote any thing certain. And of those which the
Internal causes have produced, the Stable are significators of Permanent
Inclinations; the others may possibly denote the present Passions, but not the
natural Inclinations, unless it be by accident, as Aristotle speaks.

Besides, the signs which are the least easily changed by the External causes,
are the most certain; such as are the Figure, the Air of the Countenance, and
Motion; but the Color, the Skin, the Fleshiness of the parts, and the Voice,
are consequently the less certain.

Whereto this may be added, that the Common Signs do not signify any thing
certain, unless there be some proper Sign, whereby they should be determinated.

Art. 2. Of the Means assigned by Aristotle to discover the efficacy of Signs.
ARistotle proposes another Maxim, tO find out the efficacy and certitude of
Signs. For he affirms, that, such as are observable in the principal, and most
excellent parts, are accordingly the most certain, and that, among those, the
Head is the most considerable; but, in that, the Eyes challenge the
pre-eminence, the Forehead has the next place, and then the Face,
comprehending all that is below the Eyes. Next to the Head, are accounted the
Breast and shoulders; in the third place come the Arms and Legs; The Belly is
the last of all, and the least considerable.

But this Rule seems somewhat disconsonant to the Maxims of Aristotle, nay
indeed to Reason it self. For he, who assigns the Heart for the principle of
all Actions, as being that part, wherein he affirms the Passions to be framed,
should have bestowed the first and most excellent place on the Breast, and not
on the Head, and have maintained, that the most certain signs of the
Inclinations and Passions are derivable from that part, which encompasses the
place, where they have their first birth. But it is to be observed, that
Aristotle does not there pass his judgment, of the excellency of the parts, as
a Philosopher or Physician would do; he considers them only upon this
reflection, that the Passions are more discoverable in those, then others. And
accordingly, he places the Arms and Legs before the Belly, though they be much
less excellent and less considerable, as to the essence and nature of the
Animal. Now it is certain, that there is not any part, wherein the Passions are
sooner, and more apparently observable, then they are in the Head: as we shall
show more particularly in the next Article.

Art. 3. That the Passions are most apparent in the Head.
THe first reason we shall give for the more remarkable manifestation of the
Passions in the Head, is this, that they are not framed without the use of the
Senses, from which is derived the first knowledge of those things, that move
the Passions, and that all of them, Touching only excepted, are placed in the
Head. Add to this, that the Estimative Faculty, whose work it is to conceive
the things which are good and bad, and gives the first shock to the Appetite,
is in the Brain; and that the strength and weakness of mind, which have also a
dependence on the same part, has a great influence over the Inclinations and
Passions. For it is certain, that Children, Sick persons, and Women are
ordinarily inclined to Anger, out of pure weakness of mind, as having not that
heat of blood and heart, which is requisite for a disposition to that Passion.

But the principal reason hereof proceeds from the impression, which the
Passions make on that part. For as the Soul has no other design in the motions
of the Appetite, then to bring the Animal to the enjoyment of that Good, which
she conceives necessary thereto, and to remove the Evil, whereby it may be
injured; so, to compass her desires, she employs all the parts, that are under
her jurisdiction, and causes them to move answerably to the intention she has.
Now, of these, some being more susceptible of motion then others, they
accordingly make a speedier discovery of the agitation wherein she is, and the
progress she makes therein: for there are several degrees in every Passion In
the first place, there is the emotion, or first stirring, of the Appetite,
which does not issue out of the Soul, as being an immanent action: Then the
Heart and Spirits are stirred, as being the chief Organs of the sensitive
Appetite; and, if the Passion increase, the eyes, the forehead, and the other
parts of the Head, are shaken: but if it still advance, and come to execution,
and that the Soul would really arrive at the enjoyment of the Good, and shun
the Evil, she moves the parts designed for that purpose* till at last, she puts
the whole body into motion, if she be not prevented.

So that it is to be hence observed, that the Heart and Spirits are those parts
of the body, which are first moved in the Passions. But the motion of the Heart
is not sensible, as that of the Spirits, which is immediately to be seen in the
Countenance, in regard they carry the blood along with them, the sudden arrival
or departure whereof alters, in a moment, the color and figure of the face;
which alteration happens not to the other parts, and that for two reasons. One
is, because the Spirits make their recourse to the face more abundantly then to
any of the other parts, upon this account, that the Senses are lodged therein,
which stand in need of spacious channels, whereby the Spirits may flow thither
in greater quantities, and with more ease. The other is, that the skin of the
Face is of a particular constitution, which is not to be found in any of the
other parts. For all elsewhere, unless it be in the palms of the hands, or the
soals of the feet, the skin may be separated from the flesh: But in the Face,
they are both so united together, that they cannot be separated one from the
other, without tearing and rending it. Whence it comes that the color, which
proceeds from the motion and quality of the blood, is more manifest there, then
in all the rest of the body; and this also so much the more, for that the skin
there is very thin and delicate; which is not to be found in the hands and
feet. So that, it being shown, that the Passions do principally and more easily
change the color of the Face, then that of any of the other parts, it is to be
maintained as certain, that, in such a case, it must be the place where they
appear soonest and most evidently.

Moreover, whereas the Soul, being stirred, moves, not only the Heart, the
Spirits, and Humors, but also those parts, which move voluntarily; it is not
to be questioned, but that those which are most apt to motion are the first
stirred by her, though their motion contribute but very little to the execution
of her design. For, to what end serves the wrinkling of the forehead, the
lifting up of the Eyebrows, and the widening of the nostrils in the Passion of
Anger; or, in Bashfulness, the casting down of the eyes, blushing, and being
out of countenance? And yet it is not to be doubted, but that all these motions
proceed from the disturbance caused by the Passion in the Soul, and whereby she
is hurried, to make use of whatever stands in her way, though it be no
advantage to her, as we said before.

Since therefore that, of the parts, there are not any so susceptible of
motion, nor so suddenly betray their resentment of the Passions, as those which
are in the Head, Aristotle had reason to assign it the first place, as to what
concerns Physiognomical Signs; and to dispose the eyes in the most excellent
place therein, then to bring in the forehead, and so consequently the others,
for the reasons we have alleged.

Art 4. That the Inclinations are most apparent in the Head.
IT might be said, that all this Discourse does indeed demonstrate the
appearance of the Passions more remarkably in the Face, then any where else;
but that the same thing is not to be concluded as to the inclinations, and that
all this alteration, and all these motions, which are consequent to the
agitation of the Soul, are only transient Signs, incapable of denoting
permanent disposition, such as are those of the Inclinations and Habits. But we
conceive it no inconsiderable advancement to have shown, that the Characters of
the Passions are principally apparent in that part of the Body, since that,
according to the rule of conformity, whereof we shall speak hereafter, those
who naturally have the same air, which the Passion causes, are inclinable to
the same Passion.

However it may happen, if the Temperament, the Conformation of the parts, and
the Motive virtue, be the causes of permanent Signs, it is consequently
certain, that there are not any parts, wherein the Formative virtue acts more
efficaciously, then it does in the Head, by reason of the excellency of its
Operations, and its Organs; no parts, wherein the Temperament can be more
easily discovered, by reason of the particular constitution, which the skin is
of; in fine, no parts, wherein the motive virtue is stronger, and more free in
its motions, since there it is in its proper seat and vigor.

To these reasons, this may be added, that the great variety of the organs,
which are in the Head, supplies us with a greater number of Signs, then any
other part whatsoever, and that, Audacity and Fear taken away, as also some
others which have dependence on them, there is not any Passion that leaves its
marks on the parts, whereby the Heart is encompassed. So that, without any
further difficulty, we may allow the Head the pre-eminence, as to what concerns
the Signs observable in Physiognomy.

Art. 5. That the Inclinations are discoverable by the Arms and Legs.
IT may seem deducible from these last reasons, that we are willing to allow
the second rank to the Arms and Legs, and admit them to be the places, from
which, next to the Head, there may be drawn such Signs, as may pretend to most
certainty, and whereof there are a greater number; and consequently, that the
Breast is not so considerable as they are. And indeed, if the Air of the Face,
the Behavior, and motion, be more certain Signs then the Figure, as Aristotle,
in these words seems to affirm, (...), placing the Figure after the Motions, it
is certain, that they are much more apparent in the Gesture and Gate, then in
the Breast, where it may be thought there is only the Figure to be considered.

But we are here to call to mind, what we have said elsewhere, to wit, that the
Passions may be considered in their first stirring, and in their execution, and
that the execution is not always consequent to the stirring and emotion. Now
the Arms and Legs are the principal organs in order to the execution of what
the Appetite commands, and the Heart is the principle and source of the
emotion. So that the marks which this latter gives are more universal, and more
certain, then those of the others, it being affirmed, that the Heart is always
moved in the Passions, and that every Passion comes not to execution.

I add further, that the Breast and Shoulders have also their particular
carriage and motion, as well as the Arms; besides, that the motion of the Arms,
and the manner of Going, may be changed by custom, whereas the same thing
cannot be said of the Figure of the Breast, which always denotes the
Temperament of the Heart, and consequently, the Inclinations. And as for
Aristotle, we are to affirm, that he does not make any comparison between the
Air of the Countenance, and Motion, and Figure; but he compares these three
together with the other Signs, as, for example, the Color, the Voice, the
quality of the Skin, and the Fleshy parts, which no doubt are much less certain
then the former, as we said elsewhere. So that it is to be maintained, as
manifest, that the most excellent place, from which the most remarkable Signs
of Physiognomy are to be drawn, is the Head; the next to that, the parts which
enclose the Heart; the third, the Arms and Legs; and the last, the Belly. For
though this last has some right to dispute the precedence with the Arms, by
reason of the many Signs found therein, especially as to what concerns the
Temperament; yet it is most certain, that modesty does not easily permit that
part to be considered, whence it must needs follow, that the Signs are so much
the less manifest; whereto may be added this also, that they do not principally
denote the operations of the sensitive Soul, but only of the Vegetative, and
that it is only by accident, that it makes any signification of the other.

Art. 6. From what places the Signs are taken.
THe most considerable places, from which the Signs are to be taken, are, as
Aristotle affirms, those (...), In quibus sapientiae multae apparentia fit;
which assertion may be explicated two ways. The former, that the parts where
Wisdom and Modesty ought to be most apparent, are those which discover the most
certain marks of the Inclinations. So that the air of the countenance, and the
carriage or deportment of the Body, making the principal discovery of Wisdom in
a man, it is accordingly from those places, that we are to derive the most
assured Signs of Physiognomy. For, as Prudence brings along with it a general
disposition to all the other Virtues; So, on the other side, Imprudence invests
a man with a susceptibility of all sorts of Vices and Imperfections. So that
the places, where those two qualities are most remarkable, must of necessity
furnish us with the Signs of all the other Inclinations.

The second Explication of that Assertion, and, in my judgment, the better, is,
that the external parts, whereof the Soul seems to stand most in need, and
wherein she imploys the more art and conduct, whether as to the framing of
them, or keeping them after they are framed, are those from which we are to
extract the most certain Signs of the Inclinations. The reason, this, that the
Soul, making a fuller discovery of her self, and, in some sort, more manifestly
producing her self in those parts, than in the others, may in them also make a
greater discovery of her Inclinations. Now, it is generally acknowledged, that
there are not any, wherein her cares, her conduct, and her industry are more
apparent, than in the eyes, and in the other parts of the Head; in regard that
all the Senses, nay, Reason it self, are lodged therein; and, next to them, in
the Breast, upon this account, that it comprehends the source of life, and that
the Appetite has its residence there; And lastly, in the Arms and Legs, as
being the instruments of voluntary motion, which, next to Sentiment, is the
noblest quality of the Animal.

From the precedent Discourse, it is easily seen, that there cannot be an
assured judgment made of the Soul's Inclinations, otherwise than by the proper
and permanent Signs, and that these are commonly drawn from the Figure, the Air
of the countenance, the Motions, and the Fleshy parts of the Body. So that
among the Signs proposed by Aristotle, the Figure, and Air of the countenance
have the first place. Then follows the Motion, in as much as the Animal does
not move, but answerably to the motion of the Appetite; and so it is easy to
judge, of what quality the Appetite is, by Motion, which is one of its effects.
The fleshy parts of the body have the third place, in regard they denote the
matter, whereof the body consists: Now, every matter requires its particular
form, and so, by the qualities of the matter, the qualities of the form may be
known. The Skin and Hair come next, in as much as they are certain discoveries
of the fleshiness. In fine, Color and the Voice bring up the Rear, and have
the last place, in regard they may be easily altered, especially the Voice,
which is changed in a moment, by the Passions, by the least fluxion, and by an
hundred other such accidents.

CHAP. IV. Of the Rules, which Physiognomy has framed upon the natural Signs,
in order to the discovery of the Inclinations.
AS all the Signs, whereof we have treated, taken distinctly one from the
other, afford us not a very certain judgment of what we would deduce from them;
and that it is requisite, there should be a concurrence of several of them, to
make a perfect denotation of what we would discover thereby; so Physiognomy has
reduced them into diverse Classes, wherein are comprehended all those which have
any relation to the same end and signification. And the number of these Classes
is drawn from four rapports and resemblances, which may be between Men and
other things; it being conceivable, that one man may have some resemblance to
another, who shall be moved by some passion, or to Men of another Climate, or
to Women, or to Brutes. Now, upon these four resemblances, Physiognomy has
made four general Rules, which, besides that they promote its particular
design, do further discover the initials of that Science, and the improvements
it has made, in several Times and Ages.

Art. 1. Of the Progress of Physiognomy.
I Conceive then, it may be laid down as a thing not questioned, that
Physiognomy had its beginnings and advancements, as the other Sciences had,
which have not of a sudden, and, as it were, at the first start, nor yet in the
same Age, attained the perfection and accomplishment, which Time and
after-experiences have brought them to. And it is very probable, that the first
observations made thereof, were taken from the effects, which the Passions
produce in the countenance; and that it having been observed, that a Man
transported with Anger, or cast down by sadness, had his countenance in such or
such a posture, some observant Person inferred the likelihood there was, that
those who naturally had their countenances so, were accordingly inclined to the
same Passions. For this manner of judging of the Inclinations is more consonant
to common sense, and the most easy to be observed. Afterward there was taken
into consideration the resemblance which may be between men, and other Animals,
and a judgment was made of the conformity of their Inclinations, by the
resemblance there was between them. Then was there notice taken of that which
is between the Sexes; and, at last, that between men of different Climates. For
it is certain, that the Sexes, in each Species, have the Figure of the Body and
the Inclinations different, as well as men of different Climates; and that if
there be a resemblance, as to Figure, between any two of them, there ought to
be also the same, as to their Inclinations.

Art. 2. That the Syllogistical Rule was added by Aristotle.
THus far went the Ancient Physiognomy. To these observations Aristotle has
since added the Rule which he calls Syllogistical. Now, though the rules which
the ancient Professors of Physiognomy made use of were not bad, yet were they
not certain enough, to establish a Science upon them, in regard they did not
employ them all in their judgments, nay, indeed used them not as they should
have done, and that they wanted the Syllogistical Rule, without which, the
other are defective. And thence it came, that Aristotle found fault with them,
and has shown, by solid reasons, that there was no certainty in their Science.

Art. 3. The defect of the first Rule of Physiognomy.
FOr, as to what concerns the first means, which they call apparent Conformity
or Resemblance, (...), they minded not, that there are many contrary
Inclinations, which cause the same constitution of countenance, as, for
instance, Fortitude, and Impudence. Besides, the Air of countenance is changed
in a moment, according as the Soul is moved; and so a man naturally sad, may
express a certain cheerfulness in his countenance, upon the occurrence of some
agreeable object. In fine, this Rule is very imperfect, and confined the study
of Physiognomy to too narrow limits.

Art. 4. The defectiveness of the second Rule.
THe second Rule, which they draw from the resemblance there may be, between
Man and other Animals, is yet more doubtful, especially considering the
manner, how they made use of it. For there is not any man, as Aristotle
affirms, who has an absolute resemblance with any other Animal whatsoever, but
only in some particular part; and there is ground to doubt, whether any one
part is capable of creating a judgment of an Inclination, proper to the whole
Species. Secondly, it is to be considered, that there are few Signs proper and
peculiar to any one Species, and that there be many common ones; and therefore
the resemblance which is made between a man and some other Animal, by the
common Signs, will be defective, and signify nothing, since it may be also
made to another different Species. Nay, if the resemblance be made by Signs
proper to such a Species, there will still be reason to question, whether those
Signs do determinately denote such an Inclination, since it is to be conceived,
every Animal has several others. Thus the Figure, proper to a Tygre, is, to
have a very spacious mouth, short ears, and the skin spotted; But this cannot
design a particular Inclination, in regard that being a strong, cruel, and
indocible creature, it cannot be determined to which of these qualities that
Figure may have any correspondence. And therefore the ancient Physiognomists,
could not, by this Rule, make any judgment of the Inclinations, whether they
made use of those Signs, which are common, or those which are proper to the
Animals.

Art. 5. How Aristotle makes use of the second Rule.
IT will be said, that, by this reason, Aristotle destroys as well his own
doctrine, as that of the Ancients, it being found, that, in other places, he
makes use of this very Maxim, That such, or such a Figure denotes such, or
such an Inclination, and that this is applicable to Lions, Eagles, Ravens, etc.
It is true, that Aristotle, in appearance, makes use of the same Rule, but it
is after another manner then the old Physiognomists had done. For these
considered not the marks and signs of Animals; and thereupon they concluded,
that he who resembled them in that, had the same Inclinations, as were found in
the Souls of those Animals.

On the contrary, Aristotle considers not the Signs as proper to the Animals,
but as proper to the Inclinations; which having not been observed by Baldus,
occasioned that great person to fall into a manifest contradiction. And
accordingly, he afterward teaches, how that observation is to be made, and
affirms, that we ought to consider several persons who have the same natural
habit, such as may be, for example, Fortitude, and mark, in what particular
Sign they agree: and it shall be found, that their resemblance will be in these
particulars, in having the mouth large, and the extremities thick and strong.
Then you are to make your reflection on those Creatures, which are known to be
naturally strong, as Lions, Bulls, Eagles, and Tigres, and finding that all
these kinds of Animals have those parts after the same manner, it will be very
probably judged, that they are the marks of Strength or Fortitude.

But this is not yet sufficient, it is further requisite, that we examine,
whether there may not be some other Creatures, which, though they be strong,
yet have not those marks: for if there be not, the Sign is certain, otherwise,
some doubt may be made of it. And the same course is to be taken, in order to
the discovery of all the other Inclinations. But after what manner soever we
may make use of this Rule, yet is it not of extent enough, to perform what may
be made out by Physiognomy, in regard there are but very few Creatures, whereof
we can have the knowledge of their particular inclinations, and the Figure of
the parts correspondent to those Inclinations. So that it it is then only to be
accounted certain, when it is confirmed by the others, and particularly by the
Syllogistical Rule, which supplies the defect of these four.

Art. 6. What the Syllogistical Rule is.
NOw, this Syllogistical Rule denotes the present inclinations and passions, in
a way contrary to the others, in as much as it does not require proper Signs,
but, from an inclination and a passion known by those marks, it deduces the
discovery of another, which has not any. And this Rule is grounded on the
connection there is, between the Inclinations, the Habits, and the Passions. For
one being the effect of the other, it may be judged, that a man has an
inclination to such a passion or habit, though there be not any Sign proper
thereto, and which may make any discovery of it, as being only known, that the
man has that which is the cause of this. Thus having once known, that a man is
timorous, it may be said, that he has a natural inclination to Avarice, and
consequently that he is a Miser; that he is guilty of artifices and
dissimulation; that his fearfulness causes him to speak with a certain mildness
and submission; that it renders him distrustful, apt to suspect, hard of
belief, a bad friend, etc. Thus Aristotle gives an example of this kind of
Judgment, affirming, that, if a man be subject to Anger, and of small stature,
he is Envious. But I conceive there is an error in the Text, and that instead
of (...), which signifies little, it should be read (...), which is as much as
froward, humoursome, and one who is not pleased at any thing, as we shall show
in its proper place.

As to the other four rules, those which are taken from the Air of the
countenance, and the resemblance there may be between the Sexes, are the most
certain, and the most generally acknowledged. For there is hardly any Sign but
may be referred to them, as Aristotle affirms; (...). That of the Climates is
more general then the other, which is taken from the resemblance of Animals:
but it is not so certain, in regard that all those who are of the same Climate,
are not of the same Temperament, and have not the same Conformation of parts;
and therefore this is no necessary consequence, that because a man is born in
Greece, he must be vain, unconstant, and a liar: and so of the rest.

CHAP. V. After what manner THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN, makes use of the Rules of
Physiognomy.
Art. 1. How the said Art makes use of the first Rule of that Science.
THus have we given an account of the Means which Physiognomy makes use of, in
order to the discovery of the Inclinations, and which the Art we teach ought
also to employ, in prosecution of the same design. But besides that there are
some others besides those, and that it has many more things to discover than
the other, it will not propose its Rules nakedly, as Physiognomy has done, but
establish the grounds thereof, before they be reduced into practice.

When therefore the first Rule tells us, that those, who naturally have the
same Air, and the same Characters attending the motion of a Passion, are
inclined to the same Passion; it is to be noted, that the ground on which this
Rule is established, is the knowledge of the Characters of the passions. For,
it were to no purpose, to affirm, that he, who naturally has the Characters of
Anger, is inclined to Anger, if it be not known, what the Characters of Anger
are. This Art therefore pretends to draw a pourtraiture of every passion in
particular, to design the Air and Figure it gives to all the parts of the Body,
and all the motions it excites in the Soul. For, besides what it will
contribute to the design the Art has to make known the passions, which cannot
remain secret after so many indicia given thereof; It will also, by that means,
declare those which are consequent one to another, and between which there is a
connection, the ground of the Syllogistical Rule; and by degrees, make that rule
conduce to the discovery of the passions. It must therefore divide the Treatise
of the Characters, into two and twenty Chapters, whereof the first eleven shall
treat of the Simple Passions, comprehending among them Desire, Laughter, and
Weeping; and the other eleven shall treat of the Mixed Passions, according to
the order we have set down before.

Art. 2. How it makes use of the second Rule.
AS to the second rule, which teaches, that those men, who have some parts
resembling those of some other Creatures, have the same Inclinations with those
Creatures; it is to be examined, what Creatures those are, which may give a
ground for this rule. For all are not fit to be admitted into that predicament,
either in regard that sufficient observations have not been made of them, or
that they are at too great a distance from the nature of man, as Insects,
Serpents, Fishes, etc. Aristotle therefore in his Physiognomy has pitched upon
twenty seven, to wit, fifteen four-footed Beasts, and seven Volatiles. The
former are the Lion, the Panther, the Horse, the Heart, the Ox, the Ass, the
Dog, the Wolf, the Swine, the Goat, the Sheep, the Ape, the Fox, the Cat, and
the Frog. The other are, the Eagle, the Hawk, the Cock, the Raven, the Quail,
Sea-Fowl, and small Birds. Others have added to these, the Owl, and the
Ostrich. It is therefore requisite, there should be so many Chapters designed,
wherein must be treated, of the natures of these Animals, and especially of
those parts of them, whereto those of men may have any resemblance, and of the
Inclinations they denote.

Art. 3. How the said Art makes use of the third Rule.
AS to the third Rule, which shows, that he, who has any semblance to Men of
some other Climate, has the same Inclinations as they have* this is grounded
on the Figure of the Body, and such Inclinations of the Soul, as that Climate
causes. But in as much as the Climate is to be considered, not only by the
position of the Heavens, but also by the nature of the Soil, by the Situation,
by the Winds reigning there, it is requisite in the first place to treat of
that Constitution of the Body, and the Inclinations, which a hot, dry, cold, or
moist Climate may cause; and afterward of those, which may proceed from a
moist, or dry, fruitful or barren soil. In the third place, of that which is
consequent to the situation, as it is oriental or occidental; high, or low;
maritime, or mediterranean. In fine, what contribution may be made thereto by
the several Winds, East, West, North and South.

Thence it must descend to the Figure and Manners of those Nations, which
depend partly on these causes, partly on the original of the people themselves,
whereof they still retain some tincture, as also on the good or ill fortune
which has attended them, and causes them to change their former discipline,
and their ancient course of life. This Treatise must needs be long, and will
require great pains to bring it to a period. For, besides that there must be
some reason given of the particular Figure of every People, and its
Inclinations, which is a thing very hard to do, it must also give an account of
the Laws, which are proper thereto, in regard that the Law, as Plato says, is
the finding out of Truth; all sorts of Laws being not convenient for all manner
of Nations, but only such as are conformable to their natural dispositions; and
he who has lighted on that Conformity and Correspondence, has met with Truth.
But howere it may be, this Discourse is to be divided into so many Chapters, as
there are Climates, and those subdivided again into so many Sections, as there
be Nations inhabiting each of them.

Art. 4. How the said Art makes use of the fourth Rule.
THe fourth Rule teaches us, That those men who have any thing in their
countenances approaching the Beauty of Women, have the same Inclinations as
they have, and on the contrary. This is grounded on the Beauty, which is
peculiarly answerable to either Sex, as also upon the Inclinations, which are
natural to each of them. It is therefore requisite, there should be a discourse
concerning Beauty, and that it should be divided into two Treatises; whereof
the former shall show how all the parts ought to be made which frame the Beauty
of Man, and the Inclinations attending it. And the other is to give a
particular account of the parts whereof the Beauty of the Woman consists, and
the Inclinations correspondent to her Sex. All this shall be treated in fifty
Chapters, there being no less then twenty five parts in each Sex, whereby they
are represented as differing one from the other; the Color and Proportion,
which ought to be between them, being comprehended therein.

Art. 5. Why The Art how to know Men treats of the Temperaments.
BUt in regard these two last Rules are principally grounded on the
Temperament, before we come to the examination of them, it is requisite there
should be a previous Treatise of the Temperaments, and a discovery made of the
Inclinations, which each of them causes in the Soul, and the Figure it gives to
the parts of the Body. And this is to be done in fifty two Chapters, whereof the
first sixteen shall treat of the Temperaments which are conformable to the whole
Body; and the other thirtysix, of those of the Nobler parts. For there are some
principal temperaments correspondent to the four Humors, when they are only
predominant, to wit, the Sanguine, the Choleric, the Melancholic, and the
Phlegmatic; then each of these has some one of the other humors predominant
under it, as the Cholerick-Sanguine, the Melancholick-Sanguine, etc. and that
makes up the number of sixteen. In fine, every noble part is either temperate,
or hot, cold, dry, or moist; or is hot and moist, hot and dry, cold and moist,
cold and dry. So that there being four noble parts, and each of those having
nine differences of Temperaments, all put together, make up two and fifty kinds
of Temperaments which must be known, in order to a judgment of the Inclinations.

Art. 6. That there are other Rules besides those of Physiognomy, whereby the
Inclinations may be discovered.
THus is it, that The Art how to know Men makes use of the Rules of
Physiognomy, for the discovery of the Inclinations, and how, upon small
foundations, it designs the greatest superstructure, whereof Science ever
attempted the carrying on. But it does not think that sufficient, as having
added thereto some other means whereof Physiognomy makes no advantage. For,
besides that it makes the very effects of the Inclinations to contribute to the
discovery of them, to wit, the desire of doing the actions, and the pleasure
there is in doing them often; it being a thing out of all dispute, that if a
person be observed to be often desirous to do the same thing, or that he does
it many times with a certain pleasure, it is a certain sign of the Inclination
he has thereto. Besides this, I say, it very advantageously makes use of the
remote causes, whereof we have made mention before; for though the judgments,
which may be deduced from them, be not absolutely certain, yet do they either
fortify or weaken those, which proceed from the next causes, which are, as we
said, the Instinct, the Temperament, and the Conformation of the parts.
Accordingly, if a man be of such a Temperament and Conformation, as may be
proper for courageous actions, and that he be withal a person well descended,
that he be young, fortunate, and rich; that he have some military employment,
and that he be of a warlike nation, it is certain, that the judgment which may
be made of his being inclined to courageous actions shall be more creditable,
then if those circumstances did not occur.

But if with that fortunate Constitution, he be of a mean extraction, if he be
poor and unfortunate, and stricken in years, if he be of a Profession that
abates his courage, and keeps it down; if he be of a Climate over-hot, or
over-moist, the Inclination which Nature has bestowed on him to courageous
actions shall be much weakened by these causes, how remote soever they may be,
and the judgment to be made thereof ought to be the more reserved.

It is therefore necessary that there should be a previous knowledge of the
Inclinations, which these causes produce, that they should be compared
together, and that it be examined how far they fortify or weaken the others.
Whence it comes, that, having treated of the Inclinations of the Inhabitants in
general, it must discourse of those of Children, Young persons, perfect Men,
and Old men. Thence it must descend to the Moral Causes, which are in number
seventeen; to wit, Nobleness and Meanness of Birth, Wealth and Poverty,
Sovereignty and Subjection, Prosperity and Adversity, and the course of Life,
to wit, the Art Milita^y, Medicine, Music, Hunting, Dancing, Philosophy,
Mathematics, the study of the Laws, Oratory and Poetry, observing the
Inclinations and Manners which accompany each of these Professions: so that
this will be the work of one and twenty Chapters. And after all these
disquisitions, it may well be confident, that it is able to discover, not only
the present Inclinations, but also those which are past, and those which may
yet be to come, through the change, which either has been, or shall be made,
in the Temperament and the Moral Causes.

CHAP. VI. How the Actions and Motions of the Soul are known.
THe next work of our Art how to know Men must be, to show how the actions and
motions of the Soul are to be known, we mean not those which are evident and
manifest; for it were ridiculous to give Rules, to find out, whether a Man be
in Anger, when he is seen transported with the fury, which that Passion
inspires; or whether he be sad, when he complains, and laments, and seems to be
overwhelmed with affliction. But in regard there are some Passions, which are
to be foreseen before they are framed; and that of those which are so, there
are some that are not produced to any great height, as Hatred: that some of
them are theatrical and feigned, as those of Flatterers; Nay, that there are
some cloak'd with contrary appearances, as when a man would have it thought he
loves another person, though he hates him; when one makes show of a certain
joy, when he has much ado to smother his grief; in fine, Designs closely
carried on, secret Actions, the unknown Authors of known actions: All these
things, I say, are the main subject of the Art we speak of, and the Rules it
gives for the knowledge of them. And no doubt but there are such Rules, since
there is not any thing considerable framed in the Mind, which may not be
discovered by the Countenance, by a man's Words, by the Effects, and some
Circumstances, from which there may certain, or, at least, very probable
conjectures be deduced.

Art 1. That there are two kinds of Actions.
BE it observed then, that there are, generally speaking, two kinds of actions;
some simple and plain, and such as they appear to be; others, deceitful, and
cloak'd with dissimulation. All the difficulty to be overcome in the former,
is, to discover the end for which they are done. For, in every Action, there is
always the apparent and manifest motion, which is the matter, and as it were
the body of the Action; and the Intention, which is the form; and* as it were;
the Soul of the Action, and that is ever obscure and hidden. Thus when there is
a necessity of fighting against the Enemies of the State, the act of fighting
is the matter of the Action, and is evident; but the End and Intention of it is
a secret, in regard it is not known, whether it be for Honor, or Advantage,
whether it be done out of force or by example, etc. There will be therefore a
particular Chapter for discovery of the Ends and Intentions of the Actions.

Art. 2. Of Dissimulation.
AS concerning the other Actions, which are cloak'd and covered with
Dissimulation, the discovery of them is much more difficult, for that
difficulty occurs not only in the body of the Action, but also in the End of
it, which is shrouded in diverse pretenses. And among Actions, the External may
be disguised under contrary appearances; and the Internal, which are the
Thoughts and the Passions, may be easily dissembled. Besides, Dissimulation
insinuates it self into the Words, the Countenance, and the Effects, whether it
makes its advantage of them distinctly, or altogether, as we shall show more at
large in the Treatise of Dissimulation.

Now the means, whereby the Art, we teach, pretends to the discovery of it, are
twelve in number.

The first is, to examine the dissimulation by it self, and to see whether
there be any likelihood or probability, the thing should be as it is pretended;
whether the countenance of the Dissembler belyes his words, and whether the
Effects are consonant, or contrary one to another.

The second, to oblige him who has been caught in it, to discover it himself
by fair words and persuasions.

3. To oblige him to it by punishments.

4. By Rewards.

5. By present punishments or rewards.

6. By a threatening of future punishments, and promises of future rewards.

7. By importunity.

8. By Wine and Good-fellowship.

9. By a consideration of the person who acts, as whether he be of a timorous
or confident disposition, whether he have the reputation of being sincere, or
be a noted dissembler, whether he be an inferior person who speaks, etc.

10. By a like consideration of the person against whom the dissimulation is
acted, as whether he be one who is dreaded, whether a Prince, Master, etc.

11. There is yet a further way of discovering the Dissimulation, by a sudden
motion of some Passion, which breaks forth, and betrays what is in the Soul,
such as may be that of Anger.

12. The same discovery may be made by a sudden sally of Joy.

And upon all these several means, there are certain particular Rules, which
shall be explicated in so many Chapters.

Art. 3. How Actions may be foreseen.
BUt we now come to examine, whether there be any Rules, whereby the Actions of
the Mind, and the Passions of the Soul, may be foreseen, before they are
framed; and whether it may be affirmed, that, upon such or such an occasion, a
man will have rational apprehensions, if he should chance to be transported
with Anger, or fall into Fear, etc. As to the Actions of the Mind, as they must
be necessarily conformable to the strength or weakness of the Faculties,
whereby they are produced; so is it certain, that a man, who shall have the
organs, subservient to those Faculties, well or ill disposed, shall have good
or bad productions of the mind, and that it may be assured, that, when he shall
be obliged to the reception of some sentiment, or to speak of some affair, he
will judge and speak of it, according to the capacity, which the world was
persuaded he had, as we have said elsewhere. The Habit and Inclination do the
like; for if it be known a man is Just, Magnificent, Valiant, etc. it will be
undoubtedly said, that, when any occasion shall present it self, his sentiments
will be consonant to the Virtue and Inclination he has.

Art 4. How the Passions may be foreseen.
BUt as to the Passions, there cannot so certain a judgment be made of them,
and it may only probably be said, that a man will be transported with Anger,
and suffer himself to be carried away with vanity, or some other Passion, in
regard that Reason and the Study of Philosophy may keep him in, and correct the
dispositions which he might have to those Passions.

Nay, there is this further consideration to be made, in reference to these
motions, that they are twofold, primary, and secondary. The primary or first
motions hurry us away like torrents, and, as it is commonly said, come not
within the jurisdiction of reason. The others are not so impetuous, and admit
of some time to consider them; and therefore they may be the more easily
checked. But they are withal more hardly discoverable, in as much as they are
more easily corrected; whereas the judgment, which may be made of the former,
is more certain, it being very hard, that the Habit should be so perfect, as
that it might divert Nature from those first assaults, and break that strong
connection, which is between the Inclination and the Action.

We are to make this further observation, that, of the Passions, there are some
may be called the Principal and Predominant, and others, which are only the
Companions and Attendants of the former. When a man is angry, his Predominant
Passion is Anger, as being that which has possessed it self of all his Soul,
and whereto are referred all the other Passions, which are framed afterward,
as Arrogance, Insolence, Obstinacy, etc. In like manner, Sadness, or Grief is
the predominant Passion in him who is afflicted; but Fear, Languor, Sloth,
Superstition, are its Attendant Passions In fine, there is not any one of them,
which, when it is framed in the Soul, does not call some others to its
assistance and relief; so that, the Predominant Passion once known, there is no
doubt but the others are waiting on it. But in regard the connection there is
between them, may be stronger or weaker, and that there are some, whereof the
consequence is as it were necessary, and others, wherein it is only contingent,
(For Languor, or Dejection of Spirit, and Sloth, are in a manner necessarily
attendant on Sadness; but Superstition does not always follow it.) Whence it
may be thence inferred, that the knowledge had of the former is more certain,
and that of the contingent, doubtful.

Let us therefore conclude, that there are two ways, principally, whereby
future Passions may be foreseen, to wit, the Inclination, and the Connection
there is between the Passions. Whereto may be added, the Strength or Weakness
of his Mind, who is to resent it, and the greatness of the Good or Evil, which
is to happen to him. For if it be known, that a man is to receive a great
injury, and that he be a person of a weak Spirit, some will not stick to
affirm, that he will be overcome by the Passion of Anger.

Art. 5. Whether contingent Actions may be foreseen.
IT will peradventure be objected against us, that there is not any certain
knowledge of things to come, which are Contingent, in regard they may equally
either happen or not happen: otherwise, if a certain judgment could be made
thereof, they would not be Contingent. The Answer to this Objection, which is
made against all the Sciences of Divination, is this, That there are two sorts
of Contingents, some, which have a natural and regulated cause, whereby,
according to the common order of things, they ought to be produced. Others have
no regular cause, but a fortuitous or free, as those things that happen by
hazard, or the election of the Will. Those last are purely contingent, and
cannot be determinately known any way whatsoever. But the former are not purely
contingent, and the knowledge had of them may be certain in the sequel of
things, as not differing from that of things necessary, save only in this, that
their causes may be prevented from producing their effects. The actions and
passions of the Soul are of that kind, in as much as there is a connection
between them and the Faculties, the Inclinations and the Habits: for they are
effects, which, by ordinary consequence, depend on those causes; and though
some of these effects be free, yet are they not absolutely such, when they
proceed from the said causes, and that these concur with the freer cause, such
as is the Will.

CHAP. VII. How the Habits may be known.
Art. I. Of the discovery of the Moral Habits.
IN order to our satisfaction, whether the Habits are discoverable or not, we
are to remember, that there are two kinds of them, the Intellectual, and the
Moral, and that these latter are more easily known then the Intellectual. For
it is more easy to judge whether a man be Just or Temperate, then whether he
be a Physician or Mathematician. The reason, given of this difference, is, that
the Intellectual Habits make not any impression on the body, and consequently
leave no sensible mark, whereby they might be known.

But I do not conceive this reason solid enough, in regard the Moral Habits do
not also make any manifest impression on the body, no more then the
Intellectual. It is therefore more to our purpose to affirm, that the Moral
habits are more certainly known, because the Moral inclinations are
determinated to certain Passions, which, often reiterated, produce Habits. And
whereas there are few who resist their inclinations, by reason of the
difficulty and trouble it is to change them, and that every one commonly does
what is most easy and delightful to him: it thence proceeds, that the
knowledge had of the inclinations, which is well grounded, and certain, enables
us to make a more probable judgment of the habits, whereby they are attended.

Art. 2. How the Intellectual Habits may be known.
BUt the case is otherwise in the Intellectual Habits, in regard the
Understanding is not determinated to any one Art or Science, rather than
another. And though that, of these, some have a greater conformity to the
Imagination, then they have to the Judgment or Memory, yet the great number
there is of them leaves the Mind, which cannot be naturally determinated to one
more then another, in a certain indifference. For it may be said, that a man is
fit for Poetry, Painting, or Music, by reason of his having a strong
Imagination, and not the like for Medicine, Policy, and the other Sciences,
which require a greater portion of judgment. Yet can it not be affirmed, that
he is effectually a Poet, a Painter, or a Musician, in regard the inclination
he has to the functions of the Imagination renders him equally fit for either
of them. Whereas on the contrary, the Moral inclinations are determinated to
certain passions, and those passions to particular Habits. Whence it may be
affirmed, from the knowledge had of the inclinations, that a man is endu'd with
such a Virtue, or subject to such a Vice; and it seldom happens that one is
mistaken in those judgments, for the reasons alleged.

There is therefore a discovery made of Virtues and Vices, by the means of the
inclinations which are known; and it is the only expedient that Physiognomy
makes use of. But our Art has some other, from which a greater certainty may
be derived.

Of these, the first is, to know the end of the Actions, which consists in a
free, perfect, and absolute election; for he who acts by the direction of that,
must necessarily act by virtue of some habit.

Secondly, the excess and defect of the passions, in reference to the objects;
for he who is often angry, and that in a higher degree then he ought, must
infallibly be adjudg'd to have the habit of Anger.

Thirdly, the perseverance which any person is found guilty of, in any passion.

Lastly, the effects, which the Virtues and Vices produce in the Soul and Body.
And these frame the Characters of the Virtues and Vices, which are to be
described, according to the order we have set down before.

CHAP. VIII. Of Astrological Signs.
BEsides the Natural Signs, whereof we have already treated, there are yet
others, which are called Astrological Signs, in regard it is pretended, that
the body receives the impressions of them from the Stars and Celestial
Configurations. These consist, for the most part, in certain Lines, which are
principally to be observed in the Forehead, and the Hands, and are imagined,
to be the effects of the Planets predominant over those parts.

From some observations which have been made thereof, there are two Arts
framed, Metoposcopy, and Chiromancy, or Palmistry; the former whereof considers
the Signs which the Stars have imprinted in the Forehead, and the other, those
imprinted in the Hands.

It is our work to examine, whether there be any truth in either of them: For
if any knowledge of the inclinations and the motions of the Soul may be deduced
from them, as they boast there may, the Art we teach ought not to slight them;
nay, it is requisite it should accept of their assistance, since they are
engaged in the same design, and that nothing is to be omitted, which many
contribute to the discovery of a thing, so intricate as the heart of Man is.

But if they have not any thing of certainty, and that they are only the
recreations, or, possibly, dreams and reveries, which the spirit of Man
imagines to it self, either by way of delight, or through mistake, our Art
ought to discard them as vain, superfluous, and superstitious Sciences, not
worthy to be admitted into the society of those of Nature, or to busy the
thoughts of any man that pretends ever so little to Ratiocination.

Let us therefore begin with Chiromancy, for it is better known then
Metoposcopy, and seems to have more evident principles, which may be more
easily established, nay, such as, if they prove true, will serve for a
groundwork to the other. Yet shall I not put my self to the trouble of any
other Discourse thereof, then what shall be contained in two Letters, which I
have already communicated to the public, since they are pieces, which make up
part of the design of this Work, and which the impatience of a Friend prevailed
with me to take off from the rest, to satisfy his curiosity. I shall not now
abate so much as the civilities I thought myself obliged to render him, nor yet
the precautions wherewith I would have secured myself against my Readers. For,
though that contributes nothing to my Design, yet will it afford those some
diversion who shall take the pains to read it, and give them the same pleasure,
which is sometimes derived from the sight of a strange ornament, or some
antique Mode, unexpectedly brought upon the Stage.

THE FIRST LETTER TO MONSIEUR B.D.M. UPON THE PRINCIPLES OF CHIROMANCY.
SIR,
WHen you press me to put into writing the Discourse we had together concerning
Chiromancy, and endeavor to persuade me, that it were an injury to the
public, to deprive it of the Arguments you heard me make upon that subject, I
reflect on the entreaty which Socrates's friends sometime made to him, that he
would suffer his Picture to be taken, and the confusion he conceived hereat,
after he had satisfied their desires. For before that was done, there was no
great notice taken of the defects which Nature had imprinted in his face, and
people began not to heed them, and withal, to reproach him therewith, till
after they were represented upon the Cloth. The same thing, no doubt, will
happen to me, when I shall put into writing the Discourses, whereof you assure
me, that you were not displeased at the recital. They will come to you with
this disadvantage now, that they are not attended with that grace of Novelty
which they had then; They will not he accompanied with the pleasure of walking,
and the conversation which then rendered them agreeable; and appearing before
the Eyes, whose judgment is much more severe then that of the Ears, the defects
there may be in them will soon be observed, and give me the shame and regret of
having obeyed you. Nay, what must be my doom, when I shall have other Judges
then your self, from whose friendship I derive a confidence of some favor, and
whose curiosity for these kinds of Sciences may abate somewhat of your
severity? And what reception can I expect, when I shall find the more ingenious
part of the World prepossessed with this opinion, that they are vain studies,
and all their principles, all their promises, delusive and imaginary?

But, maugre all these hazzards, wherein you engage me, I am resolved to
endeavor the satisfaction of your desires, and reduce, to a more serious
examination, the things which I entertained you with only by way of
divertisement. For if upon this second trial you shall make of them, you shall
find them of good alloy, I shall not question, but they both may, and ought to
go for current, in the commerce of Learning. And certainly, if there be any
thing rational in the conjectures I have made, nay, if they do but raise the
distrust of a Truth not yet fully known, it is just the public should
participate thereof, for the excitation of those who make it their business to
search after the miracles which God has been pleased to shut up in Man, to
make a greater discovery of this in particular, and to add thereto their
observations, which may possibly complete what I have only begun. For how poor
and low an esteem soever we may have for Chiromancy, yet may Philosophy find in
it some things not unworthy her highest and noblest Contemplations. She thinks
it no disparagement to her, to descend to the most obscure Arts, to clear up
their principles; And as the light of the Sun fastens it self on the most
impure things, yet is not corrupted thereby, and from them draws those vapors,
which it raises up into the highest regions of the air: So Philosophy, without
any derogation from her dignity, condescends even to the lowest effects of Art
and Nature, and thence derives such discoveries as she does not think unworthy
a place among her most sublime speculations. And no doubt, though I do not
pretend my self one of those, by whom she should execute so great designs; I
may however think, that I have met with something, which may not be unworthy of
her cares, and such as should not only satisfy their curiosity who are lovers
of Chiromancy, but also be advantageous to Physic. For if I can make good this
Principle, THAT EVERY NOBLE PART OF THE BODY HAS A CERTAIN PLACE IN THE HAND
WHICH IS APPROPRIATED TO IT, AND WITH WHICH IT HAS A PARTICVLAR CONNECTION AND
SYMPATHY, besides that, it will make very much for that disposition of the
Planets, which the said Science has appropriated to the same places, and upon
which it lays the main foundation of all its Rules, there may be strong
presumptions deduced thence, to conclude, that the good or bad disposition of
the principles of life may be discovered in the Hand; and that between the
other parts of the body, there are as well as in this, certain resemblances and
sympathies, which depend not on either the distribution of the Vessels* or
their structure, but on a secret influence, which contributes to their union
and association. And this will be no inconsiderable secret, in order to the
opening of the veins, and the application of remedies, in certain places, as we
shall show hereafter.

My work therefore, in this place, shall be to make good the said great
principle. For to descend to the particular rules of that Science, and to give
the reasons thereof, as you have heard me do of some of them; besides, that it
were a disrespect to the Severity of Philosophy, for a man to amuse himself
about things, which, for the most part, are either false or uncertain, as being
not confirmed by just observations, would be too great a flattery of their
simplicity, who give them more credit then they deserve, and a mis-expence of
that precious Time, which other employments challenge.

But to prevent your complaint of this abatement, I shall add to the Discourse,
wherewith I formerly entertained you, the reasons which raised in me the first
suspicion, that there might be some truth in Chiromancy* and that the grounds
of it might be more certain, then many do imagine. And I doubt not but these
reasons of mine will, in like manner, prevail wi^h all those who shall consider
them without prejudice, in as much as the very same thing, which should have
brought it into suspicion, and deterred those who were inclined to the study of
it, plead for it, and invite to the knowledge thereof.

To make this out, it is to be observed, that the first and principal ground of
Chiromancy, is the disposition of the Planets, which it has diversely placed in
the Hand: For it has put Jupiter in the forefinger, called also Index;
Saturn, on the middle-finger; the Sun, on the Ring-finger; Mercury, on the
little-finger; Venus, on the Thumb; Mars, on the palm of the Hand; and the
Moon, on the lower part of it. This foundation, I say, which inverts the
natural order of the Planets, and consequently, seems rather to be the effect
of the extravagance of the first inventors of this Science, then of any reason
they might have to rank them after that manner, is so far from bringing it into
any mistrust of falsity, that, in my judgment, it is one of those things which
have brought into question the truth there may be in it. For there is a kind of
necessity, that the mind of Man, which is so much in love with proportion, and
which, wherever it can bring it in, never fails of adorning and enriching its
imaginations therewith, should not without cause have omitted it here, and that
it has been constrained, by the certainty of the experiences it has made, to
change the order of the Planets, which it has so exactly observed in
Metoposcopy, and in a thousand other occurrences, wherein it has had the
freedom, to make application thereof. And no doubt, had it been a pure
imag^nation, it had been more easy and more rational to have placed Saturn on
the forefinger, Jupiter on the middle, Mars on the next, the Sun on the little
finger, and so to have followed the order, which those Planets observe among
themselves, then to transpose them, as they now are. Or, if there had been a
necessity of this transposition, methinks it would have been more pertinent,
to have the greatest finger governed by the greatest of those Celestial Bodies,
or to have assigned it that which is more apt to motion, then the Ring finger
is, which is both less, and less active. So that there is a great probability,
that so extraordinary a disposal of the Planets is not the production of their
pure fancies, who first spent their endeavors in that Science, but rather of
the necessity, which obliged them to follow the reasons and experiences,
whereby they discovered that truth.

But the observation which Aristotle has given us, in his History of Animals,
adds much to this suspicion. For, in that incomparable Work, wherein it may be
said, that Nature has discovered and explicated her self, he affirms, that
there are, in the Hand, certain Lines, which, according as they are long or
short, denote the length or shortness of Man's life. And this being one of the
first rules of Chiromancy, it is to be presumed, that that Science was not
unknown to him, and that so great a person would not have shuffled into a
History, which was to be one of the noblest draughts of Nature, a doubtful
thing, and such as he was not confident of the truth of. And that, if it be
certain, as experience has since confirmed, there is no rational person, but
will conclude, that the Hand ought to have a stricter connection with the
principles of life, then any of the other external parts, wherein there are no
such marks to be found; That those marks are certain effects which should make
a discovery of the good or bad disposition of the principles, from which they
proceed; And, in a word, that there are in that part such miracles, as are not
yet fully known, and that if the knowledge thereof could be attained, there
would happily be acquired that which Chiromancy does so much pretend to.

Add to this, that he who shall take notice, that the Lines, which are in the
Hands, are different in all men; that in the self-same person, they are changed
at certain periods of time, and that all this diversity cannot proceed from any
internal cause, to us yet known, will, in all likelihood, be forced to
acknowledge, that all those Characters are the effects of some secret,
influence by which they are imprinted in that particular part; And that,
nothing being superfluously done in Nature, they have their particular use, and
do denote, if not any thing else, at least this, to wit, the alteration, which
happens in the principles, whereby they are produced. For to make these
impressions relate to the Articulations, and the motions of the hand, as some
have done, is a thing which cannot be maintained; since the Articulations are
equal in all men, who nevertheless have all their Lines unequal; that there are
many Hands, wherein there is not any Articulation at all, as in the space which
lies between the joints of the fingers: That children newly born, who have
their hands shut all after the same manner, without making in a manner any
motion, have nevertheless many lines, which are different in every one of them:
that those who exercise the same Art, and consequently ought, as near as may
be, to use the same motions, have them nevertheless as different, as if they
were of contrary professions: That, in the self-same person, they are changed,
though there be not any change in his course of life: And lastly, that in the
forehead, where there is not any Articulation, and which part all men move
after the sa^^ manner, there are also such lines, wherein may be observed the
same diversity, as in those of the Hand.

We may further add to these considerations the great Antiquity of the Science
of Chiromancy, which must needs have been studied before Aristotle's time, in
as much as what he says, of the Lines of the Hand, is one of its observations
and rules; the work it has found so many learned men, who searched into the
secrets of it, and have honored it by their Writings: And lastly, the
admirable judgments which have been made according to its Maxims. For it is a
thing comes not much short of astonishment, that, of forty and five persons
whom Cocles had foreseen, by his Art, to be subject to dye violent deaths,
Cardan observ's, that there were but two of them living in his time, to whom
that misfortune had not happened.

But to come to a free acknowledgement of the truth, all these, as we have
already observed, are but so many slight suspicions, which conclude not for the
certainty of this Science. For as to the order of the Planets, which it has
changed, it gives a great presumption, that it has not been done without some
reason: but the question remains still undecided, to wit, Whether it be true,
that those celestial Bodies have any kind of power or influence over the Hand,
and whether any one of them have some particular place assigned it therein? The
Authority of Aristotle may also be questioned, and all this diversity of Lines
may proceed from other causes, and have other uses, different from those
appropriated thereto by Chiromancy.

Moreover, how ancient soever that Science may be, it makes not much for its
certainty, since there are ancient errors, whereby all the precedent Ages have
been abused: And though many great Wits have thought it not unworthy their
study, yet have there been, in all times, some, who have employed their
endeavors about curiosities, as vain, as possibly this may be. In fine, all the
testimonies and examples, which are commonly produced, in defense of it, can
pretend to no more weight and validity, then those brought for Geomancy,
Onomancy, and other Arts of Divination, all which are imaginary and
superstitious, and yet neither want Patrons to protect them, nor fail of
success in the judgments, which are made by them.

On the other side, neither do all these reasons absolutely condemn it, and
make not any otherwise against it, then in that they render it doubtful,
leaving the inquisitive person in an uncertainty, what he ought to believe, and
continuing him in the desire of being satisfied therein. Now the only means to
attain that satisfaction, is to examine the Principles of it, and to see
whether there be any reasons, whereby they may be maintained. For if any of
them be certain, and well grounded, there is not, in my judgment, any rational
person, who joining the precedent suspicions with the truth of these
Principles, but will acknowledge, that if the Science, which has been built
thereupon, is not arrived to the highest degree of certainty, it may come to it
in time, by the diligent and exact observations, which are yet to be added
thereto: And that if it cannot promise as much as Astrology pretends it should
discover by the Stars, which it has placed in the Hand, it may at least judge
of the good or bad disposition of the interior parts, between which and it
there is an undeniable sympathy, and, by that means, conduce very much to the
conservation and continuance of Health, and the curing of diseases. For when it
shall be confined within these limits, and quit all other pretenses, it will
still be a very considerable Science, and such as, for the excellency of its
discoveries, and the advantage may be made thereof, might be worthy the
curiosity of the severest Philosophers, and all those who make it their
business to enquire into the wonderful things of Nature.

These are the considerations which I had, before I fell to examine the
Principle beforementioned, which is the main foundation, on which the disposal
of the Planets, into several parts of the Hand, is built, and in a manner, the
only source, from which, all the judgments which Chiromancy can promise, are
deduced.

The method I have observed therein, is, according to the subsequent Articles,
to show, 1. That, of situations, some are more noble then others. 2. That the
nobler situations are designed for the more excellent parts, and that the
excellency of the parts is deduced from the advantage they bring along with
them. 3. What advantages may be deduced from the Hands. 4. That the Right Hand
is more noble then the Left. 5. That motion begins on the Right side. 6. That
the Hands have the greatest portion of the natural Heat. 7. That the Hands have
a greater communication with the nobler parts. 8. That some secret Virtues are
conveyed from the nobler parts into the Hands. 9. That Nature does not confound
the Virtues, and consequently 10. That the Virtues of the nobler parts are not
received into the same places of the H^nd. 11. That there is a Sympathy between
the Liver and the Forefinger. 12. That there is a Sympathy between the Heart
and the Ring-finger. 13. That there is a like Sympathy between the Spleen and
the Middle-finger. 14. That there is a Sympathy between all the interior parts
and the other parts of the Hand. 15. That the Face is an Epitome of all the
exterior parts. 16. That there is a mutual Sympathy between all the parts;
and, 17. That the distribution of the Veins made by Hippocrates, for the
discovery of that Sympathy, was not understood either by Aristotle or Galen.
18. Whence proceeds the regularity which Nature observes in her evacuations.
19. That the Planets have a certain predodominancy over the several parts of
the Hand. 20. That the Planets have also a predominacy over the interior
parts. 21. That the Moon has such a predominancy over the Brain. 22. That the
Sun has the like predominancy over the Heart. 23. That the other Planets have
the government of the other interior parts. 24. That the principles
established regulate many doubtful things in Chiromancy.


Art. 1. That, of Situations, some are more noble then others.
THat we may therefore give a solid beginning to this Disquisition, it is to be
observed, that there are three orders of SITUATION, wherein all the parts of
Animals, the Heart only excepted, are placed; to wit, Above and Beneath, Right
and Left, Before and Behind. But these are not all equal as to their origin
and dignity, and there is a diversity of perfection, not only among them, but
also between the terms and differences, whereof they consist. For Before and
Behind are more noble then Right and Left, and these last, more noble then
Above and Beneath; But further, Before is more noble then Behind, Right, then
Left; and Above, then Beneath.

The reason of this diversity proceeds, in the first place, hence, that these
three orders of Situation, are answerable to the three dimensions, observable
in every natural body, to wit, Length, Breadth, and Depth, as these last are
answerable to the three kinds of Quantity, which are admitted in every
Mathematical body, to wit, Line, Superficies, and Solid. For the Line makes the
Length, and the Length produces Above and Beneath: From the Superficies comes
Breadth, and from this last Right and Left; And the Solid body produces Depth,
as Depth does Before and Behind.

Now as the Line is more simple, and, by nature, precedent to the Superficies,
and this last to the Solid Body; in like manner Length naturally precedes
Breadth, and this last, Profundity. Accordingly the order of situation of Above
and Beneath is more simple, and previous to that of Right and Left, as this
last is, in respect of Before and Behind. So that Nature always making her
progress, from those things, which are in a lower, to such as are in a higher
degree of perfection, it follows, not only that the Line and Length, are less
perfect then Solidity and Profundity; but also* that the same diversity is
found in the orders of situation, which are answerable to every one of them:
And that consequently, that of Before and Behind is the most noble; that of
Right and Left, next; and that of Above and Beneath least of all, as being the
first, and simplest of all.

In effect, we see that all these things have been distributed to Bodies,
according to the excellence they severally ought to have. For those which have
life do in the first place grow in Length, and as they advance toward
perfection, they acquire Breadth and Profundity. Plants have indeed the
situation of Above and Beneath, but are destitute of Right and Left, Before and
Behind: only living Creatures are endued with these last differences; nay,
there are some of these, which have them not all, that being a privilege
reserved for those, which have the parts better distinguished, and whose
motions are more regular.

Yet is it to be affirmed from what has been said, that all these kinds of
situation may not be found in purely-natural bodies, but they are uncertain and
accidental; as not having any principle, whereby they are limited and
determined, and it is only by way of reference to things animate, that they are
admitted to be in them. For what is the Above and the Before of a Pillar, may
as well be the Beneath and the Behind of it, and he who is on the Right hand of
it, may be placed on the Left, yet without any change of place. But the case is
not the same in things living and animate, wherein all the differences of
situation, which the parts have, are unchangeable, as being fixed and
determinated, by the virtues and operations of the soul. And thus far of the
kinds of situation, compared among themselves.

But he who shall think fit to consider the terms and differences, whereof
each of them consists, will further find, that there is still some one of them
more noble then another, in as much as one is the principle of another, and
that the principle is more excellent then that which depends on it. For the
Above is the principle of the Beneath, the Right of the Left, and the Before of
the Behind.

And indeed the Beginning is a kind of Principle, and the beginning of the
three principal operations of the Soul is wrought in these three differences of
situation. For Nutrition begins by the Above, Motion by the Right, and
Sentiment by the Before. And accordingly the Mouth, which is the first
receptacle of the Aliment, from whence it is afterward distributed all over
the Body, makes the Above in all Animals, as the root makes it in all Plants.
Whence it comes, that the Latin Tongue calls those roots which are deepest in
the Earth, high. And it is commonly said, that Man is a Tree inverted, not upon
this account, that his hair, which has some resemblance to the roots, is
above, and those below; but because he has his mouth directly opposite to that
of trees: for it is not to be doubted, but that the Root is the mouth of
Plants, since it is by that they receive their nourishment, and that it is
thence conveyed to all the other parts. The Sentiment also begins by the
Before; for, the Sense of Touching only excepted, which it was requisite should
be spread over all the parts of the Animal, all the other Senses are placed
before, in regard it must have been the employment of the Senses, to conduct
and regulate Motion, which is always made forward, and begins on the Right
side, as we shall show hereafter. Whence it follows, that the Above, the Right,
and the Before are the Principles of the others, and that they are consequently
more noble then they.

Art 2. That the nobler Situations are designed for the more excellent parts;
and that the excellency of the Parts is deduced, from the advantage they bring
along with them.
NOw Nature always keeps to this Maxim, that she disposes the most excellent
things, into those places, which are most noble, as it may be observed in the
order, wherein she has put all the principal parts of the Universe; And
consequently, it is requisite, that, in Man, who is the Epitome, and
abbreviation, of the World the parts should be ranked conformably to their
dignity; And that it may be affirmed, not onl^ that the most excellent are in
the noblest situation but also, that those, which are in the noblest situation,
are therefore the most excellent. For, it follows thence, that the Hands, being
placed in the upper part are more excellent then the Feet, which are in the
lower; and the Hand which is on the right side is more excellent, then that on
the left. But whereas the excellency of the parts is deduced from the
advantages they bring to the Animal, we are to examine, in order to the
prosecution of our design, what use the Hands may serve for, wherein they are
more serviceable then the Feet, and what advantage the Right has over the Left.

Art. 3. What advantages may be deduced from the Hands.
IN the first place, it is certain, that all Animals, which consist of Blood,
and, for that reason, have the denomination of perfect creatures, have been
furnished with four organs, to facilitate their motion, from one place to
another; which organs are answerable to the four first differences of situation
beforementioned, to wit, Above, Beneath, Right and Left. For there have not
been any instruments, which might be conceived answerable to the two last, to
wit, Before and Behind, there being not any perfect Animal, which naturally
moves backward, and the other organs being sufficient to carry on the motion,
which is made forwards, as experience has made apparent. This truth is
evident, in all kinds of perfect creatures, since that most of the terrestrial
have four feet; volatiles have two feet and two wings; the Fishes have four
finns, and Serpents make four different folds or twinings. And all these parts
are so absolutely necessary, in order to the progressive motion, which is
natural to them, that if they wanted any one of them, it could not be performed
without some trouble. For the Volatiles are not able to fly when their legs are
broken; nor can the Fish swim when they have lost any of their finns; nor ^an
the Serpents crawl, it those parts of their bodies be cut off, which make the
last twinings of their motion.

From what has been said, it may be concluded, that the Hands, being of the
same rank with instruments, which are designed for progressive motion, do serve
to promote that of Man, and that if he were deprived thereof, he would not
perform that motion with so much ease. For we find, that a man cannot run
without much trouble, when his hands are bound; as also that he shuts his fist
when he goes to jump, and, in his ordinary gate, the arm still falls back, when
the leg on the same side is put forward. To this may be added, that, in
infancy, they do the office of feet; that when one is fallen, he cannot well
get up without them; and that if one be to climb up, or come down some steepy
places, they are no less serviceable then the legs. All which are evident
signs, that these parts contribute much to the progressive motion of Man.

But whereas Nature discovers a great frugality in all she does, and makes all
the advantages she can of them, she does not content her self with this first
employment she has imposed upon the hands; but she has designed them for so
many other uses, as it is impossible to give a particular account of them all.
So that thence came the necessity of making a comparison between them and the
Understanding, and affirming, that, as this latter is the form of forms, as
having them all in its power; in like manner, the Hand is the Instrument of
Instruments, as comprehending alone the virtue of all the rest. For it is by
the Hands that a Man receives and retains those things which are necessary and
delightful to him: By them it is, That he defends himself, and overcomes those
things, that are hurtful and prejudicial to him. In a word, they are the
principal Agents, in the compassing of all Arts, and the general Utensils,
employed by the Mind, to bring to light the noblest, and most advantageous
^nventions. And no doubt, Man derives so great an advantage from them, over all
other Animals, that if it cannot be affirmed, as it was by that ancient
Philosopher; That he is wise, because he has Hands, this at least may be
inferred, that he seems Wise, because he has Hands.

This premised, it is not to be admired the Hands should be disposed into the
upper part of Man, as the more honorable place, and that Nature should design
their situation as near as she could to the Seat of Reason and the Senses,
between them and which, there is so great a correspondence and connection.

Art. 4. That the Right Hand is more noble than the Left.
BUt though Nature has placed the Hands in the same rank, as to situation, yet
are they not equal in point of esteem with her, in as much as she treats the
RIGHT hard as the elder, and the first in dignity. For, if those things, which
are most active, are consequently most excellent, and most considerable, it
follows, that the Right Hand, being stronger, and more nimble then the Lest,
should also be more excellent then it. Now, that it has more strength and
agility, is the consequence of its having more heat, which is the source of
those qualities. And its having more heat, is again the consequence, not only
of its being sited on the same side as the right ventricle of the Heart, where
the blood is more hot and suming; not only of its being near the Liver, which
is the spring of blood; not only because the Veins of all the parts on the
right side are larger, as Hippocrates affirms; but also, by reason of its being
placed on the Right side, where motion has its first beginning.

For, as the Spirits are the principal organs of all the actions of the body,
and are by Nature most abundantly sent, to those places, where they ought to be
strongest and have most employment; so is it not to be doubted (since it is
requisite, Motion should begin on the Right side, and that all the preparations
necessary thereto, and the principal effort it requires, should be made in that
part) but that a greater quantity of Spirits make their recourse thither,
chafe, and fortify it, by the heat they carry along with them, and by the
secret influences of the vital principles, which they communicate thereto.
Thence it comes, that even those parts, which do not contribute any thing to
Motion, and are on that side, have a resentment of that force and vigor which
was designed for that sole action only. For the right Eye is stronger and
surer then the left; and the certitude of the sight, which is made by both
together, absolutely depends on the former. All the organs subservient to
generation, which are on that side, are apt to frame Males, and those which are
on the left, Females. And, generally speaking, diseases commonly assault the
parts on the left side, as such as, having least heat, are consequently the
weakest.

Art. 5. That Motion begins on the Right side.
NOw, that Motion naturally begins on the Right side, is a truth which cannot
admit of any dispute, if we but take into our consideration, what passes in all
Animals. For those which have four feet do always begin to go by setting the
right fore-foot foremost; and others, which have but two, ever raise up the
right foot first. Burdens are better carried on the left shoulder then on the
right, in regard it is requisite the principle of Motion should be fre^ and
dis-engag'd: And Painters never forget, in their Pictures, when drawn to the
full length, to dispose them into such a posture, as that the left Leg stands
foremost, as it is commonly seen in those that are standing, whereby the right
is put into an aptitude to move, when they would go from the place where they
are. Nay, there are some creatures, which, having not been able, by reason of
their Figure, to receive the two differences of Right and Left, as the
Purple-fish, and all the others which have their shells after the form of a
Snail, have not nevertheless been deprived of that of Right; in regard that, it
being necessary they should move, it was accordingly necessary, that they
should have the principle of motion.

All these truths therefore being thus established, to wit, that there are some
places and parts in the body, more or less noble; That the more noble are
designed for the reception of the more excellent parts; That the excellency of
the parts is derived from the advantage they bring along with them; And
consequently, that the Hands, which, for the many several services they do, are
placed in the upper part, as being the noblest Place, ought to have the
precedence, in point of excellency, of the Feet.

In the next place, it will be our business to show, that the Hands receive a
more considerable assistance and relief, from the principles of Life, and that
all the nobler parts do communicate a greater virtue to them, then to any other
whatsoever.

Art. 6. That the Hands have the greatest portion of natural heat.
TO make good this assertion, we are, in the first place, to observe, that
Nature has a greater care and tenderness for those parts, which are the more
excellent; That, ordinarily, she frames them first; and that she uses more Art
in the making of them, and more providence in the conservation of them, then
she does in others. This is apparent, in the order she observes in their first
conformation: for, next the Heart and Brain, whereof She first makes a draught;
the Eyes, which, without dispute, are the most delicate and noblest organs,
appear before all the other parts, nay, indeed before there is any designation
of the Liver, the Spleen, and the Reins. The Mouth, in all Animals, is also one
of the first parts that are framed next to the Eyes: Then may be seen the
organs of progressive motion, and, after them, may be observed the Liver, the
Spleen, and the other internal parts; as the last and most exact observations
of Anatomy have discovered. Moreover, we find* that the upper parts are soonest
finished, and that, in Children, they are bigger and stronger then the lower;
whence it comes, that they have all the same proportion, as is in the stature
of Dwarfs; and that it is with some difficulty they are brought to go, in
regard their Legs are too short, and too weak.

Now, it is certain, that all the care, which Nature takes, whether in the
framing of them first, or in promoting their perfection, depends on the natural
heat, whereof she communicates a greater abundance to them. For that is the
general instrument of all her actions, and the real subjunct, wherein all her
faculties reside. So that, if there be any parts which are framed before
others, it proceeds hence, that they must first have had their portions of that
heat, which is always most pure, and efficacious in its source; And if they are
brought to perfection before the others, it must be attributed to this, that it
is done by a particular application of that quality, acting there more
powerfully then in any other part, and being, for that reason, continually
supplied by the influence of the Spirits, which augment and fortify it. Whence
it must follow, that the Hands, which are framed before so many other parts,
and are sooner advanced to perfection and accomplishment, then the Feet, have
accordingly had a more advantageous distribution of the natural heat, and a
larger proportion of the Spirits, then the other.

Art. 7. That there is a greater communication between the Hands and the nobler
parts.
BUt if we would consider these parts, when they are arrived to a more perfect
state, and in a time, when they are able to execute the principal functions,
whereto they are designed, we shall certainly find, that the Heart, the Liver,
and the Brain, do communicate to them a greater portion of Virtue, then they do
to any of the other parts. For, not to mention the actions of the natural and
sensitive life, which are common to them, with the parts aforementioned,
progressive Motion is particularly reserved for them. So that, to perform that
action, wherein there is more difficulty, and more strength required, it is but
just there should come to them a greater relief, and a stronger influence, from
those principal members, then may be necessary for the other actions of life.
It is accordingly requisite, that they should have more blood, more heat, and
more spirits; more blood, to render their consistence the more firm; more vital
heat, that they may be inspired with greater force, and a greater abundance of
the animal Spirits, to convey into them not only sentiment, but also the
motive faculty. For, without these conditions, those organs are of no
advantage, and no motion can be made. In a word, since instruments are not
instruments, but correspondently to the virtue they derive from the cause,
whereby they are employed, it is necessary that those parts, which are the
instruments of Motion, s^^^^d accordingly receive, from the principles of
Motion, that virtue, whereby they are put in action. And thence it also
follows, that they should have that virtue in a higher degree then others; they
should have more Spirits, whereby it might be conveyed into them; and
consequently, there is a greater correspondence between them, and the nobler
parts; which are the sources of those spirits, and that virtue.

This reason indeed is common to the Hands and Feet, that is, comparatively to
the other parts; but if we consider the great advantage, with the situation of
the upper part has over that of the lower, as also the excellency of the
parts, which are placed in the former, and the particular care which Nature
takes, of them, as we have shown already; It will be apparent, that, in the
said distribution of Spirits and Virtues, the Hands have had the best share,
and consequently, that there is a greater correspondence between them and the
nobler parts, then there is between these last and the Feet, or any other
member whatsoever.

Art. 8. That some secret Virtues are conveyed from the nobler parts into the
Hands.
BUt besides this communication and correspondence, which there is betweeen the
Hands and the nobler parts, by means of the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, there
are yet others more secret, such as have more obscure ways and passages, and
yet much more clearly discover the truth we search after. For, if it be
certain, that the Lines of the Hand denote the length and shortness of Life,
according as they are long or short of themselves, as Aristotle and Experience
have taught us; it is necessary, not only that there should be a greater
rapport, and a stronger connection between it and the principles of life, then
there is between them and all the other parts, where those marks are not to be
found: But it is further necessary, that the nobler parts, which are the
sources, wherein those principles are comprehended, should communicate to it
some secret influence which must have no reference to the ordinary and manifest
virtues it receives from them; in as much as neither the blood, nor the
spirits, nor the heat, nor the motion, which they distribute and disperse into
it, do not contribute ought to the making of the Lines therein longer or
shorter, or denoting the length or shortness of Man's life.

Art. 9. That Nature does not confound the Virtues.
THis secret Sympathy, which is between the Hand and the nobler parts, being
presupposed, at least, till such time as we shall have proved it more at large,
by more full and particular observations, we shall lay it down, as a most
certain principle, that Nature does not confound the virtues, especially the
formal and specific, so there be ever so little opposition between them, and
that she always distinguishes them, as much as lies in her power. For, not to
bring on the Stage the Oaximes of Astrology, which has divided the Heavens
into so many Planets and Stars, into so many Signs and Houses, differing one
from another in point of virtue; there is not any order of things in the
Universe wherein this truth is not observable. For example, in perfect Animals,
the qualities necessary to generation have been divided between the two Sexes;
in each of those, the faculties conducing to the government of life, have every
one of them its particular Seat; And all the Senses have their proper organs
and distinct functions. Nay, let us examine Plants, Minerals, and Stones, and
we shall find the same distinction* and, not to descend to the particulars
which might be instanced, we need only direct our observation to the
Lodestone, where it is so obvious to the Sense, that, without blindness, or
stupidity, it cannot be doubted of. For, in an Homogenial body, the composition
whereof is equal every where, and wherein it seems that all the parts should
have one and the same power; yet is it observed, that, of those parts, there
are some, whereto the Magnetic qualities have been particularly distributed,
and that there are two Poles, wherein they have been distinctly placed. And if
what some persons of late pretend that they have made it their discovery, be
true, to wit, that there is a fixed Meridian in the said Stone, it is requisite,
that all the others should also be fixed, and consequently, they have each of
them a different inclination. So true is it, that Nature loves to distinguish
the Virtues, and so averse is she to the intermixture and confusion of them.
And indeed, if she did not exactly proceed, according to this order, things
would be done many times contrary to her design, one quality would destroy
another, and the effects would not be answerable to their causes, nor to the
end, whereto they are designed.

Art. 10. That the Virtues of the nobler parts are not received into the same
places of the Hand.
IF the case stand thus, and it be granted, that there are some particular
Virtues communicated from the nobler parts to the Hand, it is requisite that
they should not be confounded together, nor received into the same part of it;
And consequently, it is necessary, that there should be one place assigned for
that of the Liver, another for that of the Heart, and so of all the rest.

But the main difficulty is, to find out, which those particular places and
parts are, whereinto those influences are received. For though Chiromancy
assures us, that there is a sympathy between the Forefinger and the Liver,
between the Middle-finger and the Spleen, between the Ring-finger and the
Heart, etc. yet does it not produce any convincing proof of this truth; and as
for the Experiences it advances, for the confirmation thereof, they still leave
those unsatisfied, who allow nothing to be granted, but what is backed with
sound reasons, and are looked upon by them as so many reveries and
extravagances of man's curiosity. But certainly, he who could make good this
Sympathy, by other observations, then those which may be deduced from
Chiromancy, and such as should be built upon Medicine, or some other part of
natural Philosophy, might justly make it his boast, that he had discovered the
mystery of this Science, and that he had found out the only ground, upon
which the truth of all Celestial configurations is supported For my part, I do
not pretend that I can produce all those, which might be necessary, to make an
absolute proof thereof; yet dare I affirm, that I have some, which may, as it
were, lay the foundations of such an eviction, and are such, as, having
demonstrated some part of it, will leave an invincible presumption for the
rest, and a hope, that it may be accomplished, after there has been a careful
observation made of what happens to this admirable organ.

Art. 11. That there is a Sympathy between the Liver and the Forefinger.
THe first Observation then, which we have to propose, is, to show the
communication and sympathy which is between the Liver, and the Finger, commonly
called by the Latins, Index. It is deduced from Medicine, which teaches us,
that the Leprozie has its source and principal seat in the Liver, and that one
of the first Signs it gives, whereby it may be discovered, appears in that
finger. For when all the Muscles of the Hand, and indeed, of all the Body, are
full and succulent, those which are subservient to the motion of that finger
wither and dry up, especially that which is in the Thenar, that is, in the
space between the said Finger and the Thumb, where all that is fleshy is
consumed, and there remains only the skin and the fibers, which lie flat to
the bone. Now this could not happen thus, if there were not some analogy, and
secret correspondence, between the Liver and that part, since it is one of the
first that is sensible of the alteration which is wrought in its substance: it
being a thing may be confidently affirmed, that there is not any disease, which
so much corrupts the nature of the Liver, and destroys, not only its virtue,
but also its substance, as this does; which, upon that account, is called the
Universal Cancer of the Liver, and the whole mass of blood. Galen, no doubt,
was ignorant of this sympathy, as being a thing which pure Ratiocination could
never have discovered, when, to be informed thereof, it was requisite it should
be revealed to him in a dream. For he relates, that, being troubled with a
violent pain, which put him into a fright of being troubled with an Imposthume
in the Liver, he had an advice in his sleep, to open the Artery which runs
along that finger, and that the said remedy immediately appeased the pain,
whereto he had been subject a long time before. Which is a manifest sign, that
there is a particular communication between those two parts, and a certain
secret friendship and combination, whereby they are united together.

Art. 12. That there is a Sympathy between the Heart and the Ring-finger.
THe second Observation shall be, to show, that there is sympathy between the
Heart and the fourth finger, which, in regard Rings are worn on it, is commonly
called the Ring-finger. For it is a thing cannot be reflected on without
something of wonder, that, when the Gout falls into the Hands, that finger is
the last which it fastens upon: And Levinus relates, that, in all those whom he
met with troubled with that Disease, the fourth finger of the left Hand, that
is, the Ring-finger, was ever free from it, while all the others were extremly
subject to pains and inflammations.

Now, whereas the parts make a stronger or weaker resistance against Diseases,
according to the greater or lesser force they have, and that their force
depends on the greater or lesser degree of natural heat which is in them, it
must needs be inferred, that that finger must have more of it then any of the
others, since it makes a greater resistance against the evil, then they do. And
whereas the distribution of the natural heat proceeds either from the first
Conformation of the parts, or from the influence communicated to them by the
principle of heat; and that there is no probability, the said finger, having
the same structure and composition with the rest, should have a greater portion
then they of that fixed and original heat, whereof there is a distribution made
at the birth; it must needs follow, that the divident it has thereof should
proceed from the influence, which the principle of heat sends it in greater
abundance then to any of the rest; and consequently, that there is a greater
communication, a greater dependence and connection, between it and the Heart
which, without all dispute, is the principle of that heat, then there can be
between the Heart and all the other fingers put together.

Nor was Antiquity wholly ignorant of this sympathy, in as much as History
informs us, that the Ancient Physicians were of Opinion, that this finger had a
certain cordial virtue, as making use of it exclusively to all the rest, in the
mixture of those medicaments, whereof they made their Antidotes. And thence it
came that they gave it the denomination of the medical finger, which it still
keeps in the Latin Tongue, that this is one of the reasons why Rings have been
ever since worn on it; and that many apply thereto remedies for the weaknesses
of the Heart, as Levinus affirms, that he had often made experience, as also
for the curing of intermittent Fevers, as some do still, with good success

Nor is it of late only, that some have made it their business, to find out
the cause of this intelligence and relation between these two parts. For some,
as Appion, in Anlus Gellius, have affirmed, that there was a nerve which,
proceeding from the Heart, ended at the said finger; others, that that
connection was wrought by an Artery, and that it is manifestly perceived to beat
in Women during the time of their Travel, as also in those, who are wearied
with over-working, and in all the Diseases, which assault the Heart. But,
though this last Opinion be the more probable, yet does it not absolutely take
away the difficulty, in as much as the other fingers have each of them an
Artery at well as this, which Artery proceeds from the same branch, and the
same source as that of the other does. Whereto it may be added, that it is not
necessary there should be manifest conduits for the conveyance of these
virtues, Nature her self, as Hippocrates affirms, making secret paths and ways,
for the passage, not only of her own faculties, but also for that of the
humors themselves, which she would rid her self of.

Art. 13. That there is a like Sympathy between the Spleen and the
Middle-finger.
I might add for a third observation, to discover the Sympathy there is between
the Spleen and the Long or Middle-finger, the miraculous effects, which the
opening of the Salvatella produces in diseases of the Spleen. For that Vein
passing commonly between the Middle-finger, and the Ring-finger, as Hippocrates
affirms, or between the latter and the Little-finger, but sending some branch
to the Middle-finger; it may, with much probability, be imagined, that the
virtue of the Spleen is conveyed by the said Vein to that Finger, and that the
Ring-finger being wholly taken up with the influence of the Heart, cannot
entertain that of the Spleen, if it be true, that the virtues are not
confounded, as we have shown elsewhere. And indeed, what ever some late
Practicers of Physic may say, experience, backed by the authority of the first
Masters of that Science, is of more force then all the reasons can be alleged
by them.

For, besides that it is a thing of dangerous consequence, for any one to think
to make all the rules of Medicine subject to ratiocination, which is many times
weak and deceitful, and to discard the sentiments of the Ancient Professors of
that Art, who were more exact observers of things, then those who have come
after them; this, I say, not urged, I can truly and safely affirm, that, having
caused this vein to be opened in Quartan Agues, above sixty times, it never
failed, after the preparations necessary thereto, either quite to take away the
Fever, or abate much of the violence of it, and made the fits more easily
supportable. Let them not therefore argue any thing from the distribution, nor
yet from the largness of the Vessels: For as one and the same boal of a tree
has several branches, which have not the same virtue, and that, of these, some
bear flowers, or fruits, others nothing at all; In like manner, though all the
veins of the Arm and Hand proceed from the same trunk, yet have they not the
same employments, and they are only so many channels, through which the several
faculties may flow. So that the faculty which proceeds from the Spleen, may
pass wholly in the Salvatella, without dispersing it self into the other veins;
which may be imagined done, after the same manner, as it is, that the parts
disburthen themselves only on those, which are particularly attributed and
affected to them, though they have a connection with some others, by their
vessels and situation; And hence it is that the several transportations of the
humors, and the changes which diseases make from one place to another, do
proceed, as we shall show more at large hereafter.

As to the largeness of the Veins, which makes the evacuations of them more
advantageous then are those of such as are less, it is a thing out of all
dispute, when the question is of diminishing somewhat of the universal fullness
of the body: But for what concerns the discharging of some part, it is
observed, that, many times, the lesser veins, provided they be near it, and
that there be some secret communication between them, do it more safely and
more effectually then the greater. In fine, since it is an opinion, without
prescription of time, that the opening of the vein has proved successful in
diseases of the Spleen, as may be seen in the writings of Hippocrates, Galen,
and all the Arabians, it is not likely it should be approved by such eminent
persons, and that it should continue in repute for so many ages, through which
it has descended to us, had it not been supported and confirmed by experience,
in as much as there is not any Reason, which might have given ground to that
persuasion. And if it be by this way, that this remedy came to be known, there
is no necessity we should reduce it to the examination of reasons, no more then
we do the purgative faculties, and all the other specific virtues, whereof
Medicine is full.

To return therefore to the proof, which this discourse interrupted; we said,
that some advantage might be made of this observation, to confirm the sympathy
there is between the Spleen and the middle finger. But if particular instances
might serve for proofs to general Maxims, I dare affirm, that I have one, which
wonderfully makes good this sympathy. For I know a person, who, being subject
to the diseases of the Spleen, is never troubled therewith, but the middle
finger of the left Hand becomes cold, benumbed, and of a wan color, as if it
were deprived of life.

To this we may add the Story related by Hippocrates, in the fourth Book of
Popular diseases, of the Woman, whose Hypochondriae were so extended, and the
respiration so obstructed, to whom there happened the eleventh day a fluxion
and inflammation in that very finger, which gave her some ease for a certain
time, though afterward, the violence of the Fever, and the Imposthume, which
bred in her entrails, occasioned her death. For it may be conjectured thence,
that some part of the humor, which was in the Spleen, was disburthen'd into
that finger, as being a part, between it and which there was a communication
and correspondence, and that the said disburthening procured it some ease; but
with this further observation, that, it being not possible, that the whole
cause of the indisposition should be contained in so narrow a place, the
remainder occasioned the imposthume, whereof she died. However, to deal
ingenuously, we must confess, that these are only conjectures, not fit to enter
into competition with the precedent observations, which seem to have
demonstrated the truth we are enquiring after.

Art. 14. That there is a Sympathy between all the interior parts, and the
other parts of the Hand.
WHat has been said in the precedent Articles is so evictive, that it were to
be wished, we had as good proofs, to make a distinct discovery of the rest of
the Sympathies, which are between the other interior parts, and some other
places in the Hand. But, to excuse the negligence of not looking after them, it
may with much probability be affirmed, that, since those of the Heart and Liver
are certain and unquestionable, it must necessarily follow, that the others
should be so too, though they are not apparent to us; And that not only the
Brain, and the other parts, which have public and principal functions, as well
as the Heart and Liver; but also that the Spleen, the Stomach, the Lungs, the
Kidneys, and possibly some other parts, should have each of them, in the Hand,
their proper and affected place, between which and them there is a certain
correspondence and compliance.

Art. 15. That the Face is the Epitome of all the exterior parts.
IT may therefore be brought in as a proof of that secret intelligence, which
is between some parts and others, and for the honor of that we now treat of,
that the Hand and Face are as it were an abstract of all the parts of the Body.
For the latter is an Epitome of all the exterior members, there being not any
part of it, but has its particular and manifest resemblance to some one of
them; as the former, in like manner is, of all the interior parts, as having
not any place, between* which and some one of them there is not a secret
connection and sympathy. And no doubt, this is one of the principal reasons,
that these two parts have had so peculiar a constitution of the skin, which,
though all elsewhere, it be separated from the Muscles, is, in these, so
joined, that it is impossible to separate the one from the other: it being
Nature's pleasure, who has designed these parts for Mirrours, wherein all the
others were to be represented, that the flesh should be joined to the skin,
that the impression it receives from the Nerves, Veins, and Arteries, which are
spread through it, should be more easily communicated, and be more suddenly
apparent without. Which thing may also be observed in the soles of the Feet,
which, in some sort, participate of the same advantages with the Hands, and
upon the said advantages there is another Science established, called
Podomancy, which promises the same things as Chiromancy, but not with so good
success, for the reasons we shall give elsewhere.

Art. 16. That there is a mutual Sympathy between all the parts.
NOr is it only between the exterior and manifest parts, that this association
and mutual correspondence is found, there is yet another more general sympathy,
which was known by Hippocrates, and such, as he made it his ground of that
ingenious division of the Veins, which he has made in his book Of the Bones.
For that transcendent Wit, having considered the several transportations of the
humors, and the changes of diseases, so often made from some certain parts to
others, has designed the Veins whereby they might be made, and which
accordingly were to be opened, in order to the preventing thereof. And, that
such an order might be observed in that procedure as should take away the
confusion thereof, he has laid down several heads, or as it were articles, at
which he would begin the distribution of those Vessels; for he has placed the
first in the Heart; the second, in the Reins; the third, in the Liver; the
fourth, in the Eyes; and the Fifth in the Head; from whence he draws four pair
of Veins, which are afterward spread into diverse places.

Art. 17. That the distribution of the Veins made by Hippocrates, for the
discovery of the said Sympathy, was not understood either by Aristotle, or
Galen.
FRom what is abovesaid, it is not to be inferred, that Hippocrates was of
opinion, that those were the first Sources, from which the Veins derive their
origin, as Aristotle, Galen, and in a manner all their followers have imposed
upon him, since he could not be ignorant, that all of them have their root in
the Liver, whence they are distributed into all the parts of the Body, in order
to the conveyance of their nourishment into them; as he afterward makes it
appear in the distribution he has made of the Liver-vein, and whereof he has
given a further account in the second Book of Popular diseases: But it was only
to denote the correspondence there is between those five parts and the rest,
and the diseases and symptoms which they mutually communicate.

Accordingly, when he says, that the left Eye receives a Vein from the Right,
and the latter another from the Left, it is not to be taken literally, as if
those Veins did really derive their origin from those places; but it is to
show, that the indispositions of one eye are communicated to the other, as if
they had veins, whereby they might be directly conveyed. True indeed it is,
that this communication is wrought by the interposition of the veins, and that
these veins do also proceed from some common branch; but that is at such a
distance from the Eyes, that it cannot be precisely affirmed, there is any
intercourse of veins between them, upon any other account then that of the
sympathy there is between them. And this is so certain, that, many times,
Hippocrates considers not the continuity of the veins, in the distribution he
makes thereof, since he shows, that the Head and Lungs hold a correspondence
with the Spleen, though the veins of the Spleen are not united, nor continuous
with those of the aforesaid parts; in as much as it is sufficient, in order to
the correspondence, whereof he speaks, that there should be some kind of
communication between those veins, by some means or other, as we shall show
hereafter.

But to make a more particular discovery of the secret and advantage of this
admirable distribution, it is requisite we should examine some articles of it.
For when he tells us, that, from these four pair of veins, which issue from the
Head, there is one which has two branches, which falling from the Temples
descend into the Lungs, whereof one passes from the right side to the left, and
spreads into the Spleen and left Kidney; and the other passes from the left
side, and goes into the Liver and right Kidney; and afterward both those
branches end at the Hemorrhoidal veins: Does he not thereby teach us not only
why the opening of the Hemorrhoidal veins is good for those, who are troubled
with pains in the Reins, Plurifies, and Inflammations of the Lungs; but also
why the suppression of them causes the Dropsy and the Phthisick? For, though
there be other places, where it should seem, that the reflux of the blood,
which they contain, might be made; yet the correspondence there is between
them, and the Liver and Lungs, is the only reason why it is not made elsewhere.

And questionless, those branches, which, descending from them, pass from the
right side to the left, and from the left to the right, acquaint us with the
cause, which has been sought after to so little purpose; to wit, why the
imposthumes and swellings, which happen from the upper part to the lower, are
not always on the same side, where the source of the disease is observed, but
sometimes on the right, sometimes on the left; whereas those which happen from
the lower part to the upper, are always consonant to the regularity of the
part, where the seat of the indisposition is: For, without this distribution of
the Veins, it is impossible to give a reason for all these accidents.

Nay further, without the said distribution, it would not be known why there is
so great a correspondence between the Breast and the Genitals, that the Cough
ceases, when those are swelled; that the swelling is asswag'd, when the Cough
follows; nay, that the swellings of the Veins which happens to them, correct
the defects, that make the voice small or hoarse.

In a word, this is the only secret, to discover the ways, which Nature
observes in her transportation of the humors, from one part to another, and
for the discerning of the veins, which are to be opened in every particular
indisposition. For, though they have all the same root; though diverse of them
have common branches, which should equally distribute unto them the blood and
humors, which they contain; yet the correspondence and friendship there is
between the parts, prevails with Nature, to force them rather by one vein then
another, and she, making choice of that which is most convenient for her
purpose, meddles not with the others, which are near it, and proceed from the
self-same origin.

And this is evidently remarkable in the sympathy, whereof we have heretofore
given such pressing examples. For, in all probability, it is by the Veins and
Arteries, that the secret virtue, which is communicated from the Heart and
Liver to certain fingers, is conveyed into them; and yet all those; which are
in the Hand, are not employed in that conveyance, and though they proceed from
the same branch, yet is there not any more then one, whereby the virtue of the
Heart, and another, whereby that of the Liver, is conveyed. Otherwise, there
would be no determinate place for the reception of their influence, and all the
fingers of the Hand, which have veins and arteries, would receive it equally;
the contrary whereof we find by experience.

Accordingly, to say the truth, all these vessels are only channels and
conduit-pipes, which cannot, no more then those of springs or fountains, give
any motion to the humors: But they are the Spirits only, which convey and
force them, to those places, where they are ordered to go. And as the
correspondence, there is between the members, is carried on and improved by
means of these Spirits; so is it not to be doubted, but that the blood,
wherewith they are intermixed, marches along with them, from one part to
another, and, consequently, occasions that miraculous harmony of the veins,
observed by Hippocrates.

For no doubt that Harmony was the ground, upon which he and the ancient
Masters of Medicine have, in the same member, observed veins that held a
certain correspondence with several parts, as, in the Arm, the Head-vein, the
Liver-vein, and the Spleen-vein, which they always punctually opened, in the
particular indispositions of those parts, slighting, or at least not minding,
the weak reasons, which the inspection of Bodies, and the affectation of
novelty have since brought into vogue.

Art. 18. Whence proceeds the regularity which Nature observes in her
evacuations.
ANd certainly, if a recourse be not had to this direction of the Spirits, it
would be impossible to give an account of the regularity, which Nature observes
in her motions, when they are absolutely at her disposal, and which Medicine
imitates in the evacuations prescribed by it. For when, in inflammations of the
Liver, the right Ear becomes red; when ulcers rise in the right Hand and right
Foot; when blood issues out at the nostrill of the same side; or when there
happen imposthumes and swellings in the right Ear; And, on the contrary, when
all the same accidents are observable on the left side, in inflammations of the
Spleen; When, I say, Medicine prescribes Phlebotomy on the same side that the
disease is; and teaches us withal, that all the evacuations made on the
opposite side, are dangerous, in case they are made of themselves, or
naturally, or to no purpose, if done by Art. What other reason can be assigned
for this regularity, at least such as may be satisfactory to the mind, then
that alleged by us? For what is said of the straight Fibers which enter into
the composition of the vessels, whereby some are of opinion, that the humors
are attracted, is, to give it no worse term, impertinent: since they are
incapable of making any such attraction, as we have shown elsewhere; since they
are found equally on all sides of the vessel, and consequently cannot
determine, or direct the motion of the humors to one rather then another:
since there are not always Fibers to promote that regularity, in as much as
from the Spleen to the left Nostril, there cannot be any at all, the veins of
the Nose proceeding from the hollow Vein, between which and the Spleen there is
no connection; And, in fine, since the humors which are without the vessels,
nay the very vapors, and the most simple qualities are communicated from one
part to another, after the same manner, so as that the Fibers act not at all
upon those occurrences, they, in case there were any, not contributing any
thing to the transportation of the vapors and qualities.

Moreover, if any shall affirm, that this may be done by those secret conduits
that are in some parts of the flesh, and ascend from the lower parts to the
upper, yet so, as that those which are of one side have no communication with
those of the other, we answer, that it is a pure imagination without any
likelihood of truth, in as much as, most commonly, these evacuations are
wrought by the veins; and that it is requisite, the humors, which flow through
those secret conduit-pipes, should enter into the veins, where it must be
asserted there are not any passages; nay further, that there should be some
conduits cross the body, since the humors sometimes pass from the Right side
to the Left, sometimes from Before to Behind, and most commonly from the Center
to the Circumference. But, all considered, reflecting on either of these
opinions, we cannot find, why there should be so much danger, when the
regularity is not observed in the evacuations of the humors.

But it being supposed, that the said evacuations are wrought by the direction
of the Spirits, it is easily concluded to be necessary, that Nature must needs
be extremely oppressed, when she follows not the order which had been
prescribed her, and when she gets out of her ordinary road, to shun the enemy
that presses upon her. For it is to be attributed to this very reason, that the
motions she makes in sharp Fevers upon even days are always dangerous; in as
much as it is an argument of the violence she suffers, and the disorder into
which the violence of the Disease forces her, when it makes her forget the odd
days on which she ought to engage against the choler, which is the cause of
those Diseases.

But however the case stands, we may confidently affirm, that the regularity we
speak of, without all doubt, proceeds from the Spirits, which conduct the
humors all over one half of the body, and dispose them not at all into the
other, unless there be some great obstruction For, Nature has so great a
tenderness for the conservation of things living and animate, that she has, in
a manner, divided them all into two parts, out of this design, that if it
happened one suffered any alteration, the other might secure it self from it,
and so, in it self, preserve the nature of the whole. Now, this division is
real and manifest in some subjects, as in the seeds and kernels of some Plants,
all which consist of two portions, which may be separated one from the other;
as also in all those members of the Animal that are double. In others it is
obscure, and not observable in an actual separation of the parts, but only in
those operations which show, that they have each of them their distinct
jurisdiction and different concernments; such as is that whereof we speak,
which distinguishes the whole body into two halfs, whereof one is on the right,
the other, on the left. Of the same kind is also that which may be observed in
the members that are single, as the Brain, Tongue, Nose, etc. where we many
times see one half, which is assaulted by some Disease, the other free from it,
though there be not any separation between them.

If then it be true, that Nature, to preserve one half of the body, charges the
other with all the disorder that happens thereto, and permits not the humors,
wherewith it is troubled, to exceed her limits, and, by that means, to fasten
on the other, it is not to be doubted, but that the Spirits, which are her
first and principal organs, do serve her in that enterprise, and that the
transportation of the humors, from one place to another, is their charge, but
only so far as she has given them order to do. And if, to compass this
transportation, there be any necessity of making use of the Veins that are on
the other s^de, yet does not that make them forget Nature's d^s^gn, and the
commands they had received from her; and so they only pass along, if I may so
express it, the borders of their neighbors, to get to the place whereto they
are directed. Thus, for example, when, to disburthen the Spleen of the humors
whereby it is incommodated, there happens a bleeding of the Nose by the left
Nostril, it is absolutely necessary, that they should go out of the
Spleen-veins into the Hollow-vein, which is on the right side. But the Spirits
can conduct them in such manner, as, at last, to make them return all along the
same line, and within that half of the body, wherein the Spleen is. But this is
to enter too far into the secrets of Medicine; it shall therefore suffice, at
the present, to affirm, that the communication there is between the Veins,
according to the distribution made thereof by Hippocrates, proceeds from the
Spirits, which convey the humors from one to another, consonantly to the
relation and correspondence which there is between the parts, or according to
the regularity they observe among themselves.

Art. 19. That the Stars, or Planets, have a certain predominancy over the
several parts of the Hand.
TO return to the Sympathy there is between the interior members, and the
several parts of the Hand, I am of opinion, that the reasons alleged by us for
the maintaining thereof, if they do not absolutely convince the most obstinate,
will, at least, leave in their mind some doubt of the truth thereof. And I make
no question, but that Chiromancy ought to be satisfied therewith, since that
having been hitherto unknown to it, they make good* the chiefest of its
foundations; as also that it will be easy for the said Science, to establish
thereupon the maxims of Astrology, which ought to furnish it with most of its
rules, and secure its preatest promises.

For, if it be once granted, that the interior parts are governed by the
Planets, and that they receive, from those Celestial Bodies, some particular
influence, as Astrology teaches; it must of necessity follow, that the virtue
which is derived from those parts to the Hand should be accompanied by that
which the Planets communicate to them; And that, for example, if the Heart
communicates its influence to some finger, the Planet, under whose government
the Heart is, should also derive his to the same place: it being not probable,
that the influence of the Planet should make a halt at the Heart, while this
last communicates to the Hand that which is proper and natural to it; in as
much as, the truth of the Celestial influences being granted, it must be
affirmed, that those two virtues are combined into one, which is the only
essential disposition, and the specific property of each part. Now, it is a
conclusion of Astrology, confirmed by its principles and observations, That
the Liver is governed by Jupiter, the Spleen by Saturn, the Heart by the Sun,
and so of the rest: whereof the consequence is, that the forefinger should be
accordingly governed by Jupiter; the middle-finger, by Saturn; the Ring-finger,
by the Sun, etc. in regard there is a correspondence and sympathy between those
principal parts and the said fingers, and that the former communicates to the
latter the virtue they have in themselves. All which considered, we are not any
longer to think it much, that Chiromancy has changed the order of the Planets
in the Hand; nor yet ask, why it should place Jupiter on the forefinger, and
the Sun on the Ring-finger, rather then on any other part, in as much as the
nature of the Heart, and Liver, and the sympathy there is between them and
those fingers, has assigned it those places to be, as it were, particular
houses, which the said Planets have in the Hand, as they have in the Heavens
such as are peculiar to them.

These things thus laid down, the whole difficulty is reduced to this point,
viz to know, whether those Stars do really govern the principal parts of the
body, and communicate unto them some secret virtue, which might be cause of the
good or bad disposition they have?

But, for any man to think to drive on this Question as far as it might go,
and to examine all the consequences and circumstances thereof, with the
severity, which Philosophy requires in these matters; besides that it would
bring into doubt those truths which Astrology places in the rank of things
already judged, and such as its most irreconcilable enemies are, for the most
part, forced to acknowledge; it would require a Discourse which should exceed
the limits of our design, nay, indeed contradict the method wherewith all
Sciences would be treated. For this admits not, that all those things which
occurr therein should be brought into dispute; it particularly declares against
the censuring of those principles* upon which they are established, and would
have all those, which are deduced from the conclusions of the superior
Sciences, how doubtful soever they may be, to be received with the same
privilege, as the maxims and common notions of the Mathematics may
challenge. It is therefore sufficient for Chiromancy, that Natural Philosophy
maintains its first foundations; and so whatsoever it afterward receives from
Astrology, ought to be allowed, or at least the disquisition thereof left in
suspense, till the ground of Astrology it self shall have been examined.

Art. 20. That the Planets have a predominancy over the interior parts.
TO remove therefore, in some measure, the distrust which some may have, that
the Conclusions which Chiromancy derives from Astrology for principles, are
wholly imaginary, and contrary to truth, we are now to make it appear, by some
observations not admittable into dispute, That some parts of the body, are
under the particular direction and government of certain Planets.

Nor will this be any hard matter to do, as to some of them. And though we
should reject the experiences, which Astrology might furnish us with upon this
occasion, and that, upon such a rejection, we should not have others convincing
enough to make an absolute proof of this truth; yet would the former lay down a
great presumption for the ascertainment of the rest, and leave a very
wel-grounded conjecture for us to imagine, that every member is governed by one
of those Stars, and that the Principle which Astrology had made thereof, in
order to the furtherance of Chiromancy, is not ill established.

Art. 21. That the Moon has such a predominancy over the Brain.
LEt us then begin with the Brain, and affirm, that it is a thing out of all
controversy, that the Moon has a secret superintendency over that part, and
that it is more apparently sensible of its power, then any of the other parts.
For it swells and abates; it increases and diminishes, proportionably to the
increase or decrease of that Planet. Thence it comes, that the Science of
Medicine, upon a certain knowledge of these changes, takes a care, that, when
Trepanning is prescribed, it should be performed with the greater precaution in
the full of the Moon; in regard the Physicians know, that, then, the Brain is
also in its full, and that causing the Membranes, which encompass it, to come
nearer the bone, it exposes them to the danger of being the more easily touched
by the instrument.

But there cannot be a greater demonstration of the connection and sympathy,
which there is between the Moon and the Brain, then that the Diseases of that
part have their intensions and remissions, according to the course of that
Planet. For, of these ^ndispositions, there are some do so regularly follow her
motions, that they may be the Ephemerides, or Prognostications thereof: Nay,
though she be under the Horizon, and that the person subject to those
indispositions endeavor, by all ways imaginable, to secure themselves against
her influences; yet does not all this hinder but that the breaking out of a
fluxion, which comes precisely at the time appointed, in the change of her
Quarters, will cause them to be selt, though they be not seen either in the
Heavens or the Almanacks.

Moreover, do not the fits of the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness ordinarily
follow the motions of that Planet? Are there not some kinds of distractions,
and extravagances which are called Lunaeies? Nay, to descend even to Horses,
are they not subject to diseases in the Head, known by a name not much
differing from the forementioned, purely upon this account, that both of them
follow the motion of the Moon? In a word, is it not a thing generally
acknowledged, that the beams of that Planet cause stubborn distempers, and
discolor the countenance, if one be a long time exposed thereto, especially if
the party be asleep? Now all these things cannot be referred to any other cause
then the influences thereof, in as much as most of them are many times
observable, when she is under the Earth, and that, granted to be there, neither
her light, nor the Magnetic virtue attributed to her, can have any action upon
us.

Nor is there any doubt made of the truth of these secret qualities, especially
after the observations, which have been made of an infinite number of effects
they produce; and, among others, of the ^bbing and flowing of the Sea, which,
without all dispute, follows the motion of the Moon, beginning always when she
appears either above our Horizon, or that of the Antipodes, and being in her
greatest force, when she is come to their Meridian or ours. For if it can be
shown, as it would be easy for us to do, would this place admit of a discourse
so long as should be requisite thereto; if, I say, it can be demonstrated, that
the Flowing of the Sea cannot proceed from the motion of the Earth, nor from
the light of the Stars, nor from any Magnetic virtue, nor by the impulsion of
the Moon, nor by the Rarefaction caused in the Water by Heat, there remain only
the Influences of this Planet, to be the cause of that miraculous motion, and
no doubt to be also the like cause of all the accidents beforementioned.

Art. 22. That the Sun has the like predominancy over the Heart.
NOw, if it be acknowledged, that the said celestial Body (the Moon) has the
influences we have mentioned, and that it is by them it has the direction and
government of one of the principal parts of the body, there is no question to
be made, but that the Sun, which has the Supremacy, and is, as it were, the
Father of all the other Planets, should have such as are more powerful; and
that he, whose concurrence is requisite for the generation of all things, has
rese^v'd to himself the first and noblest part of Animals, that he might have
the conduct thereof, and communicate his virtues thereto. No doubt but it must
be so, and therefore it may be affirmed, that he has made choice of the Heart
for his Throne, and the place of his exaltation: and that, as he is in the
Heavens, in the midst of all the Stars, so is he placed in the midst of all the
members of the Body, which are governed by the Planets. Thence is it, that he
dilates his virtue into all the parts of the little world; and if, in his
course, he comes to suffer some mal^gnant Aspect, that member is sensible of
it, and sympathizes with the disorders of its Sovereign. Upon this discovery
has it been observed, that those, who are sick, suffer an extraordinary
weakness in Eclipses of the Sun, nay, that those, who are of a more delicate
Complexion, do sensibly resent in themselves the effect of that Constellation.
To this may be added that the vital faculty becomes languishing and weak,
during the time of the Solstices and the Aequinoxes, and, when ever any
malignant Stars rise with him, that Hippocrates has forbidden the making use
of any remedy, till ten days are past. But we must not omit to bring, in this
place, an observation, which that incomparable person has left behind him in
his Book of Dreams, whereby may be discovered, not only the sympathy there is
between the Heart and the Sun, but also that which is between the Moon and the
Stars, and the other parts of the Body. For having supposed, that the Sun has
a relation to the middle of the Body, the Moon to the cavities that are in it,
and the Stars to the external parts, he affirms, that if those Celestial bodies
appear in the dream with the purity, and according to that regularity of
motion, which is natural to them, it is a signification of perfect health, and
that there is not any thing in the body, but is consonant to the rule and
order, which Nature requires. But if the party dreaming seems to see any of the
Planets dimmed, or disappearing, or obstructed in its course, it is a sign of
some indisposition to happen in those parts, between which and those bodies
there is a sympathy and correspondence. For if those disorders happen in the
Stars, the indisposition will be in the constitution and habit of the Body; if
in the Moon, it will be in the Cavities; but if it be in the Sun, it will be so
much the more violent, and more hard to be cured, as such as engages against
the principles of life: it being not to be imagined, that the middle, he speaks
of, can be understood of any thing, but the vital parts, which comprehend the
Heart, and the parts about it.

Now, if this be true, as Reason and Experience has since frequently confirmed
it, we are to conclude thence, that since, in dreams, the Imagination frames
all those Images of the Sun, to represent to its self the good or ill
disposition of the Heart, it is necessary, that it should have some ground to
join together two things, which are so different among themselves, and that it
should find, in the said part of the body, certain Solar qualities, which may
serve for a model for the figures and representations it makes of that Star.
And, in a word, it is requisite, that the particular Influences, which the
Heart receives from the Sun, should be the originals, according to which, the
Soul* in sleep, draws all those admirable copies. If the case were otherwise,
why should she not as well make them for some other member? And why, in the
inflammation of the Liver, for example, where the heat is at that time greater,
then in any other part of the Body, should she not make to herself a
representation of that Star, which is the source of all the heat in the world,
as well as she does in the least alterations of the Heart? Certainly, there
are, in this part, some virtues, so strange and so concealed, that it is
impossible to make any reference thereof to the Elements. For that it should
many times defy the flames, so as not to be consumed thereby; That it should
not grow softer by boiling, if the Auricles be not taken away; That some kinds
of fishes cannot be boiled, if the heart be left within them; these, I say, are
effects so particular thereto, and whereof it is so hard to give any reason, by
the manifest qualities, that there is some ground to presume, that those which
it has are of a higher order, and referrible, as Aristotle affirms, to the
Element of the Stars.

Now, if the influence which the Heart receives from the Sun is the cause, that
the Dreams do, by the images of that Planet, represent the diverse
dispositions, wherein the heart is; it is requisite, the case should be the
same, as to the Moon and Stars, in reference to the Cavities of the Body, and
the exterior parts. And thence, no doubt, it proceeds, that Astrology has
disposed, under the direction of the Moon, the Brain, the Breast, the
Intestines, the Bladder, and the Matrix, which are the most considerable
cavities of the Body; as also that it has divided all the exterior parts
among the Signs of the Zodiac, grounding it self, at first, on this Doctrine
of Hippocrates, whereto it has since added its own Experiences.

Art. 23. That the other Planets have the Government of the other interior
parts.
THese reasons thus laid down, there is no difficulty to be made, but that the
other Planets have also their particular influences, and, as well as the two
already mentioned, have the government of certain parts of the Body. But
Philosophy has been so negligent in preserving the observations thereof, that,
those, which Astrology furnishes us withal, being excepted, we have not any
from which may be deduced the direction of Jupiter over the Liver, that of
Saturn over the Spleen, etc. unless we may be admitted to bring into that rank,
the marks and moles which are found naturally imprinted on those parts. For it
is an observation grounded on experience, that he, at whose birth Saturn has
the predominancy, has commonly one of those marks upon the region of the
Spleen; if it be Jupiter, he has it upon that of the Liver; if Venus, the mark
is to be seen on the privy parts, and the party has another between the
Ey-brows. Upon which observation, Dares Phrygius, in the Pourtraiture he made
of the beautiful Helene, affirms, that she had one between the Ey-brows, which
Cornelius Nepos has neatly expressed, in these two excellent verses: Parva
superciliis nubes interflua raris
Audaci macula tenues discriminat artus.
But I do not account these observations full enough, nor so sufficiently
confirmed by experience, as that a certain proof, of what we pretend to, may be
deduced from them. In the mean time, till there be a more exact disquisition
made thereof, we shall not stick to affirm, that the Sun and Moon, which,
without all dispute, have a predominancy over the Heart and Brain, may well
secure the presumption we have, to imagine, that the other Planets have a
certain Empire over the members, which Astrology has made subject thereto. And
consequently, we may conclude, that the Principle which Chiromancy derives from
it, is not without some ground, and that it may make good a great part of the
promises it makes.

Art. 24. That the Principles established regulate many doubtful things in
Chiromancy.
THese are then the reasons, upon which, I conceived, that some establishment
might be made. This further advantage may be made of them, that they may serve
to regulate many things, whereof there is some controversy in the practick
part of Chiromancy, and to discover the causes of many effects observed
therein. For there are some, who affirm, that it is not only requisite to make
an inspection into the Hands, but that it is also necessary to look upon the
Feet; that the left Hand ought to be the more considered in Women, and those
whose Nativities happen in the night; and the Right, in men, and those who are
born in the day. But the advantage which the Hands have over the Feet, clearly
shows, that the inspection of the latter is to little purpose, and that the
Artist may find out in the Hands, whatever can be expected from this kind of
knowledge. Moreover, the Right Hand being more noble then the Left, in all
sexes, at what time soever the Querent be born, ought to be more exactly
considered, then the latter, especially as to what concerns the Heart, Liver,
and Brain, between which and it there is a greater communication. But, on the
other side, the Left has the pre-eminence, as to what concerns the Spleen, and
the other parts, which are on the same side, by reason of the power which
Regularity has upon those occasions. In fine, what we have said before
concerning Length, Breadth and Profundity, furnishes us with the causes of the
diversity which is observed in the Lines: for those which are simple show that
the virtue is weak, length being the first essay it m^kes; those which are
^ros^'d discover a greater strength in it, as having extended it self into
breadth, and that it does its utmost in those which are deep.

But I forget my self, and consider not, that I insensibly enter into a
particular disquisition of those things, which it was my design to have balk'd.
^^y, I am to fear, I have expressed my self too ^reely in the general, and that
I betray a certain acknowledgment, by the certainty I find therein, that ^ have
the same persuasion for the particular. But I am far from entertaining any such
though^. Tr^e it is, I lay the foundations of a Science, which seem ^o me solid
enough, but I find not materials to complete the Edifice. For most of those
rules and prec^pts, wherewith some would have carried on the Superstructure,
are not sufficiently established; the experiences, by which they are maintained
are not fully verified and confirmed; And there is ^quinte a new supply of
observations, made with all ^he caution and exactness necessary, to give it the
^orm and solid^ty, which Art and Science require But from whom are these to be
expected, since those, who might be thought able to make them, will not busy
themselves about it? And when may they be expected, since there are so many to
be made; and that there is so much difficulty in the making of them well

But if it shall happen, that any will venture their endeavors herein, and
shall attempt it with a confidence of being able to overcome the charge and
difficulties of so great a design, I am to tell them, that, in my judgment,
they will be extremely obliged to you, SIR, for having engaged me, to promote
their work, and assigning them the foundations, on which they are to build; and
you are to acknowledge withal my compliance with your desires. For if you
consider my ordinary employments and studies, you will find, that I have done
them some violence, to humor your inclinations, and that I could not give you
a greater demonstration of the friendship and respects I have for you, then by
exposing my self to censure, to satisfy your curiosity. I am not to fear yours
because I am confident it will be favorable to me; but I dread that of the
Public, from whom no favor is to be expected, and whose judgments are very
severe, and, many times, unjust. It is your business therefore to prevent my
appearance before that severe Tribunal, if you are not sufficiently confident,
that I shall escape the punishment of temerarious Writers; and consequently,
hazard not, at least without great precaution, the little esteem good fortune
has been pleased to favor me with in the world, and for the security and
preservation whereof, I conceive you obliged to concern yourself, since you
know how much I am,

SIR, Your, etc.

THE SECOND LETTER TO MONSIEUR B.D.M. UPON THE PRINCIPLES OF METOPOSCOPY.
SIR,
I Know not whether I ought to complain of your Curiosity, which requires of me
things that are so difficult, or lay the fault on the compliance I have for
you, which will not suffer me to deny you any thing, within the reach of my
performance. When you would have me to establish the principles of Metoposcopy,
upon Physical observations, as I have done those of Chiromancy, you consider
not, that you engage me in an attempt, which Ca dan, Achillinus, and the
Conciliator durst not undertake; and when I comply with your commands, I also
reflect not, that I expose my self to the censure of all those, who shall see
this discourse, and, no doubt, will blame me for bestowing my time in the
examination of things so vain, and so much cried down, and, by my conjectures,
confirming those in their error, who give too much credit thereto. But since I
have not so much command of my self as to balk the satisfaction of your
desires, let me beg your care of my reputation, and entreat you, to acquaint
those, to whom you shall communicate this Piece, with the judgment, which, you
know, I make of these kinds of Sciences. For though I find some grounds,
whereby their Principles may be maintained, nay am of a persuasion, that if
such perfect observations might be made, as were necessary to give them rules,
there might be framed an Art thereof, which would be very advantageous and
delightful: yet does not this hinder my being of opinion, that all those, which
we find in Books, are not only false, but also temerarious, and that those who
make use of them, justly deserve the contempt, which Wisdom has for things of
that nature, and are no less justly subject to those punishments, whereto
Religion has always condemned them. With this precaution, I shall dilate my
discourse upon this subject, according to the ensuing Heads or Articles, and
show; 1. That Metoposcopy has the same Principles with Chiromancy. 2. What
part of the Face are governed by the Planets. 3. That not only the Forehead,
but also the other parts of the Face are to be considered in Metoposcopy. 4.
That the Sun and Moon have the government of the Eyes. 5. That Venus has the
government of the Nose. 6. That there is a correspondence between all the marks
of the Face, and others, in other parts of the body. 7. Whence the Lines of the
Forehead proceed. 8. What particular Planet has the government of the
Forehead. 9. That Jupiter has the government of the Cheeks. 10. That Mercury
has the like government of the Ears. 11. And lastly, that Mars has the
government of the Lips.


Art. 1. That Metoposcopy has the same Principles with Chiromancy.
WE are therefore, in the first place, to affirm, that the same Principle, upon
which Chiromancy is established, serves also for a ground to Metoposcopy, in as
much as all the promises of this latter Science are grounded on the government
and direction, which the Planets have over certain parts of the Face, as they
have over those of the Hand. So that if the said Principle be found well
established, in order to Chiromancy, there is no question to be made, but it
makes as well for Metoposcopy. Nay, it may be affirmed, that the general
reasons, whereof the former has made use, are more pressing and decisive in
the latter; And if they give presumptions and apparences of some truth in the
one in the other they seem to give assurance and certainty.

For, if it be once granted, that the Planets have a certain direction and
government over the nobler parts, and that they inspire their good or bad
qualities into them; That there is also a certain secret correspondence between
the said Parts, and some Members, whereto they communicate the good and bad
dispositions, which they may have; And that for the same reason, the same Star,
which has the government of some noble Part, governs also that, between which
and the other there is a correspondence and sympathy, as we have already shown
in the precedent discourse: If, I say* this be true in Chiromancy, it should be
much more certain in Metoposcopy; since it may be inferred, that, so far as the
Face has the pre-eminence before the Hands, so the direction of the Planets,
and the sympathy of the nobler parts should be proportionably stronger and more
efficacious in that part, then they are in any of the rest.

For certainly, there is not any likelihood, that the Heart, the Brain, the
Liver, and the other principal parts, should have any particular virtue, to be
communicated to certain parts of the Hand, as the experiences we have produced
do make evident, and not make some participation thereof, to that, which is the
most excellent of all, and as it were the Epitome of the whole Man, and the
Mirror, wherein all the dispositions of Body and Soul are represented and
observed.

We need not bring any reasons, or proofs, to demonstrate the truth of these
advantages; they are too evident, and too well known, to leave any place for
doubt; there needs no Eyes, to make a greater apprehension thereof then words
can express: nay, there reeds no more then common sense, to conclude, that, if
there be any influences communicated by the nobler parts and the Stars to the
exterior parts, the Face ought to have a better and greater share of them then
any other part whatsoever.

Art 2. What parts of the Face are governed by the Planets.
ALl those grounds and consequences being presupposed, we now come to examine,
what parts of the Face those are, between which and the Noble Parts and the
Stars* there is a certain Sympathy. For, as this Sympathy is grounded upon the
Formal and Specific virtues, and that Nature confounds not those virtues as we
have shown elsewhere; so it is requisite, that there should be some place in
the Face, answerable to the Heart and the Sun; another, to the ^iver, and
Jupiter; some other, to the Spleen, and Saturn, and so of the rest; and that
every one of them should receive the virtues and influences, which are proper
both to the noble part, between which and it there is a Sympathy, and the
Planet, under whose direction it is

The Vulgar Metoposco^y takes notice of no other places, where these
impressions should be made, then the Forehead, which the Professors of it have
divided into seven parts, in order to the placing of the seven Planets therein.
So that they have assigned the first and highest place to Saturn; the second,
to Jupiter; the third to Mars; the fourth, to the Sun; the fifth, which is
above the left Eye-brow, to Venus: that which is above the right, to Mercury;
and they lodge the Moon between those two. And when these places are marked
with any lines, they denote the power of that Starr, which is appropriated
thereto.

But I fear me, this orderly, and regular disposal of the Planets is a product
of Man's wit and invention, which affects a kind of proportion and Symmetry in
all things, and imagined, that those Celestial Bodies ought to be placed in the
Face, with a respect to the same order which they observe in the Heavens.
Chiromancy has done much better, when slighting that proportion, it changed
the order of the Planets, and placed them in the Hand, after a quite different
situation. For, from thence it has been with some reason concluded, that there
were some experiences, which had obliged it to rank them as it has done, and
to recede from that method, which the imagination so industriously observes, in
all its operations, wherein it ^^ver wants references and resemblances, to
establish its Dreams and Visions.

Now, what makes me to imagine the falling of Metoposcopy into the said error,
is this, that there are many, who have not approved the Situation, which some
others have assigned to those Planets, as having disposed Venus into the place
of the Sun, and transferred the Sun and Moon over the two Eyebrows, and set
Mercury betwixt them. And all this was done, upon an imagination they had, that
it was more pertinent, to place the two great Luminaries over the Ey-brows, in
order to their having a superintendency over the Eyes, which are the clearest
and most luminous parts of the whole Face. But this observance of proportion,
though it seems sufficiently well imagined, is not a rule for the conduct and
guidance of Nature. She proposes to her self such ends and means as are more
solid, then any of these vain Chimera's; and those, who are desirous to enter
into the knowledge of her Secrets, do not make a stand at these appearances,
but search after reasons, grounded upon certain, and well-establish'd,
experiences.

Moreover, the acquaintance I had with a person admirable in the study of this
Art, gives me a rational encouragement, to doubt of all these kinds of
orderings and rankings of the Planets. For he put Saturn in the place, where
the Sun was placed by some, and Venus by others. And whereas that is the most
remarkable part of any in the Forehead, and how scarce soever the lines may be
in that part, yet there never fails to be one there; he conceived* that the
Line of Saturn was proper and natural to the Forehead, and that all the others
were accidental, and, as it were, scattered up and down there, only to denote
the Aspects, which that Planet has to the others. and that, upon a bare
inspection of the Face, he exactly discovered the disposition of the Planets,
as it was at the minute of the Nativity. In the mean time, he made such certain
judgments upon these grounds, and I my self-have made such strange ones, upon
the rules I received from him, that they have created in me a persuasion, not
only that there is a true Science of Metoposcopy* which is not so vain and
deceitful as some might be apt to imagine; but also that that which is
commonly found in Books, and whereof such as are addicted to that study
ordinarily make use, is grounded on such false Principles and Rules, as cannot
attain the knowledge, which may justly be expected, from an Art so miraculous,
and of so great advantage.

But when all is done, what place soever be assigned to those Stars, the
Question still remains, to know, whether there are any Physical experiences and
observations whereby it may be maintained? For, if we must referr our selves to
those of the Science it self, it might produce an infinite number, and I
conceive my self able to establish the Systeme I spoke of before, by those I
have seen made by others, and those I have often made my self. But, in as much
as the testimony a man gives of himself is not legal, and may be suspected;
accordingly, it is not just to believe that which Metoposcopy might give on its
own behalf, and there is not any Art, how vain or superstitious soever, but may
be established by its own observations. Let us thefore try, whether we can
elsewhere find out such reasons and proofs, as may settle the grounds of this
Art, and give, at least, some presumption of the truth there may be in it.

Art. 3. That not only the Forehead, but also the other parts of the Face are
to be considered in Metoposcopy.
BUt, before we come to the examination of the aforesaid point, it is
requisite, we should undeceive those, who are of opinion, that the Forehead is
the only part of the Face, from which Metoposcopy deduces the signs and marks,
which it makes use of; for it is certain, that all the others do contribute
somewhat thereto, as well as it. And indeed, it is not to be imagined* that, it
being granted, there is a certain secret intelligence between the Stars and
noble parts of the body, and the exterior parts thereof, in the Face, the said
correspondence and sympathy should be between them and the Forehead only; And
that the Eyes, the Nose, and the Mouth, which are such considerable parts, and
which Nature frames and conserves with so much care and tenderness, should not
have any communication with them.

And thence it comes, that those Astrologers, who have applied themselves to
this Science, have made every part of the Face subject to some particular
Planet. For, not to mention the Forehead, wherein, as we said before, they have
placed them all, they have consigned the Right Eye to the Sun; the Left to the
Moon; the Nose to Venus; the Ears to Mercury; the Cheeks to Jupiter; and the
Lips to Mars; and according to the constitution of those parts, they have laid
down Rules whereby to judge of the good or bad disposition of those Stars, and
of the effects they might work upon the persons. So that those Rules and
Judgments being under the jurisdiction of Metoposcopy, there is no doubt to be
made, but that it makes its use and advantage of all the parts of the Face, and
that it is a gross error, to imagine, that it has nothing to consider, but
the Forehead.

This presupposed we now come to examine the reasons, whereby the situation,
which every planet has of each of those parts, may be established and
confirmed.

Art. 4. That the Sun and Moon have the government of the Eyes.
IN the first place then, if it be observed that all the Passions are to be
discerned in the Eyes, and that the Heart and Brain are the sources out of
which they proceed, it will be easily judged, according to the Principle laid
down by us, to wit, That those Noble parts of the Body, which receive some
influence from the Stars, communicate it to the Members, between which and
them there is any correspondence and sympathy; It will be concluded, I say,
that, since the Heart and Brain are governed by the Sun and Moon, as we have
shown elsewhere, it must of necessity follow, that they should derive to the
Eyes, the Virtues which they have received from those Planets.

Moreover, it is an Observation confirmed by abundance of Experiences, that
those, who are born, during the time of Eclipses, are commonly weak-sighted, as
if those two great Luminaries, which may be called the Eyes of the Heavens,
communicated their defect to the Eyes of the Body, between which and them,
there is a certain connection and correspondence.

Nor is there any reason it should be here laid to our charge, that, contrary
to the protestation we have made, we borrow this proof from Astrology; for it
is altogether natural, as all those which Medicine and Agriculture deduce from
Lunations, and the rising of the greater Stars: It is not maintained by the
doubtful calculations of Astrologers, and do not affirm, as they do, that the
Sun and Moon, being in unfortunate places, produce that effect; in as much as
that supposes the distinction of the Celestial Houses, and the Aspects, which
belong purely to the Judicial part of that Science.

And I make no doubt, but that, upon these Rules, was made that admirable
Prognostication, which Hippocrates gives an account of in his Prorrheticks,
where he says, that a Physician being sent for in a mortal disease, affirmed
the sick party would not dye of it, but that he should lose both his eyes. For
since that incomparable person, who knew more of the Prognostic part of
Physic, then all those who have come after him, ingenuously acknowledges, that
he knew not the secret of making such predictions; It is very probable, that
this was made by the Rules of Metoposcopy, according to the principle laid down
by us.

But what! It may seem deducible from what we have said, that both the eyes are
equally under the direction and government of the two great Luminaries,
whereas, in the mean time, Metoposcopy would have the Right eye to belong
privatively to the Sun, and the Left to the Moon. It will be no hard matter to
solve this difficulty, if it be remembered, what we have said in the Discourse
of Chiromancy; to wit, That there are two kinds of Influences, which all the
parts receive from the noble parts; the one common and general; the other,
particular and specific. According to the former, there is a correspondence
between the Eyes and the Heart, and Brain, by means of the vital heat, and the
sensitive virtue, which they receive from them; and, in this respect, it may be
truly affirmed, that the Sun and Moon, who have the government of these two
principal parts, have accordingly a general direction over both the eyes. But
if we consider the sympathy and particular association, which is between the
members among themselves, a Truth we have demonstrated both by experience, and
the doctrine of Hi^pocrates, it will be found, that there is some reason to
believe, that the Heart and Brain may have a stricter connection with one Ey
then with the other; and consequently, that one of them may be under the
particular direction of the Sun; and the other, under that of the Moon. Now,
whereas the Right eye is in a nobler situation then the Left; in regard it is
stronger, and more exact in its action, then the other, and that it only
causes the stedfastness and regularity of the sight as we shall show anon;
there is no doubt to be made, but that it is accordingly governed by the
noblest and most powerful Planet.

But that the Right eye it stronger then the Left, is a thing so certain, that
it needs no proof. For, not to urge that all the parts on the right side are
stronger than those on the other, nor yet, that the Right eye is less subject
to Diseases then the other, and, when the forerunners of Death dissolve and
destroy the virtue of the parts, this Eye conserves its own, sometime after the
Left is quite* extinguished; It must, upon this further account, be stronger
then the other, that it is more exact in its action. And this is an evident
sign of its being more exact, that the regularity of the full and complete
sight, which is made with both eyes, depends only on the Right. Hence it
comes, that when a man looks with both eyes on any Object whatsoever, and comes
afterward to shut the Left Eye, the Object will appear to him in the same
situation, and upon the same ^ine, as he had observed it, with both eyes. But,
if he shuts the Right Eye, the Object will appear no longer upon the same Line,
and seems to have changed its situation: Which is a certain argument, that the
regularity of the complete sight proceeds from the Right Eye, since the line
upon which it sees the Objects, is the same with that, whereby both eyes are
directed.

Art. 5. That Venus has the government of the Nose.
AS concerning the proof we have, that the Nose is under the particular
direction of Venus, it is so convincing, that the most obstinate cannot doubt
of it, it being still presupposed, that there is any part of Man's body under
the government of some Planet or other. For, according to the concurrent
testimonies of all Astrologers, which are also confirmed by the common manner
of speaking in all the nobler Languages, Venus has the oversight of
Generation, and the parts necessary thereto. Now it is out of all controversy,
that there is a correspondence and sympathy, between them and the Nose; and
consequently, it is requisite, that it should receive the same Influence, which
that Planet communicates to them, and that it should be under the same Empire
as they are subject to. I conceive there is not any person so ignorant, as not
to know somewhat of the correspondence we spoke of, since it is come even into
proverbs: but all happily are not acquainted with one thing which evidently
demonstrates it, and is this, That the natural marks or moles, which are upon
the Nose, infer and denote others about those parts, disposed in the same
situation, or at least such as is, in some measure, answerable to that they are
in, upon the other.

Art. 6. That there is a correspondence between all the marks of the Face, and
others in other parts of the Body.
ANd certainly it is a thing worthy admiration, and such as, in my judgment, is
not sufficiently taken into consideration, That there is not any of those
natural marks upon the face, but there is another upon some certain and
determinate part of the Body, particularly answerable thereto. For if there
chance to be one upon the Forehead, there will be another upon the Breast; and
accordingly as the former shall be in the midst of the Forehead, or in the
upper or lower part thereof, on the one side or the other, that upon the Breast
shall have the same differences of situation. If there be one upon the
Ey-brows, the correspondent mark shall be upon the Shoulders; if upon the Nose,
the other shall be about the Parts we spoke of in the precedent Article; if on
the Cheeks, the other shall be on the Thighs; if on the Ears, the other shall
be on the Arms, and so of the rest.

It is certainly impossible for a man to consider the miraculous references of
these correspondent marks, and not take occasion thence, to reflect on the
infinite wisdom of God, who reducing all things to unity, that they may be the
more confo^mable to himself, after he had made an abridgment of all the World
in man, thought fit to make an Epitome of man in his own Face. For it cannot be
affirmed, that this correspondence, whereof we speak, is simply in those marks,
since they are all framed of one and the same matter, and consequently, they
cannot have any more reference to one then to another: But it must of necessity
be in the parts themselves, and that the association there is between them
should be the cause, that one cannot have a mark imprinted on it, but the
correspondent member must at the same time undergo the same impression.
Accordingly we find, besides the secret concurrence they may have together, a
sensible and manifest rapport and resemblance in their situation and structure.
For the Breast, which is that part of the Body, below the Head, which is most
bony and most flat before, is exactly answerable to the Forehead, which has
the same qualities. The parts necessary to Generation are in the midst of the
Body, with a certain prominency, as the Nose is in the midst of the Face. The
Thighs, which are very fleshy, and sideling, have a reference to the Cheeks,
which have the same situation. The Ey-brow is answerable to the Shoulders by
reason of the eminency remarkable in both; the Ear, to the Arm, as being both
on the sides, and as it were our of play; and so of the rest. Yet is it not to
be inferred hence, that this resemblance is the true source of the said
sympathy; no, it is not sufficiently adjusted, and exact enough, to produce
effects so like; and it is necessary, that there should be some more secret tie
and connection, whereby these parts might be so associated among themselves as
they are, and which may be the principal cause of that miraculous Harmony which
is found among them, whereof these natural Characters are the irreproachable
witnesses.

Art. 7. Whence the Lines of the Forehead proceed.
THe Forehead is, no doubt, that part of the Face, wherein Metoposcopy finds
most work to busy it self about, and where it meets with the greatest number
of those Signs, upon which it makes its judgments, which are therefore the more
certain, in regard there is a greater diversity of the said marks, and that
they are the more apparent in that part then in any other. And this is also the
reason, why it has taken the name it bears from that part, as such as it looks
upon as the most considerable and most necessary.

For certainly, he who shall make it his business to observe, that in so narrow
a space, which should naturally be smooth and eaven, there is framed so great a
variety of lines, points, and irregular figures; That of these, some start out,
as it were, of a sudden, and others vanish, and are blotted out; That some are
more deep, others more superficial; some shorter, some longer; some pale, and
others in a manner betraying a certain color; That there are not any two men
in the world, in whom they are alike; And lastly, that all this diversity of
lines may be observed in the same person; He, I say, who shall take a
particular notice of all these things, will have just occasion to believe, that
there is in the Forehead some secret which is not known to men, and that the
impressions made therein have nobler and higher causes then any that are in
Animals.

And indeed, upon examination, it will be found, that all the reasons which may
be alleged for this diversity of Lines, cannot be deduced, but either from
Motion, which gives a certain fold or wrinkle to the skin where it has been
often accustomed to be made, as it happens in the joints; or from Drought,
which causes a contraction of the skin and wrinkles, as may be seen in fruits,
that have been long kept, and in the furrows and wrinkles which old Age spreads
into all the parts.

But there is no probability, that the Lines of the Forehead should be the
effects of the motion which it is wont to suffer, since they are different in
all men, who nevertheless move that part after the same manner. For all persons
have the same manner of dilating and contracting the Forehead; every one has
the same muscles purposely designed for those motions; And Nature inspires into
every one the same motives, upon which they ought to be made.

Some may happily affirm, that the Consistency of the skin is the cause of that
diversity, and according to its being more thin or thick, the folds are more or
less easily made in it. But are there not abundance of persons, who have the
same constitution of Skin, wherein yet there is not any line like one the
others? Are there not some, whose skin is very delicate and thin, wherein there
is not any to be seen? And are there not also those, who have it thick, which
yet is full of them?

Nor can it be maintained, on the other side, that Drought is the cause of
these Lines, since it may be observed, that some children of a sanguine
Constitution, have more of them then some decrepid old men; And that it is
found they are not alike in old people, though, it is possible, the Drought may
have been equal. Besides, I would fain know, it being supposed that this
quality should be the cause of these impressions, whence it comes, that young
people, who have wrinkles in their Foreheads, have not any in the other parts?
And why those which old Age imprints on the other parts of the skin, are alike
in all men, and are not so in the Forehead.

Yet it is not to be inferred, but that Motion and Drought contribute very much
thereto, but with this caution, that they do not occasion the first draughts of
them, and only promote their sooner, or more remarkable appearance. There is
some other Cause, which draws the first design of them, and, as a
Master Builder, takes the first measures thereof, and begins the structure;
which is afterward completed, by the contributory labors of other workmen.
For, to be short, all the Lines are designed on the Forehead, even from the
very birth, though they do not immediately appear there, but discover
themselves after a certain time, sometimes sooner, sometimes later; sometimes
they are deeper, sometimes more shallow and superficial, according to the
efficacy of the Cause, whereby they are imprinted, and consonantly to the
nature of the Temperament of every particular person, and the motions of the
Forehead whereto he is accustomed. Since it is not to be doubted, but that a
man often transported with anger, or such a one as is of a froward peevish
disposition, is wont to bend or knit his brows, that is, to frown, and by that
means causes certain folds in the Forehead, which contraction makes the Lines
drawn therein to appear sooner, and more remarkably, then they would have done
otherwise.

Since then it is to be inferred, from what has been delivered, that the first
impression of these Lines is not to be attributed to any Cause assignable
within the Body, we must endeavor to find one without it; And whereas there
are undeniable proofs, that there are certain Planets, which have the
government and direction of some particular members, wherein they produce such
effects, as cannot proceed from any thing else; It must be concluded thence,
that the lines of the Forehead are of that rank, and that they cannot be
imprinted there, but by some one of those celestial Bodies, under whose
government that part is.

There are therefore two things to be taken into our present examination* the
one, What Planets they are, which have the government of the Forehead: the
other, What Reasons and Experiences there are, whereby the said direction may
be confirmed.

Art. 8. What particular Planet has the government of the Forehead.
AS to the former Question, there is some difficulty in it, by reason of the
several opinions of those, who have written of that Science. For some of them
do make the Forehead subject to one particular Planet; others are persuaded,
that all of them have a certain government of it. But these latter are not
agreed among themselves, as to the situation of them in it, as we said
elsewhere. Had they brought any proofs to make good what they advance, 'twere
rational we should submit to their decisions: But having not produced any, we
are left at liberty to make our own choice, and, after so many experiences, as
we have seen confirmed upon other principles, we may reject these, and stand to
such as are maintained upon better grounds.

We conceive it therefore more probable, that the Forehead should be g^vern'd
by one particular Planet, rather then by all together, in as much as all the
other parts of the Face, which are more noble, and of greater advantage then
that, have each of them but one of those Stars, whereto they are subject. For
if there be a correspondence and sympathy between the parts of the Body, and
that those between which there is such a correspondence are governed by the
same Planets, it being supposed that all the Planets have some government of
the Forehead, it must follow, that every part of the Forehead, wherein any
Planet is placed, should correspond with the other Members, over which the same
Planet governs: And whereas the Moles, dispersed up and down several parts of
the Body, are the certain marks of that sympathy, it will be accordingly
requisite, that those, which happen in the Forehead, should denote others on
all the Members governed by those Stars. Now, it is clear, that they have not
any correspondence, but with those on the Breast; And consequently the Forehead
must be subject only to that Planet, which commands the Breast. And whereas
those two, viz. the Forehead and Breast are the most bony parts of the whole
Body, and that all the Bones are under the direction of Saturn, as we are
taught by Astrology, it follows, that the said Planet has its particular seat
in the Forehead.

But if that be not granted, this at least will be very probable, that if there
be any place more noble then another in the said part, it must be that wherein
the said Star acts most powerfully, and in which it imprints the Lines, which
are the effects and marks of its power. And in that case, the Line which is
directly in the midst of the Forehead belongs to Saturn, since the middle is as
it were the center and principle of the extremities.

From this Ratiocination, it may be deduced, that the Systeme of the
Physiognomist I spoke of before, is better grounded, then that of the ordinary
Metoposcopy, and that besides the Line of Saturn, which is in the midst of the
Forehead, and that which seems to be most proper and natural thereto, all the
others serve only to denote the rapports and aspects, which there might be,
between Saturn, and the other Planets.

But how ever the case stands, he attributed, to the said Planet, those lines,
after a manner different from that which is commonly used. For he assigned to
Mercury that which is immediately under that of Saturn, and that above it, to
Mars; the next to Venus, and the uppermost to Jupiter; and, on the lowest,
which are just over the Eyebrows, he placed the Sun and Moon. And according to
the constitution which each of them had, he judged of the Aspects, between
Saturn and those Planets, in the Horoscope, which proceeding proved consonant
to the calculation of Judiciary Astrology. So that, according to his judgment,
all those lines belonged as much, or more, to Saturn, then to those other
Planets, and deprived him not of the absolute government he ought to have of
the Forehead.

Upon which account I cannot forbear affirming, that the said person had so
exact a knowledge of this Art that he found in it certain Rules, whereby to
discover the day and hour of the Nativity; And that I my self, having made use
thereof, failed not above ten times at the most, in an hundred judgments, that
I made of it. Now, if the Science may arrive to that pitch, there is hardly any
one but will conclude, that it will be able to make good its promises, in the
discovery of things less obscure and abstruse, such as are the dispositions of
the noble parts, the Inclinations and manners of Men.

But to produce any other reasons of all these particulars, then the
experiences which the Art it self has thereof, is a thing not in the power of
Philosophy, which, it seems, has been negligent in making such Philosophical
observations as might have rendered the truth thereof more manifest. Let it not
however be accounted an inconsiderable assistance, that she has given us some
light, to discover, that some parts of the Face are under the direction of
certain Planets. Let us now see, whether she will help us, to show, that
Jupiter has the government of the Cheeks.

Art. 9 That Jupiter has the government of the Cheeks.
NOr will it be any hard matter for our said Directress, Philosophy, to satisfy
us, that Jupiter has the government of the Cheeks, if it be true, that the
Liver is under his jurisdiction. For, as those parts are the most fleshie, and
most sanguine of any about the Face, and such, as wherein the alterations of
the Liver and Blood are soonest and most evidently apparent; so is there not
any doubt to be made of it, but that they are under the same direction, as the
other. Besides that, the Moles, which are seen on the Cheeks, denote others on
the Thighs, which have a correspondency to the Cheeks, and are governed by the
Sign Sagittary, wherein is the House of Jupiter. For we have shown in the
precedent Discourse of Chiromancy, that the Astrologers have learned of
Hippocrates, to distribute the Veins to all the exterior parts of man's body,
according to the correspondence, and sympathy, there is between the said parts.

Art. 10. That Mercury has the like government over the Ears.
THere is some difficulty to know, whether Mercury has the government of the
lips, as some affirm, or whether Mars has the conduct thereof. But there is a
greater probability, that the Ears are the parts governed by Mercury, in regard
the Moles, to be seen on them, have others, correspondent to them, on the Arms,
between which and them there is a sympathy. Now, it is a thing generally
acknowledged in Astrology, that Mercury has the government of the Arms, and
that the Sign Gemini, wherein he has established his principal House and his
exaltation, does also govern those parts.

Art. 11. That Mars has the government of the Lips.
MOreover, there is correspondence between the Lips and the Belly, and the
Moles to be seen on the former denote others on the Latter, which is under the
direction of Mars. Add to this, that the Lips are ulcerated in Tertian Fevers,
which no doubt proceed from Choler, which is under the government of that
Planet. And this is an observation, which deserves to be exactly considered in
this place. For this ulceration being critical, and in a manner proper to those
kinds of Fevers, it must needs be inferred, that there is a particular sympathy
between the Lips, and the humor, which is the source of the disease, and that
thence proceeds its fastening on that part, rather then any other whatsoever. I
am,

SIR, Your most humble, and most affectionate Servant, LA. CHAMBER.

CHAP. IX. What Judgment is to be made of Chiromancy and Metoposcopy.
WHat we have delivered in the two precedent Discourses is all we can say upon
a Subject which has not yet come under the examination of Philosophy. For
though there have been some great Wits, who have addicted themselves very much
to the study of Chiromancy and Metoposcopy, yet is there not any one of them,
that has taken the pains to produce the least reason, to maintain the
principles thereof.

Not that I am absolutely of opinion, that those, which I have made use of, are
such as may satisfy either the expectation which some may have conceived
thereof, or yet the severity which Philosophy observes in these matters. To
give them their just desert, they are only conjectures and light presumptions,
but with this encouragement, that we must expect to run some hazard in the
disquisition of natural things, since there are so few of them, wherein
Demonstrations and convincing proofs can find any place.

For, what advantages soever we may have in order to the discovery of man, we
shall find it still a work of so much delicacy, and wherein there are so many
several pieces to be considered, that the number of those we are ignorant of,
very much exceeds that of those which we know. And whereas he is in effect a
little World, it may accordingly be affirmed, that we are as little acquainted
with the things which are abbreviated in him, as those whereof the great World
consists, which are wholly concealed from our knowledge.

The Head is, no doubt, the Epitome of the whole Heaven; it has its
Constellations and Intelligences as well as the other. But if we observe the
Stars, their situation and their motion, and yet not know what their Nature is,
nor why they are so disposed; the same thing may be said of all the parts of
the Face. For, not to speak any thing of the figure of those, which are the
most considerable, the Lines that are in the Forehead, and about the Eyes; the
strokes and features which are of each side of the Nose, and those that compass
the mouth, and a hundred other Lineaments, which diversifie that Part, and make
it unlike in all men; All this, I say, is easily discovered, and as easily
imagined, that Nature has not done it without some design. But the manner,
after which she does it, and the end, whereto she designs it, are not yet fully
known: For the Observations which have been made upon that account, have made
but a weak discovery thereof, the number of them being not considerable enough,
nor they made with that strictness and exactness they ought to have been. Nay,
most of those that are found in books are temerarious, and force the Science
beyond its just limits. For it must be granted, that the greatest jurisdicton,
that Metoposcopy and Chiromancy can have, reaches no further, then to judge of
the Dispositions of the Body, and the natural Inclinations of the Soul, and
that, if they pretend to the Confidence of Judicial Astrology, which would fain
bring free and contingent actions under its Jurisdiction, they deserve the same
contempt, and are liable to those punishments, which Religion has always
condemned the other to.

But if they keep within the limits we have assigned them, it must be
acknowledged, that there are some general reasons very favorable to them, and
such as evidently show, that there may be some truth in them. For it cannot be
doubted, in the first place, but that the Stars act by virtues, which are
different from Light, in as much as all the effects which they produce cannot
be attributed only to that quality, and that there is a necessity of having a
recourse to to the Influences, to give a reason of the flowing of the Sea, and
some diseases, which, without all dispute, follow the motion of the Moon.
Secondly, it is as certain, that there are some parts of man's body, over which
those Stars have a particular government, and that since the Heart and Brain
are of that order, in respect of the Sun and Moon, it is an invincible
presumption, that the other noble Parts are governed by the other Planets. And
lastly, that there is a connection and correspondence between those parts, and
some of the exterior, whereto they ought to communicate the virtues and
qualities, which they have received from the Stars.

Now, from these general Maxims, it follows, that there is a correspondence and
sympathy between all the Parts of the Face and Hand, and the Interior parts of
the Body, and the Planets, whereby they are governed; And consequently, that
there is a possibility of discovering the Dispositions by those latter, and,
consequently to that, the Inclinations, which accompany them, by the experience
which has been made of the nature and power which those Stars have.

I know well enough, that the Enemies of Astrology laugh at the particular
virtues commonly attributed to them: But there is a certain mediocrity to be
observed, between those, who deprive them of all, and those, who allow them too
much. For no man should be so far self-willed, as quite to destroy their
Influences, for the reason alleged by us; nor, on the other side, so credulous,
as to grant them all those virtues, which the vanity of the Judicial part of
the Science is so liberal as to give them. Though there be in it a thousand
frivolous and ridiculous suppositions; yet may there be also derived from it
some rational observations, which require a sincere acknowledgment. When it is
taken into consideration, what Agriculture, the Art of Navigation, and Medicine
affirm, of the Rising and Setting of the Stars; When it is seen, that the
Horoscope gives so exact a description of the Stature, the Temperament, and the
humor of those whose Nativities are examined; would it not be an insupportable
obstinacy, or rather a blindness of mind, out of pure willfulness, to contest
against the virtue of the Stars, upon which those judgments are made, and,
without any reason, to oppose such experiences as have been observed an
infinite number of times.

For my part, I am so distrustful of the strength of Humane Understanding, and
I find there are so few things in Nature, into which it is able to penetrate,
that, if Religion had not declared free actions to be exempted from all
subjection to the power of the Stars, I durst not, upon the pure Ratiocination
of Philosophy* affirm the contrary. What! We are ignorant of that which we
ought to know best? Nay, we are yet to learn what it is to Think, and know not
how we think, and yet we shall have the temerity to regulate the power and
influences of the greatest, and most admirable Bodies that are in the World,
and to presume that those are deceived, who allow them more then we imagine
they have?

It speaks therefore greater prudence and moderation, to comply with the common
opinion, which attributes, to those Bodies, the direction and government of the
principal parts of Man's body, as being such as is confirmed, by the many
observations and experiences, which have been made thereof. But it must be done
with this precaution however, that we suffer not our selves to be abused, by
the consequences which may be deduced from this Truth. For we must so look on
it, as not to extend much beyond the principles and grounds of Chiromancy and
Metoposcopy; in as much as particular Rules, which have been built thereon, are
either false, or uncertain. And indeed, it may confidently be affirmed, that
those Rules which pretend to judge of free and contingent actions, are absurd
and criminal; And that those others, which are limited, and levelled only to
the discovery of corporeal dispositions* are doubtful, as being not
sufficiently confirmed, by just and exact observations.

It were therefore to be wished that some persons had applied themselves more
seriously, then has yet been done by any, to this curious disquisition, in as
much as it would possibly have furnished us with a fuller knowledge of that
miraculous harmony which is observable among the parts of man's body, and g^ve
the occasion of its being sometime called (...) Mi^acle of Miracles. Nay, it
may be further presumed that the Science of Medicine, might have derived some
light, and assistance from it, in order to a more exact discovery of the
dispositions of the interior parts, and the making of more certain judgments
of the success of Diseases. And lastly, THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN would also have
made considerable advantages of such a disquisition, and would have inserted
among its own Rules, such as those kinds of Sciences should have supplied it
withal: but with this caution on the other side, as not to permit those other
things, which are not only uncertain, and, upon their ill-groundedness
unmaintainable, but also cried down as vain and superstitious, to creep into a
design so serious, and so solidly grounded, as that it pretends to. So that,
instead of going so far to find out the Signs, which may discover the
Inclinations, the Motions of the Soul, Virtues and Vices, This contents it self
with those, which are nearer hand, and more manifest, and such as may be
deducible from sublunary Causes.

SECT. 1. Of the several parts which complete THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN.
THe said Art then makes account to comprehend all the knowledge it may give,
and the several discoveries it is to make, in Nine general Treatises; whereof,
The First shall contain the Characters of the Passions, in two and twenty
Chapters. The Second, the Character of Virtues and Vices, in an hundred
Chapters. The Third, the Temperaments, in two and fifty Chapters. The Fourth,
the nature of those living Creatures, which contribute any way to the
Physiognomy, in twenty nine Chapters. The Fifth shall treat of the Beauty of
Man and Woman, in fifty Chapters. The Sixth, of the Morality of several
Nations, according to the Climates, in sixty Chapters. The Seventh, Of the
Inclinations, proceeding from Age, Fortune, Course of Life, etc. in twenty
Chapters. The Eighth, Of Dissimulation, and the ways how it may be discovered.
The Ninth, and last, shall set in order all the Signs which shall be deduced
from these great sources; shall show, as it were, at the first sight, those,
which ought to discover every Inclination in particular, every Motion of the
Soul, every Virtue, and every Vice, and so complete and give its utmost
perfection to THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN.


CHAP. X. What qualities are requisite in that person, who would apply himself
to THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN.
IF Antiquity had reason to say, That the case is the same with Sciences, as
with Seeds, and Plants, which never bring forth any thing, if they meet not
with a soil fit for them; it is certain, that there is not any, wherein that
Truth may be more evident, then in those Sciences, which pretend to Divination,
as being such as will become barren and of no advantage, if they meet not, in
their minds who are desirous to make use of them, with the dispositions which
are necessary thereto. Thence it is, that Ptolemy tells us, that it is not
sufficient to know the Rules and Maxims of them, and that if the Student have
not the particular Genius, which those Sciences require, he will never be able
to make a rational judgment. So that before he exercise himself in THE ART HOW
TO KNOW MEN, he ought to know, what that particular Genius is, whereof he
stands in need, as also the Qualities he should be Master of, to make his
advantage of that familiarity.

I shall not make the business more difficult then it is, nor bring in hither
all the other Sciences, to keep this Art of ours company. I might say, that
Medicine and Moral Philosophy are particularly requisite thereto; That treating
of Climat^, and the natures of several Animals, it cannot well be without
Geography, and Natural Philosophy; That treating further of the Proportions and
Figure of parts, it it might seem not well able to do it, without Arithmetic
and Geometry; And, in fine, that its judgments being grounded on a continual
ratiocination, and one of its Rules deriving its name from Syllogism, it were
requisite, that he, who would apply himself thereto, should be an excellent
Logician. And no doubt, to proceed further in this consideration, we may
affirm, that there is not any Science, but may be made serviceable to this. But
there is no necessity, that a Man should go and consult Hippocrates, Aristotle,
Euclid, and Ptolemy to become a Proficient therein, and balking all those
studies, that of the present work will, in my judgment, be sufficient to learn
It, and to make an advantageous use thereof.

But for this latter, I require in him, who would exercise himself therein, two
things, which I cannot absolutely teach him. One shall promote the good use he
may make of this Science; and the other shall prevent his abusing of it; as
shall be deduced in the two next ensuing Articles.

Art. 1. Of the Genius requisite, or in order to the exercise of this Art.
OF those two things, the former is the particular Genius we spoke of, under
which denomination, I comprehend all the endowments and qualities, requisite to
this Art: For I dissent from those who derive it from the Stars. It is a
fantastic imagination of the Astrologers, to assign to every man two Genius's;
one to have the presidence of Life, and is such as proceeds from the
disposition of the Heavens, at the time of the Nativity; the other, to preside
over the profession, which the party is afterward to follow, and that does not
proceed from the general constitution of the Heavens, as the former, but from
the particular disposition of some certain Stars, to which they assign the
direction of the Art, and Profession, which a man is to exercise,; and these
they affirm to be Mars, Venus, and Mercury, in the first, seventh, or tenth
House. And this is that they call the Ascendent, of whose influence this Genius
is the effect; This is that which the Platonists keep so much stir about, and
whose acquaintance and familiarity they so earnestly endeavor to acquire. But
these are no better then ridiculous and dangerous Visions, which insinuate a
certain false representation of those Truths taught us by Theology, and such as
Faith and Philosophy do justly condemn.

For my part, I am of Opinion, that we may say, of this Genius, what
Hippocrates says of the good fortune of the Physician, that this latter
proceeds not from any occult cause, which produces its effects without him, and
contrary to his expectation, but is absolutely the effect of his Abilities, and
Conduct; And, in a word, that his Prudence makes his own good fortune, and his
Patient's. For, without question, the case is the same with the Genius, which
is necessary for the Art we treat of. It is not some invisible Demon, that
illuminates the mind, by secret lights and guides, and directs it, in
particular discoveries of this Science: But it is a just and exact application
of its Rules, or rather that Prudence, which, putting the general Maxims in
use, fitly applies them to particular Subjects.

Now, this Prudence proceeds partly from the Nativity, and party from Study and
Exercise. From the Nativity do proceed the natural Qualities and Endowments of
the Mind, requisite for the exercise of a Habit. This is properly the (...) of
the Greeks, whichich we may call good or fortunate Descent, whereof, as Plato
affirms, there are three kinds; one, proper to Sciences; another, to Manners;
and the last, to Arts, such as is that, which THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN does
require.

Art. 2. Of the natural Qualities which are requisite for the exercise of this
Art.
THe natural Qualities of the Mind, necessary in order to the exercise of this
Art, are strength of Imagination, and soundness of Judgment. For, though Memory
be also requisite therein, in regard there is a necessity of remembering many
Precepts, a great number of Signs, and the connection and correspondence of many
things, whereof this Art is full; yet is it certain, that the greatest burden
lies upon the Imagination and the Judgment. For a man must, of a sudden, frame
to himself several Images; he must observe diverse conformable and
disconformable Signs, and afterward make a comparison between the one and the
other, to distinguish the stronger from the weaker; in which operation, it is
out of all doubt, that the Understanding and the Judgment are more put to it,
than the memory, which has made its provision long before, whereas the others
are hastily set on work, and not allowed the leisure to prepare themselves for
it.

But to these natural Qualities there are yet two other things to be added,
Method, and Exercise: For the latter brings a man to a certain facility of
judging well, which cannot be acquired by any other means, and creates a kind
of confidence, which may be interpreted an Enthusiasm and Divine Distraction or
Fury in these Sciences.

Art. 3. Of the Method, necessary in order to the Exercise of this Art.
THe Method we spoke of, consists in certain general Rules, which are to be
observed in order to the making of a more infallible judgment. We shall here
set down those we conceive the most considerable.

The First is, That our Artist ought very-carefully to examine the Signs, which
proceed from the external causes, which of them are transient, and which are
common, and not to make any judgment by them.

The Second* One single Sign is not to be thought sufficient to make a judgment
of the Inclinations and Habits; but it is requisite there should be more. For
it is imprudence, as Aristotle affirms, to give credit to one single mark:
(...).

The Third. When there happen to be contrary Signs, it is requisite a
particular Observation be made of the stronger, and the judgment is to proceed
according to them. Now, we have given an account of the strength and weakness
of Signs, in the Second Chapter of this Second Book.

The Fourth. Our Artist is, above all things, to consider the Temperament of
the person, whose humor he would discover, and use it as a Rule whereby he is
to measure all the other Signs. For, being the present and inseparable
instrument of the Soul, it fortifies, or weakens, the other Signs,
proportionably to its conformity or opposition thereto.

The Fifth. It is further requisite, that he strictly examine the strength or
weakness of the party's mind; for both these have a great influence over the
passions and habits, in as much as most of the passions are raised in the Soul,
for want of knowing the causes thereof. It is possible one may conceive himself
injured, when there is not any injury done him; and some other may be seized by
an apprehension, who has no cause to fear. So that upon such occasions,
weakness of mind is the cause of those emotions, as, on the other side,
soundness of judgment smother them.

The Sixth. Whereas it is possible, that vicious Inclinations may be reformed
by study, and bad education may alter and corrupt the good, it concerns the
Artist to add, as much as may be, the Moral marks, to the Natural, and
endeavor to discover by the Words and Actions of the person, whose humor he
would be acquainted with, whether he follows his Inclinations, or has reformed
them.

Art. 4. Of the Moderation of Spirit, indispensibly requisite in the Study of
this Art.
NOw, whereas all these Rules, and all these Observations, are very hard to be
reduced to practice, it must be laid down as a thing certain, that it is very
easy to make many temerarious judgments thereby, and to abuse this art, if
great care be not taken. Therefore among all the Qualities, requisite in the
person, who is desirous to study it, I wish him particularly Moderation of
Spirit, that he may not be partial or praecipitate in his judgments, and, above
all things, not to make any to the disadvantage of others, but in the secret
closet of his own Heart, so as that neither his Tongue, nor their Ears may be
witnesses thereof. Otherwise Religion and Prudence would not permit the
exercise of this noble Science, and, in stead of being necessary and
serviceable to Society, it would become its greatest Enemy.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. AN Idaea of the natural Perfection of Man page 1 ART. 1. That only
man has the sense of Touching in perfection. 3 2. All in man should be in a
mediocrity 4 3. That all the Faculties ought to be in a mean 6 4. That all
natural Inclinations are defects 7 5. That every Species has its proper
Temperament 9 6. Why Sexes were bestowed on Animals, and why the male is hot
and dry, and the female cold and moist 10 7. Wherein the Beauty of Sexes
consists. That there are two sorts of natural effects, (...). 12 8. That there
are some Faculties and Inclinations, which it is Natures design to bestow on
the Sexes, others not 13 9. That there are some parts framed by nature out of
design, others not 15
SECT. 2. Wherein the perfection of the Male consists p. 16 ART. 1. Of the
Inclinations proper to Man ib. 2. That the Temperament of Man is hot and dry in
the first degree 18 3. A model of Man's figure 19 4. Of the figure of Man's
parts 21 5. The Reasons of the figure of Man's parts 22 6. That the figure of
the parts denotes the inclinations. 23
SECT. 3. Showing wherein consists the natural perfection of the Woman 24 ART.
1. The Reasons of these Inclinations 26 2. That the Inclinations of the Woman
are not defects 28 3. That the Inclinations of Man are defects in the Woman 30
4. Wherein the Beauty of the Woman consists 31 5. The causes assigned of this
figuration of parts in the Woman 33 6. That all these parts denote the
Inclinations which are proper to the Woman 34 7. Wherein perfect Beauty
consists. 36

CHAP. II. Of the Inclinations. SECT. 1. Of the Nature of Inclination. p. 40
Art. 1. The Object of the Inclination 41 2. The distinction of the Inclinations
42 3. The Seat of the Inclinations 43 4. How Inclination is to be defined 44 5.
Whence proceeds the Disposition, wherein the Inclination consists 45 6. How the
motions of the Appetite are wrought 47 7. Of the Judgments of the said
Faculties 48 8. That the Images which are in the memory, the causes of
Inclination 50 9. That the disposition and facility of the Appetites motion
proceeds from the same Images 52
SECT. 2. What are the Causes of the Inclinations 54 Art. 1. The several
distinctions of the said causes ibid. 2. That the Instinct is one of the causes
of the Inclinations 55 3. That the Temperament is one of the causes of the
Inclinations 56 4. That the Conformation of the parts is a cause of the
Inclination 58 5. How Figure acts 60 6. How Inclinations are produced by the
remote Causes 63 7. Of the nature of Aversion 65

CHAP. III. Of the Motions of the Soul 67 SECT. 1. That the Soul moves. ibid.
Art. 1. What part of the Soul moves 68 2. That the motions of the Soul are not
metaphorical ibid. 3. That the rational Soul has a real motion, as the Angels
have 69 4. That the motions of the Will are real motions 70 5. That Objections
made against the motions of the Soul considered 73 6. The Motions of the
Appetites 75
SECT. 2. How Good and Evil move the Appetite 77 Art. 1. How Knowledge is
wrought 79 2. That the Images are multiplied 81
SECT. 3. What are Motions of the Soul 84 SECT. 4. Of the Number of the
Passions 87 Art. 1. What the Simple Passions, and how many there are 88 2. That
there are but eight Simple Passions 89 3. Why there are but eight simple
Passions ibid. 4. The Definitions of the simple Passions 91 5. The Definitions
of the mixed Passions 92 6. The Natural order of the Passions 94 7. That there
are three Orders of the Passions 95
SECT. 5. How the Passions of one Appetite are communicated to the another 98
SECT. 6. What is the Seat and first Subject of the Appetite 106 Art. 1. What is
the Seat of the Sensitive Appetite 107 2. The Seat of the natural Appetite 111
3. How the Passions are completed 113

CHAP. IV. Of the Motion of the Heart, and Spirits, in the Passions 114 Art. 1.
Of the Nature of the Spirits 115 2. Of the matter of the Spirits 116 3. How the
Spirits are framed ibid. 4. An Objection against the precedent Doctrine
answered 118 5. Why the heart moves 120 6. That the Spirits are moved for three
ends 122 7. That the Spirits convey the blood into the parts 123 8. The beating
of the Heart forces not the Blood into all the Parts 124 9. That the blood is
not attracted by the Fibers 128 10. That the blood is not atttracted by any
Magnetic virtue 130 11. That there are not any Attractive virtues 131 12. That
there is not any attractive virtue in Purgative Medicines 133 13. That Grief
and Heat are not attractive 134 14. That the blood is conveyed to the parts
only by the Spirits 136 SECT. 1. Of the animation of the Spirits 137 Art. 1.
Objections answered 142 2. The union between the Spirits and the Parts 143 3.
How the foresaid union is consistent with the intermixture of the Spirits, with
the blood and humors 144
SECT. 2. Why the Heart and Spirits move in the Passions 146 SECT. 3. What
Faculty it is that moves the Spirits 149 Art. 1. Of what kind the motion of the
Heart and Spirits is in the other Passions 152
SECT. 4. How the Soul causes the Body to move 154
CHAP. V. Of the Virtues and Vices, whereof the Art how to know men may judge
157 Art. 1. What Moral actions are 158 2. What Right Reason is 159 3. Why the
Virtues are in the mean 160 4. Of the Seat of Moral Habits 162 5. That there
are four powers which may be regulated by Right Reason 166 SECT. 1. Of PRVDENCE
167 SECT. 2. Of JUSTICE 171 SECT. 3. Of TEMPERANCE 175 SECT. 4. Of FORTITVDE 180

THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Means whereby Men may be known 183 Art. 1. What Causes they
are which serve for Signs 185 2. What the Effects are which serve for Signs 186
CHAP. II. Of the Strength and Weakness of Signs 187 Art. 1. What Judgment is
made of the Causes ibid. 2. Of the next Causes 188 3. Of the Remote Causes 189
4. What Judgment that is which is made by the Effects 190
CHAP. III. Of the Natural Signs 191 Art. 1. Of the Difference of Signs 194 2.
Of the Means assigned by Aristotle to discover the efficacy of Signs 195 3.
That the Passions are most apparent in the Head 196 4. That the Inclinations
are most apparent in the Head 199 5. That the Inclinations are discoverable by
the Arms and Legs 201 6. From what places the Signs are taken 203
CHAP. IV. Of the Rules, which Physiognomy has framed upon the natural Signs,
in order to the discovery of the Inclinations 205 Art. 1. Of the Progress of
Physiognomy 206 2. That the Syllogistical Rule was added by Aristotle 207 3.
The defects of the first Rule of Physiognomy ibid. 4. The defectiveness of the
second Rule 208 5. How Aristotle makes use of the second Rule 209 6. What the
Syllogistical Rule is 211
CHAP. V. After what manner THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN; makes use of the Rules of
Physiognomy 212 Art. 1. How the said Art makes use of the first Rule of that
Science 212 2. How it makes use of the second Rule 214 3. How the said Art
makes use of the third Rule 215 4. How the said Art makes use of the fourth
Rule 216 5. Why The Art how to know Men treats of the Temperaments 217 6. That
there are other Rules besides those of Physiognomy, whereby the Inclinations
may be discovered 218
CHAP. VI. How the Actions and Motions of the Soul are known 220 Art. 1. That
there are two kinds of Actions 221 2. Of Dissimulation 222 3. How Actions may
be foreseen 223 4. How the Passions may be foreseen 224 5. Whether contingent
Actions may be foreseen 226
CHAP. VII. How the Habits may be known 227 Art. 1. Of the discovery of the
Moral Habits ib. 2. How the Intellectual Habits may be known 228
CHAP. VIII. Of Astrological Signs 230 The first Letter to Monsieur B.D.M. upon
the Principles of CHIROMANCY 232 Art. 1. That, of Situations, some are more
noble then others 243 2. That the nobler Situations are designed for the more
excellent parts; and that the excellency of the Parts is deduced, from the
advantage they bring along with them 247 3. What advantages may be deduced from
the Hands 248 4. That the Right Hand is more noble than the Left 250 5. That
Motion begins on the Right side 252 6. That the Hands have the greatest portion
of natural heat 253 7. That there is a greater communication between the Hands
and the nobler parts 255 8. That some secret Virtues are conveyed from the
nobler parts into the Hands 256 9. That Nature does not confound the Virtues
257 10. That the Virtues of the nobler parts are not received into the same
places of the Hand 259 11. That there is a Sympathy between the Liver and the
Forefinger 260 12. That there is a Sympathy between the Heart and the Ring
finger 261 13. That there is a like Sympathy between the Spleen and the
Middle-finger 264 14. That there is a Sympathy between all the interior parts,
and the other parts of the Hand 267 15. That the Face is the Epitome of all the
exterior parts 268 16. That there is a mutual Sympathy between all the parts
269 17. That the distribution of the Veins made by Hippocrates, for the
discovery of the said Sympathy, was not understood either by Aristotle, or
Galen 270 18. Whence proceeds the regularity which Nature observes in her
evacuations 274 19. That the Stars, or Planets, have a certain predominancy
over the several parts of the Hand 278 20. That the Planets have a predominancy
over the interior parts 281 21. That the Moon has such a predominancy over
the Brain 282 22. That the Sun has the like predominancy over the Heart 284
23. That the other Planets have the Government of the other interior parts 287
24. That the Principles established regulate many doubtful things in Chiromancy
289
The Second Letter to Monsieur B.D.M. upon the Principles of METOPOSCOPY 292
Art. 1. That Metoposcopy has the same Principles with Chiromancy 294 2. What
parts of the Face are governed by the Planets 296 3. That not only the
Forehead, but also the other parts of the Face are to be considered in
Metoposcopy 300 4. That the Sun and Moon have the government of the Eyes 301 5.
That Venus has the government of the Nose 304 6. That there is a
correspondence between all the marks of the Face, and others in other parts of
the Body. 305 7. Whence the Lines of the Forehead proceed. 307 8. What
particular Planet has the government of the Forehead. 311 9. That Jupiter has
the government of the Cheeks 314 10. That Mercury has the like government over
the Ears. 315 11. That Mars has the government of the Lips ibid.

CHAP. IX. What Judgment is to be made of Chiromancy and Metoposcopy 317 SECT.
1. Of the several parts which complete THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN 322
CHAP. X. What qualities are requisite in that person, who would apply himself
to THE ART HOW TO KNOW MEN 324 1. Of the Genius requisite, or in order to the
exercise of this Art 326 2. Of the natural Qualities which are requisite for
the exercise of this Art 327 3. Of the Method, necessary in order to the
Exercise of this Art 328 4. Of the Moderation of Spirit, indispensibly
requisite in the Study of this Art 330

FINIS.

