A Further DISCOVERY OF THE PLOT, Drawn from the NARRATIVE AND DEPOSITIONS OF
Dr. Titus Oats: And Fairly Submitted to the Consideration of all Indifferent
Readers.

No man so blind as he that will not see.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1680

A Farther Discovery of the PLOT.
AS it cannot be denied, but that the Kings Witnesses have ventured as far, and
done as much as men could do, (under their Circumstances) to make out the Truth
of a Damnable, and Hellish Popish Plot upon the Life of his Sacred Majesty, our
Religion and Civil Government: So neither must it be denied, on the other hand,
but that the Justice and Wisdom of this Nation have improved all Discoveries,
by the strictest Inquisition, and scrutiny imaginable; and done all that was
possible also toward the suppressing of the Conspiracy, by the highest
Instances of Political zeal and Rigor. Insomuch, that after so many Priests
and Jesuits, and other Leading men of that Party removed by the stroke of
Public Justice; so many of them under Confinement; so many more reduced to
shift for themselves beyond the Seas, beside the severe Penalties of the Law
upon the rest, with all sorts of Encouragement, both for their detection and
punishment: After all this care taken (I say) to tear up the accursed Plot by
the Root, We are yet assured, that (all this notwithstanding) the Plot is still
carried on with Confidence, and Vigor. And this we have, even from those very
Persons themselves that formerly wrought in the same Mine with the
Conspirators; till through the Grace of a better Light they came to govern
themselves by other Measures. This is a truth no more to be doubted, then that
of the Plot it self; which has stood the Trial of so many Solemn and Public
Tests: Beside that we have the same Authority for the One as for the Other;
only the Circumstances not being brought into Proof, the matter of Fact lies a
little more in the Dark.

Whether or no the Plot goes on still, after all this Havoc made of the
Papists, is the Common subject of every Coffee-house Discourse. They that must
be presumed to know best, are of opinion that it does; and those that are upon
the Negative, reason the point after this manner. What? (say they) Is it a Plot
that will work without hands? Where are the Papists, the Instruments that
should drive it on? Are they in the Air or under Ground; or are they
Invisible? For as they are now dispersed, and broken, (beside the Terror that
overawes them) there are at least three Thousand Protestants, in sight, to one
Papist. But do they ask where they are, because we cannot see them? Why do they
not rather ask where they are Not? because they may be any where, and we not
know them: For, as I have been told by persons of Great Quality, they will indue
all shapes, and Exercise all Professions. They speak of one Jesuit that cried
work for a Cooper; another that wrought upon the Trade of a Shoemaker; Priests
in Red coats Innumerable: And it is observed that upon the bringing of the Late
Plot to Light, all the little Frenchmen with their Marionets or Puppet-shows
vanished in a trice: which gave a suspicion that they were only a kind of
Itinerant Agents for the Faction: To say nothing of their skill and Industry,
in the managing of all our Divisions, and discontents, to the advantage of
their own Party. These are stories (I know) that are much more easily
Contradicted, then Proved: and therefore without laying any stresse at all upon
Common Fame, or Hearsay, I shall now apply my self to that farther Discovery of
the Plot, which I have promised in my Title; and support my undertaking, upon
the Authority of Dr. Oats himself; with a respect both to the Validity of his
Testimony, and to the weight of his Observations; being a Person that has
dived deeper into the Mystery of this Iniquity (with favor of the rest) then
any other man.

As to the Hellish Design upon the Life of our Gracious Sovereign, by Pistol,
Sword, or Poison, we hope that the Neck of that Particular Plot is broken, to
all Intents and purposes: But we are beholden also to Dr. Oats for the
Discovery of Other and of Farther Plots that are still carried on by the same
restless Party; tending to the defaming of his Majesty's Person, and
Government; the Subversion of our Established Religion, and the Disturbance of
the Public Peace. So that unless the remaining, and the still growing
Difficulties, and Hazzards be encountered with Timely and Effectual Remedies,
the work of our Deliverance is but half done, and we shall yet run a risque of
being ruined at last even in the very Port.

Dr. Oats tells us in his Narrative, Printed by Authority of Parliament, that
the Pope, Society of Jesus, and their Confederates in this Plot, have a Design
to reduce England, Scotland, and Ireland, to the Romish Religion and Obedience,
by the Sword: Page 63. which they hope to accomplish, among Other means, by
disaffecting the Kings best Friends at home and abroad, and Subjects, against
his Person and Government; charging him with Tyranny, and Designs of
Oppressing, Governing by the Sword, and without Parliaments, Pa. 67.

By Aspersing, Deriding, Exposing, and declaiming against his Person, Councils,
and Actions in Parliaments, and elsewhere, by Mis-reporting, and raising False
News of his Affairs; by disaffecting his Majesty's Allies, Holland, Spain, the
German Emperor, and Princes by False Intelligence. By Seditious Preachers, and
Catechists, set up, sent out, Maintained, and directed what to Preach in their
Own, or other Private, or Public Conventicles, and Field-Meetings. By setting
up false pretended Titles to the Succession of the Crown; and Animating
Different Parties, one against another, on this or such like False pretenses,
to Arm and put the People in blood, upon the Kings Death.

We have found Dr. Oates's Observations (as to these particulars,) so
punctually true, that every syllable of what he has here delivered, is from
point to point, the very matter now in Agitation. For there is not a day passes
without a Libell upon his Majesty's Authority, Administration, Designs, and
solemn Resolutions of State, and Council; belying the Condition of his Affairs,
and endeavoring to create Distsrusts, and Jelousies among Foreign Princes,
and States, by False Intelligence; animating, and Exciting of Turbulent
Factions, and anticipating of Confederacies, to involve us all in Blood; upon a
Remote and Undutifull SUPPOSITION of the KINGS DEATH. And finally, we have
Sedition Preached as well as written, and our Conventicles both instructed
themselves, and instructing Others, in the Methods and Principles of Rebellion,
this may suffice for the Doctors Judgment upon the present State of things,
which in truth looks liker a Revelation, then a Conjecture.

As to his Reflections upon the Interest which the Papists had in our Past
troubles; these are his words in his Preface to the aforesaid Narrative.

Who beside these were the First Authors and Contrivers of the late Unnatural
War, by their Known Diabolical Art of enflaming Parties, and Passions against
each other? And (addressing to the King) of your Royal Fathers Unspeakable
sufferings, and Barbarous Usage? It was these that brought him to his End, and
flourished Swords, and Trumpets over his dead Body, whom they durst not
approach when Living. The Putney Projectours (says he) were in most, if not all
the Councils, that contrived his Ruin. What broke the Uxbridge Treaty, but the
Romish Interest, and Policy? Who continued to baffle all designs of Peace, and
Settlement to this Nation, and Prosperity to his Majesty's Family, but those
Incendiaries, Milton was a known frequenter of a Popish Club; who more forward
to set up Cromwell, and to put the Crown of our Kings upon his Head,
thenPapists? And his new fangled Government was contrived by a Popish Priest;
and Lambert a Papist, for above theseThirty years.

I have inserted these Passages as a Curiosity in the History of those times;
which may perhaps have escaped other men as well as my self. For though I never
made any Question, but that the Church of England, as it stands Established by
Law, in the Purity of Doctrine, and the Venerable Sobriety of Discipline, was
ever an Eye sore to the Church of Rome; yet I was of Opinion too, that a
Licentious Vein of Ambition and Sch^sm among our selves, had carried a great
stroke also in that Fatal Revol^tion. But however, this is a point wherein a
man may without loss of Honor, or Credit, admit the possibility of his being
in a Mistake. Wherefore we shall now (with the Doctors Leave) advance to plain
matter of Fact, whereupon we have his Deposition; the only Case wherein a man
may, without Vanity pronounce himself within a degree of Infallible.

We find Page 8. that Richard Nicholas Blundell had every day in the Week his
several places in the City of London, where he taught the Youth Treasonable,
and Malicious Doctrine, against the Interest, and Person of his Sacred Majesty.

Also (Page 25.) that Richard Ashby had a Conference for the sending of New
Messengers into Scotland, to promote the Commotions there; and to inform the
People, of the great Tyranny they did ly under, by reason of their being denied
the Liberty of their Conscience; and that not being to be procured but by the
sword, they must take that Course to purchase their Liberty: By which means
(said the Fathers thus Assembled) we shall weaken both the Presbyterian, and
the Episcopal Faction. At which Conference, the DEPONENT was PRESENT, and heard
the Words.

And again, Two Messengers were sent intoScotland, One by the Name of Father
Moore, and the Other by the Name of Father Saunders alias Brown, with
Instructions to carry themselves like NONCONFORMIST MINISTERS; and to Preach
to the Disaffected Scots, the Necessity of taking up the Sword for the Defense
ofLiberty ofConscience. These the DEPONENT saw Dispatched, etc.

Take notice, in the First place, that here is a Design carried on for the
Destruction of the King, and the Embroyling of the Government. Secondly, the
pretense of the Quarrel is to be matter of Liberty and Conscience. Thirdly, it
is to be promoted by Popish Emissaries, in the Councils, and Conventicles of
the Non-Conformists. Fourthly, the means by which the Papists propound to
compass their Ends, are by making Interests with the Separatists, under the
Disguise of Ministers, and Teachers, respectively of the several Parties they
have to do withal. And Fifthly, Let me recommend this Particular to your
Special Remark, that Dr. Oats, throughout the whole Course of his Depositions,
charges no part of the Popish Design upon any Intelligence, or Communication
with the Church of England; but makes it only to be a practice upon the
Dissenters from the English Communion, to transport them into Tumults, and
Distempers against both Church and State.

We have here in few words, a Scheme of the whole business; Here Is the Design,
the Pretext, the Instruments and the Methods: and upon the whole matter, here
is the Church of England acquitted, as to any point of unwarrantable affinity
with the Principles or Practices of the Church of Rome; however that Testy
Frenchman is pleased to speculate in his Fanatical Reve'ryes upon our
approaches to That Communion: Wherein it may be a Question, whether he is more
out in his History, or in his Morals. We are, in short, very much obliged to
the Doctor, for clearing our Church to all Gainsayers, from those obloquies
which by both the Extremes are indifferently cast upon us.

It must not be any longer a supposition, that which Dr. Oats has given us his
Oath for; so that taking it for granted, that there is such a Project on foot,
that the Papists are in the bottom of it; and that it is promoted by the
Sectaries, only as Passive Agents that are blindly bringing about the others
ends: the Question is now how the Government may fairly discriminate the
Protestants from the Papists; being so blended in their Interest, as well as in
their Councils; and masked under such Resemblances, the One, of the Other, that
they are not easily to be distinguished. It cannot be expected that a
pretending Protestant shall own himself to be a Papist; so that there is no
believing any man in the Case. And then the Epithete of a Reputed so or so, is
so slender an Evidence, that many a Reputed Papist is found to be a True
Protestant, and many a Reputed Protestant as true a Papist. The known and
Legal Expedient which has been hitherto found Competent enough to answer the
Reason and Intent of State, is the Test of the Two Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy: and yet this very provision will not reach all cases: For there are
many Papists that will Take them without any difficulty; and there are several
that call themselves Protestants, that will as obstinately refuse them. Now
though the Latter (Primo Eliz.) was a Provision for the abolishing of Foreign
Power, and the Former (Tertio Iac.) an Act for the discovering and repressing
of Popish Recusants; the Scope and Equity yet of Both these Provisions has a
regard to the securing of the Government against any sort of people, and
against any Pretensions whatsoever: So that whoever Refuses, upon a Lawful
Tender, to take these Oaths, he is a Papist in the eye of the Law, let his
Persuasion be what it will: For it is the only Privilege of Omniscience to
read the Heart: or if (for discourse sake) we should suppose him to be no
Papist, he is yet in the prospect of Common Reason, liable to that Imposition,
because it is exacted as a Proof of his Allegiance, not of his Faith; and men
of Different Judgments in Religion may yet agree in Common Principles of
Disloyalty.

And then again, there is no appealing in this Case from the Prudence and
Caution of the Law (which is allways presumed to intend the Common Good) to the
Testimony of a Friend or Neighbor in favor of a Recusation. For the Law is a
General Rule, that takes no notice of any Exceptions to it. The Law requires me
to Take These Oaths in proof of my Allegiance to the Government; and my answer
is, that I am a very Honest man, but I cannot take them. What is this to the
Law, that takes no Cognizance of my Honesty, but of my Obedience? And this Rule
holds in Common, as well to the Papist as to the Protestant Recusant; They both
vouch for their own Loyalty, and at the same time they do both of them Refuse
to comply with the Law. The Common way of Reply in this Case, is to cast it in
a man's Teeth; But what? will you make no difference betwixt a Papist that
refuses and a Protestant? Yes, I would, if you would but show me how I may
certainly know the One from the Other. Who knows not that Interest governs the
World? and that for Reasons best known to themselves, he that is a Protestant
in his heart may be induced rather to appear a Papist; and the Other, though a
Papist in his heart, may find it his Interest yet to seem a Protestant? But
we will yield that Point too; and put the Case, that the Law should be relaxed, on
the behalf of any man living, Does not This open a Gap (let him be never so
Honest) to the admittance of ten Thousand men that may plead Honesty too, and
yet betray their Duties? And is it not better then, that some few particulars
should suffer by keeping firm to the Law, then that the whole should be
endangered by Remitting it? so that there is neither Reason nor Safety, nor
Equity, in such a Relaxation, nor any regard of Common Justice and Duty in
demanding it.

But what if it be said, that it is not the Thing Sworn, but the Oath it self,
that is Scrupled? and that there are several sorts of Persuasions that will not
bear any swearing at all? This I must confess, is a Case somewhat nice, and
unhappy, to those people that are so straight-lac'd in that Particular: But
then, on the Other side, it is to the Government the most dangerous of all
Pretensions, and lets in all the Priests and Jesuits in Nature, under That
Color. So that now take it both ways; If the Law be partially Executed, the
Jesuits and Priests will shelter themselves under That Indulgence: Or, if the
Law should be suspended, out of a respect to those that would be thought to
make a Conscience of an Oath, the Priests would all flow into Those Parties
that should be exempted from this Test, and carry on their Designs without
either Trial or danger.

Now to wind up this Discourse, in a plain and clear Dilemma. It must be
granted, either that the Papists have a Design upon the King, Religion, and
Government, and that they advance it by acting the Parts of Quakers,
Anabaptists, Presbyterians, and Other Sectaries, or not. No man, I presume will
dare to Question the Truth of the Doctors Deposition; for in so doing he would
imply a strange abuse imposed upon the Nation. But on the other side, admitting
it to be true; there can be no security to this Government, without either
dissolving all separate Meetings, or bringing all Dissenters to this Legal
Test; for otherwise, the Papists have all sorts of Liberty, and Security in
herding themselves among the Conventicles; where upon the beating of a Bush, it
will be an even wager whether you start a Jesuit, or a Fanatic. And in effect,
in this case, there is not much difference betwixt them, where the Jesuit plays
the Fanatic, and the Fanatic the Jesuit.

If the main assertion be true, there is no way of finding out the Papists, but
by this Test: and the Dissenters themselves, if they would have Popery
ferretted out in good Earnest, cannot choose but encourage the Proposition.
Either they have Priests among them or they have not: If they have, why do they
not do the best they can to find them out? if they have not, why do they say
they have? And again, either the Non-Conformists are influenced by the Jesuits
or they are not: If they be, why do they not do all that is possible toward the
Purging of their Congregations? If they be not so Influenced, why do they
pretend that they are, and so set the Saddle upon the wrong Horse? And yet
again; either it is possible to clear their Conventicles of this dangerous
Mixture, or it is not: If it be Possible, why do they still complain of it, and
do nothing in it? If it be Impossible, there is no way of Extirpating Popery,
but by rooting out Fanaticism.

Let the World judge now, with what injustice, the Order, and the Ritualls of
the Church of England are charged with a Tincture of Superstition, and Popery,
when upon Manifest proof, the Calumniators themselves of our Ecclesiastical
State are, throughout the whole Body of them, tainted with this Leaven. We are
now come to the Bottom of the Popish Plot. This Liberty of wandering from the
Rule, is the Trojan Horse, which under a Religious color, we have entertained
within our Walls; with Discord, and Destruction in the Belly of him.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas the Subjects Right of Petitioning has been of Late in such manner
Asserted, as if his Majesty had no Right of Refusing, this is to Advertise,
that from the 3d of Ed. 3. to Hen. 8. (as appears upon the Parliament Rolls) it
was constantly the First thing done, upon the opening of all Parliaments, after
the Cause of Summons declared, to appoint out of the Lords Spiritual, and
Temporal, certain Receivers, and Tryers of Petitions; and still as they found
any Petition not fit to be admitted, it was Rejected with a Non est Petitio
Parliamenti, (as we find it endorsed upon the Rolls) and there was an end on it.
Note, that all Petitions were Dedicated to his Majesty, and that in many Cases,
when the Parliament had not time to go thorough with them all, the King
referred diverse of them to the Chancery.

Now why the King may not as well Reject a Petition Out of Parliament, as In
Parliament, and why he may not as well Reject it by Anticipation, and
Prevention in a Previous and Express Prohibition and Exception to the Matter of
it, as afterward, is a point worthy of a Resolution: and when his Majesty ever
lost the One Right, or the Subject gained the Other: This Postscript is wholly
Foreign to the Subject of This Pamphlet, but more accommodate to the Season.

The End.

