THE Observator Defended, BY The AUTHOR of the OBSERVATORS.

IN A Full ANSWER to Several Scandalls Cast upon him, in Matters of Religion,
Government, and Good Manners.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Sign of the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, Henry Lord Bishop of London.
My LORD,
YOu have here before your Lordship an Appeal from Clamor, and Calumny, to
your Honor, and Justice: And to whom, but to my Right Reverend Diocesan,
should I fly for Protection, and Relief; when Religion, and Good Manners,
(though brought in by Head and Shoulders) are made the Question! I am Arraigned
as a Stickler for Popery; An Enemy to the Established Church of England; a
Slanderer of the London-Clergy; and a Sower of Dissension among his Majesty's
Subjects: All which Reproaches I Valued as my Glory, so long as I was Wounded
for the Churches sake, and by the Common, and Professed Enemies of the True
Sons of That Church, and of All Loyal Subjects. But, I must Confess, it has
given me some Trouble, as well as matter of Admiration, to see so Unaccountable
a Change of Humor, now of Late, from what it was some Few Years agon: And that
the Same Zeal, under the Same Method of Manage, and Direction; and for the very
Same Cause too; Nay, and the Self-same Public Offices, and Applications, that
were Acknowledged, and Declared to be Meritorious Services, from the Year 1680.
to February 1684/5 should now, all on the Sudden, be Pronounced, so Scandalous,
and Offensive to the Same Protestant Church, which Before they were thought to
have Defended: And All these Contradictions at Last, from many of the very Same
Hands: Where the Fault lies, is Submitted to your Lordship to Determine; and
whether the Same Principles; the Same Judgment; the Same Practices; and the
Same Doctrine of CIVIL OBEDIENCE, (for I have gone no further) be not as
Warrantable under the Reign of our Present King, (whom God Preserve) as they
were in the time of his Late Blessed Majesty. If it shall be said that I have
Departed from my Self; I do Freely Offer-up Seven or Eight and Forty Years of
my Life, to the Scrutiny. And if upon the Strictest Examination of my Papers,
and Actions, It shall be made Appear, that I am not the very same Person at
This Day, that I was in the First Scottish Rebellion of 38 and 9. with a
respect to the Religion, and Government, both of Church and State, and without
any Shifting, either of Opinion, or so much as Outward Pretense in the
Interval, I Will Submit to be Concluded by That Instance. (Though I am persuaded
(My Lord) that the Clearest of my Accusers would be Loath to stand That Test)
And This, (under favor) is not All neither: For there Occurs yet Another
Difficulty, that is as much a Riddle as any of the Rest; which is, how the Same
Person should be so Deadly an Eyesore to the Orthodox Clergy of the Church of
England; and yet at the Same Time, (if not in the same Cause) be so Galling a
Thorn in the Sides of the Schismatiques.

With your Lordships Favor, and Patience, for a word or Two upon This Part of
my Case: If I am an Enemy to the Church, I Am a Friend to the Faction; And yet
I find no Abatement of Malicious Forgeries, and Scandals against me, from That
Quarter: If I Am an Enemy to the Schism, purely for the Churches sake, I am so
far, a Friend to the Church; And it is yet my Fortune, to meet with as Hard
Measure under Color of That Interest, as of the Other. Now (my Lord) If my
Writings, and my Life be All of a piece; (as after all This Noise, there is not
the Least Shadow of a Proof to the Contrary) If both the One, and the Other
have had the Honor, 'till now of late, of a Fair Interpretation, both as to my
Religion, and my Allegiance: If I do, at This Moment, stand upon the Same
Ground, and Assert the Same Principles that ever I did; there must be either
some Secret Practice, or some Dangerous Misunderstanding in the Business. And
the Intrigue is no more then This; The Common Enemies of the Government,
Invent, and Spread Scandals against the Friends of it. They throw out the Bait,
and here and there an Easy Honest man Swallows it; while, under That Pretext,
the Designs of the Faction are Exposed as the Sense of the Church. (as will be
set forth more at large, in This Following Tract.) Your Lordship has not taken
Notice, perhaps, that the Author of Julian the Apostate, is of late become a
Famous Stickler for the Protestant Religion and the Church-of England as by Law
Established, against Popery and Papists: And that he has Composed, and
Published Three Famous Papers upon That Subject: But withal, That as These
Three Papers were Intended for Libells; so they were Managed in the Dark, and
Privately Thrown about the Streets, as the most Pernicious of Libells: And in
fine, to Consummate the Boldness, and the Wickedness of the Hypocrisy, These
Papers were Written, Designed, and Calculated for the Service of the Rebellion
it self. To say nothing of Other Affronts put upon the Dignity of the Holy
Order, and the Protestant Profession, under the Same Disguise. It is, Briefly,
my Lord, the very Train, and Masterpiece of the Faction, by a Certain Sleight of hand, to get the Protestant Religion turned up Trump: and Then, to Play
their Own Game under it. With Permission (my Lord) This is the Just State, and
True Measure of the Case, both Public, and Private. I had it The Other day from
a Person of Great, and Unquestionable Honor, That the very Morning after the
Rebels Landed at Lime, as they were Discoursing of the Danger of their
Undertaking; [Well! (says a Head-Man among 'em) If we can but make a Breakfast
of Those Rogues, Jeffreys, and L'Estrange, we will never Repent the Hazzards we
are to run.] I take it for an Obligation that they Designed the Eating of me in
so Good Company: But (with pardon) it seems somewhat with the most yet, to be
Baited by CHRISTIANs, on the One Hand, and Worried by CANNIBALS, on the Other.

It will become me now to Enform your Lordship, in Excuse of This Confidence,
how Unwillingly I came to it. The Western Rebellion has hardly made more Noise
then my Apostasy to the Church of Rome; and it has given no small Reputation to
the Imposture, that my Enemies have taken Sanctuary in the Church; and Stabbed
me, even from behind the Altar: So that I could not so much as Defend my self,
without some sort of Irreverence: And to go further, would have been little
less then Sacrilege. It was a Dangerous, and an Unkind Dilemma that I was now
put upon: Either to Sink for want of a Vindication, or to run the Risque of
Hurting my Mother, in the Attempt of Righting my self upon some of her Froward
Children: Upon This Consideration, I contented my self with the Middle Course,
of only Touching upon the Point in question now and then in an Observator: But
still, so fast as One Sham went-off, Another came on; and finding the Work to
be Endless, I made a Virtue of my Misfortune, and took up a Philosophical
Resolution, of Troubling my Head no further, with what I could not help. So
long as the Fame of my Levity, and Hypocrisy, Passed only from hand to hand, in
a News-Letter, by Word of Mouth, or upon Common Hearsay, I stood the Shock,
without being much Concerned, whether the World were Angry, or Pleased:
Notwithstanding, that Great Names, and Authoritys were laid hold of, to
Bolster-up the Credit of the Report: But when I came, afterward, to find Ten
Sheets of a Book, Printed, under the Title of [The Difference between the
CHURCH of ENGLAND, and the CHURCH of ROME, Considered and Stated, according to
such Measures as both do Allow:] The Subject of it, liable enough, to stir up
Unseasonable Heats: And My Self (at what Hazard soever) rendered the Occasion
of the Controversy; As if the Treatise, had been only a Defense of the Church
of England, in Reply to the Observator, that had Written against it. This
Insinuation was the most Artificial Essay of Proving me a Papist, that has, as
yet, been Offered at: And left only This Choice before me; Either to put Pen to
Paper, in Denial of the Charge, or to Stand Mute, and Confess it.

You will, I hope, My Lord, Easily Excuse my Writing, under These
Circumstances; and as Generously Pardon the Adventure of This Dedication, when
you shall find, how Injuriously my Adversaries have Applied the Countenance of
your Lordships Power, and Character, toward the Oppressing of an Innocent
Person. Neither have I proceeded thus far, without Consulting All the Terms of
Discretion, Decency, and Respect: Even to the Degree, of Reasoning my self into
a Full Conviction, that I could not have done Less then now I do, without being
Wanting, both to your Lordship, and to my self: That is to say; without
Appearing less Sollicitous for the Blessing of your Good Opinion, then I ought
to be.

It is not yet, (My Lord) that I presume to Beg your Patronage, the Breadth of
a Single-Hair, beyond the Merits of the Cause; and the Exact Truth, and Rigor
of an Impartial Justice; So that my Petition, within Those Bounds, is as Good
as Granted Beforehand: But the Sum of my Humble Request (with Submission) is
only This; That I may have leave to Deposite These Sheets in your Lordships
Hand; To the End, that in case of Any Misrepresentation of the Matters here in
Question, my Accusation, and my Defense may Appear Together. I have now My
Lord, only to Crave your Benediction, upon

Your Lordships most Dutiful, and Obedient Servant, Roger L'Estrange.

To the Reader.
THis is only to show the Reader in a Few Words, how Matters stand betwixt the
Peevish Part of the World, and the Observator; and it is a Defense that I am
forced upon by a Certain Printed Paper, that lays me under the Absolute
Necessity of a Reply: And, at the same time, gives me as Fair an Opportunity as
I could Wish, of Clearing several Other Scores, all under One. My Work will be
the Easier, in regard that the most Popular Stress of the Calumny against me,
is Discharged, out of the Mouths of my very Opposers; and not without Manifest
Contradictions upon Themselves too: Beside the False Countenances that are put
upon my Writings, and Meanings, in Despite of Grammar-Rules, and of Common
Reason; which the Reader would have taken Notice of without Telling.

For the Better Color of the Business; the Title bears the Face only of a
Consideration of the Difference betwixt the Two Churches; But the First Sheet
of the Text looks quite Another way; and turns the Pretended State of the
Controversy into a Stabbing Reflection upon the Observator: As who should say,
let the Author of the Observators talk what he will, of Re-Unions, and
Accommodations; as if there were no Difference at all, but in Terms, and
Modalities, betwixt the Church-of- England and the Church of Rome: Here Is a
Brief Confutation of his Mistake, let him Deny it if he can. Upon the Authority
of This Insinuation, I am presently to be run-down for a Papist, without any
Ground for the Suggestion: Nay upon Those Points, wherein the Plaintiff, and
the Defendent Agree in Opinion, to a Single Syllable.

So that Write I must; and my Method shall be, to Take, and to Answer That
which Concerns my self, in Fact; (For I have nothing to do with matter of
Doctrine) Paragraph by Paragraph, under the Heads of CONSIDERATIONS, and NOTES,
to Distinguish the One from the Other.

The Observator Defended, etc.
1. The Difference between the Church of ENGLAND, Title.
and the Church of ROME, CONSIDERED and Stated, according to such Measures, as
both do Allow.
1. THese are the Words of the Title: Notes.
But we must look for the Drift, and Meaning of it, in the following Text;
Where, it will Appear, that the Pretended State of the Difference betwixt the
Two Churches, is the Least Part of the Business of This Treatise: Though Nine
Parts in Ten of the Bulk of it be Employed upon That Subject: So that I shall
now Proceed to the Matter.

2. After the Ingenious Author of the Observators had declared, Considerations.
that he was resolved not to intermeddle in past Controversies, Obs. Vol. 3.
Number. 1.
without fresh and public Provocation to it; and to bury Forty One, and his
Dissenters Sayings, both together; And that, if they will be quiet, he has as
large a Field before him the other way. It was no little surprise to the Honest
and Loyal Church-of- England men to observe their Religion; and to the Clergy
of London, to find themselves brought into the Field, and to be concerned in
the the other way.

2. The First Note I shall make upon This Paragraph (after my Thanks for the
[Ingenious Author] must be This, Notes.
That it is a Paper, Representative of the Honest, and Loyal
Church-of-England-men, and the Clergy of London, (at least if we may take the
Printers Word for it in the First Page) which Imports a Complaint in Their
Names, of Injurys done to Them, and Their Religion, by the Ingenious
Observator. It is now to be Hoped, that we shall have Fair Dealing in the rest
of the Clause: For Otherwise the Church of England will have Juster Cause of
Exception to her Advocate for his Vindication, then to the Observator for his
Calumny.

In the Second Place, we shall Confront the References with the Originalls; and
see how the Observators Words, and the Considerers Inferences will Hang
together. [I am Resolved (says the Observator) not to Intermeddle in Past
Controversies without Fresh, and Public Provocation to it; [Or where the
Uindication of the Government shall Naturally Require it.] I shall Bury Forty
One, and my Dissenters Sayings Both together. [And That Story shall never see
the Light more, 'till the Republicans, or the Dissenters Themselves, shall by
some Future Act of Open Disobedience force Some of Those Instances out of their
Graves again.] Compare the Citation now with the Text, and you will find the
Periods Maimed, and the Omissions Totally in favor of the Dissenters; Nay, the
Conditions of my Forbearance, Broken by an Open Rebellion; and the very
Violation of Those Conditions Smothered, and Suppressed. Here are Three Divided
Sentences Tacked into One; and when he has Disjoynted My Connection, he mightily
mistakes my Meaning. After the Words [Both together] he takes a Leap of almost
Fifty Lines to That Passage [If they will be Quiet, etc.] Which, in the
Observator runs Thus. [Obs. Prithee hold thy self Contented, Trimmer. Either
the People I have had to do withal, Will be Quiet, or they will Not be Quiet.
If they will Not, there is work enough That way Cut out, Ready to my hand: But]
if they Will be Quiet, I have as Large a Field before me THE OTHER WAY; [And I
shall be as Ready to Celebrate the Miracle of their Loyalty and Conversion, as
ever I was to set forth the History of their Ingratitude, and Disobedience.] I
must here Observe, that he has First left out One Point of the Dilemma; and
2ly, Cut off, Short of the Explication of the Other Point: Under which
Ambiguity, and Imperfection, he turns ['TOTHER WAY] upon the
Church-of-England-men, and the London-Clergy, when the Words were most
Explicitly Spoken, and Intended of the Republicans, and Phanatiques: And the
Short English of them no more then This: If they will Not be Quiet, I Will Expose
them; but if they Will be Quiet, I Will Commend them.

3. When the Clergy of the City, Consid.
under the Conduct of their Right Reverend Diocesan, had presented an Humble
Address, in the Sincerity of their Hearts, to His Sacred Majesty, with their
humble thanks for his Gracious assurance to defend Our Religion: As they could
not think the Phrase Our Religion, liable in it self to any just exceptions; so
of all men living, could not they have supposed, that this Author, who had
before treated them with Respect, and had been so treated by them, should all
of the sudden, without any provocation, or observing the Law he had before
offered even to the Dissenters, fall unmercifully upon that little Phrase, and
those that innocently used it; as if there had been a secret reserve in it; and
that under the Cant (as he is pleased to term it) of the Protestant Religion,
the Reformed Religion, and Our Religion, Observator. Number. 7.
there was intended a Cover for All Religions but Popery. An inference very
wide and extravagant, since tho Our Religion had not been followed (as it was)
with Established by Law; yet the Address being presented by such a Body of men,
as the City Clergy, and referring to His Majesty's Declaration, where he was
pleased Graciously to assure us of the care he would take to defend the Church
so Established; all mistake in that matter was sufficiently prevented.

3. There are a Great many Hard Words given to the Observator in This Clause;
Notes.
Principalities, and Powers Called into the Party; and upon the Whole Matter, a
Body can hardly fancy the Character of a Worse Man: But yet for the sake of Two
or Three Lines there, I have Good Nature enough to Forgive All the Rest. [Of
All men Living (says the Considerer) they could not have Supposed that This
Author, who had before Treated them with Respect; and had been so Treated by
them, should [all of the SUDDEN, etc.] Now This Passage, has in a Great Measure
Unveiled the Mystery; and laid Open the very Root of All the Following
Misunderstandings. Alas! I was a Protestant; a Person in Credit, and Treated
with Respect, 'till This Unlucky [All of the Sudden] Spoiled my Market, and
Shipwrackt my Religion, and my Reputation, both at a Gust. I was, in One Word,
a Very Honest Man, and a Good Protestant; a True Son of the Church, and a Loyal
Subject to his Majesty, 'till the Three and Twentieth of February Last past;
which was the Precise Date of the Bloody Observator that has wrought me all
this Woe. There was No Notice taken as yet, of the Story of my Massing-it at
Somerset House 1680. Not a Word said, of my Siding with the Loyal Papists at
Worcester, against the Rebellious Pretended Protestants there, in my
Observators of May, 1683. No Talk as yet of Modalities, and Accommodations;
though I gave the World more Pretense for it in Eighty One, then ever I did
since: But now [All of the Sudden] I Am a Papist; a Renegade, etc. And All, long
of That Unpardonable Observator. Vol. 3. Number. 7. Wherefore I cannot do better
then Remit my self to That very Paper, and leave the World to Judge, upon an
Equal Hearing, whether of the Two is the more to Blame, the Considerer, or the
Observator.

Only One Word by the way, to the Articles of my Charge. First, I am made a
Ridiculer of the Address of the London-Clergy; for the Phrase, of [Our
Religion.] Notwithstanding 2ly, [His Majesty's Gracious Assurance to Defend
[Our Religion.] And 3ly, Notwithstanding the Dignity of the Presenters, and the
Solemnity of Presenting it, I make it no better then [ a Cant; and as if there
were some Secret Reserve in it:] To this I say, First; that the Considerer
Cannot Apply the Descant upon [Our Religion] to the London-Clergy without
making them Schismatiques. Neither does the Address run in the Style of [Our
Religion;] but [Our Religion, Established by Law.] 2ly, Neither is it the Phrase
of his Majesty's Declaration it self. The Words being These [I shall make it my
Endeavor to Preserve This Government both in Church and State; as it is now by
Law Established.] 3ly, The Words [Cant,] and [Secret Reserve] are Appropriated,
and Restrained, so Inseparably, to the Schismatiques, that All the Force in the
World cannot draw from them Any Other Meaning: So that Either the Whole Charge
falls to the Ground; or he Confounds the Church, with the Schism. Beside, that
the Cavil Amounts to no more then a Bare Supposition, or the Fiction of a Case,
where the Observator is made to Condemn a Thing that was Not; but might
possibly have been; which Casts the Pretended Censure quite out of doors. These
Calumnys however, are Inculcated Over and Over, to make the Impression Sink the
Deeper: But the Merits of the Cause will be Best Tried by the Observator it
self. As for Example.

[The Winds from All the Points of the Compass, Obs. Number. 7. Vol. 3.
never wrought so much Mischief to This Island in bringing the Sea upon us, as
Liberty of Conscience has done, in the More Destructive Inundations of an
Unbounded Schism; And they have gotten a Trick too, of Covering All Religions
but Popery, under the Cant of the Protestant Religion; the Reformed Religion,
and Our Religion (which is a Mighty Business I warrant ye.) Now let Ten
Thousand Millions of Mouths Open as many Several Ways to the Tune of Our
Religion; and That same [Our Religion] looks East, West, North and South;
Answers the Whole Cry, and Stops Every Mouth of 'em. Pray Observe now, that
under This Generality, and Blind, the Common People are so far Imposed upon, as
to take Every man for a Papist that will not Subscribe to This Protestant; This
Reformed; This Our Religion at Large, etc. Obs. Vol. 3. Number. 7.]

Here Is a Debate upon Liberty of Conscience; The Danger of an Unbounded Schism;
The Tricks the Schismatiques have got, of Cozening the Multitude under
Generalities at Large, etc. Now do I Defy any man living, either to make This
an Affront to the Canonical Addressers; or to Clear Him of an Affront Himself,
that takes upon him to Pronounce it One: And again, by way of Explanation upon
the Word [PROTESTANT.]

[If you Speak of the Church-of-England, Obs. 7. V. 3.
under the Care of Episcopal Governors; And as it is by Law Established, in
Doctrine and Discipline, Give That Religion what Denomination you please, I Am
for it: But if you have a Secret Reserve to your self, of Comprehending
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, and All the Other Sects that call
Themselves Protestants, for Protesting against Popery, I am not of That
Protestant Religion. Ibid.] Neither do I take it to be Any Proof of a True
Religion, barely to Protest against a False One: For That may be the Case, of
only Combating the Errors of One Religion with the more Enormous Impieties of a
Thousand Worse. Ibid.] And yet once again.

[There's the Same Snare under the Word [Reform'd,] Ibid.
as under [Protestant,] and as much need of Explaining it, Least, when a man
thinks to Declare for the Constitution, he be Drawn-in (as it was in the
One-and-Forty-Protestation) by an Exposition Ex post facto, to an Engagement
for the Schism: But then comes [OUR Religion,] that (without some Explicit
Limitation or Restriction) raises a very Hubub; Fires the Beacons, and takes in
Turks, Jews, and Gentiles, into the Comprehension. Why Our Religion is Any
Religion; All Religions, or No Religion at all; Especially out of so many
Mouths, of as many Several Minds; And therefore Religion, is not a Thing to be
Tristed with at This Dark, Dubious, and Unintelligible Rate, without Fixing
some Mark, Name, or Appellation upon it; And therefore let 'em either say Our
Popish Religion, or Our Phanatical Religion; or [Our Religion Established by
Law, and a body knows where to have 'em: But to Set-up a Hundred False
Religions, in a Protestation to Oppose One; And then to make One True Religion
out of a Hundred Contradictions, is to Erect a Multitude of Gods, and to set-up
Altar against Altar; And on the Other hand to Extract a Compound of TRUTH, out
of a Confusion of Errors. Ibid.]

I shall now Compare the Text with the Comment; And leave it fairly to the
Reader, to Try if he can Reconcile them. Here Is First; Liberty of Conscience.
2ly, An Unbounded Schism. 3ly, The Imposture of Generalities. 4ly, So many
Mouths, so many Minds. 5ly. Secret Reserves, for a Cover to All the Phanatical
Sects. 6ly, A Hundred False Religions, and Contradictions. Here Is the Text; And
All This (says the Considerers Comment) is Intended for a Lash at Unity,
Uniformity, Express Articles, Orders, and Constitutions: Apostolical Agreement,
Orthodox Ministers, and Canonical Obedience; Harmony of Confession, etc. In
fine; Heaven and Earth may be as soon brought together as These Oppositions:
Nor could These Illusions ever have Passed upon Any Other Age then This. Nay;
And it is not all, that the Edge Cuts only upon the Schism, but to put the
Matter past the very Possibility, (as a body would think) of a Misconstruction,
there are I know not how many Savings of Honor and Respect, to the very Case
in Question, wherein I Declare my self Abundantly Satisfied with (as it falls
out) the very Terms, and Qualifications of the Address: i.e. [Establish'd by
Law.]

4. But let that Phrase fare as it will, Consid.
and our Reverences also be despised with it (though we did as little deserve, as
expect it from him) yet we think our worthy Diocesan, that for the Loyalty, as
well as the Nobility of his Family, deserves so well of the public; and for
his Zeal for, and constancy in our Religion (for we shall still make bold to
use that Phrase; Parliament of Scot. Answ. to the Kings Letter. April. 28.
especially, since we have no less than the Parliament of our Neighbor Nation
to justify us in it) deserves so well at Our, at His, and at all Church of
England men's hands, might have been spared, and that his Lordship might have
been used with other than a Comical Respect. A contempt so intolerable to us,
who have for ten years felt the happy effects of his prudent Government, that
our otherwise respected Author must pardon us, if we cannot so easily forgive
the public wrong done to that ever to be honored Person, or suffer it with
the same patience we bear our own.

4. The Considerer, Notes.
in This Tragi-Comical Paragraph, has done [Our Otherwise Respected Author] a
kindness that a man would have done a Dog. First, to give him a Flap over the
Mouth with a Fox-Tayle: And then in the Same Breath, to Arraign him for
Libelling so Reverend, and so Eminent a Prelate: When the very Calling of That
Observator, a Libell, (as I have showed already) is a most Intolerable Libell
it self: For it Touches not the Least Hair of any man's Head, that is not a
Schismatique: But I am to be made a Papist; and This must be done, by Preparing
the way to One Calumny, by Another; The Contempt of the Clergy, is a Step to
the Forsaking of the Church. I would not Believe Worse of This, or These, Man,
or Men of Consideration, then He or They Deserve; for their Own Sakes; nor
Better, for the Churches sake, because it is not Generous to Murder a man in an
Embrace: So that I Will even Stop Short, without so much as Guessing, out of what
Quiver This Arrow comes. There are Some Strokes here, I must Confess, that have
much of the Air in'em of the Epistle Dedicatory to [The Obserbator Proved a
Trimmer,] where the Church it Self was Notably Topt upon, as well as the
Observator; and I cannot Look upon the One, without Thinking of the Other. It
is a Figure much used of late, to Cover a Scandal, or an Invective, under the
Masque of a Panegyrique: As for Instance.

To the Most Reverend, Right Reverend, and Reverend Clergy of the Church of
England, By Law Established.
My Lords! And Venerable Sirs!
AS these Animadversions are made Public without the least Malice to the
Person of the Observator, or design to gratify any Faction, or undervalue any
Services his Papers may have heretofore done the Church or State; But to
Rectify certain things which he has lately advanced, that may (if they pass
uncontrouled) prove injurious to the Honor and Interest of both; so they
address not to you for Protection, any further than your Justice and Piety is
always wont to favor Truth. And therefore (humbly cast at your feet) are
submitted to your grave and impartial Considerations and Censure; as being
under God and His Majesty, the Watchful Overseers, whose especial Concern it is
(in your several Stations) to take Care Ne quid detrimenti Capiat Ecclesia.

Here Is [No Malice now to the Person of the Observator, Notes.
or Design to Undervalue Any Services his Papers may have heretofore done the
Church or State, etc.] This is the Civility of the Epistle; and the Considerer,
at the Bottom of Page. 3. comes not an Ace behind him, in the Point of
Courtesy. [We will Allow (says he) This Worthy Gentleman All the Deference his
Parts, and Pen do Deserve, etc.] I must not Slip One Note here; that All the
Adversaries of the Observator, were Friends to That Pamphlet; and Forgave it
All the Reproaches it cast upon the Church for the Good Will it had toward Me:
Beside a Hundred Shams and Forgeries, over and above, that were Cast-In to the
Composition. There were no Complaints Advanced in That Case, for Abusing of
Diocesans, though the whole Hierarchy was Trickt upon and Ridiculed:
Anabaptists, Millenaries, Presbyterians, Independents, All, Engaged in the
Compiling of it: And Care the Ammanuensis to Hand it over to the Press. But to
Proceed.

5. And yet its likely for the seven or eight and forty years Service done by
this Author (as he professes) to a Protestant Church; Consid. Observa. Number. 10.
and for a better reason which our Religion teaches us, all this would have
been buried in Silence, and the World had never heard more of it from us, were
there not a farther reason behind, that requires our appearance in this way,
and which we cannot dissemble and neglect without being false to Our Religion,
that we solemnly professed to His Majesty, to be dearer to us than our Lives.

5. At the End of the Foregoing Clause, Notes.
the Representative-Considerer Flatters me in the Name of the London-Clergy,
that They might have Forgiven me perhaps, if it had not been for [the Public
Wrong done, etc.] And now in This Clause, I might have been Forgiven even That,
it seems, too, if they could but have done it without being False to their
Religion. We shall come by and by, to Examine This Unpardonable Wickedness: But
in the Mean Time, by the Considerers leave, It was not [Our Religion] (as he
renders it) but Our Religion Established by Law] which They Represented to his
Majesty, to be Dearer to them then their Lives. I must not here Pass over the
Unfairness of his Citation, out of Observator. 10. Where the Point in Question
was the Charitable Contemplation of the Possibility of a Reunion betwixt the
Two Churches, without any Proposals toward it. Nay, (says the Observator)
We Will Suppose an Inadvertency; and that my Pen had Slipped: Faith betwixt
Christian Charity, on the One hand, and Flesh and Blood on the Other; Methinks
[Seaven or Eight and Forty Years [Constant] Service of a Protestant Church]
might have Compounded for so humane, and so Good-natured an Error. Obs. Vol. 3.
No. 10.] Would Any man have Thought now, that the Modesty, and Resignation of
This Passage, could have been Improved into the Semblance of Vanity, and
Ostentation?

6. That Religion, Consid.
we say, now Established by Law, in opposition, both to Fanatacism and Popery;
and from the Opposition it bears to the last of which, is called, more
especially, the Protestant and Reformed.

6. If the Protestant Religion, Notes.
Established by Law, stands in Opposition to Phanaticism, (as the Considerer
says it does) the Phanatiques are No Protestants: Neither are They properly, of
the English Reformed Religion, if they be not Lawful Members of the English
Communion. Now the Distinction of Protestant and Reformed, does only Denote
that we are Not Papists, without Any Particular Account of what we Are; or
under What Protestant, or Reformed Classis we Range our selves: And therefore I
am against the Generality of the Appellation; because of the Infinite
Diversities of Errors, and Contradictions, that Shelter Themselves under That
Cover. The Rebellious Sohismatiques of Forty One, Appealed to the [Protestants
Abroad,] and to the [Reformed Churches beyond the Seas.] The Traitors that have
Suffered Death in Our Late Conspiracies, and Rebellions, Usurped upon the same
Denomination and Profession: And in a Word; The Common Application, and the
Promiscuous Use of the same Terms, Indifferently, by Both Parties, Cuts the
Throat of One Protestant Religion with Another. I do not Insist upon
Strictnesses, and Criticisms; But I reckon it a Thing much to be Wished, since
the Confounding of the Church- Protestants, and the True- Protestants, (so
Called) is of so Pernicious a Consequence to the Government, that they may be
Differenced, One from Another, in the very Style, by some Note of
Discrimination. As for the Purpose; I am of the Protestant, of the Reformed
Religion, says a Canonical Churchman: And so am I too, says Every Mouth of the
Schism; and so it holds The Other way, Vice Versa, which looks as if Those Within
the Pale, and Those Without, were All One. To Conclude, [Establish'd by Law]
Sets All Right, and Solves All Difficulties.

7. But if the Case betwixt the Church of England and Rome, Consid.
betwixt Popery and those that have Reformed from it, be as this Ingenious
Person has (unwittingly we hope) represented it, Our Lives may well be dearer
to us than our Religion: And if we will yet profess Our Religion to be dearer
to us, than our Lives; it must either be perverse Obstinacy, or gross Delusion,
egregious Folly, or lewd Hypocrisy.

7. Here Is more Holy Water, Notes.
yet. [This Ingenious Person has ( Unwittingly, we hope, etc.) so Desperately
Mis-Stated the Case, betwixt the Two Churches, that it has Turned the
Preference The Other way, and made our Lives Dearer to us then Our Religion.] I
wish he had Omitted the [Perverse Obstinacy, Egregious Folly, and Lewd
Hypocrisy:] For I am persuaded, if we looked well about us, we might find Some
Persons of That Judgment, that Think Themselves in the Right in it: And Others,
that are neither Fools, nor Hypocrites; nor to be Exposed to the World under
That Character: But he has now laid his Finger upon the Sore; and upon the Sin
that is never to be Forgiven. And yet after All These Mortal Errors,
Transgressions, and Pompous Aggravations, he does Himself Clear me, in the very
Next Paragraph (and in the Name of the Church-of-England still) of Every
Article of my Charge: And in That, and the Following Clause, he comes-up to the
Uttermost Syllable of what I ever said: Insomuch, that He who but Just now made
me such an Apostate, that he could not Forbear Writing against me without being
False to his Religion, is now Iudicially Wrought upon, by an Overruling
Impulse, to do me Justice, in an Express Confirmation of the Truth of My
Opinions, and in as Point-Blanck a Contradiction to the Profession of his Own:
So that the Next Two Clauses, are Kind in Several Respects: And in regard of
the Connection and Dependence, One upon Another, we will take 'em Both together.

8. We will allow to this worthy Gentleman, Consid.
all the deference his Parts and his Pen do deserve. We allow him to be what he
professes, Observa. 6. and 10.
A Catholic of the Church of England, or a Church of England Protestant. We
allow him not to forget the Christian, the Generous, and the Friendly
Obligations, that many of the Roman Catholics have laid upon him. Lastly, Let
us allow that there are some points in the Church of Rome, Number. 6.
wherein, tho we differ in Modalities and Terms, we agree yet in the same
meaning. And that there are some other points, wherein the matter is capable of
such Condescentions and Abatements, as both sides might very well close upon,
with a just deference to Christ^^^ Charity, and without offense to the
Catholic Faith: Yet after all these Concessions, we do most certainly
believe, and seriously affirm, that there are many other points, in which
neither Modalities and Terms, do make the difference; nor is the matter capable
of such Condescentions and Abatements, as both sides might well close upon,
without offense to the Catholic Faith.

9. That is, Consid.
there are many things, they hold, and we do deny; such again as we hold, and
they do deny, that with all the Condesentions and Abatements can never be
Accomodated; nor we with all the Christian Charity be reconciled; unless we are
so base as against Truth and Reason, to go over in those points wholly to them,
or Almighty God shall open their Eyes, so to discern it, that they come fully
over to us.

8. 9. I must be very Copious now, Notes.
upon This Subject, to be very Clear: And it is Certainly worth my while too,
when the Stress that is laid upon the Cause in hand, is made, not only Matter of
Life and Death; but of Heaven and Hell too: For if ever we live to see the
second Part of Otes'es Plot, there will be both Hanging, and Damning too, in
the Case. In the First Place he Allows me to be [a Catholic of the
Church-of-England, or a Church-of-England Protestant,] which will hardly
Consist, with his making me afterward, more then Half a Papist. Now if he had
Intended Heartily, and an Impartial Justice, upon the Question about My
Religion; there was enough in the Paragraph of Obs. 6. Vol. 3. whence he took
This, to have Answered That Point beyond All Controversy: But his Business was
to Bring me On, not to Bring me Off: And so I must even do That Right for My
self, which He would not do for me. The Words of the Citation, in Connection,
are These.

[Trim. Obs. 6. V. 3.
'Twould be a great deal more Generous, to Own, and to Declare your self a
Papist, to the Whole World, then to lie Wriggling In and Out thus, betwixt Two
Religions.

Obs. Why then once for all, Trimmer, I am a CATHOLIQVE, and the very Same
Catholic that I have Ever been, and ever Professed my self to Be: That is to
say, a Catholic of the Church of England. Though I am well enough Content, to
Own my self a Protestant too, according to the Best Acceptance of the Word,
Improperly Speaking, and no Otherwise. That Religion, which I Owned, and
Process'd upon the Sacrament to the Reverend Dr* Ken, at the Hague; (Now Lord
Bishop of Bath and Wells) when I was forced to run away from a Pack of Forsworn
Miscreants here, that would have made a Papist of me; That very Religion do I
Declare my self to be of, at This Day; and that I never put Pen to Paper,
throughout the Whole Course of this Pretended Plot, in Justification of the
Papists, with any Regard to their Religion, but out of the very Indignation of
my Soul, to see an Outcry against Popery, on the One Hand, made a Cover for a
Republican, and Phanatical Rebellion, on the Other; To see the Church of
England Struck-at, in That Popery; and Every man that did but Talk like a
Christian, a Good Subject, or an Honest Man, to be presently Stigmatized for a
Papist; to see Common Malefactors, and Prostitute Hirelings, set-up for the
Saviors of a Church, and a State; and Gain Credit, by Kissing the Outside of a
Bible, without Believing One Syllable of the Contents: To see Three Kingdoms
half-Eaten-up by Catch-Poles; the Lives, and Estates of Men of Honor,
Sacrificed to the Rabble; and what with Starving Projects, and Bills of
Exclusion, the Late King, and the Royal Family, Treated Little Better then the
Meanest Subjects: Neither, in the Presence of God, was I ever Transported by
any Partialities of Prepossession, into so much as One Thought of Bitterness,
against the Dissenters, any further, then as upon Knowledge, and Sure
Experience, I was Convinced (as I am at This Instant) that the Schism is only a
Conspiracy, and a League against the Government under the Masque of Religion:
If you Doubt of This, I can Summon ye above a Hundred and Fifty of their Own
Doctors, to Verify this Opinion. I have no Interest in this Declaration, but to
Deliver the Truth, and Simplicity of my very Heart; and to Confound the Malice
of All Slanderers, Impostors, and Gainsayers.]

The Question upon the Matter here before us, is Briefly This; Not whether the
Ingenious Worthy Man of Parts, be a Protestant, or a Papist; but whether he be
a Christian or no: Nay a Pagan would not have made so Bold with his Idol, as I
have, upon This Occasion, with my Maker; if I have not here Delivered the
Truth, without Guile, or Reserve. And I am Mistaken too, if the Charity of
Believing me, be not as much a Christian Duty, on the One Hand, as the
Sincerity of the Protestations I have here made, is on the Other.

In his Next Citation out of Obs. 10. He passes over These Words at the
Beginning of the Same Period. [Though I am not of the Religion of the Roman
Catholiques] I can never forget, etc.] The Considerer, I perceive, had much
rather make the world believe that I am a Papist, then Cite Any Declarations,
or Oaths of Mine, to the Contrary; And yet now [All o'th Sudden] he comes Over
to me; and we Agree, like Two Tallys: Unless it be, that He Out-does me, even
in my Own Proposition: For he speaks Positively, both to the [Some Points;] and
to the [Some Other Points;] To which I only put my Naked Belief: But the Surest
way is to Referr to the Text it self.

[There are Some Points in the Church of Rome, Obs. 6. V. 3.
wherein [I verily Believe] though we Differ in Modalities and Terms, we Agree
yet in the Same Meaning. There are some Other Points wherein [I do As verily
Believe] the Matter Capable of Such Condescentions, and Abatements, as Both
sides might very well Close upon, with a Just Deference to Christian Charity,
and without Offense to the Catholic Faith. Obs. Number. 6. Vol. 3.]

Let Any man Compare the Considerer now, upon This Point with the Observator;
and he shall find them to be Both so perfectly of a Mind, upon the Desperate
Doctrine of Modalities, and Accommodable Differences, in [Some Points,] and in
[Some Other Points] that they Agree in the very Same Words, and Syllables: But
there are Many Other Points, he says, wherein the Matter is Not Capable of such
Condescentions and Abatements, etc.] This he says,. 8. But then within Two or
Three Lines After, in 9. He Qualifies the Matter, and Vnsays it again; Though
he is at Variance with Himself too, in That very Section. He pronounces
Peremptorily, that All the Condescentions and Abatements, or All the Christian
Charity in the World, will do no Good, in Many Cases: But then he brings
himself off, with an [VNLESS we are so Base, as against Truth and Reason, to go
over in Those Points wholly to Them; or Almighty God shall open Their Eyes, to
Discern it that they come fully over to us.] That is to say Those Points can
Not be Accommodated; unless it pleases God that they May be Accommodated: And I
could Wish now, that Those Points had been Named, which he says [We Hold,] and
[They Deny.]

But to speak more Expressly to his Ninth Section; I would fain know, if the
very Words of the Observator, Vol. 3. Number. 10. do not Import the Self Same
Conception, and Understanding of the Matter with what He Delivers. i.e.. [It is
not Exposed as the Project of a Thing Probable; but in a Charitable
Contemplation of the Possibility of it, by a Providential Removal of Those
Passions, and Prejudices that Hinder the Agreement.] He goes now forward, to
Deny in the Next Paragraph, what he has Admitted in This.

10. This is truly the Matter in question. Consid.
It is not, whether there be not Truth as well as Error in the case: and the
one may not then be separated from the other (as this Gentleman mistakes;) but
whether there be not in the Doctrine of that Church which we oppose, Error
without Truth; and whether the main matters in dispute betwixt Church and
Church, which the one faith is Truth, and the other says is Error, be capable
of such condescentions and abatements as both sides might well close upon, etc.
And that for example, the Church of Rome, which requires Purgatory to be
believed under an Anathema; and the Church of England, which says, it is a fond
thing, vainly invented, etc. can be reconciled without those that hold, it is a
fond thing vainly invented, do make it an Article of their Faith, or those that
hold it an Article of their Faith, do declare it is a fond, a vain, and a false
thing.

10. This Paragraph, Notes.
I must Confess, is too Hard for me: For I cannot Conceive, why the
Superstructure of Error upon Truth, may not as well be Taken- off, as it was
Laid- on: For it is not be Imagined, that Error and Truth can be so
Incorporated, as to become Inseparable. When I speak of Error, and Truth in the
Case, it is to be Understood, with a Respect to the Points in Difference
betwixt the Two Churches: And whether it be Error Without Truth, or Error
Accompanied With Truth, it is as Broad as it is Long. That, indeed, which the One
says is Truth, and the Other says is Error, can never be Reconciled, so long as
Both Parties Adhere to That Opposition; for that were to suppose Error, and
Truth to be all One. But [His UNLESS;] and [My PROVIDENTIAL REMOVAL] takes That
Rubb out of the Way.

11. An Accommodation in such a case is Impracticable: Consid.
For (as our Author well observes upon another occasion) it imports an
agreement of two divided Chuches in the very state of their disagreement; where
not the passions and prejudices of men, but the Nature of the things, hinder
the Agreement; and so spoils the Philosophy of a charitable contemplation about
the possibility of it.

11. It Is very True; Notes.
that an Accommodation (as he says) is Impracticable, where it is Impossible;
And it is no less True, that it is Impossible, so long as People that are of
Differing Persuasions, Continue in That Hostile State of Disagreement: But
Change of Mind removes That Obstacle; And the Grace of Almighty God (as He
Himself Confesses in the Former Page) may work that Change of Mind. Now here is
no Change all this while, in the Nature of the Thing, but in the Opinion of it:
Truth and Error are the Same still that they were before; And I know very well,
that it is Impossible to make Truth to be Error, or Error to be Truth: But
what is This to the Passions, and Prejudices of Men, that may be Taken-up, or
Lay'd-down, almost at Pleasure? The Inconciliable Opposition of Vice, and
Virtue, does not at all hinder, but that Men of Profligate Lives, and Vicious
Habits, may yet Reclaim, and become Virtuous. Ambition, Avarice, Cruelty, and
Oppression, can never be Transformed into the Opposite Uirtues: But Men that
are Addicted to Those Vices may Cast their Skins* and Passover into the Love,
and Practice of Humility, Moderation, Tenderness, Compassion, without a
Miracle. And it were Hard, Otherwise; If (according to the Sense of my
Expositors,) the most Necessary Duties of a Christian; That is to say,
Repentance and a New Life, should be Rendered only the Charitable Contemplation
of a thing Impossible. This is a Doctrine, that seems to Me, (with Submission
to be better Enform'd) to Block-up the way, and to Preclude the Means, even of
Salvation it self: For if All men Living have their Errors, and their
Failings; And, when they are once Out of the Way, if there be no getting Back;
How miserable is the Condition of Mankind, that stands Condemned, at the same
Time, to Inevitable Frailties, and to Unpardonable Mistakes! I will Allow all
the Stress that can be laid upon the most Potent Obstructions to This Blessed
End; As the Affectation of Power, and Dominion; The Charms of Glory, and of
Secular Interest; Or the Prepossessions of Education. These Impressions make
the Matter Difficult; But not Insuperable, and Utterly Impossible: Especially
(As the Considerer says) [If Allmighty God shall Vouchsafe to Open the Eyes of
the Deceived, so as to make them Discern Truth and Reason;] Or in the Words of
the Observaor, in case of [A Providential Removal of Those Passions, and
Prejudices, that Hinder the Agreement.] This is the Possibility that I
Contemplate: And I take the Considerers [ALLMIGHTY GOD] and the Observators
[PROVIDENCE] to Intend One and the Same Power.

12. This is the Case we except against, Consid.
and which we shall now proceed to the consideration of; not that we declare,
to lessen the esteem of this Author (whom we do honor for his Ingenuity and
Industry, and his other Accomplishments worthy of a Gentleman and a Scholar)
but to Vindicate our Church, and to preserve our People from the Infection of
such Doctrine; which how goodnatured soever it may be in the design, cannot but
be mischievous and pernicious in the consequents.

12 I must needs put the same Complement, Notes.
in this case, upon the Considerer, that an Italian Prince put upon a Gentleman
that gave him a Lift to Help him into the Saddle. He was a Light Person of a
Man: And the Other Threw him quite over his Horse: The Prince got up again;
And, with his Cap in his hand, Sr, (says he) the One Half of This Courtesy
would have done My Business. In like manner, I would have Compounded, with the
Considerer, with all my heart, for his Civilities to the [Gentleman] and the
[Scholar,] if he would but have Excused me from the Infamy of a Defamer of the
Charch, and a Spreader of Infectious Doctrines. I do not speak This, [to Lessen
the Esteem of the Author;] but purely to Preserve my Self from the Consequences
of so Infectious a Calumny: And a Calumny, (for ought yet appears,) without Any
Foundation. The Clause runs in the Style of [WE Except against] WE Declare] WE
do Honour] OUR Church] and OUR People:] So that the Censure falls little short
of an Anathema, for it appears here to be Published, as out of the Mouth of the
Church it Self. And what is my Crime at last now but the Poor Innocent
Observator of Feb. 23. Last Past? For my [Modalities,] and All that Train of
True-Protestant Clamours, and Scruples are Approved, and Allowed of by Himself,
to a Single Tittle. We shake hands too, in the Possibilities of Things: And I
do not hear of so much as One Syllable added to my Charge, upon this Subject.
So that upon the Main; the Whole Mystery of My Iniquity is Wrapped up in the
Gall, and Venom of Those Two Words [OVR RELIGION.] There Is Popery, there is
Heresy; there is Scandal; There Is Insolence, and In Manners in 'em; For till
That Malevolent Minute, All was Well; And the Lashing of the Schismatiques, for
the Scandal, and the Ruin that they have brought, both upon the Church and the
State, by the Equivocal, and Squinting Use they have made of Those Two General
Words, is the Only Sin, for ought I can see, that I have here to Answer for.
The Considerer Himself Dates the Quarrel from that Moment: He Founds it upon
That Bottom: And when All is done, he has given me a Discharge under his Own
Hand.

13. Our Author is pleased to affirm, Consid. Observa. Number. 3.
That the Principles of the Papists are known and certain. A proposition which
cannot be universally true, since they are far from an agreement even in such
points as are of the greatest importance for them to agree in. Such is that of
Infallibility, which whether it be in the Pope without a Council, or a Council
without the Pope, or Pope and Council, or the Church Diffusive, they cannot
agree nor determine. But supposing, that their Principles are known and
certain, where may we expect to find them, if not in their Councils, General
and Provincial; in their Canons and Decrees, in their allowed Catechisms and
solemn Professions of Faith, in their public Offices and approved Comments on
Scripture? but if these be not admitted, we must despair of satisfaction, and
have reason to conclude, their Principles are neither known nor certain.

13. He referrs Himself here, Notes.
to an Affirmation of mine, out of Observator Vol. 3. Number. 9. Where (according
to his Custom) he Draws a Citation out of the Middle of the Period. My words
are These [Such an Union with Papists as you seem to Propose with Protestants,
holds no Proportion at all with the Question in hand. First, as Their
Principles are Known and Certain; The Other Unnaccountable, and Uagabond] And
so afterward; [The One Supposes a Doctrinal Union; And the Other Demands a
Political, etc.] Now there is a Great Difference, betwixt a Positive, and a
Comparative Affirmation: So that he puts the Case upon the Stretch, to make it
the Former: Though it is the Same thing to Me, whether it be the One, or the
Other; for I Am Right, Both ways, as to My Purpose. If their Principles be Not
Known and Certain, there is One Stabbing Argument against the Papists fallen to
the Ground. That is to say, the Involving of the People of That Persuasion, to
the Last Man of 'em, in the Common Principle of Destroying (as they call them)
Heretical Princes: For the Recaptacle of Infallibility, is a Point (as he says,
p. 6.) that is not as yet Agreed, or Determined among Themselves: But if they
Be Known, and Certain; I have nothing more to say. Neither is it One Jot to
the Business of That Observator, which Respects only the Disparity betwixt
Uniting in Matters of Doctrine with men of Another Religion; and Uniting with
men that pretend to be of Our Own Religion, in Political Maxims, and Positions,
which are Subversive of the Civil State.

14. As for the Doctrine of the Church of England, Consid.
we can freely declare it to be known and certain. The sum of what we hold, is
drawn up in Nine and Thirty Articles, explained in one and Twenty Homilies, and
the way of our Worship exhibited in our Liturgy. From hence we shall therefore
collect our Materials, and, according to the method of our Articles, compare
Doctrine with Doctrine, Church with Church; by which we doubt not but to make
the Opposition between them so evident, that both sides will agree, that the
Church of England is one thing and the Church of Rome another; and, as they are
at present, no more capable of being, one, than Truth and Error can be the same.

In order to which we shall premise.

14. This looks, as if the Observator had stood-up For the Principles of the
Papists, Notes.
Against the Doctrine of the Church-of- England, and, Consequently, Extorted
from the Unwilling Author, These Papers, in Vindication of the Protestant
Religion; when yet the Observator has not Presumed, in Any sort, or upon Any
Occasion, to [Touch the Ark;] but Kept himself within the Bounds of Political
Remarques, and Disquisitions, in Order to the Service of the State, without
Breaking-in upon the Offices, and Duties of the Reverend Clergy in Any Degree
Whatsoever. Now I shall Easily Join with him, that [the Church-of-England is
One Thing, and the Church of Rome, Another:] But it is yet as Possible that
they may come to be One Again, as it was, before the Separation, that they
should come to be Divided. I Will break No Squares with him neither, upon This
Point; that [as they are at present, they are no more Capable of being One,
then Truth and Error can be the Same;] which is no more then to say, that White
can never be Black, so long as it is White; nor Black, White, so long as it is
Black. But now though the Error, or the Vice can never Change Color, the
Offender may Quit an Ill Habit, and leave his Wickedness behind him; And the
most Mistaken Creature in the world, may be brought out of Darkness into Light:
So that the Considerer might have saved himself the Labor of Iumbling
Doctrines together, and Conferring Articles, upon Any Account, (That is to say,
of the Observators:) For the Virtues of the Lodestone, or the Squaring of a
Circle, would have been a Subject, Every jot as much to the Question in hand
(for any thing that I have to do in the Case) as the Stating, and Ballancing
the Doctrine of the Two Churches.

15. First, Consid.
That there are some Articles which both Churches do in express Terms agree in;
viz Art. 1. of the Holy Trinity; Art. 2. of the Word, or Son of God; Art. 3. of
the going down of Christ into Hell; Art. 4. of the Resurrection of Christ; Art.
5. of the Holy Ghost; Art. 7. of the Old Testament; Art. 8. of the Three
Creeds; Art. 12. of good works; Art. 16. of sin after Baptism; Art. 18. of
obtaining eternal salvation only by the Name of Christ; Art. 23. of ministering
in the Congregation; Art. 26. of the unworthiness of Ministers; Art. 27. of
Baptism; Art. 33. of Excommunicate persons; Art. 38. of Christian men's goods;
Art. 39. of a Christian man's Oath. Ecclesiae Ang. Basis Impostura Luxem. 1619.
Against these the Jesuit Johan Roberti, has little or nothing to object in
his small Tract purposely written in opposition to our Articles,

16. But of these Articles it is to be observed, Consid.
there are some which each party differs as much from the other in (when they
come to explain themselves) as if there had been no agreement in Terms. Thus it
happens in Articles, 3d, 7th, and 15; as shall afterward be showed.

15. 16. This Enumeration of Articles, is Nothing at all to Me, Notes.
unless it can be made appear, that I have either Intermeddled in the Question,
or Given Any Colorable Occasion for the Animadversion, in Any Manner
Whatsoever.

17. 2ly. There are other Articles, Consid.
wherein both Churches do agree in the sense, tho they differ in Terms; or that
are not so much Controversies between Church and Church, as between private
Docters in each Church. Of this Opinion is a Learned Forreigner of the Reformed
Religion, about the matter contained in Articles the 10th and 17th, of
Free Will; and of Predestination and Election. Of the former he says, The
difference that our Adversaries will object between them and us, upon this
point of Free Will, Apology for the Protestants, done out of French into
English by R. L.
is only imaginary, and a mere cavil. Of the latter he concludes; Since we
agree in the Fundamentalls of this Doctrine (as we have already set forth); and
that our dissent is but with a few of their Doctors, it would not be very hard
(I should think) to find out such a biass of Temperament, 1681. Part. 4. Cap.
3. page 133. 150.
drawn from the Word of God, in proposing of these Opinions, and in Terms so
proportioned to their sublimity; as all humble and moderate Spirits would find
sufficient for their satisfaction.

17. The Apology here-cited, was Translated by my self, and Published with my
Name at length to it, in 1681. The Considerer is pleased to give the Author of
it, the Character of [A Learned Forreigner of the Reformed Religion.] How comes
This [Learned Forreigner,] (and so Called with a Respect to This very Piece) to
keep up His Reputation still, as a Professor of the Reformed Religion, and the
Observator to be a Lost Man, to the Church of England, past all Remission, for
not the Fiftieth part of the Liberty that the Other has taken? Or rather, How
comes a Protestant of Eighty-One, upon the very Same Foundation, to be made a
Papist in Eighty-Five? But the Partiality will be yet more Obvious, from the
Project and the Title of That Apology: An Instance, which, perhaps I might have
forgotten, if the Quotation had not brought it into my Mind. The Title, in
French, and English, is as follows, [Apologie pour les Protestans, Ou l'Auteur
justify pleinement leur Conduite and leur separation de la Communion de Rome;
and PROPOSE des Moyens FACILES, and RAISONABLES, pour vne SAINT, and
Bien-heureuse REUNION] i.e. [An Apology for Portestants, wherein the Author
fully Justifies their Proceedings, and Departure from the Church of Rome: With
a Proposal of Means, EASY and REASONABLE, for a Holy and a Blessed REUNION.]
All that I did was barely to Contemplate a PROVIDENTIAL POSSIBILITY of it:
Whereas Here Is a Point Blank PROPOSAL, of the very Ways and Methods for the
Attaining of that Happy End. In Fine: The Author of the Apology, though an Open,
and a Professed Advocate for a Reunion, is highly Recommended and Approved; While
at the same time, the Charitable Speculation, but of the Possibility of it, is
made a Mortal Sin in the Observator. The Three next Clauses run altogether upon
the Topic of Rebus sic Stantibus.

[We do not Pray (says the Considerer) for Charities sake, Consid.
to Err with those that Err, and to be Deceived with those that are Deceived,
P. 10.] But that it may please God to bring into the way of truth all such as
have Erred and are Deceived; and to strengthen such as do stand. And for This,
We Beseech thee to Hear us, Good Lord. Ibid.]

This is very well now; Notes.
And no otherwise than just thus, do I understand the matter: nay I must have
been a Stark fool, or a Madman, to have laid my self open to any other
Construction: For I might as well pretend to Reconcile Heaven and Hell, as
Truth and Error; Sound Doctrine and Heresy. And I am Afraid, there has been
more care taken to Puzzle my Meaning, than to Understand it, though I Hope that
the Considerer has been rather Misled himself, than a Willing Misleader of
others: For he is pleased to say in Another Place,

[The Project we Approve; Consid.
the Benefit of it is Apparent: But without this Renunciation, of these
[Abovementioned] as well as many other Principles Destructive to such Union,
and Society, we fear it is not Practicable, and that the Government, Our
Religion, not to say, our selves, may as well be Ruined by Credulity, as
Distrust.]

If it be a Laudable Project, Notes.
it is Well meant, and no hurt done in the Wish, though Accompanied with almost
the Despair of seeing it put in practice; And I am as much for the Renunciation
of Destructive Principles, as the Considerer Himself; And for making that
Disclaimer, the Condition of the Agreement. As to the Hazard that may Befall
the Government, [our Religion] and our Selves, as well by Credulity, as by
Distrust; the Danger is not so much in Each of them Singly, as in Both
Together; where Credulity toward a Faction, begets Fears and Iealousies of the
Magistrate: But the Considerer follows This too, by Falling in with the Author
of the Apology before Cited upon this very Text.

[We shall Conclude the Whole (says he) With what is said by a Moderate French
Writer, Consid.
Quoted before, viz. [I would to God that Those of the Church of Rome had the
same Tenderness for Us, that we have for Them; And that they would but Treat Us
with the like Openness, and Candor; They would be then Easily satisfied, that
we are no Enemies of a Reconciliation, if they would but take a step or two on
their side to Meet us upon the way.] But this can never be, so long as the Pope
of Rome pretends, not only to be the Chief of the Order, but to Exercise an
Arbitrary, and Absolute Power, as a Monarch in the Church] etc. And so he goes
on, Reckoning up a great many Errors in the Church of Rome, as Obstructions to
a Reconciliation; coming to this Result at Last. [So long I say, as These and
the Other like Abuses shall be Continued in the Church of Rome, People may make
what Overtures they please: But there is no Union to be Expected betwixt Them
and Us.] So that strike off the Abuses, and the Obstacle is Removed.

Now whatever Misunderstandings have fallen out upon the way, Notes.
I cannot see, but that the Considerer, the Apologist, and the Observator, are
all Three of the same Mind upon the Pinch of this Question, which is, that Men
Continuing in Erroneous Oppositions upon the Subject of Religion, cannot Agree
in the Truth; And that without the Truth, There can be No Agreement.

There is Another Touch upon the Observator about the Prerogative of the
Deposing-Power. Consid.
[It is so far (says the Considerer) from being True, that [Not one Papist in a
Thousand is of the Persuasion that Princes may be Deposed, Obs. Vol. 3. N. 6.]
That more Probably, not one in a Thousand is against it; and if any such be
against it, it is with as much Inconsistence to the Principles of Their Church,
as it is with the Principles of Our Religion to be for it.]

I must here Mind the Author of what he say in the 6th. Page Notes.
that the Papists are not Agreed whether the Infallibility be Lodged in the
Church Diffusive or not; or Where it is Lodged; And this Instance was used, to
show that in That Point, the Principles of the Papists are not Known and
Certain: And if so; this Inference will never hold, upon the Universality of
that Principle: Nay He Himself gives an Instance even against Himself, in the
same Page, where he Acknowledges, the Clergy of France did not long since
Publish a Proposition: [That the Pope had no Power in Civil and Temporal
Affairs, and that Kings were Subject to no Ecclesiastical Power, nor can be
Deposed, nor their Subjects be Absolved from their Allegiance.] So that here is
a Foul Gap in the Principle already, to say nothing of our late Experiences;
For it is not my Zeal for the Papists, but the Veneration that I have for
Truth, Honesty, and Common Justice, that has engaged me in this Controversy;
not forgetting what I owe to my self all this while, in the Common Cause.

To sum up the Whole now in a Few Words; The Sun is not Clearer, than it is,
that my Writings have been Perverted; The Connection Mangled, and Disjointed; My
Opinions, and my Practices Misrepresented; And that upon Pressing the several
Parts of the Calumny, the Entire Structure falls to pieces. I will, in Charity,
Believe, that the Considerer took his Citations upon Trust, Especially, in what
Concerns the Address of the Reverend Clergy of the City of London: For the
Phrase in General of Our Religion; The Protestant Religion; The Reformed
Religion, is so strictly, and so Expressly Appropriated to the Protestant
Dissenters, that it will not so much as bear an Allusion to Any thing else; And
I thought it very Reasonable, to Inculcate a Caution against Those Ambiguities,
that have been so Pernicious to the Crown, and to the Church. Nay! and at the
same time, I have over, and over, Recommended the Bare Addition of [Established
by Law,] as a short Remedy against a Thousand Inconveniences, and Mistakes:
And this is No Capriccio of my Own, neither; For you will find it, the very
Train, and Method, of Distinguishing the Friends of the Government from their
Enemies: Look thorough All the Swarms of Seditions News Papers, Mercuries,
Petitions, Addresses, and Other Libellous Discourses; And You shall find them to
run All, Unanimously, in the style of Protestant, True Protestant, Reformed
etc. and no [Established by Law] in One of a Thousand of them, Unless in the
way of Raillery or Droll. Look on the Other hand into the Counter-Petitions,
Addresses, etc. and you will hardly find the Protestant Religion in Any of them,
without the Qualification of [Establish'd by Law.] It Is the style of His
Majesty's Declaration, and likewise of the London Address abovementioned: So
that I am Charged for Skewing at them, for Words that they did not say, without
the Supplement of the Laudable, and Needful Qualification. In the Business of
the [some,] and [some Other] Accommodable Points, the Considerer, and the
Observator have Jointly given Assent and Consent, And subscribed, in Terminis,
to the very same Form. And so much for That.

No sooner did the Noise, and Envy of This Calumny begin to Wear-off: But there
was Another, Immediately started, worse then the Former; Which was, a Current,
and a Confident Report, spread all over the Kingdom, That the Observator had
Dogmatically Delivered it, as from the Chair, [That All Subjects were Bound to
be of their Prince's Religion; Now there was Nothing more in it then This.

In the Wednesday Paper of April 29. 1685. Number. 35. I was Handling the subject
of a Popular Liberty of Conscience; And how Inevitably it must Destroy the
Order, and Polity of All societies; And Justify the most Sanguinary, and
Impious of Outrages; When [I am bound to Cut your Throat, upon One Point of
Conscience, and You are bound to Cut Mine upon Another.] From hence, I
proceeded to Treat of the Conscience of the Magistrate, and the Conscience of
the Subject; But through the Whole Discourse, as a Point of Policy, and
Government, not of Religion. I Will take This Opportunity, once for all, to set
my self Right in This Particular; And no way better, then to set down the Whole
story at Large, in the very Words of the Observator.

Trim. [A Liberty for every man to serve God according to his Judgment.] Obs.
35. Vol. 3.


Obs. Why you are Out now, Several Ways. First; it is Not That Liberty of a
man's Serving God according to his Judgment: For you Challenge That to the
Subject, which you Deny to the Magistrate: His Conscience bids him Serve God,
in Order; the People will have Their Consciences at Liberty to serve him in
Confusion. The Magistrate's is a Governing Conscience: And what is to be done
now, if the Subject's Consciences shall Refuse to be Governed? The Magistrate's
Conscience is Answerable for the whole Community: The Subject's is a Private
Case, where every Individual Accounts only for his Single Self. The Magistrate
Sins against his Own Conscience if he Suffers a Capricious part of his Subjects
to run Vagabonding, and Schismatizing, according to Theirs: Besides that the
Wisdom of God, and the Disposition of Divine Providence, have made the Prince
the Judge of the Controversy; and His Conscience Exerts it self in Authority,
while the Peoples Consciences are to Acquiesce, either in Resignation, or
Obedience: The People are All and Every Man of 'em the Kings Subjects: And
besides the Impious Mixture of Erroneous, and Contradictory Opinions; All their
Pretended Associations of Conscience, are Conspiracies of Practice; when, at
the Same time, the Sovereign has the Ordinance of God; the Laws of the Land;
Piety, Duty, Imperial Prerogative, and Reason of State, on his side: So that
there is a Conscience Indispensable, on the One Hand, and a Conscience
Unwarrantable on the Other: Insomuch that Liberty of Conscience makes against
ye All the ways you can put it: For it is against Law; Against Right; Against
Truth, Nature, and Religion: And, like a Bottomless Quick-Sand, it Sucks-in the
very Frame of All Political Constitutions, Never to be Retriv'd. It is Your
Liberty of Conscience that I speak of; But the Magistrate's Right, and
Obligation of Conscience stands as Firm as the Foundations of the Earth. And
prithee will thou go now, and Consult all the Rabbi's of the Separation,
Casuistically, upon This Point. What Dispensation from Almighty God, has a
King, more then a Subject, to Act Contrary to his Conscience? Or what Answer
shall That Prince make, at the Day of Judgment* That when his Conscience
Charges him, (as he hopes for Salvation) to Provide, according to the Best of
his Skill, for the Welfare of his People, shall yet Suffer his Subjects to
Exercise That License, which He in his Conscience, Thinks, Judges, and
Believes, will be for their Destruction? The Question is, First; Whether or No
shall This Prince Govern according to his Conscience? 2ly, How is it possible,
to Reconcile This Popular Liberty, to a Consistency with the Conscience of the
Supreme Magistrate, and the Necessary Regulations of Sovereign Power? 3ly,
Which shall have the Preference, in This Case, the Kings Conscience, or the
Peoples? That is to say, in Few Words; where is the Sovereignty? In the King, or
in the Multitude?

And again, [The Supreme Magistrate has a Double Conscience, Obs. Number. 36. Vol.
3.
One with a Respect to his Personal Persuasion about Matters that Immediately
concern his Soul, The Other with a Regard to his Political Administration. The
Subject likewise has a Conscience, that purely Respects Matters betwixt God and
his Own Soul. And a Conscience likewise that Superinduces another Obligation
upon him, with Relation to the Public, as he is a Member of the Community. In
the Former he is at LIBERTY, but in the Other he is under GOVERNMENT and
COMMAND, Obs. Number. 42. Vol. 3.
Obs. Number. 36 Vol. 3.] What is this to say now but that his Religious
Conscience is Free as he is a Christian, But his Practical Conscience is
Limited as he is a Subject?

What is there more now, in All This, then that Kings are Bound in Conscience,
to keep their People from Cutting one another Throats, which they will most
Certainly do, and Destroy their Sovereign over and above, when ever he Yields
to them the Point of Popular Liberty of Conscience? So that here are Reasons of
State, Sublimated into Articles of Faith; and a Man is to be presently made a
Papist, that will not Swear Secrecy and Allegiance to the Practices and
Positions of Rebellion.

I could Muster up a Hundred other Instances of the same Batch, and Leaven; as
my Threatening of a Bookseller, if he presumed to Print any thing against
Popery, which was Proved upon Oath to be an Arrant Lie. And yet the Cry ran so
Strong, that there was hardly any beating of it down. They had another Story
too of my Stopping the Book of a Reverend Divine purely for Asserting the
Doctrine of the Church of England; which was so False, that the Gentleman
Himself Acquitted me to all Purposes upon the whole matter: But however, the
Rumor was Supported as long as they could keep Life in it; and it was
Impossible for any Man to Believe that Flam, without making me an Insolent Fool
for my Pains. There was then Another Malicious Whimsie set a Foot too, what a
Bussle I had made in I know not how many Tavern-Clubbs, with Projects, and
Proposals, about Public Business; Which in One Word was All False; And I Defy
Any man living to say the Contrary. (Which Somebody or Other Must be Able to
do, unless they will Suppose the Matter Debated at a Committee of Chairs, and
Stools.) To Conclude; There was Great Pains taken before the Opening of the
Parliament, to make Work on it for a Formal Complaint: But the Pretense would
not hold Water.

It will be said at last, that the Book was not Published; And the First Sheet
of it Countermanded: To which, I must Answer, That it was Designed to Come out
while the Press was at Liberty, which would have put me upon an After-Game,
never to be Recovered. As to the Recalling of the First Sheet, I shall referr
the Reader, for the Reasons of it, to my Defense.

THE END.

