A Brief History OF THE TIMES, etc. IN A PREFACE TO THE Third Volume OF
Observators.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's.
1687.

To POSTERITY.
A Preface, Methinks, upon a Preface, looks as Fantastical, as if a Man should
Clap one Shoeing-Horn Upon the back of Another: (and they are Both, Drawers on
too) And then, it is such a kind of a Comment upon a Comment, as will, it self
perhaps, stand in need of a Further Explication. Beside, that I shall have
Twenty Peevish Humors breaking in upon me by the By. (1) [What has he to do to
Revive a Plot, that the King has Pardoned?] (2) [What's the Freake of This
Dedication to Posterity?] (3) [And Then, Here Is a Preface made of a Book, and a
Book of a Preface, and Each, at the same time, to serve in a Double Capacity.]
To shorten the Matter, the Man has, at least, enough to do, that has the Whole
World to please; and therefore, I have Provided, (this many a day) to keep That
Care from coming near My Pillow: by Consulting my Conscience for my Peace, and
by Placing my Comfort, in the Contempt of a Fair Reputation, Basely Gott^n; by
Lodging the Innocence, and the Justice of my Cause, in the hands of Ages to
come; out of the Reach, of the most Pompous, Ignorant, Prevailing Envy, and the
most Reverend of Calumnies.

Touching the Plot; it is One Thing to Renew the Rancour of it; To Murmur at his
Majesty's Mercy, or to make Reprizals upon the Persons of Those Whom the King
has Forgiven; But it is Another Thing, to Preserve the History; and to Transmit
it Faithfully to Aftertimes, for the Enformation of Posterity, which was the
Right, and which was the Wrong. For the Honor of the King Himself; the Queen
Dowager, the Public Ministers, and Briefly, of the Loyal Nobility, Gentry,
and Commonalty; and of the Roman Catholics, (to the Last Man of 'em) lies
all, in some measure, at Stake upon This Issue. What will the Next Generation,
be able to Oppose, to Those Numberless Shoals of Libellous Prints, that, with
One Voice, lay the Fault at the Door of the Government; and Disguise the most
Ungrateful, and Venomous, of Rebellions, under the Countenance only of some
Zealous, Dutiful Heats, and Stirs, in the JUST Defense of Liberty, and
Religion? If the Sovereignty was in the People, the Conspirators did Well, and
the Treason lay on the side of the Government. It is very True, that the King,
has Pardoned the Plotters, but his Majesty has not Pardoned the Plot; and it
was never the Intent of his Royal Mercy, to make his Enemies, Innocent, for
Opposing him, and his Friends, Guilty for Serving him. Or that his Clemency to
the One, should have the Force of a Killing Rigor upon the Other: And This is
no more then a Generous Conciliation of his Goodness to his Justice.

But Why to Posterity? is the Second Objection, I answer, because Passion,
Prejudice, Affectation, Profound Eyebrows, Noise, Name, and the Loaves, Govern
This Present World; Without so much as One Grain of Sobriety, Respect, or Good
Nature. Men have got the Trick of Trouping One after Another, in Flocks, like
Sheep; They follow the Bell, and if the Foremost Leaps the Bridge, the Rest
Drown for Company.

But I am now to give a Reason for my Preface; and, (Which is more) a Reason,
for Two Prefaces in One. Why Printed Double? Why a Preface in One Capacity, and
a Book in Another, etc. I have spoken to This at Large, in What follows: But I
have yet another word or two, to say upon This Subject.

Upon the Closing of my Observators, I was, in Course, to Furnish a Preface,
and a Table to the Two Latter Parts, as I had done to the Former. But upon the
Digesting of my Thoughts, and my Matters, With my Papers about me, I found my
self at a Mighty Loss, in a Main Part of my Design; Unless I could Make Good
the Defect, by a Supplement to the Preamble of my Third Volume, (which I was
then upon) and so Pass them into the World, Both under One.

My Observations did not Strike so much upon the Plot it self, in the Spring
and the Rise of it, as upon the Matter of Fact in the Methods, and Workings of
the Design, for My Business was only to Dash False Rumors; To Rescue Truth
from Imposture; To Prevent Misunderstandings; And, in the Main, to Expound upon
the Perverse Doctrines, and Practices of That Season: But, all this while,
though the Conspiracy was as Visible as the Light of the Sun, in the Effects of
the City Ryots, Ignoramuses and Tumults; in their Ordinary Prints, Clubbs,
Conversations, etc. Their Councils, however, were still in the Dark; and the
Cabinet Locked up, to keep the Multitude from Prying into the Forbidden Secrets
of the Cabal. It was, as yet, too-Early-Days, to Dispute the Infallibility of a
Nemine Contradicente, The Merits of a False Oath for the Safety of the King,
and the Protestant Religion; The Idol-Worship of falling down before the Calves
of Bethel: It was too Early Days, I say, as yet, to Confront Causes, and give a
Kings Evidence the Lie, out of his Own Mouth. A Profane Abhorrer, might with
more safety have ventured his Carcass with Daniel in the Lions Den, then to set
so much as his Foot over the Threshold, into the Sanctum Sanctorum of a Secret
Committee, so that my Papers of Observation, were, upon the Whole, only a
History of the Transactions of That Juncture, wherein they were Published. Now
the Character of the Witnesses; the Contradictions of their Evidence; the
Seditious Principles that were Then in Course: The Desperate Liberties of
several Gown-Men of Both Professions; The Mistakes of many True-Hearted, but
Short-Sighted Honest Men, The Scomm, and Banter of Libertines; The Intemperate
Transports of Burning-Hot Zelots: These Topiques, and Others of the like
Quality I ventured upon, as Matters that fell Properly within My Province; and
Envy it self cannot Deny them (as they are there Represented, and Delivered) to
be Truly, Faithfully, and Impartially Reported. Only I must Confess, there are
Some Certain Strokes, and Allusions, that must wait Another Age, for the
Explaining of the Moral.

But, (thought I with my self) Though Posterity will Undoubtedly be Curious
Inquisitors into the True History of Past Times: Especially into the
Particulars of a Revolution that has made such a Noise in the World, as This
has done, the Story will come Lame Down, to them at Last; if, over and above
the Brawls, the Scruples, the Wickedness of the Practice, and the Characters of
the Instruments, the Curtain be not Drawn, and the Actors Themselves laid Open
in the very Tyring Room. Upon This Contemplation, I Incorporated a Supplemental
piece of History, into the Preface, to carry the Reader to- Rights, from the
Powder in the Mine, to the Council, that Debated the Enterprise, and Governed
the Resolution, Not doubting, but with the Help of This Addition, to make the
Work as Plain, and as Perfect, as the Quality of such an Undertaking would
Admit. Now to have done This in Another Manner, or in Another Place, would
perchance not have Succeeded so well: For the History would have stood in as
much need of the Observators, as the Observators did of the History; and,
whoever Consults the One, will Naturally Turn to the Other. It has been often
Hard put to me, to Write an Historical Series of This Villainous Plot, because
what with Assiduity of Application, and Extraordinary Means of Enforming my
self, I have had more Advantages toward it, perchance, then any Other Man: But
I would as soon Undertake to raise a Perfect Man again, out of the Dust of
Catiline, as to Extract a True History out of the Rubbish of Otes's Shams,
Perjuries, and Enformations: Such a History, I mean, as a Sober Man would not
be Ashamed to Own. So that there is no Thought, or Possibility of Drawing Order
out of That Confusion.

Now after a Reason given for the Grafting of This same Brief History upon That
Preface, The Telling of That Reason, is Another sufficient Reason for the
Writing of This: And I am next to give an Account Why I Printed it twice over,
and Turned a Long Preface into a Short Book. I found the True Knowledge of This
Story, Highly Necessary for the Public; and the Extract of it, so Congruous
to the Subject, Drift, and Quality of the Observators, that the One could not
well be without the Other, so that I caused it to be Printed [Double,] and in
Differing Forms, that I might, at the same Time, both Gratify the Curiosity of
the Reader, and Answer the Ends of the Observator. I would have the World
thoroughly Possessed of This Matter; And therefore I have left it at the
Readers Choice, either to take the Preface, or the Book, or if he pleases to
let them Both Alone.

Neither do I take This pains at last, out of an Incontinent Itch of Scribbling,
to feed the Longings of the Curious, or to Inflame Passions; but for the
Manifestation of Truth, and for a Caution to the People, that they lay not too
Great Stress upon Popular Appearances, or the Splendid Hypocrisy of Gilded
Pretenses: That they do not place the Force and Virtue of Things, in empty
Sounds, and Names.

The Dignity of a Parliament, is Venerable, and August, and the Englishman that
has not a Reverence for the Honor, and Wisdom of That Excellent Frame of
Constitution, is (in a Political Construction) the Worst of Bastards. And yet,
When Treason shall come once to be Clothed, and Dress'd-up under the Masque,
Face, and Countenance of That Authority, it is not the Name that will Consecrate
the Conspiracy; No, nor All the Gay, Plausible Pretenses in Nature neither,
that will Justify an Imposture. [We the Comm^ns] in Forty Two, was neither
Better, nor Worse, than [We the Rebels,] in the 25th of Edward the Third; And
[We the Knights, etc.] in the Association, were in the very same Classis, (both
in the sight of God and of Man) with their Forefathers in the Covenant; And so
for [We the Knights, etc.] again, in the Preparatory to that League of Mutual
Defense, and Assistance, What were they, but the same Mothers Children with the
Confederates Themselves that were finally to Subdue, Expel, and Destroy His
Then Royal Highness, and All that should Adhere to Him? And, if there was any
Credit to be given to State-Hypocrites, and Conscientious Atheists, What was
the Design of All this Pudder; both under Charles the First, and his Two next
Immediate Successors, but the Preservation of His Majesty's Person; the
Protestant Religion; Parliamentary Privileges, Commons of England; Wisdom of
the Nation, Saviors, of I know not what, etc. When All This yet, in the
Conclusion, was found to be only Subornation in the Shape of Sanctity;
Republican Murders, Massacres, and Depopulations, Advanced, under the Blind of
Popish, and Arbitrary Contrivances?

Now if All This be True, upon the Clearest Evidence in Nature; upon the Credit
of Witnesses Unquestionable; Papers of Intelligence Confronted, Proved, and
Owned; Characters Uncypher'd; Common Instruments of Conspiracy and Association
Detected; The Criminals Themselves, under the hands of Public Justice,
Confessing as much; Tumults, Declarations and Drawn Swords, in further
Confirmation of it. If All This be True, I say, What could be more Seasonable,
then to Recommend the Story to Posterity, with a Word or two of Good Council to
go along with it? Which Good Council shall be, that People will not spend their
Indignation altogether upon the Drudges, and the Drudgery; the Senseless
Narratives, and the shameless Knights of the Post, that have appeared in This
Diabolical Practice; But Consider, that they have been Cheated, with Forms, and
Protestations of Loyalty, and Conscience, and the Whole Villainy Stamped with a
Parliamentary Resolve, upon it. In One Word, and for a Conclusion too; The
Pretense of a Popular Reformation, (let it appear never so Holy) is only a
Prologue to a Rebellion.

TO Posterity.
THese Papers are the True History, and bear the Lively Image of the Lewd Times
they were Written in, and, Consequently, not for the Palate of the Present Age:
For a Wicked Generation will no more bear Truth, in a Book, than an
Ill-favored Woman will bear it, in her Picture, or in her Looking-Glass: And
though the Fault be Manifestly in the Face, or in the People; it is the Poor
Innocent Painter, that is to be Cursed for it, and the Glass Broken; because her
Ladyships Nose stands awry, perhaps, or that the Manners of the Age will not
Endure the Light. This is the very State of the Case, and the Ground of the
Quarrel, betwixt the World and These Dialogues. The Figures are drawn from the
Life; the Matter of Fact, is Evident, and Certain; the Doctrine, Orthodox; and,
upon the Whole; the Office it self, and the Application of it, have had many
Public, and Honorable Testimonies, for an Honest, and a Necessary Duty. But
Men, I perceive, do not allways know their Own Minds; for after I had stood the
Uttermost Malice of the Common Enemies of the Church, and State, for almost
Four Years together, during the Course of These Papers; and without the least
Change of Mind, Resolution, Countenance, or so much as of Pretense: After I
had, I say, born all manner of Indignities for the sake of Both; (diverse
Practices of Perjury and Subornation against me, over and above) and all This,
purely for the Love of Cemmon Justice, and out of a Sense of what I owe to my
Prince, and Country; I found my self in February last was Two Year, to my Great
Admiration, Delivered over to New Tormentors; and I have been Treated at such a
Rate, by Another sort of People, that the Venom, and the Sc^rrility, the Rage,
and the Slander of my Professed Adversaries, was but a Flea-Biting, to the
Wounds, and the Reproaches that I have suffered ever since, from several of my
Pretending Friends.

For these Reasons, (and More) I have made Choice to Address my Self, and my
Matters to Posterity, in This Appeal, from the Iniquity, and Injustice of a
Faction of the Last Edition. Not as if the World were likely to Mend; or the
People that come After us, to be One jot Wiser, Iuster, Honester, or
Better-Natur'd, than Those that went Before them: But All Passions Sleep in the
Grave; and as there is no Place for Envy, Calumny, Partiality, or Imposture, on
the One hand, so there is as little room for Corrupt Interest, Mercenary Design,
or Servile Adulation, on the Other, The Dead do not Bite, they say, and the
Living, (unless they be Hagg-Wolves) will not Bite the Dead. People are well
enough pleased to see [ Abuses Stripped, and Whipped,] (as George Withers has it)
provided that they be Lashed upon Other-Folks Shoulders. Now this can never
fall out, where the Parable, or the Emblem, is of One Season, and the Moral,
of Another: For in the One Case, the Painter come to Me; and in the Other, I go
to the Painter. It Is much as in a Nuisance; No body is to lay a Dunghill just
under My Nose; but if I Will Carry My Nose to Another man's Dunghill, I may thank
my self. Now it is quite another business, where the Man, and the Satyr are both
of a Time: For the Guilty are Naturally Suspicious; and He that is Conscious,
will be apt to say to himself, [ This Will, or That Tom, Points at Me.] A
Character, in This Case, Shoots Hail-Shot, and Strikes a great many more than
ever the Marks-man, either Aimed at, or Dreamt of. There is a great deal of
Difference, I know, betwixt the Whipping of the Vice, and of the Man; and
betwixt the Whipping of the Vice for the Man's sake, and the Whipping of the
Man, for the sake of the Vice. But be it as it will; it is Nonsense to Imagine,
that a Man draws a Figure in the Air, and Means No body; or that he had not
some One Man, more in his Thought then Another, toward the Instructing, or the
Finishing of the Piece. Wickedness, and Knavery can never be Drawn To the Life;
but From the Life: And the most Genuine Images that we have of Virtue, and
Vice; Wisdom, and Folly, are Gathered, and Wrought, from the Practices, and
Habits of Humane Life. This sort of Essay, is no more then Nature, taken in
Shorthand; and He that Treats of Good and Evil, does but Commonplace Mankind;
only the Difference is, that the Same Writings that are Censured for the most
Virulent Libels, (how True soever) in One Age; Pass, many times, for the most
Excellent, and Profitable of Morals, in Another. Plain-dealing Writers, Meet
with the Fate commonly, of Publique-Spirited Projectors, and Ruin Themselves,
for the Good of their Successors: And therefore, a Frank, Clear-minded Man,
that stands Condemned to the Mortification of Rubbing-out his days in a False,
Daubing, Narrow-hearted World, cannot do better, then to withdraw his Effects,
from among Parasites, and Sharpers; and to Deposite the Care of his Memory, and
Good Name, in the hands of those that are yet Unborn.

These are My very Circumstances. My Judges, are Parties; and, as the Case
stands, both Witnesses, and Jury, in a kind of Combination against me. Whither
should I Fly now, from the Tyranny of This Passion, and Prejudice, for Relief,
and Protection, but to Those Times, when the Biass of This Controversy shall be
taken off; The Intrigue, and Interest of it, Extinguished, and All the Present
Litigants, on Both sides, laid to Sleep? Especially, since the Cause it self,
and the Merits of it, will, most Infallibly, come ^hole to the Next Age: For my
Charge, and Every Article of it, being Founded upon Those very Papers that I do
here Transmit to Aftertimes, for my Defense; the Fact lies Open to All men;
and Done, or Not Done, is the Question: Wherein, Every Soul that can Read, may
Satisfy himself.

I have not the Vanity all this while, to Contend, with so much Formality of
Pomp, and Zeal, for the Single Credit of the Observator, or of his Trifling
Papers: But so it is, that without Ostentation, the Honor of the Government,
and of All the Kings Loyal Subjects; The Light, the Authority, the Tradition,
and the Faithful Memorials of Truth it self, (as to This Point) are not a
little Concerned in the Issue of This Cause. For, with All Deference to the
Works of many Abler Pens, that have Asserted the Same Interest, I may yet, with
Modesty Affirm, that This is the Only Weekly Paper, that has Stood at Mark now,
for almost Six Years together, without so much as One Discontinuance. And to
what End, but to Encounter Seditious, and Republican Positions; Scandalous
Shams, and Defamatory Imposturer, so soon as ever they took Air; And to set the
People Right, in the Truth, and Reason of Matters? And this has been done with
so much Care, and Effect, that the most Shameless of my Enemies, could never
lay a Finger yet, upon any One Falsity of Fact, or Error of Doctrine, in the
Whole Train of These Observators; and all the Bussle about them, has been only
General Hearsay, and Clamor. Now upon the Credit of These Writings, depends,
in a Great Measure, the Credit of the History of These Times; to the Extreme
Hazard of Misleading After-Ages; when they shall find, on the One hand, so
many Deposing, Disinher^^ing, Excluding, and Impeaching Nemine Contradicente's;
So many Forsworn Narratives; So many Thousand of Treasonous, and Slanderous
Libels; All, Printed, Published, and Recommended, under a Masque of Authority:
and on the Other hand, little more then This Miserable Paper, to Oppose them?
What will Future Times say of This Government, and of This Nation, when they
shall Read of a Prince in a Plot against his Sovereign, and his Brother? A
Queen, and a Wife, in the Same Plot against her Husband? Nay, of a King in a
Plot Against Himself; and Subjects in a Conspiracy to Murder their Prince, upon
an Instinct, and Principle of Religion? What will Posterity Think, I say, when
they shall find All These Diabolical Calumnies Confirmed, by so many Pestilent
Votes, Narratives, News'es, and Pamphlets, with the Solemnity too, of
Parliamentary Testimonialls, and Imprimaturs? What will they Think, I say, when
they shall find Dr. OTES, Capt. BEDLOE, Capt. DANGERFIELD, Stephen DVGDALE Esquire
with a Hundred Worthies more of the Same Batch, Canonized for Saints, forsooth,
and the SAVIOVRS of the Nation? So many Mediations for Pardon, and Preferment,
for them: So many Pulpits, and Tribunals, Trouping along for Company, with Their
Hosanna's too? What shall Charity it self be able to say, to This Cloud of
Authorities, and Certificates? to This Harmony of Lies, and Defamations, when
they shall see so Black a Story pass Current, without either Contradiction, or
Control? As if the Brains of a whole Nation had been Turned in their Heads
like a Pancake; Conscience fallen asleep; Truth Struck Dumb; Humane R ason
Degenerated into Brutality, and not One man of a Thousand, that had the Heart
to stand up for Religion, or Justice. The Next Generation would have taken This
History, for Gospel, if some body or other had not put in, to show the World,
that These their Celebrated Saviors, were Devils Incarnate; Their Pretended
Plot, Supported by Subornation, and Perjury; Their Evidence-CAPTAINS, DOCTORS,
and 'SQVIRES, only so many Pick-pockets, Cheats, and Knights of the Post, Raked
together: The Refuse of Pillories and Iayls; the Scandal of Christianity, and
the Shame of Mankind.

And now, Gentlemen of the Next Age, to whom These Presents shall come: Here Is
the Whole Matter laid before ye, in These Papers; the History of the Times; the
Merits of the Cause; the Reason of the Points in Question, Debated Pro and Con;
the Truth of Things, Separated from Falsehood, and Imposture; the Frauds of a
Republican Faction Detected; Their Methods, and Designs laid Open, and the
Malice of them Defeated; the People Cautioned, and Instructed, both in their
Interest, and in their Duty; for fear of Mistaking their Enemies, for their
Friends; and their Friends for their Enemies. This has been my Business: And
whether or no I have Discharged all these Offices, Truly, Heartily, Faithfully,
Soberly, and in One word, as a Good Christian, a Loyal Subject, an Honest Man,
and a Hearty Lover of his Country, Ought to do; be You the Judges. It Is True, I
have been Arraigned, by Common Fame, of Levity, Disguise, Hypocrisy,
Double-Dealing Halting betwixt Two Opinions; Inconsistency with my self, and by
the force of Credulity, Calumny, and Practice, Ground, as it were, betwixt Two
Millstones.

From April. 1681, to the Death of the Late Blessed King, I was Worried by
Common-Wealthe-men, and Their Accomplices; but with the Wonderful Kindness and
Esteem, of All the Professed Friends of the King, the Monarchy, and the Church,
to Balance the Outrages of That Aversion. I was ever an Infidel, as to the
Plot; and made, Consequently, a Popish Instrument, at least, to Downright
Papists; A Ridiculer of the Kings Witnesses, and (in the Style of Those Days)
of the Wisdom of the Nation. And This Entertainment, of Good, and Evil, was not
without some Color of Reason neither, on Both sides: For the Republicans made
Good the very Worst of my Surmises, and Fore-bodings; They never failed of
Doing, what I said they were About to do; and I am the Only Man, perhaps, that,
in a Tract of Eight and Forty Years Experience, they Never Deceived: But I had
now, little more to do, then to look Behind me, to know what was to Come. For
there was Nothing New, in the very Phrase, Air, and Course of Proceedings, more
then the Sublimating of the Old way of Calumniation, and Hypocrisy, into a
Barefaced, an Open, and a True-Protestant Perjury; and where the Witnesses
Bluder'd, or happened to Interfere; whether with One Another, or with
Themselves, they were either brought-off by the Charity of a Well-Affected
Comment, or otherwise, there were Inferences drawn from the Principles of the
Religion, to the Proof of the Fact; and a [ PRIEST,] or a [ PAPIST] was taken
for Synonymous, with a CONSPIRATOR, or a TRAITOR.

After I had finished my Two First Stages, with an Universal Hatred on the One
side, and Approbation, on the Other: (For whatsoever Mischiev'd the One, must
needs do the Other a Service:) It pleased God to call Charles the Second to
Himself, and James the Second (whom God long preserve) to the Crown: Which was
in February 1684, where I Begin This Third Volume; and from Whence, I am to
Date the Hard, the Unequal, (or what if I had said?) the Unjust Usage, I have
met withal, from That Day, to This: But the TIME, barely, without Other
Circumstances, will signify little to the Enforming of Posterity, in the True
State of This Matter; and therefore I shall in a very Few Words, lay Open the
Secret Springs, and Motions, that led to This Unexpected Change.

The Popish Plot was made a Cover to a Republican Conspiracy; which, tho it
Began in a Farce, was to be Concluded in a Tragedy. The Way was, First, to make
Popery a Bugbear to the People; and Then, where they could not get Oaths, to
make any man a Statutable Papist, and to Swoop him into Otes'es Plot; they had
a Device, to bring him into the Toil, under the Latitude of [ a Reputed
Papist,] or [Popishly-Affected,] which Involved the Members of Both Churches,
alike; and we had hardly any Discriminating Mark left us, of a Good Christian,
even from an Infidel, (or Worst) then the Test of Otes'es Narrative, and the
Belief of it; to the very Black-Bills, and Mustard-Balls. The Project was so
Plausible, and went down so Glib, (though never such Sotts as the Tools that
Witnessed it!) that when the King's Life, and the Protestant Religion, were
said to be at Stake; He was no longer a Son of the Church of England, that
Opposed it; and to be a Friend to the Plot, was to be a Friend to Caesar. I am
Ashamed to Reflect, or so much as to Think upon, the Inconsiderate Mistakes,
the Gross Oversights, the Glozing Complyances, and the Vngovernable Madness of
That Season: But upon the whole Story, the Application will be This: that True,
or False; Credible, or Incredible; Possible, or Impossible; It comes all to a
Case, where the Multitude are taken Captive in their Imaginations, and have no
longer any other Rule, Measure, Will, or Liking, then what they draw from the
Dictate of their Leaders. This was the Pretext, that brought Charles the First
to the Scaffold, and that was, likewise, in a Fair way of bringing his Late
Sacred Majesty to the Same End. Now Computing with my self, how much more
Popular, and Dangerous, the Same Pretext would be, under a Prince, in Communion
with the Church of Rome; then it was in the days of his Two Royal
Predecessors; Upon the Crisis of That Great Revolution, I Changed the Biass of
my Papers a little, and did what I could, to Obviate the Hazzards, and
Distempers, that (I perceive, by This Time) I had but too much Reason to Fear.
In the Two Former Parts of These Dialogues, I thought is Reasonable to Caution
a sort of Unwary, Short-sighted, Well-Meaning Men, against the Snares, and
Practices of the Common Enemy; and in this Third Volume, I Judged it no Less
Re^sonable, to give the Same People the Same Caution over again: but with This
Additional Consideration, that they should have a care of Themselves too, as
well as their Adversaries: For Bigottry is every jot as Dangerous, as
Luke-warmness; and to be Over-Righteous, (according to the Text) on the One
side, is All-out as Bad, as to be Over-Scrupulous, on the Other; and much the
Fiercer Evil of the Two. Zeal must be Bounded by Knowledge: Nay, it must be
Guided by it; for it is Knowledge that leads us to Truth; and we are never
Right, but when they do, All Three Meet upon the Same Point. Short of it;
Beyond, or on Either side of it, are only such or such Degrees, more, or less,
of Folly, and Error. A man may be too Zealous For a Good Thing, as well as
Against it; when That Zeal has more in it of Heat, then of Light. They that
pretend to Christianity, and call for Fire from Heaven, even in the Case of
Religion it self, do not know of what Spirit they are. In One word, All
Extremes are Stark Naught, both in Divinity, and in Reason; and One Ill
Circumstance, is Sufficient, to Destroy the Merit, and to Blast the Glory, of
the most Honorable Undertaking, and Pretense. A man may Cut the Throat of his
Own Religion, by Contending for it. How many Men have we seen to Set-up, and
pass for Patriots, in Common Fame, and Reputation, that, in the Sight of God,
and in the Courts both of Law, and Conscience, have been found no betrer then
Arrant Traitors? This is no more then to say, that we are to Govern All our
Actions, with a respect to Persons, Customs, Laws, Times, Places, Duty, Good
Manners, Proportion, Measure, and Discretion. It Is Possible, that a man may
Forfeit One Privilege, or Title, by Invading Another; and Lose what he has
Already, by Grasping at more then belongs to him. To say Nothing of the
Imprudence of the Weaker Provoking the Stronger; the Vnwarrantableness of
Subjects Stepping out of their Province, to Intermeddle in Matters of State:
the Sin, as well as the Scandal, of Irreverent, and Contemptuous Innuendo's.
The Impotency of an Intemperate Ardour of Contention; the Affectation of
Popular Applause, in Setting-up for the Head of a Party, etc. These, and a
Hundred other Difficulties came into my Head, upon This Occasion; and I was
Heartily afraid, what might come on it, if the Wisdom of the Serpent should not
Accompany the Innocence of the Dove: for there goes more then Greek and Latin,
to the making of a Thorough-Wise Man; and if States men and Divines, would but
Respectively Attend to their Proper Functions, they would even find as much
work as they could turn their Hands to, in their Own Trade. And then, the
Better, the Worse; when the Burning Intention of Holiness makes People forget
the Indispensable Allegiance of a Civil Duty. But to come now to the Point: I
was thus thinking within my self.

If the bare Name, and Fancy of Popery, had the Power to Destroy One Imperial,
Protestant Prince, and to Endanger Another; together with the very Foundations,
both of Church, and State, in Three Kingdoms; and without any Other Aid to the
Doing of it, then the Artificial Manage of the Imposture: What will not the
Same Cheat over again, (under Our Circumstances) be able to bring about; if any
Unwary Zelots among our selves, should chance to Ioyn in the Same Fears, and
Iealousies, and give Credit to the Conspiracy! We have the Word of a Prince, of
Faith, and Honor, for our Security: A Prince of Grace, and Clemency: A Prince
of Power, Justice, and Resolution; and it will be our Own Fault, if we fail of
our Own Desires, and Wishes. Diffidence in the Case, is both an Ingratitude,
and a Provocation; Or if we cannot avoid Being Distrustful, it is Extremely
Vain yet, Foolish, and Extravagant, to Talk on it; for we do not only Betray our
Selves, but Create Suspicions in Others; and where Subjects are the Aggressors,
it is Time for Princes to look about them. Insomuch, that it is Base, to Suspect;
Foolish to Discover our selves; and Bootless, to Struggle, where we are Sure to
be Worsted. The Honor of Princes is to be kept Religiously Sacred, in Thought,
Word, and Deed: And however the Law may Mince the Matter, a man may as well,
(in Conscience) Defame his Prince, in words at length, as by a Glance. If a man
Preaches upon This Text, All Mouths are presently Open upon him, with a [ What?
Shall Not we Defend our Religion?] I Answer, Yes, Undoubtedly. He that upon Good
Grounds finds himself in Possession of the Truth, ought rather to Dye, then
Relinquish it: Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, Friends, Relations,
Acquaintances, Life, and Estate, are All Nothing to it, where they fall in
Competition. But then the Defense must be Apostolical, Primitive, and
Christian, without Noise, Tumult or Force: There must be no Drawing of Swords
in the Case; No, not so much as any Grumbling, Calumniating, or Repining,
Toward it: No Cutting of Ears off; No Military Executions: For to Trouble
Governments under That Pretext, is to Renounce the Doctrine of Christianity,
and Example of our Blessed Savior Himself. What Is the Difference, betwixt
Actual Violence, and Scandalous, Provoking Words, and Practices that Lead
to it? any more, then as they are Several Links of the Same Chain? It Is the
Heart, sets the Tongue at Work; The Tongue, the Hands: And it is the Devil
Himself, that blows the Coal of Sedition, into a Blaze of Religion. How often
have I Talked, and Turned These Thoughts, and Discourses over and over, upon
Occasion of Considering the State of our Affairs! Why These Animosities, say I,
among Christians, upon the Subject of Religion, in so Notorious a Contradiction
to the Faith that we Profess? As if the Salvation of a Nominal Protestant,
depended upon the Damnation of a Papist. Neither are We to Stand, or to Fall,
upon Their Bottom, nor They upon Ours; but Evesy Man to his Own Master. Cannot
I Maintain my Own Religion, without Waging War against Another? There Is room
enough, upon the Points wherein we Agree; and upon the Topique of Good Life,
and Manners, for the Christian, and Charitable Exercise of Holy Duties. And as
to the Points that are in Controversy, we may Deliver and Assert, our Own
Persuasion, without Lashing out into Invectives against People of a Differing
Taste. That Bitterness of Spirit, does not become the Disciples of our Blessed
Lord. Beside that the Multitude are Prone enough to Faction, of Themselves*
without Incentives to it; and need no Encouragement, or Example, to Transport
them into Distempers. Nay, it is a Matter of Dangerous Consequence, to have
them Wonted,, or so much as Permitted, to Rail at Things that they do not
Understand: For it puts them in Possession of a most Pernicious Liberty; which
will take the Same Freedom, in State, that it does in Religion; when they are
once set a gog, by Thi^ Itch of Meddling, upon Controversy, and Brawl, without
any Sense of the Truth, and Reason of Things. Let the Doctors Sport Themselves
like the L^viathan, in the Depths, and Subtleties of the Schools; The
Simplicity of the Gospel, takes no Delight in High Flights and Figures: Neither
are the Common People, Proper Judges of Abstruse, and Mysterious Points. Their
Province is Reasonable Resignation, and Dutyfull Obedience; without taking upon
them the Office of the Chair. Their Business is the Plain Truth of Things; and
not to trouble their Heads about the Cracking of Controversies that are too
Hard for their Teeth. It Is a kind of a Protestant Implicit Faith, to Assent to
they know not what; and I take an Unknown Meaning, to be Every jot as Bad, as
an Unknown Tongue. There can be no Edification, without a Due Understanding of
the Matter Propounded. And it is much about the Same Thing too, in Religion, as
it is in Government: I find Little, or No Difference, upon the Parity of the
Reason, betwixt Haranguing against Popery at Cripplegate, (for the purpose) and
against Arbitrary Power at Gu^^ohall. The Reforming Porters, and Car-men of One
and Forty, understood Privileges of Parliament, Every jot as well as they did
the Right of the Bishops Uotes. In fine; This is a way to Transport People, not
to Enform them; and to make a Party, without any Prospect, of Clearing, or
Establishing a Truth.

With These Contemplations, and Precautions, about me, and, not without Diverse
Previous Discourses, and Deliberations, upon the Sober Apprehensions I had, of
the Hazard of a Mistaken Zeal, on That Notable Change, and Conjuncture of
Affairs: I Proceeded to This Third, and Concluding Part of my Observations. I
found, that the Church of England, could not, either in Honor, Reason, or
Prudence, Doubt of his Majesty's Goodness, Justice, and Protection, and
Consequently of her own Safety; nor, in Truth, run any Risque at all, but by
the Forfeiture of That Loyalty, to all manner of Purposes, which she has ever
Practiced, and Professed. I Considered (as I ought to do) the Mighty Work of
Divine Providence, in the Disposition of the Crown; and the Fatality of any
Gross Miscarriage, in the Matter of Reverence, and Duty, on the Part of the
Subject. I had in my Thoughts, a Thousand Difficulties, what the Heats of Some,
the Ignorance of Others; the Feuds, and the Piques of Mutineers, as well as of
Vnthinking Zelots, might probably bring upon us, without Singular Care, and
Moderation, toward the Preventing of Mischief. But the Thing I feared above all
others, was the Imposture of Wolves dressed up in Sheeps Clothing; and least
the Common Enemies of our Peace, and Welfare, a Sort of People among our
selves, that stick neither to Canon, nor Rubrique, should cast out a Bone
betwixt his Majesty, and the Loyal Subjects of his Blessed Father, and Brother,
and no Less of his ROYAL SELF, and Cry, [The Church of England did it:] As if
so many Rogues in Red Coats, should Robb the Kings Chapel, and Cry, [the
Guards did it.] Upon this Agitation of Matters, I concluded within my self,
that This was the Time, for the Kings Reformed Subjects of the Established
Church of England, to make Good the Character of their Integrity, and the
Allegiance of their Profession: and without Complementing-away, Articles of
Faith, to Ioyn with the Roman Catholics in a Harmony of Reverence to their
Prince, as Fellow Subjects to the same Master. For the Scandal is not to be
Born; not to be Defended; and never to be Forgiven, to Charge Roman Catholics
with Vndutifullness to their Sovereign, and yet, at the same Time, not to
Unite, as Franckly with Roman Catholics, in the Defense of a Prince of That
Persuasion; as ever the Roman Catholics did with Church-of-England-men, in
Defense of his Majesty's Protestant Fa^^er. In One word more; (for I would be
very Explicit upon this Subject) I bent my Uttermost Endeavors toward the
Allaying, and the Pacifying of all Unkindness, and Aversions; which, My
Interpreters have been pleased to call [ A Project for the Uniting of the Two
Churches,] and to Issue-out so many Anathema's, and Fulminations, against me
for, that if their Prayers had been Heard, I had been Fifty Fathom Under Ground
before this Time. Here lies the Core of the Ulcer; and who but the Noisy
Advocates, (as they pretend) for the Protestant Cause, to Move This Wrath, and
Indignation against me! They look Big, and Grave; They Garnish the Matter out,
with Pomp, Form, and Solemnity: and when they have turned up their Stomachs,
their Disciples Gather up the Qualm, as the Lesser Poets did Homers, and set-up
for Authors upon it. But in fine; the Story has not One Syllable of Truth in it,
as is made evident, beyond All Contradiction, over and over, in These Papers;
and, yet, betwixt Credulity, Passion, Lazyness, and want of Skill in Common
Sense; Transub^tantiation, and Idolatry, the Bugbear of the Times, has not
been more Sbittle-Cock'd, then This Argument; the Plot it self was not more
Believed; nor the Story of it more Ridiculous: Nay, This very Practice is a
Branch of it. And what is my Crime at last? (taking it at the very Worst of
their Own Construction) but the Hunting, and Discovering, of a Pack of Forsworn
Miscreants, and laying Open the Confederacy, betwixt the Mercenary Brutes, and
their more Execrable Masters? Which I have done, with the Conscience of a
Christian, a Subject, a Church-of-England-man, and a Lover of Justice. I never
liked the Hobby-Horsing Processions of Godfreys Funeral, and the Burnings of
the Pope. And it is but Natural for Those that were up to the Ears in the Plot,
when I was Tooth and Nail against it, to Hate Me, for Presuming to be in the
Right, when they were in the Wrong. But to come now at last to a Close, upon
This Question; the short-English of the Device, was, to make as Arrant, a
Iugling, Sacramenting Rascal of me, (Saving the Then Kings Evidences) as ever
Renounced God upon the Holy Altar. They did not only Propagate my Shame by Word
of Mouth, Hand it from One to Another; (Well-nigh the Only Tradition that they
would Allow of) and Spread it abroad, in their Missives, and Intelligences,
where they were sure it could not be Contradicted; but they Clubb'd, I know not
how many of 'em, to the Libelling of me in Print. Insomuch, that I was forced
to Complain to their Right Reverend Diocesan, of the Hard Usage, in a Pamphlet
called [ The Observator Defended: See Obs. 10.32.33.39.42.44. Vol. 3.
] Where I set forth the Naked Truth of the Business; and after the Exposing of
the Sham, I heard no more on it.

Now for Your Parts, Gentlemen, that were not so much as in Being when These
Ceremonies Passed; what Opinion would You have Entertained of This Abominable
Observator, without These Papers to Enform your Judgments, and to keep you
Upright in the Ways of Honor, Charity, and Justice? What would you have
Thought of a Creature that should have come down to you in Thousands of
Pamphlets, Mercuries, Pacquets, Domestiques, etc. in the Shape of so many
several sorts of Rogue? And all this, for the sake of an Interest, where the
Master was Painted yet Blacker then the Servant.

Before I go any further, I must desire you to take Notice of the Particular
Date of This Preface; and to Compute, upon the Present Face of Things, as well
as upon the Whole Antecedent Matter; Who were the True Friends to the Church of
England; the Plaintiffs, or the Defendent; and whether I do not Rise, the very
same Man, in April, 1687. that I Sat down, in April, 1681? I am No Prophet, nor
the Son of a Prophet; but I do not know any One Accident of State, that I have
either Mis-judg'd, or Misrepresented, in all These Papers: And I do persuade
my self, that I was never more in the Right, then in the Judgment I made, and
the Measures I took, upon This Last Revolution; for the Point is Clear, even to
the degree of a Demonstration; and that the Two things that I mainly Studied,
and Endeavored to Prevent, and Avoid, are Done, on the One Hand, and falln
upon us, on the Other. That is to say; an Unruly Zeal has brought us to the
Sight of our Error; and the man is Blind, that does not, by this Time, Read
his Mistake in his Punishment. Without any more ado, Hinc Illae Lachrymae: But
it is My Fortune still, to bear the Burden of Other Peoples Faults, while They,
(if I may set the Truth, against the Vanity) Reap the Fruit, and the Credit of
My Services. How have I been Laden with Reproaches of being Popishly-Affected,
for Advising the Surest, the Fairest, and the most Christian way of doing
Right, Honor, and Justice, to the Church of England; while Those very People,
setup for the Pillars of the Protestant Religion, whose Heats, and
Intemperances have the most Endangered it! I Write, and Speak my Mind, with the
same Singleness of Meaning, and Simplicity of Thought, at This Day, that Ever I
did; and I do not find, in the Change of my Master, any Change in the Tie of my
Allegiance. I reckon my self Bound, by the Laws of God, and in Common Decency,
Prudence, and Duty, to Preserve a Right Vnderstadning betwixt my Religion, and
matter of Civil Obedience, and Respect. The Divine does not Discharge the
Subject; neither does Christianity pretend to Cross the Measures, to Trouble
the Peace, or to Thwart the Order of Government. The Frame of a Political Body,
is as Nice, and Delicate, as That of a piece of Clock-work: It will hardly
endure, so much as Breathing upon; It must be kept, Clean, as well as Whole;
and from Dust, or Cankering, as well as from Falls, and Bruises: For Scandal is
a Step toward Sedition; and the Blackening of a Prince in his Reputation, is
next door to Drawing Blood of him. A man can hardly make Subjects, Think amiss
of their Sovereign, without Disposing them to Undutiful Actions too; and there
are Ways of Calumniating, so Artificial, and so Effectual, that the Greatest
Mischief in the World, seems to be done, Many times, for Gods sake, and the
Irreverence to be Hallowed, by Scripture, and by Conscience. Common Men will
not bear the Assront of being told, that there are none but Knaves, and Fools
of their Opinion; But yet, at the same Time, there will be No Exception taken,
at Men's Supporting their Own Sense of Things, without Falling Foul upon
Differing Judgments. The Question is, whether I Am in the Right, not whether
Another is in the Wrong, or No. And it is the Part of a Sober Man, to keep
himself within his Own Province. It Is so far from Meritorious, Modest,
Charitable, or Discreet, for Men that set-up for the Reputation of a Protestant
Zeal, and Purity, to be still Crying-out, (upon the Comparison) Lord! we are
not as the Idolatrous, Perfidious, and King-Killing Papists* that our Savior,
in the Parable of the Pha^isee, has Expressly set forth, for our Instruction,
his uttermost Abhorrence of those Boasting Services, and Uncharitable
Devotions. Lord! I do This, and I do That, he Cries; and Lord; I am not as
Other Men Are, nor even as This Publican. Why here is a kind of a Justification
by Works, without either Grace, Faith, or Good-manners; and a Religious Pretext
Advanced, upon the Ruins of Brotherly Love. But (as I was a saying) can it be
Imagined, that a Prince will bear That from a Subject, that One Private Man
will not Endure from Another? There Is no Libell so Bitter, so Moving, so
Provoking, and so Contemptuous, withal, as the Wounding of a King, by a
Figure. The Addresses of some of his Late Majesty's Parliaments, were
Masterpieces that way. Now the thing that I Labored, upon the Last Great
Change of Sta^e, both by Reasoning, Industry, and the most Pressing Application
of Councels, and Interest, was the doing of All that was Possible, to make the
People Think Well of the Church of England, without Lashing-out against the
Church of Rome: Especially, upon Those Capital Points, that are commonly made
use of, to Transport the Multitude, beyond all Terms of Honesty, Moderation,
and Patience; Such as Idolatry, for the purpose; where Every Cobbler shall bring
ye so many Texts against Idols; Put in for a Reformer, and make himself Judge
of the Controversy. Now upon the Truth of the Matter; the Managing of a
Religion, is, in this Case, a Political Point, as it Influences the Affections
of the Common People, with a Regard to the Honor of the Prince; the Peace, and
the Well-being of the State. Hard Words, upon the Articles of the Sovereigns
Persuasion, cannot but Glance Hard Thoughts, upon his Person; And there can
scarcely be a Scorn, or an Odium Reflected upon the One, that does not Reach
the Other: and, Consequently, Expose the Public to a very Great Risque,
without doing any manner of Good: Beside, that it is no longer Religion, (as I
have Touched upon it already) but a Spice of Faction, to Irritate, and Whip-up
the Mobile, into a Violent Aversion for any thing that they do not Understand.
It Is a Dangerous Practice, to make them the Judges in the Point: for they will be
taking the Same Liberty with Arbitrary Power, that they do with Popery; and
make themselves Arbitrators, in matters, as well of State, as of Religion; and
All, upon the License, and Encouragement, of Intermedling in things of
Government, which they have no Skill in.

The Lesson, and the Advice of Alaham to Heli, in a Tragedy of the Lord Brooks,
falls Extremely pat to This Purpose, and I cannot Close-up the Topique, Better,
then with a Passage in it, that I have now in my hand. Alaham was upon a Design
to Overturn the State; He gives Heli his Instructions what to do toward it; and
the World could not have thought of a Surer, or a Read^er Way for the
Compassing of his End. The Discourse follows.

Alaham. Misfortune Piec'd, grows more Vnfortuna^^,
And Parents Laws must Yield to Laws of State.

Heli. Then see the Means: For though the End were Good,
Yet for a Private man to Change a State;
With Monarchs Sleights to Alter Monarchy,
Seems Hard, if not Impossible to Me.

Alaham. Impossible, is but the Faith of Fear;
To make Hope Easy, fetch Belief elsewhere.
Yet lest These Sparks rak'd-up in Hollow Hearts,
Should spread, and Burn, before their Fury show.
Keep on the Course which you have USED to go.
Preach you with Fiery Tongue; Distinguish Might;
Tyrants from Kings; Duties in Question bring
'Twixt God and Man; where Power INFINITE
Compared, makes FINITE Power a Scornful Thing.
Safely so, Craft may with the Truth give Light,
To Judge of Crowns, without Enammelling,
And bring Contempt upon the Monarchs State,
Where Straight Unhallowd' Power has Peoples Hate.
Glance at Prerogatives Indefinite,
Tax Customs, Wars, and Laws all-Gathering;
Censure Kings Faults, their Spies, and Favorites;
Holiness has a Privilege to Sting
Men be not Wise; Bitterness from Zeal of Spirit
Is hardly Judged; the Envy of a King,
Makes People LIKE Reproof of Majesty,
Where GOD seems GREAT, in PRIESTS AUDACITY.

Traged. Alaham. p. 12, 13. It will become me in this Place, to Distinguish
upon the Matter in hand, before I quit the Subject. It is not My Meaning to
Confound the Project of Mischief, with the Inadvertency, and Chance-Medley of
it; or to Involve the Confederate Projectors, with the Unthinking Instruments,
in the Same Common Condemnation, and Censure: But it is sufficient to Consider,
that here is a Way Chalk'd-out, that leads most Certainly to Perdition; and that
whoever Steers, and Pursues that Course, shall, most Infallibly Arrive at the
Same End. Whether upon Set-Purpose, and Advice, or by giving Credit to a Wrong
Direction, or a False Guide, it Matters not, as to the Public: For the State
suffers as much in the One Case, as in the Other. Only it is True; that, as to
the Aggravating, or the Mitigating of the Offense; the Zeal, the Ignorance, or
the Incogitancy of the One, is much more Venial, then what the Other does, upon
Prepense-Malice, and Forethought. One tryes, out of [ Curiosity,] for
Instance, the Force of the Sun through a Burning-Glass, upon a Barrel of
Powder, in a Magazine: A Boy puts a Blazing Link, for the purpose, out of [
Wantonness,] into a Truss of Straw in a Stable. A Third leaves ye a Pan of
Coals, out of [ Negligence,] in a Room, to Air it, and the House takes Fire
upon it: A Fourth sets so many Deals a Drying, out of Reach of Fire, (as he
Imagines;) but the [Heat] lays hold of 'em. And here are Four Ways now, of
Springing a Conflagration. [Curiosity] is No Excuse for the First; nor [
Wantonness] for the Second; Nor [ Negligence,] for the Third; Nor [ had I
thought,] for the Fourth: but the Ignorance, (Especially with a Good Meaning)
is More Pardonable, then the Neglect; the Neglect, then the Wantonness; and the
Wantonness of a Child, may be Better Born with, then the Curiosity here
Supposed. But all this while, however, These several Causes, and Occasions of
Disaster, may Differ, in the Measure, and Degree, of the Wickedness, or of the
Transgression; they are All Equal yet, as to the Final Burning of the Town:
Though the Dam ^able Hellish Popish Iniquity, and Malice of Huberts Long Pole
in Pudding-Lane, (as the Romance has it) Surpasses them All. See the Commons
Votes of Jan. 10. 1680.
The Two Cases in hand, are much alike; Only the One lays but the Metropolis in
Ashes, the Other, the Three Kingdoms: and Men are Answerable Both ways, for
Care and Consideration, as Two Essential Ingredients, into All Offices of
Honor, and Duty. That which the Papists were to do, in the F^ction; the
Republicans did, in very deed, and Earnest. And (to keep to my Point) make use
of the Weak, the Careless, the Curious, the Humoursome, (and let me Add) the
Popular, the Zealous, the Fearful, and the Covetous, toward the Effecting of
the Main Work: So that it is in This, as it has been in All Other Conspiracies;
for One Man, that there is of a Factious, Spiteful, Cankered Animosity and
Venom, against the Government, there Are, and Have been, I make no doubt on it,
some Hundreds, that have been either Wheedled, or Menaced, or Corrupted, or
Seduced, or Deluded, into the Common Cause of Apostasy, and Disobedience. And
when they come to be Hampered, in Leagues, Covenants, Engagements, and
Associations, there are but too many of them, that will rather, Venture to be
Damned, for Staying with 'em, then to be Hanged, for Leaving them; and there
they lie, Snugg, 'till they are drawn out of the Mud, by the Teeth, like
Griggs, E're they will Quit their Hold. The Result, in fine, is but This; they do
all the Hurt in the World, without Meaning it, and without looking Before 'em,
into the Probable Consequences, and the Reasonable Issue, and Tendency of
Things. But the Motion of Political, is as Regular, as That of Natural Bodies;
and Kingdoms, and States, have their Revolutions, and Courses, no less than
Seasons.

A man may as well look into the Air, and Doubt whether the Sun Shines, as look
about him in the World, and Doubt whether there be a Republican Spirit at Work;
and whether it proceeds, by the Same Method^, at Present, that have been made
use of in All Former Times. That is to say; by setting False, or Daz'ling
Colors before Weak Eyes; By laying Grievances before the Rash, and Cholerique;
Dangers, and Matter of Fears, and Ielousies before the Timorous; Spiritual
Shams, before the Scrupulous; Scandalous Stories before the Credulous; Setting
the Bold, and Daring, a-fire, with Insinuations of Indignity, and Provocation;
Plying Malcontents, with Artificial Stimulations toward Revenge; Emproving
the Heats of a Mistaken Zeal, into the Contempt of Civil Order, and Government.
In fine; All Passions; All Humors; All Weaknesses; All Errors, are made
Subservient to All Confederacies of Practice against the State.

Upon These Motives, and Iuducements, it was, (as I have Hinted before) that,
upon the coming of his Present Majesty to the Crown, I did so much Press, and
Inculcate, Care, Tenderness, Charitable Good Will; a Christian, and Political
Agreement, betwixt the Common Subjects of the Same Sovereign, and the Members
of Both Churches. I did not know how far, the Craft, the Industry, and the
Application of One sort of People, might Prevail over the Easyness,
Carelessness, and the Simplicity of Another; there being so many Difficulties,
too, and Niceties, at That Time, in the way, as might very well Puzzle a man,
how to Govern himself; whether as a Good Christian, a Loyal Subject, a Friend
to his Country, and Religion: with a Just Regard to his Quality, Post, and
Station, and to the Offices of an Honest Man. I was not Mistaken, I perceive,
in my Apprehensions, and whosoever will but look back over his Shoulder, cannot
choose but find it so: But God forbid, all this while, that any man should be
Blamed for being Short-Sighted; Or that Humane Frailty in the Case of any
Mistake, should be rendered a Mortal Sin. There are Scandals Given, and there
are Scandals Taken; And, as we have had but Too many Unmannerly Hot-Spurrs of
the Former, so we have had Some very Worthy Persons of the Latter sort, that
have been Misrepresented to the World: And I lay the Stress of This Charge,
only upon the Fierce, the Obstinate, the Contumacious; and Those that have
Offended out of Malicious Wickedness.

In the making of Me a Papist, my Adversaries have done me an Honor, to Range
me (how Libellously soever they Intended it) under the Persuasion of my Royal
Master: But with This Honor, they have done me No Right yet; because, in
Truth, I am a Son of the Established Church of England; Which they wish I were
Not; and they are as Heartily Sorry, that I Am: For if I were, Really, of the
Roman Communion; I should be a very Perjured Villain, for Swearing, with so
much Solemnity, to the Contrary: Which would make My Testimony of as little
Credit against Otes, as I have made his appear to be, against the Roman
Catholics. Nay, If by their Forgeries, they could but have made a Papist of
me, to the Multitude, My Iobb had been done; and All my Discoveries of their
Treasonous, and Seditious Plots, and Conjurations, would have been so much
Breath thrown into the Air; and Three or Four Thousand Rheme of Pape^ Condemned
to the Necessary House. No No! True-Protestant-Otes, and Bedloe were Hard, and
Shot-free* against any Popish Silver Bullets, Screw'd-Guns, or Daggers: And
their Knights of the Post; Their Sham-Plot: Their White-Horse-Consults; Their
Somerset-Ho^se-Adventures, were True-Protestant-Rogueries, that C^uld only be
Blown-up, and Confounded, by a Church-P^otestant Hand. In fine; If they could
but have made-^^t the Proofs of the Plot, half so well, as I have made-out, the
Reasons why they would have Me to be a Papist, they might have gone-on, (for
ought I know) in a Comfortable way* of Drawing, Hanging, and Quartering, in
Saecula Saeculorum.

Since the Finishing of the Paragraph next above, and with the Pen yet in my
Hand, came a Gentleman to me with a Fresh Piece of Intelligence; which is, that
I have taken Pet at the Toleration, and thrown-up my Observator because Things
would not Work My Way; and I have lost All my Friends at Court upon it. Now the
Malice of this Suggestion, is well enough Applied, but the Story, Groundless,
and the very Pinch of the Case, Monstrously Mistaken. For my Discourses upon
Toleration, have not been made a Question of Religion, but of Government; and
the Main Point in Debate, has been This; Whether Liberty of Conscience, be a
Challenge in the Right of the People, or an Act of Grace, and Indulgence,
Issuing from the Prerogative of the Supreme Magistrate? My Conclusion runs
throughout in favor of the Latter; and bears an Exact Conformity to the
Present Resolutions of State. As for Example.

[All Indulgences, In, or About Externals in Religious Matters, O^s. Number. 38.
Vol. 3.
(Saving in Cases of Stipulation, Laws, Promises, and the like) are Merely
Gratuitous, and Wholly Dependent, upon the Grace, Will, and Pleasure, of the
Civil Magistrate.] And once again now.

[ This does not yet Hinder the Right of the Civil Magistrate, Obs. 39. Vol. 3.
to Interpose in such Indulgences, as may Stand with the Peace and Safety of
his Dominions: Nay, and I am Persuaded, that over and above the Natural
Softnesses of Generosity, and Good Nature, there are other Inducements to it,
that are yet Stronger, and Founded upon Principles of Piety, Religion it self,
Civil Prudence, and Honorable Just^^e. But where the Subject Challenges Those
Graces and Di^pensations, as of Right belonging to the People, the^ are not
Worthy of them: Neither, Effectually, have they any Title to them. For when
they come to Struggle once, for That as a Due, which is only a Grace; it is no
longer a Question of Conscience, but a Competition for Power: And a Prince
cannot Grant any Indulgence upon those Terms, without Ma^ming his Prerogative;
and the Cession of an Incommunicable Pr^v^^ege of his Crown.]

This is the Doctrine that runs thorough All my Writings upon This Argument,
and they are Open for any man to Examine, and, if he Can, to Disprove what I
say; Though it is a little Hard, methinks, for one to be put to Vindications,
and Defenses thus, In Season, and out of Season; and it is not Every man's Body
neither, that will Endure the Stripping, and a Reading upon it, in the
Marketplace.

But after All This Warmth, now, let me go-off like a Christian. I Forgive the
Whole World, All the Wilful, Deliberate, and Malicious Lies that any of the
Wicked Part of it have told of me; with all their Scurrilities, and Inferior
Slanders, over and above: But I cannot so easily Forget them; and I Phansy, I
shall hardly ever Trust 'em. I have not the least Unkind Impression, for those
that have Reported the Ill-Things they have Heard of me, without Knowing me;
And for the Rest, So help me God, as I have No Thought, or Wish of Revenge, in
the Heart of me.

I have drawn out This Preface, to a Length, much beyond the Measure that I
Proposed to my self; And since I am Dipped thus far, in the Merits of the Main
Case, I Will throw out my Hand; and Contract into This Preamble, the Substance,
and Marrow of what I had Designed for a larger Discourse.

We have had several Essays, by Snaps here and there, (as the Author pleased)
upon Diverse Walks of the Plot; but little has been done, as yet, to the framing
of a Just, and Formal History of it, or to the laying of the Axe to the Root.
There are in the Three Parts of These Observators, more Remarques upon the
Train, the Conduct and the Dependencies; with the Characters of the Witnesses
and of the Patrons of it; then are, perhaps, to be found any where else: As in
the Contradictions, of See Ote'es Veracities, Number. 60.61.62.72. Vol. 2.
Otes upon the Main Plot; and so of 140.141.142.180. Vol. 2.
Prance, Bedloe, etc. about the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey. But there
was so much Picking-Work in the Case; so much Puzzle in the Comparing of
Evidences, Times, Places, and Persons; such a Latitude left, for Exception,
Distinction, Evasion, Partiality of Comment, and Interpretation: So much
Allowance, for Pretext of Surprises, Slips of Memory, etc. and upon the Whole,
so strong a Prepossession, in Favor of the Plot, and Against any man that
should presume to Thwart it, that People were Believed without Opening their
Mouths, and Taught their Lessons beforehand, for fear they should be Out in
their Enformations. They had their Rolls, and Private Practices by Themselves,
before ever they came to Play their Parts, in Public, for Good and All. So
that upon the Whole, Truth was as good as Gagged, and the Plot insur^d; and a
Conscientious Evidence, against an Affidavit-man, was in much more danger of a
Gibbet, then the Other of a Pillory; for there needed no more then a Good Round
Oath, and a Trusty Second, fortified with the Unaccountable Inferences of an
Ambulatory Committee, to do any Honest man's Business: and Oaths, by This time
were Grown as Cheap as Stinking Mackrel. The Imposture was Christened, a
Narrative, or a Discovery; and the Impostors Themselves (according to a
True-Protestant Heraldry) were styled the Saviors of the Nation. A man could
not say Black was Ote'es Eye, but he was made an Invalidater of the King's
Evidence; A Ridiculer of the Damnable, Hellish, Popish Conspiracy; His Mouth
Stopped with Votes, and Proclamations, and in Danger of a Council, for Arraigning
Four Parliaments, and the Wisdom of the Nation. In few words; Such was the
Awe, and the Power of the Faction, and such the Tyranny of That Season, that
there is no Perfect Memorial to be Expected of Those Times; and whoever should
take upon him to Gather-up, and put together, the very Imperfections, and
Fragments of That History, would find Work enough for an Age; And Matter
enough, for the Bulk of the Book of Martyrs, Sixteen times over: Beside the
Squabbles that would arise upon the Variae Lectiones, and the Impossibility of
Reconciling Several Doctors Opinions, for want of Authentic Papers, and
Instruments, to proceed by. But though the Maddest Creature in Moor Fields,
would not Venture upon the Tracing of Particulars, thorough All the Turns, and
Windings of that Diabolical Maz^; or so much as Think of Digesting the
Inconsistencies, and Confusions of That-Story into any Pretense of Connection,
or Form: it may nevertherless very well stand with the Reputation, as well as
the Duty of a Sober Man, not to let the Whole Truth be Lost, for want of here
and there an Original; Provided, that it may come (so much as is on it) Pure,
and Untainted to Posterity, and Carry an Authority in the Face on it, not to be
Controlled.

Now as This Plot, partly in the Sham, partly in the Operation of it; and
Partly again, in the Occasions Administered by it, has furnished Matter for a
Course of Almost Six Years Papers; I cannot do better, then to Tack the
History, to the Reflections: Especially, when the One will be found so Needful
to the Expounding of the Other; and the Truth laid as Clear, and Certain, as if
it had been Pointed-out by a Beam of the Sun. I Draw All my Water from the
Fountain; And not One Drop that is not Neat, Natural, and Sincere; and that
will not abide the Uttermost Test. That is to say; I have, for my Authorities;
The Uotes of Several Parliaments; Printed by Order; and Published with an
Express Design to Enform the World of the very Matters which I am now about to
lay open. Oxford Debates. Fol. 1.
[ Printing our Votes (says one) will be for the Honor of the King, and the
Safety of the Nation.] Ibid. Fol. 2.
If our Actions be Naught, let the World Judge of them; If they be Good, let
them have their Virtue, etc. Therefore, I am for Printing, etc.] Ibid.
The Popish Party Dread Nothing more then Printing what you do.] Ibid.
This Printing, etc. is like Plain Englishmen, who are not Ashamed of what they
do.] Now, over and above the Main Chance, in a Compliance with Au^hority, and
Order; I have likewise upon the Publishing of These Papers, taken This Thought
into my Care; That whereas, there are many People that would be Glad, and
Willing enough to be Enform'd in this Intrigue, if it might be done without the
Encumbrance of buying a Heavy Book for the sake of a Preface: Therefore, I have
so far Consulted the Readers Ease, as to Order the Printing of it, apart, in a
Less Volume, to the End, that it may serve to Both Purposes: But for
Distinction sake, I shall give it a Title by it self however, that People may
not Confound that which is properly, Preface, with the Following History.

A Brief HISTORY Of the TIMES, FROM Dr. Otes'es taking his Degree at Salamanca,
to the Bearing of his Testimony at a Carts-Arse from Newgate to Tyburn.
THE Devil is never so Dangerous, as when he Presents himself in the Shape of
an Angel of Light; and there is nothing so Diabolical, as a Religious
Wickedness: When a man Blasphemes the Holy Ghost, by Kissing the Book; and
Defies, and Renounces God, in the very Act of Appealing to him. This was the
Case, of the Witnesses, and the Plot; which Plot, was, in Effect, such a sort
of Miracle Imposed upon the People, as the Serpents that the Magicians would
have Shamm'd upon Aaron: But Truth, in the End, Devoured the Imposture. It was,
in short, a kind of Perverse Creation, Made, out of Nothing, and without any
Pre-existence of Matter to Work upon? Only a Parliamentary Fiat, at last,
brought it out of the Abyss.

[ Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, Commons Journal. Oct. 31. 1687.

A Plot Uoted.


That upon the Evidence that has already appeared to This House, This House is
of Opinion, that there is, and has been a Damnable, and Hellish Plot,
Contrived and Carry'd-on by Popish Recusants, for Assassinating and Murdering
the King, for Subverting the Government, and Rooting-out, and Destroying the
Protestant Religion.]

This was no more then to say, That Otes, Bedloe, and Tongue Made the Plot, and
the House of Commons Found it; and they could not well do Less, at That Time of
the Day, Considering the Positive Oaths of so many Profligate Villains, and the
Constitution of That Loyal Parliament, who thought they could never
Sufficiently Abominate, or Revenge themselves on the Papists, for so Unnatural,
and Ungrateful a Conspiracy against their Prince, and their Religion. Beside,
that the Noise of Godfreys Murder; the Ferreting of the Monks in the Savoy;
Langhorn, Whitebread, Mico, Coleman, and the Lord knows how many more, to be
Seized; Papists Banished, and Disabled from Sitting in Parliament; the Raising
of the Militia, etc. This Hurry, put People out of their Wits; and
Consequently, there was no Place left for Fair Reasoning in the Sober Way of a
Cold, and Temperate Debate.

Now he that shall Stumble upon These Papers Five Hundred Year hence, and have
a mind to be Peeping into the History of a Villainy, (so many Ages before him)
shall never need to Consult the Records, either of Salamanca, or St. Omers, for
the Mystery, the Design, or the Issue of it; Nor to look any farther, then to
the Two First Parts of These Observators, for his ample Satisfaction. And so
without spending any more Time, and Paper, upon Preliminaries, I shall Hasten
to what I am to say upon This Subject; without laying any Stress at all, upon
the Authority of Hearsays, and Conjectures; without taking any thing upon
Trust, or Delivering any other Truths over to Posterity, then what I have
received in Form, from the very Lips of the Oracle it self.

According to Order.
[ I Appoint John-a-Nokes, and John-a-Styles to Print These Votes, Perused and
Signed by me, according to the Order of the House of Commons, and that no other
Person presume to print them.] ET CAETERA.

The History of the Plot.
IN Sept. 1678. Otes and Tongue, Together, made a Composition of a Damnable,
Hellish Story, that they called the Popish Plot. And, such as it was, it was
Sworn before Sir E. B. G. and Presented, with Wondrous Formalities of Zeal,
and Caution, to his Late Majesty Himself. There were Jesuits Letters, forsooth,
to be Seized at the Post House, to Patch up the Credit of a Broken Business. I
have, at This Instant, the Originals by me; Five in All, and at Least, Three of
the Five, most Undeniably the Handwriting of Otes, and Tongue, Themselves.
Briefly; the Shot was Manifes^ly Pointed at his Royal Highness, and thorough
Him at the King, his Brother; and thorough his Late Majesty, at Monarchy it
self, as will be made Clearer then the Day, in the Sequel of this Discourse.
The Faction, that was Resolved to make the Most on it, and to Improve the
Imposture; wrought such Havoc, for a Month, or Six Weeks upon it, with
Frightfull Stories, Continual Alarums; Fresh and Fresh Discoveries, and
Enformations, that a great many Wise, Good, and Sober Men were Startled at it;
and the Common People, as Mellow as Tinder, to take Fire at the least Spark.

At the Opening of the Following Parliament, of October 21. 1678. His Majesty
had This Passage in his Speech. [I now intend to Acquaint you, (as I shall
allways do with any thing that Concerns me) that I have been Informed of a
Design against my Person by the Jesuits; of which, I shall forbear any Opinion,
lest I should say too Much, or too Little; but I will leave the Matter to the
Law.] The Commons fell presently to work, upon the Plot-Papers; the Further and
Further Enformations, of Titus Otes; (That Inexhaustible Fountain of Invention,
and Slander.) Sir Edmundbury-Godfreys Matters; Priest-Hunting, and Impeaching.
And Then came-on the Humor of Seizing Caudle-Cups, for Altar-Plate; Medals,
and Guineys, for Popish-Trinkets; the Burning of our Blessed Savior, in
Effigy; Playing the Merry-Andrews, and Buffoons, in Priests-Habits; Making
Sport with Holy Orders, and Holy Things; 'till in the Conclusion, for fear of
Popery, they ran-a-Muck (as they call it) at Christianity it self, and bore
down Every thing that stood in their Way, betwixt This and Hell. There was no
Place left for Moderation, Sobriety, or Council; Truth, Justice, Humanity,
Honor, and Good Nature, were All Popishly-Affected, and never such a
Competition, betwixt Divine Providence, on the One hand, and the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, on the Other; for the Preserving, or the Destroying of a
Nation.

The History of the Interval, betwixt Otes'es Damnable Discovery, and (if the
Conceit be not too Trivial) the Discovery of Damnable Otes, has been the
Entertainment of all Peoples Tongues, and Thoughts, and the Amazement of
Christendom, no less then the Horror of All Good Men: To see the Foundations
of Three Kingdoms, Shaken with the Breath of Four or Five Prostitute, Mean, and
Stigmatized Varlets: An Imperial Monarchy, well-nigh Sunk into a Commonwealth,
upon the Credit of Notorious Impostors, and Common Cheats: An Apostolical
Church, in danger to be Over-turn'd, in the Name of God, and for the sake of
Religion, by the same Instruments: Iayls, and Dungeons, filled with Men of
Honor, Faith, and Integrity, upon the Testimony of Pillory'd Pick-Pockets, and
of the Sink of Mankind: The Heir Apparent to the Crown, in a fair way too, to
be Disinherited, at the Instance of Felons, and Renegades: Perjury, and
Subornation, Triumphant; and Nothing so Sacred, either in Heaven, or upon
Earth, as to be Secure from the Outrages of the Rabble. The Faction in short,
had got Ahead, and there was No Resisting the Torrent. Now the Fact was Agreed
upon at All Hands; but as to the Rise, the Occasion, and the Danger of these
Distempers; People were Divided; Some would have it to be a Popish Plot upon
the Kings Person, and Government, and the Protestant Religion: Others would
have it to be a Republican Plot against All Three, under Another Name, but with
the self Same Design; That is to say, of Killing the King; Changing the
Government; Dissolving the Church; and, rather then fail, their Ends to be
Compassed by Fires, and Massacres; as was Expressly Owned by diverse of the
Common-Wealth-Conspirators that were brought to Justice, Some in 1666. and
Others in 1683. Certain it is, that the Cover of the Four Evangelists never had
Fouler Lips laid to it, (the Merits of the Cause apart) then Those of the Kings
Witnesses, upon This Occasion: And it fell out too, huge Unluckily for Their
Purpose, that the People that were to be Massacred, should break out into so
many Rebellions, for fear of having their Throats Cut; while the People that
they swore were to Cut their Throats, were either Coop'd-up in Prisons, or
Gibbeted up and down the Kingdom, like so many Vermin in a Cony-Warren, without
making anyOne Attempt, either upon the Person of his Majesty, or upon the Peace
of his Dominions; Nay, and (to give them their Due) without so much as
Muttering against the Government, under All This Rigor. The Cause is now
coming to an Issue; and the Articles of the Charge (Mutatis Mutandis) the very
Same on Both sides; as Perjury, Subornation, Packing of Witnesses, and Iuries;
Only for Pickering, read Rumbold; for Papist, read True-Protestant; And so in
like manner, where the Same Reason holds in Other Cases.

The Theme that I am now upon, is so Copious; It has so many Incidents that
Necessarily fall into the Story; the Matter is of so Great a Consequence to be
Cleared, and there is so Great a Variety of Previous, and Leading
Circumstances, in the Nature of Praecognita, that require a Place in the
Preamble to This Narrative; that the Prologue to my Business has been a great
deal longer then I intended: But I shall now Hasten to an Impartial Account
upon the Two Plots in Question.

AS to the Proof, or Testimony of a Popish Plot, Two Plots in Question.
we have the Credit of Witnesses Innumerable, (such as they are) both English
and Irish: But the Foundation of the Whole Fabric, is Otes'es Consult at the
White-Horse in the Strand; And All the Rest has been, but a Superfoetation upon
that Original. It has been Sworn to be a Plot; Judged to be a Plot; I know not
how many Priests, Jesuits, and Others have Died for it as a Plot: But, in fine,
Such a Plot it was, as no body ever yet saw Any thing Of it, or any thing Like
it, but with Otes'es Eyes; which, in the Business of Don John, Mr. Coleman, and
Several Other Instances, have been found not be Infallible. So that upon the
Main, Otes'es Plot is the Groundwork of the Whole; And if That Fails, All
Fails: which may nevertheless Be, and No Affront to the Believers of it: For an
Oath may be Good in Law, and yet Carry a Man to the Devil upon the Point of
Conscience.

Simpson Tongue proves the Popish-Plot to be only a Contrivance betwixt his
Father, and Titus Otes.
NOW as to the Project commonly called, Otes'es Plot, Otes's Plot.
if a man may Speak Truth, and Shame the Devil, it was not the Doctors Alone;
but a kind of a Club betwixt Titus Otes, and Ezrel Tongue; as I have it under
the Hand of Young Tongue Himself; and upon Other very Good Authorities beside.
As for the Purpose.

[ Your Petitioner does Protest, Tonge's Evidence. The Shammer Shamm'd. p. 26.
in the Presence of Almighty God; that it is very True, that the Plot was
Contrived by my Father, and Titus Otes, when he returned the Second Time beyond
the Seas.] Subscribed Simpson Tongue; The Petition; to His Late Majesty; and the
Original, I have in My Own Hand: As likewise of these Instances that follow.

[ Under the Pretense of a Popish Plot, Ib. p. 35.
( which my Father first Imagined was a-foot, and afterward Otes at his Second
Return, Swore to be True) Their Main and Principal Design was to Disinherit his
Royal Highness. The first Persons that Managed the Plot, and were Privy to it,
were my Father, Otes, etc.] This was Addressed to my self, Dated from the
King's Bench, Ian. 5. 1681. and Signed Simpson Tongue. And once again yet.

Ib. p. 39.40.
When I came from the University, in the Year 77. I found Otes with my Father,
in a very poor Condition, who complained he knew not what to do to get Bread;
who went under the Name of Ambrose. My Father took him home, and gave him
Clothes, Lodging, and Diet, saying he would put him into a way.

And then he persuaded him to get acquainted among the Papists; and when he had
done so, then my Father told him, there had been many Plots in England to bring
in Popery, and if he would go over among the Jesuits, and Observe their ways,
it was possible it might be One now; and if he could make it out, it would be
his Preferment for ever. But however, if he could get their Names, and a little
Acquaintance from the Papists, it would be an Easy matter to stir up the People
to fear Popery.] And again, [ My Father and He ( Dr. Otes) went and Lodged at
Fox-Hall, at one Lamberts, a Bell-Founder, (which House was called by the
Neighbors the Plot-House;) And there Otes 's Narrative was Written; whereof
several Copies were Written, very Different from the Other: and the Four
Jesuits Letters (wherein Oats pretended was the whole Discovery) were
Counterfeits, etc.]

To the Instances above, I shall Add One More, for the Further Reputation of
All the Rest; which is, That when Otes'es Credit ran High, and the Faction as
Bold as Ever, upon May the 15. 1682. I Published This Following Advertisement:
And it went down without either Check, or Control.

If any Man, Woman, or Child, will be so Kind, and Generous, Obs. N. 138. Vol.
1.
as out of an Affection to the Protestant Religion, and the Vindication of Dr.
Otes; to call Simpson Tongue to a Legal Account, for Endeavoring to Destroy the
Credit of the said Doctor, and his Evidence, by Scandalous Reflections upon
Both; Roger L'Estrange does hereby offer Himself, out of a Zeal to the Public
Good, to Furnish Authentic Papers, and Memorials, toward the Prosecution of
the Work.

THe Whole Party were as Mute as Fishes, The Party Conscious that Otes was a
Cheat.
after This Publication; which they would never have been, if they durst have
put the Reputation of Otes'es Evidence to the Test. To say Nothing of the
Congruity, betwixt the Method and the Drift of their Open Proceedings in the
Case, and the Scope of Tonge's Private Enformations: For the Father, and Otes,
Acted the Same Part before the Commons, which Young Tongue said they did betwixt
Themselves, and the Mortal Malice of the Cabal, struck at the Duke of York too,
just according to the Report of His Papers. Insomuch, that while His Royal
Highness was Wounded for the Pretended Sake of the Roman-Catholiques; The
Romanists Themselves were likewise to be Sacrificed for the sake of the Duke of
York; and Both for the Common Interest of the Change they Designed.

After this Preparatory to a General Understanding of the Case here under
Consideration; it will be Proper and Needful, to set forth what such a Plot
Is, before I come to a Resolution, that This Damnable, Hellish, Popish Thing of
Otes'es, was, in Truth, such a Plot: That is to say, a Plot upon the Life of
the King; The Frame of the Government, and the Destruction of the Protestant
Religion. And to This End, Parliamentary Uotes, will be as Good in Payment, I
hope, as Fox-Hall Narratives; and as Current in the Uindication o^ the Royal
Family, as the Other were to the Defaming of it.

The Plot-Faction Designed the Ruin of the Late King; and to Compass it, by
leaving him neither MONEY, POWER, CREDIT, nor FRIENDS.
What Is a Prince, I would fain know, without [ MONEY;] without [ POWER;] without
[ CREDIT;] without [ FRIENDS?] And what are Those People that Endeavor to
Robb, and to Strip their Sovereign of All These Necessary Supports? Or what can
any man do More, toward the Execution of the Malice of the Pretended Popish
Plot, then to enter into a League, and to Ioyn in a Conspiracy, to All These
Execrable Ends? If the Project of doing All This, may be called a Plot; If to
Labor the Doing of it, be, to be In a Plot; And if This was upon the Wheel,
and Actually a Doing, by Otes, and his Confederates, and Founded, upon His
Counterfeit Plot too; And if I make All This Out, from Public Acts, and
Orders, as Credible as Records; the Question, and the Reputation of This Sham,
is at an End for Ever. And so I shall Proceed to the Four Heads above
mentioned, in Course, as they lie.

No Money.
AS to the Matter of [ MONEY;] How many Addresses were made by a Prevalent
Majority of the House of Commons, for Nov. 19. 1678.
[ Reward to the Discoverers of Godfrey's Murder?] Mar. 21. 1678.
[ Five Hundred Pound Reward to Bedloe.] Nov. 4. 1680.
[Dangerfield to be Pardoned, and Rewarded.] And so for Nov. 12. 1680.
[ Turberville, Bourk, Sampson, Macknamarra, Eustace Commins, etc.] Beside the
Horrible Charge of Pensions, for the Entertainment of Otes, Bedloe, Dugdale,
and Forty more. But after all these Expenses; not a Penny, to be either
Supplied, by Bill, or so much as Borrowed upon Anticipations; unless upon Terms
Worse then Death; as by These following Votes will Appear.

[ Resolved, That his Majesty in his Last Message; Jan. 7. 1680.
having Assured This House of his Readiness to Concur in all other Means, for
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion; This House does Declare, that
until a Bill be likewise passed, for Excluding the Duke of York, this House
cannot give any Supply to his Majesty, without Danger to his Majesty's Person.
Extreme Hazard of the Protestant Religion, and Unfaithfulness to Those by whom
This House is Entrusted.]

[ Resolved, That whosoever shall hereafter Lend, Ibid.
or Cause to be Lent, by way of Advance, any MONEY, upon the Branches of the
King's Revenue arising by Customs, Excise, or Hearth-Mony, shall be Adjudged to
Hinder the Sitting of Parliaments, and shall be Responsible for the same in
Parliament.]

[ Resolved, That whosoever shall Accept, Ibid.
or Buy any Tally of Anticipation upon any Part of the Kings Revenue; or
whosoever shall pay such Tally hereafter to be Struck, shall be Adjudged to
hinder the Sittings of Parliaments, and shall be Responsible therefore in
Parliament.]

In the Address of December. 21. 1680. The Commons Insist upon the Excluding of
the Duke of York, and an Act of Association; Or otherwise see what Follows.

[ Without these Things the Allyances of England will not be Valuable, Commons
Votes Dec. 21. 1680.
nor the People Encouraged to Contribute to your Majesty's Service.]

From hence, it does abundantly Appear that his Late Majesty was Driven upon
Expense, and Hindered of Supplys, by All Arts, and Shifts Imaginable: and the
Readiest way of finding to what End All this was done, will be to look into the
Grounds, and Reasons, of their so doing. Com. Votes. Jan. 4. 1680.
The Lords sent down a Vote to the House of Commons, for their Concurrence,
Declaring that their Lordships were fully Satisfied that there was a Horrid,
and a Treasonable Plot Carry'd-on, by the Papists in Ireland: Unto which Vote,
the Commons Agreed with an Addition, in Manner Following.

This House does Agree with the Lords in the said Vote; Com. Votes. Jan. 6.
1680.
with the Addition of These Words; That the Duke of York, being a Papist, and
the Expectation of his Coming to the Crown, has given the Greatest Countenance
and Encouragement thereto, (the Irish Plot that is) as well as to the Horrid
Popish Plot, in This Kingdom of England.

[ Resolved, That it is the Opinion of This House, Com. Votes. Jan. 7. 1680.
that there is no Security or Safety for the Protestant Religion; the King's
Life, or the Well-Constituted and Established Government of This Kingdom,
without Passing a Bill for Disabling James Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial
Crown of England, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging; and to Rely upon any other Means and Remedies, without such a Bill,
is not only Insufficient, but Dangerous.]

Here Is the Horrid Popish English Plot made the Ground, for the Excluding of
the Duke; and keeping the King short of Money; according to the Intent of the
Votes of Ian. 7. 1680. abovementioned. And That Is made the Foundation
likewise, for the Refusal, in the Address before-Cited, in the very Syllables
of the said Address.

[ That your Majesty's Sacred Life is in Continual Danger, Com. Votes. Add.
Dec. 21. 1680.
under the Prospect of a Popish Successor, is Evident, not only from the
Principles of Those Devoted to the Church of Rome, but also from the
Testimonies Given in the Prosecution of the Horrid Popish Plot, against Diverse
Traitors Attainted for Designing to put Those Accursed Principles into Practice
against your Majesty.]

There needs no Subtlety, of Quirking, or Reasoning, upon this Case, of [
MONEY,] the Spite of it lying so Open, that Every Common Eye sees thorough it;
and that the Terms the Republican Cabal Treated upon, in some of those
Parliaments, were no other, then a Trial of Skill, to see if they could bring
his Late Majesty to a Composition for his Crown. For the King was to have No
Money, No Money but in Composition for his Crown.
but upon Conditions of Disinheriting his Brother; (and more yet, as I shall
show in Due Place) Contrary to all the Ties of Conscience, Gratitude, Justice,
and Prudence: And All, for fear of [ a Damnable Hellish Popish Plot.] We shall
see now how they Dealt with his Majesty likewise, in the Matter of [Power.]

No Power.
THE Power of a Prince, Exerts it self in the Means of an Ample Revenue, to
Answer all the Necessities of the Crown; to Pay his Troops, and to Reward
Honorable Services: In the Privileges of Sovereign Authority; the Love, and
the Reputation that he has in the Hearts of his People; In the Arms of his
Militia; the Command of his Subjects; and the Cheerful Obedience of his
Friends. They had already Maimed, and Disabled his Late Sacred Majesty, in the
First Great Point, of his Revenue. That which comes-on Next, is to see how they
dealt with him in respect of his Power, of Prerogative, in General, and as to
his Forces, both by Land, and by Sea, in Particular; and whether the whole
Proceeding was not still Grounded, upon the Damnable Bugbear of the Popish
Plot. How they used him, upon the Matter of his Credit, and Friends, shall
come-on in due Time. But to Proceed now, to an Enquiry how they handled him
upon the Subject of his Prerogative. First in the Case of the Earl of Danby.

The Kings Prerogative of Pardoning Questioned.
[ REsolved, That an Humble Address be made to His Majesty, Journal. Mar. 24.
1678.
Representing to his Majesty the Irregularity, and Illegality of the Pardon,
mentioned by his Majesty to be Granted to the Earl of Danby, and the Dangerous
Consequence of Granting Pardons to Any Persons that lie under an Impeachment of
the Commons of England.]

Here Is the Kings Power of Life and Death shaken at the very Root; No Power of
Life and Death.
and what is the Unpardonable Crime at last, but This among Others!

[ That he is Popishly-Affected, and has Traitorously Concealed, Com. Journal,
Dec. 21. 1678.
after he had Notice of, the Late Horrid Plot, or Conspiracy, Contrived by the
Papists against his Majesty's Person and Government, and has Suppressed the
Evidence, and Reproachfully Discountenanced the Kings Witnesses in the
Discovery of it, in favor of Popery, Immediately tending to the Destruction of
the Kings Sacred Person, and Subversion of the Protestant Religion.]

There happened no Evil under the Sun in those Days, but the Late Horrid Plot,
or somewhat like it, had still a Finger in the Pie: But from Pardoning in my
Lord Danby's Case, they proceeded afterward, to a Bolder Step in my Lord
Staffords; and to make a Moot-Point of it, whether the King, by his
Prerogative, could so much as Remit, any Part of the Sentence; but Sir W. I.
gave his Opinion upon it, in Favor of the Prerogative, upon a very Weighty
Reason. [This House (says he) lies not under any Obligation to Offer at any
Opposition, nor concern themselves herein, Especially at This Time, when such a
Dispute may End, in Preventing of the Execution of the said Lord Stafford: And
therefore I do humbly Conceive you may do well to give your Consent, Collection
of Debates, Dec. 23. 1680. p. 215.
that the said Writ be Executed according to its Tenor.]

The Short of the Business was This; Sentence of Death was passed, Bethel and
Cornish's Scruple about the Execution of the Lord Stafford.

Lord Staffords Trial, Fol. 217.


in Form, upon my Lord Stafford; and the Kings Writ to the Sheriffs, Commanded
only his Head to be Severed from his Body. Bethel and Cornish, (the then
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex) Applied themselves by Petition, to the Lords,
to know whether they should Obey the Writ, or Not: The Lords found the Scruples
Unnecessary, and Declared [That the Kings Writ ought to be Obeyed.] After this,
to the Commons, Stating the Matter under These Four Following Quaeries. (I
speak upon the Credit of the Collection of Debates abovementioned,) Bethel's
Quaeries. Coll. of Debates, Dec. 23. 1680.
1. Whether the King, being neither Judge nor Party, can Order the Execution? 2.
Whether the Lords can award Execution? 3. Whether the King can Dispense with
any part of the Execution? 4. If the King can Dispense with some part of the
Execution, why not with All?


Upon the Debate, it was, in the Conclusion, Ibid.
[ Resolved, That This House is [CONTENT,] (That is to say; it does VOVCHSAFE,
and with MVCH A-DO too) that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, do Execute
William Late Viscount Stafford, by Severing his Head from his Body only.]

The Story of these Insolences will never be Believed in After-Ages; but
however, we are upon the Foot still, of the fol. 4.
[ Traiterous, Lord Stafford's Trial.
and Execrable Conspiracy for the fol. 5.
Imprisoning, Deposing, and Murdering his Sacred Majesty, and the fol. 6.
Raising and Disposing of Men, Monys, Arms, and other Things Necessary for
their Wicked, and Traiterous Designs, and Namely, a Commission for William
Viscount Stafford, to be Paymaster of the Army.

Here Is a Dreadful Business (as the Good Woman said) about this same
Traiterous, and Execrable Conspiracy; Pray the Lord it be all True at Last; for
the Government was Mightily off the Hinges about it; and the Fountain of Mercy,
and Power, seemed to be quite Dry'd-up. The Sheriffs were become the Peoples
Officers, and the Commons made Judges of the Validity of the King's Writ, The
Style of Authority, was no longer [ We Charge and Command] but Resolved upon
the Question;] and the Power of the Keys, dropped into St. Stephens Chapel.

Parliamentary as well as Pardoning Power Encroch'd upon.
AND that they might not seem Partial to One Prerogative more then Another,
They struck at the King's Power of Parliaments, as well as of Pardons; and
finding that an Everlasting Parliament Agreed so well with their Predecessors,
they had a Months-mind to make Trial of the Same Experiment Themselves too; as
may be seen by the By, in their Parliamentary Addresses, and Votes, but most
Expressly, in the Throng of Popular Addresses to his Majesty, and in the Libel
of Vox Patriae; where so many of the Members got themselves Addressed to, in a
kind of an Association, to That very purpose. As for Example: In the Address
against Sir George Ieffreys; the Earl of Hallifax; and several Votes upon the
same Occasion.

[ We your Majesty's most Dutiful, Commons Votes Nov. 22. 1680.
etc. in hopes to bring the Popish Conspirators to speedy Justice, were about
to Petition to your Majesty in an Humble, Dutiful, and Legal Way, for the
Sitting of This Parliament, etc.] And so again.

[ We, etc. being deeply sensible of the Manifold Dangers and Mischiefs which
have been Occasioned to This your Kingdom by the Dissolution of the Last
Parliament, Commons Votes Nov. 26. 1680.
and by the Frequent Prorogations of This Parliament, whereby the Papists have
been Greatly Encouraged to Carry on their Hellish, and Damnable Conspiracies,
etc.]

[ Resolved, That Whosoever Advised his Majesty to Prorogue This Parliament,
Commons Votes Jan. 10. 1680.
to Any Other purpose, then in Order to the Passing of a Bill for the Exclusion
of James Duke of York, is a Betrayer of the King; the Protestant Religion, and
of the Kingdom of England; a Promoter of the French Interest, and a Pensioner
to France.]

What is All This, but Overturning, and Overturning? Confusion, like Waves,
following One upon the Back of Another; and the Cabal so Intoxicated with
Passion, in the Logic of This Last Vote, that the very Despite of being
Defeated, made them Forget their Ordinary Prudence: For the Conclusion is never
to be Reconciled to the Premises. All that can be said for This Worrying Vote,
is, that they were then in their Last Agonies; for they were That Day
Prorogued, from the aforesaid 10th of January, to the 20th, in Order to a
Dissolution: And in All Mischievous Creatures, the Convulsions of Death are
ever the Strongest: But for the Rolls of the Written Addresses of Those Days,
they are most of them Peremptory, for Sitting 'till they might be Effectually
Secured, and That Is One Main Condition too, of the Countries Addresses to their
Members; And the Address of Sir Patience Ward, then Lord Mayor, etc. to his
Majesty Himself.

[ Your Petitioners were Extremely Surpised at the Late Prorogation, Vox
Patriae. f. 3.
whereby the Prosecution of the Public Justice of the Kingdom; and the Making
the Provisions Necessary for the Preservation of your Majesty, and your
Protestant Subjects, has received an Interruption, etc.

They do therefore most Humbly pray, Ibid. fol. 4.
etc. That the said Parliament may Sit from the Day to which they are
Prorogued, until by their Councels, and Endeavors, Those Good Remedies shall
be Provided, and Those Just Ends Attained; upon which, the Safety of your
Majesty's Person; The Preservation of the Protestant Religion; The Peace and
Settlement of your Kingdoms, and the Welfare of This your Ancient City, do so
Absolutely Depend.]

What is This now, but the Counter part of the Bill for Continuing the
Parliament, that was Passed in Forty One, and Chiefly upon the very Same
Pretenses too? Viz. That Public Grievances might be Redressed, and Justice
done upon Delinquents, before the Parliament should be Dissolved: Or in short;
The King was [ Not to Prorogue, Adjourn, See Whitlock's Memor. fol. 43.
or Dissolve This Parliament, without Consent of Both Houses.]

And there is Another Parliamentary Point, yet to Come, in the Vote of
Unqualifying the Members, for the Receiving of any Beneficial Office from the
King. It Is a kind of a Scandalous Incapacity, for a Subject to fare the worse
for his Master's Commission; And too much in all Conscience, for the Same Men
to Tye-up the King's Hands from Any Act of Grace, and Bounty, toward his
Subjects, that had before Ty'd-up the Peoples Hands, from Supplying his
Majesty. The Vote was This,

[ Resolved, That no Member of This House shall Accept any Office, Votes. Dec.
30. 1680.
or Place of Profit from the Crown without the Leave of This House, nor any
Promise of any such Office or Place of Profit during such time as he shall
continue a Member of This House.]

An Eminent Member that Started This Motion, made it his Observation upon the
Long Parliament, [That All Those that had Pensions, and most of Those that had
Offices, Collection of Debates. p. 218.
Voted All of a side, as they were directed by some Great Officer, etc.] If
That Gentleman had taken as much Notice, that the House had but Two sides, and
who Voted on the Other; he would have found a Noble Peer, to have Weighed
against his Great Officer, and the Matter to be no more then the Old
Discrimination over again, of [ King and Parliament.] It may be a Question now,
the Tendency, and Intent of This Touch duly Considered, whether they made the
King, or the Member, in such a Case, the Greater Delinquent of the Two.

And they were not Contented, here, neither, without a Further Essay upon the
Choice of his Majesty's Ministers, and Officers of State, War, and Justice;
After the Copy of the Old Nineteen Propositions.

The King not to Choose his own Officers, and Ministers.
[ NO Votes. Address. Dec. 21. 1680.
Judges but men of Ability, Integrity, The 19 Propositions over again.
and Known Affection to the Protestant Religion: (And They Themselves to be
Judges of the Judges) Their Offices, and Salaries, to hold, Quamdiu se been
gesserint, etc. Ibid.
No Lord-Lieutenants, but Persons of Integrity, and Known Affection to the
Protestant Religion, (the Religion of the Associators, that is) No
Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, but so Qualified; And moreover,
Men of Ability, Estates, and Interest in their Country: (under the Same
Character still) None to be Employed as Military Officers, or Officers in his
Majesty's Fleet, but men of Known Experience, Courage, and Affection to the
Protestant Religion.] (All, Parliament-Proof, still, and of the Same Stamp.] To
say nothing of the Habeas-Corpus Bill; and other Encroachments upon the
Prerogatives of the Crown: for fear of being too too Tedious. We Will see next,
how they Be^av'd themselves in the Business of the Militia, and the Kings
Guards; over and above the Step they made to have the Approbation of All
Officers, Themselves; After the Blessed Example, still, of Old Forty One: Nay,
and in the very Method too; Beginning with an Address for Guards; as follows.

They offer at the Militia, and the Guards.
Attempts upon the Militia. Journal. Oct. 24. 1678.
[WHereas the Safety and Preservation of your Majesty's Sacred Person, is of so
Great a Consequence and Concernment, to the Protestant Religion, and to All
your Subjects; We do most humbly beseech your Majesty to Command the Lord
Chamberlain, and All Other the Officers of your Majesty's Household, to take a
Strict Care that no Unknown, or Suspicious Persons may have Access near your
Majesty's Person; and that your Majesty will likewise please to Command the
Lord Mayor, and Lieutenancy of London, to Appoint sufficient Guards of the
Train-Bands, during This Session of Parliament; and likewise the Lords
Lieutenants of Middlesex and Surry, to appoint the Like Guards of the
Trained-Bands, in Middlesex, Westminster, Southwark, and other Places Adjacent,
as shall be thought Necessary.]

With Honor to That Long, Loyal Parliament; so many of them as Believed the
Witnesses, had great Reason to Provide against Otes'es Black-Bills, and
Mustard-Balls: But They that KNEW the whole Story to be as Arrant a Tale, as
Tom Thumb; Those People, I say, had Designs, of Drawing the Militia over to
Themselves, by Trepanning the Multitude into the Execution of One Cheat, under
the Dread, and Belief of Another: And there were Ill men enough got into That
Body, to Leaven the Whole Lump: The City of London however, will be Wiser, I
hope, in the time to Come, after the better Part of 200000 l. paid for
Experience; then to call for Double Guards again, for fear of Popery. But here
follows Another Address about the Militia, that goes a little Further, than the
Former; Though That would not do, Neither.

[May it please your Majesty,

We your Majesty's most dutiful, Journal, Nov. 22. 1678.
and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament Assembled, taking into
Consideration the Eminent Dangers Arising to your Majesty, and the Whole
Kingdom, from Popish Practices, and Conspiracies; and Conceiving that Nothing
can so well Resist their Attempts, as some Parts of the Militia; (The Settled
Legal Forces of This Kingdom:) [They should have said By your leave, Gentlemen
of the Guards] Actually in Arms, on whom your Majesty may Rely, with the
Greatest Confidence, and Security.

We do therefore humbly Desire your Majesty to Command your Lieutenants, and
Deputy Lieutenants of the Several Counties of This Kingdom, to Give Order to
All their Trained-Bands to be in a Readiness, and Draw together one Third Part
of the Respective Militia; and to Continue them in a Body for Fourteen Days;
and after they are Dismissed, to Draw up another Part for the same Time, etc.

The Plot would not Take it seems, in One Parliament, and so they Tried it
again in the Next; falling foul, particularly, upon the Kings Guards, in the
First Place, and after That, they were All in Post-hast again, for the Raising
of the Militia, in these two Following Instances of Vote, and Address.

[Resolved, That the Continuing of Any Standing Forces in This Nation, Journal
Ap. 1. 1679.
other then the Militia, is Illegal, and a Great Grievance, and Vexation to the
People.] And then.

We your Majesty's most Loyal, etc. do most humbly beseech your Majesty,
Journal May 10. 1679.
that your Majesty would be Graciously pleased to give Order, that the Militia
of London, Westminster, Southwark, the Tower-Hamlets, and the Counties of
Middlesex and Surry may Immediately be Raised, and put in a Posture of Defense,
in such Proportion, and for such time, as your Majesty shall think fit.]

In the Wipe upon the Guards, they had it in their Heads, directly, to Disarm
the King; Nay, to Un-king him; (for without the Power of the Sword, he has No
Power at all;) and in fine, to Turn the Point of it, upon their Sovereign: For
the Militia, at the Rate that they had Tampered the Peoples Minds, and
Affections, would have been as Fit for Another Edg-hill Expedition, against
Charles the Second, as ever it was for That, in the Time of Charles the Martyr.

Practices upon his Late Majesty's Credit.
AFter these Attempts to make the Late King Poor, and Weak, by all ways of
Draining the Exchequer, without any Prospect of Ressource; and by Usurping upon
his Prerogatives, as well Military, as Civil, they Attacqu'd him next, in his
Credit: the Conspirators of the Cabal Endeavoring to Render him as Cheap, and
as Hateful, That way, as they Propounded to all other Purposes, to make him
Miserable. When I say Credit; I do not mean the Credit of a Merchant, in Matter
of Money; but the Credit of a Prince, upon the Point of Character, and Honor.
There could not well be a Greater Libell, then their Printed Votes, beside the
Encouragements they gave, to Scurrilous Little Knaves, and Pamphlets; Nor was
it Possible, to Speak Worse of a Prince, then Those Papers made Every body
Think, that Read, and Believed them. His Wisdom, His Justice, His Truth, His
Clemency, were, All, called in Question; and Exposed by Votes and Orders: As
That One Instance of the Address, Nov. 29. 1680. may serve for All. The
Question was Popery; The Fears of it grounded upon the Plot; the Queen, and the
Duke of York involved in the Scandal of the Accusation; and his Majesty Himself
rendered, by more then Implication, a Favourer of That Plot, A Libellous
Address.
and a Conspirator against Himself. But let the Address speak in it is Own Words.

Their Opposers (the Papists) have found means to Disgrace; Votes Nov. 29.
1680. p. 77.
and if they were Judges, Justices of the Peace, or other Magistrates, to have
them turned out of Commission.

The Continuance, or Prorogation of Parliaments, Ibid.
has been Accommodated to serve the Purposes of That Party. Money raised upon
the People to Supply your Majesty's extraordinary Occasions, was by the
Prevalence of Popish Councels, Employed to make War upon a Protestant State.

When the House of Commons were Prepared to bring to a Legal Trial the
Principal Conspirators in This Plot, Ibid.
That Parliament was first Prorogued, and then Dissolved.

Witnesses are Attempted to be Corrupted, Ibid.
and not only Promises of Reward, but of the Favor of your Ma^esties Brother,
made the Motives to their Compliance.

Diverse of the most Considerable of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects, Ibid.
have Crimes of the Highest Nature Forged against them; the Charge to be
Supported by Subornation, and Perjury, that they may be Destroyed by Forms, of
Law, and Justice.

We have lately upon Mature Deliberation, Ibid.
Proposed One Remedy of These Great Evils, without which, (in Our Judgments)
All Others will prove Vain and Fruitless; And (like All Deceitful Securities,
against Certain Dangers) will rather Expose your Majesty's Person to the
Greatest Hazard, and the People, together with All that is Valuable to them, as
Men or Christians, to Utter Ruin, and Destruction.

If after All This, the Private Suggestions of the Subtle Accomplices of That
Party, and Designs should yet Prevail, Ibid.
etc. we shall have This Remaining Comfort, that we have Freed our selves from
the Guilt of That Blood and Desolation, which is like to Ensue.

What did These People make of the King all this while, but the Patron of the
Sworn Enemies of his Life, and Religion; and the Contriver of the Ruin of
Himself, and of his People? The Papists did All, it seems; and made Him to do
All too, that They pleased. Was it True, that They did so, or was it False? If
True; it must be either out of Facility, Confederacy, or (with Veneration to
his Sacred Ashes) it must be Inadvertency, to the Highest Degree, and Such an
Inadvertency, as Hazzarded his Crown, his Life, and his Reputation, All in One:
For the Action was His Own, upon what Motive soever he Did it. Was it the
Papists that put-out the Judges, and Justices? Was it the Papists, that
Continued, or Prorogued Parliaments? Was it the Papists, that made the
Protestant War? That Reprieved the Plot; and the Conspirators? Was it the
Papists, that Suborned Witnesses against Shaftsbury, and College? (for That Is
their Meaning) And was That the Case of Subornation that This Address Strikes
at? Was it the Papists, that Ruined All, for not Yielding to the Exclusion of
the Duke? Was it the Papists, again, that they make Answerable for the Blood,
and Desolation Threatened in This Address, because They Would not do the Things
which only the King, Could do? How could Any man Believe These Calumnies, and,
at the same time, keep his Thoughts of his Prince, within the Bounds of his
Duty? Or how could any man Disbelieve 'em, without the Uttermost Abhorrence of
so Diabolical a Practice upon the Honor of their Sovereign?

They stripped the Late King of his Friends too.
AND the Malice of the Conspirators was not Satisfied Here neither; The King's
Friends were either Papists Convict, or Reputed Papists.
unless, after the Stripping his Majesty of All Other Means of Supporting
Himself, they Deprived him, of the Use, and Service of his Friends too; which
Friends of his, may be Properly Divided, into Papists Convict; and Suspected,
or Reputed Papists. The Former were Visible, and Known; The Other, were a sort
of People of their Own Creation: For whoever was not for their Turn, they could
make such a Papist of him at pleasure. We shall see in Good Time, how it fared,
both with the One, and with the Other; while the Remaining Body of the Nation,
was only a Party, of so many United, or Associated Protestants, that were
Linked in One Band of Confederacy, and Waged War, to the Everlasting Reputation
of the Plot, under Otes'es Banner. But to come to the Matter, I shall begin
with the Former Sort of them, and Carry These Two Points Before me. First, The
Story, and Secondly, The Ground of their Sufferings; And bring the Whole into
as Few Words as Possible, in a Consistence with Candor, Truth, and Justice.

PApists or so Reputed, were to be Banished; Their Proceeding with Papists.
Journal Oct. 23. 1678.
[BECAVSE] of the Bloody, and Traitorous Designs of Popish Recusants.

Nov. 8. 1678.
To be taken into Custody, and Disarmed; Their Names Taken; Rewards given to
the Discoverers of their Arms, [BECAVSE] of the Damnable and Hellish Plot, for
the Destruction of his Majesty's Person, etc.

Papists to be Disabled from Sitting in Either House of Parliament, Nov. 16.
1678.
[BECAVSE] of the Restless Conspiracies of Popish Recusants, against his
Majesty's Person, etc.

No Popish Recusants to have a Residence in his Majesty's Palace, Nov. 23. 1678.
or Access unto his Presence [BECAVSE] his Person is in Danger at This Time
from Popish Conspiracies.

All Popish Recusants, or Justly Suspected Papists to be Apprehended, Dec. 3.
1678.
Disarmed, and Secured, [BECAVSE] of the Pernicious Plots and Contrivances of
Popish Persons.

Resolved, That if any Popish Recusant Convict shall Receive any Commission,
Dec. 7. 1678.
he shall be Deemed a Felon, And shall be Pursued, Apprehended, and Executed as
such.

Popish Delinquents to be brought to speedy Justice, Nov. 16. 1678.
[BECAVSE] of the Manifest Danger to his Majesty's Sacred Person, etc. from the
Notorious Conspiracies of Popish Priests, and Jesuits.

Pickering to be Executed, and all Papists or Reputed Papists to be Banished
Twenty Mile from London and Westminster for Six Months; Ap. 27. 1679.
[BECAVSE] of the Horrid Conspiracies of Popish Recusants.

London, and the Parts Adjacent, to be Freed from Popish Inhabitants. Journal
May 7. 1679.


At this rate they Proceeded against Papists Convict, in the Quality of
Papists, and put That Part of his Majesty's Friends out of Condition, of either
Serving their Master, or Helping Themselves. But then the Distinction of
[Suspected,] or [Reputed] Papists, Swept the whole Remainder of t^em, to a
Single Man: for One Wry Word, of Otes, or of his Works, was enough to bring any
Man's name into the Black Roll. Whoever Adhered to the Duke of York; Opposed the
Exclusion, was Supposed to Advise a Prorogation, or Dissolution; Denied the
Plot; Spoke Coursly of the Evidence; and in fine, Whoever was not an
Associator, or a Friend to That Interest, was Popishly Affected. But before I
proceed to That Part of the Division of the Kings Friends, there are Certain
Qualifications of Papists and Popery, under Other Circumstances, that are to be
taken in the way.

An Address to be Presented to his Majesty, Bold Addresses, Jour. Nov. 8. 1678.
that his Royal Highness may Withdraw himself from his Majesty's Person and
Council.

Resolved, That a Bill be brought in to Disable the Duke of York, May 11. 1679.
to Inherit the Imperial Crown of This Realm. Ibid.
] And then follows immediately, The Resolve, Nemine Contradicente, of the
Revenging Vote. In the Next Parliament, they were at the very same Sport again.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That the Duke of Yorks being a Papist, Votes,
Nov. 2. 1680.
and the Hopes of his coming such to the Crown, has given the Greatest
Countenance and Encouragement to the Present Designs and Conspiracies against
the King, and the Protestant Religion.

The Next Resolve is the Revenging Vote, and after That, the Disabling Bill,
These Three Successively. So that the Matter, and the Order of it, were
Evidently Fore-laid, and the Caball in Both Parliaments agreed upon it
beforehand: Nay, the Queen her self was brought into the Conspiracy; (to the
Eternal Infamy of the Believers, as well as the Reporters of That Sacrilegious
Scandal) and an Address Resolved upon, as follows.

[ We Your Majesty's most Dutyfull, Address against the Queen.
etc. having received Enformations by Several Witnesses (Otes and Bedloe) of a
most Desperate, Journal No. 28. 1678.
and Traiterous Design and Conspiracy, against the Life of your Sacred Majesty,
wherein, to their Great Astonishment, the QVEEN is particularly Charged, and
Accused. In Discharge of our Allegiance, and out of our Affections and Care for
the Preservation of your Majesty's Sacred Person, and Consequently, of the
whole Kingdom, do most Humbly beseech your Majesty, that the Queen, and All her
Family, and All Papists, and Reputed Papists, be forthwith removed from your
Majesty's Court at Whitehall.] And then followed a Resolve of the Same Date,
[That an Humble Address be Presented to his Majesty, Ibid.
that All Papists, and Suspected Papists, within the Several Counties of
England and Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed may be Apprehended, and
Secured.]

This was a Ready way now, to have a Clear Stage to Themselves: And the
Wickedness of That Age Stopped at Nothing, when the Four Evangelists came once to
be made a Stale to the Business; and when Murder was Super-Added to the
Hypocrisy, and Perjury of the False Witnesses, and their Confederate Patrons,
and Abettors. I come now to the Address that was made upon the Revenging Vote.

[WE do humbly Represent to your Majesty, The Revenging Address. May 14. 1679.
that being Deeply Sensible, that the Greatest Hopes of Success against our
Religion in the Enemies thereof, the Papists, are Founded in the Execrable
Designs, which they have laid against the Sacred Person and Life of your
Majesty, which it is not only our Duty, but our Interest, with the Greatest
Hazzards to Preserve and Defend, we have Applied our selves to the making such
Provisions by Law, as may Defeat those Popish Adversaries, their Abettors and
Adherents, etc. And while any such Laws are in Preparation, and bringing to
Perfection, it is our Resolution, and we do Declare, that in Defense of your
Majesty's Person, and the Protestant Religion, we will Stand by your Majesty
with our Lives and Fortunes, and shall be ready to Revenge any Violence Offered
by them, to your Sacred Majesty.] It is to be noted, that the Vote was
Softened, in this Address: For as it was Worded, at first, Whoever had Killed
the King, the Papists should have Gone to Pot for it, which Hint did as good as
say; Get but over This Iobb, my Masters, and you have done your Business. But the
Conspirators found a way however, to Supply That Restrictive Distinction, by
Murdering him Themselves, and giving it out that the Papists had done it;
according to the Evidence of the Republican Conspiracy; which says it was so
Determined, if the Rye House Project had Succeeded. [ The Conspirators were to
go to several Persons, Walcot's Trial, Fol. 9.
and Ask them, Supposing that the Papists should Rise, or that there should be
a General Insurrection, or a French Invasion, Are you in a Posture of Defense?]
This was the very Practice, and the Imposture, in the Case of the Militia; the
Double-Guards, and the Rout they made among the Papists. But Keeling, a little
Lower in the same Trial, puts it into somewhat Plainer English. [These Men
(says he) where to be in a readiness, Ibid.
and it was Designed that the Thing should be laid upon the Papists, as a
Branch of the Popish-Plot:] Which may serve for an Excellent Commen^ upon the
Present Text.

Upon the 15th of Dec. 1680. There was no way with 'em, but immediately to [
Banish All the Considerable Papists in England out of the Kings Dominions: Vo.
Dec. 15. 1680.
] And it is to be Supposed, that they would not have Forgotten his Royal
Highness in the Number; Especially, Considering how Mindful they were of him
in Other Cases. Insomuch that there was hardly any thing done, by the
Conspirators that had Worm'd themselves into the House, but for
Countenance-sake, and to While away Time, that had not the Ruin of the Duke,
and consequently, of his Royal Brother, in the Bottom of it; and they were so
Eager upon it, that all they could do without it, was to no purpose.

[ Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, Dec. 15. 1680.
that so long as the Papists have any Hopes of the Duke of Yorks Succeeding the
King in the Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
Belonging; The Kings Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Lives, Liberties,
and Properties of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects are in Apparent Danger
of being Destroyed.] And then follows Another Resolve, upon the Necessity of
such a Bill.

Excluding and Proroguing, Two Great Points.
THE Refusal of This Bill, and the Last Refuge (that the King had left him) of
Proroguing Parliaments, were Two Terrible Rubbs in their way: For, with the
Help of the One, they could have done the Business of the Roman Catholics, at
pleasure, and made as many Reputed, and Suspected Papists of the Rest of his
Majesty's Subjects, as they found Averse to the Popular Design. And Then, under
the Countenance of a Sitting Parliament they had a Thousand Tricks and Devices,
by their Printed Votes, Papers, and Intelligences, to make their Principals
Fall down, and Worship them, as the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion; the
Heroes, and Patriots of the Common Cause, and the Saviors of the Nation. But
the Cunning Snapps of the Faction, finding that the King would not let go his
Power of Calling them, and sending 'em away again as he pleased; and that
Prorogations and Dissolutions were but as Sentence, and Execution, to them;
They had the Wit to make a Provision of Parliamentary Guards for the Oxford
Meeting, under Color of Securing the Protestant Members from having their
Throats Cut there by the Papists: And it is more then Probable, that if his
Majesty had not very prudently, taken Two Steps at a Time, and Dissolved them
upon the very Spot, and Instant, without the Antecedent Ceremony of Proroguing
them, they would have found, (under the Color of a House of Commons yet in
Being) Another Game to Play. There had been a Heavy Cry made upon all their
Former Disappointments; in Pamphlets, Papers, Discourses, Addresses, upon
Surprising Prorogations; Popish and Amazing Prorogations, etc. which humor
they did Notably set forth in an Address to his Majesty of No. 11. 1680.

IN relation to the Trials of the Five Lords Impeached in Parliament for the
Execrable Popish Plot; An Address against Prorogations.

Coll. of Debates, No. 11. 1680.


we have so far Proceeded, as we doubt not but in a short time we shall be
ready for the same.

But we Cannot (without being Unfaithful to your Majesty, and to our Country
by whom we are Entrusted) Omit upon This Occasion humbly to Enform your
Majesty, that our Difficulties, even as to these Trials, are much Increased,
by the Evil, and Destructive Councels of those Persons who Advised your
Majesty, first, to the Prorogation, and then to the Dissolution of the Last
Parliament, at a time when the Commons had taken great pains about, and were
Prepared for those Trials. And by the like Pernicious Counsels of those who
Advised the Many and Long Prorogations of the Present Parliament, before the
same was permitted to Sit, whereby, some of the Evidence which was prepared in
the Last Parliament, may possibly, (during so long an Interval) be Forgotten or
Lost, and some Persons who might probably have Come-in as Witnesses, are either
Dead, have been Taken-off, or may have been Discouraged from giving their
Evidence.

But of One Mischievous Consequence of those Dangerous, and Unhappy Counsels,
we are Certainly, and Sadly Sensible; Namely, that the Testimony of a [
Material Witness,] against every of Those Five Lords (and who could probably
have Discovered, and brought-in much Other Evidence about the Plot in General,
and Those Lords in Particular) cannot now be given, Viva Voce, forasmuch as
That Witness is Unfortunately Dead, between the Calling and the Sitting of this
Parliament.

To prevent the Like, or Greater Inconvenience for the Future, we make it our
most Humble Request to your Excellent Majesty, that as you tender the Safety of
your Royal Person; The Security of your Loyal Subjects; and Preservation of the
True Protestant Religion; you will not suffer your self to be prevailed upon by
the Like Council to do any Thing which may Occasion, in Consequence, (though
we are Assured never with your Majesty's Intention) either the Deferring of a
Full and Perfect Discovery, and Examination of This most Wicked and Detestable
Plot, or the Preventing the Conspirators therein, from being brought to speedy
and Exemplary Justice and Punishment; and we humbly beseech your Majesty to
rest Assured, (Notwithstanding any Suggestions which may be made, by Persons
who for their Own Wicked Purposes Contrive to Create a Distrust in your Majesty
of your People) that Nothing is more in the Desires, and shall be more the
Endeavors of us your faithful and Loyal Commons, then the Promoting, and
Advancing of your Majesty's True Happiness, and Greatness.

NOW to Observe a little upon This Lamentably-Complaining Address; Notes upon
the Address.
the Old Vein, I perceive, of Popery, and Calamity, Conspiracy, and Destruction
runs quite thorough it: And what Misery soever, has either Threatened or
Befallen the King, the Government, the Church, or the People, is All-Charg'd
upon the score of This Almighty Plot, as the First Cause, and Mover of it. And
(which was the spite on it) no Averting of Those Impending Miseries, but by the
Kings Parting with his Honor, his Crown, Natural Affection, Humanity,
Gratitude, In short, His Ministers, His Friends, His Prerogative, Reas^n, and
Justice. It Is Urged, that the Councels were Evil and Destructive, that Moved
his Majesty to a Prorogation, and Then, to a Dissolution of the Foregoing
Parliament. How could it be Evil, and Destructive, in the Advising, and not so,
in the Doing too? Or what matters it, whether it be done Without Advice, or
With it; so long as the Venom of This Address Wounds the King, Equally, under
the Cover of his Ministers. The Want of That Advice, and Resolution, in the
Parliament of One and Forty, Cost the Royal Father his Life; and the Son,
Probably, upon such a Concession, would not have come-off much Cheaper: Unless
it shall be Imagined, that he might have found Better Quarter in the House,
then in the Field, from the very same Persons that were Now in Council, and
Afterward in Arms against him. It is pretended, that the Commons were ready
for the Trial of the Five Lords, at the Dissolution of the Last Parliament: Now
This was only Bubbling the Multitude; for the Commons Themselves would not
Yield to it, unless the Earl of Danby might be Tried First. But to say All in a
word; The King was Undone if he did Not Prorogue, and the Republicans, if he
Did. As to the Possibility of more Witnesses Coming in, it cannot be Denied,
that, according to the way of Summons that was then in Fashion, the Common
Iayles, (nay Newgate it Self, in the Case of Prance) were Consulted for
Evidence: and they could not well fail of as many Witnesses, as either Malice,
Faction, Countenance, or Reward, could Prevail upon to Forswear themselves; But
a [Material Evidence,] it seems, was lost by it. ( Bedloe they mean.) A Fellow
known for a Blasphemous, Atheistical Wretch; A Thief, a Cheat; and in fine, a
Scandal to the very Alms-Basket. What a Dismal, [VNFORTVNATE] Loss was This
now, of so [Material] an Evidence, (in Good Time) upon the Plot in General!
(which Material Evidence in the True Intent of it, is no Other, then a Rogue
that would Swear any thing:) But against the Five Lords, they say, in
Particular; And if there had been Five times Fifteen Hundred more of them, he
should have Sworn against 'em All at the Same Price. I can hardly look back
upon the Parting Complement, without Thinking of the Addresses and Declarations
of One and Forty, for the making of Charles the First, a Glorious King; they
are so Very, Very Alike. But so much for the Business of Prerogative. And now,
for the Other Great Point, the Matter of Exclusion, let the Bill Speak for it
self. It Is Long; But it Carries the Heart in the Face on it; and it is Pity but
Posterity should have it Entire.

The Bill amended as the House had ordered, was read, Entitled, An Act for
securing of the Protestant Religion, by disabling James Duke of York to Inherit
the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging.
The Bill of Exclusion.
WHEREAS James Duke of York is notoriously known to have been perverted from the
Protestant to the Popish Religion; whereby not only great Encouragement has
been given to the Popish Party to enter into, and carry on most Devilish and
Horrid Plots and Conspiracies for the Destruction of his Majesty's Sacred
Person and Government, and for the Extirpation of the True Protestant Religion:
But also if the said Duke should succeed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
nothing is more manifest then that a Total Change of Religion within these
Kingdoms would ensue. For the prevention whereof, Be it Enacted by the King's
most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in present Parliament Assembled, and by
the Authority of the same, that the said James Duke of York shall be, and is by
the Authority of this present Parliament Excluded, and made for ever incapable
to Inherit, Possess, or Enjoy the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and of the
Kingdoms of Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories to them, or either of
them belonging, or to have, exercise, or enjoy any Dominion, Power,
Jurisdiction or Authority in the same Kingdoms, Dominions or any of them. And
be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said James Duke
of York shall at any time hereafter, Challenge, Claim, or attempt to possess,
or enjoy, or shall take upon him to use or exercise any Dominion, Power, or
Authority, or Jurisdiction within the said Kingdoms, or Dominions, or any of
them, as King or chief Magistrate of the same; That then he the said James Duke
of York, for every such offense shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High
Treason; and shall suffer the Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, as in case of
High Treason: And further, that if any Person or Persons whatsoever shall
assist, or maintain, abet, or willingly adhere unto the said James Duke of
York, in such challenge, claim or attempt; or shall of themselves attempt, or
endeavor to put or bring the said James Duke of York into the Possession, or
Exercise of any Regal Power, Jurisdiction or Authority within the Kingdoms and
Dominions aforesaid; or shall by Writing or Preaching advisedly publish,
maintain or declare, That he has any Right, Title, or Authority to the Office
of King or Chief Magistrate of the Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid, That then
every such Person shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High Treason; and that
he suffer and undergo the pains, penalties and forfeitures aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that he the said James
Duke of York shall not at any time, from, and after the 5th. of November 1680.
return or come into, or within any of the Kingdoms or Dominions aforesaid; And
then he the said James Duke of York shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High
Treason: and shall suffer the pains, penalties, and forfeitures as in case of
High Treason; and further, that if any Person or Persons whatsoever shall be
aiding or assisting unto such return of the said James Duke of York, that then
every such person shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of High Treason; and
suffer as in cases of High Treason.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That he the said James
Duke of York, or any other Person being Guilty of any of the Treasons
aforesaid, shall not be capable of, or receive benefit by any Pardon, otherwise
than by Act of Parliament wherein they shall be particularly named; and that no
Noli prosequi, or Order for stay of Proceedings shall be received or allowed
in, or upon any Indictment for any of the offenses mentioned in this Act.

And be it further Enacted and declared; and it is hereby Enacted and Declared,
that it shall, and may be Lawful to, and for any Magistrates, Officers, or
other Subjects whatsoever of these Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid; and they
are hereby enjoined and required to apprehend and secure the said James Duke of
York, and every other person offending in any of the premises, and with him or
them in case of resistance to fight; and him or them by force to subdue: For
all which actions, and for so doing, they are, and shall be by virtue of this
Act saved harmless and indemnified.

Provided, and it is hereby declared, that nothing in this Act contained, shall
be construed, deemed, or adjudged to disenable any other Person from Inh^riting
and Enjoying the Imperial Crown of the Realms and Dominions aforesaid; (other
than the said James Duke of York) But that in case the said James Duke of York
should survive his now Majesty, and the Heirs of his Majesty's Body; The said
Imperial Crown shall descend to, and be enjoyed by such person or persons
successorily during the Life of the said James Duke of York as should have
inherited and enjoyed the same in case the said James Duke of York were
naturally Dead, any thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that during the life of
the said James Duke of York, This Act shall be given in charge at every Assizes
and General Sessions of the Peace within the Kingdoms, Dominions and
Territories aforesaid, and also shall be openly read in every Cathedral Church,
and Parish Church, and Chapels within the aforesaid Kingdoms, Dominions and
Territories, by the several Respective Parsons, Vicars, Curates and Readers
thereof, who are hereby required immediately after Service in the Fore-noon to
read the same twice in every year, that is to say, on the 25th of December,
and upon Easter Day, during the Life of the said James Duke of York.

The Faction were in a Fair way, by This time, to rid their Hands of the King's
Roman Catholic Friends; and they were not without their Expedients, and
Inventions, to get shut of Reputed, The Meaning of Reputed Papists.
as well as of Professed Papists; For there needed but an Impeachment, an
Address, a Supposition, or an Opinion, to the doing of the Whole Work. The
Popish Design, they say, was [ Assisted by the Treachery of Perfidious
Protestants. Votes. Nov. 29. 1680. p. 75.
] Now Those Perfidious Protestants made Excellent Reputed Papists. [Reputed,]
and [Suspected:] By Whom? If by Themselves; the Devil's in People, if They do
not Win All they Play for, when they have the Shuffling, and the Packing of
their own Cards, and Keep-in, or Put-out as they Themselves please.

[ Resolved, That All Persons who Advised his Majesty in his Last Message to
This House to Insist upon an Opinion against the Bill for Excluding the Duke of
York, have given Pernicious Advice to his Majesty, Votes. Jan. 7. 1680.
and are Promoters of Popery, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom.]

[ Resolved, That it is the Opinion of This House, Ibid.
that George Earl of Hallifax, Henry Marquis of Worcester, and Henry Earl of
Clarendon, are Persons who Advised his Majesty, ut Supra; and that they have
therein given Pernicious Council to his Majesty, are Promoters of Popery, and
Enemies to the King, and Kingdom.] And therefore they Addressed for the
Removing of them: And when their Hands were In; Laurence Hyde, Esquire and Lewis
Earl of Feversham were to be Removed from All Offices, and from his Majesty's
Presence for Ever, and an Anathema Passed upon the Advisers of a Prorogation,
unless upon a Condition of Excluding the Duke.

I Have Chosen, rather, The Meaning of Evil Counselors.
upon This whole Matter, to Hazard an Error on the Right Hand, then on the
Left; and to venture being Over-large in my Authorities, and Proofs, rather
than fall Short. So that here is Evidence, more then Enough, of the Snares that
were laid for All men of Integrity, and Honor, and the Advantages that the
Faction intended to make of the Zeal, the Passions, and the Credulity of the
Common People. If This Pernicious Advice, in the Case of the Earl of Strafford,
and Archbishop Laud, had been given to Charles the first; which the Votes
Impute to These Honorable Persons, in the Case of the Duke of York, it had,
most undoubtedly, Saved King, Church, and People, (if his Majesty had thought
fit to follow it) which were All lost for want of Proroguing, Dissolving, and
Asserting the Privileges of the Crown, in That Turbulent Iuncture. Insolent
Demands, Expostulations, and Propositions, are the Certain Prologue to Insolent
Actions: But his Majesty Himself, was too Good to Suspect; and where ever he
Trusted any of the Party, he was Betrayed. Briefly, the Case of the Two Last
Kings were but too much Alike: Only the Latter, when he had Parted with as much
as 'twas possible for him to Spare, and Save the Rest, he Held his Hand:
Whereas his Unhappy Father, gave On, and On, 'till he left himself at Mercy.
The Thing that made the Great Noise, was the Bill of Exclusion; but [ A King or
No King,] was the Truth of the Matter in Issue. They were of [ OPINION,] that
these noble Persons did so or so, and upon That Bare Opinion, let fly at the
King's Ministers, Effectually, by Wholesale; without any respect to the
Measures of Religion, Order, Reason, or State. How many Cart-Loads of Fears,
and Iealousies have we had, lest the King should Abuse his Power! And how many
Casuistical Whimseys of Self-Preservation, in case he does: But here was no
Right, no Color, to the Pretense, of so much as bringing That Question upon
the Carpet: And the Council that they Brand for so Pernicious, was,
undoubtedly, the most Seasonable, and Saving Advice, upon That Crisis, that
could be Given. But to go forward; If they may Exclude the Heir Apparent, for
Religion, why not the King Himself too? The Parity of Excluding the Duke,
Extending to the Deposing of the Sovereign; and This Doctrine was the very
Corner Stone of the Last Rebellion. And Excluding for RELIGION is not All
neither; for it Involves a Claim of breaking-in upon the Crown, whether there
be any Religion in the Case, or No: For the Conspirators made themselves, both
Dividers, and Chusers; and Their Single OPINION, was a Sentence in the Case;
the very Saying that it was This or That Religion, or Whatsoever Religion they
pleased, was enough to Make it so. [This House is of OPINION,] went Fifty times
further, then [ Be it Enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty.]

THis Unaccountable Stretch of Arrogance, and Usurpation, The Unaccountable
Prerogative of the Commons.
put all Sober Men to a Stand, to Consider, what would be the End, in a
Natural, and a Logical Consequence, upon This Proceeding. If a Prince has not
the Liberty of Choosing his Own Servants; If he has not the Power of Protecting
them; If Subjects shall take upon them to Treat their Sovereign like a Pupil,
and turn off his Ministers like so many Footmen; because they are of [ OPINION]
that they give him This or That Advice; and that such Advice is Pernicious; If
Matters be thus Managed, what is become of the Imperial State of This
Government? Here Is Opinion, (and the Opinion of Subjects too) (without Proof,
without Power, without Prerogative, and (shortly) without any Foundation;)
Taking upon it self to give Laws to the Majesty of a Sole Governor; and if
they could have Carried That Point, it would have been as good as a Title
Gained, in the Account of the Multitude, to the Government of the Three
Kingdoms: For nothing less then the Exclusion, would serve their Turn; and the
Confounding of all Those that were Against That Exclusion: Nay, and That it
self, would not have Done, at Last, neither; as we shall see by and by. So
that, once for all, having the Modelling, the Judging, and the Discriminating
of the Friends, and Enemies of the State, Themselves, and in their Own Right;
(as they pretended) what betwixt Associating, on the One side, and Seizing,
Banishing, Disarming, Imprisoning, Opining, Suspecting, Reputing; and the Sweet
Comfortable Methods of Swearing, Hanging, and Quartering, on the Other, there
would have been little more for the Conspirators to Do, then to Kill, and Take
Possession, and to lay Violent Hands upon the King, under the Color of a
Rescue.

BUt Religion, and Loyalty, Loyalty and Religion the Pretext.
was still the Burden of the Song; A Company of Rogues, to Blunderbuss his
Majesty! Burn Protestant Cities, and Massacre Poor Innocent People! This was
the Voice that was Lifted up, and the Outcry, that Caused so much Weeping, and
Wailing among us: While the Witnesses, in the mean time, were All-to-be
Colonell'd, Doctor'd, Captain'd, and Squir d, for the Credit of the Story. It
was a most Remarkable, and an Auspicious Resolution taken, to set apart [Gods
Day,] for [Gods Cause,] (as it was Blasphemously Christened) when they
Postpon'd the Consideration of the Lord Chancellors Speech, of Apr. 30. 1679.
Time after Time, until Sunday the 11th. of May following, which was so Arrant
a Forty-One-Banter, that I presently told my Friends, without going to a
Wizzard, the very Dunstable Meaning of it; and the Plot-Leaders were so kind to
me in That, as well as in Other of my Predictions, that they made a Prophet of
me. But I shall have another Touch upon this Particular by and by.

Upon Nov. 8. 1678. They Resolved upon an Address, Journal Nov. 8. 1678.
to Desire his Majesty, that there might be [ a Particular Prayer, or Prayers
Composed for the Cities of London and Westminster, relating to the Plot, and
Conspiracy, Contrived, and Carry'd-on by the Papists, against his Majesty's
Person and Government.]

Upon Sunday the 10 th. following, they Complained [ That in the Prayer, Nov.
10. 1678.
there was no mention made of the Papists; who (says the Vote) are the
Contrivers of These Damnable and Hellish Plots, etc. And they humbly Desire his
Majesty to give Effectual Order, etc. After this, and in the Next Parliament,
they had Another Tour of Passe-Passe; of the Same Stamp with the Former; which
went a Great way toward the Moving of All Those Passions that might be
Serviceable to the Project of That Season: as will be better seen upon the
Reading of that Address it self, or, (which is all one) of Another Address for
a day of Humiliation on Nov. 25. 1680. in the Following Parliament, which
Address is within a very little of Word for Word with the Former.

[ We your Majesty's most Dutiful, etc. being Deeply Sensible of the Sad, Mar.
21. 1678. and Nov. 25. 1680.
and Calamitous Condition of This your Majesty's Kingdom; Occasioned Chiefly by
the Impious, and Malicious Conspiracies of a Popish Party, who have not only
Plotted, and Intended the Destruction of your Majesty's Royal Person, but the
Total Subversion of the Government, and True Religion Established among us,
etc. All which, Our Many and Grievous Sins have Justly Deserved: and being now
by your Gracious Favor Assembled in Parliament, etc. do, in All Humility
beseech your Majesty, that by your Royal Proclamation, one, or More Days may be
Solemnly set apart, wherein both our Selves, and All your Majesty's Loyal
Subjects, may, by Fasting and Prayer, Seek a Reconciliation, with Allmighty
God, and with Humble and Penitent Hearts, Implore him, by his Power and
Goodness, to Infatuate, and Defeat the Wicked Councils, and Machinations of our
Enemies, etc.]

Here Is just the Style of the Old Blessed Times over again; The Old
Humiliation-Stile over again.
when Days of Humiliation were used to be set apart for the Kings Success
against the Rebels. A Body would have thought by the Solemnity of the Wording
of it, that there had been Sword, Pestilence, and Famine; Earthquakes, and Fire
and Brimstone in the Case. Now Every Thing helped to Move Terror, Jealousy,
Mortal Animosities, Indignation, and Transports of Ardent, and of Vindictive
Zeal; Even to the Degree, of a Temptation to break through all the Bars of
Duty, Shame, Modesty, Conscience, and Respect: Beside, that upon the making of
God Almighty a Party to the Quarrel, Temporal Power, Thrones and Magistrates,
are no better Accounted then Dirt under the Feet of Enthusiastique Bigotts. To
Conclude; the Addresses for One Day of Humiliation, should have put the
Kingdom, Methinks, upon Petitioning for another, for the Sin of the very
Addresses: At least, if the Plot should in the End, Prove False at the Bottom.
But after all this Dust and Scuffle now, betwixt Petitioners, and Ahorrers;
True-Protestants, and Pensioners; Whigg and Tory; Observator and Trimmer, there
are several more Difficulties yet behind, to be Inquired into. It is a Thing
Evident, without Dispute, that a Prince Cannot be more Affronted, and
Endangered, then by Pinching him in his Revenue; Paring, and Cramping his Royal
Prerogative, and Power; Lessening him in his Reputation, and putting him out of
Condition of Receiving the Servic^s of his Dutiful Friends; and Those Friends
out of Condition to Support, and to Maintain the Honor, and Dignity of their
Master. Now all this has been Attempted, and Pursued with the Uttermost
Industry, and Bitterness Imaginable. But here was a Devilish Plot, it seems,
and for That Devilish Plots Sake, the Heir of the Crown must be Disinherited,
and the Roman Catholics, in a manner, Exterminated from off the face of the
Earth; and no other way in the World to Save our Prince, and our Religion, (as
the Infallible Oracle of St. Stephens Chapel gives us to Understand) but by a
Fair Riddance of all the Kings English Subjects of That Persuasion; which by
Pursuivanting, Messengering, Sergeanting, Cooping-up, Squeezing, Rifling,
Plundering, and Oppressing, they had well-nigh Effected already: Only the Late
King stuck at the Exclusion of the Duke: But however, the Faction had such an
Offer made them, by the way of a kind of Composition for the Exclusion, as
would certainly have put them into the Possession of Their Own Wishes; If they
had not been most Providentially Infatuated, into the Neglect, or Refusal of
it: to the Preservation of the Crown, the Duke, the Royal Line, and the
Monarchy it self. And here comes the Expedient.

My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons.
THat Royal Care which his Majesty has taken for the general quiet, L.
Chancellours Speech. Ap. 30. 1679.
and satisfaction of all his Subjects, is now more evident, by those new and
fresh Instances of it which I have in Command to open to you.

His Majesty has Considered with himself, that it is not enough that your
Religion and Liberty is secure during his own Reign, but he thinks he owes it
to his People to do all that in Him lies, that these Blessings may be
transmitted to your Posterity, and so well secured to them, that no Succession
in After-ages may be able to work the least Alteration.

And therefore His Majesty, who has often said in This place, that He is ready
to consent to any Laws of this Kind, so that the same extend not to Alter the
Descent of the Crown in the Right Line, nor to defeat the Succession, has now
Commanded this to be further Explained.

And to the end it may never be in the power of any Papist, if the Crown
descend upon him, to make any Change either in Church or State; I am Commanded
to tell you, that his Majesty is willing, that Provision may be made first, to
distinguish a Papist from a Protestant Successor; then so to limit, and
circumscribe the Authority of a Popish Successor in these Cases following, that
he may be disabled to do any harm.

First, In reference to the Church, His Majesty is content, that care be taken,
that all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Benefices and Promotions in Gifts of the
Crown, may be conferred in such a manner, that we may be sure the Incumbents
shall always be of the most Pious and Learned Protestants: And that no Popish
Successor (while he continue so) may have any power to Control such
Presentiments.

In reference to the State, and Civil part of the Government, as it is already
provided, that no Papist can Sit in either House of Parliament; So the King is
pleased, that it be provided too, That there may never want a Parliament when
the King shall happen to Dye: But that the Parliament then in Being, may
continue Indissolvable for a competent time; Or, if there be no Parliament in
being, then the last Parliament, which was in being before that time, may
Re-Assemble, and Sit a competent time, without any New Summons or Election.

And as no Papist can by Law hold any place of Trust, so the King is content,
that it may be further Provided, That no Lords, or other of the Privy Council,
no Judges of the Common Law, or in Chancery, shall at any time during the Reign
of any Popish Successor, be put in, or displaced, but by the Authority of
Parliament.

And that care also be taken, that none but sincere Protestants may be Justices
of the Peace.

In Reference to the Military part, the King is willing, That no
Lord Lieutenant, or Deputy-Lieutenant, nor no Officer in the Navy (during the
Reign of any Popish Successor) be put out or removed, but either by Authority
of Parliament, or of such Persons as the Parliament shall entrust with such
Authority.

It Is hard to invent another Restraint to be put upon a Popish Successor,
considering how much the Revenue of the Successor will depend upon consent of
Parliament, and how impossible it is to raise Money without such Consent. But
yet, if any thing can else occur to the Wisdom of the Parliament, which may
further secure Religion and Liberty against a Popish Successor, without
defeating the Right of Succession it self, His Majesty will most readily
Consent to it.

Thus Watchful is the King for all your safety, and if he could think of any
thing else, that you do either want, or wish, to make you happy, he would make
it his Business to effect it for you.

God Almighty Long continue this Blessed Union, between the King and his
Parliament, and People.

NOt to Descant beyond Good Manners, upon this Wonderful Offer. The Government
seemed, now, Cross or Pile, whether it should be a Monarchy, or a
Commonwealth. But all Treating, and Propounding passed with them, for Dodging:
So that they put-off the Consideration of it, Day after Day, till the 11 th. of
May following; Journal. May. 11. 1679.
and Then, upon a Sundays Uote, they came to a Resolution of having [ A Bill
brought in, to Disable the Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial Crown of This
Realm:] Which was followed with the Revenging Vote, in the Tail on it. Now this
was rather a Mockery, then an Answer; and a Proceeding, that had more of
Haughtiness, and Insolence, then of Prudence; for it was their Interest, to
have been more Mannerly and Modest: But their Business was Matter of Power, and
Command, not Grievance, and Redress; and the Kings Complyances in this Matter,
were Worse then Flat Denyals: For the more He Yielded, the Harder They Pressed
him; and the Inference was Reasonable Enough, from the Gaining of One thing
after Another, by Importunity, to the getting of All, at Last. In short, they
had set their Hearts upon the Exclusion; and their Reputations too, were so far
at Stake upon it, that the Carrying of That Point, Either way, was a kind of
Victory, on the One side, or on the Other. They had said they Would have it;
they had Tuned the People to the Expectation of it, and therefore, Have it they
Mu^t: Insomuch, that [More,] any Other way, seemed Less to 'em: For to be
Refused, and to sit down with That Repulse would have been to Lose Ground: And
they were, upon Any Terms, to Uphold the Credit of their Authority, and the
Reason of their Demands, as well as the Opinion of their Power Delays are
Hazzardous, and they were rather for One Kingdom in Hand, then Two or Three, in
Reversion, upon the Emprovement of the Project. But they reckoned without their
Host, it seems, for that Bout, and so left the Stage, and the Debate, Re
Infecta.

UPON the Meeting of the Next Parliament, Exclusion Alone would not do the
Business Votes Dec. 21. 1680.
they Opened a little Wider; Declaring in an Address of December, 21. 1680.
That, in Truth, the Exclusion Alone, would not do the Business, without an
Association to Back it. Nay, and This was not sufficient neither, for [ As some
further means (says the Same Address) for the Preservation both of our
Religion, Ibid.
and Property, We are humble Suitors to your Majesty, that from henceforth,
Such Persons only may be Judges, etc.] And so it proceeds, to the Purging, and
Regulating of Courts of Justice; the Choice of Lord-Lieutenants,
Deputy-Leutenants, and Justices of the Peace; Military Officers both at Sea and
Land: with an Express Exception all this while, to [Men of Arbitrary
Principles, and Countenancers of Papists and Popery, etc.] That is to say;
Always Excepted, Ibid.
the Pernicious Advisers of Proroguing Parliaments, and Rejecting Bills of
Exclusion: So that in fine; the Devil a Dram of Popery, was here to be found,
upon the Foot of This Account; nor any thing else, but Sedition under a Masque
of Religion, and an Impetuous, Restless Ambition, of getting Sovereign Power
into their Own Hands.

NOW the most that can be pretended, in Mitigation of this Violent, and
Unwarrantable Practice, is; that they Meant Well, A Manifest Conspiracy.
perhaps, but fai'ld in their Measures. If there was a Wheel in a Wheel as they
say, and One Plot Nurs'd-up under Another, it might be a Thing Started by the
By; and only an Advantage made, of an Occasion, Vnforeseen, without any
Previous Design. My Answer is; that This was the Case of Some, but not of
Others; And that I hold my self Bound, in Reason, Charity, and Justice, to
Distinguish betwixt 'em: That is to say; betwixt the Bare Believers, and the
Conscientious, though Mistaken Abetters of the Plot, and the Malicious
Contrivers, and Promoters of it. Of the Two Former Sorts there were a Great
many Worthy Men, and True Lovers of their Prince, their Religion, and their
Country, that upon the first Flushing-up of the Sham, fell most Unhappily into
the Snare, and these were Persons, Effectually, so Eminently Loyal, and so
Passionately Zealous for his Majesty's Safety, and Government, and for the
Protestant Religion, that they were even the Worse for it again; for their very
Character, in Concurrence with Vile Projectors, Patrons, and Witnesses, gave a
Reputation to the Imposture. Their Passions were so taken-up, with the Horror
of the Wickedness, that they did not so much Attend to the Proofs of it; and
the Detestation they had for so Hideous a Conspiracy, Blinded their Eyes, that
they could not see the Cheat: But Time brought the Truth to Light, and People
to their Wits again. This does not hinder, (though so many Good Men were led
away at First, by Plausible Appearances) but that the Foundation of This
Structure was laid in Hell, and the Treason, Deliberately Pursued from One End
of the Train to the Other. The Exclusion of the Duke, was no other, then a
Dethroning of the King; for his Majesty's Prerogative, and his Royal Highnesses
Birthright, were Both Struckat in the very Same Address. But whether This was
done Wilfully, Spitefully, and with Malice prepense, is Another Question, which
I take to be, not only Probable, in Many Respects, but Demonstratively Clear,
and Certain, in Others.

FIrst as to the Quality of the Two Cardinal Witnesses. It was Low, and Mean,
to the Degree of a Scandalous, and a Starving Poverty; The Witnesses and the
Conspiratours, agreed upon it.
and yet One of them from a Street-Beggar, and the other from a Iayle, and an
Alms-Basket, sets up for the Discovering of a Conspiracy Carried on in the
Cabinets of Princes; In the Privacies of Cloisters, and Cells, and in the
Secret Confidences of men of Honor, of the First Rank; what Forces to be
Raised; What Officers; When, and in What Manner the King was to be Murdered;
the Price of the Villainy, and Who and Who to do the Execution. How could any
man, whose Patience upon the Surprise of the First Alarm, would but give him
leave to Think, though never so Little, of the Tale, and of the Reporters of it,
Imagine, that these Scoundrells should ever come within reach, of being Privy
to this Plot, even if Every Syllable of it had been True: And that so many
Persons of Brains and Fortune, should Trust their Lives, and Estates in the
Hands, and at the Mercy of such a Brace of Varlets! Otes at the End of his
Narrative, in his List of the Conspirators, reckons up [Nine Benedictines,
Three Carmelites, Two Franciscans, Ten Dominicans, Otes'es Narrative. fol.
58.59.60.61.
Twenty Five Jesuits, All in England: Two at Liege, Five at Watton, Twelve at
St. Omers, Seven Jesuits more abroad; Twelve Scotch Jesuits, Eight Secular
Persons; two Lay-Brothers, Fourteen Secular Priests in England, which he has
but upon Enformation, he says: (as who should say, I dare not venture an Oath
upon it.) [Four other Persons; Beside Seven and Twenty Noblemen, Gentlemen, and
Officers, that had All, Commissions, whose Names (he says) did not Occur at
Present.] This is a Great Number of Conspirators, for One poor Man to give an
Account of

As to the Probity of their Life and Conversation; They came upon the Stage,
Recommended for Buggery, Perjury, and Horse-Stealing by Advance; and Notorious,
for these Evidencing Qualifications, beforehand. In their Enformations, they
Fall Foul, not only One upon Another; but upon Themselves too, and Each of them
is Felo de se, in his Self-Contradictions. Now this is a Topique, that has been
Beaten over and over, throughout the whole Course of the Observators; and a Man
might Muster-up, at least Forty or Fifty Corroborating Swearers more, of the
Same Stamp.

BUT I am now upon the Subject of the Subborners Themselves, Not the Hirelings;
For Those Men, and Matters, would never have passed Muster, Their Cross
Mediations.
if there had not been more Care taken to Cover, and Conceal the Perjury, then
to find out the Truth. Who were the Great Sticklers for Otes, and his
Accomplices, but the very Persons that were the Ringleaders of the Late
Rebellions? And who but Otes again, at all their Republican Clubs, and Cabals?
In short; Nothing could be more Palpable, then that there was a Confederate
Agreement of the Party, in Mediating for the Professed Enemies of the
Government, and Addressing against the Unquestionable Friends, and Servants of
it. Nor could that Constant Practice have any Other End in Prospect, then the
Ruin of the King, the Subversion of the Monarchy, and the Introducing of a
Commonwealth. What was the Meaning of their Vote of [ Thanks to the City of
London for their Manifest Loyalty to the King, their Care, Charge, Votes. Jan.
10. 1680.
and Vigilance for the Preservation of his Majesty's Person and of the
Protestant Religion,] But the Firing of a Gun to Call for Help, upon the
Springing of a Leake, and no body within distance to Relieve them? And then to
follow it the same Morning, Ibid.
with Another Resolved, [That it is the Opinion of the House, Ibid.
That James Duke of Monmouth has been removed from his Offices and Commands,
by the Influence of the Duke of York.] And so to [Order an Application to be
made to his Majesty from that House, by such Members thereof as were of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to desire his Majesty to Restore the
said James Duke of Monmouth to his said Offices, and Commands.] What were These
Two Votes, I say, but so much Holy Water cast away upon the D. of M. and the
City; and to do as much as in Them lay, under That Exigence, toward the
bringing of the Head, and the Body together: Briefly, they found that One Duke
was as Necessary for the King, as the Other was for the Faction, and that was
the True Ground of the Bill of Exclusion, and the Vote of Intercession. Ben.
Harris was Fined, and Pillory'd for One Treasonous Libell; Care (with his
Strange Knack) was Fined for Another, Every jot as Bad as That; And Brown for
Other Libells, the Worst of all Three. And yet These Paltry Libellers found
Powerful Friends, and Intercessors: Nay and the very Fining of them for
Sedition, was Entered upon the Charge against Sr. W. Scroggs, as One Article
Ingredient to the making up of his Treasons. Now certainly there was something
Extraordinary in it, that more then That Number of Noble Lords, should be
Declared Pernicious Advisers; Promoters of Popery, and Enemies to the King and
Kingdom, for only Joining with the King Himself in Opinion against the
Exclusion; And that the Same Persons should Arraign the One, that Brought-off
the Other: So Mortal a Sin was it accounted, in Those days, to Serve the Crown,
and the Royal Family; and so Venial a Slip, to Endeavor the Overturning of the
Government. I do not remember so much as any One Instance, that Varied from
This Rule; And never was any thing so Constant, that came by Chance. To give
These Political Operators their Due; there was Nothing Wanting to their
Purposes, that either Fraud, Industry, Confidence or Hypocrisy could Furnish.
They made the People afraid of Infallibility, and Arbitrary Power, and at the
Same Time, looked them in the very Faces, while they Assumed the One, and
Practiced the Other, Themselves; the Former, under the Authority of [ the
Wisdom of the Nation;] and the Latter, in the Right of the [Commons of
England.] For Every Vote was, in Effect, a Sentence of Law, Reason, and Power;
Sovereign, Absolute, and without Control; And it was but saying, that This or
That [ Is, at This Time, Votes. Jan. 10. 1680.
Grievous to the Subject, a Weak'ning of the Protestant Interest, an
Encouragement to Popery, and Dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom, to make the
Resolution Authentic, with a Non Obstante, of never so many Laws to the
Contrary. If a Vote say, that the King Cannot Mar. 24. 1678.
Pardon; Jan. 7. 1681.
That Subjects shall not lend him Money; Or Oxon. Mar. 26. 1681.
That the Refusal of the Lords to Proceed in Parliament, upon the Commons
Impeachments of any Peer or Commoner, for Treason, or any other Crime, or
Misdemeanour, is a Denial of Justice, and a Uiolation of the Constitution of
Parliaments.] Here Is the King, Law, and Lords Overruled, and the Votes made
Presidents; Cited, and Pleaded, for the Prerogative of the House of Commons, in
all the Clubs, or (which is the same Thing) the Peoples Courts of Justice,
throughout the Three Kingdoms: And it could not well be Other, so long as
Green-Ribbon-Committees, and Caballs, Without doors, had such an Influence upon
what passed Within; and that the Principal Managers of Otes'es Plot, were the
very Oracles that were Consulted for Direction, and Resolution upon All the
Conspiracies that were then in Agitation. These Evidences, upon the
Transactions of the House it self; drawn from the Prints, that they Themselves
Ordered to be Published, (and that were Published accordingly) as an Appeal to
the Whole World, in Justification of their Proceedings; and to Prevent False
Copies and Reports: These very Papers are the Evidences (as their Unlucky
Stars would have it) that are now Arisen in Judgment 1against them; and
Faithfully Deliver'd-over to Succeeding Times, as the Only Sure Means of
Vnriddling the Mystery of This Wonderful Intrigue: And, certainly, No better
way to let the Reader into the Secrets of This Affair, then by the Key it self,
that was Made, Originally, to the Cipher.

I Have by this Time, Traced the Likelyhoods of a Deliberated Design upon the
King, Church, Their own Votes and Papers are the best Evidences.
and State, thorough all the Steps of Probability, and Strong Presumption, up
to the Highest Degree of Certainty, and Demonstration. Were not All the Violent
Asserters of the Duke of Monmouth's Pretended Interest, and the Opposers of the
Indubitable Right of his Royal Highness, Embarked in the Same Bottom, of
Enmity to the Government, and of Kindness to the Faction? How many were there
in Both Houses, that had the Same Hearts toward the King, in a Committee of
Parliament that they had afterward, in a Clubb, or in an Army? And still,
Otes'es Plot, the Support of All their Pretenses: And what was the Countenance
of That Plot, at Last; but that the King was in Danger of being Assassinated by
the Papists; and therefore, the Posse of the Three Kingdoms was to be Raised,
to Prevent that Murder? Now whoever Believes That Story to be True, must of
Necessity, draw this Conclusion from it; That the Same People Stickled for the
Saving of the King, at Whitehall, that were for the Killing of him, in the
West: That is to say, unless they can Bear the World down, that there was No
Rebellion: Or that None of the Leading Members of Either House were Concerned
in it; but for That, there was never any thing made Plainer, then This
Affirmative; not only from the Mouths of their Confederates, but from the
Confessions of the very Parties Themselves. For the Truth of This, I may
further Remit my self to Diverse Proclamations, Declarations, and Other Acts of
State, that have been Issued out, by the Order, and Authority of the Late
Blessed King, and of his Sacred Majesty that is now in Being. But, as a
Supplemental Explanatory to All the Rest; the Paper of Association that was
found in the Late Earl of Shaftsburies Closet, (and Proved upon him, if ever
Light it self was made Manifest) That Paper, I say, may serve; without any
Violence to the Text, for a Comment upon All the Dark Passages of That History:
for it is, in the Frame, Order, and Matter of it, no other then a Compendious
Abstract of the Debates, and Resolutions that had passed the Commons upon the
business of the Plot, and the Succession: Insomuch that there is hardly a
Syllable of any Moment in the One, that is not Answered, and Echoed, in the
Other: and whoever Licked it into Form, the Project was the Cubb of a
Close-Committee, and it was kept in Reserve for a Forc'd-Put. The French Holy
League was looked upon, in those days, as a Masterpiece; but the Devil was, as
yet, a Novice. The Scotch, and English Holy League, and Covenant, came an Age
Later into the World, and Refined upon the French One; and Then, some Forty
Year after that, came the Noble Peers Association, that Out-did them Both. But
there is no Reading upon it 'till we have the Piece it self Before us, in its own
Dimensions, Words, and Colors.

The Paper which was Seized in the E. of Shaftsbury's Closet by Francis Gwin
Esquire, One of the Clerks of His Majesty's Privy Council, and Read November
24. 1681. at the Old Bailey, before His Majesty's Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer.
WE the Knights, etc. Finding to the grief of our Hearts, the Popish Priests
and Jesuits with the Papists, and their Adherents and Abetters have for several
years last past pursued a most pernicious and Hellish Plot, to root out the
true Protestant Religion as a pestilent Heresy, to take away the Life of our
Gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liberties, and to set up Arbitrary Power
and Popery.

2. And it being Notorious that they have been highly encouraged by the
Countenance and Protection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and by
their expectations of his succeeding to the Crown, and that through crafty
Popish Councils his Designs have so far prevailed that he has created many and
great Dependents upon him by his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in
Church and State.

3. It appearing also to us, That by his Influence Mercenary Forces, have been
levied and kept on Foot for his secret Designs contrary to our Laws; the
Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the apparent
hazard of his Majesty's Person, our Religion and Government, if the danger had
not been timely foreseen by several Parliaments, and part of those Forces with
great difficulty, caused by them to be Disbanded at the Kingdoms great Expense:
And it being Evident, that notwithstanding all the continual endeavors of the
Parliament to deliver his Majesty from the Councils, and out of the Power of
the said D. yet his Interest in the Ministry of State and others has been so
prevalent, That Parliaments have been unreasonably Prorogued, and Dissolved,
when they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish Conspiracies, and ill
Ministers of State their Assistants.

4. And that the said D. in order to reduce all into his own Power has
procured the Garrisons, the Army and Ammunition, and all the Powet of the Seas
and Soldiery, and Lands belonging to these Three Kingdoms to be put into the
hands of his Party and their Adherents, even in opposition to the Advice and
Order of the last Parliament.

5. And as we considering with Heavy Hearts how greatly the Strength,
Reputation and Treasure of the Kingdom both at Sea and Land is Wasted and
Consumed, and lost by the intricate expensive management of these Wicked
destructive Designs; and finding the same Councils after exemplary Justice upon
some of the Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost devilish malice,
and desire of Revenge; whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard of being
Murdered, to make way for the said D's Advancement to the Crown, and the whole
Kingdom in such case is destitute of all security of their Religion, Laws,
Estates and Liberty, sad experience in the Case, Queen Mary having proved the
wisest Laws to be of little Force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish
Prince.

6. We have therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary-way by a Bill for the
purpose to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown, and
to Banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland. But the
first Means of the King and Kingdoms Safety being utterly rejected, and we left
almost in Despair of obtaining any real and effectual security, and knowing our
selves to be entrusted to Advise and Act for the preservation of his Majesty
and the Kingdom, and being persuaded in our Consciences that the Dangers
aforesaid are so eminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the
best means that are in our power to secure the Kingdom against them. We have
thought fit to propose to all true Protestants an Union amongst themselves by
solemn and sacred promise of Mutual Defense and Assistance in the preservation
of the true Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Person and Royal State, and our
Laws, Liberties and Properties, and we hold it our bounden Duty to join our
selves for the same intent in a Declaration of our United Affections and
Resolutions in the Form Ensuing.

THE Association.
I A. B. Do in the presence of God solemnly, Promise, Vow, and Protest to
maintain and Defend to the utmost of my Power, with my Person and Estate, the
True-Protestant Religion against Popery, and all Popish Superstition, Idolatry,
or Innovation, and all those that do or shall endeavor to spread or advance it
within this Kingdom.

I will also as far as in me lies maintain and defend His Majesty's Royal
Person and Estate; as also the power and privilege of Parliaments, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, against all Encroachments and Usurpation
of Arbitrary power whatsoever, and endeavor entirely to Disband all such
Mercenary Forces, as we have reason to believe, were raised to advance it, and
are still kept up in and about the City of London, to the great Amazement and
Terror of all the good people of the Land.

Moreover I. D. of Y. having publicly professed and owned the Popish Religion,
and notoriously given Life and Birth to the Damnable and Hellish Plots of the
Papists against his Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of this Kingdom. I will never consent that the said I. D. of Y. or
any other, who is or has been a Papist, or any ways Adhered to the Papists in
their wicked Designs be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England, But
by all lawful means and by force of Arms, if need so require, according to my
Abilities, will oppose him, and endeavor to Subdue, Expel and Destroy him if
he come into England, or the Dominions thereof; and seek by force to set up his
pretended Title, and all such as shall Adhere unto him, or raise any War,
Tumult, or Sedition for him, or by his Command, as public Enemies of our
Laws, Religion and Country.

To this end we and every one of us whose hands are here underwritten, do most
willingly bind our selves and every one of us unto the other jointly and
severally, in the Bond of one firm and loyal Society or Association, and do
promise and vow before God, That with our joint and particular Forces we will
Oppose and Pursue unto Destruction all such as upon any Title whatsoever shall
oppose the Just and Righteous ends of this Association, and Maintain, Protect
and Defend all such as shall enter into it in the just performance of the true
intent and meaning of it. And lest this Just and Pious Work should be any ways
obstructed or hindered for want of Discipline and Conduct, or any evil-minded
persons under pretense of raising Forces for the service of this Association,
should attempt or commit Disorders, we will follow such Orders as we shall from
time to time receive from this present Parliament, whilst it shall be Sitting,
or the Major Part of the Members of both Houses subscribing this Association:
when it shall be Prorogued or Dissolved, and obey such Officers as shall by
them be set over us in the several Countries, Cities, and Buroughs until the
next meeting of this or another Parliament, and will then show the same
Obedience and Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it.

Neither will we for any respect of Persons or Causes, or for Fear, or Reward,
separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the Prosecution thereof
during our Lives, upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted, and
suppressed as Perjured persons, and public Enemies to God, the King, and our
Native Country.

To which Pains and Punishments we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every
one of us without benefit of any Color or Pretense to excuse us.

In witness of all which Premises to be Inviolably kept, we do to this present
Writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and admit
any others hereafter into this Society and Association.

Notes upon the ASSOCIATION.
THE Reader will find in this Paper of Association, All the Lines of the
Pretended Popish Plot; the Sum of the Whole Cause, and of all they Contended
for. It shows the Model, and Expounds the Meaning of the Design; the Manner of
Working-it-up, and the Degrees of Ripening it for Execution. It lays Open the
Rise, Progress, and Drift, of a Republican Conspiracy, Step by Step: Insomuch,
that a man may Trace out with a Chalk, the Entire Course of the Intrigue, from
the First Broaching of it to the Last Resolution, and understand, that
[Resolv'd upon the Question] had a Hand in it, as well as [Wee the Knights,
etc.] And This will Plainly Appear, upon Comparing the One with the Other.

My Next Business is, to lay open the Conformity of Parts, and the Harmony of
Design betwixt the Proceedings of the House, and the Tendence of the Paper of
Confederacy, and when I have made out That once, there will be No Separating
the Conspirators in the Votes, from [Wee the Knights, etc.] in the Association;
but they must be Both, of Necessity Involved in the same Plot.

The First Clause finds [ a Hellish Popish Plot,] agreeable to the Vote of Oct.
31. 1678. The Second finds the Duke of York in the Bottom on it: And so did a
Following Vote, some Four Days after the Former; Whereupon, I remember, there
was a Debate Started, for an Address, to Remove him. It speaks of [the Power,
and Influence of Popish Counsels, in the Disposing of Offices;] which is the
Main Topique again, of the Address of Nov. 29. 1680. And so in the Third and
Fourth Clauses; it falls upon the Illegal, [Mercenary Forces;] [Unreasonable
Prorogations and Dissolutions;] The Strength of the Nation both at Sea, and
Land, put into the hands of [ His Royal Highnesses Party, and their Adherents;]
which is no other again, then an Extract out of Several Votes, and Addresses
already mentioned. The Fifth takes a General Prospect of the Miserable
Condition of the King and Kingdom, through the Vindictive Malice of the
Papists: Which is over and over Inculcated also, in Several of their Addresses;
as in that of November 29. 1680. If so and so; [ We have Freed our selves from
the Guilt of That Blood and Desolation which is like to Ensue. Address No. 29.
1680.
] And so afterward, in that of December 21. 1680. The Question is Put; [Whether,
in case the Crown should Descend to the Duke of York; Address Dec. 21. 1680.
the Opposition which may possibly be made to his Possessing it, may not only
Endanger the Further Descent in the Royal Line, but even Monarchy it self.] In
the Sixth Clause, it sets forth, that since they cannot Prevail upon the King
to Exclude the Duke by a Bill, in [ a Parliamentary-way,] they Propose [ a
Promise of Mutual Defense and Assistance among All True-Protestants.]

[In the Preservation of the True-Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Person,
and Royal State, and our Lives, Liberties, and Properties, etc.]

These are the Words of the Preamble, The Condition of the Association.
or Introduction to the Association; which are but the very same Thing, in
Other Terms, with the Proposal of Dec. 21. 1680. in the Address it self:
Wherein they desire [ That his Majesty will be Graciously pleased to Assent to
an Act, The Conditions of the Address Dec. 21. 1680.
whereby his Majesty's Protestant Subjects may be Enabled to Associate
Themselves for the Defense of his Majesty's Person; the Protestant Religion,
and the Security of his Kingdoms: These Requests (say they) we are Constrained
humbly to make to your Majesty, as of Absolute Necessity for the Safe and
Peaceable Enjoyment of our Religion.]

So that This Association, is Parliamentary, from Head to foot, and little more
in it, then a Working upon Their Model: Only [Wee the Knights, etc.] Took Leave
in One Case, and Asked it, in the Other. I speak of the Majority of the House,
as it was then Leavened, and with Great Honor to the Loyal, and Sober Mixture
that was in That Assembly. While the Address Abovementioned, (in Answer to the
Kings Speech of the 15th of the same Month) was under Debate, the Collectour of
the Proceedings of That Season, takes upon him to Report this following
Passage, of a Speech Delivered in the House, upon That Question.

[ I cannot agree, in Pressing the Association-Bill: Coll. of Debates, p. 202.
For being it has not yet been brought into the House, we do not well know
what will be the Purport of it: And it is not Proper that we should Ask of the
King, we know not What, nor Expect that he should Grant us what He can know
nothing of: And truly Sir, I think that These Things about the Judges,
Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace, are Minute Things to be Insisted
on, at This Time, Compared with Others, which might be Demanded! Queen
Elizabeth's Councillors never thought Her Safe 'till the Popish Successor was
in a Tower; and I am afraid that you will never be Safe, until you take some
such Course, that may bring things to an Issue. When you have done That, and
Banished All the Considerable Papists out of England, I think we shall not be
in such Apparent Danger as we now are; And seeing This may Probably be Granted,
and the Other Bills Not, I humbly Move you to Recommit the Address, that it may
be better Considered.

And what is the Difference now, in Substance, betwixt the Biass of the Debate,
and the Effect of the Resolution? The Exclusion, and Association, were not let
fall, because they were Unequal, and Unreasonable; but because they were not
Attainable; and only in Exchange too, for Other Equivalent Expedients: for Such
an Imprisonment, and Such a Banishment, would have had the Force of an
Exclusion, and an Association, without the Name of it; for the Banishing of
All, on the One side, does Naturally Resolve into an Union, of All, on the
Other.

Now to put All This together; it amounts to no more then what the Prevailing
Party in the House, had Propounded, Declared, and Resolved upon, Beforehand:
Only the Kings Peremptory Refusal, put 'em upon the After-Game of Attempting to
get That by Force, which they could not Gain by Address; And it is not to be
doubted, but the Faction Acted In the House, as well as Out of the House, by
the Same Spirit. To say the Truth on it; The Conspirators that Influenced These
Desperate Designs, were Past Rubicon, long since, and No Retreat left them, but
with Halters about their Necks; if Tenderness, and Clemency it self, had not
well nigh Dissolved the Awe of Royal Power, and Justice; in the Overflowings of
That most Gracious Prince's Patience, and Mercy: But when the Ringleaders
found, that they might Ask any thing, Gratis; they never failed of following
Denyals with Importunities, and Importunities, with Expostulations; 'till, in
the End, upon a Full Trial of their Interest, and Skill, they might come to
Settle their Measures. They Reckoned upon it, that they had Two Strings to their
Bow: And that if One Failed, they had Another would Hold. They Plied his
Majesty with the most Reproachful of Libells, under the Title of Petitions,
and Addresses; and, in a Style, and Countenance of Duty, and Respect. When they
Missed of any thing at First Request, they were sure to follow it with Passion,
Instance, Menace, and Clamor: The [Monarchy it Self] could not Stand, without
Excluding the Duke; and no way to Prevent the [ Blood that was like to Ensue]
but by an Association. Address No. 29. 1680.
And in Excuse for the Liberties they took, they had recourse to [ the Trust
Reposed in them, by those they Represented.] If the King Buckles, he is Lost, by
his Own Act: If he Persists in the Negative, there is the Ruin of Religion, and
the Three Kingdoms laid at his Door. If he Yields, it must be either; to the
Right, and Reason of their Demands, or in Acknowledgment that they are too
Strong for him, which is Equally Dangerous, Both ways: To Conclude, what
matters it, whether a Prince be Lost by Treaty, or by Violence? or whether the
People be Gulled, into a Barefaced, or into a Plausible Rebellion? But at the
same time, the Common Medium that they Depended upon, to Either End, was the
Good Will, and Favor of the People: And there needed no more to Secure That
Interest; then to put their Shams Plausibly Together: And under the Color of
Zeal, for the Public, to Draw Credit to the Imposture.

At the First Opening of This Plot, Almost All peoples Hearts took Fire at it,
and Nothing was heard, but the Bellowing of Execrations, and Revenge, against
the Accursed Bloody Papists. It was Imputed at first, and in the General, to
the Principles of the Religion; and a Roman-Catholique, and a Regicide, were
made One and the Same Thing. Nay, it was a Saying Frequent in some of our
Great, and Holy Mouths; that they were Confident, there was not so much as One
Soul of the Whole Party, within his Majesty's Dominions, that was not either an
Actor in This Plot, or a Friend to it. In this heat, they fell to Picking-up of
Priests, and Jesuits, as fast as they could Catch 'em, and so went on, to
Consult their Oracles, the Witnesses, (with All Formalities of Sifting and
Examining) upon the Particulars of Place, Time, Manner, Persons, etc. while
Westminster Hall, and the Court of Requests, were kept Warm, and Ringing still
of New Men Come in; Corroborating Proofs, and Further Discoveries, etc. Under
This Train and Method of Reasoning, the Managers Advanced Decently enough to
the Finding-out of what They Themselves had Laid, and Concerted, beforehand:
And, to give the Devil his due, the Whole Story was but a Farce of so many
Parts, and the Noisy Enformations no more then a Lesson that they had much ado
to go thorough with; even with the Help of Diligent, and Careful Tutors, and
of many and many a Prompter, to bring them off at a Dead Lift. But Popery was
so Dreadful a Thing, and the Danger of the Kings Life, and of the Protestant
Religion so Astonishing a Surprise, that People were almost bound in Duty, to
be Inconsiderate, and Outrageous upon it; And Loyalty it Self, would have looked
a little Cold, and Indifferent, if it had not been Intemperate: Insomuch, that
Zeal, Fierceness, and Iealousy, were never more Excusable, then upon This
Occasion. And Now, having Excellent Matter to Work upon, and the Passions of
the People already Disposed for Violence, and Tumult, there needed no more then
Blowing the Cole of Otes's Narrative, to put All into a Flame: And in the mean
Time, all Arts, and Accidents were Improved, as well toward the Entertainment
of the Humor, as to the Kindling of it. The people were first Hayr'd out of
their Senses, with Tales, and Ielousies, and Then made Judges of the Danger,
and Consequently of the Remedy: Which upon the Main, and Briefly, came to no
more then This. The Plot was Laid, all over the Three Kingdoms; France, Spain,
and Portugal, Taxed their Quotas to it; we were All to be Burnt in our Beds, and
Rise with our Throats Cut; and no way in the world, but Exclusion, and Union,
to help us: The Fancy of this Exclusion, Spread Immediately, like a Gangrene,
over the whole Body of the Monarchy; and no saving the Life of his Majesty,
without Cutting-off every Limb of the Prerogative; The Device of Union, passed
Insensibly, into a League, of Conspiracy; and instead of Uniting Protestants,
against Papists, Concluded, in an Association of Subjects against their
Sovereign, Consounding Policy, with Religion. By these Steps, the Managers, I
remember, proceeded to the Instrument of the Association, that is now in
Question. They Labored, at first, to Sham-it-off; for the Old Queen Elsabeths
Association Revived. Secondly, That it was only the Copy of a Bill that had
passed the House of Commons: But when the Matter appeared so Foul that there
was No Defending of it, they made use of a Third Shift, to Evade the Danger,
and the Scandal, by pretending that there was No such Paper in my Lord
Shaftesbury's Closet, any otherwise, then as They that Found it there, Laid it
there: And so they Endeavored to Turn the Malice, on the One side, into a
Trick on the Other. This Last Shuffle was as well Colored as the Case would
bear; in a Paper called. [ A Letter from a Person of Quality to his Friend,
about Addresses and Abhorrers,] It was an Artificial, Sly Piece, and the Noble
Peer more then Suspected to have a Hand in it, Himself*

Now as to the First Pretext, (to say nothing of the State-Craft of the Old
Association) there was This Difference Between them; The One was to Defend the
Queen against any Pretender upon the Suggestion of a False Title; The Other,
was a Conspiracy set up against a Just, and Legal Title; the One was only to
Work at a Distance, in Case of such an Occasion; The Other was to Blow-up a
Civil War Immediately, for fear of Imaginary Dangers to Come. The One had the
Countenance of an Union against the Queens Enemies, and With her Allowance, and
Consent; The Other, was a Plot upon the Kings Brother: and Against, his
Majesty's Mind, and Consent. The One was, (in fine) a Limited Association, with
Submission to Authority; The Other, a Treasonous Usurpation, in Defyance, and
in Despite of Authority.

The Second Cavil was as good as a Gagg to many People, in That Troublesome
Conjuncture; for a Parliamentary Association in Those Days, would have been
Sacred, even against both Law, and Gospel; and therefore Those that Believed
the Flam of its being a Bill that had passed the House; (And Consequently
Asserted the Reason of the Proceeding) reckoned upon it, that they had the
Wisdom of the Nation on their side, on One hand, as they had, most Certainly,
the Folly, and the Madness of it, on the Other. Now This Opinion served for a
Protection to All that could be said, in favor of the Project, upon That Text.
But the Passing of That Bill was a Mistake, for ought that I could ever hear to
the Contrary. The King, it is True, was Pressed in it, over and over, as the
Expedient, sine qua non, for the Saving of his Life, his Crown, the Protestant
Religion, and his People. And it is Obvious to Presume, that they had Resolved
upon the Draught, the Conditions, and the Provision of it, before ever they
made any Application about it: Beside the Manifest Agreement that was between
them, upon the special Matters in Issue. But in One Instance for All. On the
24th. of Nov. 1681. There Sat at the Sessions House in the Old-Bayly, a
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, upon a Bill of Indictment, for High Treason,
against Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury. The Foreman of the Grand-Iury put certain
Questions to a Principal Secretary of State, and a Clark of the Council, that
gave Evidence there, about this Paper of Association, which coming from a
Member of the Last Westminster House of Commons, could not but carry Great
Weight. i. e. [Do not you know, Sir, or have not you heard of a Discourse,
Proceedings at the Old-Bayly, London, upon the Bill of Indictment for
High Treason against Anthony E. of Shaftsbury. p. 34.
or Debate, in the Parliament concerning an Association? Do not you remember in
the House of Commons, Sir, it was Read upon Occasion of That Bill?] This
Question made many People think, that the Noble Peer, and the Plot-Managers in
That House of Commons, were upon the Same Bottom; and that the Former was only
to Execute, what the Other had Contrived; which was no more, in Truth, then the
Execution of his Own Purposes, and Designs: For his Lordships Head, Heart, and
Purse, were in at both Ends of the Business.

The Third Evasion was Immediately Blown off by Proofs under Mr. Wilson's Own
Hand, over and over, (a Servant of Great Trust in the Family) to make Good that
the very Paper of Associations, which was Produced at the Old-Bayly, was found
in my Lords Closet, according to the Depositions.

There can be no Doubt in the World, from what is already said, but that the
Knight-Voters, and the Knight-Vndertakers, as to the Business of the
Association, were Both of a Mind; and that there was little Difference betwixt
the One and the Other, more then that the One Cut out the Work, and the Other
made-it-up. So that if it was an Ill Thing in One, it was so in Both, and
whether it was so or not, is now to be Inquired into; and first, upon the
General.

THere was a very Loyal Declaration from the Middle Temple, Presented to his
Late Majesty by Mr. Saunders, (afterward Lord-Chief-Iustice of the
King's Bench) upon This Subject. I cannot bring an Instance, of more Honor, or
Greater Authority, toward the Confounding of This Association, then That Paper,
nor an Address more Pertinent to My Purpose, or Better Warranted, both in Law,
and Reason.

[ OUR Sense of That Execrable Paper, Middle Temple Declaration, See Ob. 106.
Vol. 1.
Purporting the Frame of a Traiterous Association, produced at the Late
Proce^dings against the Earl of Shaftsbury at the Old-Bayly, We do therefore
Declare it our Opinion, that the same Contains most Gross, and Apparent
Treasons, more Manifestly tending to the Ruin of your Majesty's Dominions then
the Old, Hypocritical, Solemn League, and Covenant, which they that were
Seduced to take, are no more bound to keep, then he that should Swear to
Murder his Father is Obliged to Commit the Parricide.

And it is most Evident to us, that whoever promoted That Rebellious
Association Designed by the said Paper, or Countenanced the Same by Refusing
upon the Full Evidence, to find Bills of Indictment against the Authors and
Promoters thereof, and thereby as much as in them lay, Preventing their being
brought to a Fair Trial, have, in a High Measure, Perverted the Laws: And could
have no other Design thereby, then to Vsurp to Themselves, an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Dominion, not only over your Subjects, but over your Majesty also.]

I Shall proceed now to the Dissecting of it, and see, if the Particulars be
not as Foul upon the Retayle, as the Whole has been here Represented, in the
Lump, and in Gross. The Ground of it is a Popish Plot: The Preservation of the
King, Religion, Laws, and People, are set forth to be the Intent of it: So that
by an Orderly Examining of One Thing after Another, it will be Easily seen, how
far the Means here Propounded, will Answer the End.

Notes upon the Association.
[WE the Knights, etc.] in the Preface, Signifies, in the Uow, and Promise,
[the Major Part either of This Present Parliament, while Sitting, or of the
Members of Both Houses, Subscribing This Association, when Prorogued, or
Dissolved.] And what is This Majority to Do now? [ To Defend and Assist one
Another In the Preservation of the True-Protestant Religion, His Majesty's
Person, and our State, and our Laws, Liberties, and Properties.] And Against
Whom, are they to Defend, and Assist: [Against Popish Priests, and Jesuits,
with the Papists, and their ADHERENTS, and ABETTERS.] That same [ Adherents,
and Abetters] goes a Great way; and needs Another Explanation: But what is the
Quarrel now? [A most Pernicious and Hellish Plot;] to Destroy All, that the
Associators have, by Solemn, and Sacred Promise, Engaged Themselves, to
Preserve. And now for the [ Adherents, and Abetters; Of ADHERENTS and ABETTERS.
] There are Several Sorts of them. There are the Plotters Themselves; the Duke
of York; the Mercenary Forces, (alias, the Guards;) The Officers that the Dukes
Interest has brought in, both by Sea, and Land; and [ All that HAVE ANY WAYS
Adhered to Him, or Them:] And [ All such as SHALL Adhere unto Him.] So that
here is an Association against the King Himself, for Adhering unto his Brother;
and Consequently, against All the Kings Loyal Subjects; for Adhering to Him,
that Adhered to his Royal Highness; which is only a Degree or Relation of
Adherency once Removed. But How now is This same Adherency to be Understood?
What is it that is here Called an Adherency? And how far does it Extend? Any
man that shall [Seek by Force to Set up the Duke's Pretended Title; or raise
any War, Tumult, or Sedition for Him, or by his Command] Or that [upon any
Title whatsoever, shall Oppose the Just and Righteous Ends of This
Association;] Or in fine [that shall ANY WAYS Adhere;] (which is an Unlimited
Latitude; and reaches to Thought, Word and Deed) That Man is an Adherent.
Allways Provided, God Save the King, I hope. No No. Without [any Respect of
Persons, or Causes] It Is against [ the Duke of York, or any other, that has
any ways Adhered to the Papists in their wicked Designs:] So that This League
is as Particularly Levelled at the King, for Refusing to pass a Bill of
Exclusion, as the Votes of Ian. 7. 1680. was at the Noble Lords there, for
Advising the King to Refuse it. Well! Again: And What Course is to be Taken at
last, with These Papists and Adherents? Why the Associators will [Endeavour
Entirely to Disband All Mercenary Forces] They will [by all Lawful Means, and
by Force of Arms, if need so require, Oppose the said Duke of York; and
Endeavor to Subdue, Expel, and Destroy him, if he comes into England, and All
such as shall Adhere unto him.] They will also [with their Joint and Particular
Forces, Oppose, and Pursue unto Death and Destruction, All such] as aforesaid.
But what are these same [Ioynt and Particular Forces,] they speak of? Whence do
they Come? Who Raises them? Who Leads 'em? By What Authority, by What Law, is
all this done? The People are [To follow such Orders as they shall from time to
time Receive from This Present Parliament, while Sitting; and the Major Part of
it, when Prorogued, or Dissolved; and to Obey such Officers, as shall be set
over them, by the Authority aforesaid.] And This they do [Knowing Themselves to
be Entrusted, to Advise, and Act for the Preservation of his Majesty, and the
Kingdom; and being persuaded in their Consciences, that the Dangers are so
Eminent, and Pressing, that there ought to be no Delay of the Best means that
are in their Power to Secure the Kingdom against them.]

WHat is all this now, but King, The Intent, and Effect of the ASSOCIATION.
Monarchy, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties and Properties, Cut Off at a Stroke?
The Papists Destroyed, under the Color of a Plot; the Duke, as the Head of the
Papists; the King, as an Adherent to the Duke: The King's Friends, for their
Fidelity to their Master; the Laws Overruled by a Uote; The Oath of Allegiance
made Void* by a Subscription to an Association: Kingly Government Sunk into a
Commonwealth. One Part of the Two Houses Enslaved to the Other: And this [
Just and Pious Work, (as they Call it) Is, in the Presence of God set a-foot
for the Preservation of the True-Protestant-Religion; His Majesty's Person, and
Royal State, Our Laws, Liberties, and Properties:] And this to be Pursued by
the Subscribers [During Life] too, [ upon pain of being by the Rest Prosecuted
and Suppressed, as Perjured Persons, and Public Enemies to God, their King,
and their Native Country.] Here Is in One Breath, an Oath that Makes them All
This, and an Oath that They will Never be Other. This Paper Begins with an
Oath, [Against] a Conspiracy, and Concludes with an Oath [Of] Conspiracy. It
begins with an Exclamation against Jesuits, Priests, and Papists, and Ends in
the Dissolution of King, Lords, and Commons. Upon the Whole, it speaks, neither
More, nor Less, then the Sense, the Design, and (within a little of) the very
Syllables of the Votes Themselves: And to say all in a Word; the One is but the
Model, or the Minutes of the Other.

THere was likewise found among my Lord Shaftsburies Papers (as I have formerly
Noted in some of my Writings) a Book of the Several Counties of England,
Worthy-MEN and Men-WORTHY.
Ranged in Alphabet; under the Heads of [ WORTHY MEN,] on the One side, and [
MEN WORTHY,] on the Other, which was Intended, and Made use of, for a
Discriminating List of the Royalists, and the Republicans. Under the Cipher of
[Men Worthy,] was Couched the Con^eit of Men Worthy to be Hanged. Now the
Probable Advantage that they intended to make of This Distinguishing Register,
(if Rightly Understood) may serve to give some Light to the Dark, and
Mysterious Part of the Oxford-Plot, upon the King's Person, The Mercenary
Forces, and the Papists Adherents, in the Style of Those Times. By the Virtue
of This Roll, and Distinction, at hand, they could, any time, at a Week, or Ten
days Warning, Flush-up an Universal Plot; Get it Authenticated upon the Oaths
of Half a dozen of the Sons of Belial that they had in Pay; Put All the
Considerable Men in the Kingdom, into the Catalogue, and File it at last, to
the Account of the Conspirators, [whose Names did not Occurr at present, Otes
Narrative Fol. 58.
] to Otes upon his Calculation of his Narrative. A Thousand ways might have
been Contrived, by giving a Hot Alarm; to have taken 'em All in their Beds
before they were aware: And at the Same time, to Beset the King with Petitions
upon their Knees, to give 'em leave to Provide [for the Preservation of his
Majesty's Person, and Royal State] to the Tune of the Association. There would
have been no more Need of Voting the Duke to be Banished, or the King's
Ministers, to be [Remov'd from his Majesty's Counsels and Presence for ever;]
but there would have been Downright Commitments, and Impeachments; and more
Work for One Poor Executioner, then Twenty Dextrous Knaves could have Turned
their Hands to. Three or Four Home-Oaths, and Warrants, Immediately Dispatched
away for the Seizure of the Conspirators, would have left the Government at
Mercy. Nothing can be Clearer, I think, then that the Oxford Plot was a Branch
of the Capital Design: And that by the Help of Shaftsbury's List, they might
have Infinitely Facilitated their Work. Now, if it be Reasonable to Believe,
that This was a Course to turn to Account; it is As Reasonable to Believe, that
they Intended to make Use of it, and Improve it as the Best Means they had
Before them. There needs no more toward the Satisfying of any man, over and
above the Evidence, in the Foundation, and Truth of the Oxford-Design; then to
Consider, how the Whole Faction were Startled at the Summons Thither; and the
Pressing, the Importune, nay and the Menacing Instances of Application to his
Majesty that the Meeting might be at Westminster. These Considerations upon the
Noble Peer's Book, and the Oxford Conspiracies, may seem to be a Digression;
but whoever duly Weighs them, will find that they hang All on a String, and are
only Several Members of the Same Plot.

Reflections upon the Whole.
I Shall now pass some Necessary Reflections upon the Whole. There never was,
perhaps, since the Creation of the World, so much Confusion Wrought, by so
Mean, so Scandalous, and so Ridiculous Instruments; Lowzy, Greazy Rogues, to be
taken into the Arms of Princes: Porters, and the Coursest of Letter-Carryers,
to be made the Confidents of Public Ministers: Starving Indigent Varlets,
that had not Credit in the World, for a Brumigen Groat, and lived upon the
Common Charity of the Basket, to be a matter of Seven Hundred Pound out of
Pocket, in his Majesty's Service; as Otes and Bedloe pretended. Sots, to find
Treason, in Words, at length, in Common Post-Letters. The Four Ruffians to have
but Twenty Pound a Man, for Murdering the King by Assault, and Sir George
Wakeman, Fifteen Thousand Pound, only for Poisoning him, without running the
Fifteenth Part of the Risque; Nay and Bedloe, Fifteen Hundred Pound for but
Lending a Hand to the Helping away of a Dead Justice. These, and a Thousand
Incredibilities more, must be All Believed, or the Witnesses found to be most
Damnably Forsworn; Unless it were for the Evidences sake that they had Credit
given 'em; for the Matter of (...), under Such Circumstances, was Morally
Imp^^^ble to be True; And for the Probity of the Witnesses, they were already
as well known as the Whipping Post, for a Pack of Swearing, Lying, Cheating; a
Prostitute, and an Abandoned Sort of Mercenary Villains: And yet such was the
Infatuated Credulity of the Common People at that Season, and such the Bold,
and Shameless Hypocrisy of the Managers of That Imposture, that there was no
Place, for either Truth, or Honesty to Appear. The Inference I draw from This
Preposterous way of Proceeding, is, that the Whole Story, from End to End, was
a Practice; that the Suborners of the Perjury, were also the Protectors, and
the Patrons of it Both under One: And that they had their Accomplices in the
House of Commons, upon This Crisis of State, that played the same Game which
their Forefathers had done upwards of Forty Years before.

The Earl of Shaftsbury a Busy Man in our Late Troubles.
BUt after the History of the Wickedness of These People, The Character of the
Late E. of Shaftsbury.
it will be Needful to look a little into the Woe they Wrought us; Or at
least, to Compute upon the Calamitous Infelicities of That Season, and Whence
they took the^r Rise. The Man knows little of the Histo^y of Our Troubles,
that is a Stranger to the Life, Practice, and Character of the Late Earl of
Shaftsbury; who had the Wit in All Changes and Revolutions of State, still to
Turn Tail to the Weather, and Swim with the Tide. And he did This too, by
Nature, as well as by Application; for, beside the Advantages of a Mercurial
Humor, a Ready Tongue, And a Dext'rous Address, he had none of Those Vulgar
Bars upon him, of Honor, Shame, or Conscience to put any Checque to the
Impetuous Course of his Ambitious Lusts: I am not upon the Story of his Life;
but it shall serve My Purpose, to say, that thorough All the Usurpations, from
Forty to Sixty, he came Sailing down still before the Wind; and so from that
time forward, steered by the same Compass.

ON November 17. 1672. His Lordship being already Chancellor of the Exchequer,
His Manage and Practices.
and one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, was further Advanced, by
his Majesty to the Keeping of the Great Seal, with the Title of Lord
Chancellor of England: And upon the 8th of November 1673. He was Discharged of
That Commission. Upon the Opening of the Parliament Feb. 5. 1672. His Lordship,
in a Large and Elegant Speech, Blesses God, and the King, as follows.

LEt us Bless God that he has given us such a King: Chancellou^ Shaftsbury's
Speech. Feb. 5. 1672.
to be the Repairer of our Breaches both in Church, and State, and the Restorer
of our Paths to dwell in; That in the midst of War, and Misery, which Rages in
our Neighbors Countries, our Garners are full, and there is no Complaining in
our Streets, etc. Let us Bless God that he has given This King Signally, the
Hearts of his People, and most Particularly of This Parliament.

Let us Bless the King, for taking away All our Fears, and leaving no room for
Jealousies; for those Assurances and Promises he has made us.

Let us Bless God and the King, that our Religion is Safe; That the Church of
England is the Care of our Prince; That Parliaments are Safe; That our
Properties and Liberties are Safe. What more has a Good Englishman to Ask, but
that This King may Long Reign, and that This Triple-Allyance, of King,
Parliament, and People, may never be Dissolved.

HIs Lordships Matters, as yet, went Merrily on, A great Stickler for the TEST,
EXCLUSION, etc.
and his Good Humor kept pace with his Good Fortune: But so soon as ever the
Wind came about, All these Blessings were thrown over the Left Shoulder: The
Clouds began now to Gather, and soon after, Discharge themselves in a Storm,
upon Papists and Public Ministers. In This Mood they brought-on the Bill
about the Test, whereof Andrew Marvel (for the Honor of his Noble Patron)
gives This Account. The Parliament having met the 5th. of Feb. 1672. [ Prepared
an Act before the Mony-Bill Slipped thorough their Fingers, Growth of Popery. p.
39. and 40.
by which the Papists were Obliged to Pass thorough a New State-Purgatory to be
Capable of Any Public Employment.] [Vpon this Occasion it was, that the Earl
of Shaftsbury, though then Lord Chancellor of England, yet Engaged so far in
Defense of That Act, and of the Protestant Religion, that in due time it Cost
him his Place, and was the First Moving Cause of all Those Mis-adventures, and
Obloquy, which since he lies (ABOVE, not) UNDER.]

IT deserves a Note, the Libellous Deduction Marvel gives the World of the
Kings Administration of Affairs, Inconsistent with Himself.
as well Before, as After This Celebrated Exploit of my Lord Shaftsbury's, in a
flat Contradiction to his Lordships Character of the King, and to his Report of
the Happy, the Safe, and the Peaceable State of the Government. For whoever
reads That Pamphlet, will find it only an Artificial Scandal, and Imposture,
Cast-out to the Multitude, upon set Purpose to make his Majesty Odious to his
People. One would have thought, that the Gaining of the Test-Bill should have
set their Hearts, a little at Ease; but That was not sufficient, without
calling for [ Fast upon Fast] [Raising the Militia, Feb. 7. 1673.
] [Voting down the Guards;] Enquiring into Public Grievances, etc. which
being Said, and Done, with a Noverint Vniversi, in the Eyes, and Ears of the
Nation, is all one, in many Cases, with Ringing the Bells Backward, and Firing
the Beacons, as if the Town were a Burning, or an Enemy Landed, and as far as
Black Heath in their March to London. And all, upon the Old, and Everlasting
Ground of Jealousy, and Apprehension still; That is to say, Address Nov. 3.
1673.
BECAUSE [The Restless Practices of Popish Recusants threatened the subversion
both of Church and State.]

The Wheel was now in Motion, and they drove like Iehu, 'till they Dropped at
last into Otes's Bottomless Plot.

Shaftsbury had been a long time at the Trade of Fast and Loose; More of his
Character.
and what with Industry, Craft, Malice, and Experience, the Fittest Man
perchance in the Three Kingdoms, to be the Head of a Faction. And he was the
Fitter for it, because his very Inclination prompted him to Mischief, Even for
Mischiefs sake. It was his Way, and his Humor, to Tear All to pieces, where he
could not be the First Man in Business Himself. And yet All this while, his
Faculty, was rather a Quirking way of Wit, then a Solidity of Judgment; and he
was much Happier at Pulling-down, then at Building-up. In One Word; He was a
man of Subtlety, not of Depth; and his Talent was Fancy, rather then Wisdom.
His Arts were Popular, and after All his Politiques, he was as great an
Hypocrite in his Understanding, as in his Manners; But the Best Incendiary yet,
upon the Face of the Earth: for he had an Excellent Invention, and a Protesting
Face, without either Faith, or Truth. Now when the Common People are to be
Cozened, One Imposture puts off Another, and False Conclusions follow
Naturally, upon False Premises. This is the Brief of his Character, from those
that knew, and understood him Best; and a man cannot do Right to the History,
without giving the Next Age a True Account of a Person that had so Great a Hand
in the Confusions of This: It Is with the Mobile, as with the Waters; the very
Blowing upon them, makes them Troublesome, and Dangerous; and in the End, to
Overflow their Banks. His Author sets him forth, as the Great Advocate, and
Champion for the Bill of the Test, and makes him, Effectually a Martyr, for the
Meritorious Services he did in That Act, both to Church, and State. It is most
Certain, that he was a great stickler in it; and it is No less Certain, that he
was afterward, as Violent for the Bill of Exclusion; and for Stripping the
Roman-Catholique Lords, and Commons, of the Undoubted Privileges of their
Birthright; Nay, and of the Common Benefits of Life, Liberty and Property;
either as Reasonable Creatures, or as Members of a Political Body. As to his
Protestant Zeal; All the world knows that he was not a man to Burn at stake,
for his Religion; and if he Proposed to himself the same End, in what he did
for the Test, and what he did, some years after, for the Plot, the Association
and Exclusion, he had undoubtedly in his eye, the Ruin of the King, the Duke
of York, and the Monarchy, from First to Last; and Designed the One, as well as
the Other, for an Expedient toward the Gaining of his Point. It looks unluckyly
too, that Marvel should, with the same Breath, so much Extol, both the Lord,
and the Project: for his Whole Book, is a Train of Scandal upon the King, and
of Treason, against him, from End to End. The Scribler and the Peer were Both
Men of Parts, They Knew what was for their Turn, and what Not; and it was
Impossible for any thing to please them, in Government, that was not Pernicious
to the State. This appeared abundantly by the Sequel: For Marvels Pamphlets,
and This Peers Practices, were the Main Incentives and Encouragements to the
Following Rebellions. To Close This Head; It was the Removal of the Lord, it
seems, that brought on the Desperate Apprehensions of Popery; for, in one and
the same Year, his Lordship found no Danger of it at All; and yet No Living for
Fear on it; without any Visible Cause of Change Intervening. Now when Another
Generation shall come to look into the Hurry, and the Distraction of These
Times, they cannot but in Reason, presume, that there was some Mighty Business
in it, to Produce such Wonderful Effects: Little Imagining, that Otes's Popish
Monstrous Snake in the Grass, should be found at last to be but a Glowworm: But
now to the State of the Kingdom, upon the coming of This Blasphemous Savior of
the Nation, into the World.

A Short View of the Miseries that this Plot brought upon us.
I am at a loss, in the Infinite Variety of Miseries that I have now before me,
Where to Begin. Here Is Soul and Body, Life, Liberty, and Estate; Peace of Mind,
Religion, Reputation, Charity, Truth, and Justice; All, in fine, that can be
Dear to a Nation, to a Christian, or to a Man; to the Present Age, or to
Posterity; All This, I say, at stake, and All these Privileges, Interests,
Rights, and Duties, Swallowed up in a Licentious, and Abandoned Contempt, and
Violation of All Obligations, Sacred, and Profane.

How many People had we, that under the Temptations of Fear, In Soul and Body.
Avarice, Malice, Revenge, Envy, Ambition, Sold themselves to Work Wickedness:
played the Hypocrites with God and the King; and Betrayed them Both, under the
Masque, of Loyalty, and Religion! How many Instances had we, of people that had
no Other Choice before them, but either to Hang, or Damn: and of Persons that
made their Election, some the One way, and some the Other! Only so much Money
Cast-in on the Swearing-side, as if it had been upon an Estimate, betwixt the
Body, and the Soul, to make the Scales Even. And so much for Soul and Body. Now
to Proceed.

How many Lives taken away by Perjury and Subornation; In Life.
And what Security had Any man for his [ Life,] when the Kingdom ran as Quick
of False Witnesses, as a Cony-Warren of Rabbets, and Every man's Breath lay at
the Mercy of a Couple of Reprobated Villains!

Where was the Freeborn Subjects [Liberty, In Liberty.
] When the Kings Witnesses were only the Re-publicans Beagles, to Draw
Dry-Foot, to the Door of Every Honest, or but Suspected Honest Man: When
Priest-Hunters, and Prince-Hunters, were One and the Same sort of People? What
an Intelligence was there betwixt the Evidences, and the Catch-Poles? When
Knights of the Post made More Rogues, then the Government had provided Prisons
to Receive them: When the English of [ Resolved upon the Question,] was only [
Take him Iaylor.] When Mittimus-es ran without Cause shown, and Commitments, as
Arbitrary as their Keepers-Fees. When men were Taken-up, and Spirited away,
without Warrants, and made Slaves contrary to Law.

What Title had any man to his [ Estate, In Estate.
] when a Pair of Affidavit-Sparks, (Matched like Indentures,) could Swear him
Out on it? When Guinneys passed for Popish Medalls; Crucifixes for the Relics
of Superstition: Choice, and Historical Pictures, in Honor, and Memorial of
the Christian Profession; When These Paintings, I say, went for the Remains of
Idolatry? When Ordinary Drinking-Plate passed for Chalices; and men were
Rifled, Robbed, and Undone, by the Basest of Felons, under the Masque of Zeal,
and Conscience? This was Undenyably, our Condition, in the Matters of Life,
Liberty, and Estate.

In Peace of Mind.
Now to the Next Point, of [Peace of Mind.] What could be more Miserable, then
to live in Perpetual Fears, Ielousies, Frights, and Alarums? In fear, for the
Kings Life; the Protestant Religion; The Peace of the Government, Tyranny,
Popery, Slavery. In Fear for Souls, Bodies, and Fortunes, Fires, Massacres,
Portugal-Black-Bills, and Smithfield-Faggots; In Fear of All that it was
Possible for us to Lose, or to Suffer; and under an Incurable Jealousy of our
Governors, and our Friends, that they meant to Betray us, and to bring All
These Evils upon us? And so for Frights, and Alarums. Our Danger was to come
from All Quarters of the Heavens. College Searches the Cellars in the
Palace-Yard, for fear of Gunpowder. There was the Black Heath Army; The
Purbeck-Invasion; the City-Guards to be Doubled; Shaftsbury, and Tongue to be
Murdered, as Godfrey was: And what did they say, for All This now? Why! the
Pulpits are Wise; and They tell of Squibbs, and Fireballs, to make Sport for
the Philistines. Such a Lord sat up all night, with his Pistols and
Blunderbusses about him, for fear of a Rising. The House knew what they Did,
when they Voted the Guards to be a Grievance, and the Militia to be Raised at a
Days Warning. What (Peace of Mind) could there Be; or rather, What Horror of
Thought, did not they Endure, that lived under the Continual Agony of These
Terrors.

Neither were we one jot more at Ease in the Matter of [ Religion; In Religion.
] for they Belied the very Religion that they pretended to; and the Practices
of the Faction, ran directly Counter to All the Precepts of the Gospel.
Treachery was called Truth, and Faith. Slander was only Liberty of Speech:
Perjury, was Hallowed by the Lips and Credit of a Kings-Evidence. Forgery (if
Detected) was but a Mistake, Rebellion, a True Protestant Association: A
Shamm-Narrative, passed for the Discovery of a Damnable Hellish Popish Plot;
and the People were Stir d-up, and Instructed to Hate, and Persecute the
Papists, in Despite of the Evangelical Precept, that bids us [ Love one
Another.] Subornation was Authorized under the Title of Reward; Murder was
recommended under the Varnish of Public Justice. Atheism was a kind of a
Qualification for a man of Interest, in This Matter, because, they were to Talk
of God, and at the same Time, make a Mock of the Belief of any such Power; and
it was Requisite, that the Hardness of their Hearts should be Proof against the
Sense of Divine Vengeance, and Justice. There was no Room left for Christian
Charity, when Every Papist was to Suffer for the Principles of his Party; and
when they could Make Those Principles to be whatever Themselves pleased. In All
their Holy Leagues, Vows, Covenants, and Associations, they have This to say
for Themselves, that the Hypocrite is of No Religion; and Consequently, that [
The lifting up of their Hands unto the Lord,] and their Solemn Promises [In the
Presence of God;] are of No more Force upon people, that do not Acknowledge a
God, then the Oath of a Jew upon the Four Evangelists.

In Reputation.
In the Matter of Reputation; How have we Lost our selves, at Home, and Abroad,
by Believing Things, (upon Second Thoughts) Incredible, and [ Believing] too;
upon the Testimony of Known Falsaties, and Blasted Criminals! By setting the
Evidence of Common Hirelings and Scoundrells, against the Character, the Tried
Faith, Integrity, and Incontestable Loyalty, of Men of Honor! The King, the
Queen, the Duke, and so many other Illustrious Persons, on the One side, to be
Confronted by Miscreants, on the Other; not to be Named in the Same Page! How
have we Exposed the Dignity of our very Profession, to make it a Point of
Conscience to work so Great a Villainy! An Instance of our Zeal, to Pursue it
into so many Barbarous Extremeties; and, which is more then All; to cast a
Protestant Cover over One of the Lewdest Impieties that ever was under the Sun,
and to make it an Impulse of our Religion, which was only a Perjurious
Conspiracy of State! It has Lost us to the Present Age thoroughout the
Christian World; for the King received not so much as one Complement of
Gratulation, from any of the Foreign Ministers, for his Deliverance; which
would have been Otherwise, if any of them had Believed it! It leaves us Exposed
likewise, to Aftertimes; Especially, Considering that so great Care has been
taken by Some for the Transmitting of the Imposture; and so Little, by Others,
for the Propagating, and Confirming of the Truth.

And now again we are as much Lost in the Offices of Charity, Truth, In Charity,
and Justice. This Plot has turned Religion into a Faction; and the Animosity
which it has begot in us toward Roman Catholics, has utterly Extinguished the
Love, and Veneration, we Owe to Christianity it self.

As to the Next Point; Truth
Truth and Falsehood have Changed Places; and, according to the Mode of the
Times, the very Quality of it is Inverted too. [ Truth] is Ridiculing the
Witnesses; Invalidating the Plot; Arraigning the Justice of the Nation; and
Popery in a Disguise; whereas Falsehood, or Perjury is a Thing to Bless God for;
a Miraculous Discovery; a Subject to beg a Pension upon; a Wonderful Service to
the Protestant Religion; and what was This Plot at last; but a Blasphemous
Slanderous Imagination, made up of Lies and Contradictions? as I shall set
forth by and By.

And Justice.
Now, over and above all the Rest; How was the Justice of the Nation, Abused,
and Impos'd-upon by the Trumperies of Confederacy, and Practice; even to the
Confounding of Right, and Wrong; Good, and Evil; and Inverting the very Order,
and Equity of Reward, and Punishment! How many Innocent Men were Clapt-up, and
Kept, upon Unconscionable Expense, 'till all they had left in the World was
little enough to Clear the Charge of the Prison: without Any Cause Assigned;
without ever being brought to know their Accusers, or their Accusation; and
forced to Content themselves, (upon their Humble Petition) with the Hope of a
Merciful Vote, in the Conclusion, for their Discharge, [Paying their Fees]
without any Reparation; while Suborners, and False-Witnesses, Pestered the
Lobbys Barefaced, with their Crimes as Open, as if they had been Writ in their
Foreheads: So Sacred was Villainy, and so Hazardous was it for any man to do his
Duty. It Is true, that upon the First Springing of this Cause, a man might for
want of Judgment, Thought, or Foresight, Charitably, and Innocently enough be
Misled, or Mistaken. The Evidence was Positive, and Bold; the Fact Horrid; so
many Conspirators of Quality, to Countenance the Tale, and Formalities of the
Law, in favor of the Witnesses: But yet afterward, when the Masque came to be
Taken off, and the whole Web of the Villainy to be Vnravel'd; the Justice of the
Nation did Then Suffer, I say, in the Opinion of the World, for not doing
Immediate Right upon these Miscreants, to a Distracted State, and People: to
the Orphans, and the Widows, that these Forsworn Wretches had made, and to the
Innocent Blood that cried for Vengeance. It gave them some sort of Reputation,
to let 'em Triumph so long in their Wickedness; Insomuch, that a Friend of mine
Burnt his Fingers in the Case of Otes, even for bringing the Bear to the Stake,
at Last. Why This will Destroy the whole Plot, they Cried, as if the leaving of
a Nest-Egg would have been such a Comfort to the Nation. I speak, in This
Place, rather of Public, then of Private, and Personal Justice; for the
Indignities they put upon the Government, were Infinitely above the Injuries,
of here and there a Member of it: for they Swore the Monarchy it self to Death,
as well as the Papists. They Embroiled the Order, and they Unsettled the
Foundations of it. Under Color of Securing the Kings Person, they Cramped his
Prerogative; and took away peoples Inheritances for fear of their Religion: How
many Incapacities and Disabilities have we seen Created upon the Same Score?
Now I take the Reason of the Case, The Case holds betwixt a Cheat at Play, and
a Cheat of State.
betwixt a Private Cheat, and a Public, to be much the Same. If a man Wins my
Money by False Dice, and I can Prove it, I Will have my Money again: and why
should not this Equity hold as well now, in the Case of a Factions getting any
thing from a Government, by the Help of False Witnesses. There Is a Plot
Affirmed, Warranted, and Sworn. We shall lose our Prince, they Cry, our
Religion, Laws, Lives, and Liberties, unless we have such and such Powers put
into our hands, to Prevent, or to Disappoint, the Danger. The Yielding, on the
One side, is, in Confidence, and upon Condition of such a Desperate Plot, on
the Other. Now if there be No Plot, there is No Bargain: Nay, and it is a Worse
Matter Yet; if what was Demanded for a Security against One Devilish Plot,
shall Appear Evidently to be Intended, and Applied, toward the Promoting, and
the Strengthening of Another. A Lapidary sells me at a Horrible Price, That
which He Warrants for a Ruby of the Old Rock; I Buy it of him accordingly. Now
if it prove afterward, to be only a Past, or a Doublet; My Remedy is good
against him. But shall Equity Relieve a Private Man, in a Cheat of Trade, and
will there lie No Relief, for a Whole Politic Body, against a Cheat of State?
Especially, where there is Mischief, and Premeditate-Malice, Super-added to the
Fraud: That is to say; where the Pretended Means of Preserving the King, are
Meant, and Improved for his Destruction. In such Instances as these, Common
Justice requires that Matters may be put into the State they were in, Before;
for otherwise, it will lie in the Power of a Brace of Prostitute Knaves, to
Swear the Government off the Hinges. To Conclude; This Impious Dissolution of
Faith, and Good Manners, made the Kingdom as Miserable, as 'twas possible to
be, without Plague, Sword, Pestilence, and Famine; and All, Charged upon the
Account of the Papists, by the Patrons and the Instruments of the Opposite
Interest.

Upon the whole Matter, we have had Saying, and Swearing, Saying and Swearing.
Abundantly, (and Nothing else) in Affirmance of the Popish Plot. Not so much
as a Letter, not a Commission Produ^'d, to Help a Lame Dog over the Style; Not
so much as One Paper found, upon the Strictest Search of Popish Houses,
Lodgings, Boxes and Cabinets (Colemans Letters Excepted) to Countenance the
Evidence; Not a Conspirator taken in the Manner; nor so much as One Material
Witness in the Cause, that did not Open for Bread and Reward, and Eat the very
Price of his Damnation. His Pardon Secured him in the False Accusing of
Himself, and his Allowance Encouraged him, in as False a Testimony against
Others: Whereas the Proceedings on the Other hand, were only One Continued
Series of Restless Importunities, Expostulation, Slander, and Tumult.

There was a Great Stress laid, it is True, upon Mr. Colemans Letters; which,
Mr. Colemans Letters.
in respect of his Over-busy Intermedling in Matters of State of so Great
Moment; Together with Several Indecencies in the Wording of them, are not, upon
any Terms, to be Defended. Whoever knew him Well, knew him to be a Forward
Zealous Man, in His way; and upon That Consideration, I told a Gentleman of
Great Honor, and my Particular Friend, the Apprehensions I had (when he was
just Taken-up, and before Any of his Papers were Seized) of the
Inconveniences, that his Careless, and Unwary Way of Writing, and Keeping
Papers by him, would bring upon the Whole Party, if they Searched His Study:
For, to be sure, Things would be Interpreted at the Worst. So I Said, and so it
Proved: But it was not upon the Plot of his Letters, but upon the Plot that
Otes and Bedloe swore against him, that He suffered: So that even supposing the
Worst that can be Imagined, of his Letters, he Died yet, upon the Oaths of Two
Perjured Varlets; That is to say; if Otes'es Plot was an Imposture: For,
Colemans Plot could have No Relation at all to a Plot that had no Being. His
Main Business was, to get Money, for the Entertainment of his Humor, in an
Expensive Train, and Equipage: To that End he Got it; and in That Way he Spent,
by much the Greater Part of it. His Pretense was the Gratifying of Members, in
order to the Service of the French Interest, and to Try what might be Done,
toward the Dissolving of the Parliament, and procuring Liberty of Conscience.
[The Subversion and Subduing of the Pestilent Northern Heresie] in one of his
Letters to Mr. Le Chaise, was a Rude, and a Dangerous Expression, but not one
jot akin yet, to his Privity or Approbation, of Groves, and Pickerings
Shooting the King, or the Design of the Four Ruffians, that was Sworn against
him by Otes; and the 10000 l. to Sir George Wakeman, for Poisoning his Majesty;
as was given in Testimony upon the Oath of Bedloe. In fine; Colemans Letters
were but Brass Grains Cast into the Scale, to help out Light Gold, and to make
the Other Evidence Weight.

THese Letters of Mr. Colemans, Coleman's Story and Godfrey's the Two Stilts of
the Plot.
and the Somerset House Gambole upon Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey, I look upon as the
Two Stilts of the Crippled-Plot. They have neither Life, nor Sense in 'em. But
without many Words in This Place, I have Some Thoughts, and Hopes, of giving
the World such an Account of the History of That Fantastical Murder; (That is
to say, if my Life, and Health will give me Leave,) as it shall be No longer a
Question, how he came by his End. For I have Materials enough by me, upon the
Oaths of Unquestionable Witnesses, not only to Trace the Matter of Fact, from
End to End, (Bating the Proof of the very Stroke it self) but to lay Open a
Great Part of the Practice, in the Manage of the Proceeding, for the making of
a Popular Cause on it. I shall show, how Evidences were Stifled, Disguised,
Rejected, Unfaithfully set down, and as Unfaithfully Reported: And though the
Contradictions of the Witnesses to the Murder, over and above Common sense, and
Reason, might serve to Convince All Mortals of the Iniquity of This Iuggle; I
shall yet make Those Inconsistencies the Least Part of My Business. This is
enough to say at present; Saving only, that I do no more doubt of his Falling
upon his Sword in the place where his Body was found, then I do of Any thing in
Nature, which I my self did not see the doing of.

THat there was a Plot, no man in his Right Wits can pretend to Doubt; A Plot,
under a Plot.
and if Otes'es Narrative was a Sham, it self, there was Some Other Plot in the
Setting-up of That Plot: and a Plot that was to be Carry'd-on, under the Cover
of the Counterfeit. We cannot find any Trace, or Footsteps of That same Popish
Plot, more then from the Incredible Informations of Incredible Mercenaries: The
very Matter, and the Men, being Equally a Scandal to the Evidence; and the
Characters of the Accusers, and the Accused, as Contrary one to the Other, as
Light is to Darkness. There Is Infamy Opposed to Honor; Persidy to Faith; Base
to Noble; and in short, the Scum, and Dreggs, of the Nation, for the Accusers,
and the very Pillars of the Monarchy, for the Traitors. Let no man say Miracles
are Ceased; and Swallow This. He that has the Faith to Believe, that so many
Prostitute Criminals, became Men of Integrity, and Conscience, all in an
Instant; and Believe This too, upon their own Bare Words for it, against the
Habitual, and the Persevering Lewdness of their Lives, and Conversations, to
Prove the Contrary: He, I say, that could Believe This, on the One hand; and
Then, that so many Persons of Eminent, and Exemplary Worth, and Dignity, All,
in the Same Moment, should Turn Apostates, on the Other, might as well be
Imposed upon, to Believe, that the Fallen Angels have Recovered their Primitive
Station; and that the Glorious Spirits, that have stood Firm ever since their
Creation, have now Joined in a Rebellion against their Maker. If a man may
Collect any thing, from Strong Presumptions, and Improbabilities Innumerable,
the Principal Abettors of Otes'es Sworn Plot for the saving of the King, were,
Themselves, Conspirators in an Vnder-Plot for the Destroying of him: and there
needs no more, for a Final Proof of This, then a Short Summary of what I have
Delivered already.

THey did all they could, Confusion, and Change of Government Designed.
to leave the King neither MONEY, POWER, CREDIT, nor FRIENDS: To Strip him both
of his Parliamentary, and his Pardoning Prerogative; the Command of his
Militia, and the Choice of his Officers. They made it Penal even to Assert his
Regalities, or come Near his Person; and when they had gone as far, as the
Plot, and Popery would Carry them, they Joined in an Express League of
Association to take up Arms against the King Himself, and to lay Violent Hands
upon the Government: So that as they Began with the Necessity of Excluding the
Duke, for fear of the Plot; They Ended, in the Opinion of as Absolute a
Necessity, of Dissolving the Monarchy for fear of the King. By These Methods,
they proceeded, from Bad, to Worse; 'till they had passed, Gradually thorough
all the Degrees of a Seditious Progress, from the Hypocritical Pretense of a
Tenderness for the Life of their Sovereign, to the Last Peremptory
Determination of taking the Crown off from his Head. If either Thought, Word,
or Deed, Project, Contrivance, or Execution, might pass for the Proof of any
thing, here is a Plot under a Plot, made as Clear as Truth it self: A Plot in a
Westminster-Committee, as well as in a King's Head Club. There was all done by
the Plotting Part of them, toward the Ruin of the King, that Spite, Art, and
Industry were Able to do. [Wee the Knights, etc.] in the Association, was, in
Plain English [We the Conspirators;] for the Members of the Present Sitting
Parliament took upon Themselves the Authority of [Subduing, Expelling, and
Destroying;] [Issuing out of Orders, and Raising of Forces;] Or in Case of
being Prorogued or Dissolved; [the Majority of the Subscribing Members,] were
like Cromwells Major Generals again, to Govern in the Counties, Cities, and
Buroughs, for which they were Chosen. Now the Business, had never come to an
Association, it seems, if his Majesty would have Hearkened to his Parliaments;
for [ the Danger was timely foreseen (they say) by several Parliaments. The
Association.
] And [ Notwithstanding all the Continual Endeavors of Parliaments to Deliver
his Majesty from the Counsels, Ibid.
and out of the Power of the said Duke of York, Yet his Interest, etc.] [Even
in Opposition to the Advice and Order of the Last Parliament.] And so again, [
We have Endeavored in a Parliamentary-Way, to Bar, Exclude, and Banish him
for ever, etc.] [ But the First Means of the King and Kingdoms Safety being
Rejected, etc.] [ We have thought fit to Propose an Union of Mutual Defense,
and Assistance, etc.] From hence it appears that they Aimed at the Same Thing
upon the Main, in their Votes, and Addresses, that they did in the Association;
and that they were Both Governed by the same Influence; and that the whole
Tract was but the same Conspiracy. So that it is now somewhat a Clearer Case,
Who they were that Designed the Murder of the King, then Who Burnt London (the
Opinion of the House, Ian. 10. 1680. notwithstanding) It would be Pleasant
enough (if it were not almost Inhumane to take any Pleasure in a Discourse
upon this Subject) to see how direct a Counter-part the Truth of the Story was
to the Fiction; for They Themselves were to do all those Things, which they
charged upon the Papists. There were to be Sham-Plots, Cutting of Throats, and
Burning of Towns. How did they Tamper, and Practice with the Witnesses, Bribe,
Suborn, Forswear! All these Things were laid at the door of the Papists, while
they Designed, and Did, those very Things Themselves. [Witnesses (says the
Address) are Attempted to be Corrupted and not only Promises of Reward, Nov.
29. 1680.
but of the Favor of your Majesty's Brother made the Motives to their
Compliance.] Was not this the very Course they took with Otes, with Prance,
with Fitz-Harris? and briefly, what were All their Mediations for? Their Secret
Examinations, Importunities for Reward, Recommendations to Deaneries; and the
Good Word of the Committee still, in their favor? What was all This, I say,
but the same Saddle set upon the Wrong Horse. [Divers of the most Considerable
of your Protestant Subjects have Crimes of the Highest Nature Forged against
them; No. 29. 1680.
the Charge to be Supported by Subornation and Perjury, that they may be
Destroyed by Forms of Law and Justice.] Was not This the very Case of the Duke,
the Lords, and other Persons of Honor, and Quality? Were not the Priests, the
Jesuits, and the Other Prisoners upon the Account of the Plot; Outrag'd at
their Trials in the very face of the Bench, by the Scomms, and Execrations of
the Rabble? When the Insolences of the Mobile, (to the Scandal of That Popular
License) made it liker a Bear-Garden, then a Court of Justice? And then, when
False Witnesses had Suppressed, and Out-fac'd the Truth, and Shamm'd the
Imposture, both upon Bench, and Jury; the Authority of Four Parliaments is
Vouched, for the Credit of the Abuse. Nay the Invention was so Pompous a piece
of Trumpery, that, Effectually, they made it a kind of
Raw-head-and-Bloudy-Bones, to the Common People [We can only Ascribe it (they
say) to an Overruling Providence, Ibid.
that your Majesty's Reign is still Continued over us; and that we are yet
Assembled to Consult the Means of our Preservation:] As who should say; it is
even a Mercy that we have not had All our Throats Cut in our Beds, by These
Bloody Papists: When yet all this while, not so much as a Popish Mouse durst
peep out of his Hole, for fear of an Evidence, or a Catch-pole; for they had
their State-Weazels Ferreting up and down in every Corner.

A Short History of Otes.
AS for Otes now, that was no man of Form, and Ceremony, but according to M.
Hunts Quaint Character of him, rather [Incurious,] and [Apert] the said Mr.
Otes, I say, never stood upon the Scruple of the Parenthesis in the Revenging
Vote, [WHICH GOD FORBID] but like a Son of Thunder, called a spade a spade; and
by the Dint of Oaths, and Maledictions, Carried Three Kingdoms before him. A
Plain Blunt Man, they cried; He did not love to Mince matters; This was his
Character. He was for Freedom of Speech, and so it appeared, upon the Executing
of a Writ of Enquiry, at the Bar of the King's Bench at Westminster, June 19.
1684. The Duke of York having brought an Action against him upon the Statute De
Scandalis Magnatum: But we will see some of his Flowers there.

THe Duke of York 's a Traitor, (says he) fol. 9. A Rascal, The Account of the
manner of Executing a Writ of Enquiry, etc.
a Papist; and a Traitor, fol. 17. A Traitor, (again) and in the Plot. 19. He
shall be Hanged, fol. 13. I shall Live to see him Hanged, fol. 16. And Hanged,
fol. 17. We Will have no more regard for him, then if he were a Scavenger of
Kent-street, fol 14. I hope to see him at the Bar of the House of Commons,
where there are many Better men then He. p. 14, 15. If the Devil has a Place in
Hell Hotter then Other, I hope he will bestow it upon him. fol. 18.]

OTes was a Free-spoken Man, we see; His Insolences Encouraged.
and there is an End on it. His Trust was in That Part of the Parliament, that
put their Trust in Him; who were so far from Checking him for These
Insolences, that They Caressed, and Encouraged him; And his Evidence,
forsooth, Atoned for his Sawciness: But all Liberties against the Government
were at that Time Indulged; and whatsoever served either to make his Majesty
Cheap, or Odious, was Welcome to them. What was the Printing of the Votes,
Addresses, and Colemans Letters for; but to Expose the King, under the Color
of Enforming the People? They saw how Audaciously Otes Treated His Majesty
Himself, and how he Belied his Own Narrative, See Otes'es Narrative. fol. 15,
and 64. And Pickerings Trial. fo. 22.
by bringing His Royal Highness into the Plot; after a [ So help me God] that
the Duke was Not in the Plot: Nay, that he was to be Murdered as well as the
King; and that the Jesuits had no hope of Gaining him. Beside a Further Oath at
the Lords Bar, Oct. 30. 1678. That he believed the Duke Innocent. If This
Wretch had not been made use of as an Instrument toward the Compassing of his
Patrons Ends, he would have been Delivered over to Everlasting Infamy, and
Exemplary Punishment. So Impudent, and so Blasphemous an Impostor, upon the
very Point of Morality, and Example, would never have been Endured; But his
Business was only to Quest and Spring to his Masters, while they were to Fly at
the Game. No man that had not Designed Ruin, and Dishonor to the Royal
Family, would ever have Countenanced him at this rate. The very Sufferance did
Sufficiently Manifest the Good Will they had to what Otes was then a doing.
Upon the Whole Business; it is as Clear as Noon day, that the Narrative-Plot
was a Cheat; and that [ We-the-Knights-Plot,] was a Formal, an Impious, and a
Desperate Conspiracy. This is Clear, I say, from the very Acts, and Instruments
of the Defenders, and Supporters of the One, and likewise, from the Harmony of
their Cooperating Endeavors toward the Accomplishing of the Other. But to
come to the Root; the Mother-Plot was the Pretended Consult, at the White-Horse
in the Strand; on the 24th of April, 1678. where the Bloody Resolution was
Taken; and the Result carried about by Otes, from House to House, as if there
had been no more in it, then the Gathering of a Parish-Tax. Take away that
Consult, and the Babel lies in the Dust.

Otes Tried, and Convict of Two Perjuries.
IN the 7 th Year of Otes'es Reign; That is to say, upon the 8 th and 9 th Days
of May. 1685. Otes was brought to his Trial, upon Two Indictments, for
Wilful, Malicious, and Corrupt Perjury, at the King's-Bench-Bar at
Westminster, before the Lord-Chief-Iustice Ieffreys, and the rest of the Judges
of That Court. The Former; Otes'es Trial upon the Consult fol. 77.
[ for Swearing in Irelands Trial, that there was a Treasonable Consult of the
Jesuits held at the White-Horse in the Strand. Ap. 24. 1678. And that He
himself was Present.] And the Other; [ for Swearing that Mr. Ireland, Otes'es
Second Trial fol. 44.
(who had been already put to Death upon Otes'es Testimony) was in London upon
the First or Second of September 1678. And likewise for Swearing That He took
his leave of him at his Chamber in Russel Street, between the Eighth and
Twelfth of August, 1678.] He was found Guilty upon Both Indictments: The
Former, by the Testimony of [ Two and Twenty Witnesses, that Swore directly,
Otes'es Trial fol. 87.
that he was Not here in London, the 24 th of April. 1678.] And not only so;
but [ They Swore Directly that he was in another Place, at That Time.] I had
the Honor to take their Enformations, my self, and I reckon it my Duty to do
them Right, upon This Occasion, in saying, (over and above the Eminent Quality
of the Persons) that it was Impossible for Men to be Tenderer, or more
Scrupulously Cautious in what they Swore. He was Convicted likewise, the Second
Day, Trial p. 52.
upon the Testimony of Forty Seven Witnesses, and most of them Persons of a
very Considerable Character. Now if Otes was not in London, the Plot falls, and
All the Branches of it, and the Superstructures upon it, go for Nothing. This
in short, was the Seed-Plot, that brought forth All the Rest.

After this General Account of the Trials, and Convictions of this Perjured
Wretch, I Will Conclude, with his Sentence at Large, as it was Pronounced by Mr.
Justice Withens, on the 26 th of May. 1685.

Otes'es Sentence.
FIrst, The Court does Order for a Fine, That you pay a Thousand Marks upon
Each Indictment.

Secondly, That you be Stripped of all your Canonical Habits.

Thirdly, The Court does Award, That you Stand upon the Pillory, and In the
Pillory, here before Westminster-Hall-Gate, upon Monday next, for an Hours
time, between the Hours of Ten and Twelve, with a Paper over your Head, (which
you must first walk with, round about all the Courts in Westminster Hall (
declaring your Crime. And That is upon the First Indictment.

Fourthly, (On the Second Indictment) Upon Tuesday, You shall stand Upon and In
the Pillory, at the Royal Exchange in London, for the Space of an Hour, between
the Hours of Twelve and Two; with the same Inscription.

You shall upon the Next Wednesday, be Whipped from Algate to Newgate.

Upon Friday, You shall be Whipped from Newgate to Tyburn, by the Hands of the
Common Hangman.

But Mr. Otes we cannot but remember, there were several Particular Times you
Swore False about: And therefore, as Annual Commemorations, that it may be
known to all People, as long as you Live; we have taken Special Care of you,
for an Annual Punishment.

Upon the 24 th of April, Every year, as long as you live, you are to stand
Upon the Pillory, and In the Pillory, at Tyburn, just Opposite to the Gallows,
for the space of an Hour, betwixt the Hours of Ten and Twelve.

You are to Stand Upon and In the Pillory, here at Westminster-Hall-Gate, every
Ninth of August in every Year, so long as you Live: And that it may be known
what we mean by it, it is to remember, what he Swore about Mr. Ireland's being
in Town between the Eighth, and the Twelfth of August.

You are to Stand Upon, and In the Pillory, at Charing Cross, on the 10 th of
August, every Year during your Life, for an Hour, between Ten and Twelve.

The like over against the Temple Gate upon the Eleventh.

And upon the Second of September, (which is Another Notorious Time, which you
cannot but be remembered of) You are to Stand Upon, and In the Pillory, for the
space of One Hour, between Twelve and Two, at the Royal Exchange: And All this
you are to do Every Year, during your Life; and to be Close Prisoner as long as
you live.

THere was never any Government upon the face of the Earth, perhaps, A Villainy,
and a Scandal beyond Example.
that Labored so long, under the Scandal of Oppression, Cruelty, and
Injustice, upon the Testimony of so Infamous, so Sottish, and so Despicable an
Impostor: Never so many Persons of Honor met in a Court to give Evidence,
toward the Confounding of so Contemptible a Miscreant: Never was any Perjury
made-out by so many Unquestionable Witnesses, and Demonstrative Proofs; and yet
for the Honor of the Criminal, it must not be Forgotten, how he stood his
Ground to the Last.

[I Appeal (says he) to the Great God of Heaven and Earth, Otes'es Appeal.
Otes'es Trial p. 76.
the Judge of All; and once more in his Presence, and before All This Auditory,
I Avow my Evidence of the Popish Plot, All and every Part of it, to be nothing
but True, and will expect from the Almighty God, the Uindication of my
Integrity and Innocence.]

THis Last Effort of his from any Other Lips, The Lewdness of his Life and
Conversation.
would have Staggered a man, if the Exact, and Wonderful Agreement of the
Testimonies against him, and the Palpable Contradictions of his Own Witnesses,
had left any Possibility for Doubting: But from a fellow so Flagitious, in the
Habit, and through the Whole Course of his Life; This Last Defyance of God's
Power, and Justice, Compared with the Ordinary Course of his Conversation and
Manners, did but serve to make the Man All of a piece. The Practice and
Attempts of Bestiality upon his own Servants; (after he was preferred from a
Street-Begger, to be a King's Evidence) the Falseness of his Malicious Oath
against Parker at Hastings; His taking the Holy Sacrament, over and over so
many times, for a Cover for his Malicious Treasons; These and the Like, are
Things so Certain, and so Notorious, that no Mortal that knows his Person, can
be a Stranger to his Villainy. My Lord Chief Justice says, indeed, that [ There
was a Consult; Trial p. 86.
and there was a Conspiracy, against the Life of our King, our Government, and
our Religion. Not a Consult at the White-Horse in the Strand, but a Caball, and
Association of Perfidious Rebels, and Traitors, who had a mind to Embroil us in
Blood and Confusion.] This is the very Truth, and may serve for the Winding-up
of That Point. There was most Indubitably, a Republican Plot, as has been made
appear from the Express Acts of the Plotters Themselves; and Traced through
Every Step of the Proceeding, from the very Project, and Foundation of it, to
the Last Resolve of putting it in Execution. But This Plot was to be Called a
Popish Plot; according to the True Intent, and Meaning of the Revenging Vote;
which, by Interpretation, was no more then This, That [ The True-Protestants
were to Kill the King, and the Papists to be Hanged for it.

Our Accounts Cast-up, whether we have Got, or Lost by the PLOT.
WE are now at the Bottom of This Bottomless Business, and we should do very
well, and like Sober Men, and Good Managers of our Honor, Time, Peace, and
Money, to Compute a little upon matters. So much for Double Guards; -- So much
for Treating the King's Witnesses; -- So much among Catch-poles; -- So much in
Pensions; -- So much for a Fond to Defray Plot-Charges; -- So much in
Narratives; -- So much in Processions, and Pope-Burnings; -- So much to
Re-imburse Otes and Bedloe, the Seven Hundred Pound a Man they were out of
Pocket for the Protestant Cause; So much upon Well-Affected Elections; -- So
much in Ignoramus Iuries; -- but Discounting All this while, for what we have
Received from the Westminster-Insurance-Offices, upon the Whole Charge: and in
One word; to see at the Foot of the Account, (Paper and Pack-Thrid paid for)
whether we have Got or Lost by Part'ner-Ship with Otes, and his Adherents, and
Abetters, in This Loyal, forsooth, This Religious, and This English
Bloud-Adventure.

IT is not to be Denied, (and it is already Agreed) that King, Great Sufferers
by the Plot.
Nation, and People, have Suffered All manner of ways, and in a very Great
Measure, too, quite thorough This Period of Otes'es Administration; and All for
Fear of the Damnable Hellish Popish-Plot: Because, and by Reason of it; and
that we were Necessitated to do what we did, to secure his Late Majesty, and
his Government, against Popish Conspirators; and his Sacred Person, against
Poison, and Silver Bullets. Had it not been for That Damnable Plot, the King
had been Safe; The Queen and the Duke, Untainted; and the People had still
continued in their Wits and in their Duty. The Popish Lords had been yet at
Liberty; the Priests, Jesuits, and the Godfrey-Men, Vnhang'd; The Papists might
have had Tolerable Quarter among the rest of the King's Subjects; and the
Honor, and Justice of the English Nation might have yet stood as Fair in the
Esteem of Other Christian Princes, and States, as ever it did: So that upon the
Vpshot, what have we now to say, for the Wickedness, the Folly, and the Madness
of Those Times, if there was [ NO Popish Plot at all,] nor any thing Like it,
but the Seditious Confederacy of an Ambitious Caball of Iuggling, Canting
Hypocrites, to Murder the King Themselves from behind That Stale? What
Reparation now, for Innocent Blood, and Oppression? What Satisfaction, or What
Effectual Repentance, for Those that Preached, Pleaded, Supported, Assisted
(how Innocently soever,) the Credit of that Diabolical Imposture, without
making the Churches, the Courts of Justice, Coffee-Houses, and Other Public
Places, Ring as Loud of their Mistakes, as ever they did of their Invectives,
and Clamours? The Misleading of People into a Belief of Falsities, of This
Desperate Kind, and Consequence, even though I my self take them to be Truths,
is but next door to the Swearing Men into a Belief of That which I Know to be
False: That is to say, If, when I come to find My Own Error, I do not Endeavor
to set All Those People Right, that I Carried out of the Way. The Shame of a
Repentance, is not far Removed from the Wilful, and Deliberate Committing of a
Sin. I do not Expect, that My Sermonizing here shall Work upon Those that Shut
their Eyes against the Light of Experience, and Example; though One would think
that men should be very Wary of Setting That Door Open, over and over again,
that had been still the Inlet to all our Former Confusions. If a Thief Breaks
into my House at a Garret-Window, I Will provide Better Bars and Bolts. And
Undoubtedly, a Government may have a Weak side, as well as a Private
Habitation; and there ought to be as much Care taken to Secure a State against
Political House-Breakers, upon That Quarter where they ever Entered Before.

A Caution against the same Cheat over again.
THE President of This Cheat, and Pretext, and the Sense of the Ruinous
Calamities, which the Belief of it has brought upon us, should, methinks,
Fortify men against Those Panick Frights; and That Childish Jealousy, and
Credulity, that has Wrought us All This Misery; And it is not to say, that
there may be more Reason for This Apprehension at One Time, then at Another;
for let the Reason be Great, Little, or None at all, it works the Same Effect
upon the Common People, when either the Fear, or the Truth of the Thing, is
Unseasonably, and Undutifully Exposed. There may be a Thousand Popular Causes
Assigned, for a Rebellion; but the Whole World can never furnish One Shadow of
a Reason for it. The Father of our Present Sovereign, was a Strict Asserter of
the Church of England: and his Sacred Majesty that now is, no less, an Asserter
of the Communion of the Church of Rome. Now the Difference of Persuasion
betwixt These two most Gracious Kings, neither Did, nor Does, One jot Operate
upon the Matter here in Question: For the very Sham of Popery Cost that Blessed
Prince his Crown, and his Life, as a Roman-Catholique, though he was so far
from it. It Is True; the Suggestion, may Color Better, One way, then Another;
but whether it be so, or Not so, it is all a Case, as to the Danger, of
Troubling the Heads, or the Minds of the Multitude with it, either One way, or
The Other. It makes Sovereignty Conditional, and the Loose Multitude Absolute;
when the Chief Magistrate shall be Answerable to the Rabble for his Religion;
and when the Mobile's Opinion shall Stamp That Religion, and say; Let him be of
This, or of That Religion, and he Shall be so. They were never Cut out for the
Judging, or the Understanding of Things; But Plausible Disguises and
Appearances, have with Them, the Force, and Value of Certain Truths, and
Foundations: And it is a Hard matter, to bring people out of the Wrong, that are
not able to Discern, and to Distinguish the Right.

The Reasons of This Undertaking.
THis is already an Overgrown Preface; and I must make it yet a little Longer,
by Expounding upon it, (with a respect to the whole Matter before me) and by
the Reasons I am to give for the Spinning of it out to This Length. I was
gotten a good way into it, with the Design of an Introduction only to my Third
Volume of Observators; and with such a Mixture of Lights, toward the Clearing
of Several Matters in Controversy betwixt the World, and my self, as might
serve to set any Reasonable Man, Right, in the Naked State of the Question.
While I had This in my Thought, and my Papers under Consideration; it came into
my Head, that there was something Wanting yet, both as to the Use, and the End
that was Aimed at, in This Publication; and that Notwithstanding the
Unquestionable Truth, and Clearness of Fact, and of Doctrine, that was
Reported, and Delivered in Those Dialogues, there were still Several Defects,
that were Inevitable, under the Circumstances wherein they were Written, and as
Necessary for my purpose, in Some Degree to be Supplied. This will Vndenyably
Appear to any man that shall but take Notice of the Time, and the Occasion of
the Undertaking.

AS to the Time; the Faction had the Ascendent of the Government, In Respect of
the Time.
and the Multitude bore down All before them like a Torrent; The Witnesses led
the Rabble; The Plot-Managers led the Witnesses; and the Devil Himself led the
Leaders: For they were to pass to their Ends, thorough Subornation, Perjury,
Hypocrisy, Sacrilege, and Treason. This was the State of Things when I first
dipped my Pen into This Subject; And there was no Launching-out, into the Abyss
of the Plot-Mystery, without Certain Ruin: but Coasting, and Slanting,
Hinting, and Trimming, was the Best Office a body could Perform, in That
Season: And the Man had been Felo de se, that should have taken upon him to
search the Ulcer to the Quick, A little Skirting now and then, upon the
Narratives; and Bantering, betwixt Jest and Earnest, upon the Credit of the
Witnesses, gave people, by Little and Little, to Understand, as much as any man
could Safely Communicate: But the Foundations of the Plot lay as yet Untouched;
The Patrons, and the Vouchers of it, remained Sacred; and, for a Long Time,
there was no Meddling with a Vote, without burning a Man's Fingers; So that the
Source of the Plot lay hitherto in the Bowels of the Earth, and (like a
Consecrated Fountain) it would have been little less then Sacrilege, to Puddle
and Profane it. But since it has pleased God, by a Beam of Providence it self,
to Light us into all the Intrigues and Recesses of it, and to Deliver this
Nation from the Tyranny of Arbitrary Orders, and Nemine Contradicente's; I
thought I could not do better, then to lay hold of, and to Improve this
Opportunity of Tracing it from the Laborers, and the Iourney-men, to their
Principalls; and, in One Word more; to show the Next Age, Puss in her Majesty,
in the Caball it self; and that [Wee the Knights, etc.] Governed the Oraculous
Delusion from One End to the Other: Beside that it is a Thing that has not so
much as yet been Offered at, by any Other Hand; and All the Rest, without This,
amounted to no more then the showing of Children a Puppet-Play: They hear the
Figures Squeak, and see 'em Dance, and Play; but know nothing of the Springs,
and Wyres, that give them Motion. So that the Historical Part of This Preamble,
is not a Repetition of the Matters Contained in the Observators, but a Fair,
and a Regular Deduction, in it is Proper Season, of a Manage, and Intrigue,
which was at That Time Secret, and not without Extreme Danger to be Laid Open
to the Public.

THere is Another Imperfection, which I reflected upon, And to the Occasion.
with a regard to the Third, and Continuation of the Story; which I could not
Attend to, in the Course of Those Observators; for their purpose being only to
Encounter Shams, Slanders, Seditious Libels, and Opinions, pro Re Nata, as the
Humor, and Business of the Season Started them; I was not the Master of my Own
Business, but forced, to Follow, Turn, or to go Forward, or Backward, as the
Freak of the Conspirators Led me; and Briefly; to Accommodate the Biass of my
Papers to the Topiques of the Times. In Few Words, they were Designed for
Present Use; and to Expose the Imposture, and the Cheat, of the Swearers, and
of the Matters Sworn, by the Palpable Contradictions of their Evidence, as well
by Word of Mouth, as in Writing. But to make some Amends, for the Disorder of
Papers that were written only by Snatches, and therefore Excusable for want of
a Formal Transition from One into Another, provided they kept the Decorum of a
Connection, every one apart: I thought it might be worth the while, to Draw a
more Methodical Extract of the Plot, out of the Transactions upon the Commons
Iournal, and to Range the Members of the Several Divisions, under their Proper
Heads; which I have done, with All Fidelity and Candor in This Short History.

PEople will be apt to take This now, for only Cold Cabbidge, Objections
Answered.
three or Four times servd up. [Why we have had Plot enough in the Observators,
they will Cry; There Is no body doubts of the Plot; and This is no more, in Effect,
then Chewing the Cud upon his Own Papers, etc.] Now This is a Question, as
Easily Answered, as it is Anticipated. I am here upon the Subject of a
Parliamentary-Plot; whereas my Observators kept themselves within the Compass
of a Narrative-Plot; neither does the One Interfere at all with the Business of
the Other. As to the Faith, and Justice of the Dialogues, I am persuaded, that
there was hardly any thing Considerable, that Passed within the Compass of
Their Date, and that would Endure a Public Test, at That Season, which may
not be found Expressly, and Punctually, set forth in that Collection; and Those
are Particulars, wherein This Additional Supplement does not pretend to
Intermeddle.

ANd I have yet One Word more to say; if I may, without Vanity, give this
Account of my self. From the First Moment of Otes'es Plot coming into the
World, I looked upon it, and Declared my Opinion of it, as a Conspiracy in
Disguise. I Contracted a Horror for it; After Otes'es Copy.
and [ Vowed to make War against the Whore and Dragon, of Geneva, and All her
Votaries as long as I had a day to Live; and that I would, to the Utmost of my
Power, Discover her Cheats and Villainies.] Learned Authors have Written after
Otes'es Copy; and (to give the Devil his Due) This Figure is Borrowed from a
Rhetorical Flight in Titus Otes'es Dedicatory to Anthony E. of Shaftsbury,
before his [Popes Warehouse,] [In the Publication of This Poor Piece, (says he)
by many Reviews and Remarques, I have been at some PAINS; and now my Lord it is
upon the [TRAVEL.] Your Lordship's Countenance may beget the Countenances of
many more Persons of Honor: So that I may not to all Intents and Purposes be
Discouraged in this War that I have Vowed to make against the Whore and Dragon
of Rome, and All her Votaries,, as long as I have a Day to Live; and will to
the Utmost of my Power Discover all her Cheats and Villainies.] And so much for
my Authority.

BUt, (as I was a saying) I Contracted a Horror for this Villainous Cheat of a
Plot, A Horror for the Plot, from the Begeginning.
from the very Spawning of it; and, in the same Instant, an Ambition, above all
things under the Sun, to have some Hand in Breaking the Neck on it. From That
time to This, I have Barred my self the Benefits of Ease, Liberty,
Conversation, and Effectually, All the Comforts of Humane Life, in Order to
This End: And I hope I have not wholly lost my Labor neither. But to make
short; I found, by Degrees, that the Plot it Self, and the Plot's-Master, Lost
Ground. I followed the Plot 'till it was Ridiculous; I followed Otes to the
King's Bench Bar, the Pillory, and the Carts-Arse. And since that was Over, I
have had the Business of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey in my Eye. It Is true, I have No
Lease of my Life, and so I cannot Positively Undertake for it: But there was
still Wanting a Parliamentary Calculation to Finish the Work; which I have here
drawn into a very Clear Method, and as Narrow a Compass, as the Infinite
Variety of Cross-Purposes and Debates would Admit. In One Syllable more; I am
an Old Fellow; and if I can but Live to get thorough That Solemn Foppery of
Prance's, and Bedloe's Vision, at Somerset House, I shall Dye in Peace.

April. 28. 1687. P.S.
SInce Finishing the Matter above, I have recovered a Paper that I had
mislay'd, and it is a Passage so remarkable, that I cannot fill an Empty Page
Better then with the Insertion of it.

In October 1678. Mr. Attorney General was appointed by an Order of Council, to
peruse the Articles against several of the Pretended Conspirators, and to make
a State of the Evidence. The Report was very Particular, and bears date
October, 18. 1678. Subscribed W. Jones, under his Own Hand, as appears by the
Original which is yet Extant: Wherein are These Words.

Some Objections have been made, as to the Credit of Mr. Otes, against some
particulars of his Testimony, which relate to the General Design; wherein he is
supposed to be mistaken: But because those Objections are many, and some of
them not made by the Prisoners; (nor perhaps will be) and because [I am not
certain what Answers he can make to them, when they shall be objected against
him, I think it fit not to mention them in particular.]

It was not the Business it seems, of Those Days, to bring the Guilty to
Justice, but to Ensnare the Innocent: For the Prime Manager of That Accursed
Plot of a Plot, saw the Devil in the Bottom of it, before ever One Drop of
Blood was Drawn: And the Conscience of a Reprobate will not be Better Evidence
against him, at the day of Judgment, then the Testimony of the very Lips of
These False Witnesses, duly Weighed, and Considered, would have been, against
These Perjured Wretches in a Temporal Court of Justice.



A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters Contained in the Foregoing Discourse.
THe Reasons of Addressing to Preface.
Posterity, page 1. More Care taken to Propagate Slanders, then Truths, 4, 5,
6. The Sham of Popery was the Foundation of Otes's Plot, 10, 11. The Duty of
Subjects in the Case, 18. The Error of an Intemperate Zeal Exposes the Church
of England, under a Pretext of Defending it, 17, 18. Alahams Lecture of
Sedition, 19. The Observator Lost himself upon the Death of the Late King, 6.
And the Case truly stated, 23, 24, 25, 26.
A Brief History of the Times, 29.
The PLOT.
A PLOT Voted, 30. The History of the Plot, 32. Two Plots in Question, 36. A
Contrivance betwixt Tongue and Otes, 37. The Party Conscious that it was a
Cheat, 39. A Manifest Conspiracy, 90. The Witnesses and the Conspirator Agreed
upon it, 91. Loyalty and Religion the Pretext, 81. The Old Humiliation Style
over again, 83. Otes'es List of Conspirators, 92. The Factions Cross
Mediations, 93. Their Own Votes and Papers are the best Evidence, 97. Mr.
Colemans Letters, 143. Colemans Story and Godfreys, the Two Stilts of the Plot,
145. A Plot under a Plot, and the Sham-Plot a Counterpart of the Real One, 146.
Confusion and Change of Government Designed, 147. The Agreement betwixt the
Association and the Address, 149. The Case much the same of False Dice, and
False Witnesses, 141. An Address against the Queen, 84. A Horror for the Plot
from the Beginning, 168.
A Short View of the Miseries that This Plot has brought upon us.
The Miseries that it brought upon us.
In Soul, and Body, 134. Life, 135. Liberty, ibid. Estate, ibid. Peace of Mind,
136. Religion, 137. Reputation, 138. Charity, 139. Truth, ibid. And Justice,
140. Saying and Swearing, 143. Our Accounts cast up, whether we have got or
lost by the Plot, 159. Great Sufferers by it, 160. Cautions against the same
Cheat over again, 162. The Paper of Association, 100. Notes upon it, 106. The
ASSOCIATION.
The Conditions of the Association and Addresses are the same, 108. The
Association made to be Parliamentary at the Old Bailey, 114. Notes upon the
Association, 119. Reflections upon the Whole, 126. Middle Temple Declaration,
118. A Short History of OTES, 151. His Scandals against his Royal Highness,
ibid. History of OTES.
His Insolences Encouraged, 152. Otes'es Plot was [We-the-Knights*] Plot, 153.
Tried and Convict of Two Perjuries, 154. His Sentence, 155, 156, 157. A
Villainy, and a Scandal beyond Example, 157. A Dreadful Appeal of his, ibid.
The Lewdness of his Life and Conversation, 158. He Vows to make War against the
Whore and Dragon of Rome, 168. SHAFTSBURY's Worthy Men and Men Worthy, 123.
SHAFTSBVRY 's Matters.
A Busy Man in Our Late Troubles, 127. His Character, Manage, and Practices,
128. His Chancellors Speech of Feb. 25. 1672. 129. A Great Stickler for the
Test and Exclusion, ibid. Inconsistent with Himself, 130. More of his
Character, 131.
The Plot-Faction Designed the Ruin of the Late King, and to leave him neither
MONEY, POWER, CREDIT, nor FRIENDS.
No MONEY, 41, 42, 43. But in Composition for his Crown, No MONEY.
44. No POWER, 45. The King's Power, No POWER.
of Life and Death Questioned, 46. Bethel and Cornishes scruples about
Executing the Late Lord Stafford, 47. Their Quoere's and the Commons Vote
upon it, 48. The King's Parliamentary Power Encroach'd upon, No Parliamentary
Power.
49. Excluding and Proroguing stuck Mightily in their Stomachs, 67. Address
against Prorogations, 68. Notes upon That Address, 70. They Offered Boldly at
the Militia, No Militia.
and the Guards, 54, 55, 56. Desperate Practices upon his Majesty's CREDIT, No
CREDIT.
57, 58, 59. They Labored the Ruin of the King's FRIENDS, No FRIENDS.
60. His Friends were either Papists Convict, or Reputed, or Suspected Papists.
ibid. The Rigor of the Proceedings against Papists, 61, 62. The Meaning of
Reputed, or Suspected Papists 76. The Meaning of Evil Counselors, and so of
Adherents and Abetters, 120.
Their Proceedings against his Royal Highness.
Votes and Addresses against him, 63, 64. The Revenging Address, 65. The Bill
of Exclusion, 72. The Exclusion would not do the Business, without an
Association, 89. Nor Both together, without the Choice of the King's Officers
and Ministers; and the Old Nineteen Propositions over again, ibid. The
Exclusion is the very Color and Condition of the Association, 100, 101, 102,
103, 104, etc. A Terrible Expedient to save the Exclusion, 85. The Reasons of
Undertaking This History, 163. In respect of the Time, 164. And of the
Occasion, 166. Objections Answered, 167.
THE END.
A Brief History OF THE TIMES, etc.

Showing the Pretended Popish Plot to have been quite another Thing then it has
been taken for.

PART. II.

LONDON Printed for R. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn. 1688.

TO Posterity.
I Call these Papers, A Second Part to a Brief History of the Times; and I
Dedicate This Part likewise to Posterity, as I did the Other; for the very
Reasons given in my Former. That is to say; I reckon my Credit, my Cause, and
my Writings, to be only Safe in the Hands of Impartial Judges. The
White-Horse-Consult, I know, is as Dead as Catilines Conspiracy; and People
will be Wondering perhaps, after so many Thousand Rheme of Paper spent upon
This Topique already, to see the same Man go on, Calculating, and
Harping-still, upon the same Subject. But let not the Reader Imagine, that I am
now about to Murder the Old Plot over again; or to surfeit the World with a
Nauseous, and a Needless Repetition of things gone and past. The Iuggle of the
Republican Intrigue, in Every Part, Branch, and Member of it, has been over and
over laid as Open as ever Daylight and Demonstra^ion Exposed any thing: and so
have the Practices, and the Managers of the Project: Neither is the Infamy of
the Witnesses less Notorious; for the bringing of Otes to Justice, has brought
the Truth to Light, and the Curse of Cain is gone out against them. [ The Voice
of thy Brothers Blood (says the Text) Cries unto me from the Ground. A
Fugitive, and a Vagabond shall thou be in the Earth. Genesis 4. v. 10. 12.] Let
any man but look about him now, and see, if This Malediction has not most
Iudicially Pursued them, to the Uttermost Degree of Misery, and Contempt. To
Sum up the Whole in a Little; The Cheat of the Plot; the League and Address of
the Conspirators, and the Hypocrisy of the Pretext, are Points made out in the
face of the Sun beyond Doubt, or Contradiction; and the Mobile, in Good time,
Delivered from the Incantation of That Epidemical Imposture.

But still, though it is Evident past all Dispute, that the Supposed Plot it
self was a Cheat; and no other then a Treasonous Confederacy at the Root; Yet
how That Plot came first into Play, and the Shamm of it to be Handed into the
World, and to get Credit in it, is a Question that has not as yet been much
Inquired into, though as Necessary perchance, to be Truly Understood, as any
other Part of That History: And the rather, for the Light it will give to the
Order, and Coherence of all the Rest; for the Tracing of a Story, step by step
is the most Natural Method toward the finding out of the Truth: Beside, that
upon an Impartial View of the Whole, and of Every Part of the Matter in hand,
Men will be better able to Judge, which is the Right, and which the
Counterfeit; and of the Dependence which One Thing has upon Another. This is it
that I propose for the Business of This Second Part; and in regard that I find
the Pretended Popish Murder of Sr Edmundbury-Godfrey to have been Imposed upon
the World as a Limb of the Pretended Popish Conspiracy, and in such a Manner
too, as if the Whole Train of it were no more then the Series of One Entire
Piece Concerted betwixt the White-Horse and Somerset House, I find my self
Obliged to say somewhat of the Original Plot it self (I speak of Habernfelds,
from whence this Larter Sham was taken) and to carry-on my Discourse to the
Rise, Progress, Conduct, and Authority of Tong's Narrative-Plot, by way of
Introduction to the Matters of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; which I reserve for A
Third Part of This Little History.

The Subject that I am now to Treat of, is such a Composition of Fragment, and
Rubbish, that it will hardly bear a Methodical Distribution into any Tolerable
State of Perspicuity, and Order, but to come as near it as I can, I shall yet
Endeavor to Reduce my Present General Purpose to some Certain Particular
Heads; that I may know where to find my self, and what Measures to take toward
the Shaping, and Bounding of the Following Discourse.

The Two Main Pillars of the Old Cause were the Protestation (that was
afterward Improved into a Covenant) and the Virtuality of the Sovereign Power
in the Two House^. These Two Fundamentalls of Popular Usurpation, by which,
Charles the First was Dethroned, and Murdered; were set-affoot in the Two Last
Parliaments of the Late Blessed King, under the Name, and Form, of an
Association, (and an Another Expedient which they found out) with the very Same
Intent and Design upon Charles the Second; No less then upon the Rights, and
Person of his Royal Brother, Our Present Sovereign, whom God long Preserve.
These two Conspiracies were Covered under the Pretended Necessity of a Common
League of Union, and Defense: and there were Two Imaginary Plots also, to
Answer, as well as to Countenance These Two Real Conspiracies; The One (as I
said even now) was Habernfelds, the Other, Tongs; Cheats Both, and of the very
Same Make, and Cut; but as True however, to the End they were Made for, as a
Pair of False Dice to the Interest of the Caster. If I may lead the Allegory a
Step further; the People were to be Buhbled; the Table was Set, the Battle
begun; the Sharpers carried all before 'em, while the Bystanders, (That is to
say the Multitude) that were to Judge the Points in Controversy, understood
Nothing at all, either of the Trick, or of the Play. Neither in Truth, was it
for Every Common Eye to Discern the Abuse. Some were blinded with
Prepossession; Others, Misled for want of Good Heed and Attention; Some again
were Short-sighted; and Some perhaps, too Charitable to suspect the Worst of
Things: But briefly the Plot of 1678 was an Imposture, and there were those
that Knew as much, and saw Thorough it upon the First bringing of the very
Pretense upon the Stage. Some I say, that saw Thorough it, and yet made the
Most on it; to the Hazard of the King, the Royal Family, and the Three
Kingdoms. I am not without Pregnant Instances, and Great Authorities to Back me
in This Opinion, over and above the Historical Course of Parliamentary
Resolutions; Votes, Orders, and Addresses, which I have lately published in a
Former Part, upon This Subjest, and Grounded upon Those Evidences, as a
Demonstrative Proof of what I take upon me to Affirm. The Thing is Clear, and
True; Fit to be Known, and Worthy of a Sober Consideration; for how can any Man
Bestow a Thought Better, then upon the Means of Distinguishing Right from
Wrong; Truth from Falsehood; Hypocrisy from Good Faith; The Means I say, of
Setting Men Right in their Understandings, and in their Duties; and of
Vndeceiving the People, in a Matter, where Misunderstandings, and Mistakes are
of so Mortal a Consequence to the Well-being of the Public? I took This Hint
from the Postscript to my Last; Resolving within my self to say somewhat
farther upon it in my Next, then I had, at That Time, either Will, or Leisure to
do: So that I shall Begin, where I left off; and proceed from Thence, to a more
Particular Enquiry into the Story of This Intrigue.

And in This Place, I must give the Reader to Understand; that whoever looks
for the Date, or the Mystery of the Pretended Popish Plot, in Otes'es Pretended
Narrative of it, will have his Labor for his Pains; for Otes was neither the
Inventer, of the One, nor the Author of the Other; any further, then as he
followed Dr Tong's Directions; Swore to Dr Tong's Words, and Wrote after Dr
Tong's Copy. So that Tongue is the Oracle we are to Consult for the Revelations
of Titus. Some there are, I know, that will have the Original Contrivance to be
the Work of Shaftsbury, and his Cabal; when, in Truth, they did only Refine
upon, and Improve Materials that were brought ready to their Hands; and to give
them their Due, they had That Talent beyond All that ever went before them. For
in the Case of Fears and Ielousies, (the Old way of Proceeding) the Advance is
only Gradual; the Dangerous Consequences at a Distance; and the Evils yet to
Come; The Treasons, Massacres, Murders, etc. are all but in Vision; and men
have the Patience to Wait for the Operation of Imaginary Causes at the
Long-Run: But our Modern Plot-Drivers have found out a way to put the Multitude
into a Present Possession of their very Fore-bodings; and, in the Name of the
Law, and under the Countenance of his Majesty's Courts of Justice, to do the
Whole Work at a Heat. Swearing is Proving, and Proving is Hanging; and a Brace
of Knights of the Post upon the Spot, will do Forty times more Execution then
the Dogging of a Plot out at Length; A Bloody Conspiracy, Signed, Sealed, and
Delivered, upon the Faith, and Reputation of Two or Three [So Help me God's]
makes Infinitely surer Work on it, then the Bare Presage of a Destruction,
Future, and Uncertain, upon any Political or Conjectural Calculation
whatsoever. This was the Masterpiece of our Late Impostors. They had Swearers
at Command; Powerful Patrons, and Mediators, for the Encouraging, Protecting,
and Rewarding of Perjuries; and Two False Oaths to a Fact, though never so
Incredible, with a Commons-Address to Back it, is as Certain Death, as a
Screw'd-Gun, or a Silver-Bullet. By the Help of This Invention, they had
Witnesses, Iuries, Advocates of the Long Robe of All sorts; Votes, Ryots, and
Tumults at their Beck, and found out so Sure, and so short a way, to their
Journeys End, it would have been a Madness to run the Risque of Attempting That
by Fallacy, and False Reasoning, which they could not fail of bringing about,
by the Dint of False-Swearing.

To Conclude; That which in Common Acceptance has passed so many Years for
Otes'es Plot, will be found no more at Last, then a Transcript of Tong's; as
Tong's was, Effectually, of Habernfeld's: and I have very Good Authority to
Support me in this Opinion. So that Otes has been but a Tool all this while,
and a sorry one too, God Wot, to make such a Bussle in the World, so long as he
has done. But to come to my Matter; we will first take the Plot, (such as it was
Sworn to be before the King and Council) with Sir Will. Iones'es Report upon
the State of the Evidence: And we will Then look back for the Head of This Nile;
and so Trace the Course of it into the Branches, which I have Divided into Ten
Chapters, according to the Order of the following Method.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Chapters.
1. SIr William Jones'es State of the Evidence about the Popish Plot. Presented
to his Late Majesty in Council, Oct. 18. 1678. With Notes upon his Report, and
upon his Opinion of the said Plot. p. 1. 2. An Extract of some Passages out of
the Manage of Otes'es Evidence, in the Prosecution of it: Compared with Sir W.
Jones'es Opinion, and Report, as to the Credit of his Testimony at the Time of
Stating it. p. 21. 3. The Pretended Popish Conspiracy, was a New Plot made of
an Old one; and Dr. Tongue (not Otes) was the Founder, and Contriver of it. p.
49. 4. The Pretended Popish Plot of 1678. was only a Copy drawn from
Habernfeld's Original of 1640. p. 58. 5. Was Habernfeld's Model it self, an
Historical Truth, or a Fiction? p. 75. 6. If Tong's, or Otes'es Plot, was an
Imposture; whether or no was it Designed from the Beginning; or were the
Impostors Themselves Imposed upon? p. 85. 7. By what Means This Imposture came
to be Promoted, and the Manner of doing it. p. 107. 8. By what Means the Author
of This Little History came by the Papers herein mentioned. p. 111. 9. The
Design of Tong's Plot was upon the Duke of York. p. 118. 10. Tongue Managed the
Whole Affair of the Plot from One End to the Other. 121.
A Brief HISTORY OF THE TIMES. PART II.
CHAP. I.
Sir William Jones'es State of the Evidence about the Popish Plot, Presented to
His Late Majesty in Council, Oct. 18. 1678. with Notes upon his Report, and
upon his Opinion of the said Plot.

IN the Handling of this Text, there are Two General Points, that I have still
laid the Main Stress of all my Discourses, and Thoughts upon: First, That the
very Story of the Popish Design upon the Kings Person, Crown and Dignity, was
an Imposture in the Original Conception of it. Secondly, That the very Same
Treasonous Design, was Couched, and Carry'd-on, by Another Party, in Truth, and
in Earnest, Under the Cover of That, in Common ^ame, and Imagination. I have so
far Cleared my way to This Question, that in the First Part of This Brief
History, I have Linked together the Entire Chain of This Project, by such a
Connection of Orderly, and Parliamentary Proceedings, that there is not so much
as one Gap in the Series; Not one Knot in the whole Third of the History. The
Exhibits I make use of, are their Own Papers, and Iournals; The Inferences, as
Natural, as it is Possible to Imagine, from a Congruity of Premises: And the
Deduction of Things, is so Full, so Plain, Faithful, and Regular, that, for so
much as is There Pretended to, the Work is done Once for All; and Unanswerable
for Ever. It sticks only, that I Write under a Prejudice, and make Ill Things
Worse then they Are; which forces me to look out a Little for some more Popular
Authority then my Own, to Support my self upon.

Upon the Opening of Tong's (commonly called Otes'es) Plot, Sir W. Jones
Ordered to make a State of the Evidence.
Sir William Jones, the Kings Attorney General, was ordered by his Majesty in
Council, October. 16. 1678. to make a State of the Evidence, against Dr.
Fogarty, John Fenwick, Edward ^etre, John Grove, William Ireland, John Smith,
Tho. Iennison, Tho. Pickering, and Richard Langhorn, (then Prisoners in
Newgate, for High Treason) in Plotting, and Attempting to Assassinate his
Majesty's Royal Person: To which End, Otes'es Narrative, and other Papers of
Enformation, were Transmitted by the Clerks of the Council to the Attorney
General, who, upon Perusal of them, Returned his Report under the Title of [ A
State of the Evidence: Dated October. 18. 1678. and Subscribed [ W. IONES] The
Report is Long, and the Greatest Part of it Narration only; which is Little or
Nothing to our purpose: So that Abstracting the one from the other, I shall
only make use of what may serve to the Clearing of the matter in hand.

If (says Mr. Attorney) the Testimony of Titus Otes be to be Credited; The
Stress of All lies upon Otes'es Credit.
and If a Single Witness in this Case of High Treason is Sufficient; without
All Question, This Horrible, and Execrable Treason is Fully and most Evidently
Proved, not only as to the Wicked Design in General; but as to every one of
these Particular Persons.] This is no more then to say, That If* Otes Be to be
Credited, the Charge is so far Proved: If he be Not to be Credited, the
Enformation falls to the Ground.

The Pinch lies here, upon Otes'es Credit, and a Single Testimony; with an [
IF] to Both. And a Little Lower, he referrs to his Narrative, and other
Examinations, with the same Qualification still, i. e. [IF] what he Swears be
[True:] Concluding that the Probability of Particulars does much depend upon
the Truth of the General. This was a Judgment grounded upon Honor and Justice;
And if This Rule had been Observed in the Following Trials; (That is to say, if
the Detecting of him to be Corruptly, and Wilfully Forsworn in some Cases,
should have Blasted his Evidence in All) a great deal of Innocent Blood might
have been saved, which, for ought I know, stands at This day upon Account for
the Nation it self to answer for. The Next Thing Remarkable is his Report upon
the Five Windsor Letters, (as they are Called.)

The Contents of the Five Windsor Letters.
There are also Certain Letters; (he says) Five in Number, which are All
Directed to Mr. Bedingfield at Windsor; One of them Subscribed Nich. Blundel,
and Dated Aug. 29. Superscribed Thus: [For Mr. Bedingfield at his Lodgings in
Windsor;] Leave This with the Postmaster at Windsor, to be Delivered to him.
The Effect of which Letter, as to the Present Purpose, is, that Blundel was
very Careful of Encouraging W. and P. ( by which is conceived to be meant
Grove and Pickering; who, as Otes has before Deposed, had Undertaken to
Assassinate his Majesty) to put on strong Resolutions; And that if the Business
hit not at Windsor, to be ready to attend 48. which, as Mr. Otes before
Deposes, signifies the KING.]

It further says, that [ Ours here are very Devout, that after so long
Patience they may Enjoy Catholic Religion in a way more Public then now
they do: Certainly we can never fail, since we have so many Strings to our Bow.
48 is secure, and All our Party very Faithful.]

The Other Four were all enclosed in One Cover; The First whereof, subscribed
John Fenwick, and superscribed For Mr Bedingfield at Windsor. Recommended to
the Postmaster there, 'till he should Call for it. This Letter is Dated the 26
th of August, without the Year, and so much thereof as concerns the Present
Matter, is, that 48 is prepared for, and you are desired to be Kind to the Four
Worthy Persons of the Irish Nation, that are Vigilant Good Men, and will do
Service for us in These Parts. They are Religious, and though not of the
Society, yet Lovers of Us, and are resolved to Ioyn Issue with us in
Dispatching Forty-Eight.

A Third Letter, which was Enclosed in the same Cover, is Subscribed FOGOTY,
without Date, or Superscription, or Seal, only it Begins with Good Mr.
Benyfield. That which is therein Contained relating to This Matter, is, that he
prays Mr. Benyfield to be Kind to Those Four Countrymen of his, who are Good
Men, and would do the Business.

A Fourth (which was also in the same Cover) is subscribed Irland, Directed to
Mr. Benyfield, and Dated at Flamstead, August. 1. 1678. It Imports, that there
is No Need of Telling him their Good Success, because Intimated already. That
they did Expect Mr. Fenwick Every day to give them Account of the Progress made
in the Business of 48. and prays him to be Careful of it is Dispatch, if
Possible.]

The Fifth, and Last Letter bears Date as the Last, and also from Flamstead,
subscribed T. White, and is Directed to Mr. Benyfield. So much thereof as
Concerns the Matter in hand, is, to beg him to Encourage Fogoty, and the rest
of Ours.

These Letters, if they can be so Proved, as to be Believed to be the Hands of
the several Persons by whom they are said to be Written; do fully make out the
Guilt of the Writers, and do much Confirm all the rest that has been Deposed
by Mr. Otes.

Mr. Otes has Deposed them to be the Hands of the Persons whose Names are
subscribed; and being showed the Letters, was able, upon the sight of some Few
Lines of them, Hiding the Name, to say whose Letter Each was; which, the Name
being Discovered, proved to fall out accordingly; and This he did readily, and
without Hesitation. And farther he said, that though the Spelling of Mr.
Bedingfields Name, and of the Writers Names, do not agree with the Right
Spelling, that it is an Usual Art of the Jesuits, purposely to Commit such
Faults to Disguise themselves if the Letters should be found: And further, that
though the Hands Themselves do not agree with what they do at other times
write, yet That is purposely done to Prevent Discovery, and that he is well
acquainted with These their assumed Hands; and knows the way of writing, not
only of These, but of about Eighty of the said Society.

But Against the Truth of the said Letters, Objections against the Five Letters.
there were many Objections; Some by the Prisoners, Others from the L^tters
Themselves, and the way of their Coming to Light: The Particulars thereof, as
they are Many, and some Resulting from the Inspection of the Letters
Themselves, so I doubt not but the same are fully remembered by your Majesty.

Toward the Stating of the Case in hand; the Attorny-General, among Other
Papers of Enformation had the Five Jesuits Letters, it seems, to work upon: And
all the world knows, that Sr. William Jones was as good at Hitting a Blot in an
Evidence, and laying his Finger upon the Pinch of the Question, as any Man
Living: So that having These Pieces before him, it may reasonably be Presumed*
that upon Comparing Circumstances, and Weighing one thing with Another, he saw
far enough into the Merits of the Cause, and the Mystery of that Intrigue,
without any Need of an Observators Spectacles. But however, I shall rather
Produce the Letters Themselves here, to tell their own Tale, and leave it
Indifferently, to any Sober Person to Consider, what Opinion, so Wise, and so
Wary a Man as Sr William Jones could entertain of These Papers.

The Five Windsor Letters, Commonly called the Jesuits Letters.
Mr Bennyfield
(1) Mr White is now about to come for -- and I suppose there will be noe
Necessity of telling you of our good Success hitherto because intimated to you
already we Expect Mr FenwickE with us every day to give us an account of your
progress made in the BVISNES of 48 I pray be careful of its dispatch if
possible I will say noe more but that I am yours

Flamsted Aug 1st 78 IRLAND

For mr Bennyfield with care,

Sr
(2) I can now give you noe further Intelligence of our affairs but that I
hear our affairs in IRLAND stand in a good condition and I am informed our
friends are arrived safely to Scotland and have made a good beginning there let
me beg of you to encourage FOGOTY and the rest of ours; I praise god Almighty
I am still in good heart yet not without some apprehension of crossing the Seas
because of my weakness mr Ashby is ready I hear to Come from the bath I pray
make my Lord BRUNEL acquainted (if you think it Convenient) with our designs I
will tell you more when I see you I therefore rest

Your Loueing Friend T White.
Flamsted Aug: 1st 78
for mr Bennyfield Windsore.

Mr Bennifield
(3) Yours of the eightht instant arrived safely to our hands and we are glad
of your care and Industry and I am now to give you to understand that our
affairs in the kindgom of IRLAND stand well and his grace of Dublin is not
only kind to us but also industrious for the promotion of our good designs
there and question not but to accomplish them Ormond would fain be friends with
the Catholic party but we must neither trust him nor let him -- much longer
forty eight is prepared for and you are desired to be kind to four worthy
persons of the Irish nation that are Vigilent good men and will do service for
us in those parts they are religious and though not of our Society yet lovers
of us and are resolved to Ioyn Issue with us in the Concerns of dispatching
forty eight I am Just now for St O with some young Ladds and may Chance return
home with our master you have heard I suppose of the Contents by Mr Stratford I
am in have and therefore Conclude and rest yours to serve you

Lot: Aug: 26 Jno Fenwicke
recommend me to mr Coleman I hope J. K. will be with you to take a little
Fresh air



For mr Bennyfield at Windsore recommended to the Postmaster there til he
shall Call for it Windsore

Good mr Bennifield
(4) I am sorry I have not had the happynes of one line from you since you left
london my good Friend his grace of Dublin is in very good health and did let
me have the favor of line or two from him and tells me that Ormond is as
much out with the Protestants as ever he was with the Catholics to gratify
them he has given them commissions but that will not do the BVISNES now he
will never gain his credit more with us I pray be kind to those four
countrymen of mine who are good men I assure you and will do the BVISNES I am
in have and rest your lo: Friend

FOGOTY


Dear Sr
(5) the present affair we have in hand gives the occasion of a line or two
to let you understand that IRLAND is now in an excellent posture and his grace
of Dublin is very Industrious in the management of the BVISNES and our master
has ordered F to advertise ours of it I have given HARCOT and Jennison notice
of it and so I have to Keines I am very careful of encourageing W and P to put
on strong resolutions if the BVISNES hit not at Windsor to be ready to attend
forty Eight and if GW do but Hitt the BVISNES here Scotland will come into us
viz the C party and then the work is done ours here are very devout that after
so long patience they may enjoy cath Religion in a way more Public then now
they do and certainly we can never fail since we have so many strings to
our Bow forty Eight is secure and all our party uery faithful my kind
respects to you and honest Mr Coleman as for Smith he is daily in his
intelligence and care is taken for sending it to Flamsted I have no more but
that I am yours

Aug 29 Nich Blundel

For Mr Bennifield at his lodgings in Windsor leave this with the Post master
at Windsor to be delivered to him Windsor.

These Letters were formerly Published at Length, The Windsor-Letters a Plain
Forgery.
with Notes upon them: October, 1684. Observator, 150.151.152.153. Vol. 2. But
the Fraud being so Palpable, and the Forgery so Manifest, and This Place so
Proper for the Exposing of the Imposture, I shall here go over with them once
again.

First, there is not so much as one Stop, Not one Comma, or Point in them All.
Point, or Comma, or any such Note of Distinction, in all the Five Letters;
which, from Five Men, (and no more) Men of Business, Learning, and Intrigue, at
the same Time, and in the same Case, was never heard of perhaps in the World
before. There is ('it is True) in Whites Letter, after the Word [Ours,] a Mark
that has some Resemblance of a Semicolon: But seems to be rather the Dab of a
Pen by Chance.

2 ly, There are several Gross Miss-Spellings, They are All Spelled False the
same way.
White Writes Lord [ BRVNAL,] for Brudenell: Blundel has [ HARCOT,] for
Harcourt: All Five Write [ BENNYFIELD,] for Bedingfield. Ireland writes himself
[IRLAND,] Blundell Spells the Kingdom, [IRLAND,] too. Fogarthy Spells his own
Name [ FOGOTY,] and White Writes it [ FOGOTY,] also. Business by Three of the
Five, (and as often as the Word Occurrs) is Spelled [BUISNES.] The Words Noe,
Do, So, are Spelled in All Five with an E.

3 ly, The Resemblance of the Matter of These Letters is very Extraordinary.

[ Our Affairs in [IRLAND] stand in a Good Condition, All of a Cast for Style
and Matter.
] says White. Our Affairs in the Kingdom of IRLAND stand Well, says Fenwick.
IRLAND is now in an Excellent Posture, says Blundels

His Grace of Dublin is not only Kind to us, bu^ Industrious, says Fenwick. His
Grace of Dublin it very Industr^ous; says Blundel.

And so Fenwick and Fogarthy agree upon it, that Ormond is quite lost with the
Catholics.

You are Desired to be kind to Four Wor^hy Persons of the Irish Nation that are
Vigilant, Good Men, and will do Service for us in Those Parts, says Fenwick. I
Pray be kind to those ^our Countrymen of Mine, who are Good Men I assure you
and will do the Buisness, says Fogoty.

4 ly, Plain Treason to no manner of Purpose.
There Is something Further Remarkable in the Contrivance, and Congruity of
these Papers. The St. Omers-Letters have Nothing at all in them but what is
Dangerous, and Impertinent. White is for Encouraging Fogoty and the rest.
Irland is for Dispatching 48. What Needed This over again, when Otes Swears
they were Under Sacraments already to go on thorough-stitch without any more
to do? So that These Letters were only Written to be Intercepted. White gives
Bennyfield an Account from St. Omers to Windsor, of Proceedings in Irland and
Scotland: Most Ridiculously sure, when the Jesuits in London might have done it
better, and much more securely, nearer Hand. And so for News; White writes from
St. Omers to Windsor, that Ashby is ready to come from the Bath.

Now to put All together; For Five Men of Letters, All the Marks of Fraud upon
them
to Write without any Point, Comma, or Mark of Distinction; To write their Own,
and one Another Names, False, the Same Way; To write False English, and the
Same False English: To agree in the Same Air of Foppery, and Affectation; Nay,
in the Same Words, Solaecisms, Style, Nonsense; Nothing less then an
Inspiration could have wrought the Miracle of This Agreement. Insomuch, that
whoever Compares the Confusion of Periods, the Blunders, both of Thought, and
of Expression; Nay, the very Strokes of the Pen, with Tong's and Otes's Papers;
(for I have the Originals, and abundantly of Both their Handwriting to
Confront them with;) will Inevitably find them to be Counterfeits, only Otes
assisted Tongue as an Ammanuensis, in Transcribing some of the Copies. But Otes
will needs persuade the King and Council, that it was the Art of the Jesuits to
Mis-spell Harcot, and Bennyfield, for a Disguise, if Letters should be found;
and so to write Feigned Hands, to Prevent Discovery. Were there ever such
Buzzards as These men of Art, to make Harcot a Cipher for Harcourt; or
Bennyfield for Bedingfield? when the Persons would be as well known by the
False spelling, as by the True! How came it They had not a Disguise, for White,
Fenwick, and Blundel, as well as for the Other Two? But Those Poor Men were
left with their Right Names to take their Fortunes. Brunal for Brudenal was
Another piece of Art too; And so was Irland the Place, as well as Irla^d the
^a^her, for fear they should know what Kingdom he meant. They all of them write
Business with an I, in the First Syllable: and so they do All their Noe s
(...)'s Soe's, with an E at the End; which is still Tong's way of writing. But
Otes Deposes, over and above, that he is able to Swear to the Feigned Names,
and Hands, not only of These, but of about Eighty more of the Society.

And there are Things very Remarkable also, even about the Paper it self. The
Two Flamsteds are of a French Flower-de-luce Marked Paper; the very Same Size,
and Mark; The Other Three are of a Cut Genoa Paper; All of the Same Mark; And
of the Same Size too, to a Hair. I Observe again; That the Two Flamsteds, (or
St Omers-Letters) are Written in a Thick Paper; And the Other Three (Supposed
from London to Windsor) in a Thin Paper; Contrary to the Usage of Both Places.
These Letters are Two, Whole-Sheets, and the Third, a Half One; All Cut, and
Matched, as if they came out of the Same Quire. If they were All Together when
they Wrote, and Used the Same Paper; why the Same thing Over and Over, to the
Same Person: When One Letter would have done as Well? If at Several Places;
it is Odd, they should All chop upon the Same Paper.

Was not This a likely Foolery to Impose upon Sr. William Jones now? It is much
indeed, that Otes, should, without any Hesitation, upon the sight of a few
Lines without the Name, say, This is such a ones Hand (as is set forth in the
Report) But it was a great deal More for him to Swear to the Character, further
then Another Man could Discern the Ink: Especially for an Owl-Ey'd Fellow, that
could not see Coleman by Candlelight, when he was just at his Nose End. In a
word; Sr. William Jones had the Originals, and the Matter whole before him, and
what Thoughts he had of the Truth of Otes'es Deposition, and the Probity of the
Witness, cannot but be obvious certainly to any Man of Sense, that does but
Consider the Inconsistences of the Story; The Extravagant Improbabilities of
the Evidence; The Character of the Deponent, and the Difficulty of Putting a
Cheat upon him that was to make the Scrutiny. There is not so much as one of
the Instances abovementioned, that does not Carry Fraud, Folly, and
Conspiracy, in the Face on it; and the Imposture lay so Open, that it was a
Miracle how Mr. Attorney came to Miss it. He does, in General Terms, Acknowledge
[many Objections, both from the Prisoners; The Letters themselves, and the Way
(he says) of their Coming to Light;] but remits the Particulars to his
Majesty's Judgment and Memory, without Naming, or so much as Pointing at them.
Though he very well knew that the Late King Pronounced them Counterfeits, as
soon as he saw them; and that both Tongue and Otes were Concerned in the
Practice.

The Design of This Packet was to have it snapt-up at the Letter-Office, The
Design of the Windsor Packet spoiled.
and so made use of in Evidence against Bedingfield, as a Wonderful Discovery;
but Bedingfield, by good hap, taking up his own Letters, That Bout, (which he
never did Before) smelt out a Contrivance, Himself, and was the First Man that
Complained of it. So that He that was Marked out for the Traitor, by That
Providence, became the Discoverer.

The short of the Business was This. The Manner of the Disappointment.
Father Bedingfield was going to Monsieur De Puy, and seeing the Maile, asked
if they had any Letters for him. They looked, and there being a great Packet
they quickly found it and gave it him. Upon Perusal of the Papers, he observed
the Subscriptions not to be the Hands of the Pretended Subscribers; suspected
some Villainy in the Bottom; and so Carried the Papers Immediately to His Royal
Highness, and Delivered his Own Thoughts upon them. The Duke showed the Letters
to His Late Majesty; and what opinion the King Himself had of This Discovery,
we shall see by and by. Monsieur De Puy, in This Interim, went to the
Post Office, and, for a Countenance, asked if they had any Letters for Him?
They said, No; and that if there had been any, they should have been sent him.
He Demanded Then, if they had any Letters for one Mr. Bedingfield; They told
him what a Mighty Do there had been about that same Mr. Bedingfield, and they
knew not how many People to ask for Letters for Him.

Before I proceed any further upon This Story, it should be known by the way,
that among Other Particulars that were delivered in Charge to Sr. William Jones
to advise upon, there were Articles against John Grove, under the Name of
Honest William, and against one Pickering, as two of the Assassins that were in
a Conspiracy to Murder the King. I Pitch upon These Two by Name, because I find
Their Part, and the Transaction about the Windsor Letters, very Clearly, and
Orderly set forth, in a Discourse called [ An Impartial State of the Case of
the Earl of Danby, etc.] It was Printed in 1679. and speaks very Expressly to
the Points here in hand. Mr. Christopher Kirkby, and Dr. Tongue Presented his
Late Majesty, Aug. 13. 1678. with Forty Three Articles of Otes'es True
Narrative (falsely so called) in the Handwriting of Tongue; which the King
(going to Windsor the Day following) sent to the Earl of Danby; Appointing them
to Attend his Lordship the Next Morning. Upon Tong's Application to the Earl of
Danby about the Pretended Popish Plot, his Lordship put several Questions to
him, and Received his Answers, in Manner following.

Quest. Whether the Dr. knew Those Men who were Called Honest William and
Pickering, Tongue Examined by the E. of Danby about Grove, and Pickering.
who were Named in Those Papers (the Narrative) as Men Designed to Assassinate
the King.

Answ. That they used to walk frequently in St. Iames's-Park, and if any Body
were appointed to keep him (the Dr.) Company, it was Two to One but he should
have an opportunity of letting that Person see One or Both of them in a Little
Time.

Quest. If he knew where they Lived? for that it would be Necessary to Secure
Those Men forthwith.

Answ. He knew not at That time, but would Inform himself, and let his Lordship
know very Speedily.

Hereupon his Lordship went Immediately to Windsor, and Acquainted the King,
That Dr Tongue had been with him according to his Majesty's Directions; And
Enform'd his Majesty of All that had Passed, (showing also the Additional
Paper to those which had been sent his Lordship by his Majesty) and that he had
left a Servant at London, purposely to get a sight of Honest William, and
Pickering, in order to the Apprehending of them if his Majesty thought fit.

The E. of D's Proceeding upon the Matter.
At This time his Lordship desired the King, That one of the Secretaries might
send a Warrant for the Apprehending them; and that, the matter being of such
Danger to his Majesty's Person, some more of the Council might be acquainted
with it: But his Majesty would Neither let the Men be Apprehended, 'till he
were more Informed of the Design, nor would he suffer the Earl to speak One
Word to any Body of it, but on the Contrary Commanded the Earl should not speak
of it, so much as to the Duke of York; only said, he would be very Careful of
himself, 'till he heard more.

The Earl went from Windsor to his House at Wimbleton, directing, that if the
Dr. had any thing more to say unto him of That Matter, he should come to him
thither, or send away That Gentleman the Earl had left to stay with him, to see
the Men, and Learn their Lodgings; and to be Diligent in bringing any
Intelligence which Required Haste.

Accordingly That Gentleman did go from London to Wimbleton every Day, and back
to the Doctor at Night; and did sometimes bring Additional Papers to the
Former, and brought Enformation of the Dwellings of Honest William, and
Pickering, and brought word also from the Doctor, that he should be able to
give his Lordship Certain Notice beforehand, when any of them were to go to
Windsor: Of All which the Earl never failed to give his Majesty an Account,
from time to time.

Among other Enformations, the Dr. went one Night to Wimbleton himself, Tongs
Sham of the Ruffians going to Windsor.
and told his Lordship that some of the Intended Assassinates were to go the
next morning to Windsor, but that he could order it so that the Earls Gentleman
should go in the same Coach with them, or if the Coach should be Full, he might
go on Horseback in their Company, and watch them so as to give Notice of their
Arrival, and take them more Conveniently that way, upon the Place, where they
would not be able to give any account what they had to do there.

Hereupon the Earl ordered this Gentleman to Observe the Drs. Directions, and
went immediately himself to Windsor: where he acquainted his Majesty with All
This, and order was taken for seizing These Men at their Arrival at Windsor:
But instead of That, the Gentleman brought word from the Dr. that Something had
Prevented their going that Day; but that they intended their Journey the day
Following, or within Two Days at farthest, but then also News was brought that
they were again Prevented, by one of their Horses being slipped in the Shoulder;
or some such Accident.

Whereupon his Majesty (who before would not give Credit to it) did then take
it for so Mere a Fiction, The King believed Nothing a^ all of the Story.
that Notwithstanding all the Earl could say to get the Business Communicated
to Others, besides himself, the King was more Positive not to Permit it,
saying, He should Allarm all England, and put thoughts of Killing him, into
Peoples Heads, who had no such thoughts before.

The Earl having done All that lay in his Power, and having Business into
Oxfordshire, asked leave of his Majesty to go thither (being but Twenty Two
Miles from Windsor, whither he could return in half a day) and left Order at
Wimbleton, to have any thing Dispatched to him, that should come from Dr. Tongue.

Accordingly, in Three days after, came a Letter from the Doctor to the Earl,
The Sham of Bedingfields Packet.
giving Notice of a Packet of Letters from Jesuits Concerned in the Plot,
which were to go to the Post House in Windsor. Directed to one Bedingfield a
Priest: Whereupon the Earl returned immediately to Windsor, and Enform'd his
Majesty, showing the Doctors Letter, and his Majesty replied, that there was
such a Packet had been Delivered some Few hours before by the said
Bedingfield, to the Duke of York; and that Bedingfield had told the Duke, he
feared some Ill was intended him by the said Packet, because the Letters
therein seemed to be of a Dangerous Nature, and that he was sure they were not
the Handwriting of the Persons whose Names were Subscribed to the Letters.

This still begot Less Belief in his Majesty that there was any Real Plot; The
Packet Confirmed to be a Cheat.
Insomuch, that I have heard the Earl say, he doubted whether ever he had been
permitted to produce These Papers, and Intelligence he had Received from Dr.
Tongue, if his Royal Highness had not been Earnest to have the Truth of Those
Letters Examined, which had been brought to him by Mr Bedingfield; by which
means he got leave at the same time to produce the said Papers, and Letters to
the Council, and from Thence, they have all been Transmitted to both Houses of
Parliament, in one of which they remain at This Day.

When they were first Produced to the Council, The Letters Produced to the
Council.
and Dr Tongue brought thither to Attest them, the Dr. then said, He was Sorry
they had been Disclosed so soon, and that it would have been much better, and
more would have been Discovered, if the Business had been kept Concealed some
time longer. Fol. 14.15.16.

This Narrative-Part of the Story could not be well Omitted. But to return now
to my First Matter.

The Attorny-General was Manifestly Privy to Every Step of this Proceeding; Sr
W. Jones Privy to All.
and saw the Sham Thorough and Thorough, in the very Act of Disclosing it. But
upon the Winding-up of his Report, he comes a Little Homer to the Point.

Some Objections have been made (says he) as to the Credit of Mr. Otes, And
Convinced that Otes was an Impostor.
against Some Particulars of his Testimony, which Relate to the General Design:
Wherein he is Supposed to be Mistaken. But because those Objections are Many,
and Some of them not made by These Prisoners, nor perhaps, Will be; and because
I am not Certain what Answer he Can make to them, when they shall be Objected
against him; I think it fit not to Mention them in Particular; but shall only
Conclude, by making Two Questions, which, I Conceive, do properly belong to
This Matter.

1. Whether the Evidence of One Witness be Sufficient, either to Indict, or
Convict a Man of High Treason of This Nature?

2. If it be Not; Whether here be any Evidence against These Particular
Persons, besides the Single Testimony of Mr Otes?

18. Oct. 1678. All which is Humbly Submitted. W. Jones.


With these Words, Sir W. Jones Closes his Report: Notes upon Sir W. Jones'es
Final Report.
Where, it is Remarkable, that he was Conscious of Objections made, both
General, and Particular; wherein Otes is, in a Soft way, [Supposed] to be
Mistaken. (Only [Supposed] That is, and only [Mistaken.] But in the Next Line,
Those some Objections are grown to be Many; Though for the Comfort of the
Cause, the Prisoners have not hit upon some of 'em as Yet, and perhaps never
Will. And because a body does not know what Otes Can be able to say for
himself, if those Objections should come to be laid Home to him; Therefore,
'twere better to say Nothing of 'em, and even take the Rogues on the
Blind-side, and Hang-'em-up for want of Means to make the Best of their Defense.

Let any Man lay These Matters together now: i. e. The Ridiculous Incongruities
of the Enformations, and of These Letters. The Presence of Mind, and the
Wonderful Sagacity of the Attorney General, to Discern, to Sift, and to
find-out the Truth, and Bottom of such a Case as This: with the Tendency, and
Biass of his Report, and there will need no more to satisfy any Reasonable Man,
whether Sr William Jones believed This Narrative-Plot to be a Real Conspiracy,
or a Counterfeit. But if it shall appear, that he Suspected it at First, and
gave Credit to it Afterward, it is the only Instance that ever I met withal,
of a Case wherein the Reputation of This Plot, Mended upon any Man's Hands. But
the Best way of Expounding this Great Man of Law, will be to Compare what he
Thought of it at First, with what he Did in it Afterward. Not but that we have
already, in sight, abundantly enough to satisfy any Man with Eyes in his Head,
how far Otes was to be Credited upon his Veracity; and what Stress the Attorney
General Himself laid upon his Evidence, which stood at That Time without a
Second to Support it.

CHAP. II.
An Extract of some Passages out of the Manage of Otes'es Evidence, in the
Prosecution of it, Compared with Sir W. Jones'es Opinion, and Report, as to the
Credit of his Testimony at the Time of Stating it.

IF a Man would set himself to make a Reasonable Estimate, Ignorance and
Credulity gave the Plot Credit.
in some Modest Degree of Proportion betwixt the Believers, and the
Disbelievers of the Pretended Popish Plot; a body, in my Conscience, might
Compute upon at least Nine and Thirty, of Forty parts of the Nation, that in
some Measure or other gave it Credit, for One that saw the Imposture of it,
from the very beginning. That is to say, thorough all the Blinds, Pretexts, and
Disguises, that were put upon us, from the Bar, the Pulpit, Caballs,
Coffee-Houses, Committees, etc. in favor of the Design. But the Attorney
General was not a Person to be thus Imposed upon; and to a Man that had Seen,
Observed, and kept in his Memory, the Practices, and the Methods of the
Scottish and English Rebellions, under Charles the First, the Story of Tongue,
and Otes, was no more then a Tale the Second Time Told, and the Common People,
that neither Understood the Reason, nor Considered the Issue of things, hung by
the Chopps like Griggs upon the Bait of Religion and Property, though the next
remove, was to be Effectually, from the Worm to the Drying Pan. Briefly, where
there was neither Experience, nor Consideration; but Damned Perjuries on the
One side, to work upon Good Nature, and Credulity, on the Other; and neither
the Faculty of Distinguishing, nor the Means of Disproving; what Remedy but
Patience! till the Scales should fall from the Peoples Eyes, and till Time, and
Misery, should bring them to their Wits and their Duties again, and so to a
Sight of their Sins, by a Sense of their Punishment. The Wisdom of the
Multitude does not lie so much in their Heads, as in their Skins, and their
Pockets; Their Feeling, is their Understanding; and Evil Consequences, are
Little more with Them, then that which they commonly call, the Luck on it. I
have taken up This Digression, to the End that there may be no Place Left for
the Drawing of any Malevolent Inferences from the Head that I am now upon.

There are Three Things here, wherein a Man may be Positive, with Honesty,
Discretion, and Good Manners. Otes'es Narrative was a Palpable Practice, and
Sir W. J. knew as much.
1. That Otes in his Narrative, and Enformations, was directly Felo de se, as
any Man may Unquestionably satisfy himself upon the Reading of 'em. To say
nothing of his Rank Absurdities, and Palpable Contradictions, as they are
Exposed from one End to the other of the Second Volume of Observators. 2 ly.
That Sir W. Jones Himself, upon the Stating of the Evidence does more then
Tacitly Presume, and Acknowledge, the Great Vnlikelyhood, at least, if not the
Downright Incredibility of his Testimony. 3 ly. That it is very Hard to
Reconcile the Progress of his Prosecution, to the Tenor of his First Report.
And this Third, is the Point that I am in This Place to Pursue, with a Charity
for All Errors, and Complyances, upon Misenformation, or Mistake.

It would have been Morally Impossible, The Methods of a Faction.
for the Conspirators of One and Forty, ever to have Gained their Point upon
Charles the First, without a Protestation, or Covenant, to Unite them: (as I
have Hinted already) And the Doctrine of Co-ordination, to Head them, under the
Color of a Quorum of the Three Estates; They could never have brought their
Ends about, I say, without This: Beside, that after These Two Steps Advanced,
with Impunity, and Success, the Work was more then Half-done: And over and
above the Proportion betwixt the Means, and the End, the very Attempt of These
Encrochements upon their Prince, did Manifestly Import a Design of taking the
Sovereignty into their own Hands. This They Attempted upon Charles the Second,
in the Association, and in the Bill of Exclusion. The Former, was to Unite, and
Strengthen the Confederacy; and the Other was to Invade, and to Vsurp upon the
Prerogative Royal: And what had they more to do, after Assuming Absolute Power
to Themselves, and Translating the Allegiance of the People, from their King to
their Fellow Subjects, (which was Expressly the Case of their Association, and,
in Consequence, That of the Bill of Exclusion too) then to Kill, and take
Possession? Or, in a word, what could They Propose Less to Themselves, by
setting These Practices afoot, then the Subversion of the State? Only for the
better Face of the Business, Religion is made a Cloak to their Ambition, and
the Crown to be Secured in the Peoples Hands, for fear of Popery. But let it be
either the One way or the Other, The Thing was to be done however, and whether
by an Ambitious Zeal, or a Holy Ambition, it Comes all to a Case.

There came out an Octavo in Eighty One, under the Title of [ An Exact
Collection of the most Considerable Debates in the Honorable House of Commons,
at the Parliament held at Westminster the one and Twentieth of October, 1680.]
The several Speeches therein, are Introduced with the Two First Letters, as the
Publisher Intends them, of the Speakers Name. I take the matter as I find it.
There are many Lewd things, it is True, reported in the Book, according to the
License of the Times they were said to be Spoken in; but I have not, as yet met
with any Exception to it, of Falsity, for the matters therein Delivered.

I do not here Propose the Strictnesses of a Methodical Division, in a Case
where I have Scarce room barely to Name some Few General Heads, before I Leave
them. Here Is a Plot Supposed; The Being of it, Presumed; and the Danger of it
taken for Granted: Together with a Formal Contemplation of the Rise of it, the
Operations, and the Remedies. I find Several Passages in this Book, under the
Title of [ Sir W. I.] Referring to all these Particulars. As for Instance.

UPON a Report maid by Coll. Birch of the Informations relating to the Irish
Plot, etc. Ian. 6. 1681. Sir W. I. is represented Speaking in These Words.

Mr. Speaker.

Sir,

The Evidence which you have heard at the Bar, The Irish grounded upon Otes'es
English Plot.
and the Report which has been Read, as to the Popish Plot in Ireland, is not
only a Plain Discovery of the Dangerous, and Deplorable Condition of the
Protestants in Ireland, but a Great Confirmation of what Dr. Otes, and the rest
of the Witnesses, have said, as to the Plot Here: So that Now [No Man can have
any Excuse for not Believing it; but such as are Misled by Others, who Know it
too well, because they are In it. I Cannot but observe what a Coherence and
Agreement there is, in the Carrying on the Two Plots. Collections. p. 230.]

In Seventy Five, and Seventy Six, all the Clergy in Ireland said, The Duke of
York made the Head of Both Plots.
(as Fitzgerard Deposes) that the Duke of York should be King in 1678. etc.
And does it not appear by the Witnesses here, that they Intended about That
Time to Cutoff the King; Massacre most of the Protestants, and to Conquer
Others, etc. And does not This Agree, not only with Dr Otes'es Discovery, but
Prances too? p. 231. And so he goes on, Descanting upon Parallels and
Resemblances, 'till at last, finding, that All the Plots Center in the Duke of
York; he advises a Declaration to This Purpose.

That the Duke of York's being a Papists, Sr W. J. proposes a Declaration to
That Effect.
and the Expectation which That Party have of his coming such to the Crown,
have given the Greatest Encouragement to the Popish Plot in Ireland as well as
Here. p. 233.

This Resolve leads to a Bill of Exclusion, without any more ado; and Sr W. I.
is no less Earnest for an Association-Bill; Provided, he says, it might be made
as it should be. p. 183.

For This Bill (says he) must be much stronger then That in Queen Elizabeth's
Days; And a strong Bill of Association.
That was for an Association only, after her Death, but I cannot tell if such a
Bill will Secure us Now; the Circumstances we are under, being very Different.
In Queen Elizabeth's days the Privy Counselors were All for the Queens
Interest, and Now for the Successor's; Now, Most of the Privy Counselors are
for the Successor, and Few for the King. Then the Ministers Unanimously agreed
to keep-out Popery, now we have too much reason to fear there are many that are
for Bringing-it-In. In Those days, they All agreed to keep the Popish Successor
in Scotland; Now, the Major part agreed to keep the Successor Here: All which
must be considered, in drawing up the Bill. p. 184.

He takes a great deal of pains, in Another place, to show the Danger and
Necessity of Things; and it is Observable, in the Heat of his Course; how he
does, Effectually, Drop the Business of the Plot, and Transferr the Ground of
the Exclusion to a Scruple of Religion.

As to the Danger, (Sr W. I. says) It cannot be Imagined that the Great Body of
Protestants which are in This Nation, The Danger Transferred from the Popish
Plot to the Religion.
will Tamely submit to the Popish Yoke; which they will in Time see, must be
the Consequence of Submitting to a Popish King; without some Struggling, p.
91.] The Safety of the King and Kingdom depend upon it. p. 92. And so again: [
By assisting the Popish Faction, his Majesty is reduced to Great Difficulties
and Trouble in the Administration of his Regal Authority, and the Credit,
Peace, and Tranquillity of the Nation, almost Irr^coverably Lost, As to All
which, the Art of Man cannot find out any Remedy, as long as there is a Popish
Successor, and the Fears of a Popish King; And Therefore I humbly Move you This
Bill may Pass. p. 94.] That is to say the Bill of Exclusion. [Without the
Exclusion-Bill, there can be no Expedient. p. 192. No Safety without a Bill of
Exclusion.
] All other Acts of Grace will but serve to Fatten us for the Slaughter of our
Enemies. p. 193.]

I am against the Vote that was Proposed, That the Dukes being a Papist has
rendered him Incapable of the Crown; for that were to take on us a Legislative
Power; but let your Question be, That it is the Opinion of This House that the
Kings Person, nor Protestant Religion Cannot be Secure without That Bill. p.
248.]

In the First Suggestion, there is not only a Sedition Predicted, Notes upon
the Westminster Debates.
but Tacitly Encouraged, and the Question is no longer a Popish Conspiracy; but
a Popish Successor: the Apprehension being now removed, from the Plot, to the
Religion: So that the Cause was not the Same, in the Political Agitation of it,
that it was in Westminster Hall before a Court of Justice: For in the One Case,
the Duke was to be Disinherited for being the Presumptive Head of the
Conspiracy; And in the Other, he was to be Precluded, for being of the
Communion of the Church of Rome. And it is very Notable Likewise, quite
thorough, that there was not One Argument against the Successor, that was not
Levelled at the King in Possession too; And the Doctrine of Excluding his Royal
Highness, did not only Authorize the Deposing of his Late Majesty, but had,
many Years before, Actually Cut Off, the Head of his Blessed Father.

We have had Sir W. Iones's Thoughts already, upon Otes and his Plot, in his
State of the Evidence: It comes now to be Enquired into, what Opinion the same
Sir William Jones had, of the Credit of the same Otes, and the same Plot, at
the King's Bench at Westminister, upon the Trials of Green, Berry, and Hill.
Feb. 10. 1673/9. And afterward, at the Trial of William Viscount Stafford. etc.
upon [ an Impeachment of the Commons of England, in November and December
1680.] Upon a matter of Four Months Consideration in the Former Trial,
(Computing from his State of the Evidence Oct. 18. 1678.) And above Two Years
time to advise with his Second thoughts afterward; in the Latter; wherein he
acted as one of the Committee appointed to Manage the Evidence.

I was saying somewhat even now, that upon the First starting of this
Mysterious Sham, The Credit of the Plot lessened daily.
the Topique was so Popular, and the People so prepared to be Cozened, that
there was not One Man of Forty, but Believed, more or less of that Romance:
though from that time to this, the Credit of it (God be Thanked,) has gone on,
Lessening and Lessening still, 'till in the Conclusion, there is not One Man of
a Thousand, that does not look upon it, in his Conscience, and in his Judgment,
to have been a Bloody and a Scandalous Cheat; Now if Sir William Jones gave it
more Reputation, after Two Years Time for Scrutiny and Recollection, and where
the Lives of so many Men of Honor, Faith, and Integrity to their Prince, were
at Stake upon the Issue of the Cause, then ever he thought it Worthy of, upon
the First Summing-up of the Depositions, Only it Mended upon Sir William
Jones'es Hand.
he was the Only Man certainly, of the three Kingdoms, of whom it may be said,
that the Longer he Considered of it, the Better he Liked it. For it is
Naturally, and Reasonably to be Presumed, that he had all the Enformations, and
Suggestions, Pro and Con, under his Eye; and that if there were any
Considerable Number of Gross Contradictions, and Inconsistences in the
Evidence, he was Undoubtedly so much Master of his Business as to Retrieve, and
to Discover the Intrigue. So that taking for Granted, that he wanted neither
Means, nor Brains, nor Industry; to Carry him the nearest way to his Iourneys
End: it must be Concluded, that he Saw as much of the matter as was to be Seen;
and that he knew as much of it as was to be known: But how far he Improved
those Advantages to the Delivering of the Innocent, is Submitted to an
Impartial Censure, and Consideration, in that which Follows: And First, upon
the Trials about Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

The Cause of Green, Berry, and Hill, it is True, Of Green, Berry, and Hill.
was not so Properly Otes'es Plot; in Strictness, as a Superstructure Raised
upon it: Though all the Pretended Proofs of the General Plot, Involve a
Justification of Otes'es, as the Foundation of the Whole Project: Beside that
Otes could have done no more; without his Coroborating Fellow-Swearers, then
They Could have done without His Scheme of Articles to Swear by. So that though
the Story of Godfrey does not Affect Otes (to Borrow his own Word) Yet Bedloe,
and Prance do mightily affect him, in Lending him an Affidavit or two, toward
the Crutching up of an Impotent Plot, that by this time was Lame of all Four.
Nay take the matter Aright, and according to the Just Reason of the Thing;
Green, Berry, and Hill, were not Hanged so much for Godfrey, as for Otes; for
it was for the Plots sake, that the Murder was brought-on; They wanted Seconds
to the Conspiracy, and so made use of a fresh Brace of Miscreants, to Kill Two
Birds with One Stone. They that would Swear False to a Plot, would Swear false
to a Murder; And they that would Swear False to a Murder, would Swear False to
a Plot: So that begin where you will, The Other comes-on, in Course, and it
breaks no Squares betwixt the Devil, and the Client, whether he Pawns his Soul
for One Perjury, or for Two, or which goes First.

In the Trials of Green, Berry, and Hill, Mr. Attorney General has these Words.

My Lord, As Murder is allways a very Great Crime; Sir W. J. upon Godfreys
Murder.
So the Murder which is now to be Tried before your Lordship, is, it may be,
the Most Heinous and Barbarous that ever was Committed. The Murder was
Committed upon a Gentleman and upon a Magistrate; And I wish he had not
Therefore been Murdered, because he was a Protes^ant Magistrate. Greens Trial.
fol. 6.7.

If Sir William Jones had been Minded of Another Murder, wherein both the
Gentleman, the Magistrate, and the Protestant, were Maliciously, and
Rebelliously brought to the Scaffold, in the Person of a Most Gracious, a
Pious, and a Lawful Prince, he would not, I hope, have accounted the Murder
there in Question, to have been the most Heinous and Barbarous, that ever was
Committed: Especially Valuing himself, as he does, some Three or Four Lines
after, upon the Pains he had taken for the Perfect Understanding of This Affair.

I (says he) that have made a Strict Examination into this Matter, do find that
I shall better spend my Time in making Observations, and showing how the
Witnesses do Agree, After the Evidence given, then Before. Ibid.

This Declaration of Mr. Attorney, reaches as well to Otes'es Plot, as to
Godfreys Murder; and it is already Granted, that he was as fully Possessed of
the Whole Extent of the Matter there in Question, as it was Possible for any
Man to be, upon* Study, Search, and Enformation. As to any thing purely
relating to the Matter of Sr Edmund-bury Godfrey, I shall Remit my self upon
that Particular, to the Third Part of This Brief History, which I have
Expressly Reserved for a Discourse upon That Subject.

In Fol. 7. of Greens Trial, Mr. Attorney Grafts the Murder of Godfrey upon the
Discovery of the Late Horrid Plot; and sets forth how Industrious Sr Edmund was
in finding out the Principal Actors in That Plot; and how Mortal an Enemy to
Priests and Jesuits; Whereas it is Notoriously known, that he called Otes a
Rogue, and a Cheat, from the very Beginning; and that he did many Good Offices
to Known Priests, when he found them in Distress, to the Extreme hazard, both
of his Person and Estate. Let it Suffice, that I do here Affirm This to be
True, and Oblige my seif to Prove it so, upon Authorities Unquestionable,
hereafter.

It is but matter of Course, for Mules (according to the Adage) to Knab one
another; Otes, Bedloe, and Prance Help out one another.
and so there is no Love Lost betwixt Otes, Prance, and Bedloe: The Two Latter
put their Shoulders to the helping of Otes'es Plot out at a Dead Lift; And
Thankful Otes does as much toward the Helping out of Bedloe and Prance, in Sr
Edmund-bury Godfreys Murder. Godfrey told Otes a Tale, it seems, how the Popish
Lords had Threatened him, and what a Fright he was in for fear of his Life,
from the Popish Party; and how they had been several days Dogging of him.
Trial. Fol. 12. So that Otes'es Testimony some way or other, was the Life of
the Cause all this while; and take away That Pillar, the whole Building sinks
into Rubbish: But to see now, at the Close of the Trial, and of the Day, how
Mr. Attorney Blesses himself, to find Every thing made out so Clear, even to
Admiration.

I intended (says he) when I began to open the Evidence, A Gross ^artiality.
to have made some Observations after the Evidence Ended; to show how Each Part
of it did Agree, and how the Main was Strengthened by Concurring Circumstances:
But in Truth, the Kings Evidence did fall out much better then I could Expect:
And the Defense of the Prisoners much Weaker then I could foresee: So that I
think the Proof against the Prisoners is so Strong; and so Little has been
Alleged by them in their Defense, that it would be but loss of Time to do what
I at first Intended. fol. 71.] As to the Strength of the Evidence, and the
Weakness of the Defense; the Trial is Extant, and let the Cause speak for it
self. But Thus however, he goes on Haranguing upon the Harmony of the
Witnesses, 'till at last he Crowns the Exploit, with an Address to the Jury in
These Words.

I shall say no more, but Conclude to the Jury with That Saying that I remember
in the Book of Judges, Sr W. J's Enflaming Speech to the Jury.
( in the Case of a Murder too, though of another Nature) Judges 19.30. The
People said there was no such Deed done, nor seen, from the Day that the
Children of Israel came out of Egypt.] And I may say there was never such a
Barbarous Murder Committed in England, since the People of England were Freed
from the Yoke of the Popes Tyranny and as it is said There, so say I now;
Consider of it, Take advice, and speak your Minds, fol. 72.

The Barbarous Murder of Charles the First is forgotten, here once again: But
now we are upon the Subject of Innocent Blood; let any Man set the Blood that
was Drawn upon This Authority, and Encouragement, against That, which was There
in Question, and then lay his Hand upon his Heart. To say nothing of the Lives
that were Afterward Sacrificed, under the Countenance, and in Consequence of
That President. The Whole Intrigue was known to SrW.J.
It Cannot be too often Repeated, that Mr. Attorney had all the Papers at his
Command, that might give him Light to a Distinct and Perfect Understanding of
the Main Cause, and Every Part of it: As the Iournals of Both Houses; The
Council-Minutes; and Other Public, and Attested Enformations: that he had the
Whole Cause before him, as in a Breviat, and the Means, Consequently, of
Comparing every Several Witness with Himself, and every Witness Respectively,
One with Another, to see how far their Oaths upon the Lords Iournals agreed
with what they Swore in Court; and how far their Depositions before the King
and Council, or before so many of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, Squared
with Both, or Either of the Other. By Virtue of These Advantages, Sr. William
Jones was upon so great a Certainty of Knowledge in All he Said, or Did, upon
this Matter, that it was hardly possible for any Practice of Confederacy; any
Doubling or Shuffling; any Flaw, Contradiction, or Equivocation in the Evidence
to Escape him. Beside that he wanted neither Wisdom, nor Industry to make the
best of his Materials. And yet upon laying Things together, It is a little hard
to Imagine, how this Learned Gentleman should come to Phansy so Admirable a
Concurrence of Circumstances. The Strength of the Kings Evidences so much
beyond Expectation, and the Defense of the Prisoners so short of it; in a Case
which to all other Men's Eyes appears a mere Huddle, and Mish-mash, of
Unaccountable Confusions: which I do here Oblige my self to make as Manifest as
the Light of the Sun, in the Continuation of This Story, if I live but a very
little while longer, to Finish it. The most Favorable Construction that can be
offered in Excuse of the Proceeding, will be This; that though Mr. Attorney had
the Care of the Cause, and the Command of all Papers and Enformations
Concerning it, Multiplicity of other Thoughts, and Business, might yet Divert
him perhaps, from attending All the Critical Minutes of the Case, so Nicely as
he Ought to have done.

Sir William Jones proceeded Thus far, Sr W. J. a Manager against the Lord
Stafford.
in the Quality of Attorney General; We shall see now what Part he sustained in
the Trial of my Lord Stafford; as a Manager of the Evidence, upon an
Impeachment in the Names of the Commons of England.

My Lords (says Sr William Jones) I think I may take leave to say, that the
Plot in General, has been now Sufficiently Proved. And if we Consider whath
has been Proved at Former Trials; ( upon which, many of the Offenders, and
Traitors have been Executed) what has been Published in Print, and above All,
Colemans Letters, written all with his own Hand, and for That Reason Impossible
to be Falsify'd, we may Justly Conclude, that there is not a Man in England, of
Any Understanding, but must be fully Convinced of the Truth of the Plot in
General, etc. p. 169.] So that I think now None Remain, He makes all
Disbelievers of the Plo^ to be either Fools or Co^spirators.
that do Pretend, Not to Believe it, but Two Sorts of Persons; The One, Those
that were Conspirators In it; and the Other, Those that Wished it Had
Succeeded, and Desire it May so Still. p. 170.

This was a Shot at Random, I hope, without considering where it would fall:
The Disbelievers Vindicated.
for it makes All Men whatsoever, without any Exception of Persons, to be
either Fools, or Knaves, that were not of the Managers Pretended Opinion. I
call it [ Pretended,] because I look upon it as a Flight of his Rhetorique,
rather then a Motion of his Conscience; And that it was Designed to work upon
the Passions of those that heard him, rather then upon their Judgments. This
Liberty does not only give every Honest Thinking Man an Honorable Right, but
puts him upon a Defensive Necessity of Throwing-off that Infamous Character,
let it Light where it Will, and of Rangeing the Fools, and the Knaves on the
Other side. But This is a Sentence however, with Two Edges: One way he makes
People Conspirators,, and Abetters, for not Believing the Plot, at a Uenture,
whether the Supposed Fact be True, or False; The Other way, he makes a General
Plot on it, by taking All Into It that do not Believe it. But as to the Proof
now, of a General Plot, If Otes'es Plot falls, there Remains No General Plot to
Prove upon.

Colemans Letters are a Particular Matter, of a Personal Practice, Mr.
Coleman's Case.
and Undertaking, And His Crime, at the Uttermost Stretch of it, amounted to no
more, then a Forward Intermeddling with State-Matters without a Commission. I
could never find out the least Color in that whole Proceeding, to Imagine any
sort of Affinity, that Colemans Letter-Plot had with Sir Will. Iones'es
pretended Narrative Plot. He had a Plot undoubtedly, upon the Fing'ring of
French Money: But without any Malice, in my Conscience, against Either King, or
Government.

Sir William Jones draws Inferences from the Jesuits Several Meetings. Sir W.
J. Founds the whole Plot upon Otes'es Bottom.
Their Raising of Arms, and Gathering of Moneys, toward the Execution of their
Design, fol. 169. Certain Imaginary Commissions, to Popish Lords; Seditious
Sermons, and Discourses. Ibid. All which is upon Otes'es Bottom, still: And so
my Lord Staffords being at Fenwicks Chamber, and his Bolting-out Treasonous
Words in Otes'es Hearing* against the King, fol. 170. The Pages 178. and 179*
are spent in Justifying Otes; wherein Sir William does not only admit Otes'es
Change of Religion, but even blesses Providence for it, in these Words.

I am sure it is happy for us that he Did Change his Religion. He blesses God
forOtes'es being a Papist, when he himself swears he was none.
Without That, we had not had the First Knowledge of the Plot, nor of many
Particulars, which he could not come to know, but by Occasion of that Change
fol. 179.

This was a Mighty Mistake, for we had the First Knowledge of the Plot, from
Tongue: And then for so great a Man, there was as unlucky an Oversight. Sir
William Jones, upon the Summing-up of the Evidence, makes Otes to be a Papist;
though He Himself Swore he was None, in the Trial. Nay and he raises Arguments
from his Being the Thing, that he Swore he was Not; and Emproves His
Forswearing Himself, to the Advantage of his Evidence. [I desire to know (says
my Lord Stafford) whether Mr Otes was Really a Papist, or did but Pretend.
[Otes.] I did only Pretend; I was not Rea^^y One, I Declare it. fol. 123.

The Evidence (says Sr W. in another Place) is so Strong, He makes All Papist^
to be Traitors.
that I think it admits of No Doubt; and the Offenses proved against My Lord,
and the Rest of his Part^, are so Foul, that they need no Aggravation. The
Offenses are against the King, against his Sacred Life, against the Protestant
Religion, nay against All Protestants; for it was for the Extirpation of All
Protestants out of These Three Nations. I mean not of Every one that is Now so,
but of Every one that would have Continued so; Every one amongst us (if These
Designs had been Accomplished) must either have Turned his Religion, or turned
out of his Country, or have been Burned in it. fol. 186.

Here Is a Charge of Treason against every Papist in the Three Kingdoms; to a
Single Man; Every Protestant Throat to be Cut, or to fly his Country, or to
Turn, or to Burn. Taking away the Kings Life, and the Extirpating of the
Protestant Religion by Violence, were the Points of the Conspiracy: what could
be more Incentive toward an Universal Tumult? What more Repugnant to Christian
Charity, and to Common Sense, then to Build such Conclusions upon the Testimony
of Abandoned Cheats, and the Visionary Extravagances of Dreamers of Dreams;
(for such was Tongue, most Superstitiously, according to the Letter) But to
carry it further yet: All These Pretenses have been Detected for a Forgery, and
a Counter-Plot Proved on the Other side, to Answer Every Malicious Point of
This. What Atonement is the whole World able to make, for the Affronts that
have been put upon Gods Providence, Truth, and Justice; upon the Honor of the
King, the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Reputation of the Oppressed, and
Injured Party. But to return to my Point.

It will deserve one word more now, after Otes'es Passing Muster for a
Competent, and a Credible Witness, according to Sr William Iones'es
Qualifications, and Measures, to take a little notice on the other side; what
it is that he makes to be an Incapacity, for a Warrantable, and a Creditable
Discharge of that Duty. It Is no great Wonder, where a Profligate Sodomite, and
a Common Knight-of-the-Post passes for a Testis Probus: to See a Man of Honor,
upon the File, for an Infamous Rascal.

Sir William Jones makes his Exceptions to Mr. Lydcot's Evidence, which he gave
Concerning My Lord Castlemain. Lord Staffords Trial, page 115. etc. I refer the
Reader to the Trial it self, and he will find no need of a Gloss upon the Text,
to show him how that Worthy Honest Gentleman was handled in Court by the
Manager: But He that would more Particularly Enform himself in the Ground of
Sir Williams Exceptions, must look for his Crime, fol. 177. upon Summing-up the
Evidence.

A Man, (says Sir W. Jones) that owns himself the Continual Companion and
Secretary, Scandalous Exceptions to Mr Lydcots Evidence for Common Justice done
to the E. of Castlemain.
of one so Famous in the Popish Party, as my Lord Castlemaine is: A Man that
Pretends he was never out of his Company; And a Man that owns that two Years
since he was Taking of Notes at a Trial for This Plot: Not only for his
Curiosity, but for his Lord, who was Concerned in the Accusation. That This Man
should be a Fellow of Kings College, seems Strange, and 'till it be better
Proved will hardly be Believed, Nor will he deserve any Credit.

From one End to the other of This History of the Pretended Popish Conspiracy,
The whole Stress lies upon Otes'es Probity.
the Weight of the Proof still rests upon Otes'es Probity and Reputation: and
the Whole Frame has nothing more to Support it, then Flourish and Noise. The
Proof and Character of a Licentious, and Habitual Dissolution of Manners,
through the Entire Course of Otes'es Conversation, is still Blown-off with one
of These Two Banters, Set a Rogue to Catch a Rogue; That is to say, He must be
a Party to the Treason, to Qualify him for a Testimony. The other is This: Let
him be Detected of a Thousand Falsities, A man is Pop't in the Mouth with this
Answer, [ Where Is your Record?] Why [You might have Indicted him] If you can
Produce a Record, you say Something.] when yet to my Certain Knowledge, Means
have been made by Application, and Petition, for Leave to Prosecute him for
Perjury, according to the Ordinary Methods of Common Justice, and there was no
Obtaining of it. This, in one Instance for All, was the Case of Mr Cox a
Linnen-Draper in Covent Garden, who Frankly and Honestly made the Attempt, and
he was only Brow-Beaten, Repuls d, and Baffled for his Pains. I would fain get
over This Topique, but the Nature, the Reason, and the Importance of the
Subject in hand forces me to be yet a little more at Large.

It will now come into Course, to see what Quarrel it is that SrWilliam Jones
had to the Testimony of Mr. Lydcot. First, Notes upon the Exceptions to M.
Lydcot.
as he was Secretary to the Earl of Castlemain, he was True to his Lord. 2 ly.
In the Honor and Freedom of a Companion to Him, He was Just to his Noble
Friend. 3 ly. In taking Notes for my Lords Service, who was himself Concerned
in Otes'es Accusation; He did no more, then what in Generosity, Good Faith,
Common Humanity, Tenderness, and Prudence, he was Bound to do: He took Notes,
that he might be able upon any occasion in the Future to bear Witness to a
Truth; which Truth would have been as much Against my Lord, if he were Guilty,
as For him, if he were Innocent: and the Service he Intended my Lord by These
Notes, was only the Attesting of a Truth on his Behalf, in Confidence of his
Integrity. The Want of an Evidence in This Case, would have been Just as Mortal
as the want of a Record in the Other before Spoken of; and men's Lives were Lost
both ways, in This Controversy, for want of a Legal Proof of an Indubitable
Truth. So that here is a short Result of the Stress of the Exception. First,
Block-up the way to an Enformation of Perjury against a Forsworn Varlet, and
Then Hang-up an Honest Man, for Want of one. Make it a Misdemeanor, and a
Scandal, High enough to Incapacitate any man for a Witness, that shall Presume
to take Notes in a Popish Cause, and then Truss-up the Pretended Traitor,
though never so Innocent, for want of an Evidence to Prove, what was Said or
Sworn upon such a Trial. Why This looks like Lying in Wait for Blood; when
they find they Cannot reach a Man upon a Guilt of Fact, to Ty-him-up by
Surprise for either Ignorance, or Neglect, upon a Formality of Proof.

But in One Syllable now; From a General Contemplation, or Supposition of the
Case, to the Real Condition, and Quality of that Case as it was found
afterward before a Court of Justice, in Truth, and in Effect.

No man was More Pressed, or Harder put to it, The Injustice of the Exceptions
laid open in the Honorable Defense, and Acquittal of the E. of Castlemain.
and no man put himself more Franckly upon his Justification then my Lord
Castlemaine: I remember what Pains was taken upon his Lordships Trial, to make
a Witness of Dangerfield; A Wretch of a Character, to bring an Infamy upon a
Common Iayl. And I remember an Oath of Otes'es there, in a Flat Contradiction
to what he Swore in my Lord Staffords Trial. [I have a Charge of High Treason
(says Otes) against That Man (one Mr. Hutchison, an Evidence against him) for
Seducing me from my Religion. My Lord, I will Swear he Turned me to the Church
of Rome; and I desire it may be Recorded. Lord Castlemain's Trial. fol. 51.]
Upon the whole Matter, his Lordship was acquitted with Honor, and to the
Confusion of his Enemies; and it is but a Bare Justice, Abstracted from All
other Considerations, to say, that no Man L^ving, perhaps, has given a more
Vncontestable Proof of his Faith, and Affections to the Crown, then Himself.
And as to Mr Lydcot (now Sr John Lydcot, and Worthily advanced to a more
Honorable Station) It is beyond Question, that he Behaved himself in This
Office, toward both the Government, and my Lord Castlemaine, with a Resolution
and Integrity, Answerable to the Character of a Man of Honor.

There have been so many Hares Started in my way, and the Change of Subject has
Carried me into so many Digressions, that I had almost forgot one Passage,
which, though formerly Cited, Cannot be well Passed over in this Place.

There were Certain Quaeries offered to the House of Commons, by the Sheriffs
of London and Midl. Dec. 23. 1680. about the Kings Prerogative, in Dispensing
with any part of the Sentence upon My Lord Stafford; upon which occasion, Sir
W. I. Delivered his Opinion, and Advice, in These Words.

[ It is probable, that the Royal Power has always Dispensed with such
Sentences formerly; and if so, Sir W. J's care to Secure the Execution of my
Lord Stafford.
This House Lies not under any Obligation, to offer at any Opposition, nor
Concern themselves herein: Especially at This Time, when such a Dispute may End
in Preventing the Execution of the said Lord Stafford. And Therefore I humbly
Conceive, you may do well to give your Consent, that the said writ be Executed
according to its Tenure. Collections. p. 215.]

Here Is an Indubitable Prerogative subjected to a Question. The [Resolution]
given, is, that [It is Probable etc.] Mr Attorneys Advice is, [ Not to Offer at
any Unseasonable Opposition] for fear My Lord Stafford's Life might be Saved
by it. [The^efore] says he, (...) Give your Consent.

For the Avoiding of Confusion, I have Interjected, (where there was Room
Convenient for it,) Some Remarques, and Reflections, upon the Attorney Generals
State of the Evidence, and upon the Progress of his Animadversions, in the
Further Prosecution of that Pretended Popish Cause; as well in the Quality of a
Kings Council, upon the Trials of Green, Berry, and Hill, as in That afterward
of a Principal Manager of the Evidence against my Lord Stafford. This did not
yet Hinder the Saving to my self, the Liberty of a Word or Two more upon the
Whole Matter, at Last.

There are Three General Points that fall Naturally under Consideration in This
Place. First, Did the Kings Witnesses (as the Law Terms them) Agree in their
Evidence, or Not? 2 ly. If they did Not Agree, Where and How does That appear?
Did they Swear One Thing, at One Time, and Another Thing at Another? Was not
their Evidence in Court, the Same with that before the King and Council? The
Kings Justices of the Peace; the Two Houses, and the Committees? 3 ly. Was Sir
W. I. Sufficiently Armed, and Instructed, with All Necessary Powers, and
Papers, for the Perfect Understanding of the Matter, both in the Whole, and in
Every Part?

To These Three Questions, I return These Three Answers. The Witnesses Clash.
First, That there are Disagreements, and Inconsistencies, in the Evidence,
both Jointly and Severally, that are Utterly Impossible to be Reconciled.

2 ly. I appeal for the Proof of This, to the Council-Books; The Lords Iournal,
and the Printed Trials; (even under All their Partialities) where their
Depositions, many times, are no more One to Another, then Chalk is to Cheese.
But not to Clogg the Business with Unnecessary Recitals, the Second Volume of
Observators has Instances in abundance of This Kind: and particularly, Number.
61.62.72. Upon Otes'es Veracities: and Number. 141.142.186. etc. upon the
Harmony betwixt Prance, and Bedloe.

3 ly. As it stands Clear, from the Nature of the Case, Sir W. J. had all their
Contradictions before him.
and according to Common Reason, and Usage, that Sir William Jones must of
Necessity have All Those Enformations either Before him, or at Command, out of
which he was to Extract a State of the Evidence, and without which, it was not
Possible for him to do it: So does he likewise Acknowledge in his Report, the
Receipt of Those Papers, whereupon he was to Ground his Opinion, and to Deliver
his Judgment.

Now to Stop the Mouths of a Certain Republican Caball, that at That Time made
such a Noise about the Providential Discovery of This Plot; and called for
Humiliation in Sackcloth and Ashes, to Appease the Divine Wrath, and, if
Possible, to Avert This Mock-Iudgment from us; The Greatest Providence that
ever appeared in favor of This Conspiracy was, That a Person so Quick-Sighted
to All Other Purposes, as to find out the Invisible Religion of This Cheat,
should Overlook so many Gross Frauds, and Notorious Contradictions, that lay in
so Great Numbers, and in so many Several Shapes, under his Eye, without taking
any Notice of them at all. Now in Truth, the [Iudgment] was not the Reality of
a Popish Plot, but the Belief of such a Plot where there was None; Assisted
with a Blind Infatuation, that Hindered men from seeing a True Conspiracy
thorough the Cover of a False one.

But to say no more of the Miracle of These Oversights, there is One Slip yet
behind, which the Wit of Man shall never be able to Excuse; No, nor so much as
to Palliate, with the least Color of a Defense. That is to say; the Business
of the Five Windsor-Letters; with which I intend to Close This Chapter.

Before I come to Touch This Matter to the Quick, Tongue and Otes's Narrative
looked upon as a Cheat.
it is Previously to be Noted, and made Known, that Tong's, or Otes'es
Narrative of Articles, was already as good as Hung upon the Hedge, for want of
Collateral Evidence. The Story of Pickering, and Grove, made Little or no
Impression upon his Majesty; And then the Disappointment of the Ruffians going
to Windsor, made the Story yet More Suspicious; 'till, in the Conclusion,
Bedingfields Packet of Letters Confirmed the King, The Five Letters that
should have given them Credit Confirmed the Forgery.
that there was No Plot at all, and that the Whole was a Forgery; according to
the Account already given in [ The Impartial State of the Case of the Earl of
Danby.] The Gradation of the Proceeding lies Thus. First, The Truth of the
Narrative was Suspected. 2 ly. The Business of Grove and Pickering, (that were
brought in, to Support One Capital Branch of the Narrative) made it yet More
Suspected. 3 ly. The Slurr that was put upon the Earl of Danby, in the Sham of
the Windsor Ruffians, in pursuance of Groves, and Pickerings Design, rendered
Matters still Worse and Worse. And, 4 ly. The Invention of the Jesuits Letters,
that were Trump'd-up, in hopes of Gaining Credit, both General, and Particular,
to the Entire Train of the Enformation; put a Final End to the Reputation of
All that had been Said, or Done Before.

There is enough said already in it is Proper Place, to the Marks of Practice
and Confederacy, In and Upon These Letters [The way of their coming to Light]
(as Sr William Jones well Observes) is somewhat Extraordinary. Tongue and Otes
could not be Believed, and so they Remitted themselves to the more Certain, and
Infallible Proofs that would Arise, they said, upon the Intercepting of Some
Jesuits Letters at the Post Office in Windsor, according to their Directions.
The Letters, as is formerly said, fell into the Wrong Hand; for though they
were Addressed to Bedingfield, it was never Intended that he should have the
Opening of them: But as Providence Ordered the Matter, so it Proved; and the
Pretended Conspirator was, Himself, the Discoverer, Against Himself. This was
only Introductive, but the Main Stress lies upon the Design, and Subject Matter
of These Letters; whether they were Believed, or Not Believed. If they were Not
Believed; why did not the Credit of the Letters, and of the Plot Vanish
Together? if they Were Believed, how came it, that thorough the Whole Series of
the Prosecution, they were never made Use of; No, not so much as Named toward
Supporting the Belief of This Conspiracy? How came it, I say, that These
Letters, that were only Exhibited to keep the Sinking Reputation of the
Narrative, above Water, should fall to the Ground Themselves, and the Narrative
yet Stand Firm, without a Foundation? As for Example.

According to the Project of the Plot, and the Pretext of the Narrative, They
were the very Contents of the Plot.
the King was to be Murdered, FORTY EIGHT was the Cipher for the King: Grove
(under the Name of Honest William) and Pickering, were to be Two of the
Assassins. Four Irish Ruffians, over and above. Catholic Religion to be
Settled. Ireland and Scotland Engaged in the Plot: Bedingfield, Ireland, White,
Fenwick, Fogarthy, Blundel, were All in the Black List of the Conspirators. It
is Worthy of a Consideration now, to see how These Blundering Buzzards, brought
their Five Letters (for Theirs they were) to Square with These Particular
Heads, though so Awkardly put together, that the Fool played Booty against the
Knave, and gave the Sign out of his hand. The Five Pretended Writers, are Five
of the Conspirators, and they Direct to Bedingfield, who makes up the Sixth.
It Is a Wonderful Thing now, that These Letters were never Charged upon
Ireland, White, nor Fenwick, at their Trials: And, in Truth, that the Prisoners
Themselves never Called for 'em. Either they were Genuine, and Authentic, and
so Believed, and Reputed; or they were Not so. If the Former; they were,
without All Controversy, the Best Foot the Plot had to Stand upon; but if
Spurious, and Counterfeit, and so Deemed, and Taken to be, the Plot and the
Letters ought to have run the Same Fate, and no Credit to be given, for the
Future, either to the One, or to the Other. For the very Plot it self was
Wrapt-up in these Letters, and the Pretense of the Indubitable Authority of the
Latter, was made use of to Patch-up the Broken Reputation of the Former. Three
of them Undertake for the Good Inclinations of Ireland, to the Plot. Two, for
Scotland: Four of them are, over and over for Dispatching, anddoing the
Business of 48. Two Recommendations of the Four Irish Ruffians: One for the
Encouragement of W. and P. (That is to say, Grove and Pickering) G. W. for Sir
George Wakeman, is not forgotten neither; Nor [ the Enjoying of Cath. Religion
in a way more Public then now they do.]

In a Word; The Plot, and the Letters had both the Same Vouchers; They were so
Rank a Cheat, they durst never bring them in Evidence.
and I cannot find an Argument in Nature for the Belief of the One, after the
Disbelief of the Other. If the Plot-Masters had not been Conscious, and
thoroughly Satisfied that the Five Letters were a Downright Cheat, they would
Undoubtedly have Served them up, in Evidence; but the Forgery was so Gross,
that the very Producing of them, would have broke the Neck of the Whole Design;
for the Practice lay as Open as the Sun, and out of the Power, Reach, nay and
Possibility of any False Oath to Cover it. The Party, I say, would have
Insisted upon 'em, if they Durst. So that they Suppressed them Wilfully, and
upon Prepense Purpose, and Deliberation; and whenever any man living shall
furnish but the Least Shadow of any other Reason for the Suppressing of them,
then an Inhumane Thirst of Blood; or a Manifest Partiality, to one of the most
Impious Practices that ever was under the Cope of Heaven, I will Submit to have
[ Here lies a fool, and a Knave.] Written upon my Gravestone. [These Letters
(says Sir William Jones in his Report) if they can be so Proved as to be
Believed to be the Hands of the Several Persons by whom they are said to be
Written, do ^ully make out the Guilt of the Writers. Sir W. Jones in his Report
upon These Letters, with the Rest of the Evidence does yet Want a Second
Testimony to Back Otes'es. If he had given Credit to these Letters, the Proof
would have been Full. If he had but Doubted the Forgery, he would have made
some Essay upon Proving the Hand: But out of all Dispute it is, that he
Desponded of them at First Sight, and so they were let fall, never to Rise
again.

In One Syllable more now, to Expound my self upon This Matter, I speak only of
those that Officially had the whole Affair under that Care, and Consideration:
without Expecting that Other men should Divine upon Things that they were
Strangers to, and that lay out of their Province.

Here is as much said as is Needful, upon the Subject Matter of These Two
Chapters. That is to say; concerning Sir William Iones'es Opinion, both of the
Plot, and the Plot-makers, from the Stating of the Evidence in October 1678. to
the Death of my Lord Stafford in December, 1680. And there is as much done as
is Needful too, Since That Time, to the Proving of the Whole History of That
Pretended Popish Conspiracy, that Cost so many Innocent Lives, and wrought so
much Mischief, both to King, and People; to have been only a Scandalous
Imposture, Bolster'd-up with Perjury, and Subornation: But How That Sham came
to be Started, What it Was, and Who was the Founder of it, is to be the Subject
of the Next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
The Pretended Popish Conspiracy, was a New Plot made of an Old One; and Dr.
Tongue (not Otes) was the Founder and Contriver of it.

IT Fell-out that some short Time after the Broaching of the Pretended Popish
Plot, How the Pretended Popish Plot, came to be Started.
One Boulter, a Bookseller, brought me Tong's Royal Martyr, for a License. I
could not Pass it, and the Bookseller went Mumbling away with a kind of Menace
betwixt his Teeth, for the Refusal. Upon This, I went and told Tongue at
Whitehall, that I could not give it an Imprimatur, and so Pointed him out,
(over and above Certain Scandalous Reflections, and Historical Mistakes) to some
Unlucky Hints in the Preface, that, People, I said, would be apt to take
Offense at.

You tell the World, said I, that you have with Great Care Drawn-up the History
of the Old Popish Plot, Tongue was the ^roj^ctor of it, and put Otes upon it.
(meaning the Business of Andreas ab Habernfeld) and that showing it to Dr.
Otes, who very much Approved of the Draught, You did as Good as tell him,
[Titus, it were worth the while to know if This Plot does not go on still:
Wherefore do you go, and put your self among the Jesuits, and see whether it
does or No.] You say further, that Dr Otes Did go among them, pretending to be
One of them, and that when he came back, he told you that the Business went-on,
and that it was no New Plot, but the Old One Continued. [ Well, (says Dr. Tongue)
All This is True, and where is the Offense?] So I up and told him, that it might
be looked upon as a Strange Council, either to Give, or to Take. The Advice
Given, said I, is This; [Titus, do you go over, and pretend to be a Papist,
Take All their Oaths and Tests, Ioyn with them in an Idolatrous Worship, (for
so Tongue Reputed it) and Swear your self to the Devil through Thick and Thin,
only to see whether it be Cross or Pile. This seems to Me, to be the Advice
Given, and the Following of This Advice upon Forethought, and Consideration,
may be taken for as Extraordinary a Resolution. The Doctors Answer was to This
Purpose: God Allmighty will do his Work by his Own Way, and Method.

This Account was Printed in 1681. in [ The Shammer Shamm'd. p. 8.] together
with several Letters, and Papers of Young Tong's, Confirming every Particular;
and though they were Published in the very Heat of the Republican Conspiracy,
and my Name at Length to the Edition, there was not One Syllable Objected to
the Truth of it. There was as little said too, in Exception to an Advertisement
of May. 15. 1682. Obs. 138. Vol. 1. Wherein was Notify'd, that Simpson Tongue
Endeavored to Destroy the Credit of Otes, and of his Evidence; and that if any
Man would Prosecute him, I my self would find Materials to Proceed upon.

Th^re are Five or Six Passages in the Matter above, that upon the Tacking of
them together, will Naturally lead us into the Train of the Story that I am
now upon.

First, It was an Odd kind of Business, The Rise and Manner of Promoting it.
Tong's Stumbling upon the Old Popish Plot of Habernfeld; which was only the
finding out of a Model to make Another Plot by.

2 ly, What did he show the Draught of it to Otes for, but to set him his
Lesson?

3 ly, There Is Otes'es Approbation of it. As who should say; I Am of your Mind
whatever it is.

4 ly, Tong's sending Otes away among the Jesuits, to see if the Old Plot (of
almost Forty Year standing) went on still or Not. Now This was not so much to
Tell him what he was to Look for, as what he was to Find.

5 ly, Consider Otes'es Adventure upon That Errand. The Blockhead went first
for Spain, and after a while came back again, not One jot the Wiser- Tongue
finding that he was not Thoroughly possessed of the Hint, was forced to be a
little Plainer with him; and not only Advised him to go Over-Sea again; but
gave him the very Reason, and his Business. i. e. [If he could but get the
Names of the Jesuits; Learn their Ways; and make Acquaintance among them, the
People might be Easily stirred up to Fear Popery, and it would be the Making of
him for ever.] Now This Making of him, Tongue called putting him in a way. This
shall be Expounded by and by.

6 ly. It Is Remarkable how Otes Edified upon the Second Handling, by the
Discovery he made to Tongue at his Next Return. i. e. [That the Present Plot was
No New Plot, but the Old One Continued.] So that by This Reckoning, Habernfelds
Plot Sunk in 1640. and Came up again, in 1677. and 1678; after it had run
underground the Better Part of Two Kings Reigns.

These Circumstances are the very Links of the Chain. Tong's Head is set upon a
Plot: He pitches upon Habernfeld's for an Example; shows Otes it for a Fac
Simile; Otes Cons his Lesson; Runs Over-Sea among the Jesuits; Finds the Old
Plot at Work Still; Brings back Word on it: And Then, Out comes the Counterpart,
in a Narrative to make All Good. It is here further to be Noted, that Tongue was
the Dominus Fac Totum all this while; and Otes but the Tool that he wrought
withal. In Plain English, there was an Imposture Projected from the Beginning,
and it passed through the whole Train, and Conduct of the History, from One End
to the Other. Tongue Managed it; Otes Swore to it; and the Lines of the Design
were drawn from Habernfeld's Model. It rests upon Me now, to Prove what I have
said; That is to say, that Tongue was all the way a-gog upon a Plot; The Master
Operator in the Late Pretended Popish Plot; That Habernfeld's was the Original,
from whence he took his Copy; and that Otes'es Office in it, was only That of
Lung's in the Alchymist to Blow the Bellows.

I find under Tong's Own Hand, in the Copy of an Enformation Given by Him to
the House of Commons, as follows.

I have in my Wandering, fallen into some Acquaintance with Dr Beal of Yeovel in
Somersetshire; How the Maggot of it came into Tong's Head.
a Man known to many of This House. He Strongly Alarmed me, and from his
Experience of the Troubles the Jesuits and Other Papal Emissaries gave the Wise
Senators of Venice, whilst he Resided there with Sr H. W. in the Interdict of
That State: He Concluded, that though Both Honorable Houses, and his Majesty
should Unanimously Concur, and put out all your Force, You cannot prevent
their Plot, etc. At my Parting from Him, and by his Advice, (as All a man of my
Rank could do) I resolved to Oppose, Yearly and Quarterly, if possible, some
Small Treatises in Print, to Alarm, and Awaken his Majesty, and These Houses,
etc.

He tells afterward, in the Same Paper, His Stickling to Advance it.
of an Enformation he had from De la March, a French Minister; for whom he
drew a Petition; and [ how upon a Conference with him about what Blood had
discovered to him, he came to Apprehend the Fire of London to be Papal, French,
and Lovestein Plots, United or Confounded: In This London-Fire-Plot, (says he)
Major General Lambert, ( as he has usually been called) was Designed to Draw
Forces together; in appearance Fanatique, but in the Bottom, Papal, to Divert,
and Distract us, whilst the French should have Seized, or Destroyed our Naval,
and Other Military Provisions in the Tower, River, and Carcass of the City,
when her Citizens are Massacred, and Scared into the Country to their
Relations. Now the Story of This same De la March, and Lambert was altogether
News to Oats, and yet Trusty Titus, to Second his Principal; Tells the King in
his Epistle to his Narrative, that Lambert was a Papist of above Thirty Years
Standing.

He has it in Another of his Papers, that One Edward Price of Kempton in
Herefordshire, a Sadler, had for some Months, or Years, made Holsters and
Saddles for the Popish Gentry of those Parts, and for some Persons such a
Proportion, as gave him suspicion that they were about to Raise some Troops of
Horse, for some Disloyal, and Wicked Design. And so he goes-on Inferring the
Likelihood of a Plot because the Protestant Gentry did not buy Saddles, and
Holsters too, as well as the Popish Gentry.

The Paper above bears the Title of [ Dr Tong's Short Narrative and Apology for
his Book called the Massacre,] which Pamphlet of his, is Dedicated To the
Honorable theCommittee of the House of Commons appointed for the Examination
of the Popish Conspiracies. And it is Entitled [ Dr. Tong's Relation of the
General Massacre Intended and Plotted by the Papists, and brought* into
Parliament by his Direction, and Assistance. fol. 1.] He calls This Paper, in
his Epistle, [A Plain Relation of the First Discovery of the
Popish-Plotted-Conspiracy for Subverting the Government and Religion, and
Massacring the People of England, and Other his Majesty's Dominions; and the
Assassinating of his Royal Person, etc.] Now the short of the Business was
This. One Mr Boyer of Herefordshire, Arrests Green, a Weaver of the same
County, and Green Swears a Plot against him. Tongue meets Green, with a Complaint
in his Mouth, in the Court of Requests; Advises him to Present it to the
Committee for Suppressing of Popery; Takes his Enformation; Draws him up a
Petition, with Articles; and puts it into the Hand of a Zealous Member of the
House to Promote it. This was it which Tongue calls Laying the Foundation of the
Discovery of This Plot, and the bringing of it into Parliament, with One
Witness Present to Attest it. fol. 7.

The Enformation was so Trivial, that Green Himself Complains, [ he was never
yet Examined upon Oath, though he attended the Secret Committee Several Times.
fol. 8.] And so Tongue got Green to Swear his Depositions afterward, May. 12.
1679. before a Master of Chancery; to remain in Testimony for a Perpetual
Memorial. Now This was no other then a Tacit Charge, of either Negligence, or
Disaffection upon the Committee: In whose Vindication I shall adventure to say;
that if the Weaver had not been Cursed in his Mothers Belly, he could never
have failed, at That Time of the Day, of getting himself Adopted into the Order
of the Kings Witnesses, when, perchance, he was the Only Candidate for That
Honor, that ever received a Repulse;] Even Eustace Commins Himself not
Excepted.

The Doctor sets forth in Another Paper of his, called [ Dr Tong's Case and
Request] the Same Thing over again, and withal, [ that he had been at
Extraordinary, and to Him Great Charges, in Searching-out Evidences of This
Plot before it is Full Discovery; but more Especially, before Mr Otes'es
Discovery, in Attending, Soliciting, Promoting and Expediting it, etc.]

I am gotten here into so Copious, and Tiresome a Subject, that a man must even
Write in his Sleep to go thorough with it: But there needs no more to lay open
the Doctor's Weak side, then to Consider the Fire he took upon This Freak. Who
but He, to set-up for a Discoverer, both Out of Parliament, and In Parliament?
Dr Beale sets Tongue a Scribbling: Tongue puts it about, and sets De la March,
Green and Others, a Petitioning; and who but He again, in fine, to Pen their
Narratives, Enformations, and Articles; and to do the Office of Solicitor
General to the Whole Party! Who, I say, but Dr Tongue, still, to make-out the
Popish Conspiracy! The Fires of London, Wapping, Southwark, etc. The Murder of
Godfrey, and All sorts of Popish Assassinations, Massacres and Invasions; Past,
Present, and to Come! Nothing, in short, came Amiss to him.

Ordered that Dr. Tongue and Mr. Otes be Summoned to Attend the Bar of This House
at Four a Clock in the Afternoon, Tong's Credit with the House of Commons.
to give an Account Touching the Plot; and the Conspiracy, etc. Commons
Journal, Oct. 25. 1678.

Ordered that Dr. Tongue do Attend again to morrow Morning, to give an Account
concerning the Fire of the City of London. Ib.

Here Is a Manifestation, sufficient of the Hand, Interest, and Design, that Dr
Tongue had in the Plot: and the Encouragement he met withal, on the One side,
was, in All Respects, Answerable to the Zeal he Expressed for the Promoting of
it, on the Other; As will be further seen hereafter.

But yet the Wisdom of the Nation was, His Confession that he knew nothing of
the Matter.
Certainly, never more over-shot, then in laying any sort of Stress upon the
Credit of His Report. For, over and above the Absurdity of his Reasons, the
Impotence of his Passions, and the Scandal of his Authorities, that lie Open
for All the World to Judge of; he Cuts his Own Throat with his Own Hand, in a
Petition to That very House of Commons that seemed to Believe him; by laying
Reasons Unanswerable before them, why they Ought Not to Believe him, wherein he
Declares, and Affirms, [that he had no Knowledge of any Person Charged, or
Suspected to be in the Confederacy; Hardly of any One Popish Gentleman in
England.] So that here is a Popish Plot Undertaken to be Proved against so many
Persons by Name; And That Proof Accepted for Current; when the very Accuser
himself, Confesses, and Declares, that he knows not so much as any One
Conspirator. But an Infallible Vote Solves Impossibilities, and Reconciles
Contradictions. A Plot is ^esolv'd upon* A Plot there Is, and a Plot there Must
be, though they fetch it out of the Grave again, after so many Years Dead and
Buried.

This is a Story so Silly, Flat, and Nauseous, that I should hold my self
Obliged to beg a Public Pardon for Exposing it, if it were not for These Two
Uses of Application. First, to show the Senseless Ground, and Foundation of All
our Late Troubles, and Distresses: And, Secondly, That there is No Tale, or
Fable so Monstrous, or Incredible, that Prejudice, and Credulity shall not make
to Pass for Gospel. This Plot, in fine, such as it is, was Tongs Plot; The
Project of it, Copy'd-out from That of Habernfeld; and no more upon the Whole,
then One Forgery Grafted upon Another. But This will be Best Cleared, by
Confronting the Two Narratives. The Parallel will be somewhat Large; but my
hand is now In: it is a Matter of Moment that Depends upon it, and so the Case
will the Better Bear it.

CHAP. IV.
The Pretended Popish Plot of 1678. was only a Copy drawn from Habernfelds
Original, of 1640.

THe History of Habernfeld's Discovery, Habernfelds discovery Published by
Prynne. 1643.
was first Published in Forty Three, by Prynne in his Romes Masterpiece;
having been seized by him, (as he sets it forth in his Preface) in the
Archbishops Chamber in the Tower, by Warrant from the Close Committee. May.
31. 1643. His Introduction is a kind of Synopsis of the Whole Relation; which
Prynne Pronounces for so Indubitable a Truth, that [ Whoever deems it an
Imposture, may well be Reputed an Infidel, (he says) if not a Monster of
Incredulity.] To which I may Interpose, that I have known many of Mr Prynne's
Infidels, and Monsters, that have been very Good Christians, and very Honest
Men.

Upon the Coming-forth of Otes'es Popish-Plot-Narrative, in 1678. The Old Story
of Habernfeld was Reprinted, under This Title. [ The Grand Designs of the
Papists in the Reign of our Late Sovereign Charles the 1 st; And now Carried on
against his Present Majesty, his Government, and the Protestant Religion.] The
Prefacer seems to be Absolutely of Tong's and Otes'es Opinion, upon the Matter
in Question about the Two Plots, only with This Difference, That the One
Illustrates the Old Plot by the New one: and the Other Illustrates the New Plot
by the Old one: and so there is an Inference, Interchangeably drawn, from the
Resemblance of the Counterfeit to the Authority of the Story. But over and
above These Considerations, it seems to Me not unlikely, that Tongue had some
hand in the Publication: For it came out just after my Refusal to License his
Royal Martyr, where the Stress was laid upon That Point; And the Conspiracy
being, at That Time, Hot from the Forge; Tongue could not do better, then by
Matching the President, to make One Sham Vouch for Another.

It is not the Design of These Papers (says the Publisher) to give an Account
of the Discovery of the Late Plot, Resemblance of the Two Plots.
but only to Present the Reader with the Narrative of Another against his
Majesty's Royal Father of Blessed Memory; So Exactly resembling This, which now
lies under Examination, that it can hardly be called Another; Being nothing
else, but the Same thing Acted over again, only with the Necessary Alteration
of Circumstances of Time, Places, and Persons. Preface.

After this Preface, follows a Paper, Entitled: Papers and Letters about
Habernfelds Plot.
[ Sir William Boswell's First Letter to the Archbishop concerning the Plot.
Dated Hague. Sep. 9. 1640.] which he dispatched away to the Archbishop, with
one from Habernfeld Enclosed, under the Title of [ Andreas ab Habernfeld's
Letter to the Archbishop, concerning the Plot Revealed to him.]

This is Accompanied, with Another Paper, Entitled [ The General Overture, and
Discovery of the Plot.]

And there is likewise a Third Paper of Habernfelds, which he calls, [ The
Large, and Particular Discovery of the Plot, and Treason against the King,
Kingdom, and Protestant Religion; and to raise the Scottish Wars.]

The Story is Heavy, and there is too Much on it, to be Inserted at Length; but
my Business being only to set forth the Resemblance betwixt the Two Plots, and
to run the Parallel; the Heads of the Relation, in Abstract, will abundantly
Answer My End: And when I shall have gotten over This part of the Proceeding, a
Man may properly enough Enquire into the Merits of the Whole Matter, and see
what Opinion the King Himself, the Archbishop, and Sr William Boswell, had of
This Discovery.

To take the Particulars as they Rise, and to Apply the Parallel to Those
Points, in the Same Order as I find them in the Original, I shall begin with
the Preface, and run thorough both the Abstract of Habernfeld, and Tong's
Counter-Part, in as Few Words as Possible.

The Parallel of the Two Plots.
The Discoverer (he says) was a Chief Actor in This Plot, Plot.
sent hither from Rome, by Cardinal Barbarini, to Assist Con the Popes Legate,
in the Pursuit of it; and Privy to All the Particulars therein Discovered.]
Preface.

And was not Our Prime Discoverer, Parallel.
Otes, a Chief Actor too? Sent over from St Omers, to Assist the Plot; and
about the Jesuits Affairs? Lord Staffords Trial. fol. 28. Entrusted with
Commissions? Jesuits Trial, fol. 13. Tempted to Kill the King? Narrative, Ar.
60. Dispatched with Proposals to the Carmelites about it? fol. 61. Ordered to
Manage the Fire at the Hermitage? 71. To carry the White-Horse Consult from
Company to Company? fol. 18. And was not Our Discoverer, Privy to Wakeman's
Poison, Conyers'es Dagger, Pickerings Screw'd-Gun, and the Silver Bullets: The
History of the Black-Bills, the Pilgrims, Ruffians, and the Levies of Men and
Money? etc. Was not Otes privy to a matter of Eighteen Commissions, Military,
and Civil: under the Hand of Ioannes Paulus De Oliva, by Virtue of a Brief from
the Pope? (as he Swore before the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs) One of them to
John Lambert to be Adjutant-General to the Army; and Nine or Ten of them
Delivered with his Own Hand? Was he not Privy, in fine, to the Price of the
Whole Villainy, to a Single Sixpence? So that as to the matter of Privity; the
Privity of Habernfeld, and his Principal, is quite Outdone, by the Privity of
Tongue, and Otes; who, according to their Narrative, and Pretensions were
Undoubtedly Privy, to Fifty times more then ever any Two men upon the face of
the Earth were Privy to, before them.

The Discoverer (says the Preface again) was Troubled in Conscience, Plot.
and Therefore Disclosed the Conspiracy; Renounced That Bloody Church, and
Religion; though Promised Greater Advancements for his Diligence in This
Design. Ib.

And what was it but Horror of Conscience too, (if we may believe Oaths,
Parallel.
either Judicial, or Extrajudicial) that made our Converted Discoverers,
whether Papists Bred-up, or Proselyted, to Disclose This Popish Treason, and to
Renounce That Bloody Religion, in Defiance of All Offers of Rewards, and
Advancement? Was not Dugdale to have 500 l. Lord Staffords Trial. p. 43. And to
be Sainted? Ib. 44. Was not Bedloe to have 4000 l. in the Case of Godfrey?
Greens Trial. p. 30. And might not Otes, and all his Fellows, have come in for
Their Snips to, if their Consciences would have Touched?

But This Plot was Discovered under an Oath of Secrecy (says the Preface) and
the Discoverer Offered his Own Oath too, Plot
in Confirmation of the Particulars. Ib.

What was Bedloes Sacrament of the Altar. Parallel.
Twice a Week, to Conceal the Plot; (Greens Trial. fol. 33.) but an Oath of
Secrecy? Dugdale took at least Ten Sacraments of Secrecy. Sr George Wakemans
Trial. p. 10. Otes, an Oath of Secresy, at Weld-House-Chappel. Irelands Trial.
p. 28. And then there was Another Oath of Secrecy taken at Fox-Hall too. And so
for the Rest; Our Discoverers did not only Offer, but Deliver their Own Oaths,
in Confirmation of Every Article.

Habernfeld Discovers, Persons, Places, Plot.
and Times of Meeting too. Ib.

And does not Otes Discover the Lords in the Tower; Parallel.
and such Others of the Nobility and Gentry, as are in the Conspiracy. See his
Narrative from fol. 61. to the End. Their Priests, Jesuits, and Papists, of All
Sorts? The Times, and Places of their Meetings, Even to the Year Week, Day,
Nay, and sometimes to the very Hour? One while at the Savoy, Another while at
the White-Horse, Russel Street* Weld-Street, and the like.

Well! But Habernfeld's Principal Conspirators are [known to be Fit Instruments
for such a Design. Plot.
Ib.]

And are not Otes'es, as Fit Instruments as Habernfelds? Parallel.
The Principals, are, most of them, Men of Quality, Brains, Interest, and
Estate: and Consequently, better Qualified then other People for the Execution
of any Mischief they have a Mind to. Beside, that as it is a Popish Plot, they
are, not only to be All, Roman Catholics: but All made Principals too;
without leaving so much as One Soul of them to Witness for Another. Now as
there is no Means of Clearing them, on the One hand, saving by Palpable
Blunders, and Contradictions, on the Part of the Accusers; So if any of 'em
will Swear to the Hanging-up of his Fellows, on the Other Hand, he is presently
made Sacred, under the Character of a Kings Evidence; and [ Touch not his
Majesty's Witness,] carries more Authority along with it, then [ Touch not the
Lords Anointed.]

The Preface says further; that [Sir W. Boswell, and the Archbishop, Plot.
if not the King Himself, were fully Satisfied, that the Plot was Real. Ib.]

Men may be Satisfied in the Reality of a Thing, Parallel.
and yet Mistaken about it; As we have found many Men in Both Plots that have
Seemed to be Satisfied, and yet afterward abundantly Convinced that they were
Abused. So that the Belief of a Thing does not Necessarily Infer the Truth of
it; but it must be the Work of Time, and Scrutiny, to Perfect the Discovery.
Neither do I find, Effectually, that there was so much Credit given to
Habernfelds Plot, as is here Suggested. A [ Nemine Contradicente,] is No
Article of my Faith; Though it says, that [ There Is, and Has been, a Damnable
and Hellish Plot, Contrived, and Carried on, by Popish Recusants, for
Assassinating, and Murdering the King; for Subverting the Government, and
Rooting-out, and Destroying the Protestant Religion. Commons Iournal. Oct. 31.
1678.] Though I must Confess they had One Powerful way of Convincing Men, by
the Argument of Swearing them out of their Reputations, Lives, Liberties, and
Fortunes, if they would Not Believe it.

The Parallel holds thus far Exactly, and we will see now, how it Suites with the
Minutes of Habernfelds Letter to the Archbishop, which I have made as short as
I can, for the Readers Ease, and for my Own.

The Minutes of Habernfelds Letter.
Beside Expectation, This Good Man (says Habernfeld (speaking of the First
Discoverer) became Known unto me. Plot.
p. 1.

By the same Providence it was, that Otes, Parallel.
Bedloe, Prance, and Twenty more of our Plot-Merchant-Adventurers came
Acquainted. Bedloe Swore to the Lords that [ he did not know Otes,] 'till it
came out, by Providence, that [ he knew him as Ambrose, but not as Otes?] And
so, Otes, to requite his Kindness, [ knew Williams, though he did not know
Bedloe.] 'Twas such another Wonderful Providence, Bedloes knowing Prance over
a Pot of Ale, at Heaven, after he had Enquired, and been Told, which was
Prance, in the Commons-Lobby. [Damme (says Bedloe) That Is one of the Rogues
that Murdered Sr Edmundbury Godfrey.]

Plot.
As to the [ Scottish Stirs,] he speaks of. p. 1.

Parallel.
Otes'es Missionaries Answer Habernfelds Scotch Lords; of whom hereafter.

[The Factions of the Jesuits thorough England and Scotland, p. 2.] and the
Discoverers Descant; we have in Dr. Beale's Readings to Tongue upon them.

Plot and Parallel.
Otes'es Narrative ^its the [ Adjacent Writing there spoken of. Ib.]

Plot and Parallel.
[ Habernfeld got Free Liberty to Treat. Ib.] And so did Tongue.

There must be [ No Delay, Plot.
] says Habernfeld. Ib.

Make Otes'es Enformation a Record, Parallel.
Immediately, says Tongue; And so away goes the One, to Sr William Boswell, Ib.
and the Other to Sr Edmund-bury Godfrey.

And now forward. As Some Principal Heads (in Habernfeld's Relation) were
purposely Pretermitted. Plot.
p. 3.

So Bedloe shortened his Evidence against Whitebread, and Fenwick, Parallel.
in the Jesuits Trial, and Swore Further* after he had Sworn All, Before: And
so did Otes and the rest, [ Purposely Pretermit] many things, and keep
themselves upon the Reserve.

Habernfeld Propounds the Intercepting of a Packet at Bruxelles. Plot.


Our Jesuits Five Letters to be Intercepted at the Post House at Windsor.
Parallel.
p. 3. are the very same Project.

Habernfeld's Letters are [ Characteristically Written. Plot.
Ib.]

And so are the Letters in Tong's Plot-Hand. Parallel.


Read is to Vncypher them. p. 4. Plot.


As Otes Vncyphers Forty Eight, Sixty Six, Ciocolatti, Mum, Parallel.
and Mustard-Balls; as Read is to do the Same Office for Habernfeld, (P. 4.)
Or if it falls out, that Read, upon the Question, will rather Hang then
Discover more then he Knows; it is but Allowing him Thirty Thousand Masses for
the Health of his Soul, and All Is well again.

The Searching of Reads House for a Congregation, Ibid, was so much Outdone
by Our Discoverers, that for Habernfelds One Read, and One Congregation, they
have showed us Forty.

Habernfeld takes Great Care, for fear of trusting Popish Pursuivants. Plot.
Ib.

Parallel.
For which Reason, the Searching of our Houses, for Priests, and Popish
Trinkets, was Committed to Otes, Bedloe, Dangerfield, etc. instead of
Constables and Ordinary Messengers.

Habernfield Advises the Abolishing of All Bitterness of mind, Plot.
that the Intestine Enemy may be Invaded on Both Parts. p. 4.

Parallel.
Which Tongs Friends in the Westminster Parliament, Translated into the Uniting
of Protestants against the Common Enemy.

We shall come now to [ the General Overture and Discovery of the Plot:]
Bearing date, Hague, Sept. 6. 1640. sent with Sir W. Boswells First Letter. p.
6. and see how the Counterpart Answers it, Head by Head, as it lies.

The General Overture, and Discovery of the Plot, etc.
Plot.
1. That the Kings Majesty, and the Lord Archbishop are Both of them in Great
Danger of their Lives, p. 6.

Parallel.
So says, Otes'es Consult.

Plot.
2 ly, That the Whole Commonwealth is by This Means Endangered, unless the
Mischief by Speedily Prevented. Ibid.

Parallel.
A most Natural Consequence: and so says the Consult, too.

Plot.
3 ly, That These Scottish Troubles are Raised to the End, that under This
Pretext, the King and Archbishop might be Destroyed. Ibid.

Father Moor, Parallel.
and Father Saunders sent into Scotland to This very End. Otes'es Narrative.
Ar. 43.

4 ly, Plot.
That there is a Means to be Prescribed, whereby Both of them in This Case, may
be Preserved, and This Tumult Speedily Composed. Ibid.

This was the very Proposal on the Other side too; Parallel.
and the Means found out to Save All, were Swearing, Iayling, Drawing, Hanging,
and Quartering.

5 ly, Plot.
That although these Scottish Tumults be Speedily Composed, Yet that the King
is Endangered, and that there are many ways, by which Destruction is Plotted to
the King, and Lord Archbishop. Ibid.

And All is not Safe neither, Parallel.
though Scotland were Quieted; for there are many other ways Plotted to Destroy
the King: As Pickerings Gun, Conyers'es Dagger, Wakemans Poison, Invasions,
Insurrections, Assassinations, etc.

6 ly, Plot.
That a Certain Society has Conspired, which Attempts the Death of the King,
and Lord Archbishop, and Convulsion of the Whole Realm. Ibid.

This same Certain Society may be heard of at St Omers, Weld-House, Parallel.
The White-Horse-Tavern, and the like.

7 ly, Plot.
That the same Society Every Week Deposites with the President of the Society,
what Intelligence Every of them has purchased in Eight Days search; and then
Confer all into One Packet, which is Weekly sent to the Director of the
Business. p. 7.

Pacquets for the Provincial, Parallel.
and Letters of Intelligence are a Great Part of the Narrative Intrigue.

8 ly, That All the Confederates in the said Conspiracy, Plot.
may verily be Named by the Poll: But because they may be made known by Other
Means, it is thought Meet to Deferr it till hereafter. Ib.

Otes could have Poll'd All the Conspirators, Parallel.
Man by Man, if he had thought fit; but some New Men and Things must be left
for Bedloe, to Discover, some for Prance, some for Dugdale; with an Allowance
to Otes, for a Roll of Conspirators, [Whose Names do Not Occur at Present,] as
well as for those whose Names Do Occurr at Present. Narrative fol. 61.

9 ly, That there is a Ready Means whereby the Villainy may be Discovered, Plot.
in One Moment; The Chief Conspirators Circumvented, and the Primary Members of
the Conjuration, apprehended in the very Act. Ibid.

Otes has his Ready Means too for the Ordering of the whole Work in an Instant;
Parallel.
Grove and Pickering, we know, were to be Taken in St. Iames'es-Park; and the
Ruffians had been Dogged to Windsor (as Tongue Assured the Earl of Danby) if One
of the Horses had not got a Slip in the Shoulder. Or at worst; 'twas but
Picking-up Priests, Papists, and All Suspected Persons; Plundering their Baggs,
and their Houses; Rifling their Papers; Cooping-up the Popish Lords in the
Tower; and then Swearing them All into the Treason.

10 ly, [That very many about the King, who are Accounted most Faithful, Plot.
and Intimate, to whom likewise the most Secret Things are Entrusted, Are
Traitors to the King, Corrupted with a Foreign Pension, who Communicate All
Secrets of Greater or Lesser Moment, to a Foreign Power.] Ibid.

This was Otes'es Method too; Parallel.
to make Traitors of Those that the King Accounted his Best Friends; and
Consequently, to make Loyal Subjects of Traitors: And then the Old Westminster
Parliament Supplied the Pensioners.

11 ly, These, and other most Secret Things, Plot.
which shall be Necessary to be Known, for the Security of the King, may be
Revealed, if These Things shall be Acceptable to the Lord Archbishop. p. 7.

This Article is an Expletive; Parallel.
and Signifies just nothing; for how many of these Secrets did the Kings
Witnesses Promise to Reveal, that never came to Light: and, in Truth, never had
any Being in the Nature of Things! But the very Noise, and Amusement was
enough to do the Work.

12 ly. In the Mean Time; Plot.
if his Royal Majesty and the Lord Archbishop, desire to Consult well to
Themselves, they shall Keep These Things only Superficially Communicated unto
them, most Secretly under Deep Silence, Not Communicating them so much as to
those whom they Judge most Faithful to them, before they shall receive by
Name, in whom they may Confide; for else they are safe on No side. p. 8.

Just at This rate were the Superficial Communications, Parallel.
and the Injunctions of Silence, in the Case of Tongue, and Otes; and what was
the Condition at last too, but that the King should Trust No Other, then such
as the Discoverers or (which is all one) the Conspirators should Name: As Otes
Excepted to such and such Persons by Name, out of the Committee that was to
Examine him.

13 ly. Likewise they may be Assured, Plot.
that whatsoever Things are here Proposed, are No Figments, nor Fables, nor
Vain Dreams; but such Real Verities, which may be Demonstrated in every small
Tittle: For Those who Thrust themselves into This Business, are such men, who
mind no [Gain;] but the very Zeal of Christian Charity suffers them not to
Conceal These Things: Yet, both from his Majesty, and the Lord Archbishop,
some Small Exemplar of Gratitude will be Expected. p. 8.

These are the very Reasonings, and Pretenses of Ezrel Tongue, Parallel.
put into the Mouth of Titus Otes: No Figments, So help me God; No Thought of
Gain; but Pure Zeal, and Christian Charity, to work upon the Discoverers. But
yet some Small Exemplar of Gratitude will be Expected; as a matter of Ten, or
Twelve Pound a Week-Pension for Otes; and the Value, perhaps, of Four or Five
times as much more, in Presents, and Veils: A Deanery, or some such Trifle, for
Tongue. What is All This, but a Flat Contradiction, thrown in the very Face of
the Pretext?

It is as Clear as Day, that Tongue and Habernfeld, in All Things Material, Walk
Hand in Hand thorough the Whole Story: But to avoid Idle Repetitions as much as
may be, I shall in the Next Place make a Short Abstract of Habernfeld's Last,
and Long Paper of Intelligence; and so Finish my Parallel. It bears This
Following Title; And from thence I shall Proceed to the Heads of it.

[The Large, and Particular Discovery of the Plot against the King, Kingdom,
and Protestant Religion, and to raise the Scottish Wars. p. 13.]
Plot.
The [A] King is in Danger of his Life and Crown, [B] England and Scotland to be
Subverted. The Discoverer of This was Born and Bred in the [C] Popish Religion*
being [ D] Fit for the Design. p. 13. He was [ E] sent over by Cardinal
Barbarini [F] Troubled in Conscience, and [ G] came over to the Orthodox
Religion. [H] Revealed the Treason to a Friend, [I] Put the Particulars in
Writing, out of which were drawn [K.] Articles. p. 14. He falls upon the [L]
Iesuitical Offspring of Cham. p. 15. The [M] Society are the Conspirators. The
[N] Popes Legate is their Chief Patron. They hold their [O] Weekly
Intelligences. p. 16. Cuneus, the Instrument of the [P] Conjured Society. He
Presents the King with Roman Curiosities: Promises, but Means it not, to
Espouse the Cause of the Palatinate. p. 17. Offers the Bishop a Cardinals Cap;
makes use of Court-Instruments and Mediations. p. 18. But finding All in Vain;
[Q] Ambushes were to be Prepared, wherewith the Lord Archbishop, together with
the King, should be Taken. p. 19. They pass [R] Sentence against the King, and
lay hold of the Indignities put upon Prynne, Burton, and Bastwick; and the
Scotch Service Book; to stir up the Puritans to a Revenge. Some Scottish Popish
Lords, are sent to Inflame [S] Scotland; by which, the [ T] Hurtful Disturber
of the Scottish Liberty might be Slain. [ V] An Indian Nut provided by the
Society, and showed to the Discoverer, in a [ W] Boasting Manner; To Poison the
[X] King, after the Example of his Father. p. 21. Hamilton's Chaplain Private
with Cuneus: A Chaplain of Richelieu's sent over to Assist the Conspiracy: A
Character given of Sr Toby Mathews. p. 22. And an Account of his Intelligences,
Haunts, and Meetings. p. 23. The Story of Read over again. p. 24. Jesuits
Letters, and Meetings, And [Y] All the Papists of England Contributing to the
Design. p. 25. One Widow Gave Forty Thousand Pound English, toward it, And
Others, beyond their Ability in Proportion. He follows This, with a Ramble upon
Several Persons by Name, that were dipped in the Conspiracy; And further with
This Remarkable Discovery.

The President of the aforesaid Society, was my Lord Gage, a Jesuit Priest,
Dead above Three Years since. He had a Palace Adorned with Lascivious Pictures,
which Counterfeited Profaneness in the House; but with them was Palliated a
Monastery, wherein Forty Nuns were Maintained, hid in so Great a Palace. It is
Situated in Queen Street, which the Statue of a Golden Queen Adorns. The
Secular Jesuits have bought All This Street, and have Reduced it into a
Quadrangle, where a Jesuitical College is Tacitly built, with the Hope that it
might be Openly finished as soon as the Universal Reformation was begun. p. 29.]

To pass a Short Note now upon the Whole; Parallel to the Large Discovery.
The Design upon the [A] King, and [B] England and Scotland, is the General
Scope of Otes'es Plot.. He pretends to come over from [ C] the Popish Religion.
No man Fitter for the [ D] Design: [ E] sent over, [ F] Troubled in Conscience,
and [G] Converted. The General of the Jesuits at Rome, and the Provincial Here,
did the Parts of Cardinal Barbarini, and the Popes Legate. Otes [H] Revealed the
Treason to Tongue, and [ I] put the Particulars in Writing; out of which, Tongue
Extracted [K] Articles. Otes makes [ M] the Society the Conspirators. The
Provincial serves for [ N] The Popes Legate. The [O] Weekly Intelligences Grove
took an Account of; and for Instruments of the [P] Conjured Society. Otes'es
Narrative has them in abundance. The [Q] Ambushes were laid in St. Iames'es,
and at Windsor. The [R] Sentence passed at several Consults. The Rebellion in
[S] Scotland, by Irritating the Puritans was Managed by Otes'es Missionaries;
and the King to be Murdered, as the [T] Hurtful Disturber of their Liberties.
Wakemans Poison was [ V] the Indian Nut; and Cuneus's Boasting of it, Answers
Conyers'es showing Otes the Dagger, in Grays-Inn-Walks. Habernfelds Talk of
Poisoning the [X] King, after the Example of his Father, was Matched, both in
the Narrative of Otes'es Plot, and Expressly in his Epistle before that
Narrative: to the Eternal Infamy of the Reporters of it: And as Habernfeld [Y]
makes All the Papists of England to be Concerned in This Conspiracy, so Otes in
his Epistle, and Narrative, has made an Universal Plot on it: Only we want a
Forty-Thousand-Pound Widow to Perfect the Parallel: But That Defect is Amply
Supplied in Irish Contributions, and Other Secret Services.

As to the Foolery of the Last Paragraph, the Man must be a Great Stranger to
London, as well as to Common Sense, that can look upon it as any other then a
most Extravagant Foppery; and without any Color, or Coherence.

After This Large Discovery, as the Enformer Pretends, comes a Summary, in
Eleven Heads, of the Whole Matter, which is only the same over again; and is
Answered over again by the same Parallel: Only the 10 th Clause has an
Expression in it Worthy of Remarque.

Some (says he) of the Principal, Unfaithful ones of the Kings Party, are
Notify'd by Name. Many of whose Names [Occur] Not yet their Habitations are
Known. p. 31.

Now in Otes'es Muster of the Conspirators, it runs [ Whose Names [Occurr] at
Present. Nar. fol. 61.] One would have thought they might have Varied the
Phrase a little: But our Modern Discoverers have been much better at Copying
then at Inventing; Witness This Whole Parallel; and the Five Jesuits Letters.
It must not be Omitted neither, that [ the Order of Politicians] which
Habernfeld speaks of, p. 15. is Learnedly Turned, forsooth, into the Order of
[POLITITIANI,] by Otes, in his Narrative. Art. 53.

In Conclusion, here is a Plot Copy'd-out to the Life, and the Transcript, a
most Scandalous, and Impious Cheat, beyond all Controversy, whatever the
Original was. But in regard the Publisher Affirms, that the Kings Minister, and
the Archbishop, if not the King Himself, were fully Satisfied in the Reality
of it; we shall first Examine upon what Grounds the Publisher speaks; And after
That, come to a Fair Reasoning upon the Main Matter in Issue; which cannot be
so well done, as by Delivering the Several Letters at Large, and then making a
Judgment upon the Whole Proceeding. We are got thus far Onward of our way now
thorough the Parallel; And the Next Question will be This.

CHAP. V.
Was Habernfelds Model it self, an Historical Truth, or a Fiction?

WHoever looks Narrowly into Habernfelds Plot, and the several Parts of it,
will find it to be rather a Lesson, or a Project, then the Just Account of an
Historical Truth. The Business of Conscience, Oaths of Secresy, Enformation,
and the Circumstances of Who, What, Where, When, How, etc. are only matters of
Course; for there must be Persons, Things, Places, Time, and Manner Assigned,
even to the most Extravagant Fiction that ever was in Nature. This was the
Composition, First, of Habernfelds Discovery, and afterward of Tong's
Counter-part of it: He furnishes Otes with Lights, and Instructions; Gives the
Contrivance the Name of a Conspiracy; Titus Plucks up a Good Heart, and Swears
to it, and so there is a New Plot made of an Old one.

It must be Observed that This Intelligence of Habernfeld was set afoot, when
Charles the First, The First Opening of Habernfelds Plot.
was at York, in September, 1640. to Advise with his Great Council of Peers
about the Scottish Rebellion. The Kings Affairs were upon a Pinch, and there
never was more need of a Forgery to Cast the Scottish Insurrection upon the
Papists, and to turn the Peoples Hearts, From, and Against his Majesty, then
upon that Juncture: Especially, for a Preparatory to the Work of the Next
Parliament, that was to Meet Novem. 3. following. Upon this Occasion, Sir W.
Boswell, (the Kings Minister at the Hague) wrote to the Archbishop about This
Plot. The Letter is Long, and so are the Other Papers upon This Subject: but to
satisfy the Readers Curiosity they may be seen at Large in the Pamphlet
heretofore mentioned, or in the First Volume of Dr. Nalsons Collections. fol.
467. So that a short Abstract will be enough for my Business: And I shall begin
with Sir W. Boswells First Letter. He sends Enclosed in this Letter, a Copy of
Habernfeld's Enformation concerning the Plot, wherein the Points that I shall
Remarque upon, are Principally These.

An Abstract of Sir W. Boswells First Letter.
The Discovery was First, made to him at [Second-Hand,] and [in Speech.]

The Matter was soon after put into [Order,] Avowed by the [Principal Party;]
and Delivered him in Writing by [Both Together;] Upon Promise and Oath, to
Reveal it only to his Grace, and by him to his Majesty.

Habernfeld remits himself to the Archbishop, with a most Earnest Charge of
Silence, and that No Person be By, or within Hearing, at the Communicating of
it to his Majesty; and No Mortal else to know of it.

There must be no Asking of Names, nor of Further Discoveries, nor
Advertisements; nor the Discoverer, upon any Terms, to be so much as
Pointed-at, for fear of spoiling the Whole Business: For the [King, Government,
and Religion,] are All at Stake, and the Enformer will run Extreme Hazard of
his Person, and Life. No; it must not be so much as Inquired How, or by What
Means the Discoverer came to Know All This.

As to Sr William Boswells Opinion of the Matter; he ^as these words, [ As I
May believe These Overtures are Verifyable in the Way they will be laid; and
that the Parties will not shrink, etc.] And again [ If These Overtures happily
sort with his Majesty's, and your Graces Mind, etc.]

The Rest is only Praying of Instructions; Proposing a Cipher; and so with a
suitable Decency of Respect, in such a Case, he Concludes his Letter. Hague.
September. 9. 1640. Sti. Loci.

There was never less perhaps of Surprise, or Astonishment (the weight of the
matter Considered) then was Expressed upon This Occasion: which shows
Sufficiently What Opinion the Kings Minister Entertained of the Truth of the
Story. He was Sworn to Secrecy, Himself; and he Presses it to the Archbishop
under the Conscience of That Obligation. The Caution is Habernfelds; Sr William
Boswells Confidence goes no farther then I [MAY] Believe. And then [IF] These
Overtures happily sort with his Majesty's, and your Graces Mind, and shall
accordingly prove Effectual in their Operation] etc. Here Is [ No Contracting of
Bowels; No Loins trembling with Horror, in the Style of Habernfeld. p. 4. and
yet I persuade my self, that the Kings Resident had as much Tenderness for the
Kings Life, as Andreas ab Habernfeld.

But here is the Train of my Parallel still, The Parallel of Tongs Plot, and
Habernfelds goes on still.
even through This Letter it felf. Otes'es pretended Discovery was [by a Second
^and] by Tongue; And at First, in [Spe^ch] too; which was the Case of Tongue again
to Mr Kirkby. It was likewise [Order'd] by Tongue, and [ soon after Avowed by the
Principal,] (which was Otes) and [ Delivered in Writing, also, by Both
Together.] And so was Otes'es True Narrative]. [Vpon Promise and Oath of
Secrecy:] which Agrees with Young Tong's Paper of Ian. 5. 1681. [ When my
Father and Otes came to Fox-Hall (says he) Mr Kirkby was taken in as an
Assistant, after he had been Sworn to Secrecy:] And This is Effectually,
Confirmed again by Mr Kirkby's Own Narrative, which says that Tongue Earnestly
requested him not to Acquaint any Other Person with it then the King.] Nay
Habernfeld takes upon him, in some sort, to Tutor his Majesty, by Prescribing
to him the very Measures of Faith, Justice, and Prudence, that he was to Walk
by. He must not Show, nor Trust, nor be Overheard, nor Ask Questions; but lay
it home to the King, as he will Answer it to God in a Case of Conscience, etc.
So that not only Tongs Model, but Otes'es Sawcyness was Copied, after the
President of Habernfeld. Upon the Whole Matter, here are so many Amusements,
Generalities, and Restrictions, and the Danger Spun out so far at length, that
Charles the First might have been Murdered Fifty times over, in the very Time
of Habernfeld's telling his Tale; And Charles the Second, in the Parallel, ran
the very same Risque in the Discovery of Otes.

Upon the Receipt of Habernfelds from Sr William Boswell, The Archbishop writes
Immediately to the King.
his Grace of Canterbury Dispatched an Express away immediately to the King,
and received his own Letter again with his Majesty's Directions in the Margent.
The Marginals are only Assurance of Secrecy; Notes of Respect; and Directions
What to do, without laying any Stress upon the Danger of the Conspiracy. The
Only Passages in the Archbishops Letter, for my present purpose, are These
Following.

[ The Danger it seems is Imminent, and laid by God knows whom, An Abstract of
his Graces Letter.
but to be Executed by them that are near about you.

Now may it please your Majesty, This Enformation is either True, or there is
some Mistake in it. If it be True, the Persons that make the Discovery will
deserve Thanks, and Reward. If there should be Any Mistake in it, your Majesty
can lose nothing but a little Silence.

The Business (If it be) is Extreme Foul; The Discovery thus by God's
Providence offered, seems Fair. I do hereby humbly beg it upon my Knees of your
Majesty, that you would Conceal This Business from Every Creature, and His Name
that Sends This to me.

Sr, For Gods sake, and your Own Safety, Secrecy in This Business: And I
beseech you send me back This Letter, and All that comes with it, speedily, and
Secretly, and trust not your Own Pockets with them. I shall not Eat, nor Sleep
in Quiet, 'till I receive them.

Once again, Secrec^, for Gods sake and your Own.

So far am I now from* finding the King, and the Archbishop so [Fully
Satisfy'd] of the Reality of this Plot, (as Mr. Prynne affirms they were) that
the Matter seems to Me to be left rather in Balance, with an [ If it be True;]
And [ the Business, If it be, is Extreme Foul:] Beside that the Expression of [
By no body knows whom,] seems to Intimate from That Generality, that the
Enformation is either Fruitless, or False: For it Insinuates a Treachery in
some about the King; It Labors to make his Majesty Ielous of his Servants,
without giving him any Means to Avoid the Danger. The Main Stress of the Letter
lies upon the Point of [ Secrecy,] wherein the Archbishop did but Comply with
the Injunctions that were laid upon him; nor is there any thing more said in
This Case upon the Hazard of the Kings Person, then by that Dutyfull, Wise,
Zealous, and Faithful Prelate, would have been said, upon the Odds of Ten
Thousand Worlds to a Nut-shell, against the Truth of the Enformation* And Those
Words [ Sr, For Gods sake, and your Own Safety, [Secrecy] in This Business,]
Amount to no more then such a Caution as would have been given against the most
Unlikely of Possibilities.

There are Two Letters more of Sr William Boswells to the Archbishop, of Later
Date, which have little more in them then Secrecy, and Circumspection, over and
over again; and the Discoverers Oath Offered [to what he has already Declared,
or shall hereafter Declare in the Business.] [His Name must be still Concealed,
though he thinks his Majesty, by the Character he gives of Himself, will easily
Imagine who he is, having been known so Generally through Court, and City for
Three or Four Year in the Quality, and Employment he Acknowledges by his
Declaration Himself to have held.

As to Habernfelds Readyness to Swear; The ^arallel goes on.
That has been Otes'es Part too; and for his [Secrecy, and Circumspection,]
Tongue and Otes have kept themselves upon the Same Guard. Habernfeld was afraid
of being Discovered; while Tongue and Otes Refine upon his Fears* and Demonstrate
the Ill Consequences of Blabbing; As in the Case of his being Can'd, and
Buffeted by Whitebread, and almost Murdered in Cock-Pit-Alley by a Drunken
Fellow that took him for a Bawd; which Affront, Otes Files to the Popish
Account; for Stratford, he says, (the Drunken Fellows Name) was Employed by the
Jesuits to do him a Mischief. Narrative Article 80.] I am to Mark once again,
that after All Habernfelds Importunities to be kept Private, he Discovers
Himself: which is but Tongue and Otes, all along still.

Upon Dr. Tongs First Appearance before the King and Council, Otes known to his
Majesty by a Certain Token.
Sept. 28. 1678. he was desired (as I have the Story under his own Hand) to
give some Character of Mr Otes's Person: [In that, he referred himself to his
Majesty, and the Board, to whom Mr Otes was Well known, he said, by Several
Affairs, which he had Managed before them with Uarious Success, as he had
heard; and particularly in an Affair of the Navy, wherein he was Employed under
Sir Richard Ruth 's Command.] His Majesty thereupon ( says Dr. Tong's Paper)
called him to Mind, and said he knew him.] Here Is the Parallel of Otes'es
Incognito too: And what was Otes'es Business before the King and Council at
last, but briefly This.

One Parker of Hastings in 1675. The Token i^ self.
upon very Good Reasons, kept Otes out of the Pulpit; Otes, in Requital, Swore
Sodomy upon him: Parker thereupon was Clapt-up, Indicted, Tried, and Acquitted,
upon Manifest Proof of the Impossiblity of Otes'es Accusation to be True: for,
by Good Luck, Parker Proved himself to have been at a Public Meeting, at the
time laid in the Indictment. While Parker was in Prison, Otes Accused This
Parkers Father, for very Scandalous Words against some of the Lords of the
Council; The Matter was brought to a Hearing; Parker Discharged, and the Whole
Business found to be a False and Malicious Prosecution. This was the Affair
that made Otes Known to the King, and Council: And then for his Employment
under Sr. Richard Ruth; If his Coat had not Pleaded for his Neck, he might have
Stretched, for Buggery, while he was under his Command; And never any Creature
certainly was Valued upon his being known to a Privy Council, by Lewder Tokens.
But now to the Story of Habernfeld again.

The Intelligence began Sep. 6. 1640. and from thence, Habernfelds Plot had
Less Credit every day then Other.
to the following October. 15. it was Every day less Heeded then Other:
Insomuch, that Sr. William Boswells Two Last Letters, had little more in them
then a Ministerial Respect to his Majesty's Order and Command; and There it
was, (for ought I could ever hear to the Contrary) that the Discovery Sunk too,
without any further Tidings of the Sentence, or of the Ambushes in Habernfelds
Declaration. Neither do I find, after all his Instances for Concealment, and
his Promises of Discovery, so much as One Proveable Point in the Whole
Relation; but it runs altogether upon Generalities, and Political Reflections,
and from thence it was, that Tongue drew the Lines of Otes'es Narrative. Any man
that has Eyes in his Head may see, that the Plot of 1678. was taken out of That
of 1640. And truly I look upon Habernfelds Plot to have been as much a Sham in
the Original, as Tong's was in the Copy. It was Started in 1640. when the
Scotts were up to the Ears in the Rebellion. The Peoples Heads were set upon
Plots at That Time, and the Faction had need of them; for they had no better
way in the World to Palliate the Treason, then to make the Papists the Authors
of it; and by a kind of Revulsion, to draw the Ill Humor from the Puritans to
the Roman Catholics: Beside, the Dilemma they put upon the King, either to be
Ruined, by the Envy of Joining Interests with the Papists, or by the want of
Those Hands which might have Contributed to his Preservation. The Discoverer
pretends himself a Convert too, in Abhorrence of the Malicious Practices of the
Bloody Romanists. So that he Dates his Conversion from before the Scottish
Tumults, which began in 1637. and brings in his Discovery, betwixt Two and
Three Year after. So that either the Story was a Cheat, or the Penitent was a
Cheat; and it is just as Broad as it is Long, as to the Kings Interest, whether
of the Two.

And it is not All neither, that the Manage of it was Cold, and Dilatory; The
Progress Slow, and the Enformation Extremely Short, and Trivial; but the
Narrative it self is Inconsistent, One Part of it with Another, and as Coursly
Contrived, as it is Incongruously put together.

Cardinal Richelieu, he says, was the First Mover of the Scottish Troubles, and
yet Lowden was Committed to the Tower for Signing an Address for Relief, and
Protection, to That very Cardinal. So that the Scots rather dealt with the
French, then the French with Them; And how Great-Good-Will soever the Cardinal
might have for our Divisio^s, we do not read of any Visible Succors yet they
received from That Quarter.

If the Five Members were Papists, Well and Good; for [ their Treating with
Foreign Power to Assist them, was One Article of their Charge. Exact Coll. p.
544.] And then the Great Act of Indemnity, upon the Late Kings Restoration, is
a Thousand Proofs against them; for they had the Wit to carry the Retrospect of
That Pardon up to 1637. That is to say, to the Opening of the Scotch Tumults;
which was a matter of Three Year beyond the Date of the English Rebellion: and
shows what sort of Papists they were, that Moved the Scottish Broils. There
never was perhaps such a Jumble of Nonsense put upon a Nation, for Politiques,
as in These Two Pretended Plots, the King was at the same time to be Murdered
by the Protestants, as a Papist, and by the Papists, as a Puritan; and his
Roman Catholic Subjects in Flesh and Blood, to have their Brains beat out in
his Defense, by Another Army of Papists in the Air, that sought his Confusion.
The Papists, it seems, Disaffected the People; Instructed the Faction, Managed
the Rebellion; Laid Ambushes (says Habernfeld, and Otes after him) for the
King: Passed Sentence upon him, and in the End, were Sequestered, Plundered,
Iayl'd, Hang'd-up, or Cut to pieces, by the Puritans for their Pains.

But to draw to an End, Dr Heylin in his Cyprianus Anglicus, and the Author of
the Popes Nuncio, are both Agreed upon it, that the Commission of Cuneus
respected only to the Queen, and her Devotion. It appears likewise, that there
were some Overtures toward a Better Understanding betwixt the Members of the
Two Churches, by Certain Abatements and Approches, on the One side, and on the
Other; but not One Syllable of a Plot upon his Majesty's Person, 'till This
Bohemians Revelation. The Publisher of Whitlocks Memorials, makes no more of
Habernfelds Long Letter, then [ a Fancy which Prynne has Published in Print,
upon Trust, (as he uses to do) as well as Others. fol. 31.]

It is further to be Considered, that for This Plot, (such as it was) the King
knew of it, and never Minded it further; Though Prynne makes it the Root of all
our Following Calamities; and Tongue brings it down to Otes'es Discovery, and the
Lord knows how long after: So that Charles the First, Fought, and Acted against
himself, all the while, and came to be Murdered in the Conclusion, by the One
side because he Would Not be a Papist, and by the Other, because he Was One.
Just as Tongue brought the Late King into Otes'es Plot, against his Own Life,
Crown, and Dignity.

CHAP. VI.
If Tong's, or Otes'es Plot, was an Imposture, whether or no was it so Designed
from the Beginning; or were the Impostors Themselves, Imposed upon.

THat This Plot was a Cheat, is no longer a Doubt, nor, at Present, the
Question; but whether it was Originally Meant for One, or Afterward Improved
into One, will be the Point in This Place. Now I am persuaded, that it was
Both; for it is no less Clear, that Tongue Vnkennel'd the Fox, then it is that
Shaftsbury, the Master of the Bloud-Hounds, Governed the Chase. I shall be very
careful of Delivering any thing upon This Subject but on as Good Authorities
as the Testimony of Authentic Papers, Reasonable Inferences, and Notoriety of
Fact can furnish me withal: And I doubt not of making Good the Truth of my
Evidences, or the Force, and Equity of my Conclusions, upon as Pregnant Proofs,
and Presumptions, as the Law it self requires for the Fair Gaining of a Cause
in Westminster Hall.

In One of Dr. Tong's Papers, I find These Words [ To Discover the Plot against
the King and his Family, Tongs Plot.
I wrote the Royal Martyr in the Year 1672.] Or, as he has it in several Other
Places [ About the Year Seventy One and Two.] So that here is a Plot Presumed,
and a Book Written, purposely to Discover it; but No Plot as yet in Sight, more
then the Design of Setting up One Plot under the Apprehension of Another. It Is
but first putting it in the Peoples heads, that there Is a Popish Conspiracy. 2
ly, Asking them what they would do, if the Papists should Rise? 3 ly, Beginning
a Fire, a Massacre, or an Insurrection, Themselves, and calling it a Popish
one, and here is the Work Carry'd-on in a Direct Line from Tong's Royal Martyr
to the Battle at Sedgmore.

According to Tong's Computation we are to believe Habernfeld's Plot,
Habernfeld's and Tongs Plot, much the same.
and Otes'es to be One and the same; though well nigh Forty Years betwixt 'em:
An Eight Years Rebellion; A Twelve Years Interregnum; (as to the Kings Exercise
of his Power.) Another Dozen of Years from the Restoring of the Late King,
Intervening; The Managers of the Old Plot, in their Graves; Not so much as One
of Habernfeld's Patrons, or Instruments, in Being, to Promote it: And yet after
so many Turns, Changes, and Wonderful Revolutions of State, (never Stranger
perhaps) in Two Kings Reigns, we are set upon the Hunt, in Seventy Eight, for a
Plot Antecedent to the Scottish Tumults in Thirty Seven; and to take Tong's,
and Otes'es Word for it, that Their Narrative is, in Effect, but the True
History of Habernfeld's, and the Old Plot Continued. If it should be s^id that
it is only the Same Influence Continued, they will be put to Prove the
Descending of it, in a Regular, and an Uninterrupted Process, and Operation,
which is a thing as ^mpossible to be made-out, as it is Ridiculous to Imagine:
Beside, that All the Old Actors are either out of the World, out of the Case,
or out of Play; and an Inference would hold as well from the History of Noah's
Flood to the Last Sea-breach, as from One Conspiracy to the Other: Over and
above that, This Fancy puts All Otes'es Intelligences, Dispatches, Commissions,
and Consults, quite out of Doors. To talk of a Plot of Reformation going on,
signifies Nothing, where the King-Killing Plot is the Question. The Plot of
Persuading Other People to be of Our Religion, ever Did, and Does, and Will
go-on, no doubt on it, 'till People are all of a Mind; and it is but a
Charitable Duty, for a Man that thinks Himself in a Safe way to Heaven, to wish
that his Brother would go along with him for Company. Beside, that This is a
Design to Date from Edward the Sixth, or Henry the Eighth, rather then from
Cuneus, or Habernfeld. But Tongue talks of Habernfelds Plot, as if it were to
serve to the end of the World, like a Perpetual Almanac* [The Son (says Tongue
after Cuneus) was to follow the Fate of his Father.] Why did they not Dispatch
him then in his Exile; when they had him in their Power? Why did they put it
off so long after his Return? How came This Malicious Determination to Sleep
all this while? Or where did it Rest? The Most, in fine, that can be made on it,
is, that Tongue might perchance Imagine a Plot, and That Plot to be Everlasting
too, where in Truth there was None at all; and a man may lie under a Mistake,
without Incurring the Scandal of an Impostor: To which, This is my Answer: that
I lay no Stress upon bare Likelihoods, Possibilitie^, or Peradventures: But I
shall Prove from his own Pen, and Practice, that he Meditated an Imposture from
the Beginning, and Assisted it with all his Might.

But why the History of Habernfelds Plot of Forty, in the Year Seaventy Two?
Saving only to Frame a New Plot by it that should Answer the Features of the
Old One? At this rate, he Made the Plot that he Pretended only to Divine, or
Foresee: And instead of Tracing Habernfelds Plot down to Otes'es, he Carry'd-up
Otes'es Narrative to sit for the Picture of Habernfelds. He did, in short, like
your Prophetical Incendiaries; That First Foretell Fires, and then Kindle them.

Tongue an Agent for Popery.
It is well known among the Parishoners of St. Mary Staynings London, that for
some Years before the Alarm of the Pretended Popish Plot, Tongue was perpetually
Calculating, what Wonderful Things they should soon See and Hear from the
Papists: Insomuch, that an Enformation of August 1681. was Delivered upon That
Subject, to Sr Leoline Ienkins, in these Following Words.

These are to Certify whom it may Concern, A Remarkable Practice.
That the Parties Subscribed, do Acknowledge and Declare, that Dr Otes and Dr
Tongue were very well acquainted together in our Parish of St. Mary-Staynings,
London, before Dr Otes went to St. Omers, and afterward. And further we do
declare, that we have heard Dr Tongue say at a Public Table to several of our
Neighbors, that if any Person or Persons would turn to the Roman Religion, the
said Dr Tongue would have them to a Place, where the Persons so Turned should
receive Fourteen shillings a Week, or Words to the same Purpose; which, he
said, would be Paid, without Loss of Time, or Hindrance of Business.

A^g. 26. 1^8^. Christopher Kemble, James Morton.



It was well enough Judged of Tongue, that the Dread of Popery in Vision, was the
ready way to Introduce the Belief of a Popish Plot in Fact; and that the
Presage would Naturally Usher-in the Imposture. He took his Text still out of
Habernfeld; made a New Narrative of an Old One; Cut it out into Articles; Got
them Home Sworn; (which he calls making a Record of them) and so brought his
Own Predictions to Pass. That this was his Aim, Prospect, and Intent, no Mortal
will be able to Doubt, that takes ^long with him the Circumstances, and the
Manage of That Affair. He had Otes all this while in his Eye, and at his Elbow,
and Command: So that he was his Tool, his Witness, and his Pensioner, All in
One; A Fellow that had neither Brains, Money, Friends, Credit, nor Conscience;
but a Shameless Hardness of Heart, and Forehead, to Qualify him for a Confident
to This Execrable, and Diabolical Secret. Tong's Offer of Fourteen Shillings a
Week to any man that should turn Papist, was only a more Artificial way of
Fishing for Witnesses: For He that would go over, or Pretend to go over, for
Fourteen Shillings, would probably come back again for Four and Twenty. This
was the Course he took afterward with Otes; And so the Project Advanced from
Step to Step, as Naturally as One Point of a Line runs into Another. It Is True,
that he Crossed Shins a little with himself, in First Frighting People with the
Fear of Popery, and Then, playing the Part of a Popish Agent for the Promoting
of it; but he wanted Mer^enaries to Assi^^ him in his Design, and This was his
way of Angling, to Hook them In. Briefly, Tong's Heart was set upon a Plot, and
for want of Invention to Make a New one, he Contents himself with the
Counterfeit of an Old one. He sets it afoot; Otes Kisses the Book upon it;
Collateral Evidences are Ferreted out; and so soon as ever the Brat was in
Condition to endure the Air, who but Tongue to lay it at the Door of St Stephens
Chapel, where he knew it would never want Fathers to Own it; And from That
time it was Adopted, in Common Fame, the Parliaments Plot; and, to follow the
Allegory, it was put out to the Kingdom to see it Nursed, and Brought-up at the
Charge of the Public.

So soon as ever Dr. Tongue found that his Neighbors were not to be Caught with
That Bait, he bethought himself of a Surer Chard, yet nearer hand to Trust to;
Meaning Titus Otes. But before I proceed to the Merits of the Cause, and to
Consider how far Jointly and Severally they were Both Concerned in the Manage
of That Intrigue, it will do well to enquire, First, where Otes Was at That
time? And, 2 ly, How Tongue and He came to be Acquainted?

The Dr. in One of his Papers has These Words [ Mr Otes (says he) had Hired a
Lodging in the Barbican near Sr Richard Barker's House, the more conveniently
to Discourse with the Dr about their [Common Purpos^:] Which [Common Purpose]
was no Other then an Agreement of Confederacy in the Common Cheat.

The Occasion of their First Acquaintance was This. How Tongue and Otes came
Acquainted.
[ Sr Richard Barker Presented Otes'es Father to a Church in Hastings. This
brought Titus Otes to Sr Richards, and There it was that Tongue came first
acquainted with him; and showed him several Treatises that he had fitted for
the Press.] This I have under Tong's Own Hand in a Paper Entitled [ a Narrative
Preface.]

The same Paper says likewise, that in 1675. Sr R. B. took the Dr into his
House, where he Continued ['till Mr Otes Returned from St. Omers, in July.
1678.]

And now we have Brought them together, it will do well to see a little what
they Did together, and how they Concerted their Matters from One Imposture, to
Another.

The Preface abovementioned says; Their Practices together.
that [ the Dr showed to Mr Otes (then dessrous of Employment) several
Treatises in pursuance of the Advice he had taken with the Reverend Dr Beale,
etc.] And he says in Another Paper, That [ his Royal Martyr, was, if not the
Only, nor Chief, yet not the Least Incentive to Otes'es Adventure among the
Jesuits.

He says again, [ that the Jesuits had kept Otes so Close during his Abode in
London, Tongs Plea for Otes'es Perjury.
in Attendance on Their Consultations in the Months of April, and May, that he
by Providence only found Testimony of his being here; and did Watch, and Keep
him so Strictly at the College in St Omers 'till June, 1678. Old Style, that
they thereon most Confidently Built their Lately Disproved Assertion, That he
never stirred thence.

Upon the Clause above, lies the Main Stress of the Cheat; and it needs to be
very particularly Expounded. Otes was hard put to it to Prove himself in London,
at the Consult in April, and May, 1678. His Pretext for want of Witnesses, was;
that [ he was Charged to lie Close, and keep Private,] but he made a shift
however to bring Four Persons at his Trial to speak to That Point. Two of them
Contradicted a Third, and a 4 th Swore to the Wrong Year. See Otes'es Trial,
fol. 91. A Perjury, in fine, was Proved against him upon the Oaths of Two and
Twenty Witnesses. fol. 87. And what does Tongue now, but Knowingly, and Wickedly,
upon this Pinch, Cover, and Support a Perjury? He Imputes his want of Evidence,
to his Lying so Close: (Inferring, that if He could see No body, No body could
see Him) And Suggests, that he was Here, in April, or May, 1678. Went over to
St Omers soon after; and then came back again, in June or July, as was set
forth in his Defense. Thus far, Tongue on Otes'es Behalf, though his Soul, and
Conscience Knew to the Contrary.

The Pinch of the Question is Briefly This. Was Otes in England, April. 24. as
he Swears he Was? and did Tongue know Certainly, whether he Was Here or No? It Is
a strange Thing, that Otes should go to Sir Richard Barkers, where Tongue Lodged;
Be seen there by some of his Servants, and Moreover Ask of them for Tongue, (as
they Swear all This at the Trial) and Tongue not so much as Hear any thing all
this while of Otes'es being in England. Nay, Tongue is Positive on the Other
hand, He Contradicts Otes upon the Main Point.
that he did Not Return, till June or July; according to the Computation of the
Style. [Till Mr Otes Returned from St Omers in IVLY. 1678.] says the Narrative
Preface abovementioned.

And so in Another Paper, Entitled, [ Tongs Case and Request.] [The Dr. (says
he) did Actually Produce to Light a Narrative Testimony of the Hellish Plot of
the General Massacre, in JUNE, 1678. [ Before Mr Otes Returned from St Omers.]

And he sets forth likewise in a Petition to the House of Commons, that [ he
Presented them with a Discovery of the Popish Massacre, in JUNE 1678: [ Before
Mr Otes, or Any other Discoverer appeared.] And he has the same thing over and
over in Diverse Papers, with an Emphatical Note still, that it was [ Before Otes
came over, in JUNE, or IVLY. 1678.]

Simpson Tongue says, in Effect, the same Thing in his Petition to his Majesty.
i. e. [ Your Petitioner does Protest in the Presence of Allmighty God, That it
is very True, The Plot was a Shamm.
that the Plot was Contrived by my Father and Titus Otes, when he Returned the
Second Time from beyond the Seas, etc.] And so in a Letter to Me of Ian. 5.
1681. [ The Contrivance was Thus, That under the Pretense of a Popish Plot
(which my Father First Imagined was afoot, and afterward Otes, at his Second
Return from beyond the Seas Swore to be True, etc.] And so in Another Letter
also, [ That Otes went Over Sea a Second Time* and Returned about June, 1678.]

From hence it is Manifest that the Plot was a Contrivance; A Popish Plot the
Pretext; Otes Swore to it at his Second Return, which was JUNE 1678. It had been
his THIRD Return if he had come over in April; for he gave no Evidence upon
Oath, 'till September Following.

These are Proofs not to be Contested: Otes only Tongs Property.
But now to Reason a little upon the Matter. Otes went abroad upon Tongs
Errand, and had Tongue still for his Confident, his Councellor, and his Friend.
Can it be Thought now, that if Otes had come back in April; Flushed with
Intel^igence; Big with a Discovery; and full Freighted with the Commodity he
went over for; That Tongue, I say, should hear no News of him 'till the Latter
End of June, or July; and the world hear no News of the Plot neither, 'till the
Latter End of August? Why Tongue was the very Soul of Otes'es-Clay; The Other
only His Instrument, His Factor; but it was Tongue that set him at Work, and Tongue
that paid him his Wages. Tongue sends him abroad to Discover a Plot; Nay and he
tells him what kind of Plot he Is to Discover too. Otes makes a Step over the
Water; lays his Nose to the Train; Follows the Scent, and comes back again with
a Duck in his Mouth; but without his Masters Blessing, and Assistance, the
Silly Curr knows not what in the world to do with it. In This Posture, we must
Imagine Otes to stand for a matter of Two Months, Wagging his Tail, and Waiting
with a Conspiracy betwixt his Teeth, 'till at length the Doctor comes, and
takes it of him, and so Dresses it up into a Narrative* Otes Furnishes Names,
Dates, Places; Tongue finds Matter to them; Ranges so many Particulars into so
many Treasons, Dissects the Whole into so many Articles; Otes Kisses the Four
Evangelists upon 'em; And This is the very History of the Pretended Plot. Now
These Trusts, and Privacies duly Considered, a man can very hardly believe that
Otes should Go and Come; and be Himself Present here at a Treasonous Consult in
April; and Tongue know nothing of it.

It fared, in fine, with These Two Sparks in the Business of the Plot, as it
falls out many times in a Freakish Amor. There may Pass Hard Words, perchance;
Ielousies, Disputes, Humors of going off and on betwixt the Two Lovers, as the
Maggot bites, and yet Both Parties at last, as true as Steel to the Common
Cause. This was the Very Very Case of Our Two Worthies. The Plot had never been
Thought-of, Found-out, Digested, Licked into Shape, Recommended, and brought
upon the Stage, if it had not been for Tongue. But though Tongue, all this while,
under Habernf^ld, was the First Founder of it, and the Main Agitator that gave
it Life and Motion: Otes had the Good Fortune yet, to run away with the Title
of the Savior of the Nation, and with the Profit as well as the Reputation of
the Discovery. In Little, From the First Blowing of That Bubble in the
Barbican, to the Enthroning of Otes in Whitehall, Hand and Glove were never
Better together, then These Two Brethren; and Otes Quietly Enjoyed all the
Trophies of his Achievements; the Blessings of the Committees, and the
Hosannahs of the Mobile, without either Envy, or Opposition. Thus far in short,
it was Hony-Moon betwixt them. Nothing too Great for Otes, in Tongs Opinion;
Nor any thing too Much for Tongue, in Otes'es. But it was with Otes as with Many
Men of Dignity that I have known in the World, that when they are once Mounted
Themselves, Forget Those that Heaved them into the Saddle.

To Pursue my Digression yet a little further; What with the Dread of Otes'es
Commission to Murder Tongue; And the Frightfull Assault and Battery of Old Bully
Whitebread, upon the Body of Titus Otes, for Betraying the Plot to the King; [
According to the Honorable and Reverend Advice] (as Tongue has it) they took
Sanctuary at the House of One Lambert a Bell-Founder over the Water, where they
staid not long, before they had Quarters Allotted 'em at Whitehall; that they
might with more Safety, and Convenience, lay their Heads together, and Conferr
Notes. Ezrel and Titus were thus far Simeon and Levi, 'till there came a Bone
of Dissension, upon a Puntillo of Honor, to be Unluckily cast in betwixt them.
The Dr, it seems, had let fall some Words, Tongue sets-up for the first
Discoverer.
as if He Himself had been the First Discoverer of the Plot; And was within a
Trifle of Printing a Book too, with That very Claim in the Title Page; but upon
the Refusal of an Imprimatur, it Stopped there, and went no further. The Case
came to a Squabble, and was very fairly decided in the Councell-Lobby by Half a
dozen of the Kings Witnesses, where, upon a Full Hearing of Both Parties, it
went for the Defendent. This bred Ill Blood, and the Next News I heard, was,
that Otes had shut Tongue out of his Lodgings at Whitehall; and, as it is in the
Proverb, When Thieves fall out, Honest men come by their Goods. Tongue, upon
This, sets up for the First Discoverer, and most Unhappily Shoots a Bolt, that,
instead of Proving him to be the First Discoverer, Proved him to be ^o
Discoverer; and by leaving No Plot at all, left No Ground for any Discovery at
all: Insomuch, that Tong's Single Testimony did the Plot more Mischief, then
the whole Band of St Omers Witnesses: For to make himself a Prior Evidence, he
Overthrows Otes'es Pretense of being here at the Consult in April: For [ This
was (says he) in June, or July. 1678. Before Otes, or any Other Discoverer
appeared.] Now if Otes was not here before June, the Narrative, and All that is
Built upon it falls into a Thousand Pieces; For the Doctor has broken the Neck
of Otes'es Evidence, and Tript up the Heels of his Own Plot, both at once; and
the Babel of That Sham is laid in the Dust by the very Hand that Raised it.

A Short Word or Two now to Tong's Excuse on Otes'es Behalf for want of
Witnesses. Otes'es Contradictions.
[My Lord (says Otes) when I came to London, I was Ordered to keep very Close.
Irelands Trial. fol. 36.] But then in the Jesuits Trial he tells quite Another
Story. [ When I came away from St Omers (says he) I was to Attend the Motions
of the Fathers at your Chamber (speaking to Whitebread) where the Fathers were
Respectively Met. fol. 19.] In pursuance of this Order, he went from Place to
Place, from Lodging to Lodging, to get it Signed. He was at the
White-Horse-Tavern, and Particular Chambers, I know not how Many, and how
Often. He saw Pickering and Grove, several times Walking together in the Park*
with their Screw'd-Pistols: And he saw their Silver-Bullets in the Month of
May. Irelands Trial. p. 23.24. He was up and down in Arundel-Buildings, and
several other Parts of the Town. He Swore he Dined at Islington, etc. So that
he was Obliged, by the Fathers, it seems, to be both Public, and Private. His
very Part in this Tragedy of a Farce, was only That of a Common Messenger, and
a Thames Street Porter might have made the same Pretense of lying Close, that
Otes did, (first for Himself, and Tongue afterward for him) with as good a
Grace. But the Dr does him the Good Office to throw a Cloak over the
Subornation, and called it [ A Testimony found by Providence,] and so to Cover
the Perjury, though with a Falsity as Transparent as Crystal. Now there never
was any thing Plainer, then that Tongue was all this while, as well a Party, and
a Confederate to the Cheat in the Execution of it, as he was the Principal* in
the Design. He was Privy to it; and Approver of it; and an Advocate for it; and
not only in This Particular; but he went Snips with Otes, in the Guilt of Every
Walk, and Turn of the Imposture; and, for my Own Part, (without the Grace of a
Distinguishing Repentance) I had even as live stand in Otes'es ^oat, at the Day
of Judgment, as in Tongs.

The Dr follows his Point, in his Narrative Preface beforementioned; Tongue a
Confederate quite thorough.
with this Addition to his Excuse for Otes. [They Watched him so Strictly at
St. Omers, he says, that he had no other hopes left him of Escaping their
Hands, then by Deceiving their Malice, and Undertaking to Poison, or otherwise
destroy the Author of those Books; (The Jesuits Morals, etc.) nor did their
Important Malice suffer him to Return to his Native Country on That Errand,
'till they had Laden his Soul, and Consci^^ce with an Oath to Poison, or
Otherwise Destroy him, Sealed with their Abominable Sacrament of the Mass.

This Foppery would not be Worth one Stroke of a Pen upon it, if i^ were not
that it has had the Honor to Fool, and almost to Ruin Three Kingdoms. The Dr,
methinks, when his Zeal was In, upon Otes's [Abominable Sacrament] (as he calls
it) might have found Hell and Damnation on the Taking side, as well as on the
Giving: And it would have been never theWorse, neither, if he had mingled a
little Remorse of Conscience, with the Color of the Murder, toward the
bringing of him Back: But it is no Wonder for the First Contriver, and Designer
of the Abuse, to go on to Countenance, and Support it; and briefly, to do the
Best Service he could toward the Reputation, and Success, of his Own Project.
This was the Doctors Case thorough All the Mazes, and Windings of the Intrigue;
And I do not know any One Instance, either so Wicked, so Gross, or so
Notoriously False, that he does not set-up to Undertake for, and to Defend.

The Matter Briefly stands Thus: The Plot was a Sham: Tongue the Founder, and
Promoter of it. It was Meant for a Cheat; It was Carry'd-on by Confederacy,
Forgery, and Subornation; and Tongue still a Voucher for every Considerable
Article of the Villainy. There Is enough said already in the Third Chapter, how
Tong's Heart was set upon a Popish Plot; How Zealous he was to Propagate the
Fear, and the Belief of it, and how Industrious, if he could not Find a Plot,
to Make One. He could have no Thought of Gaining his Point, without Matter to
Work Upon; Instruments to Work With, and some Proper Means of bringing Those
Instruments over to serve his Purpose. The Matter, was the Traduction of
Habernfelds Relation: His Instrument was Otes, and the Supplying of Otes'es
Barking Necessities was a sure way for the Engaging of so Profligate a Wretch.
It was not for Nothing, that he showed Otes, his Royal Martyr, with the Draught
of Habernfelds Story in it: Or that he gave him his Lesson, and sent him Beyond
Sea upon it.

[ Mr Otes went from Barbican, (says Dr Tongue in a Paper of Feb. 2. 1676/7) in
Pursuit of his Design to Discover the Jesuits Plot, as Discoursed in Tong's
Royal Martyr, etc.] This Agrees, as to Time, and Place, with his Own Evidence
in the Lord Staffords Trial. fol. 25.26.

Dr Tongue says in Another Paper; that [Otes Protested unto him, that he went
among the Jesuits to find whether the Plot Dr Tongue Charged upon them in his
Royal Martyr, were True, and went-on or Not.] And then says Young Tongue further,
in a Letter under his Hand.

[ My Father persuaded Otes to get Acquainted among the Papists, and told him
there had been many Plots in England, to bring in Popery, and if he would go
over among the Jesuits, and Observe their Ways, it was Possible it might be
one now.] Nay, it is Remarkable thorough the Tract of the whole Story, that
Tongue Values himself at Every Turn upon his Good Offices toward the Discovery
and the Credit of the Plot. He has it in his Papers at least Thirteen times
over, how it was His Royal Martyr, that set the Wheel a going; And His
Recommendation of Habernfelds Model in it, that sent Otes abroad among the
Jesuits, to see if he could Match it: And, Effectually, his Project was not the
Tra^ing of One Plot, but the Bolting, and Swearing of Another; which is a Case
so Clear, and so Indu^itable, that it were but holding a Candle to the Sun,
through so M^nifest a Course and Practice, of Deli^^r^^^, and Palp^^le Frauds,
and Subornations, to spend Time, and Paper upon the Proving of it. For, most
Certain it is, that Otes never spoke a Killing Word in the Quality of a Kings
Evidence, (that is to say, 'till he came at last to set-up for Himself) but he
had Tongs Benediction along with it.

His First Adventure was to Spain; but the Society and Otes could not Cotton;
and so he came back again to the Tutouring, just as Wise as he went over.

[ My Father, (says Young Tongue again) furnished Otes with some Money, who then
Pretended himself a Papist and often frequented a Popish Club, and was very
great with one Berry, a Secular Briest, and by his Assistance got over-Sea to
the Jesuits; and staid there a while, and then returned, but my Father found he
knew Nothing of them, and persuaded him to go again. He did so, and [returned
about JUNE 78.] Continued among the Papists here a little while, to Try what he
could Get or Learn amongst them.]

The short Sum of the business is This; Otes had Habernfelds Matter to Work
upon; a Commission, and Instructions by a Side-Wind, how to make the Best on it.
His Manage of it was according to the Hints and Dicta^^s he received from Tongue;
and they Both, Acted with the same Common End, and Design. Tongue had a Plot in
Vision, long before Otes Swore it in his Narrative; and he saw All the Motions,
and Effects of it, in the very Belly of the First Causes. What was the
Tampering of his Parishioners for; His Paraphrasing upon the Old Project of
Habernfeld? What was the Meaning of All his Searches, Solicitations,
Attendances, Narratives, Cases, and Petitions, by way of Anticipation; but to
serve as a Preparatory, toward the Fitting of a Plot to Otes'es Mouth? and the
Adjusting of a Present Invention to so many Imaginary Articles of a Discovery
that was yet to Come? Na^, the very Subornation, and Perjury, that followed
upon it, was little better then a Bargain struck-up betwixt them. The Dr. tells
us in his Narrative-Preface, that Otes was [^^sir^u^ ^f Employment.] And in
another Paper, of his Hiring a Lodging in the Barbican near Sir Richard Barkers
House, the more Conveniently to Converse with the Dr. in their Common Purpose;
which ^ommon Purpose, is as Legible a ^ypher for a Conspiracy, as the
Dis^atching of ^orty E^ght, in the Windsor Letters: But in the Barbican they
were it seems, and wherever they were the Cheat went forward.

[ When I came from the University (says Young Tongue) in the Year 1677. Otes'es
Starving condition in 1677
I found Otes with my Father, in a very Poor Condition, who Complained, he knew
not what to do to get Br^ed, who went under the Name of Ambrose. My Father took
him Home, and gave him Clothes, Lodging, and Dy^t, saying that he would put him
in a Way.]

Now the Design of the One, and the Condition and Character of the Other,
reasonably Considered: Never was there a Fitter Master for such a Man, nor ever
a Fitter Man for such a Master. A Fellow under Starving Necessities, and past
the Sense, of either Shame, or Conscience: So that if the Dr. had Raked Hell
for a Factor, the Devil Himself could not have Furnished him with an Instrument
that was more Made for his Purpose. There was Swearing to be had for Bread, on
the One side, and Bread for Swearing, on the Other: And a Crust, for a False
Oath was as Arrant a Subornation, as a False Oath for That Crust was a Perjury;
though to the Best of Tongs Ability, and Interest, Money or Moneys Worth was
not Wanting neither; as is made Appear already. The One did as good as Ask
[what Course he should take to get Bread,] the Other [takes him to him, and
Promises to put him in a Way;] and what the Dr Meant, He Swears for Bread.
by putting him in a Way, will be seen by the Way he put him in. He Advised him
to go among the Jesuits, and Observe if there were not a Plot among them to
bring in Popery; Adding, in the Words of his Son.

[That if he could make it out, it would be his Preferment for ever. Tongue gives
him his Lesson and sends him abroad.
But however; if he could get their Names, and a little Acquaintance from the
Papists, it would be an Easy matter to Stirr-up the People to Fear Popery.] Now
says Young Tongue, in Another Letter. [ Their Main, and Principal Design was,
under the Pretense of a Popish Plot, to Disinherit his Royal Highness, and when
they had brought an Odium upon the Duke, Then. Proposalls were made by Otes and
my Father, etc. Their next Business must be to Ingratiate Themselves with
several -- (Eminent Men) which was Effected, etc.]

So that here was Present Supply, and the Hopes of Preferment, on the One side*
upon Condition of either Finding, or Forging a Popish Plot, on the Other. Otes
took his Tutors Council; Gets over among the Jesuits, and after a while comes
back again, as Arrant a Noddy as he went. He made a little stay here, for the
better Conning of his Instructions, and was then persuaded to go over again, by
the Same Hand, and upon the Same Commission. His Second Ramble was to St Omers,
where they grew quickly as Sick of him, as he had made them before at
Valladolid. He went thither about Christmas, 1677. And Returned, toward the
Latter End of June following. 1678. Old Style. According to the Concurring
Testimony of the Two Tong's, (Father and Son) over and above Two and Twenty
Witnesses more that gave Evidence at h is Trial.

The Doctor and his Pupil were, by This Time, All Ceremony apart.
past all the Ceremonies of Caution, Form, and Scruple; and the Perfect
Knowledge they had of one another Minds, had Created so Entire, and Mutual a
Confidence, that from hence-forward their Hearts were as Open to one another,
as their Faces; and the Confederate Guilt of Perjury, and Murder, with the
Varnish of Religion put upon it, was no longer a Secret betwixt them.

After Otes's Return, in June, or July from St Omers, Otes returns from St
Omers.
he lay Lurching up and down the Town: One while in Drury Lane; Another while
with Tongue at the Flying-Horse in Kings-Street Westminster; Kick'd-off by the
Jesuits, and at his Wits End what to do with himself, 'till, in the Conclusion,
he betook himself to his Old Councellor again in the Barbican; and there they
fell to the Hammering of their First Project over again. The Doctor in one of
his Diary-Papers gives this Short Account of the Matter.

[ About the First of August, 1678. Mr Otes brought and read unto Dr Tongue at
his Chamber in the Barbican, his Discovery of the Plot, Tongs Account of the
Plot*
Written in a Hand wherewith the Doctor was not then Acquainted, but refused to
leave it, or to give a Copy of it to the Doctor.] Now says Young Tongue, [My
Father Advised Otes to write the Plot in Greek Letters, because that None but
Themselves might be Privy to what was done: The Copy which was in Greek Letters
was burnt by Otes. When they came to Fox-Hall, Mr Kirkby was taken in for an
Assistant, after he had been Sworn to Secrecy.] The Dr says likewise to This
Matter in a Paper Dated, Aug. 11. [ That Mr Otes put the Discovery of the Plot,
which he had written in 43 Articles, under the Wainscoat, at the further end of
Sr Richard Barkers Gallery, in his House in the Barbican, near Dr Tongs
Chamber Door, according to the Drs Directions, where the Dr took them up; and
choosing for Privacy to Correspond rather by Papers with an Unknown Person, then
Personally with Any man in the Plot, gave Mr Otes Direction to Write, or Cause
his Enformations to be Written in the Greek Character, In the Greek Character.
rather then in his Own hand, which he could not Vary, nor Hide from being
Known; and gave him Other Directions, both to Abscond his Person and Hand;
which notwithstanding he Observed not: That Dr^ Tongue Copied the said Articles
forthwith, and sought to Communicate them to his Majesty.

Compare This again with a Passage in. Tongue referred by his Majesty to the Earl
of Danby.
[ The Impartial State of the Case of the Earl of Danby, etc.] concerning
Otes'es Narrative, which Tongue had Presented to his Majesty, and the King had
put afterward into the Hands of his Lordship. It gives an Account of my Lords
Discourse with the Dr upon This Subject, in Question and Answer.

The Earl showed the Papers to the Dr, and Asked if Those were They? which he
said they Were.

Qu. Whether they were Originals?

Ans. No. They were Copies of His, the Drs Writing.

Qu. Who was the Author, and where the Original?

Ans. He did not know the Author, for that the Originals (which he said were in
his Custody) had been Thrust under the Door of his Chamber, but he did not know
by Whom, only he did fancy it must be One that had some time before held
Discourse with him tending to such Matters.

Qu. If he knew where to find That Man?

Ans. No. But he had seen him lately Two or Three times in the Streets, and it
was likely not to be Long before he should Meet him again.

What is All This now, but Sham upon Sham? The Whole Story a Sham.
The Articles were not yet brought to bear, and therefore, the Plot did Better
in Greek then in English, 'till, upon Further Thoughts, it might be Lickt over,
Corrected, and Amended: This Conjecture is very Expressly seconded with a
Passage of Young Tongs in Another Letter, where he says that [ there were
several Copies Written of Otes'es Narrative very Different the One from the
Other.] It is again to be Noted, how Slyly Tongue tells the Earl of Danby that [
they were Thrust under the Door; but by Whom he did not know, nor where to find
the Man:] When yet the Thing was Done by His Advice; The Doer of it in Tong's
Company all this while; and the Man as well known to Tongue as ever One Man was
to Another.

[ They went (afterward) to Fox-Hall (says Young Tongue) by my Fathers Advice,
They go to Fox-Hall*
to the end they might be more Private, where Those Papers that they Wrote at
Sr Richard Barkers, were put into Form, and deliver'd-in to the Council.

[ After, They All Removed from Fox-Hall, and Nailed up the Chamber Door,
having left Several Papers behind; And my Father Understanding by Mr Lambert,
that the Door was broken up by the Landlord, and the Papers like to be Seized
on, was much Troubled at it, and sent away the Rent that was Due, by his Man
Richard -- [ This House where my Father and Otes Lodged, was called by ^he
Neighbors, the Plot-House; and there Otes'es Narrative was Written, whereof
several Copies were Written Different the One from the Other, and the Four
Jesuits Letters, wherein Otes pretended was the Whole Discovery, were
Counterfeits.] The Four Letters here Mentioned, were the Four Letters that the
Attorny-General says in his State of the Evidence were All Enclosed in One
Cover. The Windsor Letters.
But there was likewise a Fifth, Subscribed Nich. Blundel, etc. which Young
Tongue, it seems, had no Knowledge of.

There are, in fine, so many Circumstances of Proveable, and Open Fact in This
Cause, that there is no room Imaginable for so much as the Pretense of a
Contradiction: But still the Point at last of the Windsor Letters Clears the
Proof of a Conspiracy, if it were possible, even above All the rest. I have the
Originals at This Present in my Hand, and there is the Paw of Tongue and Otes so
manifestly in the very Writing of them; as if they had not thought it worth the
while to Disguise the Cheat. It was an Imposture, that their very Souls, Heads,
Hearts, and Hands were All at Work upon; And the Forgery Undeniable; only Tongue
Himself was the Master-Hocus. It makes me think of a Story betwixt a C^uncellor
and his Clyent, about an Answer to a Bill in Chancery. You must needs come, and
draw up your Answer, says the Lawyer, we shall be under a Contempt else. Why
draw it up then, quoth the Clyent. Well! says the Other; but what do I know
what you can Swear to? Never Trouble your Head for That (says the Clyent again
in a Banter) Look You to the Lawyers Part, and draw me up a Sufficient Answer,
and leave it to Me to do the Part of a Gentleman, and Swear to it when you have
done. This Dialogue in Jest* was the very Case of Tongue and Otes in Earnest; and
what the One Dictated, the Other Swore to.

CHAP. VII.
By what means This Imposture came to be Promoted, and the Manner of doing it.

WE have now brought down This Phantome of a Plot, The Deduction of the Plot.
from Forty to Seventy Two; From Seventy Two, to Seventy Eight; From Habernfeld
to Sr William Boswell, and so to Archbishop Laud, to King Charles the First;
To Prynnes Romes Masterpiece; To Tongs True Narrative; From Valladolid, St
Omers, the White Horse in the Strand; The Consult at the Savoy, 'till we have
at last Lodged it at Fox-Hall, where it lies ready for Projection. Tongue says
that He and his Pupil went thither for Privacy. Otes Swears that it was for
Sanctuary; and that they went Both, in fear of their Lives from the Provincial,
and the Jesuits. They had been Tossing, Turning, and Contriving, a Long time
before they could bring their Matters together; And now it begins to Work for
Good and All.

Dr Tong's Diary of Sep. 2. 1678. says that [ Mr Jones, Tong's Diary of their
going to Whitehall.
and Mr Otes came to Dr Tongue to St Mary Overies after Sermon time, and so All
Three went by Water to Fox-Hall; but Otes in a Boat by Himself, and following
at a Distance for fear of discovery, which was the first time that Otes was
made known to Mr Kirkby. Upon This Occasion, Otes was furnished with Money, a
Suit and a Gown, with Other Necessaries.] Tongue having made the Way smooth
beforehand. The Council-Minutes agree likewise, that Monday the Second of
September, was the First Day that ever Mr Kirkby saw Otes.

There is likewise in the Handwriting of Dr Tongue, a Paper Entitled [ Mr
Christopher Kirkbys Enformation;] which is very nigh word for word the same
with a Printed Paper of 1679. Entitled, [ A Complete, and True Narrative of the
Manner of the Discovery of the Popish Plot to his Majesty, by Mr Christoper
Kirkby. The Abstract of it is This.

That August 12. 1678. About Noon, An Abstract of Mr Kirkbys Narrative.
Tongue showed Mr. Kirkby a Narrative of the Popish Confederacy in Forty Three
Articles. Tongue Enjoined Mr Kirkby Privacy; and to tell no body of it but the
King, which he Promised to do. He could not speak with his Majesty That Day,
but the Day following, he put a Paper into the Kings Hand in the Outward
Gallery going into the Park. His Majesty Asked him some Questions, and so
Appointed him to Attend 'till he came back; when Kirkby told the King, that
Pickering and Grove were to shoot him, and Sir George Wakeman to Poison him;
and that he had a friend at hand with Papers to make out the Particulars.
Kirkby was then Commanded to bring his Friend in the Evening, to Attend his
Majesty; And in the Red Room a Copy of the Narrative was Delivered to his
Majesty in the Doctors Hand, but with All Caution of Privacy Imaginable. His
Majesty told them that he would put the ^apers into a sure Hand, and Ordered
them to Attend the Earl of Danby, which they did the Next Day; finding his
Lordship with the Papers in his Hand, who desired Mr Kirkby to Withdraw while
he spoke to the Dr. Some Two or Three Days after, the Dr brought More
Enformations, which Mr Kirkby sealed up, and Conveyed to the said Earl. About
the 20th of August the Dr Proposed the seizing of Pickering, and Grove; and on
the 23th, Pickering and Keines were to be showed, that they might know them
again; and Grove should have gone to Windsor, but he fell Sick. On the 26th The
Dr. Proposed the Intercepting of Letters: and on the 31th. Enquiry was made in
the Post Office about such Letters.

Sep. 2. Otes came first to Fox-Hall, and Presently there came out Further
Discoveries. Sep. 4. Otes told Kirkby that the Provincial had Beaten him for
Telling Tales; Whereupon, Tongue got Otes to Swear his Narrative before Sir
Edmund-bury Godfrey, Sep. 6. Tongue Deposing upon Oath, that it had been made
known to the King. Sep. 5. Mr Kirkby went to Windsor, but the King took no
Notice of him. On the 7 th and 8 th, he could not speak with the Earl of Danby
Neither. Sep. 9. The King took no Notice of Kirkby again; All of them thinking
it hard, that the Discovery was so much Neglected. Sep. 27. Tongue was Ordered to
Attend the Council; but coming Late was Ordered to Attend the Next Morning. In
the Mean time they Resolved to get Copies Sworn; and on the 28 th early they
got Two Copies of the First Depositions also Sworn; that they might Each of
them have an Authentic Copy. Mr Kirkby and Tongue went after This, to
Whitehall, while Otes went to Fox-Hall. The Coun^ell, in fine, Ordered Tongue to
bring Otes thither, whereupon they Attended, and had Both their Lodgings
Immediately Assigned them in Whitehall. Thus far Mr Kirkbys Narrative; To which
I shall only add a Word or Two out of a Paper of Dr Tongs.

Friday, Sep. 27. The Council met about the Plot, and sent for Dr Tongue; but
rose before he Spoke with them. Sir Robert Southwell Ordered Dr Tongue to appear
before his Majesty and the Council Next Morning. Mr Otes Swore Two Copies
before Sir E. B. Godfrey.

Saturday 28. Dr Tongue appeared, and referred himself to the Papers he had
Given, Tongue with his Narrative before the Council.
or Transmitted to his Majesty. Being desired to give the like Brief Account to
them, as he had done to his Majesty, he referred himself also therein to a
Paper-Account, which he had formerly Transmitted to his Majesty, which was
Read. The Dr was also afterward desired to put the Papers before the Board into
Method; To which he Answered, that they were a Journal, and Ordered, as he
Received them, not only by Dates, but by Marginal Numbers.]

After Tongue and Otes's taking Sanctuary in Whitehall, these Sparks could not
fail of being Wellcom'd into the Next House of Commons; for the very
Countenance of giving them Credit thus far, was as Good as a Testimonial for a
Countenance of Reputation in Another Place; And after the Authority of
believing it so far in Jest, it is not to be Wondered that it should Gain much
a Greater Reputation among the Common People in Earnest. There was a Nest-Egg
of Old Standing, and that Every body gave over almost for Ad^le, 'till in the
End it came to Disclose, and by Degrees, to Feather, and Take Wing. There Is One
Note in This Place not to be Omitted, which is; that in several Rags of
Scribled Papers of Dr Tongs that pretend to Matter of Fact; there are Diverse
Passages Manifestly Defaced, and Altered; So that of One Thing they are made
quite Another, which could never be by Applying the Truth to the Fac^, but by
Accommodating the Story to the Imposture.

CHAP. VIII.
By what Means the Author of This Little History came by the Papers herein
mentioned.

I Was Charged in October, 1680. L'Estrange falsely Accused by Young Tongue, and
Otes.
for Tampering with Tongue to Invalidate Otes'es Evidence, and upon Two Full
Hearings before his Majesty and Council, I was twice Acquitted by the
Unanimous Judgment of the Whole Board. In December* 1681. there came a Person to
me from Young Tongue, who was at That Time a Prisoner in the King's Bench, with an
Assurance that he was very much Troubled in Conscience for a False Oath about
the Business of his Father, and of my self; Showing me likewise a Paper to That
purpose under his Hand, and desiring me Forgiveness for the Injury he had done
me: Whereupon I wrote to him as follows.

Sir,
You will wonder at This Letter perhaps, L'Estranges First Letter to Young Tongue.
from a Person that has neither Directly nor Indirectly had any thing to do
with you, either by Word, Writing, or Message, since October Last was
Twelvemonth; when, upon your Enformation I was Questioned, and Wrongfully
Accused, in many Particulars before the King and Council.

I look upon it as my Duty to Forgive you; and at This Good Time to tell you
so, and I have the Charity to believe, if it had come into your Thoughts, you
would have found it your Part to have Desired it, etc.

December. 27. 1681.

In Return to This of mine, I received an Answer with the Copy of a Petition to
his Majesty, Enclosed in manner as follows.

Ever Honored Sir,
I humbly thank you for your Charity, Tongs Answer.
in forgiving the Wrong I did you in October was Twelvemonth; And I Assure you
it has been a Great Trouble to me; and if I could have hoped for Pardon, I
should have begged it of you long since, but I am Confident if you had known,
how I was Used, by my Uncle First, and afterward by College, and Otes, to Force
me to Accuse you Falsely, you would sooner have Pitied my Weakness, and Forgiven
me, what I have done against you: But This Generous Charity which you have now
showed in giving me the Pardon which I durst not Ask for, has Encouraged me to
Entreat you to Intercede with his Majesty to Grant me his Gracious Pardon for
the Great Offenses which I have Committed against him; and that he would be
pleased to let me be brought to my Trial, and have the Perusal of my Fathers
Papers, to help to make my Defense; And I hope to make out the Truth, to ihe
Satisfaction of All Honest Men, and Discharge the Conscience of,

Honored Sir, Your veryest Commandable Servant* Simpson Tongue.


To his Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of Simpson Tongue, Prisoner
in the King's Bench.
Shows,

THat after your Petitioner had Declared the Truth to your Majesty concerning
the Contrivance of his Father and Mr Titus Otes, your Petitioner being in great
want of Necessaries, his Uncle, Captain Tongue, having sent for him was
compelled to go to him for Relief; and Captain Tongue made your Petitioner Drunk,
and then Threatened and Forced him to deny the Truth, and to Sign a Paper,
which the said Captain Tongue had Written, your Petitioner not knowing what he
did, and afterward when your Petitioner was Committed to Newgate, College
came to him, and by Threats and Promises forced your Petitioner to deny the
Truth, for the which your Petitioner has been ever since under great Trouble
of Mind for his great Wickedness and Cowardice to deny the Truth: but your
Petitioner does protest in the presence of Almighty God, that it is very true
that the Plot was Contrived by my Father and Titus Otes, when he re^urned the
Second time beyond the Seas, my Father and he writ much of it out of Houselife,
Queen Elizabeth, and out of the Book writ by Hooper or Hocker that came from
Rome, and swore against Campian and the other Jesuits; as will appear both by
the said Books, and by my Fathers Papers, if your Majesty please to cause them
to be Searched into: They first Writ at Sir Richard Barkers, where the Plot was
Written by Otes in Greek Letters, and afterward went to Fox-Hall, and one of
the Jesuits Letters is in my Fathers Hand.

Wherefore your Petitioner does most Humbly Pray, (...) Beseech your Sacred
Majesty, to pity the sad (...) of your Petitioner, and to pardon his great
Crime (...) going from the Truth; and to let him be brought (...) Trial, and to
have his Fathers Papers delivered (...) make his Defense; and your Petitioner
hopes (...) what ^e has Written so clear, that your (...) think him more fit
for your Pity then your (...), and forgive the great Wickedness of your (...),
for the which he is truly Penitent, and will (...) per^sh here in Prison, then
ever be Guilty of the (...); as he has showed to those that have been with
^im, since ^is great Poverty, to pervert him further from the Truth; but your
Petitioner would not. Therefore your Petitioner does most Humbly beseech your
Majesty to pity the Sad and Miserable Condition of your Petitioner, and not to
let him lie here and star ve for want of Cloth and Bread.

And your Petitioner [as in Duty bound] shall ever pray, etc. Simpson Tongue.


Tongue refers himself in the Foregoing Letter and Petition, to Certain Papers
that he would make use of for his Defense: Upon which Point he Expounds himself
in a Letter of Ian. 2. in these Words.

[Some of the Papers (says he) which my Father left, A Second Le^ter of Tong's.
were taken at Colleges House, and my Uncle sent one Mr Hill to me in the
King's Bench, and brought one who was a Stranger to me with a Paper to
Administer on my Behalf, and I Signed it, and under Pretense of Administering
for me, has seized on the rest of my Fathers Papers.]


This same Hill was a French Man, and his Name De Mont, and a Pestilent Enemy
to the Late King, and his Government.

Tongs Fumbling in his Petition, at the Names of Books he has forgot, is a
little better Expounded in a Letter to me of Ian. 5. 1681/2. [ My Father (says
he) used to take Notes out of a Great Book, a Supplement after Hollingshead
left off, and writ, as I have heard him say, by one How, or Howes; and Other
little Books written by Hocker, or Hopper, that was the Witness, and Prosecuted
the Jesuits, etc.

Now to the Credit of these Papers, My Correspondence with Young Tongue began
December 27. 1681. and Brake off upon the 11th of January following. I
Published his Letters in Print, soon after the Receiving of them, and with a
Provocation to any man that would take up Otes'es Quarrel, and call Simpson
Tongue to an Account for making the Plot to be only a Cheat: and Dr. Tongue, and
Titus Otes, a Brace of Cony-Catching Impostors. This Villainy was Exposed
Barefaced, over and over; People Invited, nay Pressed, and Challenged, to
undertake the Vindication of them; even at a time when the Authority of the
Plot was yet Rampant; and when it was made Less Criminal, and Dangerous to
Conspire against the King, then to Disbelieve Otes. This was Certainly the most
Desperate Evidence that ever was set afoot against the Sham of That Pretended
Conspiracy, 'till the Final Decision of the Main Cause that followed some years
after, at the Kings-Bench-Bar, Westminster, on the 8th and 9th Days of May,
1685. The Faction was at That Time Fleshed in Blood, Bold, Violent, and
Successful; and yet not so much as One Mouth to Open in favor of the Forgery;
or to call Tongue to an Account for Ridiculing the Veracity of the Kings
Witnesses, or Affronting the Reputative Honor and Wisdom of the Nation. I
should have Scrupled the Use of Young Tongs Testimony, after the Scandal of his
Saying and Unsaying; and his going Off and On at the Rate that he did; if it
were not that I find his Enformations strengthened, and Supported by other
Concurring Evidences; and by the very Tenor of the History of That Season: and
if it were not likewise, that Notwithstanding the Blasted Infamy of his
Chara^ter, and that his Credit was then at Lowest, they were Glad yet to make
Fair Weather with him, without putting him to the Stress of Proving his
Enformations; which at That time probably might have been made out by Other
Hands.

It may be made a Question perchance, How the Author came by Tong's Papers.
in the Next place, What Warrant I have for the Vouching of These Papers of Old
Tong's to be Authentic; either as Originals, or as True Copies? To which I
can only say, that there was a Trunk of Dr Tongs Papers Seized at Colleges,
which was brought to Me, a Long Time after the Taking of them, to be Opened,
and Examined, and so they were, and Att^sted in the Presence of several
Justices of the Peace, and Other Gentlemen. These were the Papers that Simson
Tongue says were Taken at Colleges (where the Dr Died:) And it appears from the
very Quality of These Papers that there were others of Greater Consequence
Conveyed away; which Confirms what Simpson Tongue says further, about the
Administration, and the Conveying away of the Other Writing. The much Greater
Part of the Papers in the Trunk, were Whimsyes of Project, Calculations about
Antichrist, and the Number of the Beast; Snaps of Chimistry, Political
Speculations, Rough Draughts of Cases, Petitions, and Addresses, Several Copies
of a Sort: But among Others, there were Abundance of Dirty Fragments of Paper,
with a Confusion of Minutes, and Memorials upon them of Times, Dates, Places,
and Persons, and Particularly, several Passages according to those
Circumstances, that I find in the Narrative, which Manifestly shows that they
were rat^er Matters Concerted toward the Making of a Narrative, and the
Adjusting of Articles that might Hang together, then any Report of Otes'es upon
the Point of Narration, and Fact. In One Word; These Broken Snaps of Writing
were undoubtedly Forgotten, or Not Heeded rather, then laid up in this Trunk;
and a man might easily gather from what was Left, that there had been a Cull
made out of them Before: For there was enough remaining (as I have said
already) to give Light to the Subject, and Design of Those that were either
Removed, or Destroyed: But the Doctors Hand is as Distinguishable from any
Other Character, that I ever saw, as ever One man's Face was from Another. One
of the Jesuits Letters (says Tongue in his Petition) is in my Fathers Hand; And
any man that has a mind to Compare That Jesuits Letter with the Other Papers of
the Doctor's, that I have Cited in These Remarques, will no longer be able to
Doubt that they were Both Written by the Same Hand. And This I suppose, may
pass for a very Reasonable Account, both of my having These Papers in my
Possession, and of the Credit of them.

CHAP. IX.
The Design of Tong's Plot was upon the Duke of York.

[ THe Main, and Principal Design, (says Young Tongue in one of his Letters) was
to Disinherit His Royal Highness.] Popery was the Color; The Duke of York was
brought in Consequently as the Head of the Roman Catholics; The Queen not
Spared; and the Late King Himself more then Innuendo'd into the Conspiracy.
Plain-Dealing Otes gives his Late Majesty a Touch on it in the Preface to his
Narrative: And if it be True (as it comes from a very Good Hand, and I believe
it) when Bedloe was Pressed to say Whom he saw about the Murdered Body of Sr
Edmundbury Godfrey, he did Heroically Declare, that he would not Name the Man;
Nay, and though he was Adjur'd to do it by an Eminent Patron of the Cause that
is now in the Grave, His Answer was Short, and Resolute, that there was He, and
He, and a Tall ^l^ck Man, but he would go no Further. So that the King, and the
whole Royal Family were brought into the Toil, as well as His Royal Highness:
For Excluding for Popery, Involves Deposing; and Monarchy it self was to Fall
too, with his Majesty: Witness the Association; that was rendered Inseparable
from the Exclusion, and Carried in the Project of it, the very Lines, and
Method of a Commonwealth. Simpson Tongue follows the Blow at His Royal Highness,
(with some Particular Names, which, out of Decency, and Respect, I shall
forbear) making Mention of the Lord Shaftsbury, etc. by whom the Matter was
Publicly, and in Truth, Carry'd-on: But it was no Great Wonder, when a
Company of Fools had put so many Shams together, and given them the Countenance
of a Discovery, or a Narrative, for a Pack of Crafty Blades to Vernish it over
afterward and to put Popular Glosses upon it.

As to Tongs Aversion to the Duke of York, Tong's (...) to the Duke (...) York.
with a Regard both to his Title, and Religion; the Vein of it runs quite
thorough All his Papers wherever he can but bring in That Subject, thoug^ by
Head and Shoulders; particularly in the Business of Mr Coleman, and in the
Cheat of the Five Windsor Letters, where he lays the Blasting of That Discovery
at the Door of his Then Royal Highness, by Possessing his Majesty against the
Belief of Bedingfields Letters, and overruling the Credit of them, whereas it
is made Sufficiently Notorious already, that when the Faction afterward were
Audacious, and Powerful enough to ^ress, and to Procure his Banishment; to
Attempt his Exclusion, Impeachment; nay the making a Traitor of him; they had
not yet either the Face, or the Heart to venture so much as One Syllable, of
All These Letters into Evidence. But One Instance shall serve for All.

In Tong's Jesuits Assassins, (being the Enformation of One Green a Weaver,
drawn up, and made Parliament-Proof, by Dr Tongue) he brings in a Discourse
betwixt One Mr ^oyer, and Green a Weaver, concerning the Titles of the Duke of
York, and Duke of Monmouth.

If there be a Difference (says Green) between the Duke of York, Tongs Malice
to the Duke of York.
and the Duke of Monmouth, and the Parliament do not Settle it; I believe that
All the Protestants in England will venture their Blood, before the Duke of
Monmouth shall lose his Birthright, and We lose the Liberty of Our Religion too.

B^y^r. And We will Venture All our Lives and Fortunes on the Behalf of the
Duke of York, and for the Interest of Our Religion.

Green. What can You do? for You be Nothing to Us.

Boyer. Do not you Think so; for although we are but Thin here, yet there be
Many in Other Places, and Powerful Persons too. I will raise a Company, etc. I
am now gotten into the Acquaintance of them, by whose Assistance I can get a
Commission from the Duke of York as well as Another. fol. 2.] And now comes
Tongue with a Politic Nota Been upon it.

N. B. This agrees well with Mr Jenisons Relation of a Commission promised Him,
etc. And here it may be Noted by what False, Sly, and Pernicious Suggestions,
and Insinuations, the Jesuits Sow the Seeds of Sedition, and Rebellion in the
Minds of Simple, and Well Meaning Persons of All Degrees, as here in the
Present Case; pretending and Raising False Titles to the Crown, and thereby
Dividing the Loyal Subjects thereof, into Bloody Feuds, and Resolutions.] This
Pretended Discourse passed in 1675. So that Tongs Plot was much before his
Discovery.

CHAP. X.
Tongue Managed the whole Affair of the Plot, from One End to the Other.

WE are now come to the Last Chapter of This Little Piece of History. We have
seen the State of the Original Cause; and That State, Reported: We have taken a
Specimen of some Proceedings upon it: Inquired into the Rise, and Creation of
it; and find it at Length to be only One Counterfeit Drawn from Another; and
Designed for a Cheat, from the Beginning. We have showed likewise how it came
to be Entertained, and to Thrive in the World. We have given an Honest Account
of the several Evidences and the Papers also, that are here made use of toward
the Proof of This Matter. It appears further, that Tong's Pretended Plot struck
at the very Root of This Imperial Monarchy. Thus far we have gone Already; and
it remains now, only in One Section more, to set forth, that the Founder of
This Imposture was the Chief Manager too; and that all this Hurly-Burly has
been, in a Great Measure, the Work of One Weak Man; A Simple, Visionary Bigot,
and a very Dreamer of Dreams, according to the Letter. But when People are so
Blinded with Passion on the One side, as not to Discern the most Palpable
Folly, and Wickedness, on the Other, what will not an Obstinate Enthusiasm be
able to bring about, when it is not only Supported by a Prevalent Faction, in
favor of it, but Prejudice, and Ignorance, to Work upon, over and above?

It is a Long Time now, that Titus Otes has Had, Otes was only Tong's Tool.
Held, and Enjoyed, All the Advantages of an Vndisputed Title to the first
Discovery of the Plot. He has Eat, Drunk, Slept, Sworn, Blasphemed, Ranted, and
(with Pardon of the Modest Reader) Bugger'd upon the Credit of it; and in
Despite of Hell, and Infamy, All this Notwithstanding, he has still Upheld the
Dignity of his Claim, and the Knee has been Bowed to him, from Aldgate to
Westminster, as to [ the Savior of the Nation:] Nay, he Continues Blessing
God, to this very Day, and Hour, under the Discipline of the Common Hangman;
and all his Annual Processions, Toties Quoties, from the Iayle to the Gallows,
are but Reckoned upon as the Bearing of his Testimony for Righteousness sake.
But now to Saddle the Right Horse, and to give the Devil Himself his Due; as to
all these Titles, Triumphs, Pomps, Pleasures and Solemnities, I look upon Dr.
Tongue, that has passed for no more then a Property all this while, to have had
Incomparably the Fairer Equity of the Two: For it was Tongue made the Music all
this while, and Otes only Drew the Bellows: But we are not here to Dispute the
Heraldry of That Affair. I am only for doing Justice to the Memory of Men
Famous in their Genenerations, and of Men that Contended too for a Preference
in This Matter; for there is an Ambition even among the Damned Themselves, who
shall be the First Devil in Hell. The [ FIRST DISCOVERER] Sounds as Big in
their Iuggling, Witnessing Way, as [ the First Man that Enters a Brea^h] does,
in a Military way of Honor: and the One takes it as Ill, not to stand Foremost
in the Scandal, as the Other to find himself Post-Pon'd in the Record and Glory
of the Action. So that, without Derogating from the One, or Ascribing more to
the Other, then in Strictness of Truth, and Justice belongs to him; My Business
is only to Rectify the Memorials of This History, and to set Tongue Right, with
the Next Age, upon the Subject Matter of This Competition, which is a Good
Office that no body ever yet Ventured upon but my self; And if a man might
Apply the Case of Sa^l and David, to That of Our Two Worthies, it should be
that [ OTES has Slain his Thousands, and TONGUE, his Ten Thousands:] And so I Will
on to my Matter as fast as ever I can.

To see what Part Dr Tongue had in the Government of This Sham; The whole Manage
of it was Tong's.
or rather, that he was (like the Soul) in the Whole, and in Every Part of it;
we must begin as far Upward of Seventy Two, as He looked beyond it, to the
Story of Habernfeld: At which time he was Calculating, how he might make the
Narrative of 1640. do the same Trick over again, in Time to Come. [ It will be
an Easy Matter (says he) to stir up the People to Fear Popery:] and therefore,
upon the Advice of his Reverend Friend Dr Beale, he put himself upon the
Writing of Pamphlets [Yearly, and Quarterly, if Possible,] (as he says) to
Alarm the People;] as the Jesuits Morals, the Royal-Martyr, etc. To the Latter
of which, he Ascribes the Providence, in a manner, of the Whole Discovery. He
fell in League afterward, with De la March, a French Minister; Edward Price, a
Sadler; Green, a Weaver, etc. and wrote Petitions, Cases, Addresses,
Enformations, and Narratives, for them. Otes, all this while, was Familiar, and
sent abroad (according to the Pleasant Character of Sr Harry Wottons Public
Minister, to Lie (with Reverence be it spoken) for the Service of his Master.)
And in the mean time, who but the Dr to Furnish him with Meat, Money, and
Clothes, for the Discharge of his Commission! If there was Any thing upon the
Common Subject of the Plot, to be Presented to the Public; who but Tongue to
Settle the Standard of it; and to see that All Articles, and Accusations,
should be Statutable Weight and Measure: Nay he was so well known in his way,
that Folks came as Naturally to Him for Collateral Evidences to help out a
Blundering Witness at a Dead Lift, as a Cook-Wench Carries her Broken Brass to
the man that Cries, Have ye any Work for a Tinker to Mend?

But to Come to my Text now, and to Stick to it; and to save as much Time,
Trouble, and Paper as is Possible within the Compass of my Business. The Point
to be Cleared in This Chapter, is, (according to the Argument in the Head on it)
that [ Tongue Managed the Whole Affair of the Plot from One End to the Other]
This is the very Truth of the Thing, and that it was His Engine, Labor, Zeal,
Industry, and Prowess, that has given Life, Countenance, and Motion, to This
Illustrious Adventure; though by the Iniquity of the Age, and by the Assistance
(as the Dr has it) of Noble, and Reverend Friends, Otes has made a shift to run
away with the Reputation of the Undertaking. There will need Little more to
make This Evident beyond All Doubt, or Contradiction, then to Gather into One
short Summary, the Scattered Minutes of what we have already Touch^d upon in
These Papers; and so to Carry the Train from First to Last thorough the Whole
Cause, and in Order.

He Began with Habernfelds Plot; he fancied Another of the Same under the
Color of That Plot's going on Still. A Brief Deduction of Tong's Plot.
He took a Copy of it in his Royal Martyr, for a President: He showed it to
Otes to Consider of. In One Word, He Wished for a Plot; He did all he could to
make People Believe there was a Plot; He Designed a Plot; He Framed and put
together the Heads of a Plot; And in fine, He Contributed with Purse, and
Council, Heart, Hand, and Good Will, toward the Execution of it. It was by His
means that Otes was Maintained; By his Advice, that Otes was sent over; By his
Direction, that Otes got Jesuits Names, and Acquaintances, to Build so much as
a Pretense upon. He did not only Passover Otes'es Execrable Hypocrysies,
Blaspemous Perjuries, and Mock Sacraments; but he was Privy to, Advised,
Approved, and Encouraged them; He bids Otes go over, and gives him His
Directions, not so much what to Look for, as what to Find; Upon Otes'es Return,
he sends him back again upon the Same Commission. Otes wanted Bread; Tongue stops
his Mouth, and takes upon him to put him in a way: Do but Discover a Plot, says
Tongue, and You Are a Made Man for ever. Make the People Ielous of Popery, and your
Work is done. Otes Undertakes the Task, and without any more Words, a Bargain's
a Bargain.

During This Manage of Otes, Tongue was not Idle Otherwise neither: Witness his [
Searching out Evidence, Soliciting, Promoting, and Expediting,] to his very
Great Expense, as he sets forth in his [ Case and Request.] The Paying of above
Forty Clarks to Write for him; His Undertakings, and Disbursements to diverse of
the Irish, as well as the English Witnesses, as apears upon several Bills, and
Discharges under his Own hand; His Restless Scribbling, to Provoke Fears and
Ielousies; The Indefatigable Pains he took to Assist False Witnesses, and to
help forward Scandalous Enformations; To say nothing of the Crotchet of
Fourteen Shillings a Week to any of his Parishioners that would Turn Papists.

Now upon the whole Matter, Otes neither Saw with his Own Eyes; Otes only Swore
to Tongs words.
nor Heard with his Own Ears; He stirred neither Hand nor Foot, and his Tongue
hardly Wagg'd in his Mouth but by Tong's Direction. His Way was still Chalked
out before him; and All that he had to do, was to Swear to Tongs Words and
Matter. Where Otes made a Stumble, as about his lying so Close in Town at the
Time of the Consult, that he could get No Witnesses; Who but Tongue to Cover the
Perjury; and, upon All other Occasions, to Palliate his Fooleries. Who was it
but Tongue that Made the Plot? That Wrote the Story of it? That Hunted out
Knights of the Post to Second it? That Espoused all sorts of Impostures for the
Coloring of That Cheat; and it Cost him more Trouble at Last, to Defend, and
to Excuse the False Oaths, then to Procure them. Who was it but Tongue, that took
Otes to him in the Barbican for their Common Purpose? as he calls it; That bad
him Write the Plot in Greek, and lay it behind the Wainscot. It was Tongs
Invention too, the Promising of Otes Fifty Pound to Murder him for his Jesuits
Moralls; and the Sowcing of him in a Damned Oath for the Performance of
Covenants. The Battery that was made upon Otes'es Person, by the Provincial on
Sept. 6. 1678. And Another by Stratford in Cock-Pit-Alley, that was set on by
the Jesuits the Day following; This was All the Mother-Wit of the Dr still; and
so was the Advice of their Snugging together, at Fox-Hall upon it, for their
Common Security, and to keep themselves in a whole Skin. What were the First
Three and Forty Articles, but the Work yet of the Same Head, and Hand? Who but
Tongue to tell Mr Kirkby of it; and by his Means to get Access to the King? who
but Tongue again, to Deliver Those Articles to the King; and afterward, by his
Majesty's Order, to Attend the Earl of Danby about That most Important Affair?
Who was it that told his Lordship the Story over and over again of Grove,
Pickering, and Wakeman; the Windsor-Ruffians; and how they might be Caught in
their Rogueries, upon the very Spot, with their Guns and their Daggers? Who was
it that Excused the Ruffians afterward, for not going to Windsor, because One
of 'em was Indisposed, and Another's Horse had Slipped his Shoulder? Who was it
that showed Pickering at the Altar at Somerset House for fear of Mistaking the
Man? Who was it that brought still more and more Enformations, One upon the
Neck of Another; That made so many Jaunts, Out of Town, and Back again, with
News, and for Orders, only to Fetch and Carry? Who was it again that put Otes
upon Swearing his Enformations before Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey? Who was it that
Carried him thither, and Supported him there, with an Oath, that the Contents
of Those Papers bad been showed to the King already? Who was it that
Counseled Otes to have several Copies of them Transcribed, and that Helped
both in the Writing, and in the Recommending of them Himself? Who but Dr Tongue,
that Guided, and Influenced This whole Affair? And Otes all this while, not so
much as Seen or Heard of, 'till the Second of September at Fox-Hall: Only the
Plenipotentiary Dr, with Full Powers, and Authorities, was his own Principal,
and Commissioner, Both under One. Nay, and he was his Own, as well as Otes'es
Confessor too; for he Absolved himself of the Sin of False Speaking, as he had
done Otes before, upon the Account of False Swearing, as in his Shuffling with
the Earl of Danby, is made appear already.

It must be further said now, for the Drs. Credit; Tong's Method of Pursuing
the Plot.
that he showed as much Steadyness, in his Perseverance, as Boldness, and
Resolution, thus far in the Attempt: For he Gained his Point at Last, in
Despite of All the Bug-Bears of Honor, and Conscience, and in Defiance of All
the Oppositions of Law, Reason, and Common Sense. His First Narrative Shrunk in
the Wetting, and was found, One ^art of it to Clash with Another, and not to
Agree with It self: Insomuch, that Tongue Pressed many times upon the Earl of
Danby; and Mr Kirkby more then Once, Presented Himself in the Kings Eye,
without any Notice taken of them, or Gaining any Hopes of a Further Access: So
that they gave it off for That Time, and Remitted the Matter to some More
Favorable Season. When Tongue saw that the Narrative did not Take; he
Re-enforces his Attempt with Fresh Articles: He follows them with News of the
Ruffians going to Windsor, and with the Proposal, that One of the Earls
Domestiques should go along with them. The Disappointment abovementioned made
the Business look Worse; and his Majesty threw off the Thought on it, as a most
Palpable Fiction: So that the Dr was now put, for Another Invention, to the
Uttermost Stretch of his Wits, and Courage: And then comes-in the Sham of the
Five Windsor Letters: But That which Tongue Propounded for an Evidence so
Demonstrative of the Truth of All he had Delivered, that it would put a Final
End to Any Question upon That Point, served only to Conclude the Whole to be a
Forgery; These Letters now were Manifestly of Tong's Contriving, One of them of
his Own Handwriting; Nay the Authority, and the Truth of them, in respect both
of the Authors and the Matters, were, to the Uttermost of Tong's Poor Might and
Skill, in such a Manner Excused, and Defended; that they were Argued to be Such
and Such Peoples Hands, because they were Not Like their Hands, and without
pretending to show any Other of their Counterfeit Letters to Compare them by.
And Tongue has not quite done yet neither.

Tongue gets himself sent for to the Council; He Delivers his Papers in; Fetches
Otes; He Sollicits King, Lords, Commons, and Committees; There was not One Step
in the whole Frame of the Conspiracy, which he does not Write Notes,
Narratives, or Relations upon. He Is In at All, thorough the Three Kingdoms. Who
but Tongue to furnish the History of all our ^ires; Treasons; Popish Commissi^n^,
Allyances; ^aggots, Pe^s^cut^ons? Who but He, to undertake for the Lists of the
Plotters, the Particularities of their Crimes, and to set-up, in short, for
Historiographer to the Conspiracy, and the Common Solicitor to the whole
Faction? Though he Declares, (as is said already) in a Petition to the House of
Commons, that [ he had No Knowledge of any Person, Charged or Susp^cted to be
in the Conf^deracy; and hardly of any One Popish Gent^eman in England.]

I have yet One Paper more of His, bearing Date April. 29. 1679. Tuesday.

He takes upon him, Tong's Saucy Expostulations with the Late King.
with his usual Confidence, to Advise his Majesty to Deliver up all Priests and
Jesuits to the severity of the Laws in that Case Provided: For (says he) [They
are not to be Considered as Mere Priests; but as Professed and Known Enemies to
our King and Kingdom, Spies, Assassins, and Incendiaries.]

To This Discourse, the King showed Great Dislike, and Changed his Countenance
with Displeasure, and said, that Blood Became not the Dr, nor his Coat; Said,
he must Preach Other Doctrine to Him, and That, on the Account of Conscience;
and Appealed to the Drs Own Conscience, whether He would be Contented to be so
Persecuted (Terming them Poor People;) and said, Other as Effectual Means might
be Used.

The Dr Answered, that he spoke This only for his Majesty's Enformation, and
that he might know that he was not Obliged, neither in Honor, Promise, nor
Conscience to Interpose for them as Priests; if his Affairs Pressed him, and
Required him to do Otherwise.

If I had thought of it sooner, This Treatise would as well have born the Title
of a Brief History of Tongue, as of a Brief History of the Times; Or it would
have done as well perhaps, as either of them, to have Called it A Vindication
of Titus Otes: For His Murders were a kind of Chance-Medley, Compared with the
Others. He, Poor Devil, Swore to Any thing that came Next, without either
Feeling, or Foreseeing the Conscience, or the Consequences of Things. A False
Oath in His Mouth was no more then an Envenomed Tooth in the Mouth of a Mad
Dog. He S^apt at Every thing that was in his Way; and No Remedy for the Wound,
like a Piece of his Own Liver. The very Bleeding of him at a Carts-Arse has
Purged away the Malignity of the Poison. Otes'es Part was Divided, betwixt a
Malicious Humor that he brought into the World with him, and an Habitual
Course of Wickedness, that made his Sins as Familiar to him as his Daily Bread:
but the Invention, the Contrivance, and the Conduct, was Altogether Tong's;
Who, Certainly, had the Forethought, the Deliberation, and the Study of
Wickedness to Answer for Over and Above. And Otes made no more of a False Oath,
then of Writing just so many Words out of a Copy-Book: And I have yet One Word
more to say Comparatively, even on Tong's Behalf; which is, That he himself had
his Directors also, that were the More Criminal of the Two: For Even in the
Confusion of Hell it self, there is a Subordination, as well as in Heaven; and
there are Degrees of Anguish, and Desparation in the One, as there are of
Glories in the Other; Nay, Lucifer, (if I may say so) Values Himself upon the
Dignity of being Uppermost; and the Deeper the Horror, the Greater is His Glory.

The End.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE TIMES, etc.

PART III.

Treating of the DEATH OF Sir E.B. Godfrey.

By Sir Roger L'Estrange Knight.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn, MDCLXXXVIII.

TO POSTERITY.
THERE will be a Time when Truth shall be Believed, and the Witnesses of it
Iustify'd; and the World never the more upon the mending Hand, neither perhaps.
For it is Matter of Course, in the Reason and Flux of Humane Affairs, for the
Next Age to do That Right to the Former, which the Former could Not do to it
self. It Is a Rare Felicity of the Times (says Tacitus) when the Present State
of Things will bear a True History. But so it is however, that One Generation
finds Argument and Entertainment for Another; And whether the Subject be Good
or Bad; or the Succeeding Age, Better or Worse, Things will be never the less
Agreeable in the Story, for being Execrable in the Practice. For the Popular
Test of Good or Evil, is Profit, or Loss; and it is only Interest that supports
the Reputation of Wickedness, and Quenches the Veneration that is due to Virtue.

So that in saying There will be such a Time, etc. and in Appealing from the
Envy of the Present, to the Impartial Justice of the Times to come, I do not
take upon me to speak with the Spirit of a Prophet; (as if I Foretold Things
Hard to be Fore-known.) Neither do I reckon that I put any Complement upon
Posterity, in Transmitting my Cause, and my Papers into Their Hands. My
Business is only to Place Truth in a Proper Light, and to take the best Care I
can, that Aftertimes may be the Wiser for Our Follies; the Honester for our
Impostures; and that the Infamy of the Present Age, may not pass for History in
the Next.

This Tract is Intended for a Third Part, in Continuation of what I have
already Published in Two Other Parts, under the Title of [ A Brief History of
the Times, etc.] In the First Part, I have laid open the Scheme and Manage of
the Late Conspiracy, upon the Credit of the Conspirators Proper Acts and
Records. In the Second, I have Endeavored to give the World a True Account of
the Rise, Progress, and Conduct of the Pretended Popish Plot. And to show, not
so much what it was Not, as what it Was; which will make the Story appear quite
Another Thing then all this while it has been taken to be.

The Third Part that I am now entering upon, is a kind of Historical Review upon
the Matters of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. If he was Murdered at Somerset House,
as Bedloe and Prance swear he was, the Jesuits and their Fellows are certainly
the Damnedst Fools upon the Face of the Earth: But if That story was utterly
Impossible to be true, the Lord open the Eyes of the Blind, and be merciful to
the Souls of those that all this while have swallowed All These Shams for
Gospel.

For the sake of Good Method, I have Subdivided this Third Part into Two Other
Parts, within it self. The Former Treats of the Somerset House Invention, with
the Circumstances of Time, Place, Manner, Persons; And so goes on with the
Iaunt from the Stable-Rayles to Primrose-Hill; Comparing and Examining
Depositions, Iournals, and Public Entries; 'till, in the End, it appears upon
Demonstration as Infallible as Truth it self, that a Man might as well take
upon him to bring Heaven and Hell to shake Hands, as to Reconcile Prance and
Bedloe, One to Another; or Either of them to the Bare Possibility of a
Consistence with Himself.

It follows now, in the Second Part, since Sir Edmund was Not Murdered so and
so, at Somerset House, in such or such a Place; by such and such Hands; or for
this or that Reason, according to the Witnesses Report, to Enquire How? When?
Where? Why? By Whom? Or, in fine, By what Disaster he was brought to his End?
Upon the Whole, I have no more to say, then to desire the Reader, in the Awe of
God, and of his Conscience, to Ask, and to Resolve All these foregoing
Questions within Himself.

There are Three Points of very Great Importance, that I have here made the
Argument of These Three Treatises; of Great Importance, I say, in the
Subject Matter of them; In the Credit they have found in the World: In the
Countenance that has been Given them: In the Miserable Consequences that they
have Already brought upon the Honor and Peace of the Government, even to the
Scandal of Religion it self, and of the English Nation. And of Great Importance
else in the Further Operation of These Impostures upon the Generations that are
yet to come; in Transmitting an Everlasting Infamy upon so many Noble Families
and Persons, as have been falsely Accused for this Pretended Conspiracy: And no
way to Encounter the Scandal, but by taking the Masque off in Time, and
bringing the Naked Truth of this Iugling History into a Clearer Light.

Such as it is, I am now about to Deliver a Third Part of it over into the
World; partly upon an Impulse of Conscience and Duty; and partly as I am a
Friend to Plain-Dealing and Common Justice. But I know very well, that Good
Dispositions are of Little or no Effect, without Necessary Powers and
Authorities, for the putting of them in Exercise. Upon this Consideration,
before I ever advanced One Step or Syllable upon This Design, I made it my
Humble Suit to his Late Blessed Majesty, that he would give me Leave and
Commission, to make a Warrantable Enquiry into the Forgeries of Otes; and to
try if I could fairly bring him to Justice for his Perjuries. His Majesty was
hereupon pleased to Grant me an Order for the Examining of Witnesses, and
Comparing Evidences; and the Matter succeeded according to the Wish of every
Honest Man in the Three Kingdoms.

So soon as I found that Otes was Fast in the Toil; it was but Reason
Methought, for Prance to take His Turn too: The Business of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey being the Only Leg the Plot had now left to stand upon. Beside, that
the White-Horse-Consult and the Somerset-House-Murther rested upon the same
Bottom: Insomuch that the Fall of the Plot Tript up the Heels of the Murder;
for Bedloe and Prance swearing to Both Alike; if there was No Plot, they were
Consequently Forsworn to Both Alike.

In few words, All the Narratives, Depositions, and Articles of Otes, Bedloe,
and Prance, were so tuned One to Another, that it was Impossible to Touch
Either of the Three, and the Other Two not Feel on it. I speak of their
Agreement in One Common END; for they fall foul one upon another, every Step
they set, in the WAY to it. I^ Otes was Forsworn, so were the Other Two, by an
Inseparable Complication; and Prance's Business was more then three quarters
done, in the very doing of Otes's. This Consideration was most Dutifully laid
before the Late King, and not without some sort of Importunity, (within the
Compass of Good Manners) for the Honor of His Majesty's Leave, Order, and
Commission, to see if Prance might not be brought to the Stake as well as Otes;
and the One Proved to be as Rank an Impostor as the Other. His Majesty was
Graciously pleased hereupon, to Encourage, and to Appoint such a Scrutiny; and
to Enable me with All Necessary Powers for an Effectual Enquiry into the True
State and Condition of That Affair. In pursuance hereof, Diverse Enformations
were Taken; the Matter Reported upon; and Sir Edmund's Clark found at all hands
to have been the Great Confident of the Secret. But he having withdrawn himself
into the Isle of Ely; and not without some Jealousy upon the Reason of his
going out of the way, as well as Difficulty to learn where he was; His Majesty
was pleased to Direct a Special Commission for the strict Examination of him,
as hereunder follows.

WHereas His Majesty is given to understand, upon the Enformation of Roger
L'Estrange, Esquire That there is one Henry Moor, living at present at Little-port,
or elsewhere in the Isle of Ely, who is able to Discover Matters of Great
Importance to his Majesty's Service: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name,
and by his Special Direction and Appointment, to will and require you, or
either of you, forthwith upon the Receipt hereof to send for the said Henry
Moor, and him strictly and punctually to Examine, upon certain Matters, and
Things, whereof Roger L'Estrange, Esquire abovesaid shall give you particular
Enformation: And him having Examined, to transmit the said Examination unto the
said Mr. L'Estrange. And for so doing, This shall be your Warrant. Given at our
Court at Winchester, the 8th. Day of September, 1684.

To John Nalson, L. L. D. and John Fincham, Esquire Two of his Majesty's Justices
of Peace for the Isle of Ely, or either of them.

By a Letter from Mr. Fincham, bearing Date, Sept. 20. 1684. I understood that
these Worthy Gentlemen had Examined Harry Moor, according to their Order. And
by Another from Dr. Nalson of the 22 d. I received the Examination it self,
with an Account from Both, how Moor stood upon his Guard; and how Dexterously he
Managed his Point.

We found him ( says Mr. Fincham) to be very subtle and dexterous in
Equivocating: His Answers for the most part, Studied, and Labored; and
although we took a great deal of Pains with him, and used all the Arguments we
could to be clear and plain, yet we could not prevail. However, he has
confessed enough to confirm Mr. Wynels Enformation; and likewise owns Mrs.
Gibbons coming to Sir Edmunds House on the Tuesday, and his leading her to
Church after the Corpse; and Declares, That he went with the Godfreys to her
House on the Sunday.

He acknowledges his telling Mrs. Pamphlin, on Sunday Morning, that Sir Edmund
was gone Abroad Two Hours before she enquired for him; and for the Reason of
it, he gives the Command of Secrecy Enjoined him by Mr. Godfrey. In short, the
Great Secrecy that he was all along obliged to, by the Godfreys, (for which we
could not get any Reason from him, when we told him how much it had been the
Interest of his Masters Brothers, and all his Friends, if they had suspected he
had been Murdered by any Person, to have made the same Public, and obtained
my L. C. Justice's Warrant to have searched all Places that they had suspected
for him) together with the Evasive Answers he gave us, shows a Practice, etc.

Dr. Nalson Writes thus, [He is a Cunning old Fellow as ever I saw; and what
you have, is Extorted from him by a Thousand Cross Questions; for we were upon
him Five or Six Hours.

It is the Greatest Riddle (as I told him) that, as he Averrs, only He Himself,
and the Two Godfreys should know of Sir E. G's Absenting, till the Tuesday; and
yet the Saturday Post sent it all over England, that the Papists had Murdered
him, or at least, that there was such a Fear.

This Cavil about the Saturdays Post I have cleared over and over, where the
Subject led me to That Point; And so I have the Other Pretense of the Worlds
taking no Notice of Sir E's Absenting Himself till Tuesday; for they went from
place to place Enquiring after him, to my Lady Prats, to Captain Gibbons; they
told Parsons, and Mason as much before, and most of the Enformations Dated from
the very day of his Absenting himself; it being All over the Town, upon the
Sunday, What was become of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey? He went out Yesterday
Morning, and did not come home Last Night.

The First Thing Necessary, was to Learn out the Truth of the Fact; and the
Next Thing in question, was the Practice of the Instruments and Managers of
These Plot-Matters; and Principally, how they dealt with their Prisoners by the
Force of Money, Cruelty, False-Witnesses, Sham-Accusations, Menaces,
Flatteries, the Fear of Death, or the Hope of Life: And in fine, by All the
ways Imaginable of Hitting the Blind side of the Men they had to do withal.
It Is no News at This time of Day, what Arts and Solicitations were used to
Carry people off and on, according to the Biass of Those* Times; when the True
Interpretation of [ Confess the Truth, or you shall certainly be Hanged,] was [
Forswear yourself and be Damned.] Now the Stories of This way of Tampering were
so Rife, while This Business of the Plot was in Agitation, that His Majesty was
pleased to Grant Another Order of Enquiry into any thing of This Kind that
passed in the Prisons: (which I did accordingly) And the Order runs in the
Terms Following.

Whitehall, October. 6. 1684.
WHereas his Majesty has lately received several Enformations concerning the
Manage of Edward Fits-Harris, and Miles Prance, and several other Persons while
they were Prisoners in Newgate, the Gate House, and Elsewhere; It is his
Majesty's Pleasure, that you make a particular Enquiry by the Means of Captain
Richardson, Mr. Church, and others, into the Matters aforesaid, concerning the
Practices of Those that came to them, and had to do with them, by any unlawful,
and Unwarrantable Ways.

And you aro likewise hereby Authorized, and Empowered, to assure the said
Keepers, or Others by them Employed of his Majesty's particular Grace and
Favor, even in case of their own Failings or Misdemeanors, upon a full and a
clear Declaration of the Truth, in, or concerning this Affair. And hereof, you
are forthwith to make a Report.

To Roger L'Estrange, Esquire

It was a Great Advance that was made into the Cause of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey:
and the Proceedings against Otes were by This time brought to the very Day of
Issue; when God Almighty took to Himself our Late Gracious, and Blessed
Sovereign, which put a short Stop to the Prosecution both of the One, and of
the Other: But however, the Prosecution was Revived, and upon the 8th, and 9th.
Days of May, 1685. Otes was Convict at the Kings-Bench-Bar upon Two Indictments
for Wilful, Malicious, and Corrupt Perjury; and Miles Prance was also Convict
of Perjury in the Case of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey and Mr. Vernatti, May 4. 1686.
So that now there was a Fair Place left for a General Review: But I was
Concerned however, to secure my self under the Warrant and Protection of a
Further Authority for a Continuation of the Scrutiny; which his PRESENT Majesty
was Graciously pleased to Grant me in the Form following.

JAMES R.

IT is Our Royal Will, Pleasure and Command, that immediately upon Sight
hereof, you make a strict and diligent Enquiry into such Matters and Things as
you shall reasonably conceive may give some Light concerning the Death of the
Late Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and that you forthwith send for such Persons of
Probity and good Repute, as you shall know, hear, or understand to have been
privy to any Circumstances relating to the said End: And that you Examine every
such Person upon Oath touching the same; more especially the Keeper of Newgate,
and such of his Officers and People, as had the Care of Miles Prance, while he
was there a Prisoner: And likewise one Boyce a Glass-Eye-Maker, and such others
as you shall have cause to believe may be able to give any Material Enformation
thereupon. You are hereby Required, and Authorized to proceed upon the Matters
aforesaid without any Delay; and to give us a particular Account of the whole
Affair: And for so doing, this shall be your Warrant.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 19th Day of February, 1685/6. in the
Second year of our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. Sunderland P.

To our Trusty and well-beloved, Sir Roger L'Estrange, Knight.

Over and above These Authorities, I had likewise the View of the
Parliament-Iournals, the Councel-Papers, and All Public Depositions, that
might be helpful to me upon This Subject, and Occasion; to say nothing of all
the Printed Trials, and Narratives that are Extant. So that in short, there
wanted only True Copies of the Enformations before the Coroner, to put me in
possession of the whole Matter: to which End I was further Enabled by This
Following Order.

Robert Earl of Sunderland, Baron Spencer of Wormleighton, President of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Principal Secretary of State, etc.

WHereas upon, or about the 18th. Day of October, 1678. You by Your Precept
summoned a Jury to Enquire how Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, late of the County of
Middlesex, Deceased, came by his Death. And whereas you did Execute the said
Inquisition, and several Witnesses were Produced, and Examined before you on
the Behalf of the King; whose Enformations upon Oath in Writing are in your
Custody or Power, True Copies of which Examinations from the Originals, as also
a True Copy of the Inquisition, it his Majesty's Pleasure should be forthwith
delivered to Sir Roger L'Estrange, Knight, One of his Majesty's Justices of
Peace for the County of Middlesex: These are therefore to will and require you
forthwith to deliver to the said Sir Roger L'Estrange True Copies of All the
said Enformations, not omitting any one of them; and likewise a True Copy of
the said Inquisition, by him to be compared with the several Originals; And
hereof you are not to fail.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 28th Day of March, 1687. Sunderland P.

To Mr. John Cowper, one of his Majesty's Coroners for the County of Middlesex.

Upon This Order, Mr. Cowper the Coroner delivered me the Copies of several
Enformations. As the Enformation of Joseph Radcliffe, and of Eleanor his Wife:
Two Enformations of Zachariah Skillarne; Two of John Brown the Constable; and
the Enformations of Nicholas Cambridge, John Wilson, Tho. Morgan, William
Bromwell, John Walters, John Rawson, Henry Moor, Caleb Wind, Richard Duke, and
Mary the Wife of Captain Tho. Gibbon. The foregoing Enformations must be
understood, according to the Order to Mr. Cowper, to be the True Copies of the
said Enformations. And to be All too, [ Not omitting any one of them.] And Mr.
Cowper Delivered me likewise a Copy of the Order it self, by him thus Attested,
at the foot of the said Order.

6th of April, 1686.
This is a true Copy of the Order above-written, Delivered unto Sir Roger
L'Estrange Knight, by me; the Original being in my Custody.

Jo. Cowper.

Here are Sixteen Enformations upon Tale, and not One Word to the Question of
the manner of his Death; but upon the Conjecture of the Two Surgeons, Mr.
Skillarne and Mr. Cambridge. Mrs. Gibbon, that could have spoken very much,
says very little, and it was not properly an Enformation to the Coroner
neither; for the Verdict was Over first. Moor the Clark, (that was in Effect, a
Secretis, to the whole Mystery, was only Interrogated, If his Master went out
in a Laced Band: I do not object to That Question; but why That Question, and
No More, to a man that both, the Brothers, and the Coroner knew to be Privy to
the whole Transaction? If he went out in a Laced Band, he was Murdered; but if
he had gone out in a Plain Band, he had been Felo de se. For whether he Died by
the Sword, or the Rope, or the Linen Cloth, was the Question. The Jury sat
upon Friday, and Adjourned 'till Saturday; and it was after Midnight when they
gave up their Verdict. Now the Surgeons Delivered their Conjectural Evidence
upon Friday; but the Jurors being wholly Vnsatisfy'd, upon That meeting, were
Prevailed upon to Adjourn in order to the Getting of Further, and of Better
Proofs. And what were those Further, and those Better Proofs that came in next
day, but Mr. Radcliffe and Mrs. Radcliffe, Caleb Wind and Richard Duke, that
saw Sir Edmund in the Strand at Twelve or One a Clock the Saturday of his going
away, after he had taken his Walk in the Fields toward Marybone: But These are
Points that are Handled in Better Order, and more at large in Their Due places.

After this Care taken for the Finding out of the Truth, and for the Methods of
Arriving at it. All Good men, I hope, will Acquit me, that I have proceeded
upon the Conscience of an Honest Man, in the very Inclinations of doing it; and
that in the Zeal of pushing it forward, I have no cause to be Ashamed of Owning
my self an Officious Lover of Justice. And I have been no less Tender of
usurping upon the Province of my Superiors, in keeping my self strictly to all
the Measures of Duty and Reverence toward the Government. I can fairly Appeal
to the Reader now in one Word more, that I have taken as much Care to lay open
the matter of Fact on the One side, as on the Other; for where should any Man
look for the True and Reasonable Grounds of a Verdict, but in the Words and
Import of the Evidence? To which End, I have here exposed the Enformations that
were taken by the Coroner; I have likewise Impartially Extracted the Uttermost
Force of All that was said in Proof of the Murder, upon the Trials: And upon
the whole Matter, I do here submit my self as to the Candor of this Following,
Discourse to All Indifferent Judges.

Let me not be thought Insensible all this while that I Write now against the
Stream, and that an Integrity of This Standard Labors against Wind and Tide. A
stubborn Inflexible Honesty is almost sure of as many Enemies, as there are
Men able to do him Mischief, that have Sacrificed to Pluralities upon the Poll,
Popular Applause, Interest, and Occasion: But my Fortune is made, in the
Comfort of a Good Conscience, and in the Blessing of an Indifference, that has
cast All these Cares behind it. I will have the Vanity too, (even without
Asking God Forgiveness for it) to Hope, that These Papers may outlive the Envy
that This Necessary way of Liberty has brought upon the Composer of them; And
that Aftertimes shall Thank me in my Grave, for the Plain History of many
Useful Truths, how Odious soever at Present, which in all Likelihood they
should never have known without me.

But to show now at last, that the Officious Zeal of a Pragmatical Observator
(as the Wit in Mode has it) has not Transported him beyond the Terms of Decency
and Good Manners. I have not so much as skew'd, in this Whole Discourse, upon
Any Person where the Third of the Story did not Absolutely Require it. I meddle
with no Man's Opinion, Foreign to this Single point. Toleration, or no
Toleration, has nothing at all to do in This Book. I support my self from one
End of it to the Other, upon Evident and Visible Fact: I have the Public, and
the Solemn Declaration of a Famous Common Lawyer, for the Equity and the
Legality of my Conclusions, as they are drawn from Warrantable Premises.

As to the Coroners Jury, with a respect to the Verdict, I do here make use of
several of their Enformations, which were Frankly Delivered, and they are as
Faithfully Reported. I do not find that there was any Great Stress laid upon
the Evidence before Them, that spoke to the very Pinch of the Question. Only
upon the First day, while Blood, or No Blood was any part of the Debate, they
stood it out; for they themselves knowing that there was a Great Deal of Blood,
would not agree to find him Strangled, so long as Blood was insisted upon as an
Argument that he Died by the Sword. But upon the Saturday; and after a whole
Nights Contest, what to make on it: The Blood, (that is to say the Demonstrative
Proof) being quite laid aside; the Surgeons continued of Opinion that he was
Strangled, and the Question being a Surgeons-Matter, the Jury resigned
themselves, and Agreed upon the Verdict.

JUst as I was Finishing the History of One Popish Murder, up starts Another.

Upon the 30 th of January Last past, about Nine at Night there was found, in
Parkers Lane, among the Dunghills, the Trunk of a Murdered and Dismembered Body
of a Man. The Thighs, Legs, and Arms were taken up Next Morning, from under a
House of Office in the Savoy; Drippings of Blood seen on the Wall; and the Head
found in Another Common Place of Easement, in the Strand, near Exeter Exchange.

This Tragical Story raised such a Hubub, of Rumor and Discourse all'ore the
Kingdom, that This Particular Assassinate was most Industriously Represented,
as no Other, then the Earnest of an Universal Massacre. Insomuch, that there
was hardly an Eminent Protestant Divine, but they were presently Fitting His
Head to This Bodies Shoulders. It fell out unluckily enough, that a Couple of
poor Iournymen Ioyners, that were taken Notice of to be more Busy then
Ordinary, about the Place That night where the Body was Laid, were Taken, and
Committed upon it: And in my Conscience, it would have gone Hard with them, if
God's Providence had not Ordered such a Discovery, Another way, as Cleared
these Two Men to All Purposes of any Possibility of being Guilty of the Fact.

I take Freedom to Discourse the Case thus far, in regard that they have been
already taken into Custody, Examined, Produced, and Acquitted, by the Coroners
Inquest.

The Criminals, upon the Other Account, are in the hand of the Law, and it will
not become Me to Anticipate the Judgment of a Court of Justice, by any General,
or Particular Previous Descant, upon the Point in Question. I shall only say,
that since the Whole Matter (what ever the Town may Talk to the contrary) has
passed through my Hands; As the Discovery of the Head; the Proving of That Head
to be the Head of Aubry; and the Proving Those Quarters also that were found in
the Savoy, to belong to the same Body. Since All This is True; I say, (as Sir
Robert Clark, and several others will bear me Witness) and that All the
Enformations, Every One of them, fell under My Particular Care; (Three only
Excepted, wherein Justice Lugg Joined with me) I have some Right, Methinks, for
the Credit of Truth, and of my self, to speak a Word or Two on the Safe Side of
the Question.

The Story of the Body, the Blood, the Quarters, etc. being All put together,
furnished Matter for so Terrible a Relation, that the Phantome it self of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was Nothing to it: Insomuch that a man could hardly Walk the
Streets, without being Flapt in the Mouth, with a [ Will you believe Now that
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Murdered by the Papists?] I received a Penny-Post
Letter upon the Occasion, which the Reader shall have as Cheap here as I had it.

Sir,
I understand that you are Writing a Book to Prove to the World that Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey Murdered Himself. It would be a Work Equally Acceptable to
This Nation, to Demonstrate that the Person lately found Murdered, did Cut off
his Own Arms and Legs, and then with his Own Hands did Cut off his Own Head,
and Ordered his Trunk to be Carried, and left upon a Dunghill in Parkers-Lane,
and there to receive Burial as Heretics Deserve.

Yours. Philo-dicus.


This Letter is a Specimen of the Humor, both of the Season, and of the
People, that are so Forward to Erect Articles of Faith upon Visionary
Illusions. It Is a Thing Incredible, what a Concourse of People Met Every Day
and Hour, in Shoals, to see the Dreadful sight of the Blood at the Savoy: What
Romances upon it; What Inferences, and Applications, as if Every Drop of
Protestant Blood in the Peoples Veins were to go the same Way with That upon
the Savoy-Wall. But to see now, how the Just Goodness of Heaven has Turned All
This, to the Reputation of Godfrey's Case, instead of Confounding it. For let
the Present Murder be Fixed where it will; the Blood at the Savoy will have No
Part at all in That Story: so that I hope the Snare of this Pretense, for the
Abusing, the Embroiling, and the Tumultuating of the Common People, when they
shall Discern how Dangerous, and how Malicious the Cheat was, may turn to their
Advantage. Methinks it should make them Careful, What to Believe, and Whom to
Trust: And say to Themselves; Instead of [ Here Is the second Part of the Murder
of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; Here Is the second Part of the Imposture of That
Pretended Murder.

I cannot have a Better Occasion, or a Better Place, for the Exposing of This
Spiteful Sham, then That which I am now upon; And I cannot better do it, then
by setting forth the Truth of That Business of the Blood: And that it was a
Sort of Blood, which they that would have it Thought to be Protestant Blood are
not so Tender of Spilling. I must Desire the Reader to take Notice here, that
Murder, is of No Religion: and that Truth, is of All Religions that ever were
under the Sun. But for the Clearer Illustration of the Matter, I shall here
subjoyn several Enformations that I have taken concerning This Blood: And it is
Desired, that an Enquiry may be made by any man that has the Least Doubt upon
him, whether All the Circumstances of Time, Place, and Persons, in These
Following Depositions, be not True in Every Point, according to the Known
Matter of Fact.

Midd. and Westminster. ss. The Enformation of Dr. Richard Lamb of the Parish ofSt.
Clements Danes, Feb. 7. 1687/8.
SAYS, that upon Sunday Morning the 29th of January Last Past, Mr. Hall one of
the Fathers in the Savoy, finding himself Ill with the Spitting of Blood, sent
for this Enformant (as appeared by the Message) to come to the said Mr. Hall,
and let him Blood: The said Mr. Hall telling This Enformant, that it was by the
Order of Sir George Wakeman. And this Enformant went accordingly, and Opened a
Vein, taking a Quantity of Blood from him according to his Order.

And says, That on the Morning following, This Enformant went again to the
Savoy, and Opened a Vein for Mr. James Cook, and likewise for John Tailor.
Having let Mr. Hall Blood in a Room One pair of Stairs, in the Presence of
several People: Mr. Cook being let Blood Three pair of Stairs High; and John
Tailor in the Kitchen.

Jurat. die and Anno supradict. Coram Me

To. L'Estrange.


Richard Lamb.

Midd. and Westminster. ss. The Enformation of Francis Hunter of the Savoy, Taken
upon Oath, Feb. 9. 168 7/8.
SAYS, That on Monday, Jan. 30. 168 7/8. in the Morning, This Enformant held
the Porringer to Mr. James Cook, while Mr. Lamb let him Blood, in a Room Three
pair of Stairs High.

Jurat. die and An. supradict' Francis Hunter.

The Enformation of John Taylour of the Savoy, Taken upon Oath, Feb. 9. 168 7/8.
SAYS, That upon Monday, Jan. 30. 168 7/8. in the Morning, Dr. Lamb let This
Enformant Blood in the Savoy-Kitchen.

And says, that about One, the Cook threw the Blood out at the Kitchin-Window.

Jurat. die and Anno supradict. The Mark of John T Taylour

The Enformation of Mr. James Cook of the Savoy, etc.
SAYS, That Mr. Lamb came to This Enformant, upon Monday Morning the 30th of
January Last past, and let him Blood: And that This Enformant seeing the Blood
yet standing in the Porringer on the Day following, One asked This Enformant
what he meant to do with the Blood, to let it stand so long? And so he took it
and threw it out at the Window into the Thames. And This Enformant heard that
Blood was seen upon the Wall, and at the Bottom where it fell; but This
Enformant did not see it.

And This Enformant seeing People about the Blood under the Window, and
Reflecting upon the Limbs that were there found, bad the Cook not Wash the
Porringer, for People might possibly come to search about it.

Jurat. die and Anno supradict. James Cook

Midd. and Westminster. ss. The Enformation of Peter Bailey, of the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields, Taken upon Oath, Ian. 9. 168 7/8.
THIS Enformant says, that upon Monday, the 30th. of January, 168 7/8. About
one of the Clock, he was in the Kitchen belonging to the Schools in the Savoy,
where he saw two Porringers of Blood, which he was told was the Blood of Mr.
Cook, and of John Tailor. And that he this Enformant saw the Cook throw out the
Blood of the said John Tailor (as he was told it was) out of the Kitchen Window.

Jurat' die and Anno Supradict. Peter Bailey.

The Enformation of Ignatius Walters, of the Savoy, taken upon Oath, Feb. 29.
168 7/8.
SAYS, that on Sunday, Jan. 29. 168 7/8. This Enformant held the Porringer to
Mr. Hall in the Great Room up One pair of Stairs, while Mr. Lamb let him Blood.

And says, That on Tuesday Morning next following, he saw Mr. Allen throw out
Mr. Hall's Blood; and Mr. Cook throw his Own, out at the Kitchen-Window. And
that on the Monday above, this Enformant saw John Tailor let Blood, and this
Enformant threw it out of the Aforesaid Window the same Afternoon.

And this Enformant says, That a little of the Blood stuck upon the Wall
toward the Thames, which was not brushed off till the Thursday following.

Jurat' die and Anno supradict. Ignatius Walters.

There never were Two Shams better Matched, and the World could never have
Furnished me with a more Auspicious Entrance into my Story of Godfrey, then
this of Aubry. (For Dennis Aubry is the Name of this Murdered Person.) I speak
as to the Emprovement of a Prodigious Mischief out of a False, and a Scandalous
Foundation: Only for the Honor of This Latter, the Other was much the Grosser
Imposture of the Two, as will more and more appear, upon a thorough Perusal and
Consideration of this Ensuing Treatise.

As to the Method and Disposition of the Matter in hand; I have Divided the
Whole into Two Parts; and Each Part into Chapters, with Contents to them, that
will do the Office of a Table.

And I have further, (for the Stopping of All Mouths) Deposited the Originals
in the Paper-Office, to the End, that whoever Doubts whether they are
Authentic or not, needs go no further for satisfaction then to the Bundle it
self, as it remains there, under the Title of [ Enformations concerning the
Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
PART I.
CHAP. I. SIR Edmundbury Godfrey did certainly Dye a Violent Death; and William
Bedloe and Miles Prance took upon them to discover the Murderers, and the
Murder. p. 1. II. Why and How the Pretended Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
was made a Branch of the Pretended Plot, Exhibited by Dr. Tongue, and Titus Otes,
p. 8. III. Bedloe and Prance swore to the Plot as well as to the Murder, p.
15. IV. Notes upon the Transition of Bedloe's and Prance's Evidence from the
Proof of the Murder, to the Witnessing of the Plot, p. 22. V. Notes upon
certain Omissions, Enlargements, Disagreements, and Contradictions, in the
Evidence of Bedloe and Prance, concerning the Plot, together with the True
Reasons thereof, p. 28. VI. An Abstract of the Evidence that Bedloe gave
concerning the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. First, before the Lords House,
the Lords Committees, and the King and Council. 2ly. Upon the Trials of Green*
Berry, and Hill, in the Court of King's Bench, with Notes upon the Whole, p. 42.
VII. How Prance came to be Taken-up; How he was Managed; With the Sum of his
Evidence about Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and a General Reflection upon the Whole,
p. 51. VIII. The Secret History of Prance's Condition, from December 29. 1678.
to January 11. 1679. and the secret Manage of him in the Prison, p. 64. IX.
Prance's Ill Usage, with a Brief Account of Himself; How he came to Depart from
his Evidence. The Bishop of St. Asaphs Commission to Examine him; and several
Passages cleared in the Proceeding, p. 74. X. Why this History was not
published sooner. Their Ways of suppressing the Truth, as in the Case of
Brumwel, Walters, Gibbon, Coral, etc. and of Encouraging False Witnesses, p.
92. XI. Notes upon Bedloe's and Prance's Evidence, compared one with Another,
p. 110. XII. Some General Touches upon the Character of Bedloe and Prance. and
their Credit in other Cases as well as This, not forgetting Titus Otes, p. 116.
XIII. The Relation of Godfrey's Murder, as it stands in the Narratives and
Trials, is one of the most Unlikely Stories to be True, that ever was made
Public and Believed, p. 132. XIV. The Extreme Difficulty of Reconciling the
History of the Murder at Somerset House to the Matters of Fact, as they
appeared in the Ditch at Primrose-hill, and upon the Verdict; The Reasons of
that Difficulty, and how it might have been in some measure prevented, p. 153.
XV. Supposing the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey to have been a Branch of
the Popish Plot, (as it was commonly reputed*) If there was No such Plot, there
was No such Murder, p. 159,
PART II.
THE Vindication of Green, Berry, and Hill, upon the Ground of Sir William
Jones's Law and Equity, p. 163. II. What Humor was Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
observed to be in upon the Morning and Day when he left his House? p. 170. III.
What Notice was taken of Sir E. B's Melancholy before he went away from his
House, and what Opinion, or Apprehension had People concerning it? p. 176. IV.
What Opinion or Apprehension had Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Himself of his
Melancholy before he went away? and what was it that made him use that
Expression so often, I shall be the first Martyr, or, I shall not live long? p.
181. V. What did Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Friends, Relations, Servants and
Acquaintance, think was become of him, from the time of his going away to the
time when the Body was found? p. 188. VI. What Endeavors were used to lay the
Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey upon the Papists, p. 199. VII. How Matters were
managed while Sir E. B. Godfrey was missing, toward the finding out what was
become of him, p. 202. VIII. When, How, Where, and in what Manner the Body of
Sir E. B. Godfrey was found, and what passed till the Coroners Inquest sat upon
the View of it, p. 212. IX. A Jury Summoned to sit upon the Body of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, and some Difficulty start^d about it, p. 220. X. The
Subject of the Debate; and first of the Position of the Body as it lay in the
Ditch, p. 226. XI. The Jury found Sir E. B. Godfrey to be Strangled, and Not
Killed with the Sword. The Surgeons were of the same Opinion, and gave their
Reasons for it, p. 231. XII. The Jurors Reasons for the Verdict they gave upon
the View of Sir E. B. Godfrey's Body, p. 242. XIII. The Jury Adjourned the
Debate for want of Evidence. Quaere, What Better Evidence they had the Next
Day, when they came to a Verdict, then was produced the Day before? p. 251.
XIV. Blood, or No Blood was the Main Point in Issue, though the Least Part of
the Question, either at the Inquest, or at the Trials, p. 262. XV. The
Enformations before the Coroner Examined, and not on^ word in them to the Point
in Issue, p. 274. XVI. The Coroners Enformations Further Examined; and not one
Word in them of Blood, the Posture, or any thing else material to the Question,
p. 285. XVII. Notes upon the Mysterious Examination of Henry Moor, Clark to Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, p. 290. XVIII. A very pertinent Evidence of Joseph
Radcliffe's made worse th^n nothing, p. 298. XIX. The Opening of the Body had
certainly Discovered the Cause of Sir E. B. G's Death; and it was Advised, and
Propounded by Doctors, Friends, and Surgeons, but Rejected, p. 312. XX. Mrs.
Gibbon's Enformation compared with the Coroners Report, and the Matter
submitted to All Indiferent Men, whether the Design throughout was to Discover
the Truth, or to Stifle it; with an Appendix, for a Conclusion. p. 320.
THE MYSTERY OF THE DEATH OF Sir E. B. Godfrey UNFOLDED. PART. I.
CHAP. I.
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey did certainly Dye a violent Death; and William Bedloe
and Miles Prance took upon them to Discover the Murderers, and the Murder.

THERE never was, perhaps, such a Mystery made of a Plain Case, as we have had
in the Business of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey: That is to say; Concerning the
Manner of his Death; The Time; The Place; The Occasion of it; and by what Hands
He Fell: And All This only for want of Taking right Measures in the Tracing and
Timing of Things. For Whoever draws Inferences, Hand-over-Head, from Bold
Allegations, to Certainty of Fact; or from Positive Oaths, to the Truth of
every Thing that is Sworn, without Further Enquiry, or Examination, will find
himself Mightily Mistaken upon the Subject here in Issue.

To do This as it should be done, there must a Regard be had to the Order, both
of Time, and of Connection; the Date, the Series, and the Succession of Things,
Apart; with the Reasons, and Countenances of Affairs, as they stand in the
Context. It will Need but a very short Deduction, to bring down the Course of
This Story into the Proper Channel, by laying open the Naked Fact of Sir E. B.
G's Dying a Violent Death: By showing Who they were that took upon them to
Detect the Murderers, and to Prove the Murder; and how Godfrey's Name came
Originally into the Story; which, as they pretended, was the Occasion of his
Death. This is it that I propose for the Argument of my First Chapter, and
Thence to Proceed, Step by Step, and in a Natural Method from one Point to
another.

The First Question will be, Whether or No the Murder was Committed in Manner,
and Form, as the Witnesses Swear it was, at Somerset House? The Second Point
will be This. In Case it shall appear that he was Not Murdered at
Somerset House, or by such Persons, or by such Means, or upon such a Grudge, as
Prance and Bedloe swear he was; In what Place, by what Instruments, in what
Way, and by what Instigation, Was he Murdered? These Two Considerations shall
be laid indifferently before the Reader, in a Distribution of this Discourse,
respectively, into Two Parts, without Bespeaking One Partial Word or Thought
upon the whole Matter.

As to the Two Witnesses that gave Testimony in This Cause, they had no more
Skill in the Merits of it, then the Next Cast of Parrots in the Price of
Almonds: But there was an Intrigue of State driven on, under the Cover of a
Iesuitical Confederacy, which rendered it Necessary, at That Time, to make the
Papists as Odious as they could, and to lay all Judgments and Calamities, as
well Public, as Private, at their Door. As, among others, This Unhappy
Miscarriage of Sir E. B. Godfrey for One: So that we are to Consult the Popish
Plot for the Popish Murder: The Latter being made so Essential a Part of the
Former, that there is No Disbelieving the One, without Ridiculing the Other: But
how These Two came to be Incorporated into One Interest and Design, will
Deserve a Place by is self.

Dr. Tongue was hardly ever without a Plot in his Head, and a Pen in his Hand.
The One Bred the Maggots, and the Other Vented them: As his Royal Martyr, for
Example; His Jesuits Assassins, and other Writings of his under the Title of
Cases, or Narratives: which Narratives were Transformed, with One Breath of
Otes's, into Damnable Conspiracies. Now Narrative in those Days, was only a
Modish Name for a Romantique Forgery. This was the Rise of the Doctor's Popish
Plot; He took the Idea of it from Habernfeld; Sent Otes among the Jesuits, for
Hints, and Materials; and so away Trudges he to Valladolid, and after that to
St. Omers, where he stays a while, and then comes back again to his Principal,
Charged with Minutes of Names. Times, Places, Customs, etc. Tongue Pounds them
into One Confection, and according to the Text, Exodus Chapter 32. ver. 24. [ There
came out this Calf.]

The Project being now formed, and Distributed into Articles, Tongue presented a
Copy of them, in a Narrative, to his Late Majesty upon the Thirteenth of
August, 1678. Plying the King with Fresh Informations and further
Importunities, till toward the End of September following; but instead of
gaining Credit by the Pretense of Additional Confirmations and Discoveries, His
Majesty came by Degrees to be Fully possessed in the Conclusion, That the whole
Train of the History was no better then a Downright Imposture. The King's
Hardness of Belief, was quickly smoked by the Plot-master, and his Advisers;
Insomuch, that though they could not Totally take the Matter out of His
Majesty's Hand, They did what they could yet, by a Side-Wind, to Transfer the
Cause, from the Privy Council, to the Parliament; where they made themselves
sure beforehand, of a Majority to bid it Welcome. In Order hereunto, Sir E. B.
Godfrey was Earnestly pressed, and with much Difficulty prevailed upon, Sept.
6. 1678. to Swear Otes to Tong's Narrative; and likewise to take his Oath over
again, to the same Copies, with Fresh and further Enformations, upon the 28 th.
of the same Month; which Depositions were presented by Tongue, That very Morning,
to the King and Council.

While Matters were thus Depending, Sir E.B. Godfrey went from his House on
Saturday, the 12 th of October following; And No Tidings what was become of
him, till Thursday the 17 th. when he was found, toward the Evening, in a
Ditch, with his own Sword through his Body, at, or near a Place Called
Prim-Rose-Hill. The Coronors Inquest sat upon it, but adjourned to the Day
Following, and Then gave up their Verdict, i. e. [That he was Murdered by
diverse Persons Unknown; etc.] October 20 th. His Majesty Emitted a Proclamation
for the Discovery of the Murderers, wherein are these Words.

His Majesty is graciously pleased hereby to promise to any Person or Persons,
who shall make such a Discovery, whereby the said Murderers, or any of them,
shall be Apprehended, the Sum of Five Hundred Pound, which shall be immediately
paid down upon sufficient Testimony, that such Persons or Person are, or is
Guilty of the said Murder: And if any one of the Murderers shall discover the
rest, whereby They, or any of them, shall be apprehended, such Discoverer shall
not only be Pardoned his Offense, but shall in like manner receive the said
Reward of Five Hundred Pound. On the Thursday following, upon a Suggestion that
there were People would come in to discover the Murder, if it were not for the
Danger of being Murdered themselves in Revenge; His Majesty was graciously
pleased, by Another Proclamation, to add an Assurance of Protection to the
former Promise of Pardon, and Reward; so that here was Indemnity, Money, and
Security offered to the fairest Bidder, and it fell to the Lot of W. Bedloe (or
rather Beddoe) to be the Man. We shall reserve the Consideration of his
Character, and of his Evidence for Another Place.

The Second Proclamation was not Eight-and-Forty-Hours-Old, when a sudden Freak
took him in the Head of making a Step from London to Bristol, and there was a
Gentlewoman in his Company that went down to her Parents there, by the same
Passage. They were no sooner come to their Inn at Newberry, but Bedloe Called
presently for Pen, Ink, and Paper, to write, he said, to Secretary Coventry.
The Woman saw the Writing, Sealing, Superscribing, and the sending away of the
Letter by the Post: She Read the Superscription too, but could not get any
thing from him of the Contents, more then This, That if the Business of that
Letter succeeded, he would present her with a Diamond Ring (being a small Sum
of Money in her Debt, it seems) And he said Farther, that he expected to receive
an Answer of That Letter at Bristoll, which accordingly he did receive with a
Letter Enclosed to the Mayor of Bristoll in the Terms Following.

Whitehall, Nov. 2. 1678. Mr. Bedloe,
I Have Received your Letter of October 30th. and shall be glad to see you here
with all the Convenient Speed you can; but whereas you desire to come (as you
Express it) Clandestinely, and not to be seen by Those People that sent you out
of Town, and yet would have me give you an Order to the Mayor of Bristoll, for
your Appearance before Me: These two Things seem to be Inconsistent. You may,
if you think Fit, come-up of your self, as Privately as you Can, without the
Knowledge of the Mayor, or any other Person, being under No Restraint, as I
suppose you are Not. But if you Judge it Convenient that Mr. Mayor be
acquainted with your coming, I have written a short Letter to him
here-Enclosed; and have sent you a Copy of it, that you may consider whether
you will make use of it or No. I know not whom you mean by [Those People that
sent you out of Town;] but when you come to Town, I will take the most
Effectual Course I can for your Safety and Protection: I am

Your Humble Servant, H. Coventry.

To Mr. W. Bedloe at Mr. T. Jones 's house in Broadstreet. Bristoll.

Mr. Secretary Coventry's Letter to the Mayor of Bristoll, Nov. 2. 1678.
Worthy Sir,
THere being some Special Occasion for Mr. William Bedloe, (now residing in
your City) to make his Appearance before me, I have thought it fit hereby to
acquaint you with it, desiring you to favor and further his speedy coming
hither, with such Orders and Directions as you shall think necessary, if he
shall apply himself to you in that behalf: But because Secrecy is to be used in
This matter, I must entreat you to keep it Private, so as No Notice may be
taken thereof. I am with much Truth, Sir,

Your Affectionate Humble Servant, H. Coventry.


I shall only observe here, that Notwithstanding Bedloe's Caution of Priva^y,
he had the Vanity to make his pretended Discovery a Work of Noise, and Clamor:
For he got himself to be taken up at Noonday upon the Tolzey, with hundreds of
People Crowding about him; and the Multitude were not only Witnesses of the
Seizure, but made Privy also to the Business, which was as Public as a
Street-Rumour, and his Affectation of being taken Notice of, could make it.
From Bristoll he was Conveyed to London, where he was Immediately Dubbed a
Captain, and a Kings Evidence. By This Timely Application, he got the Start
however of All Other Pretenders, to the Five-Hundred-Pound-Reward.

It was upon the 5 th. of November, 1678. that he Left Bristoll, and upon St.
Thomas day following, Miles Prance, a Silver-Smith, was taken into Custody upon
Suspicion of being one of the Assassins. He Denied All, at First, and so by
Fitts, went off and on, Afterward, till the Condemned Hole in Newgate, with
the help of the Earl of Shaftsbury, opened his Eyes, and brought him in the
End, to do the Office of a Necessary, and a Thorough-pac'd-Evidence.

CHAP. II.
Why, and How the Pretended Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was made a Branch
of the Pretended Plot, Exhibited by Dr. Tongue and Titus Otes.

TO Talk of a PRETENDED Murder, and of a PRETENDED Plot, may look perchance
like a prejudging of the Cause; and if it were a Stage, as it is a State-Plot,
It would not, I must Confess, be so Masterly, to forestall the Readers
Curiosity by telling him the Secret so soon: But in a Case of Truth, Honesty,
and Conscience, I take the Readiest Way to the clearing of the Point, to be the
Best; Beside, That even if the very Fact, both of the One, and of the Other,
were, to a Tittle as it is Reported to be, it would go no further then PRETENDED
Still; That is to say, with a Respect to the Reporters, if they Swear
Positively to more then they Know. But for Pretended, or Not Pretended, we'll
let That Pass, and come short to the First Member of this Division, that is to
say, [WHY] was the Murder, etc. made a Branch of the Plot?

There was at That Time, a Real Conspiracy upon the Wheel, under the
Countenance of another in Vision; and the Hopes of the One, Depended entirely
upon the Reputation of the Other; for the Peoples Affections are as Necessary
to a Rebellion, as their Fingers; and for One Man that Heartily Espouses the
Wickedness, and the Malice of a Sedition, a Body may Honestly reckon upon a
Hundred, that are Tricked into it, by a Plausible Cheat: Now the Heat of Otes's
Plot was, by This Time, pretty well Cooled, and the Republican Practices
Consequently at some sort of Stand. Men began to Hearken, to Enquire, to Lay
Things and Things Together, and to Examine Matters; to Carry their own Heads
upon their own Shoulders: Again, to Judge for Themselves, and to Act like
Reasonable Creatures. They began, I say, to make Use of their Own Eyes, and
Understandings, and to Try if they could find the way Home again, without the
help of a Dog and a Bell. The Supposed Conspiracy, they saw, had but One Single
Testimony to support it: And That, a Blasted one too: Nay, the Narrative it
self was found to be only Noise, without Proof. But in fine; what with This,
That, and The Other, the Cause, (in Common Reputation at least) was even giving
up the Ghost; for want of Variety, as well of Matter, as of Witnesses, to keep
the Life and Soul together on it. But at Length, through a Wonderful Providence
(as Providence went Then-a-Days) both these Wants were supplied, by Bedloe and
Prance; and a Second Fraud made use of, to Prove the Truth of the Former. So it
was, in fin^, That Tong's and Otes's Devil had been quite Sunk, they said, if
the Two New Conjurers had not Called him Up again. The Matter in Brief, was so
Managed, that the Murder was to prove the Plot, and the Plot, to Prove the
Murder: Witness the Stress that was laid upon the Matter at All Trials, in
favor of the Truth, and Providence of the Discovery. Nay, they went so
Inseparably hand in hand together, that [ Who Murdered Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey?] was the Common Refuge of People that were run up to the Wall, upon
That Controversy. Insomuch, that it Stopped All Mouths, and Answered all
Objections. The Pretended Conspiracy it self, as I was a-saying, had as much
need of a Second, as the Witness; and when Otes and his Works came once to be
Blown upon, they were, in their own Defense, to find out something else that
was Horrid in Fact, to Bolster up the Reputation of the Guns, Daggers, Pilgrims
and Consults, that never had any Being in the Nature of Things, further then in
Imagination. And People began to make their Observations also, that though
there was Time enough allowed before the Discovery, for the Uttermost Execution
of the whole Villainy; there was not so much as an Inch of Match found; Not a
Flask of Powder, or a Dark Lanthorn, toward the bringing of it to Effect: No,
not so much as one Snip of a Letter, or Commission, to uphold the Credit of the
Pretense; so that the Managers were exceedingly in the Right, under so many
Difficulties and Disappointments, to cast the Weight of the Plot upon That
Issue: For the Cry of a Popish Murder, and a Protestant Justice, at that Time
of the Day, was enough to lay the Three Kingdoms in Sackcloth and Ashes;
Especially with the Pulpits, Iuries, News-Letters, and Coffee-Houses to friend.
This was the Reason for That way of Proceeding, and their Expectations were not
deceived in the Event. To Conclude; as they found it Necessary to link the Plot
and the Murder together; so they made it, quite throughout, the Interest of
the One to Assist toward the Belief of the Other: And whoever Disputed the
Murder, Affronted the Conspiracy. Now if a PLOT or NO Plot, was the Question,
there needs no more to be said upon the WHY and the WHEREFORE of the Business,
then that the Whole was at Stake upon This Cast. It was next to be Considered,
HOW, i. e. upon what Pretext, by what Means and Methods this Pretended Murder
was made a Branch of the Pretended Plot.

It happened very Unluckily, that the Pretended Popish Murder should fall upon
him that took the Depositions of the Pretended Popish Plot: for it was This
Accident that gave the Hint and Countenance, to the Alliance that was
afterward Contracted betwixt them. The Fact was Evident, and the Color,
Popular Enough, to ground an Imposture upon: as if the One had been the
Provocation, and the Other the Revenge. The Sham was, at First, so Fair, and
Specious; the Contrivers, Promoters, and Abe^tors of it, so Industrious, and
Powerful, that it went down in the General, without Chewing; or if it happened
to stick by the way, People were at their Choice, whether they would Choke, or
have it Ramm'd down their Throats. It was come to This, in short, That a Man
might with more Credit and Security give his Oath to Twenty Palpable
Falsehoods, then Assert one Generous, Righteous Truth.

The First Step they made, was to gain an Enformation of the Popish Murder; as
a Point that could not Fail of bringing on an Enformation of the Popish Plot,
in Course: for the Ice being once broken, the Two Perjuries, they knew would be
Both of a Price. This they foresaw, and Projected, and the Measures they took
did not deceive them. Bedloe could not speak one Word to the Plot, at his First
Coming-in as a Witness to the Murder: and Prance upon his First Commi^tment,
renounced God over and over, if he knew one Syllable, either of the One, or of
the Other. But upon Second Thought^, These Two Discoverers came to see as far
into a Millstone as Otes Himself, and set up in a short time for a Pair of
Principal Pillars of the Cause; asw ill appear by the Evidence they give upon
the whole Matter.

So soon as those Sparks had delivered their Testimony about the Tragedy of
Godfrey, it was then but Cross or Pile whether the Scene should open at the
White-Horse in the Strand, or at the Chappel-Gallery in Somerset House: Or in
few Words, Whether they should carry the Murder to the Plot, or bring the Plot
to the Murder: For so the Plot were in the Case, No Matter how it came Into It.
Briefly, they swore the [ Needfull] (as they call it) and in That Oath,
Projected the Foundations of a New Heaven and a New Earth.

Their First Step (as I said) was, to Gain such an Enformation: The Second was
to Improve That Information, by setting the Stamp of a Vote upon it to make it
pass Current for the Discovery of a Plot: which was, in Truth, a kind of
Naturalization. The Third Step was, to procure an Order for the Seizing of All
the Persons Named in such an Enformation, as Parties to the Conspiracy, at
which Blessed Rate, it was but saying WHO and WHO, to lay the Three Kingdoms at
the Mercy of Half a Score Knights of the Post. After such an Enformation, such
a Vote, such an Order, and such a Seizure, there follows an Address, an
Indictment, an Impeachment, a Trial: and, after That, a Verdict: By Virtue of
which Verdict, all the Mistakes that led to it are made Sacred, and Authentic:
and Then Is the Time for Declamatoryes, and Exaggerations; And when the
Conscience, at Last, the Wisdom, and the Justice of the Nation, come to be all
Concerned in the Espousing of such an Error, the Lord have Mercy upon that
People, until Time, that is the Mother of Truth; and Experience, that is the
Daughter of Time, shall put Men's Heads and Hearts in their Right Places again.
There was, in sooth, so much Application, and Artifice used, to give This sad
Accident the face of a Popish Contrivance, Design, and Execution, that they
broached the Report of it as a Thing Resolved, Passed, and Done; even while Sir
Edmund was yet living, to prepare People for the Fiction that was to Follow. Of
this we shall say something hereafter.

Upon the First Rumor of his being Missing, there were several Surmises, of
Fancy, and Conjecture, put about, what might be Become of him? One while he was
Murdered in Arundell House: Another while in My Lord Bellasis Cellar: And then
again, the Duke of Norfolk's Coach was seen to come from Prim-rose-Hill the
Saturday that he went away: But in fine, Somerset House was the Place they
pitched upon; and That They Stuck to; It was but Requisite, that it should be a
Popish Place to Answer a Popish Conspiracy; and Reconcile it to a Popish
Intelligence. For the Plot was at that Time Almost Cold in the Mouth, and they
were fain to take in the Murder to get Credit to the Treason. It was a
Thousand Pitties, that when the Devil had Furnished them with so plausible an
Argument to work upon, they could find no better Pretense for the Strangling of
him, then to get the Enformations out of his Hands. Bedloe swears indeed, that
They Treated with him about those Enformations, before the Smothering of him [
betwixt two Pillows.] But Prance swears that his Business was done with a [
Twisted Handkerchief] without so much as the Ceremony of, by your leave, Sir
Edmond; (which was much the Courser way of the Two) But a Note by the By Now;
Why should they expect to find the Enformations still in his Pocket, that he
had Taken, Some of them, a Fortnight, and Others, Five Weeks before? Or what
would it have availed them, if they had taken the Papers too, when they
Dispatched the Justice? Could not Tongue, and Otes, (that they left behind them)
have Sworn the same Enformations Forty times over again, and have made them
Fifty times stronger then they were at First? Beside that they had been in the
Kings Hands Already, above Two Months before: To draw toward a Close, when
Bedloe had once Declared himself for their Turn, they wanted another Witness
yet to Second Bedloe; but Principally for the Tacking of the Murder to the
Plot; To which End they Swore Prance into the Noose, and left him This Choice
before him, Whether being Innocent he would Confess Himself to be a Murderer,
and so Escape; or Deny it, and Hang: But Charity began at home, and he Chose the
Perjury. By This Time they were a Gleek of Knaves strong, to the Two Great
Points: and every one of the Three Seconded the Other Two, both to the Plot,
and to the Murder: which was a Point well enough Ordered, by the Contrivance
of making the same Persons, (as Walsh, Pritchard, Le Phaire) Parties to Both.

The Authority of This Imposture was Established in such a Manner, that there
was no Touching the Murder, without an Indignity to the Plot; nor any Touching
the Plot, without Grating upon the Murder: Nay the Somerset House Relation was
held to be so Authentic, that there was nothing to be Bated on it, to the very
Spright and the Piss-pot. They had an Excellent way too of Breaking into their
Particulars, by a Previous Proof of the General Plot; which Enraged the
Multitude, before ever they came to the Cause in Hand, to such a Degree, that
the Prisoner at the Bar was as good as Condemned before he was Heard; And
Truss'd-up by the Sentence of the Rabble, for the Sins of his Forefathers.
This may suffice to show the Reason, and the Manner of making Godfrey's Murder
a Branch of the Popish Plot. It follows next to see how far Bedloe, and Prance,
gave Evidence to them both in one.

CHAP. III.
Bedloe and Prance Swore to the Plot as well as to the Murder.

THE Question is not in This Place, whether Prance and Bedloe, upon the Matter
of Fact, swore True or False; but how far they Swore to the Murder, and to the
Plot, Both under One; and how far They took upon them to Swear to the Plot,
over and above the Murder; And not to a Plot at Random neither, but
Catechistically, (if a Body may so say) to the Parts, Branches, and Articles,
Directly, or Indirectly of Otes's Narrative. Every Body knows that Bedloe
came-in with a Cry only of Murder in his Mouth; but for the Conspiracy, he
Declared that he knew nothing at all on it; though it is likely enough, that
another Five-Hundred-Pound-Proclamation for the Discovery of the Plot, might
have refreshed his Memory without Need of a Prompter. And who knows but his
Compunction might have wrought as Heartily upon him, in That Case, for fear of
the Kings Life, as his Remorse of Conscience did in the Other, for the Death of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. But I am now to bring my Chapter to my Text, and in the
First Place to take a short View of the Evidence that These Two Iustice-Killers
Delivered upon the History of the Plot. The Informations I know are Many,
Intricate, and Tedious: but a brief Abstract of the Whole will serve my Present
Turn, Every jot as well as Copies at Large: So that I shall Content my self to
make the Matter as Short, and as Orderly, as I can, without more Trouble,
either to the Reader, or to my Self, then needs must.

To take the Third of the Story along with me, Upon the 5 th. of November,
1678. Bedloe came from Bristoll, upon This Adventure, directly for London,
where he was Examined on the 7 th. by the Two Principal Secretaries of State,
in the Presence of His Late Majesty, touching the Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey; Declaring upon his Oath, at the same Time, that He could say Nothing
at All to the Plot that was Then in Question. And the Lords Iournal does
Effectually hold forth as much as That comes to, upon the said Examnation.

Nov. 8. 1678.
THe Lord Treasurer Reported by His Majesty's Directions, that Yesterday one
William Bedloe was examined at Whitehall concerning the Discovery of the
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and that his Majesty had given Order he
should be brought to give This House an Account thereof; Who being brought to
the Bar, and having his Oath given him, made a Large Narrative to This Effect:
That he was born in Monmouthshire, and was of the Church of England till within
these Two Years; that by Persuasion, and Promises from the Jesuits, he was
drawn over to them; that he is not in Orders* He KNOWS that Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was Murdered in Somerset House, etc. Lords Journal.

From hence it appears that he had been Examined about the Murder, and that he
was now to give an account to the Lords of what he knew Concerning that Matter:
But when his Hand was once In, he was pleased, out of a Superabundant Zeal for
the Safety of the King and his Government, and for the Preservation of the
Protestant Religion, to Launch out into the Depths of the Plot, with a New, and
Supplemental Evidence: Wherein he says further, that Walsh and Le Phaire
Enform'd him, that the Lord Bellassis had a Commission to Command Forces in the
North, the Earl of Powis, in South Wales, and the Lord Arundel of Warder, had a
Commission from the Pope to grant Commissions to whom he pleased; that Coleman
had been a great Agitator in the Design against the King, and that he asking
the Jesuits why they had not formerly told him what they had Designed
concerning the Kings Death; they Answered, that None but whom my Lord Bellassis
gave Directions for, were to know it: Desired he might have Time to put the
whole Narrative in Writing, which he had Begun; And being asked, If he knew
Titus Otes, he Denied it. Lords Iournal, Nov. 8. 1678.

But he had a Salvo for This afterward, which was, that he knew him by the
Name of Ambrose, not by the Name of Otes. Journal 29. 1678. And such another
Fetch he had in the Case of Whitebread: I speak it with a Caution, says he,
That I never heard of Whitebread, that he was so very much Concerned: And
indeed I had No Reason to say so, because I heard him my self, and could not so
well speak from the Hearsay of Another. Five Jesuits Trials. P. 32.

Immediately upon This Evidence, an Order was Passed to make a Strict Search
for Charles Walsh, Le Phaire, and other Suspicious Persons, etc. and an
Address, the Day following for a Proclamation against Conyers, Simmonds, Walsh,
Le Phaire, Pritchard, and Cattaway, as Persons Guilty of the Damnable and
Hellish Plot, etc.

Nov. 12. 1678. The Lord Marquess of Winton reported, that the Committee
appointed to take Examinations for the Discovery of the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, have spent Many days therein, and do present the House Two
Examinations of Mr. William Bedloe; and some Examinations of several other
Persons. His Lordship said, that the Lords Committees did Conjure William
Bedloe to speak Nothing but Truth, and he did in the Presence of God, as he
should Answer it at the Day of Judgment, assure All to be true he had Deposed.
Lords Journal.

Then the Examinations taken November the 8th. 1678. at the Committee of Lords
for Enquiring into the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey were read. Lords
Journal.

After he had spoken to the Murder, he proceeds, as before to the Plot; but
not without Intermixing here and there a Word, even in the Depositions touching
the Murder, that Skew'd upon the Plot too; [ There was a Man to be Killed, he
says, that was a great Obstacle of their Design.] And then he speaks Afterward
[ Of the Principal Plotters of that Design against the King;] and so Passes-on
to his Evidence, about the Conspiracy, under the Title of.

The Further Examinations of William Bedloe being Sworn at the Bar.
THe Monks at Doway told him the Design, he said, and after Four Sacraments of
Secrecy, they sent him to Harcourt a Jesuit in Duke-street; who Provided for
him, and sent him to Paris, etc. Le Phaire, Walsh, Pritchard, and Lewis told
him what Lords were to Govern; What Men to be Raised; Forty Thousand to be
ready in London; What Succors to be Expected; Ten Thousand from Flanders;
Twenty or Thirty Thousand Religious Men, and Pilgrims, from St. Iago; Hull to
be Surpised: But just in the Godspeed, the Plot was Discovered. Le Phaire gave
him a Sacrament of Secrecy; They told him Who and Who were to be killed; and
the Men that were to do the Work. Le Phaire sa^d further, that Conyers was My
Lord Bellassis's Confessor, and Communicated his Orders; and that they were
resolved, if any Plotters were Taken, to Dispatch 'em before they could be
brought to a Trial, or to Burn the Prison. And he Deposes moreover, that Le
Phaire, Pritchard, Lewis, Keines, Walsh, and others had often told him, [That
there was not a Roman Catholic in England, of any Quality or Credit, but was
acquainted with this Design of the Papists, and had r^ceived the Sacrament from
their Father-Confessors, to be Secret aad Assistant in the Carrying of it on.
Lords Journal, Nov. 12. 1678.

On the 18th. of November, 1678. He Delivered an Enformation upon Oath
concerning the Plot, to the Lord Chief Justice, in the Speakers Chamber, which
was in Effect, but so much over again; adding only that the part assigned him,
was to bring and carry Orders and Counsels, and all other Intelligences from
One Army to Another, upon All occasions, he knowing every Part and Road of
England and Wales.

That about the Latter end of April, or the beginning of May last was a
Twelvemonth, about Six a Clock in the Afternoon there was a Consult held in the
Chappel-Gallery at Somerset House, where were present the Lord Bellasis, and,
he thinks, the Lord Powis, Mr. Coleman, Le Phaire, Pritchard, Latham, and
Sheldon; and Two Frenchmen in Orders, whom he took to be Abbots, and two other
Persons of Quality, but did not see their Faces, and Others: Amongst Them, the
Queen: And further that Coleman and Pritchard told him, that after the Consult,
the Queen Wept at what was proposed there, but was Over-perswaded to Consent,
by the Strength of Two French-men's Arguments: That he was below walking in the
Chapel at the Time of the Consult, with others, etc. That after the Consult,
the Queen came through the Room where the Priests Dressed Themselves, and that
he then observed some Alteration in her Majesty's. Council Chamber, Nov. 27.
1678.] And so he runs on into a Ramble of his carrying Letters for France; and
Treasonous Discourses betwixt Stapilton and Himself, at Cambray, etc.] All of
the same Batch with the other.

Presently upon This Enformation, there Followed [ an Address for Removing the
QUEEN, and all her Family, and All PAPISTS, and REPVTED or SVSPECTED Papists
from his Majesty's Court at Whitehall.] There is one remarkable Deposition yet
behind, that was taken before the Council, June 24. 1679. upon the Subject of
the Consult last above mentioned; which is not upon any Terms to be Passed
over, for Reasons to be given hereafter.

He brings the Queen into the Plot of Poisoning the King, her Husband, by the
Hand of Sir Geo. Wakeman: And says that [ He Himself being the Latter Part of
the Last Summer in Harcourt 's Chamber, Sir Geo. came in there in a great Huff,
saying, Why should I be so Drilled on, and Slighted, when I have Undertaken so
great Work, having been promised so many Thousands? etc.] Harcourt thereupon,
went and took a Paper out of his Cabinet; which for a While he held in his
Hand, telling him he had been at Whitehall to Fetch That Paper; and thereupon
read it to him, and it was a Bill for 2000 l. written by the Queens Order, etc.
He also further says, that when Harcourt showed the said Bill for 2000 l. to
Sir Geo. Wakeman, in the Deponents Presence, Sir Geo. asked Harcourt, Who the
Deponent was? to which, Harcourt replied, ['Tis one whom we have Entrusted, not
in so Great a Work as Yours, but in a Work next to That;] by which he supposes,
was meant the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. Council Chamber, June 24. 1679.]
Harcourt owning also to Bedloe, that the Great Work was to Poison the King.

He says Moreover, that at a Meeting, where several of them were together, he
heard them Express great Dissatisfaction that there had been so many
Opportunities lost of Killing the King whilst he was at Windsor, and therefore
to repair the same, there went Eight of them after the King to Newmarket;
taking Horse from Harcourt 's Lodging at Four in the Afternoon, whereof Grove,
and Pickering, were Two.

But not to be Endless; I find a Charge of betwixt Thirty and Forty
Conspirators, by Name, in his Enformations before the Lords: Beside,
Generalities, and Societies, He gives an Account of Commissions in Coleman 's
Trial, p. 41. Pritchard told him that Grove and Pickering were to Kill the
King. Irelands Trial, page 40. Four Ruffians sent to Windsor. Ibid.. And they
Missing, Conyers was taken in. Ibid. He tells also of 30000 Masses for the One,
and 1500 l. for the Other. P. 43. And that Ireland, Whitebread, and Fenwick
were at the Consult. Ib. He saw the Money for the Ruffians. Five Jesuits Trials,
p. 32. Pickering was Disciplined for missing Opportunities, fol. 33. Wakeman to
have 15000 l. Ibid. Ireland Proposed the Murder at Newmarket. Ib. Finally,
There Is little more in Bedloe's Plot-Evidence then an Amusement of Words,
Names, Places, and other Circumstances of Things to Jingle with Otes's
Narrative, and to make out the Miraculous Harmony, as they call it, of the
Kings Witnesses. He tells a Tale of Father Le Chaise, the French King's
Confessor, Secretary Coleman, Harcourt, Ireland, Stapilton, Pickering, Grove,
Conyers, Whitebread, Father Warner, Sir John Warner, Sir Geo. Wakeman,
Duke-street, Somerset House, Windsor, St. Omers, Watton, Valladolid, St. Iago,
Ruffians, Commissions, Poisoning, Groves 1500 l. Pickerings 30000 Masses, etc.
And no more Agreement at last upon the whole matter, then if the Four and
Twenty Letters had been thrown in at Hap-Hazzard.

And Prances Manage was the very same with Bedloes too; only the Other got the
start of him, in Time; and had the honor of standing Otes's second when the
Plot it self must have sunk without That Supporter: for Bedloe was a Mortal
Evidence against Coleman, Ireland, etc. The Five Jesuits, Langhorn, Green,
Berry, and Hill, etc. Whereas Prance never opened his Mouth in a Criminal Cause
'till the Business of Godfrey, though they made a shift with him afterward, for
a kind of Bungling Evidence against Fenwick; And then he came by Degrees to
have some Insight into the Plot too; and to hear of Fifty Thousand Men to be
Raised: Sir George Wakeman's Trial, p. 19. What Lords to Command the Army, and
what Commissions, p. 20. And, in a Word, Who and Who were to kill the King, and
How it was to be done. As to Other Particular Charges I refer my self to his
Narratives.

CHAP. IV.
Notes upon the Transition of Bedloe's and Prance's Evidence, from the Proof of
the Murder, to the Witnessing of the Plot.

THE Reader must not Imagine, when he finds the Argument of This Chapter to be
[ Notes upon Bedloe's and Prance's Evidence, etc.] that it is my Purpose to
Pick a Gotham-Quarrell with every Blunder and Soloecism, in such a
Chance-Medley of Enformations; or to Enter into a Captious Scrutiny upon the
whole affair: for my business is not to Expose simple Oversights,
Inadvertencies or Mistakes; No, Nor, in this Place, so much as to Cavil at the
Credit, and Authority of the Witnesses, Or to Bear too hard upon the
Vnlikelyhood of Things Affirmed, or Denied; but to lay open the Matter Nakedly
as it is represented, and leave the Reader to the Liberty of his own Comment.

The Depositions here in Question, were sworn, either before the Council, the
Lords Committees, at the Bar of the Lords House, or given in Evidence at the
Trials of the Pretended Criminals. Now to be Fair, they must hold such a
Congruity, One part to Another, and every Part to the Whole, as in a Charitable
Construction to be found All of a Piece, without any Considerable Variation of
the Story, either in Superfluity or Defect: which is No more then according to
the very letter of the Oath; to Deliver the Truth, the Whole Truth and Nothing
But the Truth: and the Matter still to be the same, in what Diversity of Phrase
or Expression soever. It Is very remarkable, the Progress of Bedloe's openings,
or Illumination, into the Mystery of This Plot.

Upon the 7 th. of November, 1678. he had not so much as the least Kenning of
it. The 8 th. Sprung a Pretty light to it. The 12 th. He was as good as Master
of the Secret. The 18, 19, and the 27 th, he saw further into it. The 24. June
following, [Where his Majesty's Life was concerned, he must and would speak
Truth, he says, Although it was against HIS OWN DEAR MOTHER.] and so Charged
the Queen. And as he went further On, he saw Things Clearer and Clearer, and
More and More still, though all his Swearing hitherto amounted Only to the
keeping of his Faculty in Ure, and his Conscience in Breath. But when he came
to Sharps afterward, upon Life and Death, there was No avoiding of his Point,
for he had still some New way of Attaque or Other that never was heard of
before: and against which there was No Place, for either Prevention, or
Defense. He swore then to the Prisoner, rather then to the Crime, for there
Needed No more then the Clapping of any Man's Name to This or That Article, or
Accusation, to the doing of his Business: Though his Depositions upon the Lords
Iournal, and Those in the Printed Trials are in Many Cases Flat East and West,
One to the Other: But to proceed now from Reasoning upon Matters, to the Fact
it self.

His First appearance upon Oath, was, (as is already set forth), on the 7 th.
of November, 1678. before his Majesty and his Two Secretaries: at which time,
he spoke singly to the Murder, Disclaiming to any Knowledge at all of the
Plot. By the Next day, he was brought to Understand, that though it was the
Murder that made the Noise in the Proclamation, he would yet find the
Discovery of the Plot to be the Nearest way to the Five-hundred-Pound that was
Promised in it; so that on the 8 th, he gave the Lords Committees a General
Touch of the Popish Lords; Commissions; Armies to be raised; of [Coleman's
being a Great Agitator in the Design against the King] The Jesuits in the
Conspiracy, etc. [Desiring Time to put the Whole Narrative in Writing, which he
had Begun.] Now to Explain the Amusement of This Wild, and Uncertain
Generality, the Revelation was but of One Days standing; and they had not as
yet Time enough to Concert the Particulars; so that the Bare Naming of the
Lords, and their Commissions; The very Hinting of Armies to be Raised, and the
simple Mention of Coleman for an Agitator, was as much as Bedloe durst venture
Upon, without further Lights, and Instructions. Coleman's Accusation was then
upon the Anvil; and the Plot the Groundwork of the Whole Transaction; but
there was No want of Heart and good Will, All this While to the Emproving of
This Occasion; and his desire of Time, to put the Whole Narrative in Writing,
carried the very same Countenance, as if he should have said, [ Pray My Lords
spare us but Three or Four Days to Confer with the Managers of the Intrigue,
and let us alone for a Damnable Hellish Popish Plot, ready Cut and Dried, and a
Second Witness to support it. This is so fair, and Reasonable a Gloss upon the
Text, That the Lords Committees were not without some Jelousies of it, even in
the very First Instance; as appears upon the same Journal, by their asking
Bedloe [Whether he knew Otes or not:] And why should Bedloe then Deny the
knowledge of him, if he had not been Conscious that the Owning of an
Acquaintance with him would have made the Evidence smell too Rank of a
Confederacy? But to Touch This Matter to the Quick, It will appear by and By
upon the Comparing of Notes, and Resemblances that Bedloe and Prance were
Initiated into This Mystery by the same Lesson of Instructions; only with This
Difference in the Motives to what they did, that the One Forswore himself for
Fear, and the Other, for Money.

Bedloe (as I have said) gave Evidence to the Murder upon the 7 th. of
November, 1678. Prance was Committed on Saturday the 21. of December following
[for Assisting in the Murder of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey] He was Examined the
same Night, and stood stiff in it, that he knew Nothing, either of the Death of
Godfrey, or of the Popish Plot; and Bedloe was as Positive upon the First
Examination, that He knew Nothing of the Plot neither. Now the Plot was a Thing
so Necessary, that the Five-hundred-Pound-Murther would not have been worth
Fifty Farthings without it: and though the Bait was thrown out for the
Discoverers of the Murder, the Anglers were yet secured beforehand, that upon
a sound Bite, they should draw up a Discoverer of the Plot: for the Matter
being Equally Both ways a Perjury, the One they knew (as I have noted before)
would be as Cheap as the other. They had both of them however, only One Night,
and no more, to Sleep upon it: And it was Impossible, in that Pinch of Time, to
bring their Matters to Agree in Every Point like a Pair of Tallyes: And
therefore Bedloe was fain to Content himself at Present with a Tale of a Cock
and a Bull, (Just as the Journal sets it forth) without any Pregnancy of
Likelyhoods, or Particularity of Circumstances, to give it Credit.

Now Prance was upon his Peril to speak out, at Four-and-Twenty-hours-warning
too; for on the same Day that he was taken up, and Examined, (Damning himself
to the Pit of Hell if he knew any thing either of the Death, or of the Plot) he
was Committed to the Condemned Hole in Newgate; Laden with Heavy Irons; And
for That Night left to Chew upon it, whether he would venture his Soul, or his
Carcass; (which was the very Choice Before him) In This Condition he lay, both
of Body, and of Mind; till Early next Morning (being Sunday) when Up comes a
Person to him Wholly Unknown, Lays down a Paper upon a Form just by him, and
so goes his way. Soon after This, Comes Another, with a Candle; sets it down,
and Leaves him. By the light of that Candle Prance read the Paper, Wherein he
found the Substance of These Following Minutes.

So many Popish Lords mentioned by Name^, Fifty Thousand Men to be Raised;
Commissions given out; Officers Appointed. Ireland was acquainted with the
Design; And Bedloes Evidence against Godfrey, was Summ'd-up, and Abstracted in
it too.

There were Suggestions in it, that Prance must undoubtedly be Privy to the
Plot, with Words to This Purpose [You had better Confess then be Hanged.]
Prance fancied This presently to be a Contrivance of Shaftsburyes, and Designed
for Hints of what he was to Swear to. Now These were the very Points also of
Bedloe's Depositions: And as Bedloe was to second Otes in the One; So Prance
was to second Bedloe in the Other: Prance Pondered for some hours upon the
Heads of his Paper and the Circumstances of his Condition; and what with the
Noisomness of the Place, the Cold of the Season, the Weight of his Chains, the
Sense of his Misery; Want of Health, and the Dread of Death; upon the laying of
things together, he took the right Queen, and desired the Master of the Prison
to Carry him to my Lord Shaftsburys, under Pretense of Matters of Great Moment
to Communicate to his Lordship. Captain Richardson gave his Lordship an Account
of it, and Thereupon, received [ An Order for Bringing of Miles Prance to
Shaftsbury-House, to be farther Examined.] He was Carried thither betwixt Five
and Six the same Evening, and there Continued till about Eleven that Night. So
soon as he came thither, he was Called into a Low Parlour where was Shaftsbury
(and Three more) And there Examined strictly upon the Points of the Paper; and
Threatened with Hanging if he did not Confess. Upon these Menaces, Prance
Yielded; and so framed a Pretended Discovery in Part, with a Promise to speak
out more at Large, if he might have his Pardon. VVhereupon, there was a Paper
drawn up, which Prance Signed, and he was then returned to the Place from
whence he came. By this time they had secured Three Strings to their Bovv; and
it is worthy of a Note, that Bedloe and Prance, like a Couple of Schoolboys
of the same Form, had in Effect the very same Lesson given them, and the very
same Allowance of Time to get it by Heart in.

But to come now to the Matter. Bedloe was upon his Oath, as I have said
Already, to Deliver [ the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth.]
And the Lords Committees did over and above Conjure William Bedloe to speak
Nothing but Truth: And [he did in the Presence of God, as he should Answer it
at the Day of Judgment, assure All to be True he had Deposed. Lords Journal,
Nov. 12. ^678.] It was upon the same Terms too, and Under the same Conditions
that he gave his Evidence upon all Trials of the Prisoners in Question. The
Next Point will be how far he was True to his Matter, and to Himself, without
either Stretching, Shortning, Suppressing, or Clashing with his own Testimony;
but with a Charitable Abatement of, and a Christian Allowance still for Humane
Frailty. The Point in Issue was [ a Plot or No Plot, upon the Life of the King,
etc.] So that all Omissions upon That Mortal Article, are Mightily to be
suspected of Malice, and Iniquity, where they carry the Face of a Direct
Tendency to That Execrable End.

CHAP. V.
Notes upon Certain Omissions, Enlargements, Disagreements, and Contradictions,
in the Evidence of Bedloe and Prance concerning the Plot, together with the
True Reasons Thereof.

WE have Already given a General, and a Sufficient Account (in the Last Chapter
but one) of the Evidences Delivered by Bedloe and Prance, upon the Subject of
the Plot: And we are now to take into Consideration the Competency, the
Fairness, the Fullness, and the Consistency of Those Depositions. In the First
Place, the Omissions, and Enlargements that appear in the several Enformations,
upon Comparing them One with another. Now this is a Point not to be Cleared,
without References, Repetitions, and Recitals: So that there is No help for it,
but by making them as Few, and as Short as may be.

1. I find it upon the Lord's Journal, that the Monks of Doway gave Bedloe the
Sacrament Four Times, upon a Charge of Secrecy. Nov. 12. 1678.

2. And again: That Bedloe Demanded of Mr. Gage the Rector of the English
College, what they would do with the King. He Answered, They would keep him
well in a Convent.

3. Bedloe then Demanded who should Govern in Chief; He told him there should
be a Tender made to [ONE] of the Crown, if he would Acknowledge it from the
Church; but they did believe he would not Accept of it, and then the Government
should be left to some Lords that the Pope would appoint; which Lords he would
not tell me, but said, I should know it from the Monks at Paris. Lords Journal,
Ib.

4. He says again in the same Deposition as is Already hinted in the Third
Chapter, Who were to Govern, Who Told him so. Ten Thousand from Flanders to
Land at Bridlington-Bay. The Lord Powes, Petres, etc. to Rendezvous in
South Wales with Another Army, and They to Ioyn Twenty or Thirty Thousand more,
that were to Land at Milford Haven from the Groin in Spain, which Army was to
be [RELIGIOVS] Men and [PILGRIMS] from St. Jago in Spain, etc. Lords Journal,
Ibid.

5. Forty Thousand Men ready in London, Beside Those that would on the Alarm
be Posted at Every Alehouse Door, to have Killed the Soldiers as they went out
of their Quarters.

6. Le Phaire told him also that when any Plotter was taken up, he should be
killed before he was brought to his Trial, or the Prison Burnt.

7. And That Guernsey and Jersey were to be surpised by a Power from Breast,
and other Places of France; and that several French Ships have layn in, and
about the Channel All This Summer upon the same Occasion.

8 And further, Le Phaire, Pritchard, etc. (as before) had often told him that
there was not a Roman Catholic in England that was not Privy to the Design,
and had not Received the Sacrament from their Father Confessors to be secret,
and assistant to the carrying of it on.

To Pass a Note or Two upon the Particulars above, they are of so great
Importance to be Thoroughly Sifted, and made out, that the Plot it self, the
Credit, and the very Being of it, stands, or falls, upon the Truth or Falsity
of these Enformations. But the Stress does not lie so much upon True or False,
as whether this be the Whole Truth, or Not; For All these Heads, and
Circumstances of the Story upon the Lords Iournal (and the Four Evangelists
over and above) are utterly Forgotten in the Evidence, upon the Trial of the
Prisoners. Now if Bedloe Delivered the Whole Truth at First, how came he
afterward to Enlarge his Evidence?

But to Expound this Riddle now; he swore before the Lords to the Generals only
of Otes's Plot; for Otes himself was not yet Resolved upon the Particulars: So
that which way soever Titus Led, William was bound to Follow; and the Point of
his Oath in Westminster Hall was not Levelled at the Plot it self, but at the
Persons of the Pretended Conspirators.

Now to trace Things in order as they lie before us: We hear Nothing of Four
Sacraments; The Convent; The Tender of the Crown, and the Pope's Resolution
upon it; The Ten Thousand, and the Twenty or Thirty Thousand, the Pilgrims, and
the Religious; The London Forty Thousand; The Posting of People at Alehouse
Doors; The Killing of Plotters, or the Burning of Prisons; The Surprising of
Guernsey and Iersey; Every Roman Catholic of Quality under a Sacrament to
serve the Design. We have not one Syllable of All this, in the Printed Trials,
though upon the same Oath, and from the same Lips that swore to the Whole Truth
upon the Lords Iournal. But here is the Scheme of Otes's Plot yet, upon the
whole Matter. And then for the Tender of the Crown, as it is Pointed at in the
Third Article, it is so exactly the Drift, and the Case of a Whimsey, set forth
in Otes's Narrative, only in other Words, viz.

The Pope has ordered (says Otes) That in case the Duke of York, (which is the
[ ONE] he speaks of) will not accept these Crowns as forfeited by his Brother
unto the Pope, as of his Gift; and settle such Prelates and Dignitaries in the
Church, and such Officers in Commands and Places, Civil, Naval, and Military,
as he has Commissioned as above, Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and in
Order thereunto, Ex post Facto, consent to the Assassination of the King his
Brother; Massacre of his Protestant Subjects; Firing of his Towns, etc. by
Pardoning the Assassins, Murderers, and Incendiaries, that then [HE] be also
Poisoned, or Destroyed, after they have for some time abused his Name, and
Title, to strengthen their Plot; Weakened and Divided the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, thereby, in Civil Wars and Rebellions, as in his Fathens
Time, to make way for the French to seize These Kingdoms, and totally ruin
their Infantry, and Naval Force. Otes's Narrative, p. 64.

This Paragraph comprizes in few Words a General View of the whole Project; and
it was but Swearing so many Men to such and such Parts and Offices in this
Fiction of a Conspiracy, to Complete the Reputation of the Discovery: that is
to say, some were to have Public Charges and Commissions; Others to carry on
the Massacres, Murders, Assassinates, Poisoning, and Conflagrations; And after
the Digesting of the Treasons, they could not well fail of Discovering the
Traitors, especially when the same Oath that made the One made the Other.

It is not to be Imagined, that Bedloe, upon his repeated Oaths, before the
King and the Lords, could Honestly forget so many remarkable Instances, of Men,
and Things, as he calls Afterward to Mind, and upon Recollection, swears to,
over and above what he had sworn before. And it is a Thing no less Remarkable,
that he should upon the Following Trials, Forget so many Capital, and Dangerous
Articles of the Plot, as he had formerly sworn before the King and the Lords;
and the Omissions, all the while, as Essential to the Matter in hand, in one
Place, as in the other. But This Wonder will Cease, if a Man Rightly Considers
what the Points are that are omitted in the One, and supplied in the Other; and
the Relation which they Respectively had to the Design that was Then in
Agitation. While the Plot was General, the Enformation must be General too; and
Bedloe did as much as Man could do, upon Bare-four-and-twenty-Hours-time,
toward the Tuning of his Depositions to the Narrative; which was all he had to
Work upon at Present: But New Lords New Laws; and when Otes came to Charge
Particular Persons upon the Strength and Foundations of That Geneneral Model,
Bedloe was no longer at Liberty to Steer his own Course, but Tied up too swear
in a Conformity to Otes's Measures: So that Bedloe must have Divined, before
the Lords, to Hit the Evidence, that in the Future, would be necessary at the
Trials. As for the Purpose now, to Begin with Coleman.

He Carried a Packet, he says, from Mr. Coleman to Monsieur Le Chaise; and
that he heard Coleman say, If he had an Hundred Lives, and a Sea of Blood to
carry on the Cause, he would spend it all to further the Cause of the Church of
Rome, and to establish the Church of Rome in England; And if there was an
Hundred Heretical Kings to be Deposed, He would see them All Destroyed. This he
swears was spoken in his own House behind Westminster-Abbey at the Foot of the
Staircase. Colemans Trial, page 43, 44. [ They were carrying-on a Plot, he
says, to Destroy the King, and the Lords of the Council, p. 44.] Now there is
not one Word either of Le Chaise, or of This Matter, to be found in the Lords
Iournal: Nor any thing more of Coleman, then that he had been a Great Agitator
in the Design against the King, Nov. 8. 1678. Under which Generality, Bedloe,
saved to himself a kind of Right to say more afterward, as he should come to
be further Enlightn'd, and better Enform'd: For Bedloe, in short, was no other
then Otes's Echo; and His Business, no more, in Effect, then to take the same
Oath that the Foreman had done. In one Word, as there is a most Extravagant
Difference betwixt his Depositions before the King and the Lords, and Those
against the supposed Plotters, at the Kings Bench; so the Reason of it is
obvious, for he is forced to stretch his Latter-Evidence against the Prisoners,
where his Former Deposition would not Reach them.

In the Trials of Ireland, Pickering, and Grove, Otes swears a Consult in
August, 1678. at Harcourts Chamber; Ireland present at it; Grove and Pickering
appointed to kill the King; the One to have 30000 Masses, if he Miscarried, and
the Other 1500 l. Upon their Failing, Four Ruffians were hired to do it at
Windsor: Coleman gave a Messenger a Guinnea to carry them their Money.
Fogarthy, Ireland, Grove, and Pickering were present at the Resolution; and if
all Failed, Sir Geo. Wakeman was to do the Work by Poison, the very Price
agreed upon, and Part of the Money Received, etc. Now there is not one Syllable
of All This in Bedloe's Evidence upon the Lord's Iournal; No not so much as the
NAME of Corker, Fogarthy, Fenwick, Grove, Pickering, and yet Bedloe, upon the
Trial, sets-up for Otes's Second to every Point; and the Disagreement leads
still to the Hanging of the Prisoner.

And so again in the Trial of the Five Jesuits. He brings in Whitebread for
sending the Four Ruffians to Windsor: Coleman's Guinnea given to drink his
Health; The 1500 l. again, and the 30000 Masses. Pickering is Disciplined for
the Neglect of his Flint. Once he had no Powder in the Pan; Another Time no
Powder in the Barrel: Wakeman's 15000 l. The King to be killed at New Market,
Conyers taken in for an Assistant.] But to conclude, there is not one Word of
All This neither, nor so much as the Name of Whitebread, and several other of
the Prisoners, upon the Lords Iournal.

It Is the same Case again with him upon the Trials of Sir Geo. Wakeman, William
Marshal, William Rumley, and James Corker, where he Charges Keines, and Corker,
with Discourse about Raising an Army, KILLING, and DESIGN. He makes Marshal one
of the Club, and runs through the whole History of Sir Geo. Wakeman. This was,
July 18. 1679. And the Particulars were never so much as thought of, till his
Deposition before the King and Council of June 24. then last past, when he was
preparing for That Jobb.

He took the same Measures too, in the Business of Langhorn. Le Chaise told
him, he says, of Money to be remitted into England; and that he had remitted
some of it to Coleman, and Ireland, p. 21. and he speaks of Three Letters that
he saw Langhorn Transcribe; One to the English Monks at Paris; Another to
Monsieur Le Chaise; Another to the Popes Nuncio, p. 53. This is All New Matter,
Newly Accommodated to the Evidence of Otes, and the Case of the Prisoner,
without one Word of it in his Original Discovery.

It would be Endless to take All his Evidences to Pieces, and to Confront one
Testimony with Another: but one Instance may serve for the Measure of All: That
is to say, his Additions are still, Stabbing, if not Mortal; and Adapted to the
Case, without any regard to the Truth.

As for Miles Prance, he was under the same Government also, with his Brother
Bedloe; only coming in Late, he had not so much occasion to show his Parts; but
he served as well as the Best however, for a General Plot-man. He made several
Proffers yet at the Helping out of the Conspiracy, though to little or no
Purpose; only in the Case of Fenwick, he had the Honor to pass, with Otes, and
Bedloe, for a Third Witness. His was only a dull kind of Hackney-Story still;
that Mr. Messenger was to Kill the King. 50000 Men to be raised; The Popish
Lords to Command them; Fenwick, Ireland, and Grove, spoke of this Together;
Harcourt said the King was to be killed by several; and Fenwick said that
Langhorn was to have a great hand in it. Langhorn's Trial, fol. 8. He brought in
All the Roman Catholics he could Name, for an Appendix, it is true, but made
Little on it, and ordered his Matters all the way with an Eye to his First Paper.

Upon the whole matter, Right or Wrong, here is Perjury without Dispute, either
for not swearing the Whole Truth at First, or for swearing More then the Truth,
afterward; and the Presumption of the Perjury is so much the stronger, in
Regard that almost All the Diversities, and Additions in the Evidence upon the
Trials, are Expressly Calculated, (as I have Already observed) for the
Destruction of the Prisoners: And This is not All Neither; for Bedloe lies much
opener in his Disagreements and Contradictions, then he does in his Omissions
and Supplements; though it is Manifest, well-nigh to a Demonstration, that all
his Capital Oaths were Applied only to the Serving of a Turn. And so I shall go
on with him upon the two Latter Points.

He swears before the Lords, that the Army of Twenty or Thirty Thousand Men who
were to Land at Milford Haven from the Groin, was to be Religious Men and
Pilgrims, from St. Iago in Spain. Lords Iournal, Nov. 12. 1678. But then in
Langhorn's Trials, He Swears, That they had provided in Spain, under the Notion
of Pilgrims from St. Jago, some Irish Cashiered Soldiers, that had left their
Country, some for Religion, and some for their Crimes, and a great many
Lay-Brothers, whom they had procured and gathered together, under the Notion of
Pilgrims, to be ready to take Shipping at the Groin, to Land at Milford-Haven,
There to meet my Lord Powis, and an Army that he was to raise in Wales to
further this Design, fol. 20.

In a Deposition before the Lords, he swears himself to have been of the Church
of England, till within These Two Years; That by Persuasion and Promises from
the Jesuits, he was drawn over to them. Lords Iournal, Nov. 8. 1678. But upon
the Trial of Ireland, he Swears, That he had been Five Years almost Employed by
the Society of Jesuits, and the English Monks at Paris, to carry and bring
Letters between them, etc. Fol. 37.

In the Trial of Coleman: Being Interrogated what he had seen or heard touching
any Commission to Mr. Coleman, he gives This Answer, [ In particular I know not
of any Commission directed to Mr. Coleman. I do not know any thing of it but
what Sir Henry Tichborn told me, that he had a Commission, and he brought a
Commission for Mr. Coleman, and the rest of the Lords, from the Principal
Jesuits at Rome, by order of the Pope, etc. fol. 41. The Title of it I do not
know, because I did not See it: But then in Langhorn's Trial; being asked where
he saw Certain Commissions there in Question, His Answer was This, Sir Henry
Tichborn did Show me Three Commissions in Paris, signed by the General of the
Order, and Sealed with the Jesuits Seal.

Not to Multiply Instances, One more upon This subject shall serve for All.

Sir George Wakeman was to come to his Trial on the 18 th. of July, 1679. The
Five-Iesuits-Tryal (as they call it) having been on the 13, and 14. of the June
before: And it was then High Time to Adjust their Matters toward That which
was to Follow. The Evidence that was given by Bedloe, at the Jesuits Trial of
June 13, 14. concerning the Queens being in a Practice with Sir George to
Poison the King, gave occasion to a further Examination of him before the
Council, on the 24. of the same Month; which was Introduced with a Preface
remarkable, and in These following Words, truly Copied, and strictly Examined,
from and by the Original; every Page Attested by his own hand.

At the Council Chamber, June 24. 1679.
MR. Bedloe being Called in and Sworn, is told that his Majesty had appointed
This Council to know the Bottom of all That Danger that might Concern his own
Person, and in Particular what he could say touching the Queen's being in any
Measure Privy to it; And if she were Concerned therein, the Danger was so much
the Greater as she is near to his Majesty; so that it would not without the
Utmost Peril be Concealed by any; Yet that if he had any New Matter to declare,
the Concealment of it should not be Penal unto him; And therefore, that he
should, upon his Allegiance, speak out, Fully, and Plainly, without respect to
any Person whatsoever: (which he might do with All Freedom and Safety) And not
only for what Concerned the Danger of the King's Life, but the Plot in General
against the Government, and the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey.

After the Flam of the Chappel-Gallery-Consult, and the Cambray-Adventure, he
comes to his Point, and Deposes, [that Sir George Wakeman coming to Harcourt's
Chamber with a Complaint that they had not kept Touch with him, Harcourt told
him he had not so much reason to Complain, for he was provided for; and
thereupon went and took a Paper out of his Cabinet, which, for a While, he held
in his hand, telling him he had been at Whitehall to Fetch that Paper; and
thereupon read it to them, and it was a Bill for Two Thousand Pounds, written
by the Queen's order. Council Chamber, June 24. 1679.

The Deponent further says, that when Harcourt showed Sir George Wakeman the
said Bill, he said, This indeed is something, but when shall I have the rest?
Harcourt Answered he should have Five Thousand Pounds in Due Time, and also Ten
Thousand more, and that the Two Thousand Pounds was only for his present
Supply] And says, that Pritchard told him afterward, that it was for Poisoning
the King; and Harcourt likewise owned the same. Ib.

And says, that when Harcourt showed the said Bill, for Two Thousand Pounds to
Sir George Wakeman in the Deponents Presence, Sir George asked Harcourt who
this Deponent was? To which, Harcourt replied, he is one we have Entrusted; not
in so great a Work as Yours, but in a Work next to That; by which he supposes
was meant the Death of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey.] Ib.

We shall now see how his Depositions before the Council as to this Point,
Agree with the Evidence he gave at the Five Jesuits, and Langhorn's Trial.

Sir George Wakeman, he says, received a Bill of Exchange from Mr. Harcourt,
and he was told, here is a Bill of Exchange for 2000 l. as part of a greater
Sum, To which Sir George Wakeman Answered: that 15000 l. was a small reward
for the settling of Religion, and preserving the Three Kingdoms, etc. Five
Jesuits Trial, p. 35. And after he had given Sir George Wakeman the Bill, Sir
George Wakeman opened it, and Read it. Ib.]

And then in the next Page, says Bedloe, I did only [ see] the Bill out of Mr.
Harcourt's hand: but it was [Read] There only by Sir George Wakeman. In fol.
36. Sir George Wakeman Received the Bill of Exchange from Mr. Harcourt, he Read
it Himself, Folded it up, and went and Received the Money.

Note here, that before the Council, [HARCOURT] Read it; but in the Iesuiss
Trial, [WAKEMAN] only Read it. In the former, the Two Thousand Pounds was for
Sir Georges Present Supply; In the Latter, it was as Part of a greater Sum. In
the Former, Sir George seemed well enough Content with the 15000 l. In the
Latter, he thought it too Little. Nay in fol. 35. Sir George opened it, which
Implies, it was Then Folded; and yet fol. 36. Sir George Wakeman Folded it up,
not Folded it up Again: But Barely [Folded it up,] which looks as if it had not
been Folded before.

In Sir George Wakeman's Trial, he says, that Sir Geo. VVakeman Fetched a Turn
or Two about the Room, seeming Angry, and Discontented, and asked Harcourt if
he had any Thing for him? Then Harcourt asked him how he did Proceed? said he,
I don't know whether I shall or No, etc. fol. 31. with That, Harcourt, went to
his Cabinet and took out Five or Six papers, and brought a small Bill, etc. Ib.
( of 2000 l.) Well, said Sir George, I will go and see if the Bill be accepted,
and you shall hear of me to Night. And Bedloe met him Presently after, and Sir
George told him it was accepted, and that he was to go in the Afternoon to
Receive it, Ib. Soon after This, He is Called upon to go over with This Part of
his Evidence again, fol. 46. and There we have him searching among his Bags,
and finding a Little Note among them: And the Relation Effectually to be quite
Another Thing.

He is Now got into Clear Another story than the Two Former; for there was no
such Question as [ Have you any Thing for Me?] No such Peevishness, or
Hesitation, as [ I don't know whether I shall or No] In One Deposition, Five or
Six Papers taken out of the Cabinet, Whereas in the other Depositions, there is
mention made only of One. Nor is there any Talk of Acceptance or Payment.

There remains Yet Another scruple with a respect to the Timing of This action,
which is Never to be Reconciled. He makes it before the Council, to have been
the Latter part of the last Summer, i. e. 1678. That This Meeting was in
Harcourt's Chamber [It was (I think, says He) about the beginning of August.
Sir George Wakeman's Trial, fol. 37.] But being Pressed afterward by Sir George
Wakeman in These words [ What Day was it, that I had the Discourse with
Harcourt, and Received the Bill from him, as You say?]

[ Mr. Bedloe] To satisfy you as well as I can, I say it was the Beginning of
August, or Part of the Beginning. I do not speak to a Day, p. 40.

So that according to Bedloe's Oath before the Council, of June 24. 1679. Mr.
Harcourt gives Sir George Wakeman a Hint, which Bedloe Understood to be Meant
of his being Employed to kill Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, and Bedloe looks the
same way in his Evidence at Sir George Wakeman's Trial. Sir George asked of
Harcourt (says he) Who I was? Said he, It Is a Friend, that has been long
Engaged in our Business, and is to do the Next Great Work to Yours. Fol. 37.

Now upon the Upshot of the Matter, Bedloe swears that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
was Murdered because of Tong's and Otes's Enformations that he had Taken: and
Bedloe was Employed at the Beginning of August to Destroy Godfrey, for having
Taken those Enformations, which he never Took, nor ever so much as heard of,
till the Sixth of the Following September.

His Swearing Off and On in the Case of Whitebread and Fenwick, was a Notable
Cast of his Faculty too; that is to say, They, being upon their Trials with
Ireland, Grove, and Pickering, Bedloe declares, that [ he does not Charge any
Man but them Three] and when he was told by the Court, [ What he said was not
any Evidence against Whitebread:] and demanded what he could say as to Fenwick:
his Answer was in These words, [ No more then as I have to Mr VVhitebread.
Ireands Trial, fol. 42.] But This Notwithstanding Whitebread and Fenwick were
remanded back to the Goal, by reason that Otes's Testimony was so Full: It
being Insisted on, That the King having sent forth a Proclamation for further
Discovery, there was [ No Question made, but that before the Time therein
prefixed should come out, there would come in more Evidence. Ib. page 56.

This was at the Sessions House at the Old-Bayly; December 17. 1678. where They
were brought upon their Trials again on the 13. and 14. of June, 1679. at which
Trial, Bedloe Charged Whitebread upon the Matter of the Four Ruffians that were
sent to Windsor about September, fol. 32. and Whitebread, and Fenwick, Both,
with being Privy and Consenting to the Practice, fol. 33. Bedloe's Evidence
passed for Current, notwithstanding his former Declaration; and upon the
Summing of it up, Prance was also accounted upon as a Third Witness.

CHAP. VI.
An Abstract of the Evidence that Bedloe gave concerning the Death of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey. First, before the Lords House, the Lords Committees, and
the King and Council. 2ly. Upon the Trials of Green, Berry, and Hill, in the
Court of the Kings Bench: With Notes upon the Whole.

THE Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey being found, a View passed upon it, and a
Verdict delivered up; It Behooved the Witnesses (whether they were True or
False) to keep close to the Circumstances of the Fact that was before them: And
therefore, since a Malicious Murder it Was to be, There must be some
Provocation Thought upon, or Presumed: Hands found out to Execute it; a Place
Convenient for the Action; some Way or other Proposed for the Doing of it; and
then some Means or other for the getting of the Body out of the Way when the
Deed was done. This Train of Forecast, brings us Decently to Primrose-Hill;
and whether he went Thither by Horse, Chair, Litter, Coach, or Wagon, it
Matters not a Single Marque, Provided there be a Decorum in the Story; and that
the Thing be done A-Gods-Name, as they say, and without the Help of Spirits, or
Art Magic to Convey him Thither. The Next Point to be consulted, is the
Position of the Body in the Ditch; The Sword, the Bruises, the Circles about
the Neck, and Finally, the Linen Cloth that he was Strangled with; which will
all be taken into Consideration in Due Time and Place. As to the Visible Matter
of Fact, it stands good and agreed upon at All hands, That is to say, the
Death; the Finding of the Body; the Place where he was found; the Date When;
the Time and the Manner of Removing it; the Summoning of a Jury; the View, the
Debate, and the Verdict. But for what lay out of Sight, it must be left either
to Further Discovery, or to Conjecture: Though in a Made-story as This was from
the Beginning, That which was well Fancied was well Proved: And no doubt but
Bedloe and Prance would have made More on it, if they had but been aware time
enough of the Blessings Heaven had in store for them; and that the Fates had
Designed them one day for Supporters of a Glorious Church and State. They made
a Shift however to draw Blood, and at That Time, and in That Cause, the
Speaking Head might have done as much. The Mischief was, that Bedloe's Bolt was
Shot so long before Prance appeared; And that notwithstanding the General
Lights given to Prance about Godfrey and Bedloe, in the Newgate-Paper
heretofore spoken of, he was yet left Miserably in the Dark, how to put Things
and Things together, toward the Formalizing of a Story. He very well knew, upon
the Main, that Godfrey was to be Killed at Somerset House; and the Papists to
do it; but upon what Provocation; to what End; how to get him Thither; In what
Part of the House; and in what Manner it was Done; and what Numerical Persons
were to do it; How to Dispose of the Body from Place to Place; When, and which
way to get it Out; His Instructions were short, and nothing but pure Dint of
Forehead to bear him out in the History: This may serve for a kind of Apology
for their Blunders in the General, but we shall now look into the Merits of the
Cause, upon a Sober and Candid View of their Evidence in Particular.

Bedloe's Evidence before the Lords, as it stands upon the Iournal, Friday,
Nov. 8. 1678. was Briefly This.

He [KNOWS] that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Murdered in Somerset House, on
Saturday, by Charles Walsh and Le Phaire, Jesuits: and by Two Laymen. He saw
the Body after it was Murdered, and before it was carried out; and Le Phaire
told him he was Stifled between Two Pillows; and he was offered Two Thousand
Guinneas to be one of the Three to carry out the Body; which was kept either in
the Room, or the next where the Duke of Albermarle lay in State; that the
Chair-men who carried out the Body, on Monday Night at Nine of the Clock, are
Retainers to Somerset House, but he knows them not: He says that Walsh, Le
Phaire, and Pritchard told him, that the Lord Bellassis Employed them in This
Business.]

Upon his Examination before the Lords on the Tuesday following, He calls to
Mind, that He was offered Four Thousand Pound to be one of the Four, or Six,
that should kill him, which he promised to do, but Saunter'd up and down, to
Grays-Inn-Walks, Fleetstreet, Red-Lyon-Court, Palsgrave-Head Tavern,
Somerset-House-Court, etc. and was none of the Man at last, either to kill, or
to carry away; but tells a Story how he saw the Body; and Le Phaire, VValsh,
Beeston, Atkins, and one belonging to the Queens Chapel in the same Place with
the Body.] So that by this Time, he had made a kind of an Ambling Story on it. [
They Agreed, he says, to carry him in a Chair to Clarendon-House-Corner, and
there to put him in a Coach, to carry him to the Place where he was found; and
having concluded This, they agreed to carry him off at Eleven a Clock of the
same Night.] But now to the Timing of the Business.

Bedloe Swears that betwixt Eight and Nine at Night, Le Phaire and He met in
the Cloister at Somerset House Court, and passed the Time there about Half an
Hour* After This, they walked into the Middle of the Court to be out of
Hearing; and Le Phaire told him, that the Person whom he was to kill was killed
already, and his Body th^n in Somerset House; but he should shill have half the
Reward, if he would help to Carry the Body to a Place where they had chose to
lay him. Bedloe asked who should go with him; and Le Phaire Named himself for
one; Mr. Walsh the Lord Bellassis 's Gentleman, Mr. Atkins, and one that
belonged to the Queens Chapel. Le Phaire then brought him by the Hand in the
Dark, led him into the Room where the Body was, and then pulled a Dark Lanthorn
from under his Coat, and showed a small light in the Room, where Bedloe saw the
Persons before Named, etc. After This, they Debated how to carry him out, and
to what Place; and Agreed upon the Hour of Eleven That Night, (as is said
already.) Some further Chat they had about the Person that was Murdered, but
Bedloe Excusing himself for One Half Hour, gave them the Slip, and came no more
that Night. Le Phaire Meeting him the Next Day, told him that the Person was
Justice Godfrey, and how they got him to Somerset House, and where they found
him, viz. That He Himself, Walsh, and the Lord Bellassis Gentleman met him by
the Kings-head-Inn in the Strand, Crossing of the Street, about Five of the
Clock; and told him, that if he would please to go with them so far as
Strand-Bridge, they would bring him to a Place near St. Clements Church, where
there were a Company met; Principal Plotters of [That Design against the King]
and There (if he would go presently) he might Take them, and the Principal of
their Papers, etc.] To shorten the Matter; Godfrey offered his Warrant and a
Constable; but was loath to go Himself, though they got him at last into
Somerset House Court; While Somebody was gone as pretended to fetch a
Constable; and after a Turn or Two, there came Two Persons more, and should him
into a Room; Presented a Pistol to shoot him, if he made a Noise; but if he
would Answer their Expectation, they would do him no Harm; and so they bad him
send fon the Examinations. He said he had them not; and upon Refusal, they
seized, and stifled him with a Pillow; but finding sometime after that he was
not quite Dead, they strangled him with a Long Crevat, which Crevat Bedloe saw
the Monday Night about his Neck; Le Phaire telling him further, That they had
made a Wound in his Body, and laid his Sword by him, as if he had killed
himself.

I shall only Note upon the Enformations above, that if Bedloe had stuck in his
Second Deposition to the Offer of Two Thousand Pound in the Former, to help
carry away the Body, without Clapping in Four Thousand Pound Extraordinary, to
be One of the Four, or Six, that should commit the Murder, the Story would
have hung never the worse together; for when his Hand was in, upon the Reward,
'Twas a wonderful Thing how he should remember the Two Thousand, and forget the
Four; and then the Carrying out of the Body at Nine of the Clock in his
Deposition of Friday, Nov. 8. And the Resolution of not Carrying it out 'till
Eleven, in his Deposition of the Tuesday following; This Stumble, I say, has
knocked the History quite out of Joint; for it could not be less then Ten at the
rate of his Second Enformation, when they came to a Resolution of carrying the
Body off at Eleven. Whereas he swears Positively in the Former, that it was
Carried away at Nine, and yet in the Trial, fol. 34. He Swears that [ He saw it
there after Nine.] There was an unlucky Oversight too in the Wording of the
Pretense; when Le Phaire and his Fellows were to Trepan Godfrey into
Somerset House, under the Color of a Meeting thereabouts of [ the Princpial
Plotters in [ That Design against the King.] And why That Design, to a
stranger? when the Demonstrative is Nonsense, where the Two Parties to the
Colloquy do not Mutually Understand One Another. If Godfrey knew the Persons,
it is odds he knew their Religion, and their Character; and would never have
been put upon, by known Jesuits for the Discoverer of the Conspiracy.

Here Is the Sum now of the Depositions above; but the Evidence that he gave
upon the Trials of Green, Berry and Hill, Feb. 10. 1678/9. was briefly This.

Le Phaire, Pritchard, Keines, etc. Trea^ed with Bedloe about Murdering a
Gentleman; Promising him both Assistance, and Reward. Trial, fol. 28. He was
set to make an Acquaintance with Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, and Plied him at his
House for six or seven Days together, on Pretense of getting Warrants against
Persons, when there were None such, for their good Behavior. He sent his Boy
from the Greyhound Tavern in the Strand, October 11. to have gotten Godfrey
over to him. He had then Five Jesuits in his Company; but Missing him at Home,
Bedloe and Two of the Jesuits, Le Phaire, and Walsh, went into the City. Greens
Trial, p. 29. Le Phaire came to his Chamber next Morning, and Missed him, but
by accident they Met about Four, Afternoon, in Lincolns-Inn-Fields; went to the
Palsgraves Head together; and there told Bedloe of a very Material Man that was
to be put out of the way That Night; for he had gotten All Otes's and Tong's
Enformations; And if he were not Dispatched, it would Endanger the Design.
Bedloe said, he should need to be well seconded: And asking about the Money, Le
Phaire told him the Lord Bellassis was Engaged for it, and Coleman had order to
Pay it. The Sum was 4000 l. Bedloe Promised to Meet him at Somerset House That
Night; but failed him, fol. 30.] and saw him No more 'till he met him next
Night in Red-Lyon Court, where he put his Cane to his Nose, for a Hint to
Bedloe, that he was to Blame not to keep his Promise. They went together to the
Greyhound Tavern in Fleet Street, where they appointed to Meet at Nine that
Night, at Somerset House. Bedloe met him Exactly at the Time, when they Walked
and Talked a Great While; Le Phaire telling him, that he was Murdered; and
offered him Half yet to Help Carry him off: and so (says Bedloe) he took me by
the hand, and led me into the Room thorough a Dark Entry. In the Room were a
Great many: I cannot tell who they All were [Mr. Justice Iones] What kind of
Light had they Mr. Prance? [Mr. Prance] It was a Middle-siz'd Lanthorn. [Mr.
Just. Iones] Was it a small Light or a great Light? [Mr. Bedloe] It was a
small Light. [Mr. Just. Iones] Had they No Light but that Lanthorn? [Mr.
Bedloe] No, and they did not open it 'till I had had a Turn about the Room.
Upon this, They Threw off the Thing that was laid upon Him, fol. 31. and Bedloe
knew him; And he had about his Neck such a kind of Crevat (says he) as This
about my Neck, and I went to Try and could not get my Finger in betwixt. Bedloe
would have had Weights Tied to his Head and Feet, and Thrown him into the
River. No, said they, We will put it upon Himself, there are None but Friends
Concerned. So they Resolved to put him in a Chair, and Berry the Porter should
sit up to let them out at the Gate. They told me ( says Bedloe) they had
strangled him, but how he did not know. They Pressed Bedloe to help Carry him
out; but he Excused himself, and said it was too Early, and that about Eleven,
or Twelve a Clock would be a Better Time: So Bedloe promising Le Phaire upon
the Sacrament he took on Thursday, to be at the Carrying of This Man That
Night, he got away. [fol. 32.] He went then to Bristoll, but very Restless, and
Disturbed in his Mind, 'till at last he could forbear Discovery no longer; and
so he wrote to the Secretary of it, and went to the Parliament, and gave in his
Enformation.

One Day (says Mr. Bedloe) I met with Prance in the Lobby.

[Mr. Attorney General] I will ask you one Question: Had you any Discourse with
Mr. Prance Between the time you saw him with the Body, and the Day he was
Apprehended?

It is to be Noted here, that Bedloe had said Nothing at All as Yet of seeing
Prance with the Body; but it was found a Necessary Tack for the Holding of the
Story Together, That the Two Chief Murderers should be brought Acquainted.

Bedloe says further, he saw Green about the Court, and was told that Berry was
to open the Gate; but he did not see Hill. Prance, he says, was taken up upon
Suspicion, for lying out of his Lodging; and when he was There, in the
Constable's Hands, Otes came by and Desired to see him, and presently after He
Himself came thither. The Constable Asking him, Mr. Prance, Will you see Mr.
Bedloe? No (he said) he would not; And then Prance put his Hat over his Eyes,
that Bedloe might not see his Face, [ fol. 3.] But Bedloe calling to have the
Lobby Cleared, he happened at Prance 's coming by, to cast his Eyes upon his
Face, and presently knew him, and Cried, Oh! Pray Sir Stay; you are one of my
Friends that must stay here: And I presently Charged my Guards to take Charge
of him. Says the Constable, He is my Prisoner. Is he so, said I? Then you have
a very good Prisoner: And Pray look safe to him: And then when I went into the
House of Lords, I made out my Charge against him, fol. 34.

Now to Compare Bedloe with Himself, in his Deposition of Oct. 8. The Body was
Carry'd-off on Monday Night at Nine of the Clock. He swears upon the 12 th.
before the Lords, that He himself saw the Body there long after Nine, when they
Agreed to carry it away at Eleven; and in Green's Trial again, Expressly that he
saw it there after Nine, fol. 34.

He was told upon the 8 th. That they stifled Godfrey betwixt Two Pillows. On
the 12 th. That he was stifled with a Pillow: And upon the Trial, fol. 32. was
told they had Strangled him, but he did not know How.

In his Enformation, Nov. 12. He appointed to meet Le Phaire at Somerset House
at Eight in the Evening, and accordingly, betwixt Eight and Nine, went Thither:
but Le Phaire said he had stayed almost an Hour for him: whereas at the Trial,
the Appointment was Nine a Clock, and they met Exactly at the Hour. Trial, page
31. He Swears, Nov. 12. 1678. That Le Phaire led him into the Room where the
Body was; which was Dark, and pulled out a Dark Lanthorn, etc. Whereas in the
Trial, he takes Notice that the Entry was Dark, but not the Room, fol. 31. And
he had forgot the Lanthorn, if Prance had not minded him of it. Beside that he
took a Turn in the Room before it was opened. Ibid. Bedloe had a mind, he says,
to Discover, Two Years ago; but was Prevented, and only Drilled them on to know
the Party that was to be Murdered, that he might prevent them, Trial, p. 28.
It is here to be Noted, that, fol. 28. Bedloe was Resolved to Discover; but
fol. 32. He is Contriving how to Conceal the Murder. And 2 ly. That he had a
Mind to Discover it some Two Years ago; That is to say, a matter of Two Year
before 'twas Committed. He says again, That He did not see Le Phaire, from
Sunday, to Monday Night, page 31. And yet before the Lords, he met him by
Accident, upon Sunday, in Fleetstreet. The Jesuits, he says, that were about
the Body, and had Employed him to Insinuate himself into Godfrey 's
Acquaintance, thought he had not known them, fol. 32. though it was Le Phaire,
Pritchard, and Walsh, that set him to insinuate Himself into Godfrey's
Acquaintance; Le Phaire Himself that now showed him the Body. Trial, page 29.
And that were present (as he Swears before the Lords) at the same Time in the
Room with the Body. Prance says, That they run him through with his own Sword,
and then threw him into a Ditch. Bedloe says upon the Journal, That they had
made a Wound in his Body, and laid his Sword by him.

Upon the whole Matter, This Story was certainly one of the Rankest Forgeries
that ever passed so much, and so long Current for a Truth: But we shall now
take a Summary View of Prance's Evidence, upon the same Subject, and Pretext.

CHAP. VII.
How Prance came to be Taken up; How he was Managed; with the Sum of his
Evidence about Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and a General Reflection upon the whole.

THE Intrigue of Prance's Affair must be Methodically Opened, or it will never
be Clearly Understood; and the Truth of the History it self, will suffer
without the Light of an Orderly Introduction.

Prance had the Ill Fortune to have a Lodger in his House, one John Wren, that
was behind-hand with him for Fourteen Months Rent; and Pressing him for his
Money, he was observed to cast out Threatening Words against his Landlord. Soon
after This, there was a Tankard gone; and a Squabble about it; but in short,
Prance never heard more of his Tankard; He had his Rent Paid him on St. Thomas
Eve, 1678. And was Taken up Next Morning upon a Warrant bearing Date the Day
before, at the Instance and Complaint of This Wren and others, upon a Suspicion
of being Privy to the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. This VVarrant was
Delivered to the Officer by one Hill, and there it was suggested in the
Enformation, That Prance lay out of his House some Nights while Sir Edmund was
Missing. His Dealings with Grove: His Hiring a Horse to go out of Town: His
Brother being a Priest; Pickering, and Ireland having been at his House, etc.
It came to This, in fine, that John Wren, Joseph Hill, and Another, put in for
the Five Hundred Pound Promised in the Proclamation; as being the First
Discoverers of the Murder, and obtained a Certificate to That End, Dated
December 27. 1678. upon Prance's Taking upon Himself to have had a Hand in the
Action: He was Carried away in Custody, into a Little Room within a Lobby by
the House of Commons, and While they were There Attending, in comes Bedloe;
staring up and down, and Enquiring Privately which was the Prisoner, They
showed him the Man, and so soon as Ever he had got sight of him, he went his
way.

Now the Truth of this Matter is quite Another Thing from the Business of the
Lobby, as Bedloe has Reported it in his Evidence, Trial 33, 34. for Bedloe did
not Apprehend Prance, as he says, but he was in Custody already; No such
Question asked by the Constable as Mr. Prance, will you see Mr. Bedloe? No
Plucking his Hat over his Eyes; Not one Word said Bedloe to Prance; No Bidding
of his Guards to take Charge of him. And so for the Business of his going to
Bristoll, in such Trouble of Mind forsooth, for the Murders that had been
Already Committed, and the Greater One's that were Daily intended, and his
being at last Convinced, and Writing to the Secretary, etc. Green's Trial, p.
33. It Is all a Sham (as appears Already) for he Wrote from Newbery upon his way
to Bristoll; and had the Cheat, the Perjury, and the Reward at That Time in his
Eye.

After the Officers had Waited for some Hours with Prance in the Lobby, they
Carried him to an Eating House called Heaven; Into a Room (as by Chance) where
Bedloe was Planted by Sir William Waller, and some Others, by Manifest Design:
when, of a sudden, Up starts Bedloe, and with an Oath Worthy of That Mouth
cried out [ This is one of the Rogues that I saw with a Dark Lanthorn about the
Body of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, but he was then in a Periwig.] Prance was
Carried from Thence to the Committee of Lords, and While he was Waiting to be
Called; Wren came to him and told him, [ Now is your Time to Confess, or you
are Ruined:] speaking of the Murder of Sir Edmund B. Godfrey. Bedloe Charged
him before the Lords with the Murder; and Wren, with being out of his House
while the Body was Missing, but he Denied All upon his Examination, Affirming
that he knew Nothing of the Murder, neither did he know Bedloe: and objecting
against Wren, as an Incompetent Witness. This was December 21, 1678. And the
Heads of his Depositions were as follows;

That he had been a Papist, but was now a Protestant, and had taken the Oaths:
That he had wrought in his Trade for Groves, Pickering, Fenwick, and Ireland;
That the Sunday after These Persons were Taken up, He said in a Coffee-house,
[they were very Honest Men:] which some People took offense at. He kept out of
the Way for fear of being Questioned. He never lay out of his House but Three
Nights in Two Year. He had not seen Rawson of the VVhite-house, This
Twelvemonth; Nor did he go to the Queens Chapel once a Month. He Denied the
Hiring of a Horse, at First; but Confessed it afterward, and that it was to
Avoid the Oaths. That an Arrest stayed him in Town. That his Wife was a Papist.
That he Changed Guinneas for one Mr. Owen a Layman: That he had nothing to do
with the Death of Godfrey: That he sent a Halbert over the Way once, when they
were searching for Arms; That he lay at a Neighbors House on Monday when Sir
Edmund was Missing. That he had made a Light Flaxen Periwig of his Wive's Hair,
but he never Wore it; That he had Dealt with Grove for Guinneas, and had Money
of him for Work: That he knew Pickering, and had been lately in his Company,
but Neither VValsh, nor Prichard: That Pickering was a Clark in the Queens
Chapel: That he did not know Le Phaire, and thinks he did not know Captain
Pugh; And that he was at Home from Five the Last Night, to Eleven.

I have been the more Particular in This, in Regard of the Relation it has to
All the Rest; but to come Round now to my Business, Here Is the short on it.

Upon Saturday, December 21. Prance Denies All. His First nights Lodging in the
Condemned Hole, and a Paper of Instructions next his Heart on Sunday Morning,
Mollify'd, and made very Wax of him to Yield to Any Impression. That Sunday
Night, by the help of some Illuminations in Aldersgate Street, he began to see
Daylight, and to Promise Discoveries, if he Might be sure of a Pardon. On
Monday, the 23. [ The House was Informed (as I find it upon the Lords Journal)
That Miles Prance has made some Discovery of the-Plot, and has offered to
make further Discovery of the Plot; and also touching the Death of Sir
Edmund-bury Godfrey, and the Whole Manner of it, If he might First be fully
Assured of his Majesty's Gracious and General Pardon, etc.

The Plot goes First, I perceive; but upon This Report, Immediate Application
was made to His Majesty; a Full and General Pardon Promised; and it was
forthwith [ Ordered, that certain Lords should acquaint Miles Prance in
Newgate, That Afternoon with his Majesty's Gracious Assurance, and that they
should then and there Proceed to Examine him thorougly in Order to a True and
perfect Discovery; and that Care should he taken that No other Person, Lord, or
Commoner should be present at the said Examination, but the said Lords, and the
Prisoner.]

The House of Commons passed Two Orders of the same Date likewise, upon the
same Subject.

1. Ordered, That the Committee of Secrecy, or any Three of them, do repair to
the Prison, and take the Examination of Mr. Prance touching the Plot, and the
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

Post Meridiem.
2. Ordered, That the Committee of Secrecy appointed to Examine Mr. Prance, do
Impart to the Prisoners in Newgate, the Contents of His Majesty's Proclamation
in Relation to the Discovery of the Plot against his Majesty's Person and
Government. Commons Journal, page 206, 207.

It makes a Man Tremble, to think what a Iayl-Delivery of Discoverers this
Temptation might have Produced. The Assurance of a Pardon, had by This Time
Mellow'd Prance, and made him Ripe for a Further Examination; so that upon
Tuesday Morning, December. 24. He was Examined by the King in Council, about the
Plot, and about the Murder, with a Promise of Pardon upon a Full Discovery.

Hereupon he Declared, That One Girald, an Irish Priest spoke to him about the
Killing of a Man, not saying who it was; this was about a Fortnight before the
Murder: And about a Week after, Girald, Green, and Hill told him they would
Kill Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; for he was an Enemy to the Queen, or her Servants:
He had used some Irish Men Ill; and Girald told him, the Lord Bellassis would
see the Action rewarded; Girald owning an Old Grudge to Sir Edmund, about a
Business of Parish-Duties. He said they had Watched him a Week or Fortnight
before his Death: Green had called at his House that Saturday Morning, and that
He, Girald, and Hill had Dogged him That Day until he came by his Death.

His Majesty thereupon appointed the Duke of Monmouth, and the Earl of Ossory
to take Prance's Enformation at Somerset House, from Place to Place, where the
Things were acted; which they did accordingly, and reported the Matter to his
Majesty in Council, which Report we shall here Insert at Length, as the very
Key of the Imposture, to any Man that shall but Trace the Story through the
Lodgings.

May it Please your Majesty,
IN Obedience to your Majesty's Order signified to us this Morning in Council,
we have been at Somerset House, and there taken the Examination of Miles Prance
a Silver-Smith, touching the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, upon the Place
where the same was Committed, and in Virtue of the Oath taken before your
Majesty, he declared as follows.

That it was either at the Latter End, or the Beginning of the Week, that Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey did, about Nine of the Clock at Night, pass from toward St.
Clements as far as the Great Watergate at Somerset House, being watched and
followed by Lawrence Hill, one Green, and one Gerald; that Hill making some
have before, stepped within the Wicket which was open, and turning soon out
again, called to Sir Edmund as he was Passing, and said there were two Men
quarrelling within, who might soon be quieted if once they saw him: Whereupon
he entered through the Wicket, and after him, Green and Gerald, and down they
all went, till they came to a Bench that is at the Bottom of the Deep Descent,
and joining to a Rail next to the upper end of the Stables on the Right hand:
That upon the said Bench, there were sitting and attending their coming, the
Examinate, Miles Prance, and one Berry the Porter of the Other Gate, together
with an Irishman that Lodged at Green's House, whose Name (...) knows not; And
by that time they were come half way down, he the said Prance went up to the
Wicket there to attend, and give notice, if any came; and at the same time the
said Berry went straight on, from the Bench toward the Stone Stairs which led
to the Upper Court: and when Sir Edmundbury Godfrey came down to the Bench,
Green, who followed him, put about his Neck a large Twisted Handkercher* and
thereupon all the rest Assisted, and dragged him into a Corner which is behind
the said Bench and the said Rail: and Green, who Informed him in the manner
hereof, and with whom he had before Seen the large Twisted Handkercher, added,
that he had Thumped him on the Breast, and Twisted his Neck until he Broak it.

And the Examinant says, that he did, in about a Quarter of an hour after he
had been standing at the Wicket, come down to see what was done; and found that
they had Throatled him, but his Body remained Warm, and seemed hardly Dead. But
He, together with the said Hill, Green, Gerald, and Berry, and the Irishman,
took him up, and conveyed him through a Door that is on the Left Hand coming
down at the Corner of the Coach-House, which leads up several Stairs into a
long dark Passage or Gallery, opening at last into the Upper Court, in which
Passage there is a Door on the Left hand, which being opened, leads up with
Eight Stairs into Another House adjoining; but Immediately upon the Right hand,
being got up, there is a little Closet, or Square Room, into which they
conveyed the Body; and there set the Body Bending, with the Back against a Bed,
which the Examinant having now seen again, thinks to be the same Bed that was
there at the said Time. He further said, that Hill lived at this House, and the
Body was for Two Days Left there, in his care; but then being afraid of
Discovery, Hill, Gerald, Green, Berry, and the Irishman, as they told him, did
Take and Convey the Body from thence about Nine or Ten of the Clock at N^^ht,
and carried it into the House, and into some Room toward the Garden; and that
while the Body lay there, he was, by Hill, conducted to see it, and saw the
Body as it lay Bended, and Green, and Gerald were present. That from Thence,
upon a Tuesday Night, the Body was brought back near to the Place where first
it lay, into a Room in the said Gallery, over against the first Door, somewhat
higher up toward the Court, the Chamber belonging to some of the Servants of
Sir John Arundel, where it remained until Nine or Ten of the Clock on
Wednesday-Night: and then, thinking it fit to remove it to the Little Room
where first it Lay, this Examinant happened to come as they were lifting it up
the said Eight Steps, whereupon Hill and Berry fled, as supposing him to be
some Stranger; but Gerald, Green, and the Irishman stood still; and so he
helped them to Lift up the Body into the former Closet, and There it continued
till after Twelve of the Clock the same Wednesday Night. Hill and Berry came to
them when their Fright was over; and Hill having got a Sedan, and placing it in
the long dark Entry at the Foot of the said Eight Stairs, they put the Body
thereinto. The Examinate Prance, and Gerald, first took up the Chair, and
conveyed it through the Upper-Court; Berry the Porter opened half the Gate, and
let them out; and they rested not till they came to Covent Garden, where Green,
and another Irishman took their Turns, and so carried the Sedan, and Body in
it, as far as the New Grecian Church in the So-ho; and there Hill met them with
a Horse; whereupon they took out the Body, and forcing open the Legs, they set
it upon the Horse, Hill Riding behind, to keep the Body up, while Green,
Gerald, and the Irishman went to accompany him. Berry the Porter did not
depart from the Gate, and the Examinate Prance, fearing to be missing, returned
home when the Body was set on Horseback; and the Sedan, which was left in one
of the New Unfinished Houses, they took it up, and brought it home as they came
back.

He further says, That the Body lay in Somerset House about Six or Seven Days,
before it was Carried out: but he is not certain in the Number of the Days. He
was very Positive as to the Place where the Murder was Committed, and the
Manner of it; as also for the Room where the Body was first laid; but being
desired to conduct us to the Room next the Garden, he led us to the Corner of
the Piazza on the Left hand, and so down a Pair of Stairs, and so far seemed to
be assured he had been Led, and did think that he passed through the Great
Court Below: But when from Thence we went up and down into several Rooms, he
seemed very Doubtful, and could not ascertain the Places; saying, He had never
been there but that Once, when Hill conveyed him thither with a Dark Lanthorn;
but that it was some Chamber toward the Garden. In the House where the Body
was first laid, we found a Woman, whose Deposition we have taken; She was
Housekeeper to Dr. Godwin, and the said Hill had been a Servant to the said
Doctor in this House, for above Seven Years; and continued to live there since
the Doctor's Departure until Michaelmas Last: but that he has been there Three
several Times since; and she also knew the Examinate, and called him by his
Name.

All which is humbly submitted to your Majesty. 24. December. 1678.
Monmouth. Ossory.

Upon reading which Report, it appeared that the Particulars were very
Consonant to what he had spoken at the Board in the Morning before his going;
at which time being also further asked, Why he gave so different a Relation to
the Commitee of the Lords, from what he now so freely Confessed? He made
Answer, He was in much Confusion before the Committee, being not sure of his
Pardon; but now, being Sure of it, and also upon his Oath, he did Speak the
whole Truth, according to his Knowledge. And being then further Asked, Why he
came not in upon the Proclamation, and the Reward thereof: He said, He was
afraid to Trust thereunto. And being further Asked, What Reward he had
received from those that Employed him? He said, He had yet received no Reward,
nor had he sought for any, but only the Promise of Gerald, that there should be
a Reward, by the Lord Bellassis. He said that he wrought in the way of his
Trade to the Queens Chapel, and was a Roman Catholic, but that about Eight
Weeks ago he had taken the Oaths: Being Asked, Whether there were no Guards in
the usual places, at the time of Carrying on this Work? He says, He did not
take Notice of any: And being asked, Whether he saw Bedloe when he was Carried
to see the Body, when it lay in the Back-Chamber near the Garden? He Answered,
He could not tell whether Bedloe was There or No; but does remember, that
Gerald, and Green, were then Present. He adds, that Hill, Green, and Gerald,
told him that they had at Primrose-hill Thrust Sir Edmund's Sword through his
Body, till it came an Inch out of his Back: and that he strugled very much at
the time they strangled him, but that Green punched him with his knees upon his
Body, to hasten his Death.

The Council sat again in the Afternoon, and Prance was Confronted with Green,
Hill, and Berry, who Denied every Syllable of the Charge, and Prance stood as
stoutly to every Point of the Accusation.

On the Following 25, 26, 27, 28, December, there passed little more then the
same thing over again, from some Members of Both Houses, who were often with
him in Newgate, and still telling him, when his Evidence did not agree with
Bedloe's, that he was a Rogue, and had a Mind to spoil All, with Menares if he
did not Confess.

Upon Sunday the 29 th, he was Examined before the King in Council; And,
Denying All; he was asked what Inducement he had to the story? Why he swore
against Those Persons? Who put him upon it? He said, No Body Prompted him; He
only knew the Men that he swore against; He never saw Bedloe before he was
taken up. He knew Nothing of the Plot, nor of the Murder; All he had Sworn was
False; He never was Guilty of any Man's Blood, and could not Rest for the Story
he had told: But Wren ought him Money, and Threatened him because he Pressed him
for it; and so Hair'd him into it. Some there were that Called him a Thousand
Villains, and Apostates; and Threatened to show him the Wrack; but he was in the
Conclusion, Remanded to Newgate. It should have been Premised, that the Keeper
being Ordered to Attend the Council with his Prisoner, Prance made it his
request that he might Wait upon his Majesty, before he Carried him to the
Council. Captain Richardson Enform'd the King of his Earnest desire; and he was
Ordered to Carry Prance to Mr. Chiffinch's Lodgings, which accordingly he did;
and stayed there together with him, 'till his Majesty came into the next
Chamber, and Beckoned Prance to come to him; and the Door was shut after him.
He had been a very short time there, When his Majesty Opened the Door, (Prance
being then upon his knees) and bad Mr. Chiffinch, and Captain Richardson to
take Notice of what Prance said; Who, being called upon to speak what he had
to say, [ Declared that the Men he had sworn against, were All Innocent: and
that All he had sworn against them was False: which he Affirmed with great
Passion, and Earnest Asseveration. The Late Blessed King Pressing him in These
very Words, (as I have good Authority for it) Upon your Salvation is it so?
Prance Replying Upon my Salvation the whole Accusation is False] He was Carried
thence to the Council, where he fell down upon his knees also, and Denied All
that he had sworn at First; Insomuch that the Duke of Monmouth Inferred, that
Certainly they had let Priests and Jesuits come to him, he could Never have
gone off as he did else. He told the very same story to the King in Council
upon the 30 th. as he had done upon the 29 th. To Conclude; He stood Firm to
This Denial, against All Terrors, and Temptations, from the 29 th. of December,
to the 11 th. of the Following January; and his Carcass had not as yet gotten
the full Mastery of his Conscience; but when he once overcame That scruple, He
Proceeded by Degrees from a sin of Infirmity, to the Habit of a Most Malicious
Wickedness: Though upon the Whole Matter, I have Charitable Reason yet to
Believe, that God has vouchsafed him, the Mercy, and the Grace of an Unfeigned
Repentance.

I should now come to take his Westminster Hall Evidence to Pieces; but telling
his Tale by Book, and having Little or No occasion to Change his Note, His
running the History over and over in his Evidence was in Effect but the so many
times saying of the same Lesson again. Not but that there are Blunders,
abundantly, and Incongruities, upon the Connection, that are never to be
Justified or Reconciled. As for Example.

Prance swears before the King and Council, December. 24. 1678. That Sir
Edmund-bury Godfrey was Murdered either the Latter end, or the Beginning of
the Week; and afterward, that the Body lay about Six or Seven Days in
Somerset House before it was Carried out: But he swears Punctually, upon the
Trials, to the Saturday Morning: Nay to the very Hour of Nine or Ten, fol. 15.
to the Dogging of him till about Seven; to his coming to Somerset House about
Eight or Nine; where he lay till Munday-Night; and what became of him 'till
Tuesday; and so to the Chairing of him away to Prim-Rose-Hill, upon Wednesday
about Midnight, which amounts to but Four Days from Saturday Night, and from
Monday, but Two.

But we shall have Work enough to Observe upon Contradictions and Absurdities
when we come to Confront Prance, and Bedloe, One with Another: and in the Mean
time, it shall suffice, that he has given Himself the Lie with the Horridest
Solemnity of Imprecations Imaginable in Denial of Every Article of his
Accusation: Besides that he was as much Out, when he was to show the Duke of
Monmouth and My Lord Ossory the Room in Somerset House where the Body was First
Laid, December 24. as Otes was to bring the Earls of Ossory and Bridgwater to
the Staircase that led to the Place where he Overheard the Queen speaking
Treason, Nov. 26. Nay My Lord Ossory Himself had such an Opinion of the Story,
that Mr. Vincent who was then Attending the Duke of Monmouth, heard my Lord
Ossory tell his Master upon Asking What he Thought on it, that it was All a
Great Cheat.

CHAP. VIII.
The Secret History of Prance's Condition, from December 29. 1678. to January
11. 1679. and the Secret Manage of him in the Prison.

THE Readers Memory must be Refreshed once again with it, that Prance was
Taken-up by the Lords Committees; Examined and Committed to Newgate, December.
21. 1678. Finally, Denying every Point that was Charged upon him. On the 22 d.
Shaftsbury, etc had the Handling of him, (as Captain Richardson well knows) and
by the Help of a Preparatory Paper of Instructions, formerly spoken of, Wrought
upon Good Nature so far, as the next Morning to obtain the Promise of a Pardon
for him, upon the Plot-Condition of Making out a Full and Perfect Discovery;
and on the same day he was Close Plied in the Prison with Two Committees, one
after another, upon the Subject (to Cross the Proverb) of Confess, and you
shall Not be Hanged. On the 24 th. he Delivered his Enformation at large to the
King in Council; from whence he was Removed back again, and according to Order,
put into a Better Lodging; There he continued near a Week, with his Irons,
sometimes off, sometimes on; During which Time, he was taken out by one of the
Keepers, who told him, You are now going to be hanged; but they Carried him to
my Lord Chief Justice: And upon his Refusal to Answer to Certain
Interrogatories, he was taken back again to Prison: There passed Nothing
Considerable till the 29 th. and 30 th. Upon which Two Days, he did, with
Dreadful Imprecations Declare, and Affirm, both to the King and Council upon
his Knees, and [upon his Salvation] (tho Those Words are left out of Mr.
Chiffinche 's Evidence in the Trial) that his Depositions are wholly False, and
the Persons Innocent that he had Accused: Affirming likewise to his Majesty and
Council, that he had no other Hints to the Story he had told, then what he took
from the aforesaid Paper of Instructions, that was laid by him in the Condemned
Hole in Newgate, as is set forth in another place.

Now That which I call Prance's Secret History, is the Account of what passed
in the Interval betwixt his Falling off from his Former Evidence, and his
returning to it again; a Parenthesis that lies much in the Dark, and a Period
too Remarkable to be Buried in Silence.

Soon after This Vehement Denial, and Retractation of Prance's, the Lords
Committees ( Ian. 2.) Ordered one William Boyce to Attend them about Miles
Prance, who accordingly, with his Wife, Attended their Lordships on the 4 th.
And being Interrogated upon the Enformation of John Wren about Prances Lying
abroad at His House, they made This Answer.

WILLIAM BOYCE Enforms, That upon Clapping up of the Jesuits into Newgate, he
was in a Coffee-House, with Miles Prance, who hearing thereof, Lamented their
Misfortune, and openly Declared them to be such Honest Men, that some of the
Company said, they would Complain of him to the Council Board; whereupon
Prance, being afraid, did, on Wednesday and Thursday Night, the Second and
Third of October Last, come and lie at his House, but never before, nor since.
And the Wife of Boyce also being call'd-in, Deposed the same.

Now This Enformation of Boyce Destroys the Oath of John Wren, that says he was
out Tuesday and Wednasday Night, when Godfrey was Missing; and of Margaret his
Wife, that says he was Missing Four Nights that Week; And so of Charles
Manning; and Elizabeth Trevor, that swear to his Lying abroad some Nights More
or Fewer, betwixt the 12 th, and the 17 th of October, according to the Entryes
of them made in the Council Books: He Persisted in his Denial of All; and from
the 30 th. of December to the 8 th. of January following, what with the Deadly
Cold, and Nastiness of the Place; the Distress of his Condition, the Agony of
his Thoughts, under the Horror of Drawing upon himself the Guilt of Innocent
Blood, and the Galling Weight of his Irons, he lay in such Torments, both of
Body and Mind, that he spent his Hours in Roaring and Groaning, and Restlessly
Exclaiming; and Crying out Not Guilty, Not Guilty. No Murder. And so the same
Outcries, or Clamours at least, to that Effect, Over and Over, that they had
no way to Cover the Scandal, and the Inhumanity of his Usage, but either by
Imputing the Anguish of a Wounded Conscience to the Ravings of a Distempered
Brain; or else to make a worse Matter on it, by Ridiculing a True Repentance
into the Story of a Counterfeit Madness. But when Things were at the worst,
Miles Prance was, now and then by Fits, as the Good Humor Prevailed, Eased of
his Irons; Comforted with Good Words; and nothing of Manage Omitted for the
bringing Him to Understand Reason.

Upon the 8 th. of January, 1678/9. Captain Richardson attended the Lords
Committees about the Safe Custody of Miles Prance, according to an Order of the
Day before. He was call'd-in to give some Enformation in Writing concerning
him; as Also the Enformation of his Servant Charles Cooper; and it appearing to
the Lords that Prance strives what he can to Counterfeit being Mad, and that he
spoke Plainest when he was in Irons, their Lordships therefore Direct Captain
Richardson to return him to the Condition he was first in, hoping by some
Streightness he may be brought to stand to the Truth. Their Lordships further
Ordered that Dr. Lloyd, the Dean of Bangor, be Desired to Discourse with
Prance, in order to settle his Mind, if there be any real Occasion for it, and
that Mr. Dean do attend their Lordships to Morrow to receive Directions therein.

On the Day following Dr. Lloyd Attended the Council Chamger, according to
Order; And thereupon a Letter of Instructions was sent to Richardson as folows.

Sir,
THe Lords of the Committees have This Morning Discoursed Dr. Lloyd, the Dean
of Bangor, concerning Miles Prance, and the Various Tempers he has appeared
in: and their Lordships have Desired the Dean to try whether he can Compose his
Mind by such Methods of Discourse and Persuasion, as he shall think fit to use.
Wherefore the Lords Direct that you, do from Time to Time permit Mr. Dean to
have Access to him, as he shall desire; and as well All the Papers of Mr.
Prance's Evidence here Depending, as also what your Man Cooper has Certify'd
touching his Behavior, there, have been sent to Mr. Dean for his Better
Enformation, etc.


It appears likewise upon the Council-Books that a Servant of Captain
Richardson 's Attended their Lordships the same Day.

Cooper, a Servant from Captain Richardson, acquainted the Lords, that he sat
up last Night with Prance, who is, according to Directions, put in Irons. He
says, that he slept very Little, and used much Raving Talk; but having Drink by
him, and pretending to have spilt it, by Flinging down the Vessel, there did
not appear one quarter of the Drink to be spilt. That when he put on his
Stockings, having Stirrups within, and one of them Tore, he laid the Pieces
over each other before he drew the Upper Stocking on; and having put on his
Shoes with the Buckles Wrong, he presently Altered them to Rights.

The Next day, Ian. 10. Captain Richardson had another Letter about giving
Boyce Liberty to Visit Prance in the Words following.

SIR,
THE Lords of the Committee did think fit This Morning to send for William
Boyce, who was an old Friend and Acquaintance to Miles Prance, and believing
that he may do much toward the Composing of the Man's Mind, the Lords have
Discoursed with him at Large, and would have you also Enform him in what you
can, and to permit him from time to time to have Access to the said Prance, and
he will come and Enform the Lords how things do Pass, which is all I have in
Command from the Lords to signify, and am, etc.


On the Next Day came Cooper again with Another Report from Newgate about
Prance.

Charles Cooper Servant to Captain Richardson, gave their Lordships an Account,
how that Prance had Yesterday Raved very much, but in the Afternoon, grew more
Mild, and desired to speak with Captain Richardson, which he did, and soon
after Dr. Lloyd came to him: That he rested well till Midnight, but then fell
to Rave, Crying out frequently, that it was not He Murdered him, but They
killed him. He having long forborne to Eat, Cooper told him he would lose his
Stomach if he did not Eat; whereupon he fell to Eat very Heartily, and having
the last Night thrown in to him a Flock-Bed, with a Piece or Two of Blanket to
cover him, he made use of all to his Convenience, rather than to Continue on
the Boards.

On Ian. 11. Captain Richardson receives Another Letter, as follows, about
Prance.

SIR,
THE Lords of the Committee having put into the hands of Dr. Lloyd his
Majesty's Warrant for Prance's Pardon, and Instructions how to make use of the
same, you are to follow such Direction as the said Doctor shall give you,
either to the taking off Mr. Prance's Irons, or for his Better Accommodation,
notwithstanding their Lordships former Order to the Contrary.


And the same Day Mr. Dean of Bangor tells their Lordships, that having been
several times with Prance, he first found him very Sullen, and Denying all; but
at last his Speech was Consistent, and he desired the Doctor to come the next
day, as if then he would say more, which the Doctor doing, he appeared very
well composed, and in good humor, saying that he had Confessed Honestly
before, and had not Wronged any of those he had Accused.

This Report of the Doctors, is followed with another of Boyces, of the same
Date.

William Boyce, who had also been with Prance, tells the Lords, That he
Inquired for his Wife, and was glad to hear she was not in Prison.

That he feared he should be Hanged, by what my Lord Shaftsbury told him, That
if he did not Confess, and Agree with Bedloe in what Concerned the Murder,
that he should be Hanged.

He also seemed to fear that Those Three whom he accused, (meaning Green,
Berry, and Hill) were set at Liberty; That he would Confess All, if he were
sure of his Pardon; That he desired to speak with the Lord Shaftsbury about
Four Men that had a Design to Murder him.

Captain Richardson tells the Lords that Prance sent Yesterday for him while he
was in his good Temper; told him that Four Persons Named in the Following
Warrant, together with Young Staley, and Himself, were lately Drinking at the
Cross-Keys over against Staley's Shop; and that their Discourse was, how that
the Lord Shaftsbury was a great Persecutor of the Catholics, and must be
taken off by shooting, or some Other way: and that he would have told the Lord
Shaftsbury of it when he came to Newgate, but that his Lordship appeared so
Hasty, that he would not let him speak. Their Lordships presently Signed a
Warrant for the Apprehending of These Men, and Appointed Sir Robert Southwell
to go in the Afternoon to acquaint the Earl of Shaftsbury therewith. The
Persons Accused were Humphry Adamson, George Bradshaw, Benedict Prosser, and
Christopher Maddison.

Mr. Boyce further Enform'd their Lordships on the day above, that being This
morning in Newgate with hopes to have found Prance in the same Temper; he found
him so sullen that he would not speak a Word to him, but laying down his Face
upon his Arms, Cried out, and often Repeated, I have Committed No Murder.

Captain Richardson being Examined what might be the Cause of This Fright from
whence All These Changes seem to Arise; says that he cannot Imagine, unless it
were that when once he brought him down, several People came to Enquire of him,
when the Men, meaning the Three Condemned would be Executed: wherein he might
perhaps think himself Concerned. That Prance had once told him of a Whisper
through the Keyhole, which he Believed not; but supposes Another thing might
be True which is said by him, that Moore, and Messenger, being here Attending
when he was brought, did Beckon to him, which made him alter his Mind.

Their Lordships thought fit to Move his Majesty for a Warrant of Pardon, which
is accordingly obtained, and Mr. Dean is to show it unto him, in order to
settle his Doubts; and if he appears to Embrace it, and Deserve it, then that
his Irons be knocked off; and He removed into Better Quarters: and a Letter, to
This Effect, to Captain Richardson, which appears in the beginning of This Days
Entry, and as well the Dean as Mr. Boyce are to A^quaint their Lordships, on
Monday, how This Business proceeds.

Upon Monday the 10th. the Dean of Bangor is called in, and says, that he gave
on Saturday-night to Mr. Secretary Coventry such Enformation in Writing as he
had from Miles Prance; which being called for, to be Read, was for some Reasons
of Secrecy, Excused, as Discovering New Persons Not yet apprehended.

That when the Dean went to him on Saturday, he found him almost Dead, and
without a Pulse: but at last, when his Irons were off, and he Carried into a
Warm Room, he began to Hearken to his Pardon, and did Revive; Promising that he
would Declare all he knew, but first desiring to have his Pardon Completed, and
after Insisting hereupon; that Then he should speak out.

William Boyce says he found him in a very good Temper: but very Jelous, and
Desirous about his Pardon.

And then he opened and told him of Dangerous Words spoken by Bradshaw, and
Guzzeen; of Mr. Messenger's being set on by the Popish Lords to Kill the King;
Vernatti Concerned in the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, etc.

^e had now sworn Himself out of the Condemned Hole, (...) out of a starving
Condition upon the Boards, into a Warm Room, Variety of Dishes, a Convenient
Lodging; and his Friend Boyce at his Elbow, with the Liberty of Invention, Pen,
Ink and Paper, toward the Compiling of his Narratives.

It is a Bold Adventure for One Man to Undertake for Another Man's Conscience;
but it is yet a Bolder, Under so many Signs, and Indications of Remorse, as
Prance Expressed in the Prison, for so many Days together, to Pronounce That
Appearance of Penitence* to be Hypocrisy, and to Interpret That steadyness, in
favor of a Lie, rather then of a Truth; He Denied Every Syllable of the
Accusation, upon his First Charge. He shrunk after That, under the Fear of
Death, from the 22. of December to the 29. And there, as a Man that was not as
yet Wholly Abandoned to Work Wickedness, he went off again; and from Thence, to
the Following 11 th. of January, he Continued Firm notwithstanding All the
Temptations of Life, Liberty, and Ease. But the First Proof of his Frailty, was
an Encouragement to the making of a Further Trial of it; And, Effectually,
Prance's Case was the very same Case with that of Green, Berry, and Hill, as to
the Choice they had before them, of Living or Dying, upon the same Terms.

Now as to his Playing the Madman, the very Fancying of it, Under his
Circumstances, is Certainly One of the most Fantastical Freaks, next to the
Believing of it, that ever was in Nature. To take it first in the Reason of the
Thing. Suppose it a Murder, and Himself one of the Murderers; or suppose it
Neither One, nor the Other: He was to Dye, in Case of not Confessing, whether
he were Guilty or Not. Now for him to stand out in the Defense of a Falsity (as
the Patron of the Murder will have it) was the Certain way to Carry him to the
Gallows, and to the D^^il, Both at once; and the owning of a Truth (a^ T^^y
would have it Understood) was the Ready Way to the Saving of him both Soul and
Body.

There is a Second Consideration, which makes that Conceit of it so Ridiculous,
that a Man of sense would rather Choose to wear a Fools-Coat then own himself
the Author of it. They will have it a Piece of Art in him to make himself
appear a Madman; when on the Contrary, it was Manifestly his Interest the Most
in the World to be taken for a Sober Man; for after the Irresistible
Transports, and Agitations of a Laboring Conscience, Reflecting upon his
having called God to Witness to a Perjurious Oath against the Life of his
Neighbor; His Business was to gain Belief to his Innocence, by taking shame
upon Himself for the Guiltless Blood that he had Endangered by a False Oath,
and Retracting, as well as by Confessing the Wickedness: But on the Other side,
what end could he have in Making the world Believe, that All his [Not Guilties]
and [ No Murthers] were rather the Issue of a Distempered Head, then of a
Troubled Conscience? To take the Matter in Order; Captain Richardson, and his
Man Cooper; are Witnesses to the Fact here in Question. Prance told the same
story to the King and Council. He said the same Thing also to his Friend Mr.
Boyce; Who in an Enformation of April 5th. 1686. upon This Subject has Expressly
These words.

[ Here I am in Prison, Jan. 10. 1678. And I am like to be Hanged, and I am
Falsely accused.]

There is Nothing hitherto that looks like the Playing of a Part; and it will
appear upon further Enquiry, that Prance's Body was as much out of Humor, for
Fooling, as his Mind. But before I proceed to the Hardness of his Condition,
and to the Severity of the Usage; it will be but Justice to Note by the Way,
that the Plot-Pris'ners were not under the same Methods of Government with
Those People, that the Law Lodges in the Power, and in some sort, at the
Discretionary Mercy of their Keepers. For there is a Great Difference betwixt
Men that were Brought Rogues Into Newgate, and Men that were to be Made Rogues
There; and so to be molded for the Use they were Taken-up for: A great
Difference, I say, betwixt a Criminal of Law, and an Instrument of State: And
in This Latter Case, the Keepers were Effectually under the Direction of a
Certain Ambulatory Committee, When and in what Degree, to Squeeze, to Pinch, to
Ease, to Shackle, to Comfort, or to Torment their Prisoners, and Little or
Nothing was done, but according to the Order and Disposition, Either General,
or Particular, of the Cabal. I am now Entr'ing upon so Copious a Subject, that
I Cannot do it Right without being Tedious; And therefore, though the Matter
may seem all of a Piece with the Head that I am now upon, I shall yet assign it
a Section by it self; And after the Narrative I have Already Exhibited, out of
Authentic Entries, and Papers, of what passed Back and Forward concerning
Prance, produce such Further Authorities, and Depositions to the same Effect,
as will leave Envy and Diffidence it self, No Place for a Cavil.

CHAP. IX.
Prances Ill Usage, with a Brief Account of Himself; How he came to Depart from
his Evidence. The Bishop of St. Asaphs Commission to Examine him; and several
Passages Cleared in the Proceeding.

THE History of the Last Chapter has laid the matter here in Question so open,
that it Needs neither Enlargement, nor Comment. But the Reverend Dean of
Bangor, (now Lord Bishop of St. Asaph) having been Assigned so Great a Part in
the Transaction, I find my self Obliged in Duty, Justice, Common Prudence, and
Good Manners, to make use of That Reverend Name upon This Occasion.

There are some years now past since I had a Commission to look into This Case
of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and finding the Bishops Name, so often mentioned in
Records, and Iournals concerning it, I took the Freedom to Trouble his Lordship
with Several Papers about it; to which I had the Honor to Receive very
Particular and Satisfactory Answers. But of This, By and By. And so we will pass
on to the remaining part of our Secret History; beginning with several
Enformations referring to Prance's Condition in Newgate, till he went off from
his Evidence.

William Boyce Deposes, That upon Friday, (Jan. 10. 1678/9.) some time after
Christmas, while Miles Prance was a Prisoner in Newgate, going to the said
Prance by Order, went into a Room to him on the Left hand of the Entrance into
the Lodge, where he found the said Prance in Irons, and brought him down into
the Lodge; where the said Prance said to This Enformant, to this Effect; Here I
am in Prison, and I am like to be Hanged, I am falsely Accused. This Enformant,
after some stay with him, went his Way, and Dr. Lloyd went in to him, This
Enformant staying at Captain Richardson's House, 'till the said Dr. Lloyd
returned again.

And says; That the Next Morning to the Day aforesaid, This Enformant was sent
to by Captain Richardson to come to the said Prance again; whither This
Enformant went, and found the said Miles Prance in his Irons, in the same Room
where he found him the Day before; The Captain and his Servants telling him
This Enformant, that the said Prance had a Raving Night of it; And This
Enformant going to the said Prance, found him Lying at his Length upon the
Boards, and Crying, [Guilty, Guilty; Not Guilty, Not Guilty, No Murder.]
Crying so Loud, that some of the Neighborhood told This Enformant, that they
had heard the Noise into the Street in the Night.

Mary Preston Deposes, That this Enformant going frequently to visit her
Husband, who on the First of November, 1678. was Committed to Newgate upon the
Oath of Titus Otes, for a Priest, she This Enformant, in or about Christmas, in
the year above, being in Company with one Mrs. Bridgman, Mrs. Medbourn, and
Mrs. Medbourns Sister, with some others, coming down the Stairs of the said
Prison into the Lodge, heard a Loud and a Constant Groaning of a Man as in
great Torment; which was Taken Notice of also by the Company, which at that
Time was with This Enformant. The Noise seeming to come from a Place called the
Condemned Hole: because the nearer this Enformant went that way, the Plainer it
was heard. Whereupon, This Enformant, or some of her Company, asked the Keeper
who it was, one of them replying it was a Woman in Labor. But This Enformant
and her Company, Concluded it to be a Man's Voice; after which, the said Keeper
hastened This Enformant and her Company out of the Lodge, and so they Departed:
But staying a while without the Door under the Arch, they heard the Noise and
Groaning very plainly still.

And This Enformant came the next Morning to the said Prison again, and waiting
longer then Ordinary for the Keepers Coming, to turn the Key for her to go to
her Husband, she This Enformant walking in the Lodge about a Quarter of an
hour, heard the Groaning of a Man from the same Place as the day before, though
much Weaker.

This Enformant heard afterward a Discourse in the Prison, that Prance was
Mad, and she remembers that within a few days after the hearing of these
Groans, she This Enformant enquired how Prance did, receiving for Answer that
he was Pretty well; And that they had given him a Flock-bed. This Enformant
referring her self upon the Contents of this Enformation, to the Best of her
Knowledge and Memory.

Catharine Wallis and Elizabeth Newens do jointly Depose, That these
Enformants, having been to visit Mr. Medbourn in Newgate, Coming down Stairs,
and staying at the Door 'till the Turn-Key Vnlock'd it, heard a Dreadful
Groaning, and Noise out of a Place they call the Condemned Hole, and heard it
likewise in the Lodge, and so out in the Street, 'till they came to the Old
Bayly-Corner, Diverse Passengers stopping in the Street to hear the Noise, were
Chid away by the Keepers.

They say likewise, that the Keepers were asked what the Noise was; but they
desired to be Excused, they must not Tell: Only it was said in the Prison, that
it was the Cry of Miles Prance.

Elizabeth Newens Deposes apart, That the time above-spoken-of in the Joint
Enformation of this Deponent and Mrs. Catharine Wallis, was some very few days
before the Saturday, whereupon Miles Prance (as this Enformant heard in the
Prison) was Removed from the Condemned Hole into the Press-yard; and that there
was Present, one Mrs. Preston, and several others, who all took notice of the
same Cry.

Philip Cook Deposes, That this Enformant was Committed to Newgate by the Lord
Mayor of London, upon the First public Fast Day for the Plot, where he This
Enformant Continued a Prisoner near the space of a year.

And that this Enformant, in, or about the time of Christmas next Ensuing the
Commitment of This Enformant; He this Enformant heard the Strong Groans of a
Man, which this Enformant Judged to be in the Place called the Condemned Hole;
and several of his Fellow-Pris'ners declar^d themselves to be of the same
Opinion; diverse of them harkening after it: And this Enformant hearing it
passing up and down the Stairs, and at the Grate of the Lodge, for the space
(as he Believes) of at least half an Hour.

And that This Enformant Enquiring what the Matter might be, the Prisoners in
the House said, that they were Torturing of Prance: and this Enformant asked
some of the Keepers likewise; but he does not particularly remember who they
were, only he remembers that some one or more of them told this Enformant
softly, That it was Prance that made That Noise; seeming unwilling to have any
Notice taken of it; They refusing to tell it to some Others that asked the
Question.

The Enformant Delivers all the matters in this Enformation contained,
according to the best of his Knowledge and Memory.

Many more Instances might be added; but upon the whole Matter, Prance was made
Guilty when he Denied the Murder, though Innocent of it; and no way to save
his Life, but by Confessing it, whether Guilty or Not. The Pain that made him
Roar, made him Counterfeit himself Mad, and no way but loading him with Fresh
Irons to bring him to his Wits again. But after all This, How did it appear
that he was come to his Senses again? Why first, he pretended to have Spilt his
Drink, when he had Drunk Three Parts of Four on it. 2 ly. He found out an
Expedient to draw-on his Upper Stocking, though the Stirrup was torn. 3 ly. He
found that the Buckles of his Shoes were put on wrong, and Presently set them
to Rights again: I shall lay no stress upon any Testimonials that are not
Current, but keep my self to the Lords Iournals; The Entries of the
Council-Books; Enformations formally taken upon Oath; and such other Evidences
as, Morally speaking, are of Equivalent Certainty with any of the Rest.

Let me not be thought to reckon any thing that Prance says of Himself, among
these Credible Testimonials; tho Truth is Truth still, Whoever Delivers it; I
shall only Condition, that Men of Probity may not Suffer, where Prance Agrees
with them in the Point of Fact; and This without Prejudice to the Reputation of
any Man, where they Differ.

As to the Enformation, and the Enformers against Prance; The Day of his
Seizure, (being Saturday, December 21. 1678. his Charge, Examination, and
Commitment; Wren 's Sham-Advice to him in the Lobby; The Imposture of Bedloe's
Story there; and the Trepanning of him into the Devils Mouth; The loading him
with Irons in the Condemned Hole; The Carrying of him to be Tutour'd, and
Curry'd by Shaftsbury the Next day; and the Hammering of him by Shaftsbury
again, and other Examiners in the Prison, the Day following; His Perjury for
fear of Death; His Enformations before the Lords, and the Promise of his Pardon
upon That Discovery; The Dance he led the Duke of Monmouth, and the Earl of
Ossory at Somerset House upon Tuesday the 24 th. The remanding of him to
Newgate; His Denial of his Evidence to the King and Council, December 29. and
30. His Raving in Newgate, and Denying the Murder; The Turning of him back out
of a Convenient Lodging into the Hole again; Boyce's coming to him by Order,
and his Privacies with him; and Dr. Lloyd's being sent to him, both by the
King, and the Lords Committees; The Doctors Reports upon the Matter, as well of
Conscience, as of Health; The Killing Cold, and Nastiness of the Place; The
Misery of his Condition; The Showing him his Pardon; The Effects of it; and his
Change of Resolution, to the very Time of his Removal into Better Quarters;
These Circumstances are All Punctually Reported by Prance, and Confirmed by
other Witnesses; He speaks also of his Horrible Pains, and Extreme Weakness
upon Thursday, Friday, and Saturday; which agrees both with the Doctor's
Report, and several Affidavits. But for what Now follows, though Prance affirms
every Syllable on it to be True, the Reader is yet at Liberty whether to believe
it or not.

He says he had a Paper of Instructions brought him into the Condemned Hole;
with Hints, and Minutes of the Plot, as is set forth Already, with these Words
in it, [You had better Confess then be Hanged.

He says further, That the Lord Shaftsbury told him particularly, that there
were Great Ones concerned; and he must discover Them too; for the Little Ones
should not serve his Turn, calling him Rogue and Rascal several Times, for
Crossing Bedloe 's Evidence, and saying [there must be Great Persons in it]
reflecting upon the Queen and the Duke of York; bidding him not to spare the
King Himself; saying likewise, That the Body was laid under the Altar, and that
he was Carried in a Coach to Primrose-Hill; and that Bedloe said he was stifled
under a Pillow, and that he (meaning Prance) would have it anohter way. He
says, That some of the Keepers, upon his Crying-out in the Anguish of his
Affliction, took him to that Part of the Room that was furthest from the
Street, and Chained him down to a Staple over Night, and Loosened him again in
the Morning; and that one time, as he was lying with his back upon the Ground,
and Roaring in the Extremity of his Pain, Two of the Keepers took him by Neck
and Heels, and cast him Three or Four Times against the Ground.

We have now got over the Dark and Doleful Period of Prance's Conflict, betwixt
a Whole Skin and a Good Conscience, and brought him from the Sordid Necessities
of the Condemned Hole, to the Comfort of Meat, Drink Lodging, and Clean Linen
again. I had no sooner Promised (says Prance) upon my Assurances of Pardon,
that I would stand to my Former Evidence, but my Irons were Immediately knocked
off; I was removed to a very good Room, and a Curious Bed in the Press-Yard,
where I had Varieties of Meats and Drinks as good as I could wish.

This was the 11 th. of January 1678/9.

So soon as Prance had compounded for the Wages of Unrighteousness, and Rocked
his Conscience Asleep, in Attending and Providing for the Security of his
Carcass, he called for Pen, Ink, and Paper, and had his Lesson given him, to
Provide for the Trial of the Pretended Murderers, Green, Berry, and Hill; who
were Convicted on Monday, February 10. 1678/9. Sentenced the Day following; and
Green and Hill Executed on the 21 th. and Berry Respited till the 28 th.

There is Annexed to the Printed Trial a most Unchristian, an Uncharitable, and
an Inhumane Reflection upon the Truth, and Conscience of Hill's Dying Words,
which is not only the Killing of a Man over again, but the Ridiculing of the
most Sacred Test of Truth in Nature. I shall have occasion to Insert a Piece of
the Poor Man's Letter to his Wife, in his Extremity, which will do some sort of
Right to his Memory. The whole Course of the Story is a Mystery, but This shall
suffice for the Present Time, Place, and Occasion.

I am now to Proceed in Course, to the Honor of the Correspondence, which the
Right Reverend Bishop of St. Asaph was Pleased to Vouchsafe me upon This
Subject; and in particular I Begged a Word from his Lordship to These Following
Queries.

[In what State he found Prance in Newgate, with Respect to his Owning, or
Denying the Murder? In what Condition of Health; and in what Manner he was
Chained and Fettered; and whether he did not Condition, upon his Discovery, to
be Eased of his Irons.]

His Lordship was pleased to return me an Answer to this Question, bearing
Date, April. 16. 1686. in the Words following.

It was late (as I remember) on a Friday, in the Afternoon (Jan. 10. 1678/9.)
when I was called before his Majesty in Council, and there Ordered to go to
Prance, Then in Newgate; and it was quite Dark before I got thither. When I
came to Captain Richardson with my Order, he brought me up into the Room where
Prance was. I never saw it before, or since, that I remember; nor saw it then,
but only by a small Candle Light. It was walled strong and close, with great
Pieces of Timber; And yet it was very Cold through the Extreme Hardness of the
Weather. Prance lay in the furthest Corner of the Room, from the Door, Wrapped up
in a Coverlet, or some such kind of Thing. ( Now This was the Flock-bed, and
Blanket before mentioned by Cooper.) When the Captain called him up, he seemed
to have very little Strength in him, but with much ado, he came to me at the
Chimney, where I think there was a little Fire; but I am not certain of this.
The Captain withdrew, and I said to him what I ought in Obedience to the Order
that was given me. He at first Denied his Privity to the Murder with which he
was Charged, and he Confessed Nothing of it at That Visit. But at last he
desired me to come again, and then he would tell me Every thing that he knew.

When I came the next Day in the Evening, (Jan. 11. 1678/9.) he was brought
down to the Hall Fire, where, for a good while, I spoke All that was said, and
he did not Answer a Word to me: perhaps he could not, for he seemed to be
Stupefied with Cold. By Degrees, he seemed to come to himself; and then
complained Extremely of Pains, one while in his Arms, Another while in his
Legs, Roaring with it, till the Natural Heat had prevailed. Then he seemed to
be a New Man, and spoke to me of his own Accord to This Purpose, [I remember
you were with me the last Night, and then I promised you I would tell you All
that I knew;] and then he began to open to me so freely, not only of the
Murder of Sir E. G. but of Designs against the Kings Life, by some Persons
whom he then mentioned (by the way, Vernatti was not mentioned at that Time)
that I began to be afraid of him, and warned him of so wicked a Thing, as the
Accusing of Innocent Persons, and thereby drawing the Guilt of Their Blood upon
his Head; but he protested very solemnly, he Had told me, and would tell me
nothing but the very Truth; So then I heard him out, till he said he had told
me All that he knew, or all that he could Think of. Then I caused him to repeat
it before Captain Richardson, and told him I would acquaint his Majesty with
it, which he Earnestly Desired me to do, for fear These Designs should take
Effect.

Then, and (as I think) not before, he desired he might be Eased of his Irons,
and that he might be Lodged in a Warmer Room. He also desired me to help him to
a Physician, complaining very much of the loss of his Health. I promised to
remember These Things, and so left him, and went Immediately to wait on his
Majesty with an Account of All that had passed, by whose Order I delivered the
Enformations in Writing that Night to Secretary Coventry; but first, (by his
Majesty's Order likewise) I sent Dr. Dickinson to him to be his Physician, from
whom you may have a better Account of his Health then I am able to give you.

For that which is suggested of a Chain laid across him, to keep him down upon
the Floor, I saw no such Thing, neither do I believe it, because I found him
wrapped up as I have said.]

Note; that this was the 10 th. of January, that Prance was found wrapped up in
This Coverlet: Cooper gave it him the same Night, as is said Already; and the
Captain had received an Order the Day before, for the Admittance of the Dean.
So that there was both Notice and Preparation for his Reception. Once more yet
in Another of Ian. 18.

For that Complaint of the Severity of his Usage in Prison, if there was no
other Cause then that which I saw, there was too much in That, as you will find
by the Account I have given you. But whether this Severity was a Fault of the
Jailer, or the Sheriffs, or whose else, I know not; I found him Lodged in That
which I take to be the Common Room for Guilty Felons and Murderers; (the
Condemned Hole) and such he had made himself by His Own Former Confession. He
lay there in Irons, which I suppose is the usual Accommodation of the Place. But
besides, he was very slenderly Provided against the Extreme Coldness of the
Weather; which alone, I did Believe would have killed him, if he had continued
there a few days. These Things I faithfully represented to his Majesty, and did
not Conceal them from any one that asked me of him at That Time.

I was then so much afraid that this Hardship to a White-Liver'd-Man, of No
Principles, might drive him into That Fit of Confession, that I made my Visits
to him the more sparingly. I think I went not once, but when I had a Command
for it, either by my Lord Clarendon, or one of the Secretaries.] But from the
Credit of the Story, to the Credit of the Man.

The Commission of Enquiry, to the Reverend Dean of Bangor, both from his
Majesty, and the Lords Committees, into This Business of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, gave his Present Lordship great Advantages of seeing further into This
Intrigue then another Man; and if they had left the Story to Common Fame,
without bringing in such Witnesses to make good the Imposture, as were
sufficient to Blast the Credit even of Truth it self; I see nothing to the
Contrary, but that it might have lived many a fair Day without Control. [I
never saw (says the Dean, April 16. 1686.) how Prance's Evidence could stand;
and I never went about to Support it.] As for Otes's, and Bedloe 's, and Prance
's Enformations, they would make me (says he) Renounce Any Thing that Depends
on their Credit.] His Lordship says again in Another of April 18.

[I believe, Prance can say nothing more then every one knows of the Murder of
Sir E. G. Yet he is best able to Confute his own Fictions concerning it, and
his Word may be of some Credit in This, though of None in any thing else.] And
a Little Lower Thus.

[It was his Majesty's Pleasure, (and That, as I remember) in Council, to
Employ me to Berry, the Queens Porter, who was then a Close Prisoner in Newgate
upon Prance's Enformation. Prance had made him one of them that at Eight, or
Nine of the Clock at Night went up with Sir E. G's Dead Body, as he said, into
a Chamber in the Stable-Yard at Somerset House. I Charged Berry with This. He
told me, Upon his Salvation 'twas False. But, says he, How could Prance Swear
to This, if it were True?] He gave such Reasons for what he said, that I went
to Prance with them immediately, and Endeavored to Convince him that it was a
False, or Rash Oath that he had taken. He would not Yield, nor Abate, but still
Persisted in it, and Affirmed, Upon his Salvation, that All This Part of his
Enformation was True. I could not certainly tell which of them had forsworn
himself, though I Suspected Prance much rather of the Two. But being now very
sick of my Employment, I went home to my House in Leicester-fields, where
Presently a Lady of Quality came in, and, having heard before that I was sent
to Berry in Newgate, she, out of Curiosity, Asked me what I had heard of Sir E.
G. I told her that I had heard That, which made my Hair stand an End: Meaning
of the Two Contradictory Oaths, as I should have Explained my self if I had
staid. But at That Instant I was called away to Whitehall; and the Good Lady
went away with the Belief that I had heard such Things from Berry of That
Murder; which being blown about the Town, it was expected I should have made
great Discoveries, while I, on the other Hand, Questioned all that had been
made. This enraged a Faction against me. They said that Berry had Confessed
most Horrible Things to me, as I Acknowledged, before I went to the Court; but
that There I was Charmed into Concealment. And Again in Another of May the 2d.
Following.

Prance's Enformation was such as made me much afraid of him; for I could not
satisfy my self, but that if Those things were True, of the Plots against the
King's Life, that he pretended to Discover, he must have Discovered them
sooner, while he was Second to Bedloe; though then I should not have been apt
to Believe him, for other Reasons. But now I was extremely Distrustful, and
therefore came as little near him as I could.

Having Proceeded thus far with all Simplicity, and Openness upon This Subject,
it will be now Matter of Respect to This Reverend Person, as well as Common
Justice to the Truth of the Story, to Touch upon some other Passages that
Naturally fall under Consideration; and may be found Liable to a Sinister
Construction, if I should be wholly Silent in the Point.

I took the Liberty to Crave (among other Things) his Lordships Favorable
Explanation of a Certain Expression, page 24. in his Funeral Sermon, upon Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey. The Words are These.

I was told it some Hours before the Discovery, that he was found with his own
Sword through his Body: Others could tell that he had Two Wounds about him.
These Things were found to be True some Hours after.] To the Enquiry above, His
Lordships Answer of April 16. 1686. was This.

It was Mr. Angus, now or lately Curat of St. Dunstans in the West, that told
me he heard Sir E. B. G. was found Dead with his own Sword thrust through his
Body. This he told me before Dinner, on the Thursday in which Sir E. B.
Godfrey's Body was found, in that manner, (as I heard it afterward in every
ones Mouth) about Two or Three of the Clock in the Afternoon.

When I heard of This before Dinner, I sent presently my Man Peter Fuller to
enquire in Sir E. Godfrey's Family, What they had heard of this News. My Man
brought me word that they had heard of no such Thing. Thereupon, Enquiring no
further, I went and Dined with some Friends in the City, and did not return
home till the Evening. Then, at my Return, I heard every one speak of the
finding of his Body at Primrose-Hill. Whereupon I sent again to his House, that
enquiry should be made after the Author's of Mr. Angus's Story. At that Time I
was wholly a Stranger to the Brothers of Sir E. B. G. But they told me
afterward, that they went to Mr. Angus, and took him with them to enquire
after the Authors: and that they had heard the News from Others, with this
Enlargement, that it was said that he was found Dead with Two Wounds.

Upon This I Discoursed with Mr. Angus, who gave me an Enformation of the
Matter by word of Mouth; and afterward delivered upon Oath as follows.

Adam Angus Deposes, That this Enformant dined at the Wool-sack in Ivy-Lane,
with one Mr. Oswald, a Minister, upon the Thursday, whereon the Body of Sir
Edmund-B. Godfrey was said to be found, about Five in the Afternoon, in a Ditch
upon Primrose-Hill: and that after Dinner, This Enformant went in Company with
the above said Mr. Oswald, to the Shop of Mr. Chiswell a Book seller in St.
Pauls-Church-yard. This Enformant stood for some time, Leaning over the
Counter, and reading some Printed Papers there; Mr. Oswald being in the Shop at
the same time, at a Distance from him. And when This Enformant had been about a
Quarter of an hour in the Shop, (about One of the Clock as he believes) a
Young Man, in a Grey-Colour'd Suit passing by, Clapped This Enformant on the
Shoulder, and This Enformant looking toward him, Do you hear the News? says
he; This Enformant asking him What News? He Answered, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey is
found. This Enformant asked him Where? The Other Answered, In Leicester-Fields,
at the Dead Wall, with his own Sword run through him. This Enformant
Discovering himself to be Surpised at the News, Mr. Oswald asked the Enformant
what the matter was? Who related it to him as above; And This Enformant does
not remember any further Discourse upon it.

This Enformant hereupon went Immediately to Dr. Burnet, having some Dependence
upon him at That Time, as an Ammanuensis to him in his History of the
Reformation, and Entrusted with the Care of the Press.

Upon This Enformants telling Dr. Burnet, what he had heard, as above, the said
Dr. desired This Enformant to take a Coach, and Ask Dr. Lloyd Enformant went
accordingly, and found that the Dr. knew Nothing of it. The Dr. Immediately
sending his Servant to enquire about it in Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Family, who
brought back word, that they had heard Nothing of the News: This Enformant
staying there about a Quarter of an Hour for the Boys Return.

This Enformant Presumes, that the Dr. had not as yet Dined, because both the
Dr. and his Lady earnestly desired This Enformant to stay and Dine.

And further; This Enformant neither did, nor does know, or so much as Guess at
the Name of the Person that told him the News; Nor does he remember, that ever
he saw the said Person, either before or since the Time abovementioned: But
This Enformant does Reasonably persuade himself, by the Manner of the Other
Persons speaking to him This Enformant, that He the said Person might have some
Knowledge of This Enformant.

And moreover, that This Enformant never heard any thing of the Murder, or the
Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, before he heard it, standing in Chiswells
Shop, as aforesaid.

Since the Enformation above, I have found out Mr. Oswald, who gives the
Following Account upon the Matter in Question.

John Oswald Deposes, That upon the Thursday, when the Body of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was said to be found, he Dined at the Woolsack in Ivy-Lane, with Mr.
Adam Angus, and that staying there together a pretty while after Dinner, they
went, about Two a Clock (as he Believes) to Mr. Chiswell's Shop in St.
Pauls-Churchyard; Mr. Angus being at that part of the Counter next the Street;
And This Enformant at a Distance; A Servant of the House being present in the
Shop. And that after some time spent there, the said Mr. Angus said to him with
some Wonder, that one passing by, said, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was found
Dead in Leicester-Fields with his own Sword run through him; but that He This
Enformant, neither Saw the Man, nor Heard any such Thing said; neither (as he
remembers) did the Servant of the House take any Notice of it 'till after he
was gone; Mr. Angus hereupon going his way.

Beyond All-Doubt, Mr. Angus Carried the First News of it to Dr. Lloyd, and the
Dr. Dined in the City That day; And if Mr. Oswald had not taken it to be an
Hour Later when This happened in Mr. Chiswell's Shop, then Mr. Angus did, I
should have thought that Mr. Angus himself had been an Hour too Late: for he
makes it past One of the Clock, Himself, when he went to Dr. Burnet in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields: And after That, he goes to Dr. Lloyd in Leicester-Fields,
(and before Dinner still) He stays there till Peter Fuller goes to
Harts-horn-Lane, and comes back again, and Time enough after all This yet, for
the Dr. to go into the City to Dinner. I was, I must Confess, a Little
Diffident at first, Considering No body else either Saw the Person, or Heard
the Words; Whether there might not be a Fetch in it, to put such a Story about;
'till the Fair Character I had of Mr. Angus, Resolved that seeming Incongruity
into a Mistake of the Time. But This should have been followed, they will say,
while Things were fresh, and People in the way. Now This Objection lies open to
several Answers. First it was Attempted, but to No Purpose, and Attempted by My
Self too; While People were yet Living, and the Report at the Hottest; and the
Story is This.

Mr. William Goldsborough the Younger was Under the Barbers hands, and while he
was a Trimming, comes a Person into the Shop, Open-mouthed, That Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was found. It was Asked where, and his Answer was, That he had killed
himself upon Primrose Hill. This was upon Tuesday Morning, while he was
missing; and upon Thursday following in the Evening, the Body was There found.
I talked with Mr. Goldsborough my Self about it, and asked him, if either He or
the Barber knew the Man? he said, No: But if he saw him again, he thought he
should know him from All the Men in the World. What? said I, did he come into
the Shop only to tell his Tale, and be Gone again? No, (says he) It may be he
was in haste to be Trimmed, and could not stay. I had the First Account of it
from his Mother; a Person of Sense, and of Value, and she told it, not without
Reflection and Admiration. This Mr. Goldsborough succeeding his Father to the
Clerks Place in the House of Commons, I went into Man's Coffee-house in the
Court of Requests, while the Parliament was Sitting, and Mr. Goldsborough in
his Place; and there I told Sir Thomas Player of This, with Several Other
Members in his Company; Desired them to Represent the Matter to the House, and
to get Mr. Goldsborough Examined about it; Propounding some not Unlikely Ways
of finding it out my self. I could not learn, after all my Diligence, and Zeal,
that any of them ever so much as mentioned This, afterward, either in the
House, or to the Clark: For what Reason, no Mortal can Imagine, unless that
some of 'em were afraid the Truth should be brought to Light. Sir Thomas
Player and Mr. Goldsborough are Dead since; but the Story is Published in an
Observator, Number. 123. Vol. 1. April 15. 1682.

Another Reason for Not Pressing This Matter too far so Early-Dayes, was the
Danger of an Honest Man's Attempting the Discovery of what the Cabal had a Mind
to Conceal; Witness the Riotous Affronts upon the Sacredness of Public
Justice, so often as any Witnesses appeared in favor of the Truth, and the
Prisoner. Nay, so far were Those Times from Suffering any Man that Generously,
and Conscienciously stood up as an Advocate for Oppressed Innocence, that
Coral the Coachman, Bromwell, Walters, and several Others, were Almost
Murdered, because they would not be Murderers, and because they would not
Forswear Themselves to take away the Lives of Honest Men. To say Nothing of
Those that Suffered Death Outright upon That Score.

CHAP. X.
Why This History was not Published sooner. Their Ways of Suppressing the
Truth; as in the Case of Bromwell, Walters, Gibbon, Coral, etc. and of
Encouraging False Witnesses.

THE whole Intrigue of This Murder being an Imposture; and the Pretended
Conspiracy that was wrapped up in it, a mere Fiction, there could be No thought of
Supporting One Cheat, but by Another: And the Credit of it was not to be
Bolster'd up but by a Sham-Evidence. This was the Reason of the Thing, and
These Two Ends were the Two Main Points: wherein they Governed Themselves by a
certain General Rule, of making it as Dangerous, as Detrimental, as Scandalous,
Fruitless, and Inconvenient, on the One side, to Detect, or to Invalidate a
Forgery, as the Contrary, on the Other hand, to Assert, Swear-it-up, and
Maintain it. This was the Policy and the Practice of Those Times, when Knights
of the Post were Christened Kings Evidences; and Men* of Honor stigmatized for
Conspirators. This was the Case; and People will be apt to say perhaps, that it
was a Sad Story too; but the Murder of Godfrey, they Cry, was a Question of
Another Season, Why comes it out so Late? or Rather, What Need on it at All? I
have Answered the Former in the Close of the Last Chapter. The People were not
in Tune at That Time for the Impartial Truth of Things, and a Man might as well
have talked Reason to a Tempest, as to the Multitude. In short, Nothing more
Familiar, then Instances of Men that were Ruined, for but Discovering Barely a
Good Will to the Good Office. In fine, This is not an Age for Devotees; and the
Humor of Men's Sacrificing themselves for the Good of their Country, is worn
mightily out of Fashion: So that there is No Great Wonder in it, if People were
Wary of Meddling, when they were only to be Undone for their Pains. But This was
not a Thing to be expected, so long as the Kingdom lay Trembling and Groaning
under the Awe and Tyranny of the Plot-Faction; and therefore it was but
Reasonable to Wait, till Honest Men might come once again to have a Clear
Stage, and Fair Judges.

As to the Second Objection, of the Season being Past, and Consequently the
Use, and Service of such an Enformation, I have This to say for my self, that
if the Sacredness of Truth be at All Times, and upon All Occasions, within the
Compass of Discretion, and Good Manners, to be Preserved: Nay, to carry it yet
Higher and Higher; If the Setting of all Christendom right, upon a Subject
wherein they have been abused by Thousands of False and Scandalous Papers and
Reports, to the Dishonor of the King, the Royal Family, This Imperial
Government, and the English Nation: If the doing of All This, I say, be a Thing
Necessary to be done (to the Highest Degree of a Moral Necessity) I can then
Justify my self to be at This Instant, in the Exercise of a Needful, as well
as a Warrantable Duty.

But now the Objection of [ Why so Late?] seems to look Two Ways: First, for
Instance, as who should say, It Is Pity 'twas done no sooner; Implying a Thing
fit to be done: And this same, [Why so late,] Another way Taken, may Import
quite Another Meaning, as who should say again, [ He durst not meddle with it
while People were Living and Matters fresh in their Memories;] Now this
Suggestion is so far from Reflecting a Prejudice upon the Testimony of the
Kings Witnesses, or the Reputation of That Cause: so far, I say, from a
Disadvantage on That side, and an Advantage, on the Other; that I shall Allow
the Testimony of the Kings Witnesses to be of the same force Now, that it was
Before, and pay the same Deference to the Proofs of the Dead Witnesses, on That
side, that I do to the Living. So that Their Cause is just in the same State
Now that it was Before: Whereas the Delay, on the Other Hand, has made it
Infinitely Harder to Detect the Sham at This Distance, then it was so long ago.
For there are I know not how many Stabbing Witnesses Dead since (who Durst not
open their Mouths when the Prosecution was afoot) that would have Spoken to the
Practices of Prance, and Bedloe; the Discoveries they made in their Froliques,
The Privacies of That Interval, betwixt Sir Edmunds Departure from his House,
and the finding of his Body: And All These are Lost Now to My Purpose, Any
further then as to the Hearsay, of what they spoke upon Knowledge. And yet in
Despite of Calumny, Oblivion, nay of Death it Self, the Light of the
Noon-Day-Sun shall not be more Universally Acknowledged by All Men that have
Eyes in their Heads, then the Clearness of the Matter here in Question, to All
Those that are not Sworn Enemies to Plain-Dealing, and Common Sense: I shall
only give some few Instances when I come to That Topique, out of a great Many,
and lay No more stress upon them, then in Equity the Presumption will bear.

To come Now to the Methods that were Used for the Frighting, the Baffling, or
the Suppressing of Fair Witnesses, and for the Suborning, the Engaging, the
Protecting, and Countenancing of Profligate Mercenaries that will swear any
Thing; This Practice, in the First place, Answers the Question [Why so Late;]
And it comes Next to be Considered, What it was, How it was Managed, and what
Effects it Produced.

There is but Soul, Body, Reputation, Life, Limb, Liberty, and Estate, the
Comfort of Friends, Relations, and Humane Society, that a Man has to Consider
in This World; and every Man as he Likes, when he comes to the Touch, upon This
Point.

[Here was the Body of a Magistrate found Dead in a Ditch, in such Manner and
with such Circumstances, as has been said Over and Over already: Now it was
Highly Expedient, at That Time, to make a Popish Assassination of it, and so to
Close-Draw it into the same Piece with the Popish Plot. During the Innocence of
the First Heat, there was a Warm Application made to his Late Majesty, for the
Promise of a Reward, upon the Discovery, to the Discoverers of it. There was
(as it happened) the Snare of a Dilemma upon the King. Covered Under This
Proposition; A Refusal would have been Interpreted a Popish Inclination, in
favor of the Plot, and had Infallibly been made use of as a Mighty
Stumbling Block: In Case of Yielding, it was Constructively, but so much Money
offered to any Man, that Right or Wrong would swear Himself into a Discovery.
But there was However a Proclamation Emitted, a Reward of Five Hundred Pound
Promised, and William Bedloe (or Beddoe) was the First that Leapt at the Bait.
The Wheel was now in Motion; Here Is a second Witness to the Plot, and a single
Evidence to the Murder. But the Plot, by Good Manage, was so Artificially
Linked to the Murder, that Both Works were put in a Way to go-on Together. In
one Word, they were to make their Market, among an Abandoned sort of People,
that had Neither Honor, nor Conscience: and the Profligate, and the Fearful,
were the Men for their Turns, so many as would be wrought upon by Money,
Liberty, Protection, Indemnity, or Popular Applause, to act against All
Principles of Faith, Truth and Conscience, were Instruments for their Purpose:
And This was it which they called the Providence of Raising so many Witnesses
out of Dungeons, and Alms-Baskets, for the Preservation of our Sovereign, and
our Religion: And at the same Time, there were Catch-Poles, Pursevants, Iayles,
Pillories, and Gibbits at hand, for the doing of any Man's Business that
opposed These Violences, either by Word, or Deed; and Preserved a good
Conscience, to the Contempt of All Bodily, or Worldly Interests. This was the
General Course, and Biass of their Proceedings; and I think a Man may safely
say This of them, They were so Merciful in their Wrath, so Placable, or in
other words, they had so much Wit in their Anger, as in a Political
Construction to make Every Man whose Life they took away, a kind of Felo de se,
by Choosing rather to Dye Innocent, then to Live Guilty; and to run All Honest
Hazards, Themselves, rather then to accuse others, Wrongfully: But the
Particular Master-stroke was This. The Guilty accused the Innocent, and they
were Immediately Taken-up upon it; and in This Condition, there was but Two
Oaths, and Those Two Oaths Concerted in Two Minutes, betwixt Any Man's Neck,
and the Gallows. Now in This Pinch, the Prisoner had no other Choice before
him, then either by a False Oath to Hang Other People; or by a True one to Hang
Himself. This has been the Case of Many and Many an Innocent Person, since the
Broaching of Otes's Pretended Discovery; and it has been a Wonderful Mercy,
that More have not shrunk under the Temptation. But as to the
Voluntier-Witnesses now, they were such a Parcel of Dissolute Miscreants in the
Whole Habit of their Lives, that their Souls were scarce Blacker, After the
Perjury then they were Before.

We have been here speaking of their Practices upon such as have been formally
Accused, Articled, and Impeached, etc. [And Then says Bedloe of Prance, when I
went into the House of Lords, I made out My Charge against him. Green's Trial,
pa. 34.] But now there were Another sort of People too, that, as a Man may say,
fell into the Toil by Chance; and This in Twenty Several Cases: But I am here
upon the Business of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and I Will keep to My Subject.

The Two Persons that Found the Stick, and the Gloves, that gave the First
Light to the Discovery, of the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, did their Duties
Honestly, and Discreetly, upon That occasion, as Will appear by the
Enformations here following: and we shall see the Thanks they had for their
Pains: Over and above a very Good Reason Why This was not done While Matters
were Fresh.

William Brumwell Deposes, That This Enformant, together with one John
Walters Passing by Primrose Hill toward the White House, about Three or Four in
the Afternoon of That Thursday, when the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
found; saw a Cane and a Pair of Gloves, lying within a Thicket, upon a Green
Bank near the Ditch, This Enformant and the said VValters went forward to the
White-house: Where, as they were Drinking together, speaking of the said
Gloves, and Stick: and likewise of a Belt lying with them, (as This Enformant
remembers) It was Proposed, and Agreed, to go down to the Place to see whether
they were there still: And being come Thither, the Master of the White-house
stooping to take them up, started back on the sudden, saying, [Lord Bless us!
There Is a Man Murther'd] This Enformant, and the Company, after a very Little
stay, and without Touching the Body, or Meddling with the Gloves, and Stick,
that lay by, went away presently to Mr. Brown, who was then Constable; And upon
This Enformants, and the Others Description of the Person to Mr. Brown, he said
to This Effect; I wish it be not Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

And that in the way from Primrose Hill, to Mr. Browns, This Enformant with his
Company, Met one Jennings, a Cow-keeper, at Cony-bury Hall, And told him, that
they had found a Man Dead in such a Place, Naming the Place, and Considering
what was best to do in it: The said Jennings replying, You had best let it
Alone, and take No further Notice for fear You should come into Trouble about
it.] Rawson Rebuking the said Jennings for Talking at that Rate, and so they
Parted from the said Jennings.

And says Likewise, that about the Latter end of October. 1678. This Enformant
and John VValters abovesaid, were Taken up, and brought before the Lords
Committees at VVallingford-house, the Earl of Shaftsbury being in the Chair,
where they were Examined, and this Enformant severely Threatened by the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and Committed to Newgate. And about Ten days after; This Enformant
was sent for again, Where the Lord Shaftsbury Declared, That This Enformant was
set on by some Great Roman Catholic to find out the Body of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey; And if any Man ever was Hanged, He should be Hanged if he did not
Discover it.

And further, that after These Menaces of the Lord Shaftsbury, Major W -- took
This Enformant into a By-Place, and there asked This Enformant Why he would not
Discover Who set him on, for he should have 500 l. Reward, His Life Secured,
etc.] Still Pressing This Enformant as aforesaid: This Enformant telling him,
that he had spoke What he Knew already, and that He Could say no More, nor
Would he Accuse any Man Falsely.

And Moreover, That This Enformant was kept about Nine-Weeks a Prisoner in
Newgate, without suffering Any body to come to him, saving only that This
Enformant's Wife had an Order from the Duke of Buckingham, Twice, to Visit him.

John Walters Deposes, that He This Enformant Walking with William Bromwell
toward the White-house, upon the Day when Justice Godfrey's Body was found, saw
a Cane and a Pair of Gloves, upon a Bank near Primrose Hill, about Three or
Four in the Afternoon: And as they were Drinking afterward at the White-house,
speaking of the said Gloves, and Stick, they went down to the Place to see if
they were there still, the Master of the House going along with them, who being
come to the place, and stooping to take up the Gloves, started back, and Cried,
Lord Bless us! There Is a Man Murdered: This Enformant and Company made very
Little stay after This, but left things as they found them, and went away to
see for a Constable, and were Directed to one Mr. Brown, Who upon Describing
the Body, said to This Effect, I VVish it be not Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

And that as they were upon the Way to get a Constable, they met One Jennings,
and told him of a Body they had found in such a Place; Naming the Place; Whose
answer was, I take You for Neighbors and Friends, I do 'een advise you to say
Nothing on it, but let some body else find it out, for you may bring your selves
into a Great Deal of Trouble: This Enformant and the Company Blaming Jennings
for Talking so; And then they Parted.

And says, that about the Latter end of October, 1678. This Enformant was
Taken up by One that belonged to the Duke of Buckingham, (as he told This
Enformant) and Carried to the Lords Committees at VVallingford-house, the Day
that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Body was Buried: The Late Earl of Shaftsbury
being in the Chair; and Titus Otes appointed to See if he Knew This Enformant;
The said Earl Threatening This Enformant very severely; and This Enformant was
Committed thereupon to the Gate House, where he was Fettered, and Hand-Cuff'd,
and kept in the Dungeon for Three Days, and Three Nights.

That about Eight or Ten Days after his Commitment, This Enformant was sent for
again to the Lords Committees, when the said Lord Saftsbury took This Enformant
aside into a By-Closet, speaking to him to This Effect, [Honest Smug the Smith,
Thou look like an Honest Fellow, Thou shall shoe my Horses, and I Will make a
Man of thee: saying further, Tell me who Murdered This Man, and who set thee
to find him out? What Papists do thou Work for? And so the said Earl went
on, Pressing This Enformant to the same Effect, This Enformant making Answer,
My Lord, If I knew Your self had Murdered him, I would Discover it, though I
Died for it, This Enformant telling the said Earl, as well as he Could remember
for what Customers he Wrought; After which, This Enformant was Delivered up to
the Keeper, but presently called back, and Discharged.

For a Word of Introduction to what now follows, Mrs. Mary Gibbon, the Wife
of Captain Thomas Gibbon was related to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and No Creature
more his Confident then This Lady was, as will be further seen hereafter: But
at Present, I have only to observe, that when This Matter was at the Hottest
before the Lords Committees, This Mr. Gibbon Delivered a Paper (the Contents
whereof she has since Attested upon Oath) to a Person of Quality, Sir I. B.
who delivered the Paper to the Earl of Shaftsbury; And upon This Paper Mrs.
Gibbon was sent for to Attend the Committee, where (to speak the Words of the
Enformation.)

The Lord Shaftsbury called to her, saying, You Damned Woman, what Devilish
Paper is This you have given us in? Putting her upon her Oath to Declare who
Wrote it; calling her Bitch, and other Vile Names, and Threatening her, That if
she would not Confess, that Sir John Banks, Mr. Pepys, and Monsieur de Puy set
her on to write that Paper, she should he Torn to Pieces by the Multitude;
Threatening her to have her Worried as the Dogs Worry Cats, insomuch that she
fell into Fits upon it, and thought she should never have got home. Note, that
the Enformation above spoken of, was Delivered to Sir Leoline Ienkins several
Years before ever I had the Knowledge of her Person; and that she Delivered me
a Copy of the said Enformation, with This following Postscript at the Bottom of
it.

I Mary Gibbon am Indisposed in Health; but whether I Live, or Dye, in the
Presence of God, and his Holy Angels, I do make Oath, that this is every
Syllable True; And I have left the same, and made Oath of it to a Worthy
Gentleman, a Secretary of State very Lately; and if I Live till it is
Questioned, I will Witness it. There remains yet a very remarkable Instance of
the Faith and Generosity of a Poor Hackney Coachman; his Name Francis Corral;
And if I could Contribute as ^uch to the making of his Fortunt, as I may to the
Advantage of his Name, and Reputation, it should be the first Thing I would do;
for they wanted but a Second Evidence against the Lords in the Tower; and Forty
other Persons of Eminent Quality, that were laid up in Lavender, to be in
readiness for the Providence of a Further Discovery; and if this Poor Fellow
had but Yielded, Bedloe's Coach would have done the Iobb of carrying Sir Edmund
to Primrose-Hill, every Jot as well as Prance's way of Horsing him Thither: And
so for Brumwell and Walters too: Either of them would have served, some Way or
Another, to the same Purpose. This Business of Corrall is a Barbarous Story;
but I Will be as easy in the Telling of it, as is Possible, with a Respect, both
to Decency, and to Common Justice. The Truth of it is, The Severity of his
Imprisonment could not well Exceed the very Direction of the Orders that the
Keeper had for the Mortifying of him; and Corrall Himself does likewise Charge
many Cruelties upon the Under Keepers, which he cannot say the Master was Privy
to. But be it as it will, we shall here Deliver Corrall's Enformation, for so
much as concerns the matter before us, in his own Words: Giving only to
understand by the way, that he was taken into Custody some a Fortnight or
thereabouts, after the Body was found, upon an Officious Enformation of Some
Words he had spoken concerning the Carrying of it to Primrose-Hill: Whereupon
he was had to Newgate, and next Day to Wallingford-House, where he was Sworn,
and Examined; of which Examination he gives This Account.

Francis Corral Deposes, That The Lord Shaftsbury, with others, asked this
Enformant if he carried Sir Edmundbury Godfrey to Primrose-Hill in his Coach,
or knew who Carried him? To which, This Enformant Answered, That he did Not,
and that he Knew not who did. The Lord Shaftsbury said to this Enformant, That
if he would swear the Truth, he should have Five Hundred Pound: The said Lord
Shaftsbury laying down some Money upon the Table, saying, that this Enformant
should have a Room near the Court, if he was afraid of any Body that set him
to Work, and should Command a File of Musketeers, at any time when he had
Occasion to go abroad, to Guard him, for fear any of Those that employed him,
should do him any Mischief. This Enformant asked him, my Lord, Who should those
be? No body set me at Work; Nor do I know for what I am brought hither. To
which the Lord Shaftsbury replied, We are the Peers of the Land; and if thou will not Confess, there shall be a Barrel of Nails provided for thee, to put
thee in, and roll thee down a Hill. The Enformant made Answer, What would you
have me to say, my Lord? I know nothing of the matter, would you have me to
accuse other People, to bring them into the same Condition I now am? The Lord
Shaftsbury Answering, Then thou shall Dye. Whereupon a Mittimus was Drawn, and
this Enformant carried back and Committed to Newgate.

This Enformant was laid in Huge Heavy Irons, and thrust into the Dungeon;
where, after he had continued about three or four Hours, he was Taken out
again, by Lion, one of the Keepers, who likewise was the Man that put this
Enformant into the Dungeon. And this Enformant was so faint with the Closeness
and Nastiness of the Place, that he swounded away, and that they were fain to
give him Brandy to keep Life in him.

This Enformant Recollecteth, that before his coming from Wallingford House,
the Lord Shaftsbury said to This effect, The Papists have Hired him, and he
will not Confess.

He was now remanded to Prison, and about Three in the Afternoon, they had him
to a House in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, where the Lord Shaftsbury Examined him again.

Saying to this Enformant, Now you Rogue; Here Is one that will Justify he saw
you (speaking of one that stood there to bear Witness;) The Lord Shaftsbury
saying to the said Person, Did not you see him Whip his Horses, and go down by
Tottenham-Court? The Man saying, Yes my Lord? [Sirrah, (said the Lord
Shaftsbury to This Enformant) What Is the Reason that you will not confess, but
put us to All this Trouble? This Enformant speaking hastily, said, What would
you have me confess, my Lord? I know no more than your Lordship does, and it
may be, not so much: Then said the Lord Shaftsbury, If thou will not Confess,
Richardson, take him away, and let him be starved to Death; which made this
Enformant to weep: Whereupon the Lord Shaftsbury replied, Ah Rogue! There Is
never a Tear comes down; This Enformant with Imprecations telling my Lord, that
he knew no more than the Child that was unborn: That Is a Popish Word (says my
Lord Shaftsbury) He has consulted with the Papists, and will not Confess;
bidding Richardson take him away, and punish him s^verely. This was Thursday;
and this Enformant was kept in Great Irons in the Condemned Hole, till Sunday
Noon, without any thing to Eat or Drink, which put This Enformant into so great
Despair, that if his Knife had not dropped out of his Hand, he had Killed
Himself. On Monday Morning this Enformant was led into the House of Lords,
where one of the Lords bad Richardson bring this Enformant into the Committee,
where this Enformant saw the same Lords as before; and the Lord Shaftsbury
spoke after This Manner to this Enformant. [Come (says he) thou look like an
honest Fellow, tell us the Truth, and thou shall have the same Reward that was
promised thee at Wallingford-House; and then thou shall go presently home to
thy Wife and Children, and we will secure thee from any Harm: What do thou
say to us all? Now speak. Then This Enformant fell down upon his Knees, and
said, I know nothing of it, and before I wrong any Man, I will Dye Immediately.
The Lord Shaftsbury replying, Thou art such a Peremptory Rogue, thou shall go
back to Newgate, and lie and Rot there a while. And then thou shall be brought
to be tried at the Sessions, and then there will come enough against thee, and
thou shall be Hanged. Had thou not better Confess the Truth, and have that
Money, then be brought before the Bar of the Judges, and be condemned to be
Hanged? It will be a Dreadful Hearing for Thee. [Yes, my Lord, (said this
Enformant) I know it will be a Dreadful Hearing: But, my Lord, It will be a
more Dreadful Hearing for me, at the Lord's Bar, if I should wrongfully accuse
any Man; it will be a more Dreadful Hearing, when it shall be said, Take him
away Devil, for he has falsely Accused those he knew no hurt by. Whereupon the
Lord Shaftsbury said, I see we can do no good with him; take him away, and let
him lie there and Rot. This Enformant Pleading that he had a Wife, and
Children; the Lord Shaftsbury Answered, Let his Wife and Children starve. This
Enformant lay in the Condemned Hole with Heavy Irons, Six Weeks and Three Days;
and afterward, Seven Weeks on the Common Side upon Bords, without Irons.

This Enformant says also, that He Complaining at a Time uncertain, of his Ill
Usage, one Richard, and one that was commonly called John-Come-Last, said, that
their Master had Power from my Lord Shaftsbury, and the Committee, to torment
this Enformant, if he would not Confess. This Enformant says likewise, that a
Tall Man in a Ministers Habit, was with him in the Condemned Hole, Pressing him
to Confess; and Pressing him, This Enformant several times to Confess, after
that he had Imprecated himself that he knew Nothing of the matter.

And says, That this Enformant, as he was reading the 20th. Chapter of the
Revelation aloud in the Hole, He this Enformant heard of a sudden, the rattling
of Chains, and Roaring like that of a Bear, Believing it to be an Evil Spirit,
and that the Door had been Open: In this Fright, This Enformant let his Candle
fall, and in the Dark he was more afraid, the Noise continuing near a Quarter
of an Hour: This Enformat had been now about a Fortnight in the Hole; and
afterward, telling one Harris and some others of the Keepers, how this
Enformant was Terrified, They made him Answer, If you do not Confess, the Devil
will have you.

There are so many Instances of this Kind, that the Proceedings at length,
would make rather the History of a Persecution, then the Narrative of a
Conspiracy: But in one Word, He had Two Great Holes worn in his right Leg; One
in his left: He was Eight Weeks after his Discharge, before he was able to
Drive a Coach again. He got Salve for These Wounds at Sir Thomas Witherley's;
and likewise of Mr. Knolles the Surgeon. He is able to produce Forty Witnesses
that saw These Wounds: But it must not be omitted, that his Misery gave the
Earl of Clarendon a great Tenderness for him, insomuch, that he Viewed his
Ulcers himself, took Compassion of the Man, and gave him Money.

There are Two Objections that I expect will be made to This Account of the
Hard Usage both of Prance and Corrall. The Former, while he was under the Power
of the Lying Spirit; and went on without either Fear, or Wit; was brought a
Witness at Mrs. Celier's Trial, where his Evidence in the Colloquy, or Context,
was as follows.

Mr. Bar. Weston. Mr. Prance; Pray were you ever Tortured in Prison?


[Mr. Prance.] No, I never saw any such Thing there in my Life.


Mr. Bar. Weston. How were you used?


Mr. Prance. Very well, I had every thing that was fitting; Captain Richardson
did take great Care of me, etc. And a little after.


Mr. Prance (again) Dr. Lloyd was with me many times for half an hour together,
and if any such thing had been, he would have seen it, Celiers Trial, p. 25.


Now This was a Cast of Mr. Prances Civility and Good Nature; but he was
Mightily Overseen to Appeal to Dr. Lloyd in it; who found him Roaring under his
Pains, and Almost Killed with the Misery of his Condition; but all this while,
the Keeper had his Orders how to use him.

Corrall was Also to be made use of, for the same Iobb; but This shall Suffice,
(Unless I shall be Absolutely Forced to say more on it) that the Marks he
Carries to This Day, are Ten Thousand Witnesses of the Hardship he Endured.

But in the End, when Prance came to stand to it, that the Body was Carried a
Horseback, Corrall, upon very Good Security, was Discharged for not Carrying
him in his Coach.

This was their Way of Compassing Witnesses, where People were not Wicked
Enough to go to the Devil of their own Accord: And the same Method went
thorough the Whole Tract of their Proceedings in All such Cases, and with all
Persons therein Concerned. The Choice was short, Either Stand out and be
Hanged, or Confess and be Damned. But to take up where we left.

We brought Prance to his New Lodgings on the 11 th. and there we find him,
with Mr. Boyce at his Bedside, on the 12 th. of January, 1678. According to his
own Relation, and upon the Preparatory for the Trial of the Persons whom he had
Accused. He had, even at That Time, some Grudgings of Another Relapse,
Exclayming sometimes by Fits, that he had Sworn False; and that he was Utterly
Ruined: But being still Plied with the Memory of what he had Confessed
Already, and the Hammering of it into his Head, that he would be Hanged if he
went off: And that if either Green, Berry, or Hill, should come to Confess
Before him, he was a Lost Man beyond Recovery: His Heart would not serve him to
go thorough with his Resolution; He had several Messages from Bedloe about the
Periwig; and that if he did not Own the Periwig, the Three Men would not Dye:
He was seldom without an Ammanuensis, or a Dictator rather, in the Chamber with
him. And the way was This: He was asked what Papists he knew; where they Lived;
and what he could say of them; and so the Most was made of Those Minutes, 'till
they came to be Improved into Narratives. He is positive, that the Nights he
lay abroad in, were within the First Week of October: And he finally Avers,
That if it had not been for the Dread of Death, and Misery, that was with so
much Restless Importunity Pressed upon him; And the Flattering Promises of the
Great Advantage it would be to him, to Persist in his Evidence of the Murder,
he verily Believes, he should rather have Died, then have Hazarded his
Damnation by Another Perjury.

And it was not All yet Neither, that the Scum of the Rabble passed Muster for
Competent Witnesses against Men of Honor, in Matters of State; That the most
Abandoned Miscreants, even of that Scum, were Allowed to give Evidence as Men
of Probity; that Every Thing was Screwed in favor of the Guilty, and to the
Destruction of the Innocent, That the Prisoners and their Witnesses, were
rather brought to the Stake, then to a Trial, and Put, by the Violences of the
Rout into an Incapacity, of Defending, either Themselves or their Friends, etc.
This was not All, I say, without making a False Witness of the very Press too.
Is it so upon your Salvation? (Says the Late King to Prance, speaking of the
Evidence against Green, Berry, and Hill,) Upon my Salvation, (says Prance) It
is All False: Now This Passage was given in Evidence by Mr. Chiffinch at
Green's Trial, and Left-out in the Print. Did not Mr. Langhorn, upon his Trial,
Move the Court, that some of the Jury might be sent to the Temple upon a View
of his Study, and Chamber? and offer to put his Life upon That Issue, if they
should find it but so much as Possible for Bedloes Oath to be True; in
Swearing, that out of the Chamber, he saw Langhorn taking Duplicates of Letters
in his Study? Now there is Nothing of This Neither in the Printed Trial. The
Trial of Not. Thompson, etc. is Printed Double; One by Simmons, and the Other
by Mason. In Masons Trial, Fisher that helped to Strip the Body, gives This
Evidence; We could not Bend his Arms, when we came to his Shirt, So we Tore it
Open, fol. 6. Now This Stiffness of his Arms would hardly Agree with the
Condition of a Dead Body to be put into a Chair: So that in Simmon's Trial,
fol. 22. they have very Discreetly told the Rest of the Story without That
Circumstance.

But to come now to a Conclusion, as to the Matter of Writing This History No
Sooner; What should any Man put Pen to Paper for, in an Age, when there was No
place, No Security for Truth, No Refuge for Innocence; and No Protection for
Common Justice? The Noise of the People was Called the Voice of the People, and
Popular Tumults passed for the Wisdom of the Nation; when Impostors were
Consulted as Oracles; and when All sorts of Men were Practiced, and wrought
upon, by All Sorts of Means, to Blind their Understandings, or to Corrupt their
Morals: There was Money for the Covetous; Preferment for the Ambitious; The
Impunity of an Unaccountable License, for Malice, or Revenge. In Short, Cases
in Those Days were Carried by Huzzahs instead of Votes; and Bear-Garden-Law was
All many an Honest Man had to Trust to for the Liberty of the Subject.

CHAP. XI.
Notes upon Bedloes and Prances Evidence, Compared One with Another.

WE are now Entering upon a Subject to Confound a Man, as well where to Begin,
as where to End; and there is No Accommodating the Matter, but by Covering the
Depositions on Both Sides with One Great Plot.

Here Is a Horrible Outcry of a Barbarous Murder; A Popish Murder, A
Plot-Murther; The Murder of a Magistrate; The Murder of a Protestant
Magistrate; and in fine; The Murder of a Magistrate, in Revenge, for his
Endeavoring to Prevent the Murdering of a King, the Burning of his Towns, and
the Massacring of his People. Here Is the Scale of the Case, and who but Bedloe,
and Prance, the Devotes upon This Occasion, for the Saving of their Prince and
Country! The Noise of This Murder, and the Fame of the Discoverers, has filled
All Mouths and Places Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil; Churches, and Pulpits
have been Dedicated to their Honor: And if Altars had not been Popish, and if
the same Whimsey had gone on Still, we might have come in Time, to a St. Titus,
a St. William, a St. Miles: Nay, and a St. Eustace Comins too, Orate pro nobis:
But for Temporal Preferments however, there was Care taken, that they should
not want either Mediations or Effects. We have Spoken Already of the Two
Supporters of This Quarter-Part of the Plot, and respectively of their
Depositions, apart; but we are now going to see how they look upon One Another,
Together; And whether 'twas the Spirit of Revelation that Guided the Kings
Witnesses, or the Spirit of Delusion that wrought upon the Believers of them:
That is to say, upon Those Believers of them, that had the Whole Cause under
Their Eye, and Command; and, Duly Considered the Proportion of the several
Parts, and Coherence of the Intrigue.

It seems a Wonderful Thing, that Bedloe and Prance that were Two of the Main
Wheels of This Motion, should hold No Communication at all One with Another.
Prance does not so much as Mention Bedloe; nor Bedloe Prance; either before the
Lords, or upon the Trials, ( Previously, that is, to the Murder) save only
Once; and That by Implication too; When the very Name of Prance was Thrown into
Bedloes Mouth by a Leading Question. Trial, fol. 33. And it was not the Two
Witnesses only that were Strangers to One Another; but the Principal Agitators
Themselves, were Few of them Acquainted. The Instruments, Several, and they
took Several Walks too, at the same Time for the doing of the same Business,
and without holding any visible Correspondence: As if Diverse Men had Stumbled,
or rather Pitched by Impulse, upon the same Thoughts without Knowing One
Another Minds.

Bedloe Swears before the Lords, that he Knows that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
Murdered in Somerset House, on the Saturday, by Walsh, Le Phaire, Two Laymen;
a Gentleman that Waits on my Lord Bellassis, and an Under-waiter in the Queens
Chapel. He Swears, that he Knows what afterward he Delivers but upon
Hearsay. Now Prance tells us upon the Trial, that He Himself, Green, Berry,
Hill, and Gerald, were the Five Murderers, fol. 18. without so much as One
Word of Bedloes Confederates. Prance was Enticed in (he says) by Gerald and
Kelley, fol. 14. But it was Le Phaire, Pritchard, Keines, and several Other
Priests that Treated with Bedloe about the Murder, Trial, fol. 28. And then
Upon the Lords Journal, Nov. 12. 1678. He Speaks as if it were only Le Phaire,
and Walsh, that offered him 4000 l. to Help forward with it. But it was Gerald,
and Vernatti that spoke of a Great Reward to Prance; Trial, fol. 22. Prance
says, that it was He Himself, Green, Hill, Gerald, and Kelley, that put the
Body into the Sedan, and Helped it away out of the House [All set our Hands
to it,] he says, Trial, fo. 19, 20. But Bedloe, before the Lords, says that Le
Phaire, Walsh, the Lord Bellassis Gentleman, Atkins, and one that belonged to
the Queens Chapel, were the Persons that were to go with it. The Whole Story,
in Fine, is made up of Ill-Contriv'd, and Incredible Disagreements, and
Point-Blank-Contradictions. And they are at the same Variance One with the
Other in the Walks they took, and in the Conduct, and Manage of the Whole
Design.

Bedloe in his Depositions before the Lords, Leads us a Dance to Le Phaire in
Grays-Inn-VValks; to Le Phaire again by Accident, in Fleet Street, going into
Red-Lyon-Court, and to An Appointment at the Palsgraves-Head-Tavern; Thence to
the Cloister in Somerset-House-Court. He tells us a Story then of
Clarendon-House, Lincolns-Inn-Fields, the Greyhound-Tavern, the Kings-Head-Inn
in the Strand, etc. Now Prance, on the Other Hand, lays his Scene at
Somerset House VVater-Gate; Talks of the VVicket; The Bench by the Rayles, and
the Stables; Dr. Godden 's Lodgings; A Little Closet or Square Room; The
Grecian Church, and So-ho; And saving that Somerset House was to be the Place
of Action; There Is No sort of Intelligence betwixt One Passage and Another. Now
when Prance comes to his Evidence upon the Trials, the Plow-Alehouse strikes a
Great Stroke; Red-Lyon-Fields; And then for a Supplement, comes Sir John
Arundel's Lodgings, Covent Garden, Long Acre, the Queens-Head at Bow, etc. and
not one Word in Bedloe of any of These Jaunts: So that they Squared now as
Little about the Places, as they did before about the Instruments; Sir Edmund
was to be Dogged however; And we shall find as much Difference about the Time,
the Manner of it, and the Particular Persons that were upon the Heel of him, as
about any thing else.

Bedloe before the Lords, says nothing more of Dogging him, then that Le
Phaire, Walsh, and my Lord Bellassi 's Gentleman met him by the King's Head in
the Strand, Crossing the Street about Five Afternoon; and so by a very Pitiful
Wile Trepanned him into Somerset-House-Court, and there did his Business. He
says indeed upon the Trials, that he was sent to Insinuate Himself into Sir
Edmund 's Acquaintance, page 29. but still not one Word of This before the
Lords. He says further, that he had been Six or Seven Days together with him at
his House, upon Pretense of getting Warrants for the Good Behavior, against
Persons that there were None such: Wherein he must Manifestly ^orswear Himself,
whether he did so, or Not; for Godfrey was not a Man to Grant any such
Warrants, but upon Oath. He says further, That he was with Five Jesuits at the
Greyhound Tavern, on the Friday, and sent his Boy to see if Sir Edmund were at
Home. Ib.] But not a Syllable of This neither in his other Depositions.: And
then to talk of his Boy too; the Boy of a Fellow that was but newly Spewed out
of an Alms-Basket. The whole Remainder of his Evidence is only the Old Story
made worse. But Prance, for all this, I Warrant ye, had him Dogged into
Red-Lyon-Fields, fol. 15. And Afterward by Girald, Green, and Hill into St.
Clements; and so back again to Somerset House. But a Word or Two now to the
Desperate Provocation to This Bloody Revenge.

Bedloe says before the Lords, that he was to be put out of the way, because of
some Examinations that he had taken tending to the Discovery of the Popish
Design, Nov. 12. 1678. But Prance before the Lords, swears it was out of Malice
for being Cross-grained to the Queen and her Servants. Bedloe makes no more
on it upon the Trial, then that there was a very Material Man to be taken out of
the way; One that had All the Enformations that Mr. Otes and Dr. Tongue had given
in; and if the Papers were not taken from him, the Business would be
Obstructed, and go near to be Discovered, p. 30. But Bedloe was still for
giving him Quarter before the Lords; and for doing it by Fair Means or by Foul,
according as he should Behave Himself. But Not a Word of That Neither, upon the
Trials: Beside that in the Lords Journal, he was stifled betwixt Two Pillows:
And in the Trial, they had Strangled him, he says, but he knew not how, p. 32.
And in one Word, Bedloe, and Prance, did both agree at the Court of Kings Bench
to Destroy him Outright, without offering any Terms, or Conditions, for the
saving of his Life; contrary to what Bedloe swore before the Lords.

The Two Witnesses were as much Divided too, about the Place where he was
Murdered, and the Manner of the Execution; but they Both Agreed that he was
Murdered at Somerset House. Prance will have the Deed to be done upon the
Descent by the Stables; and that he was Wheedled down under the Pretense of
Parting a Fray, Trial, fol. 16. Bedloe gets him thither under Color of
Catching some of the Plotters. Lords Iournal. Prance makes Green to follow him
with a Twisted Handkercher, and to get him down by Surprise, for. 16, 17.
Bedloe, in the Journal makes it to be done Fairly, with Presenting a Pistol,
and upon Articles of Mercy; though No body could ever find out Bedloe's, and
Prance 's Place, where the Body was Conveyed, any more then Otes's Staircase
that led to her Majesty's Whispering Room: And it is to be noted also, that
This was no Hear-say-Evidence, upon the Final Resolution of the Case; for
Bedloe saw the Body by Le Phaire 's Dark Lanthorn; and Prance saw it by Hill 's
Dark Lanthorn, at the same Time and Place; and yet they had no Light there, but
one Dark Lanthorn, Trial, fol. 31. Nay, and Bedloe saw it by Prance 's Dark
Lanthorn, or he was Damnably Forsworn, when Prance was brought from the Lobby
to the Eating-House. There were, in fine, Two Sir Edmund's Murdered, One in
the House, The Other in the Yard; and Bedloe 's was Carried off on Monday at
Night, at Nine of the Clock, Iournal, Nov. 8. 1678. Prance 's, not 'till
Wednesday about Twelve of the Clock, Trial, p. 19. This Passage starts a Hint
worth the taking Notice of: Bedloe has the Body Carried away on the Monday
Night upon the Lords Journal: But Prance upon the Trial, mistook his Notes, and
says it was only removed into Somerset House. Trial, page 18. And so they
concerted the Business of the Dark Lanthorn too; only they were not agreed upon
the Bearer of it, as is already set forth; so that Le Phaire was Bedloe's
Lanthorn-Bearer, and Hill was Prance's.

Here Is even enough in Conscience said Already upon the Particularities of This
Subject, to make all Thinking Men of the Next Age, Blush at the Corruptions and
Credulity of This: But Whoever considers the Circumstances of the Men that Gave
This Evidence, will no longer Trouble his Head with Wondering at the Evidence
that was Delivered. And I shall give the Reader a Taste upon This Topique, in
the Following Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
Some General Touches upon the Character of Bedloe and Prance, and their Credit
in Other Cases as well as This, Not forgetting Titus Otes.

IT was under the Triumvirate of Otes, Bedloe, and Prance, that the Tragedy of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was brought upon the Stage; and something ought to be
said, Methinks, of the Persons, as well as the Actions of These Three Heroes;
if a Man could but hit upon the Just Medium, betwixt too Much, and too Little.

Titus Otes was the Son of Samuel Otes; A Gifted and a Dipping Weaver: And he
Dip^ fair too; He was Arraigned at Chelmsford Assizes, p. 146. for the Murder
of One Anne Martin, that Died some Fourteen Days after the Dipping, and laid
her Death to his Charge. Gangrena, part 3. p. 105. There Is a story Pleasant
enough, and Every Body has it, of a Woman that he had Under the Ord'nance of
Dipping, that still fell to Squalling, and Screaming so soon as ever they had
her above Water, [ Down with her again (cries Otes) It Is her Concupiscence:]
Now the Matter in Truth was This, The Roguy Boys had sunk a Huge Bundle of
Brambles, and Thorns in the Dipping-Place, and the Poor Woman's Body, it seems,
did not like That way of Discipline.

As to Titus, it was a Long Time before he had so much as the Badge of
Christianity, and there he stopped too, without ever Advancing one step further
into the Practice of it. He never Lived any where after Fourteen, but when ever
he quitted the Place, he left the Character of an Infamous Creature behind him:
As at Caius College in Cambridge; Hastings; Bobbing, Valladolid, St. Omers,
White Hall, the Kings Courts of Records; and finally at Sea, Under Sir Richard
Ruth, as well as at Land. He Began with Perjury and Sodomy; so soon as ever he
came to be qualified, either by the Law for a Competent Evidence, or by the
state of Virility for the Other Execrable Villainy. His False Oaths, and his
Attempts of that sort of Brutality, are so Many, that they are scarce to be
Numbered; and so Notorious, that there is No Need of Holding a Candle to them;
for they are as Public as the Solemnity of Attestations, Trials, Verdicts,
and Judicial Sentences can Make any thing. In One Word; His Narrative Consists
of 81. Articles; and I dare be Answerable for Four times as many Falsities in
'em; To say Nothing of Driblets, By-Blowes and Loose Grains, Over and Above.

Bedloe indeed was the Merryer, though perhaps not the Greater Rogue of the
Two; but the fittest Man Yet in Nature to stand Second to such a Principal. His
True Name (after That of his Reputed Father) was Beddoe, a Word that according
to the Septuagint, Imports [Little] or [Diminutive.] The Fiddlers, and the
Cobblers were at as much strife as Ever the Cities were for Homer, whose Bedloe
he should be; for he had a smattering in Both Faculties. The One he Learned
from his Mothers First Husband that Plied at May-Poles, Wakes, and Fairs; and
then she had afterward Another that Dealt in Clouting, Capping, and
Vnderlaying; but in short, the Poor Woman, they say, took a Great Deal of Pains
to Mend the Strain. His First Commission was to run on Errands, at Hap-Hazard,
for him that came Next; and from Thence, he stepped into a Livery, and served the
King, and the Protestant Religion in the quality of a Footboy. This was his
Rise, to the Knowledge of Men, and Business. He got the Names, and Habitations
of Men of Quality, their Relations, Correspondents and Interest: and upon This
Bottom it was, with a Convenient stock of Impudence, and a Dextrous Turn of
Fancy and Address, that he put himself into the World. There was No sort of
Cheat, that he was not In at, and Good at. But his Masterpiece was his
Personating Men of Quality; Getting Credit for Watches, Coats, Horses,
Borrowing Money upon Recommendations; Bilking of Vintners, and Tradesmen; Lying,
Pilfering, and Romancing, to the Degree of Imposing almost upon any man that
had any spark in him of Humanity, or Good Nature. His Character, and his
History, in fine, Truly drawn, would have Sixteen Guzmans in the Belly of it:
But there Needs no more then Common Fame, upon the Tracing of his Motions, to
the Instructing of that Story. He passed thorough All the Degrees of Knavery,
and Wickedness, as Gradually, and Insensibly, as he did through the Moments,
and the Inches of his Age, and Stature; He Lived like a Wild Arabs, upon the
Prey, and the Ramble; and where ever he was in Flanders, France, Spain, or
England, he never faild of leaving the Footsteps, and the Reputation of a
Prostitute Cheat behind him: He was hardly ever at Home, but in a Prison; Nor
in his Element, as they say, any Longer then he was in the King's Highway
to it. That is to say; he was still a doing somewhat or Other, Contrary to Law,
Honesty and Good Manners.

This, upon the Whole Matter, was but a Congruous Preparatory to the
Consummated state of a Flagitious Miscreant; when he came Afterward to Ioyn
Issue in a Perjurious, and Murderous Cause, with Otes, Prance, and Others, as a
King's-Evidence. The Pompous sound of [ a King's Evidence;] And the Terrible
Chymera of a Plot upon his Majesty's Life, and the Protestant Religion, Dazzled,
and Blinded the People, as if the Sun had been thrown in their Eyes from a
Looking-Glass: Insomuch that in Two as Lewd Lives as ever were led Under the
Canopy of Heaven, in the Persons of Otes and Bedloe, and the Character of These
Two Wretches as Well known, as the Whipping-Post, they could not find in their
Conscience Yet, to make any Exception to the Probity of These Witnesses. Nay,
and they were not only Believed, but, if not Temples, Pulpits, at least,
Dedicated to their Honor, and by a Blasphemous Figure, They were Recommended
to the Mobile, as the Saviors of the Nation, though the Left Hand Thief upon
the Cross, Might, to All Humane Appearance, have made as Good an Evidence.
Well! And there is more in it Yet too; for Bedloe was much Better at a Sham,
Off-Hand, then at a Conspiracy, by Book. Take them singly, and they give
Themselves the Lie; Take them Respectively, and they give One Another the Lie;
And Yet after all, When they neither Believed Themselves, nor One Another,
there were found so many Believers of them, that Great Britain was within One
Gust more, of sinking, under the Malice and Folly of the one side, and of the
other; beyond All Possibility of Redemption without the relief of a Miracle.

That Bedloe and Otes were Forsworn in the Business of Godfrey, no less then in
That of the Plot, (and Prance for Company) is no more to be Doubted, then the
most Certain Evidence we have of Any One Instance of Fact in These Times; And
This being most Undeniably Clear, it is not so much My Part, or in Truth, My
Business, to show where Bedloe was forsworn in any other Cases; as to Defy any
Man to Produce any one Oath he made, in favor of the Credit of That Plot,
wherein he was Not Forsworn; for to Name some, and Not All, would be a Tacit
Scandal upon the Rest.

In the Course of My Design, Prances Place should be now Immediately Next; but
as there is an Order even among the Devils in Hell, the same Decorum ought to
be Observed toward his Instruments here upon Earth; So that I shall Post-Pone
Prance a Little, as a Poor, Sneaking, off-and-on-Wretch, that is scarce Worthy
to be Named on the same Day with the Other Two. Now if a Man Might Honestly
Laugh upon so Tragical, and so Reprobated an occasion, Who could forbear, at
the seeing of a Thousand Fooleries less Credible then the Fables of the Poets,
Warranted for Gospel! Ovid has not in All his Tales a more Incredible
Metamorphosis, then This of Otes, and Bedloe. Religious Brutes; State Fools;
Devils Incarnate, turned all of a sudden, Bigots; Beggarly Varlets, with
Neither Faith nor Brains, all in the turning of a Hand, become Mony'd Men, and
the Confidents of Princes. Nay, and Not Only to Continue False, and Scandalous,
but to Grow Wickeder After their Conversion then they were Before. And for That
Monster Otes, to go on Buggering, and Yet at the same Time Celebrated in
Despite of Common Sense, and Shame, as a Vessel of the Holy Ghost. But not to
spread the Matter too Thin, I shall Entertain the Reader here with Two Bills of
Monyes laid out in his Majesty's Service; The One by Otes, at a Time when he
was not VVorth a Brumigem-Groat to Sponge for a Dish of Coffee: The Other, by
Bedloe, out of his Savings, when he lived a Little before in the Marshallsea
upon the Charity of the Alms-Basket.

Otes's Bill of Expenses, Feb. 11. 1678.
l. s. d. IMprimis, My Journey into Spain, besides the Ten Pounds given me 15
00 00 Item, My Manuscript of the Alexandrian Version of the Septuagint, which I
gave them 50 00 00 Item, For a Journey to Madrid more then was allowed me 05 00
00 Item, For a Journey to Villa Garcia more then was allowed me 01 00 00 Item,
For a Journey to Salamanca more then was allowed me 04 00 00 Item, for my
Expense to Madrid in a Second Journey more then was Allowed me 10 10 00 Item,
For my Expenses in Intelligence from Sevill and other parts in Spain, more then
was known 12 00 00 Item, For a Present of Twezers, and a Case of Knives to
Father Sweetman at Madrid, and 2 Cases of Spectacles 02 10 00 Item, For a Watch
to present to the Archbishop of Tuam when at Madrid 08 10 00 Item, For a Case
of Knives to the Rector of the English College at Valladolid 01 00 00 More for
a Dozen of Gloves to be presented to him 01 10 00 Item, For my Expenses home to
England more then was allowed me 12 10 00 Item, For my Expenses for the Time I
was in London more then was allowed me 02 00 00 Item, For my Expenses from
London to St. Omers more then was allowed me 04 00 00 Item For Gloves and
Knives to present to the Rector of St. Omers 02 10 00 Item, For my Journey to
Paris more then was allowed me 03 10 06 Item, For my Journey to Ghent more then
was allowed me 05 00 00 Item, For my Expenses in St. Omers 08 00 00 Item, For
my Expenses in my Journey to, and in doing Business in England, in APRIL more
then was allowed me 10 00 00 And for my Journey Back again 03 00 00 Item, For
my Expenses home to England in June, more then was allowed me 07 04 00 Item,
For my Expenses from the 17 th. June, to the 14 th of August last 50 00 00
Item, From the 14 th of August to the 8 th of September 70 10 00 Item, From the
8 th of September, to the 28 th of September 46 10 00 Item, From the 28 th of
September, to the 21 th of October 38 18 00 For Cloths 10 10 00 For Linen 02
00 00 Item, For Expenses from October 21. to December 29. 90 00 00 Item, From
December 29. to February 8. 40 08 00 For Necessaries for Winter 20 10 00 For
Books which the Jesuits had of me 40 00 00 Money owed to me by the Jesuits 80
00 00 For my Council 20 00 00 For Witnesses 00 12 00 678 12 06

To say Nothing of his Alexandrian Version, his [Intelligence more then was
known.] His Accounts with the Jesuits; and the other Fopperies that he has
Farc'd up his Bill withal. It is very Remarkable, how close he Sticks to his
24 th of April, and the Business of the Consult; for he is very Particular in
the Expenses of his April-Iourney into England; and his Journey back again, and
so afterward, for his Journey into England again in June, which keeps touch
with his Evidence upon the Trials, though never any thing was more Clearly
proved Then his Perjury upon That Point: and that from his going to St. Omers
the December before, he never set Foot in England again, till toward the Latter
end of June. And now follows a Conscionable Bill of Bedloes too.

Bedloe's Account of Expenses, February 15. 1678.
An Account of several Expenses made by William Bedloe, on Occasion of the
Service of his Majesty, and the Kingdom, which as to the Gross Sums he is ready
to attest upon Oath, and does most humbly Crave Allowance for the same, that he
may repay his poor Friends what he has Borrowed from them for this public
Service; and which, notwithstanding 90 l. Received from his Majesty's Bounty,
does still remain in Arrear, being 123 l. according to the Particulars
Following.
November. 5. Borrowed to bring me up from Bristoll 20 00 00 Laid out since I
came to London in Coach-hire, Watermen and Links 43 00 00 l. s. d. For several
Necessaries in and about my Chamber* 09 00 00 For several Dinners for my self,
and other Witnesses on the Trial 16 00 00 For fetching out of Kent one Mr. Codd
and his Maid, who are Material Witnesses upon the Trial of the Lords 10 00 00
For sending for several Witnesses out of the Country, and keeping them in Town,
till the King is pleased to order their Trials 50 00 00 For several Meetings
and Dinners for the Witnesses that brought in, and Testified against Prance 15
00 00 For several Occasions laying out Money in Searching Suspected Houses for
Priests, and Papers, and other suspected Persons 20 00 00 Money laid out to have
the Advice of an honest Councellor, in many great and weighty Matters, and for
a Clerk to write, and put in Order my Papers, with many other Necessary and
Unavoidable Occasions, which I could not omit 30 00 00 213 00 00

Here are Two Accounts now that might pass betwixt Father and Son, and, in my
Conscience, their Bills are as true as their Narratives: So much Sworn to a
Syllable, and so much Spent to a Penny. Otes sets down in Debts, Books, and
Presents to the Jesuits, 186 l. And Bedloe Reckons 91 l. for Witnesses. But
People will be apt to Cry out now, What Is All this to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's
Murder? Why Truly, if there were no more in it then a bare Curiosity, the very
Memorial would be worth the Ink and Paper that is bestowed upon it. Beside that
in This Place it falls in most Naturally with my Purpose, and Text: First, as
it is Another Branch of Roguery apart from the Plot, and shows them to be
Pick-pockets as well as Knights of the Post; which may serve to Illustrate what
Credit is to be given them in Other Cases. 2 ly. It gives any Man to
understand, that at a Time when such Fellows, and such Nonsensical Impostures
could keep a Government in Awe, it was not for any Private Man, with a Single
Voice, and Reason, to oppose an Epidemical Madness; for the Reckoning carried
Fraud, and Insolence in the Face on it, and the Witnesses knew beforehand, that
it would be no more Believed by Others, then They Believed it Themselves. But
they Pushed on the Affront never the Less; and though I never heard of a Tally
struck upon that Account, it was yet a kind of Victory to come off Gratis.

But Thirdly; The Timing of it was the Great Point of All; for the whole Nation
was then at Gaze upon the Trials of the Pretended Murders of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, and most People were of Opinion, that the Supposed Popish Plot was to
Stand or Fall, upon That Issue: But for my own Part, I was never of that
Persuasion: If the Verdict went against the Prisoners, it was Reasonable Enough
to expect that it would make a Horrible Noise; Especially considering the
Pompous Solemnities that had Prepared Men Already, for Wild and Dangerous
Impressions. And then on the other hand, if they had been Acquitted, it was but
Arraigning the Bench, the Jury, and the Witnesses, as they did in other Cases
Afterward to make All whole again. This does not Hinder, but that Otes and
Bedloe did very Prudently strike while the Iron was hot; for the Trial bears
Date the 10 th. of February, 1678/9. the Day of the Conviction of the Three
Prisoners. And these Two Blades put in their Bills, the very same Week with the
Trials; Otes on the 11 th. and Bedloe his on the 15 th. And if ever such a
Reckoning was to pass Muster, That Nicking Minute was the Time for it.

As to Prance's Character, All that I shall say of it is This; that he had a
good Will to be Honest, but not the Heart to go thorough with it; and that he
took more Care of his Carcass at First, then he did afterward of his
Conscience. I shall do him This Common right yet, to say, that he had not the
Brand upon him of an infamous Course of Life, to Blast his Evidence as his
Fellow-Witnesses had: And This may serve, in some sort, to Color the Easiness
of Those that gave Credit to him. In one Word more, If the Murder and the
Plot were the only Two Points in Dispute, upon the Credit of his Testimony, his
Justice and Faith in other Cases, might Induce a Charitable Softness toward the
Believing of him in This: But from his Swearing False in Every Thing Else, (as
That Is the Case) to Infer that in One Single Point, or Two, he swears True,
would be a very Perverse way of Reasoning. To shorten the Business now, I have
a Letter of Prance's upon This Subject, and I cannot better Dispose of it then
in This Place; And there can hardly be a Better Testimony, then that of an Ill
Man, who, without either Hope, or Fear of being the Better or the Worse for it,
bears Witness against Himself.

SIR,
HEaring that you are about to Publish something concerning the Death of Sir
Edmunbury Godfrey, I think it my Duty to take Shame upon me, and to make a
Public Declaration to the World of my Confession and Repentance of the
Heinous Sins that I have committed against God, and my Offenses against his
Sacred Majesty, my most Gracious Mistress the Queen Dowager, the Noblemen,
Gentry, and All others that I have wickedly and wrongfully Accused about the
Death of That Gentleman. I cannot hope or expect that any thing I say should
find Credit in the World; but it will be some Ease to my Conscience, if I may
obtain the favor of a Place for this Declaration any where among your Papers,
if you shall commit any upon This Subject to the Press.

From the time of taking off my Irons, and changing my Lodging, which was upon
my Yielding Basely to Forswear my self against those Innocent Persons, Green,
Berry, and Hill, that Died upon my Wicked Evidence: Mr. Boyce was the Man that
Acted for me, and writ many Things which I Copied after him; I found by his
Discourse that he had been several Times with my Lord Shaftsbury, and with
Bedloe; and he told me, that I would be certainly Hanged, if I did not agree
with Bedloe's Evidence, and own the Periwig, the Men would not be Hanged; I
would not yield to it, so he yielded to mine, and the Periwig was spoke no more
on; and bidding me consider what a Condition I should be in, if any of them
should confess first. He got me out of Newgate some few Days after the Trial of
Green, etc. But before any of them were Executed, Mr. Boyce told me how much
some of Sir Edmund's Relations were troubled that I was out so soon, for fear I
should deny all again; and so Mr. Boyce took me to his own House, and watched
me, and went with me ^heresoever I went, till the Innocent men were Executed. I
would fain have had Berry saved, but Mr. Boyce said he was Guilty of the
Murder, and could not be saved; and that if the King had a mind to pardon him,
he might do it without my Troubling my self.

It was purely the fear of Death, and the Misery of my Condition, that wrought
upon me to For swear my self, without any thought of reward, although I was
told several Times that Great Things would be done for me. My Lord Shaftsbury
told me my Trade should be Better then ever it was, and bought some Plate of me
Himself, part whereof was for Otes. This brings to my Mind that in the Time
while I Denied the Murder, or any Knowledge of it, I was taken out of Newgate,
and carried to Two Eminent Lawyers, where I was Vpbraided for departing from my
Evidence; One of them, wondering much what should make me do it, and speaking to
me to this Effect, [You were afraid, perhaps, of Losing your Trade, that lay
mostly among the Papists; or else perchance you did not think your self sure of
your Pardon, etc.] which Words were spoken in such a way, that I took them for
Hints to me what Excuse I might make upon going off again, and as I am a
Christian, This was it that first put That Excuse into my Head. My Lord
Shaftsbury gave me Two Guinnea's once, to help off a Man that I had Sworn
against for Dangerovus Words against the King. I received Thirty Pounds by his
Majesty's Order, and Five Pounds of Bedloe.

As to those I swore against about the Plot; If I may take the Names as they
lie in the Narrative: I Accused one of the Townleys of Townley in Lancashire,
with saying, [That when his Brothers, who were then at Doway, came back from
Flanders, they expected to receive Commissions from the Lord Bellassis, and
other Catholic Lords concerned for the raising of Men to carry on the
Catholic Cause; and that I had heard Adamson a Watch-maker several Times
speak of this at the Club in Veer-street. I do declare in the Presence of God
Almighty, that the Accusation is false in every Point of it, both concerning
Mr. Townley and Mr. Adamson. See Narrative, fol. 3. I do declare likewise, That
I was no otherwise put upon it, then by a Paper that was brought to me in the
Condemned Hole, and by the Menaces of Hanging me, if I did not confess more and
more, saying, Hang him Rogue, He thinks This shall save him.

I Accused Mr. Keightly also, when the Earl of Shaftsbury, etc. was in the
Tower, with Rejoicing at their Imprisonment, and the Differences amongst the
Lords; and if the Duke of York did but follow the Business close, they doubted
not but the Catholic Religion would be quickly settled, fol. 3. I declare
with the same Solemnity as aforesaid, I never knew nor heard that Mr. Keightly
said any such Words. This Accusation was drawn up by Mr. B. from General Heads
that I gave him, and one drew up the Narrative, wherein they both went further
then I directed. They did as the rest did; If I spoke a Word, they made Ten
on it.

I accused Mr. Singleton a Priest, for saying, He hoped to be settled in a
Parish Church within a Twelvemonth; and that he would make no more to stab
Forty Parliament Men, then he would do to eat his Dinner, fol. 4. which
Accusation I do declare to be utterly false, and of my own Framing.

And so likewise was that of Mr. Ridley's saying, that He hoped to be Surgeon
to the Catholic Army in England, and that he hoped to have the Lord Bellassis
to Friend. Ibid.

My Accusation of Mr. Paston for saying, That the King was a great Heretic;
but the Lord Bellassis, Arundel, Powis, and Petres would have a gallant Army
for Deposing the King; and that they had already given out Commissions to
diverse Gentlemen, as Sir Henry Beddingfield, Mr. Talbot, and Mr. Stoner, as was
suggested to me by my first Paper of Instructions, but made much more in
drawing up the Enformation and Narrative.

My Charge, fol. 5. against Ireland, for saying ^n the Presence of Fenwick and
Grove, That there would be shortly Fifty Thousand Men in Arms, and Fenwick
saying thereupon, That they should be commanded by the Lords, Bellassis,
Arundel, Powis, and Others, is False in every part of it; and so is the
following Article of Grove's saying, That the Lords, Bellassis, Arundel, Powis,
and Petres was to Command this intended Army, and had Commissions for that
Purpose. I took Hints toward these Accusations from my first Paper of
Instructions, and they that drew up the Enformations made the rest.

I did falsely Accuse Le Phaire also, for a Disscourse about the Catholics
Providing Weapons, fol. 6. and likewise Mr. Moor. Ibid. for speaking of Ten
Thousand Horse to be shortly raised for the Catholic Cause. It was all false,
likewise, and of my own Contrivance.

My Charge against Mr. Messenger, ibid. for Boasting, that the Heretics would
e're long be rooted out, was false, and my own too.

And in like manner that of Lawrence's speaking These Words, I wish with all my
Heart that half the Parliament were poisoned, for they will ruin us all; which
is utterly False, and out of my own Head; and so was my Accusation of my Lord
Arundel's Butler, for saying, That Mr. Messenger was to have a vast Reward to
kill the King, fol. 7.

And so was my Charge likewise upon Mr. Grove a Schoolmaster, For being privy
to the Levy of Fifty Thousand Men, which were suddenly to be Raised, fol. 8.

I shall now speak to the Pretended Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; wherein
I Charged Gerald, Kelley, Green, Berry, Hill, Lewson, and Vernatti, to be
either Actors or Confederates. I do declare for my part I know nothing of such
a Confederacy; neither do I believe there was any such, but that the whole
Pretense of the Murder, as well for the Persons, as for the Place, was all
False.

The Particulars above Written are All True, as I hope for Salvation: And
Begging your Worships Pardon for This Presumption, I Rest

Your most Humble and Obedient Servant. Miles Prance.
Princes-street, Ian. 17. 1677/8.

CHAP. XIII.
The Relation of Godfrey's Murder, as it stands in the Narratives and Trials,
is one of the most Unlikely Stories to be True, that ever was made Public,
and Believed.

THe Body was found in the Ditch; Cary'd Thence to the White House; And so they
Proceeded upon it to a View, and to a Verdict: This was, in few Words, the
Groundwork of the History: They began, Effectually at the Wrong End, and, by
an Inverted Way of Reasoning, instead of Drawing Conclusions from Premises;
Their Business was Subsequently to Frame and Accommodate Premises, to a
Fore-laid Conclusion. This Unhappy Gentleman, was, in Truth, Miserably Haunted
with an Hereditary and a Fore-boding Melancholy; and it was the Manage of that
Season to Improve Every Fit of the Spleen, into a Popish Dagger at the Heart of
him: Insomuch, that he was said to be Murdered by the Papists, (as in Due Time
and Place shall be made appear) even while he was yet Alive: Nay, betwixt the
Saturday when he went away, and the Thursday Night Following, when he was
found, it was in Every Bodies Mouth, that the Papists had Killed Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey. The Resolution being already taken, to make a Popish Murder on it, and
so to make a Popish Conspiracy the Root of This Popish Murder. Never was any
thing more Ridiculously Ordered, from One End of the Series to the Other.
First, for the Place in General, it was the Queens Palace; and then in
Particular, where the Execution was done. Prance's Evidence says it was by the
Stables; Bedloe swears it was by Shoving him out of the Upper Court. But
whether the One way, or the Other, it was in a Quarter so Public, that what
with the Guards, The Concourse of People; The Grooms, Watermen, Passengers; The
Lights and the Windows thereabouts, there might any Bussle have been seen, or
heard, from Forty several Places; and upon the Least Outcry, either at the One
Place, or the Other, Sir Edmund had Infallibly been Rescued, and the Assassin
taken. Beside that it was now but between Five and Six, by Bedloe's Account,
and Nine a Clock at most, by Prance's; a Time when People were every where up,
and stirring, and the Porters Window over the Watergate looked directly All
this While, upon the Place where the Fact was said to be Committed.

And then the Dogging of him at the Rate, and Manner, that they said they did;
was a Notable Fetch of a Project too. They had been upon the Heel of him, as
Prance says, a Matter of a Week or a Fortnight before he was Murdered, Trial,
pa. 15. But at last, by the Consent of the Witnesses he was fairly Hunted to
Somerset House, from Below-street, says One, and from Above, says the Other;
And they brought him in at Two Several Gates, And at Two Several Hours; The
One, at Five, and the Other at Nine: and strangled him as soon as they had him
in, Two Several Ways, and in Two Several Places. Now the Contradictions apart;
Nothing could be More Senseless then the very Propo^ition. For First, they
might have found a Thousand better Ways and Opportunities for the doing of his
Business. The Device of getting him into the Toil, was Silly to the Last
Degree too; under the Pretense of Parting a Quarrel; in a place where having No
Authority to Meddle, he knew better Things then to Lash out in so Tickle a
Point. And was it not Another Notable Piece of Invention, to Hound him up and
down, (as the VVitnesses swear they did) either Bedloe's way, with a Crevat, or
with a Hand-kercher, which Bedloe and Prance had seen before, (they say) as
Predesign'd for the Execution? Now Methinks the Point of a Sword, or a Poniard
in his Guts, or a Convenient Brace of Bullets in the Head of him, might have
made every jot as sure Work, as either the Handkercher or the Crevat. Or if
That Must Needs be the way still, they were Mightily overseen again in the
Choice of the Instrument; for Green was a Little Old Fellow, and Godfrey, a
Tall, Strong Man; Now the Handkercher, was to be Thrown Over his Head, Hat, and
All, I suppose, Unless they Expected he should Doff it Himself, and put his own
Neck into the Noose. So that the Life of Every Mothers Child of them was at
stake too upon That Adventure; either if Green had Missed his Cast, or else had
not put him out of Condition of Defense, Upon the First Tugg: But Now they have
him down, What Is to be done with the Body? is the Next Question. The Story is
too long, and too silly, to bear the Drawing out of the Train at Length; but it
is Impossible for any Man to Trace the Passages, and to Believe the Evidence,
without turning Somerset House into an Enchanted Castle; and Casting a Mist
before the Eyes of Forty People, to render Both the Body, and the Bearers
Invisible: And so, Effectually, it was to All the World but Bedloe, and Prance;
who swore they saw the Body lying at the same Time, in Two Several Places;
Though No Creature could give Any Tidings of it Beside. Nor could They
Themselves ever find, or Direct the way to Those Places again. The Body, in
fine, (while it lay there) was forced, upon Several Occasions to shift for it
self; and upon every Fright, though but at the Wagging of a Feather, Whipped away
out of One Room into Another, with as much Ease as a Cat would Carry-off a
Mouse. It was kept, from Saturday, till Sunday Night, (or Prance is Forsworn)
in the Chamber of Lawrence Hill, in Dr. Godden's Lodgings: And now, to say
Nothing of the Incomprehensible Way, and Manner of getting the Body Thither,
let any Man read but These Following Depositions, and then Consider, what a
Place they had found out for the Concealment of such a Villainy.

Elizabeth Hill Deposes, that She this Enformant lay that Saturday Night that
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was First Missing, and the Sunday and Monday following,
and several Nights before and After in the very Room where Prance Relates the
Dead Body of the said Sir Edmund to have been laid: And that This Enformant was
in that very Room before mentioned, the Greatest Part of the Sunday and Monday
next after the Saturday before spoken of.

And This Enformant being Interrogated, if there were not some Hiding Places in
or about That Room, where the body might be Concealed, Makes Answer, that the
Room was so little, that it would very hardly hold Necessaries for the Chamber,
There being but One Little Bed in the Room, and the Place Crowded with Boxes
and Trunks under the Bed, so that it was Impossible for such a Body to lie in
that Room any where Vndiscover'd: the Door of the Room being Constantly also
with the Key in it, and that Chamber the Common Place for Pen, Ink and Paper,
for the Servi^^ of the Family: This Enformant also lying there with her Husband
and a Child. And that During the Time Abovesaid there was No Dead Body in the
said Room, to This Enformants Certain Knowledge.

This Enformant says further, that upon the Saturday, when Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was First Missing, This Enformants Husband being at Cards at the House
of Mr. Thomas Cutler, She This Enformant went at about Eight That Evening to
fetch her Husband Home, and they went home together Accordingly, This
Enformants Husband not going out again That Night.

Elizabeth Hill.

Ann Broadstreet Deposes, that She this Enformant knew Laurence Hill, a
Servant of Dr. Goddens, very well; and that for several Years together, This
Enformant Living in the House of the said Dr. Godden, Never knew him to be one
Night Missing out of the House: And says Particularly, that at the time when
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was first said to be Missing; (being Saturday the 12th.
of October) Until the Middle of the Next Week after, Mr. Hill, and his Wife,
and his Child, lodged in the very Room, where Prance Affirmed the Dead Body to
have been laid. And that the said Room was not Capable of Receiving a Dead
Body, beside the Boxes and Trunks that were there before. The Room being found
upon Measure to be but Six Foot and Three Inches, Broad; and Nine Foot, wanting
Two Inches, Long; there being in it a Bed, a Cupboard-Table, Two or Three
Trunks, and several Boxes, under the Bed, and a Little Stool to sit upon.

Ann Broadstreet.

Beside the Evidence given upon the Trial, by Mrs. Mary Tylden, that the
Footmen, upon Occasion, were fain to wait in Hill's Chamber, and that she went
every Day into That Room for Something or Other; and that Particularly, on the
Sunday, when Sir Edmund was missing, she was in it, and saw No Dead Body there,
Trial, p. 55.58.

Catharine Lee Testifies, That Room of Hills, to have been a Common Place for
Footmen; and that she went into it every Morning, and there was No Dead Body
there, p. 58.

James Warrier swears, that upon Saturday, the 12 th. of October, 1678. coming
to his House in the Strand, about Seven a Clock in the Evening he found Robert
Green ( one of the Pretended Murderers) sitting by the Fire with his Wife; and
that after that time they did not Part Company till a pretty while After Ten a
Clock: And this Warrier's Wife gives Evidence to the very same Effect, which I
shall have Occasion to Recite at large in another Place.

Thomas Cutler also Swears, That upon the Saturday when Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
went away from his House, Lawrence Hill, a Servant to Dr. Godden, came to the
House of this same Cutler about Four in the Afternoon, and there finding some
Company, they went to Whisk, there being one Mr. Robert Belt, Mr. John Moor,
Cutler Himself, and others in the Company; and that the said Mr. Hill did not
stir from Cutler 's House till about Eight of the Clock, when Hill 's Wife
went to fetch him Home.

Now this has quite spoiled the Fashion of Prance's Story of Green and Hill's
Dogging of Godfrey from Place to Place, at These very Hours: But a Man can
hardly set one Single Step in This Proceeding, without a Stumble; And from the
Monday Night's Remove out of Hill's Chamber, to the Twelve-a-Clock-Adventure on
the Wednesday Night following, to Primrose-Hill, in the Face, and yet out of
the Sight, it seems, of the Guards and Watches, is but the same Unaccountable
Foolery all of a Piece.

There was a Plot first to make out the Murder: 2 ly. To make a Plot on it: And
Then, to throw it up into the Air like a Paper-Kite, with Protestant Religion,
Privileges, Liberty and Property at the Tail of it; to set the Mobile a
Gaping: So that it was to be made a Murder of the First Magnitude; And they
were in All Conscience, and Reason, to Assign some Cause, or Provocation,
Answerable to so Nefarious a Fact: And what was This; but either Green's
Revenge for Sir Edmund's bearing hard upon him about a Parish-Duty, as Prance
has it; or to Force Examinations from him, according to Bedloe's Project; which
Examinations were Already before the King and Council, Sworn Copies of them in
several Hands; and the Witnesses then in Being, to swear them over again. Was
This a Matter of Moment, to move the Foundations of Three Kingdoms? Or was
there ever a more Senseless Pretext in Nature, without either Weight in the
One, or Color in the Other? But there was a Third Reason yet, which, by the
help of a Popular, and a Mercenary Eloquence, made more Noise then the other
Two. And that was his Zeal for the Discovery of the Plot; and the Enmity he
bare to the Papists; when it is yet Notoriously known that he believed it a
Sham from the Beginning, That he took Tongue and Otes for a Brace of False
Miscreants; and that he was so far from being an Enemy to the Papists, that in
Cases of Need he did them All the Good Offices he could.

And now to come to the Chair-work. A Chair it was, that certainly dropped out of
the Clouds for This Particular Service, and went Thither again; for we do not
find that it was either Made a Purpose, or who was the Owner of it; nor whence
it came, nor whether it went at last. Only Prance tells us that [ they set it
in a new House by So-ho, till they came back again, etc. Tr. page 20.] And then
we are to Imagine a Tall, Stiff Body to be Crowded Into It; and then Carried off
with Ropes to Cut any Man's Shoulders to the Bone; a Brace of Bearers to it,
that never set one Step in a Chair before; And it is a Thing of Time to Break
your Chair-men to the Work, that they may March, and Trot together. But the
Body is by This Time Cased, Housed, Sedann'd, Box'd-up, or call it what you
will. Now the Matter duly Considered, the whole Train of the History is but One
Insuperable Difficulty upon the Heel of Another. Hill brought the Sedan, They
put him Into It; and upon a Hem in the Queens Court at Midnight, Berry opened
the Gate, fol. 19. In the Lords Iournal, Dec. 24. It was but Half the Gate, and
the Single Wicket would have served as well too, and with Less Danger of giving
the Alarm. And this was All to be done, and the Body and Chair-men, to Pass
Invisibly too; for Nicholas Trollop Nicholas Wright, and Gabriel Hesketh, that
were placed Sentinels by Corporal Collet, that Wednesday Night within the Gate,
saw nothing of All This; though Trollops stood from Seven to Ten; Wright
relieved him at Ten, and staid till One; Hesketh relieved him at One, and staid
till Four. They all swear to the Night, to the Hour, to the Place, and
Positively, that they kept to their Post, and that there was No Sedan Passed
out at Somerset House that Night. Berry's Maid, Elizabeth Minshaw, swears that
her Master came Home That Night in the Dusk, and was not an Hour Out, 'till he
went to Bed about Twelve. Trial, page 68, 69, 70.

Consider the Season too, when there were Two Plots a-foot at once; One upon
the King, and Another upon Godfrey: And a Man could hardly walk the Streets,
without being taken for a Suspected Person: And they were to pass in the very
Teeth of the Watch too: And why so Far, when they went every Moment in Danger
of their Lives? And the Single Question of Who goes there? would have Hanged
them All: If they were but met, and Examined, they were Lost: So that wherever
they found the Coast Clear, it would have been infinitely more for the Bearers
Security, and for the Impostors purpose too, to have thrown the Body into the
very Kennel, before the Gate of the House: Which would have given some
Countenance to the Sham; or at a Venture, to have left both Chair, and Body
together, Any where in the Open Street to have taken their Fortune.

Would any People in their Right Wits now, ever have sworn such a Huddle of
Inconsistencies and Contradictions, into the Pretext of a True History? where
the Fact was not only False, but so Easily Proved to be so?

Hill was gone abroad to Dog Sir E. Godfrey about Nine or Ten a Clock on
Saturday Morning, October 12. 1678. Trial, p. 17. This is Prance's Story: And
Elizabeth Curtis agrees with Mr. Prance Exactly in Point of Time, as Mr.
Attorney Observes, Trial, p. 40. And this Elizabeth Curtis again, is Sworn, and
Examined, Trial, page 38. as Sir Edmund's Servant, which was a monstrous great
Hazard they ran, to lay the Stress of an Evidence, upon her Privity to Matters,
as a Servant in the House, when it was Notorious that she was never so: But
only a Poor Woman that now and then did Chair-work for them. Now Robert How
Swears, That upon That Saturday, Hill and He were together from about Nine till
One, page 61. And Richard Lazenby Confirms How Is Testimony, by his Evidence,
that they two Dined with Hill that Saturday. And Lazenby swears again, that
upon the Wednesday Night following, he was with him from Five to Seven: And yet
this was the Hour that Girald, Green, and Hill had Dogged him into St.
Clements, Trial, page 20. And so for Elizabeth Curtis, that swears Directly to
the Particular Knowledge of Green and Hill, fol. 39. Judith Pamphlin, that
lived in the House with Sir Edmund, deposes quite another Matter: And Avis
Warrier does very notably Corroborate Pamphlins Evidence. Pamphlin 's
Deposition is This.

Judith Pamphlin Deposes, That she This Enformant, with her Daughter;
Elizabeth Draper, (or Eliz. Curtis) going to Newgate by direction from Henry
Moor, to take a view of Green, Berry, and Hill, (at that time Prisoners there)
to see if they could Remember that they had seen These Persons, or any of them,
at Sir Edmunds House: she This Enformant did not remember any of them, and the
said Eliz. Draper declared, at the same time, that she had not seen any of them
Neither.

Now this same Judith Pamphlin that had Lived a year and a half in the Family,
would have been a shrewd Evidence against Curtis, as well as to many other
Material Points then in Question; But she was kept safe enough, from Appearing.
Her Evidence as to This Point, however, is most Particularly Confirmed, by a
Passage in a Letter of Hills to his Wife out of Newgate, as follows.

On the Thursday after I came to This Place, there came Two Grave Men like
Justices, to Examine me; they called me not a few Rogues, and Ordered me to be
Chained to Boards; but was set at Liberty in the Night. The Monday after, they
came again, and brought Two Women with them, which I suppose, were Sir Edmunds
Servants. At first, when they came, they declared they had never seen me in
their Lives: and said, it was a Lesser Man, and had Another kind of Face that
brought the Letter. So I was sent up, but Immediately sent for down again, and
a Barber sent for to Shave me, and when he had done they Whispered; what they
said God knows, etc. And then the Enformation of Avis Warrier Delivered upon
Oath, March 18. 1685. runs in These Words.

Avis Warrier Deposes, That one Robert Green belonging to the Queens Chapel,
came to This Enformants House to Lodge some few days before Michaelmas-day,
1678. And to the best of the Enformants Memory, it was the Friday before the
said Michaelmas-day; And that the said Green Continued a Lodger in the House
aforesaid, without Lying out of the House One Night; to the Best of This
Enformants Memory and Knowledge; for the Space of about Five or Six Weeks: At
which time, there came an Order to This Enformant, to give an account what
Lodgers she had in the House, and who and what they were: Whereupon, the said
Green Departed from his Lodging; and This Enformant gave an Account of the Rest.

This Enformant being Interrogated, if she remembers, upon what Day it was
Reported that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey left his House; makes Answer, That it was
said to be upon a Saturday, that he was first Missing. And being likewise
Interrogated, if she remembers that she saw Robert Green abovesaid, upon the
said Saturday. And at what Time, and How Long? And being demanded to give a
Particular Answer to These Questions, She this Enformant says, That she did
see Robert Green upon the same Saturday, when the said Sir Edmund was said
first to be Missing; And that she well remembers that it was the second
Saturday following the Michaelmas-day aforesaid.

And says further, That she this Enformant Particularly remembers that the
said Saturday was very Rainy, especially toward the Evening; And that about Six
a Clock in the Evening, to this Enformants Best Remembrance, the said Robert
Green came into the House of This Enformant, very wet; and took off his Hat,
and Shuck it to Drain the Wet from it, and hung it upon the Door; The said
Green asking for his Wife, and she not being within; he bad This Enformant tell
his Wife when she came in, that he was gone to Georges Coffee-house, within
Four Doors of the House of This Enformant, whither he went, as This Enformant
Believes, and after about a Quarter of an hours stay, returned to This
Enformant again; and about half an hour afterward This Enformants Husband came
home. And then This Enformant, with her Husband, the said Robert Green, and
Robert Green's Wife, were in Company together, till a Good While after Ten.

And This Enformant being further Interrogated, how she Come^ to Remember that
Saturday so particulary, after so many years, This Enformant answers, that
she This Enformant remembers very well, that she had bought Pigeons that very
Saturday, that was intended for the Next days Dinner, with the said Robert
Green and his Wife. And that hearing afterward the Name of the said Green
mentioned, as one of the Murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, she This
Enformant, together with her Husband, and others in the Family, entered into a
Discourse upon the Matter, while the Time was yet fresh in their Memory, and
they all agreed with This Enformant upon the Saturday before mentioned: And
that the said Robert Green was in the House of This Enformant, in Manner as is
abovesaid, that very Saturday that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was said to be First
Missing.

And says further, That she This Enformant being Subpoena'd by Mrs. Green
above mentioned, to give Evidence at the Trial of the above said Robert Green,
etc. to the Effect abovementioned, there was an Elderly Woman in Mourning,
that seeing This Enformant waiting to be called in for a Witness, among other
Questions, asked This Enformant for whom she was to be a Witness? This
Enformant making Answer, She did not know whom her words might serve for. And
then asking This Enformant where she Lived? and being told that This Enformant
Lived in the Strand, Oh then said the other, you come to give Evidence for my
Master; This Enformant asking her who her Master was; the Woman made Answer to
This Effect, The Gentleman that is Dead: This Enformant Asked the said Woman in
Mourning, hereupon, Whether she had ever seen Robert Green before-spoken of, at
her Masters House? Who Answered, That he had been twice at her Masters House
that Day he was First Missing; This Enformant then bidding her have a Care, for
there were Three Men's Lives at Stake, and there might be many more. And that
she This Enformant had heard the said Green declare several times, before he
was accused, that he never saw Sir Edmundbury Godfrey in his Life. To which the
other replied, If it was not Green, 'twas Hill.

This Enformant says further, upon Recollection, that the said Woman in
Mourning Described the said Robert Green by wearing a Black Periwig, instead of
a Light Reddish Wig.

But then the Fancy of Horsing away the Corpse from So-ho to Prim-rose Hill,
Carried as many Absurdities in the Face on it as ever met perhaps in an action
of That Compass. The Body must be First Plied for the Chair; and then made
stiff, and straight again, for the Horse. Now either it was stumbling-dark,
that it was in Danger of a Tumble every step they sat; Or if light, in a
Greater Danger of Discovery: But for the state of the Moon, My Almanac says,
that it was the First Quarter upon Sunday 23. Minutes past 3. in the Morning;
And it was Wednesday Night following, when the Body was Packed away. A Man can
hardly frame to himself a more surprising Figure; or a more Uncouth
Contrivance. A Merry-Andrew in fine, or a Scaramouchi could never have
Presented any thing more Ridiculous: Over and Above the Almost-Impassable
Foulness of the Way; The Difficulties of Hedge and Ditch; Nay and of finding
the very Way to the Place Designed. A Dead Body Mounted Astride, and a Living
Man behind him, Holding him up, with his Hat, his Sword, his Stick, his Gloves,
and All his Little Bus'nesses about him: as if they had been rather upon a
Freak to fright People with a Fantome, and make 'em Believe the Place was
Haunted, then to save their Necks by the Concealment of a Murder: But Whence
came This Horse? Whose Horse was he? Where did Hill get him? What Became of him
Afterward? Prance before the Lords was asked the Color of the Horse, December
24. 1678. And gave This Answer [ that though it was Dark, Yet he could Discern
the Horse to be a Brown Horse.] And in his Deposition of the Date above, he
says likewise of the Sedan, that it was left in One of the New Built houses,
and They took it up and brought it home as they came back: But the Horse
Disappeared, it seems, and so did the Chair too After the Iobb was over, for it
was never heard of again. Now the Horse had like to have been How Is Horse: And
thereby Hangs a Story.

And then, to My thinking, they were Out a Little in their Reckoning, upon the
very Timing of it. They set out at Twelve, and Considering that they were but
Young Chair-men; Ill settled in their Geeres; a Long Iobb, and a Heavy Burden;
The Ways Dirty, The Night Dark; And, in fine, laying All Circumstances
together, they could not be well less then Two hours and a half upon the Way;
And what with the Time spent in fidling about the Body, and setting things to
Rights, a Man may honestly Reckon it five a Clock before they got back again.
Prance swears that he came home again, so soon as they had Mounted the Corpse.
Hill was a Horseback, while Green, Gerald, and the Irish Man were left to
bring home the Chair. And why did they bring it home again, to Betray
themselves Backward as well as Forward? They tell us Nothing of Restoring the
Chair, as if it had been Borrowed or Taken by stealth: Neither was the Sedan
Ever heard of After That Time: Nor do they Tell us where That same Home was:
But the story of the Horse that I was speaking of, lies so fit for my Hand in
This Place, that it will be VVorth the While to give the Enformation here at
Length that I have upon This Subject.

Thomas Whitfield Deposes, That in or about the Month of March 1680. This
Enformant standing at his own Door in Cranborn-street near Leicester-Fields,
one William Boyce, (well known to This Enformant) passing by, told this
Enformant, that he was Carrying a Couple of Glass-Eyes into the Square, and
would be with This Enformant again presently: and within less then half an
hour, he the said William Boyce called at This Enformant's house accordingly.

And that the said William Boyce, and This Enformant, drank, and smok'd a Pipe
together in the Fore-Room of the said House, where, among other Discourses, He
asked the Enformant if he had heard of the Difference betwixt him the said
Boyce and Miles Prance: This Enformant replying that he had heard Nothing of
it: Whereupon, Boyce told this Enformant, that Prance was a Great Rogue: This
Enformant telling the said Boyce again, that He the said Boyce knew best, for
He had had the Tutoring of him. Boyce going on, to Confirm it, that he was a
Great Rogue; for, says Boyce, Prance and I dyn'd Together, and we did not Part,
till betwixt Eleven and Twelve at Night, that very Day that Prance swore He was
at the Murdering of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey at Nine of the Clock at Night; when
He was so Drunk, that I Am sure he was not able to Murder a Cock-Chicken.

And that as This Enformant was sitting with the said Boyce in the Fore-Room as
above; One Robert Howes passed by into the Kitchen, the said Boyce saying, that
he thought he should know That Man: to which This Enformant made Answer, Yes,
it may be you May, Boyce asking if he was not a Carpenter? This Enformant
telling him, Yes. Boyce asking again, if he did not belong to Somerset House?
This Enformant said, Yes, He was one of the Queens Carpenters. Well! says
Boyce; he may thank me for his Life. This Enformant asking him, Why thank him
for his Life? Boyce Answered, that if it had not been for Him (the said Boyce,)
Prance would have sworn that it was Howes 's Horse that Carried Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey to Primrose-hill.

Upon This, the Enformant went and Called Howes out of the Kitchen, into the
Fore-Room, and there told him, in the Presence, and hearing of Boyce. Here
Howes; Here Is your saver, he that saved your Life: for if it had not been for
Him, Prance would have sworn that it was Your Horse that Carried Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey to Primrose-hill. My Horse, says Howes? Why I have sold my Horse Three
Years agon: Boyce telling Howes, that Prance had brought in the said Howes, but
for Him.

The Underwritten Robert Whitfield of St. Martins in the Fields, declares upon
his Oath, That Thomas Whitfield above mentioned, told the said Whitfield the
effect of the foregoing* Enformation for so much as concerns the Relation of
what past betwixt the said Thoms Whitfield, and William Boyce; and that he told
it to This Enformant about the time assigned in the aforesaid Enformation.

To bring this Long Paper to an end at last. This Part of the Confederacy seems
to have been as Weak, and as Short in the Contrivance, and Manage of it, as it
was Malicious in the Project; and there does not hitherto appear so much as One
Glimpse of a Probability to keep it in Countenance. To say Nothing on the other
Hand, of the Dying Testimony of Mr. Coleman, Hill, Green, Berry, Harcourt,
Fenwick, etc. who did all Declare upon the Faith of Dying Men, that they were
Innocent of that Murder. And I cannot Close This Section Better now, then with
the Christian, and the Charitable Resignation of Poor Hill, in a Letter to his
Wife upon This Occasion.

My Dear Wife,
I Recommend you to that Good God of Heaven, who, I hope, will be both a
Husband to you, and a Father to my Poor Child; If you Serve and Love him as you
ought to do: And the First Thing you are to do, is Heartily to Forgive him that
is the Occasion of my Death; and not bear him any Malice, but leave the Revenge
wholly to God, who knows best how to Revenge the Innocent. This I earnestly beg
of you to do, and likewise to Desire all my Friends to pray to God Almighty,
that if it be his Divine Will, that this Little Suffering may Mitigate his Just
Wrath against me for my heinous Sins.


We have Proceeded thus far, in so Full, so Clear, so Particular, and so
Faithful a Deduction of Matters, that there is hardly Any thing more Left for a
Man to wish for, toward the Satisfaction, either of his Curiosity, or his
Judgment, upon This Subject. The Imposture from One End to the Other, is made
up of Vnlikelyhoods, Incoherences, and Contradictions, without so much as One
Point in the whole Story that will bear a Color. Take each of the Witnesses,
apart, and he gives himself the Lie to his own Teeth; Take them Together, and
they dash one another to pieces. But it is to be hoped, that the Two Principals
were well Seconded as to the Credit, both of the Matter, and of the Evidence;
and it will be but Fair Dealing to Examine the Balance.

The First Witness that opens upon the Trial for the King (as they call it) as
to the Point here in Question, is Otes: And the Short of his Evidence is This,
That Two Days after the Swearing of his Depositions, Sir Godfrey came to him,
and told him of Affronts he had Received from some Great Persons for being so
Zealous, and of others Threatening him for being too Remiss: telling him a while
after, how he had been Menaced by several Popish Lords; and that he went in
fear of his Life, by the Popish Party, that had been Dogging him several Days,
Trial, fol. 12. The use made of This Evidence was to show that his Forwardness
in the Discovery of the Popish Plot, was the Thing that set them on to Murder
him; and that he Dreaded Mischief from them Himself upon That Account. Ibid.

Now instead of Sir Edmund's being too Forward, in One Page, he was, it seems,
too Backward in Another; for he told Mr. Robinson, That he took Otes's
Examination very unwillingly, and would fain have had it done by others. And
then upon Mr. Robinson's wishing, That the Depth of the Matter were found out.
I am afraid (said he) of That, that it Is not. But Discoursing further, he said
These Words, Upon my Conscience, I believe I shall be the first Martyr. Now Sir
Godfrey's Apprehension was not from the Papists for fear of a Discovery, but
partly for incurring the Danger of a Misprision, upon the Concealment of it;
and partly for Another Reason, as will be more Expressly set forth hereafter.

Brown the Constable swears to the Posture they found the Body in; The Sword,
the Bruises, the Neck, the Stick, and the Gloves, and to No Blood in the Ditch:
And Five Lines Afterward, That there was No Blood at all when the Sword was
taken out; He does not say [Where] but [When] fol. 36. and so saves himself by
the Reservation of Meaning the Ditch still; for he Swears elsewhere, to a Great
Quantity of Blood that came Gubling out. But People were ove^-aw'd, and made
the best Shift they could to keep themselves in a Whole Skin. Beside that there
lies No Stress at all upon This Testimony.

The Attorney General called then for the Surgeons that Viewed, and Opened the
Body; That is, Mr. Skillarn, and Mr. Cambridge, who were both Sworn, fol. 36.
This Hint made the Court take it for Granted, that the Body was Opened, as it
ought to have been, whereas it was not Opened at All, any further, then with a
Little Inscision to let out some Corrupt Matter: Nay, Sk^^arn Moved the
Godfreys to have it Opened: and could not get any Answer from them. Mr.
Skillarn speaks to the Bruises; The Distortion of the Neck; The Two Wounds; and
that there was More done to his Neck then an ordinary Suffocation. If the
Wounds had Killed him, his Muscles would have been Turgid, he says. He
observed, that Strangled People never Swell. If he had Died of the Wound, there
would have been Some Evacuation of Blood, at least, which there was Not; And
then again, That the Wound went through his very Heart; and there would have
appar'd Some Blood, if it had been done quickly after his Death: So that the
Main Point in Issue is This, Whether there was any Evacuation of Blood, or No.

Mr. Cambridge speaks also to the Bruises; Two Punctures; His Neck Dislocated;
and delivers his Opinion, That the Wound was given him after his Death, fol.
38. but without showing any Reason for it. Now These Two Evidences are so far
from Proving the Strangulation, that if We Prove the Blood, They do,
Effectually, give up the Cause.

The next Person called for, is Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Maid, Elizabeth
Curtis. She knows Green, saw him, and talked with him at her Masters, about a
Fortnight before his Death; spoke to him in French, which she could not
understand, it seems, page 38. and yet, swears 'twas French; Swears Positively
to the Knowledge of the Man; The Color of his Periwig: How Long he was with
her Master, etc. And then immediatlyCharges Hill with coming to her Master That
Saturday Morning; and Talking in the Parlour with him: she saw him afterward in
Newgate; and so she turns it off with a SleevelessStory of some Body that
brought a Note to the House upon the Friday before; and there the Question was
very Civilly dropped. No^ this is an Oath to go for Nothing, as well as Otes's.
For in Taking upon her to know Green and Hill, she is Forsworn upon the
Testimony of Two or Three Enformations, already Produced. I must not pass over
a Deposition of this Elizabeth Curtis, or Draper, bearing Date the 8 th. of
January, 1678/9. before the Lords Committees in the Council Chamger, where she
swears, [ That she Lived off and on for about Six Years with Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey before his Death.] This Off and On, must be taken for her Chare-Days,
when she came to help Scowr the Pewter, or Clean the House; for she never was a
Servant in That Family in all her Days.

She Swears further, that Green came to her Master's House a Fortnight before
he was Murdered, bringing with him in his Company, one in a Purple-Colour'd
Livery, who stood at the Door; and that the said Green spoke to her Master,
First, in French, and Afterward in English. We have No News now of the Purple
Livery, in the Trial; And that which was First in French, and Afterward in
English, in the Council Chamger, was turned Cross at the Kings Bench. [Green
said, Good Morrow, Sir, in English, and Afterward spoke to Sir E.B. Godfrey in
French, Trial, page 38.]

We are to make room now for the Master and Man at the Plow Alehouse. Prance
swears to a Discourse there with Green, Hill, and Girald, about the Murder of
Godfrey; The House Proves that they had been There together, and the very
Meeting Presumes the Design.

Here Is the Collateral Evidence that was offered, in Favor of Bedloe's, and
Prance's Testimony, which I shall Leave fairly before the Reader, to weigh one
against the other.

CHAP. XIV.
The Extreme Difficulty of Reconciling the History of the Murder at
Somerset House, to the Matters of Fact as they appeared in the Ditch at
Primrose-Hill; and upon the Verdict. The Reasons of That Difficulty, and how it
might have been in some Measure Prevented.

AFter so many Several Tales, and Those Several Tales, so many Several Ways
Told too, of one and the same Thing. After the Saying and Swearing of That same
[Same] Thing, to be done in so many Several Places, Shapes, and Manners; At so
many Several Times; By so many Several Methods and Persons, upon such and such
Several Reasons; and to so many Several Ends: It can be no Longer a Question, I
say, upon the Whole Matter; After These Diversities, Disagreements and
Contradictions, Whether the Point in Issue be True, or False; For Truth is
Simple, Uniform, Consistent with it self, and in Every Line and Article of it,
Still, and Ever the same. This is the very Case, betwixt the History of the
Somerset-House-Murther upon Saturday, and That of the Dead Body that was found
the Thursday following. They are, without more ado, so Unlike; so Foreign; Nay
so Contrary, One to Another, in many Passages even of the Greatest Weight; that
they Agree only in the Name of the Justice; Insomuch, that Supposing Two Sir
Edmund Godfreys, the Relation might very well Pass for an Account of Two
several Persons.

Now since it is a Thing Utterly Impossible to Unite These Variations, and
Oppositions in the same Point; and to make good Evidence to the World; of
Those Allegations that are Never to be Reconciled; I am, in This Chapter, to
Ask Bedloes and Prances Pardon, for having made such Fools of a Couple of the
Kings Witnesses in some Half a dozen Chapters before, as if it had been Wholy
Their Fault^, that Things and Things Cotton'd No better together; when, in very
Deed, Their Present Circumstances, and the Parts they had in the Plot, Duly
Considered, they were at That Time, Under a Moral Necessity, either of laying
themselves open, or of doing Things not to be Done: So that for want of
Well-grounded Presumptions, and Authentic Proofs to move men's Understandings,
they were fain to Content Themselves with Dazzling the Peoples Eyes, and Boiling
up their Passions, by the most Popular, and Plausible Arts the Matter would
bear. Where the Sham was not strong enough to stand upon its own Legs, the
Security of his Majesty's Person, and the Protestant Religion; the Honor of so
many Parliaments, the Wisdom of the Nation, and the Credit of the Kings
Witnesses, were All Called in to the Upholding of it; and the Restless Alarms
of Popish Fires, Massacres, and Faggots, were like so many Rods in Piss, for
Those Infidels, that had not the Grace to give Credit to a Forgery, so
Necessary to be Believed. When I speak of the Difficulty of Reconciling the
History to the Fiction, in This Present Instance, I do not Mean, that the
making a Plausible Imposture of it, was a Thing Utterly Impossible, if it had
been Attended in Time; though I am very well aware too, that Falsity can Never
Pass for Truth, but for want of Means, and Industry to find out where the
Inconciliable Difference Lies: But the Difficulties to be Treated of in This
Place are of Another Quality; and not so much arising from the Contradictions
in the Nature of True and False, as Peculiar to the State of Things in That
Iuncture, and to the Matter in Hand.

The Body was found out of Town yonder, in a Ditch; and the Murder was laid at
Somerset House. The Death of Sir Edmund was made a Murder; Nay, and a Popish
Murder; as is formerly Observed, even while he was Yet Alive. Now this could
be no other, then an Ominous Foreboding upon a Desperate Melancholy, which he
had then upon him. For there was No Talk of any Apprehension he had of the
Papists, 'till the very day that he left his House. We shall speak in Another
Place, to the Business of his Saying, that he should be the first Martyr, or
the first Man that should suffer. The Faction had no sooner made a Popish
Murder of this Disaster, but it dropped Naturally into the Common Receptacle of
All Rogueries, the Pretended Popish Plot. This Occasion lay so fair, for the
Hand of the Republican Conspirators, who under Another Pretext, were at that
time Designing upon the King, the Royal Line, and the Monarchy it self, that
having drawn his Royal Highness, the Queen Consort, and Almost the Late Blessed
King Himself into the Confederacy, they thought they could not do better, then
to make her Majesty's Palace the Scene of the Villainy.

This was the Groundwork of the Mock-Tragedy, that Our Knights of the Post,
Bedloe and Prance (Nay, Otes came in for a Snack too) afterward, Played their
Parts in, upon That Stage. In one Syllable, the Plot-Cabal Lodged it there, and
Bedloe took them at their Word, and Swore to it there; by which Unlucky Blunder,
the Project was as good as Cursed in the Cradle; for when it was once Lodged
within Those Walls, there was no removing of it, at least, without taking the
House for Company. The Story, it is true, went off well enough at Volley, for a
good while, and passed Current among the People, upon Content, without either
Weighing, or Computing it: But when they came once to Confront Matters, and to
Adjust Things to Things, they found themselves Horribly out in their Measures,
and that they might as well pretend to bring Heaven and Hell together, as to
Tally the Two Stories of Somerset House and Primrose-Hill. There was the Hat,
the Gloves, the Stick, the Sword, the Ditch, the Posture, the Two Wounds, the
Bruises, the Fly-blows, the Blood, the Linen Cloth, the Looseness of his Neck,
and the Circles about it, etc. Now All these Cases and Accidents were to be
Obviated, and Provided for in the Counter-part: As in some sort they were too.
There was a Twisted Hankercher and a Crevat to Answer the Linen Cloth: Green
to Wring his Neck about: Hill and the rest to Punch him, to Encounter the
Bruises, Trial, fol. 17. Hill, Kelly, and Gerald to run him through with his
own Sword, throw him into a Ditch, and lay his Gloves, and other Things upon
the Bank, Trial, fol. 20. to make the Tale Square with the Original. To say
nothing of the Risque of Discovery upon the Place, or upon the Way; and the
Vanity of so much as Hoping to Prevail upon any Man in his Right Wits, either
to Undertake, or Believe so Ridiculous an Adventure. Upon the whole Matter, If
People had but taken Half the Pains to Detect, and to Crush this Imposture,
that they did to Countenance, and Conceal it, the Cheat could never have stood
a Six Minutes Close Examination: For the Witn^sses Launched out into such a
Variety of Circumstances, and Matters, that it was wholly Impossible for them
so to Concert their Lessons, as not to lie open to a Hundred Surprises.

It was a kind of Fantastical, if not an Unaccountable Resolution taken, to
send the Body away to Primrose-hill, and just to such a Ditch there; A Place
that it is odds none of the Assassins ever so much as heard of Before; and to
give such Orders as they pretend they did, about the Disposing of things with
the Body, the Sword, the Stick, the Gloves, etc. Now whether this was History,
or Forgery, let the World Judge. But in Fact, the Body was there: So and so
Found; and, in the Congruity of the Counterfeit, it must be thither carried,
and so and so laid. The Distance, the Danger, the Chair, and the Difficulties
of the Way thither, are the Soberest part of the Foolery. Nay, and by the
strangest Consent of Thought that ever was heard of, the Murderers Pitched
upon the very Place, upon the Wednesday Night, that Sir Godfrey Inquired the
Way to, the Saturday Morning before.

There were, in fine, a Number of Inextricable Difficulties in the Way, as they
had ordered the Contrivance. But the Mother-Over-sight, and in Truth, the Root
of all the Difficulties, and Cross Accidents, that Followed, was the laying of
the Murder so far at first from the Place where the Body was found. For if
they had but Hounded him to Primrose-Hill, instead of Dogging him to
Somerset House, and opened the Intrigue upon the very Spot; the Mystery of This
Project might have remained a Secret to the Day of Judgment: Especially, having
so fair a Pretense to Look for him That Way: for this was not only known to be
Sir Edmund's Usual Walk, but he was seen Going thitherward, and taken Notice of
to Enquire which was the way to That Place, that very Morning: So that for
Brevities sake, they should have Smothered, or Stifled, or Strangled him, or
what they would have called it else, and then have run him through with his own
Sword, in the very Ditch it self, which would have Prevented all the ensuing
Dangers betwixt the Cup and the Lip, as they say. If they had gone that way to
Work, there would have been no need of a Comment upon the Text of
Somerset House. The Story of the Crevats, the Pistols, and the twisted
Handkercher; the Watergate, and the Court-Gate; the Plotters, and the
Quarrels; the Stable-yard, the Upper Court, the Invisible Chair, and the Dead
Body a-Cock-horse, would have been All out of Doors. There would have been no
need of Witchcraft to cast Mists before the Eyes of the Guards. But in fine,
All these Plunges, and a Hundred and Fifty more, might have been saved, and the
VVitnesses might have brought Green, Berry, and Hill as Cheap to the Ditch;
Especially when they had him (as Prance says) in Red-Lyon-Fields already, and
have Sworn as true to the One, as they did to the Other; But This was the Fault
of the First Discoverer. Bedloe's heart was so set upon the Five Hundred Pound,
that he thought of nothing else; and when the Word was once passed, and the
Charge Rivetted to Somerset House, there was No Recalling, No Vnclinching of
it. But now if he had thought on it tine enough, to have Ordered the Regulation
of This Murder in the Chappel-Gallery; and the Execution of it about the
White-House, the History might have been kept up to the Decorum of a Probable
Truth. I must not slip the Occasion here of Obviating a Question that very
frequently offers it self in this Case [ If this was Sir Edmund's usual Walk,
why should he ask the Way to a Place that he knew as well as any body could
tell him?] There Is no Divining upon Men's Thoughts; but since it is certain he
knew the way; and no less certain, that he did Ask the Way; and that he did
not Ask it Neither, as Ignorant of it, or as Needing the Enformation. Why
might not his Enquiry be intended for a Hint, or a Light to People where they
should look for him, when they should afterward come to miss him?

CHAP. XV.
Supposing the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey to have been a Branch of the
Popish Plot; (as it was Commonly Reputed) If there was no such Plot, there was
No such Murder.

THERE was a Time, when a Popish Murder was Trumpt up for the Proof of a
Popish Plot; but we are Now as hard put to it for want of a Plot to Prove That
Murder, as we were Formerly for want of a Murder to Prove That Plot: In
short, there is no Reconciling Either of them to it self, Apart; or Both, Each
to the Other. If there was No Popish Plot, There was Consequently No Popish
Murder; at least upon That Bottom: Unless a Man shall suppose a Branch without
a Root; or an Effect, without a Cause. If there were No Treasonous Consults,
how should there be Murderous Practices Grounded upon Imaginary Councels? The
Equity of Otes's Conviction of Wilful, Malicious, and Corrupt Perjury, at the
King's Bench Bar, Westminster, the 8th. of May 1685. upon the Jesuits Trial in
the Business of That Plot, lies every Jot as strong, in Parity of Reason, and
of Justice, against Prance and Bedloe, for This Pretended Branch of That
Pretended Conspiracy. They Hang both upon the same String, and whoever
Overthrows the One, Trips up the Heels of the Other. That is to say, where the
Matter of Fact is False in the foundation, All Inferences from it must be so
likewise, in the Superstructure: and whatsoever Bedloe and Prance have Sworn
upon a Plot where there was None, is only the Seconding of one Perjury with
Another; For the Profligate Improbity of the Witness Blasts the Credit of the
Murder, as well as of the Treason. I do not say but that there might be a
Murder, and yet No Conspiracy: Nay, I say there might be a Murder Executed by
Papists too; and yet That Murder not a Popish Assassinate neither, for I would
Distinguish the Wicked Practices of some particulars in All Religions, from the
Wicked Principles of a Whole Body of Men, of This, or That Persuasion; so that
we have a Great Many Steps to make, before we come to a Resolution upon This
Question. We take it for Granted, First, (as we find it upon Record) that
Otes's Popish Plot was an Imposture. 2 dly, That if there was No Popish Plot,
there could be No Popish Branch of it: From whence it will Now Follow, that
Prance and Bedloe are Manifestly forsworn in Every Tittle of their Evidence,
that either Imputes the Murder to the Conspiracy, or lends a helping hand to
the Confirming of the Forgery. They Swore the Murder into the Plot, for the
Sake of the Plot; Not the Plot into the Murder, for the Sake of the Murder.
And though Bedloe came in to give Evidence to the Murder, 'twas his Swearing
to the Plot, that got him the 500 l. And to make the best on it, his Perjury in
the One Case made him Incompetent in the Other.

To Sum up All in a Little, (for I am Now about to Close the First Part of This
Discourse) Was Godfrey Murdered at Somerset House, according to the
Depositions of Bedloe, and Prance, or was he Not? What Inducement have we to
believe it? or what Arguments, or Objections to the Contrary? As to the
Credibility of the Fact in Issue; There were so many Contradictions in the
Watching, and Dogging of him, in the Manner of Des^roying him; in the
Concealing, and Removing of him; in the Means of Carrying him away; and in
other Circumstances of Time, and Place, as Never were heard of in This World
from the Mouths of Two Credible Witnesses. They Might as well have Sworn to the
Conveying of him into the Ditch in a Mist, or upon a Broom-stick, as in a
Chair, or on Horseback. Bedloe swears against Bedloe and Prance; and Prance
swears against Prance and Bedloe. They swear One thing before the Lords
Committees, and quite Another thing at the Trials. Insomuch, that Light and
Darkness might as well have been Reconciled, as These Testimonies, either
severally, or One to Another. In one Word: What shall I need to say more on it,
then Effectually is said Already? The Story is Wholly Inconsistent with it
self; never any thing more Ridiculously Projected, more scandalously Attested;
or, upon Comparing of Evidences, more Impossible to be True. So that here is the
First Question of Sir Godfrey's being Murdered at Somerset House, Cleared
beyond All Dispute, or Contradiction. And Consequently the End of This My First
Part, Answered, to All Intents and Purposes. For we are not more Certain of any
thing, then we are Morally Sure, that the Pompous History of This Pretended
Villainy, has been, from End to End of it, a State-Cheat, and No other, then a
Palpable Imposture.

But some People will not Content themselves perhaps, with a Negative upon the
Abuse; in satisfying the World that he was Not killed in the Place, and Manner,
as is laid in the Indictment; Unless they may receive Further Satisfaction,
How, Where, and by Whom, he was brought to his End. Now This Case Lies so much
in the Dark, by what Hand soever it was done, that Reasonable Collections,
Inferences and Pregnant Presumptions, are All in the very Nature of the Thing,
the Matter in Question will bear: But I shall leave the Reader to his own
Freedom of Belief, or Judgment, upon a Fair Report of the Fact, as he shall
find it Impartially Delivered in the Second Part of This Discourse.

The End of the First Book.
THE MYSTERY OF THE DEATH OF Sir E. B. Godfrey UNFOLDED. PART. II.
CHAP. I.
The Vindication of Green, Berry, and Hill, upon the Ground of Sir William
Jones's Law and Equity.

THE Whole Sum of the Matter here in Issue, lies within This Compass; Either
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Murdered in Somerset House, according to the Oaths
of Bedloe and Prance, or he was Not. Whoever supposes that he Was, must take
This Along with him, that he was Murdered in Several Places; by Several
Instruments, Ways, and Means, for Differing Reasons, and with Differing Ends,
and Designs. And in short, that he was Murdered One Way before the Lords
Committees, and Several Other Ways upon the Trials of the Pretended Criminals.
These Contradictions and Inconsistences are laid as open as the Day, in the
Former Part of This Little History; and the Witnesses turned Naked into the
World, without so much as a Fig-leaf to cover their Shame. Nay, and without so
much as an Advocate, to Excuse them from a Deliberate, and Wilful Perjury. We
are all satisfied, they cry, that he was Not Killed at Somerset House; and that
the whole History of it is an Imposture: But it will be a harder piece of Work
to make it out, How, Where, and by Whom he Was Killed, then How, Where, and by
Whom he was Not. Conjecture, they say, is No Evidence, and we have not the
least Glimmering of any Light toward the Certain-Truth, and Knowledge of This
Matter.

The World cannot give a Better Answer to This Objection, then what Sir William
Jones has put in my Mouth; upon the Summing up of the Evidence at the Trial of
That Cause.

[Mr. Attorney General.] My Lord, I shall be bold to say, here is certainly as
much Evidence as the Matter is Capable of. It is not to be Expected, that they
should call Witnesses to be By, when they do such Foul Facts: so that None can
swear directly the Fact, but such a One, as was an Actor in it: All
Circumstances relating to the Fact, both Before, and After, are made out by
Concurrent Testimony. Greens Trial, page 72.] Now if the Matter here in hand be
of the same Quality, and the same Secrecy; (with Sir William Iones's Instance)
and supported by More, and by stronger Circumstances, relating to the Fact,
both Before, and After; Why may not my Circumstances go as far toward the
Vindicating of the memory of Three Innocents, as Mr. Attorneys Circumstances
did, toward the taking away of their Lives? And why may not my Concurrent
Testimonies, with the Great Odds of Weight, and Number, do as much toward the
Retrieving, and the Establishing of a Truth, as the Concurrent Testimony that
Mr. Attorney here speaks of, did toward the Supporting, and the Authorizing of
an Imposture? He that Kills Himself, goes as Privately to Work as Any Other Man
would do that were to Kill him. And if none but an Actor can swear Directly to
the Fact, it were madness to require a Witness to a Felo de se, when there is no
Man left alive to bear Testimony: And I have This Advantage Over and Above, (as
I say) that I shall here set up a Greater Number of Fairer Likelyhoods, and
more Pregnant Presumptions of Subornation, and Perjury; to Supply the Want of a
Point-Blank-Evidence: And Leave No room for Doubting to any Man, that would not
stretch his Belief further in favor of Falsehood and Oppression, then to Assert
the Cause of Truth, and Justice.

The Paragraph Above Cited has so many Remarkable strokes in it, that it is pity
any of it should be Lost, and so I Will go on with it.

My Lord, I must Observe, that it was a Murder, Committed through Zeal to a
False Religion; and That Religion was a Bond of Secrecy. We all know his
Majesty has been Graciously pleased by his Proclamation to Propose a Pardon,
and a Reward to the Discoverers. And yet almost without Effect; Their Zeal to a
False Religion was a Greater Obstacle, then the Proclamation was an Incitement
to the Discovery. And I do believe, if Mr. Prance had not had some Inclination
to Change his Religion, You had still been without so Clear a Discovery of This
Work of Darkness, as now you have. Ibid. Here Is a Murder Presumed, upon the
Evidence of a False Oath; Religion made the Ground and the Bond of That
Murder; And yet at the same Time, Three Other Murders Designed, Carry'd-on
and Accomplished, upon the Credit of it; beside Innumerable Other Mischiefs
that lay out of sight, under the Veil of Hidden Events. The King's Proclamation
did, in Truth, fall short of Producing a Discovery; but the Five Hundred Pound
Promised in it, proved a Temptation to a Most Damnable Cheat: (for that was the
Lure that brought Bedloe down.) To say Nothing of an Evidence-Proselyte: in
making Prance's Forswearing himself, to be the Test of his Conversion. Only
once again now, and I have done.

I shall say no more, but Conclude to the Jury, with That saying, that I
remember in the Book of Judges ( in the Case of a Murder too, though of
Another Nature) Judge. 19.30. (The People said, there was No such Deed Done, Nor
seen, from the Day that the Children of Israel came out of Egypt:] And I may
say, There was Never such a Barbarous Murder Committed in England, since the
People of England were freed from the Yoke of the Pope's Tyranny; And as it is
said There, so say I, Now, Consider of it; Take Advice; and speak your Minds.
Ibid.] A Man should have been very sure of his Point, before he Lashed out into
so Bold a Figure; for here is Scripture called into his Aid, for the
Illustrating of a Forgery. Here Is One Notorious Murder, (in the False
Witnesses, That is) Supported, under the Color of Arraigning Another. And
here is the Actual, the Treasonous, and the Sacrilegious Murder of a Pious, a
Gracious, and a Merciful King, set in Balance, with the Fictitious Murder of
a Malancholique Justice; and found Light upon the Comparison. But be it as it
will, here is Case against Case: And so long as I have the Authority and Opinion
of Sir William Jones on my Side, as to the Legal Competency of Circumstantial
and Presumptive Evidences, I Will make no Difficulty of casting my Reputation
upon the Merits of the Cause. Only a Word or Two by way of Preparatory, that I
may slide Naturally into my Business.

It Is out of Doubt, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Died a Violent Death; but
whether by Another Hand, or by his Own, is the Single Question: Now One of the
Two it must be; though Which of them, is not as yet Determined: If by the
Former, there must have been some Notorious Grudge, Quarrel, or Controversy,
whereupon to ground so Mortal a Malice, and Revenge. If by the Latter, it is no
New Thing for a Man that lies under either the Load of a Hideous Melancholy, or
the Power of a Temptation that he has not Strength to Resist, (though otherwise
of never so Fair a Life and Conversation) to sink under the Horror of his own
Thoughts, and to Lay Violent Hands upon Himself. Now how far any thing of This
might appear in the Circumstances of his Temper and Condition, is a Point that
a Thinking Man would not on either hand wholly pass over without loooking both
ways upon This Occasion.

First, as to any Matter of Grudge, Quarrel, Controversy, or Rancorous
Animosity, Private, and Personal; I cannot Learn that there has been any Thing
of This, either Observed, Apprehended, or Suggested: Nor in Truth (which was a
wonderful Thing) that any of his Family were ever so much as Examined to That
Point. But in a Word, for want of a Personal Pretense, they have turned it to
the Spleen of a Party, and Grafted the Murder into the Conspiracy: However;
for Color sake, There were Two Reasons Assigned; The One, Special; and the
Other, General; as the Inducements to This Barbarous Fact. The Former was the
taking of Tong's and Otes's Depositions; which (as I have it elsewhere) would
not have Signified a Single Hair of a Man's Head; if Ten Thousand Lives had
depended upon the Matter there Deposed. The Other Reason was as Groundless as
the Former was Frivolous: [The Murder (says the Kings Council) was Committed
upon a Gentleman, and upon a Magistrate; and I wish he had not Therefore been
Murdered, because he was a Protestant Magistrate. Greens Trial, fol. 7. And he
was very Industrious in finding out the Principal Actors in this Plot. Ibid.
This was the Song in all the Narratives, Pamphlets, and Trials; That the
Papists Murdered him; and Principally, for the Hatred he bore That Party.

Now This is so Notorious a Mistake, that he Lived in a strict Confidence, and
Friendship, with Diverse Roman Catholics of No mean Quality, and Character: He
was so far from Promoting the Plot, that he took it for a Cheat from the
Beginning; Gave his Royal Highness an Account of Otes's Depositions; and so
likewise to some Other Men of Honor of the Roman Communion upon the First
Taking of them: Nay he was so Tender of any Oppression That way, that upon the
bringing of one Mr. Burnet a Priest before him to be Examined, and Proceeded
against according to Law, Sir Edmund made his Application to Dr. Godden (then
belonging to the Queen) about him; told him how it was, and, though at That
Time a Stranger to him, desired him to use what Means he could, either by her
Majesty, or by a Secretary of State, to Prevent his going to Prison; and in the
mean while, he Himself would put the Business off as long as he could.

So that hitherto, there appears neither Interest, nor Provocation, Private, or
Public, toward the taking away This Gentleman's Life; but, for want of a more
Plausible Pretext, there has been Objected over and over the Frequency of his
Exclamations, that he should be the First Martyr; That he should be the first
Man to suffer in the Cause; and other various Readings upon Words of his to
That Purpose, according to the Relish of the People's Fancy, or Palate, that
Heard them. Now this was an Expression that Carried the Best Countenance of a
Favorable Insinuation of any that they made use of: But there is Nothing said
in all these Fore-bodings, from what Quarter it was that the Danger Threatened
him; only he told Otes (if Otes does not Belly him) [ That he was in a great
Fright, and went in fear of his Life by the Popish Party. Greens Trial, fol.
12.] Wherein, Otes's Sagacity supplied a Dark Text, (to speak in his own fine
way) with an Elucidating Comment, worth Twenty of the Alexandrian Version of
the Septuagint that he presented the Jesuits with. But why he should be afraid
of his Known Friends, and of Those that knew him to be Their Friend: And why
should he be Afraid of the Papists, for fear of Spoiling Their Plot, when he
had Already, so much as in Him lay, Spoiled Otes's Plot, by Discovering the
Roguery of it upon the first Instance; Why, I say, the Papists should Murder
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey contrary to all the Rules of Morality, Humanity,
Gratitude, Justice, and Common Prudence; and do All This to No Manner of
Purpose too; is a Mystery wholly Unaccountable. We shall speak to his
Exclamations by and by: But First to his Melancholy; and Then, Leave the World
to Judge whether These Ejaculatory Starts, and Apprehensions took their Rise
from Splenetick Vapors, or from any Reasonable Fears.

In the Handling of This Subject, I shall Range what I have to say under These
Following Heads; and Assign to every Head a Chapter by it self, for the
avoiding of either Prolixity, or Confusion.

First, What Humor was Sir E. B. Godfrey observed to be in upon the Morning,
and Day, when he last left his House?

2 ly. What Notice was taken of Sir E. B. Godfrey 's Melancholy, before he left
his House? And what Opinion, or Apprehension had People of it?

3 ly. What Opinion, or Apprehension had Sir E. B. Godfrey Himself of his
Melancholy before he went away?

4 ly. What did Sir E. B. Godfrey's Friends, Relations, Servants, and
Acquaintance think was become of him, from the time of his going away to the
Time when the Body was found?

CHAP. II.
What Humor was Sir E. B. Godfrey Observed to be in upon the Morning and Day
when he last Left his House?

SIR E. B. Godfrey went away from his House in Harts-horn-Lane, upon Saturday
Morning, the 12 th of October, 1678. People are Divided about the Hour, but
most Agree that it was Early. Now from the Time of his Departure, we shall Date
the Entrance into our Discourse upon This Subject, and begin with the Evidence
of his Clark, Henry Moor; as to Some Passages of That Morning.

Henry Moor Deposes, That he was Sole Clerk to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey for a
year and half before his Death; and that after the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
had taken the several Depositions of Tongue and Otes, he This Deponent Observed
him to be Under Great Discontent, and in Disorder many times, and wished they
had never come to him.

And further This Deponent says, That between the Hours of Nine and Ten in the
Morning, on the same Saturday that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, in the year One
Thousand Six Hundred Seventy and Eight, Left his House, He This Deponent was in
the Parlour with him, and he bid this Enformant help him on with a New Chamblet
Coat, which he did; but presently after, Ordered him to help him on with an Old
Chamblet Coat, which he told this Deponent would Serve that Day well enough;
and Immediately after his said Coat was put on, he went out of the Room, and
was going abroad, and at the Gate, going out of the Yard into the Lane, he
Suddenly Stopped, and turned Himself toward this Deponent, and Looked Seriously
upon him, as if he would have said something to this Deponent; and in That
Posture he Stood a small Time, but Immediately went his Way, Not Speaking to
this Deponent; and after That time He this Deponent never saw him Alive.

There will need no Hand in the Margent here, to bespeak a Note upon the
Disorder This Unhappy Gentleman was in upon his Last Farewell to his House and
Family: But I could wish the Clerk had been Called upon (who is since Dead) to
Explain himself upon the Last Words of This Paragraph; where he says, that
[After that Time he never saw his Master [Alive.] And why not as well that he
never saw him after, till he saw the Body at the White-house, or in
Hartshorn-Lane, when it was brought home? as that [ afterward he never saw him
ALIVE. The Stress lies upon the Word [ALIVE;] for Moor acknowledged upon the
Examination above, that he had been to look for his Master about Primrose-Hill
upon the Enformation of one Parsons, a Coach-maker, who told him that upon
Saturday Morning, Sir Edmund Asked him the way thither; Moor Declaring further,
[ That he was looking for him within a little from the Place where the Body was
found.] Now Considering the Distraction that Moor, and the Rest of the Family
were in, upon his First going away; and taking Moor's Expression along with it,
that he had been Looking for him about Those Fields; It must be Naturally
Understood, that he looked for him in Ditches, and Retired Places; unless he
should think to find him a Grazing among the Cows, or the Sheep; a Day, Two, or
Three after he was Missing: So that in All Likelihood Moor found the Body in
the very Ditch, and Covers the Concealment under the Disguise of Not having
seen him Alive. I lay no Stress upon This; but it may, or it may not be, and no
great matter which.

There are Two Enformations of Mr. Cooper, and Mrs. Leeson, that speak to his
Ill Humor of That Morning.

Richard Cooper Deposes, That He this Enformant well remembers Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, and that he met him in St. Martins Lane, going toward Newstreet,
betwixt That and the Crown and Scepter; and that This Enformant saluted him by
his Name; and the Said Sir Edmund returning the Civility to this Enformant,
saying, Good Morrow, Mr. Cooper. This Enformant's Sister being in Company with
him, and one James Lowen, Keeper of Hatfield Park. This was about Eight a Clock
in the Morning; but this Enformant cannot Positively speak to the Certain Day;
only he says, that he this Enforman^ did hear the day following, that the said
Sir Edmund was Missing, and did not come-in All Night.

And says, That to the best of this Enformants Memory, the said Sir Edmund was
in Black Cloths, Stockings, and Hat, and that he walked with his Cane Dangling
before him, and that the said Sir Edmund, having been formerly used to speak
Freely, and Pleasantly to this Enformant upon all Occasions, this Enformant's
Sister took notice of his Change of Humor, and that he spoke Melancholy, and
Discontented.

Mary Leeson Deposes, That about Eight a Clock in the Morning (to the best of
this Enformants Memory) when Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was first missing from his
House, as this Enformant heard it reported: This Enformant being in Company
with Mr. Richard Cooper, and one Lowen, met the said Sir Edmund in St. Martins
Lane; He going up toward New-street, and this Enformant going toward the
Strand. This Enformant telling the said Mr. Cooper, There comes Justice
Godfrey; The said Mr. Cooper Answering, So he does; and Mr. Cooper, when he
came up to him, saluting him saying, Good Morrow Sir Edmund; the said Sir
Edmund replying in a Grave, Formal Way, Good Morrow Mr. Cooper: which gave this
Enformant Occasion to say, The Justice is Melancholy. Mr. Cooper replying, No,
He is Studying.

Mr. Joseph Radcliffe speaks to the Same Point also, and his Wife agrees with
him in the same Thought, upon the Humor they observed him to be in, about One
of the Clock the same Saturday. See the Enformation at Lage, cap. 18.

I have Three Other Depositions that speak to the same Day, and to the same
Purpose; and with them I shall Conclude This Chapter.

Thomas Snell Deposes, That He this Enformant had no Personal Knowledge of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey; but that Living in Holborn, over against Turn-Style, he
has seen a Person often passing by his House into the Red-Lyon-Fields, and
has been told Several Times (but by whom this Enformant does not remember)
that the said Person was Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

He says further, That upon the Day (as he Remembers and Believes) whereon
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was first missing, he saw (about Noon as he remembers)
the same Person (as he verily b^lieveth) which he had formerly been told was
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, pass by the House of This Enformant, into
Red-Lyon-Fields.

And further, That hearing afterward that the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
was found, This Enformant Reflected upon the Person that he had seen as
abovesaid; and upon the Melancholique Appearance of him, as he passed by This
Enformants House at the Time aforesaid.

Thomas Grundy Deposes, That He This Enformant walking out toward Hampstead,
in Company with Mr. Huysman a Painter, upon the Saturday when Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was first missing; being (to the best of This Enformants Memory) the
12th of October, 1678. He This Enformant about Two or Three in the Afternoon of
the Day aforesaid, (as he remembers) Seeing a Tall Person walking alone,
toward the White-House near Primrose-Hill, He this Enformant said to Mr.
Huysman, there goes Dr. Barwick; But this Enformant observing him further, told
the said Mr. Huysman, that it was not (...) ^arwick: but wondering a little with
himself, to see a Person alone thereabouts, This Enformant having often taken
that Walk, but very rarely seeing any Body thereabouts before: This Enformant
followed him in the same way, at the matter of Twenty Yards distance, for near
a Quarter of a Mile; and observed, that his Stockings were a kind of a Rusty
Black, and his Shoes seemed to be Old, and his Coat of a Dark-Colour'd Mixed
Chamblet (as this Enformant Remembers.)

And further, That this Enformant going to take the same Walk some Days after,
and going by So-ho, this Enformant was there told the First News he had heard
of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, being found Murdered upon Primrose-Hill. Upon
which, this Enformant reflected on the Person that he had taken upon the
Saturday for Dr. Barwick, and concluded within himself, that the Person whom he
first took for Dr. Barwick, was Sir E. Godfrey. This Enformant knowing Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, and remembering that he had seen him in such a Colored
Coat; which Struck this Enformant with an Apprehension as he Declared to
Several Others, that the said Sir Edmund had laid Uiolent Hands upon Himself.

James Huysman Deposes, That he this Enformant hearing that the Body of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was found, at, or near Primrose Hill; and that the said Sir
Edmund had been missing ever since the Saturday before; This Enformant
reflected upon it, that he had seen a Person in a very Melancholique Posture,
and way of Walking, near the said Place, upon the Day when Sir Edmund was
reported to have been first missing; And (as this Enformant remembers) it was
betwixt Two and Three that Afternoon. He was a Tall, slender Man, in a Black or
Dark Coat, which this Enformant took to be Chamblet; This Enformant wondering
within himself to See a Person of his Appearance walking in so Lonesom a Place.

And says, That this Enformant speaking with one Mr. Grundy, after the Body
was found, about the said Sir Edmund, the said Mr. Grundy having been with this
Enformant at the Time when they saw the said Person that is above described; He
the said Mr. Grundy, and This Enformant, Comparing the Person of the Man with
the Circumstances of the Day, the Place, and the Appearing Sadness in the said
Persons Gate and Motion, did Jointly Agree in an Apprehension, that the Person
above Described, and whom they had seen Together as aforesaid, was Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey. And that this Enformant going afterward to the White-house,
Asked the Woman of the House, Whether Sir Edmunds Body had been brought
Thither, and if any Blood came from it; the said Woman Answered This Enformant,
that it was Laid there upon the Table, and that the Blood Dreyned from the Body
into the Cellar; and that Clots of Blood were found about the Body, to the Best
of This Enformants Memory.

CHAP. III.
What Notice was taken of Sir E. B. Godfrey's Melancholy before he went away
from his House; And what Opinion, or Apprehension People had Concerning it.

THis Topique is the very Hinge of the Main Question. There Is a Great deal to
be said upon it; And I shall rather Adventure to be thought Tedious, then to
fall short in any thing that is very Particular, and very Material; for it is
not with such a Trial as This, in a Book, as it is with a Trial at Bar in a
Court of Justice; Where All that is over and above a Legal Competency of
Witnesses for Probity, and for Number, is Burdensome and Superfluous, and only
so much Money, or Time thrown away. Now I am not in This Place to contend with
Rules, and Forms of Law and Equity; but Common Fame sits Judge of the
Controversy, while Reason is to be Tried by Noise, and Prejudice. So that I
must, both in Necessity, and in Discretion, make use of All Honest Aids to my
Advantage, though I prove the same thing over and over again, by Twenty several
Hands, in as many several Ways; and so, as to leave no Place for Prepossession:
For when Men of All Sorts and Conditions; Men of Several Qualities and
Persuasions; And Men of Credit, in fine, of what Judgment soever; When All
These, I say, shall agree, as with One Voice, to the Truth of what I deliver; I
have no more to Ask, but the Readers Patience for a Candid Report of the Fact;
and Every Man then is at Liberty to make his Own Inference: We shall now Begin
our Remarques upon the Eve to That Fatal Saturday before mentioned.

Mr. Richard Wheeler of St. Martins in the Fields, Deposes, That upon Friday,
October 11. 1678. being at a Vestry in St. Martins, Sir E. B. Godfrey, who was
commonly the Mouth of the Board, sat Leaning, with his Face upon his Hand,
without a Word speaking, saving that he once Lifted up his Head, and Uttered
These, or the like Words [That will not do.] Captain Bridal being there
present: That the Company Adjourned from thence to a Tavern, where, upon
Discourse of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, it was Agreed, that he Was not, or had not
been Well; his Countenance, and Behavior being very much Altered.

Mr. Joseph Radcliffe gives an Account of a Humor of his at Mr. Weldens in
York-Buildings, That very Night after the rising of the Vestry. See it at
large, Cap. 18.

Mr. Edward Birthy Deposes, That about Four or Five in the Afternoon of the
Friday Next before the Saturday that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was First Missing.
This Enformant, with his Wife, and Another Person since Dead, going to Cross
the Street from the Red-Lyon-Inn in Drury Lane, saw Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
walking down Drury Lane to the Strandward, Close by the side of the Kennel,
looking still upon the Ground, seeming to be Extremely Pensive, and
Melancholique.

And that as This Enformant was just about to Pass the Kennel, He this
Enformant with his Company stopped, till Sir Edmund might go by, who happened to
be Passing, just at That Place; this Enformant saluting him with his Hat; as
being very well known to him: Whereupon, the said Sir Edmund made a very
strange, and a sudden Pause, Setting one Foot forward with a stamp, Catching
hold of the Brims of his Hat, as if he were to look at something, and star'd
this Enformant in the Face a while, without a Word speaking: This Enformant and
the Company Passing by him while he stood in this Posture, and so continued a
little while after, This Enformant observing the said Sir Edmund to continue
his Course by the side of the Kennel, 'till This Enformant and his Company went
out of the Lane into a Little Alley, a good Way from thence. This Enformant
telling his Company thereupon, This is Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; This looks
strangely; Pray God Bless him, or to that Effect. This Enformant being at that
Time much Troubled to see him in such a Disorder; and the Company at That Time
making the same Reflection upon it.

Mary Gibbons, Junior, Deposes, That Judith Pamphlin ( who lived in the House
with Sir Edmundbury Godfrey) told this Enformant, that Sir Edmund was the most
Melancholique, Altered Man of Late that could be; and how upon the Day before
he was Missing, he brought down, in a Great Discontent, as many Papers as she
thought would fill her Apron, and threw them into the Fire.

Mrs. Gibbons, the Mother, says also, That Mrs. Pamphlin told her, that Sir
Edmund had been so very Discontented, and out of his Ordinary Temper of Late,
that he Quarreled with his very Band: Saying further, That the said Sir Edmund
was in so great a Disorder the Friday Night before he went away, that he
Tumbled over his Drawers, and Trunks, and burnt as many Papers as her Apron
would hold.

To pass a short Reflection now upon the Matters above; His Disorder at the
Vestry was Manifest; The Wildness of his Discourse, and Actions at Weldens,
seemed to Point Directly at what Followed. His Behavior in Drury Lane was as
Freakish as any of the Rest; and as much Wondered at, by Those that were mere
Strangers to him. It must be Somewhat Extraordinary too, the Account that
Pamphlin gives of Burning his Papers. And it was as Extravagant Perhaps as any
thing else; his odd manner of coming to my Lady Prats That Day, and behaving
himself at a rate, to put the whole Company in Amazement. This was the Action
of Friday: But now to look further back a little.

Mr. Thomas Wynell Deposes, That having many Occasions of Business with Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, as well at the Enformants House at Cranbrook in Essex, as
at the House of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, in Harts-horn-Lane in the Strand: He
this Enformant took Notice many Times that Sir Edmund was very much Disordered
and Troubled in his Mind; and particularly, some Two or Three Days before this
last Appointment, ( i. e. of Dining together that Saturday.) Insomuch, that
this Enformant did often Reason the Matter with the said Sir Edmund; and use
all the Means, and Arguments he could, to remove that Extreme Sadness, and
Melancholy that he Labored Under. The said Sir Edmund still persisting in That
Disconsolate Temper of Mind; and often expressing the Deep Sense he had of the
Unhappiness of his Condition, and that he had not Long to Live.

Captain Thomas Gibbon Deposes, that about Ten of the Clock in the Morning,
upon the Thursday before Sir E. B. Godfrey left his House, the said Sir Edmund
having sent for the Wife of this Enformant, who could not at that Time leave
her sick Mother: He this Enformant went into Harts-horn-Lane, to the said Sir
Edmund, whom he found by his Dress, Looks, and Actions, to be in great
Disorder. And this Enformant finding his Company Uneasy to the said Sir
Edmund, soon took his Leave, and returning home to his Wife, he this Enformant
told her his Thoughts of Sir Edmund; Expressing Great Trouble for his
Condition, the said Sir Edmund being This Enformants Particular Friend.

Mary Gibbons, the Daughter of the Captain abovenam'd, Deposes, That some Few
Days before Sir Edmund was Missing, the Father of This Enformant told her, that
he had been to Visit Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and that he found him in so great
Disorder, that he was afraid he would make some Attempt upon Himself, as his
Father had done.

Mary, the Wife of Captain Thomas Gibbons, Deposes as above, and tells of a
Remarkable Extravagance of Sir Godfrey, at her House the Tuesday was Senight
before he went away, of which we shall speak more particularly in the Last
Chapter of This Book.

CHAP. IV.
What Opinion or Apprehension had Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Himself of his
Melancholy before he went away? And what was it that made him use That
Expression so often, I shall be the First Martyr; Or, I shall not Live Long.

MAry Gibbon, Senior, Deposes, That she observed Sir Edmundbury Godfrey very
Sad and Pensive, some time before his Death; and that the said Sir Edmund has
lamented his Condition to this Enformant, saying, [Oh! Cozen, I do inherit my
Fathers Deep Melancholy: I cannot get it off. I have taken away a great many
Ounces of Blood, but I cannot get the Victory. These Words, or Words to this
effect, the said Sir Edmund has spoken very many times, saying, I am best
Alone; I cannot get off This Melancholy; and the Like Expressions.

And says, that not long before his Death, he being Ill, sent for her to make
him some Jelly, and that a Day or Two after, she going to Visit him, she found
him drinking Whey with Brown Bread in it; and then she said to him, Sir, I make
Jelly for you one Day, and you Drink Whey another. Oh Cozen (says he) throwing
the Pot one way, and the Spoon Another) My Fathers Dark Melancholy has Seized
me; It is Hereditary, and I cannot get it out of me.

Mary Gibbons the Younger Deposes, That this Enformant has heard Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, not long before his Death, say, that He Inherited his
Fathers Melancholy, and that he had been let Blood, but it did him no Good.

William Church of the Inner Temple, Gent. Deposes, That this Enformant was
very well acquainted with Sir Edmundbury Godfrey for many Years before he Died.
And that the said Sir Edmund coming often to Richmond, had Lodgings there
within Four or Five Doors of the House of this Enformant; where this Enformant
observed him to walk much Alone, and to Shun the Company of the Gentry
thereabouts: And this Enformant taking Notice that the said Sir Edmund did
usually exercise himself upon the Bowling-Green with Ordinary Company;
sometimes with Mr. Gofton's Footman; at other Times, with the Man that helps to
Roll, and Make the Ground: And this Enformant meeting him, did ask him the
Reason, Why he did not afford this Enformant, and the Gentry of the Town his
Conversation, but kept Company with Footmen and Ordinary Fellows, which were a
Scandal to him. To which the said Sir Edmund Replied, That Company was very
Irksom to him; That he Bowl'd and Exercised with those mean People, that he
might run up and down, and do what he would, to divert Melancholy, for he was
so Overpowered with Melancholy, that his Life was very Uneasy and Burdensome to
him.

The Substance of the Enformation above, has run much in the Mind of this
Enformant, and he has upon several Occasions, and for several Years past, in
Public Places made the same Observations; and spoke to the same effect, of
what he here Delivers. These Expressions of the said Sir Edmund (to the Best of
this Enformants Memory) were about a Year before he Died.

I shall Force Nothing beyond the Genuine Signification and Import of Words,
and Actions, in the Simplicity of their Meaning. Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was too
well acquainted with the Dismal State and Effects of his Fathers Melancholy, to
lay such an Emphasis upon his Own, as still to call it Hereditary; and at the
same time, not to have Other Apprehensions about him then the Fear of being
Murdered by the Papists. There were No Tongs, nor Otes's in his Fathers Days;
No Wholesale Narrative men to deal for Treason by the Gross; and yet so often
as he found himself in any Extraordinary Distress, and Anguish of Thought, it
was still his Fathers Melancholy, that he Inherited; That Dark Melancholy, as
he calls it; and nothing but the Instance of his Fathers Melancholy would serve
him for the Illustration of his Own. This was sure a very Unhappy President,
for him to Copy out the Resemblance of his Own Distemper by; for I find it
Asserted upon Oath, by Mrs. Gibbon (and No Body knew the Family Better) that
the Father of This Miserable Gentleman (though otherwise a very Good Man) was
so Overcome with Melancholy, that he attempted several Times to kill Himself;
that she had seen him Bound in his Bed; and that in One Fit of Distraction, he
wounded three of his Children, almost mortally, with a Cleaver. This, in
Substance, is Confirmed by many Others; And I could carry it further, but it is
a Calamity to be Compassionated; and even This alone would have been too much,
if the Necessity of the Case and of the Argument had not Required it. He says,
He was afraid of his Fathers Melancholy; and this is only to show what kind of
Melancholy it was that he was afraid of. Harry Moor, the Clark, speaks of the
Father to the same effect.

To bring my Matters Now a little Nearer. If it be True, that Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey Died a violent Death; and Certain, that He was Killed, either by Some
body else, or by Himself; If No Animosity Private, or Public, appeared to
make it either a Personal Act, or the Malice of a Conspiracy: Nay, and that the
Gentleman was Manifestly a Friend to That Party, which the Faction would
persuade the World he had so much reason to be afraid of; it will be as hard
to Believe at Last, that This Gentleman Died by the Hands of Papists, as that
he Died the Somerset-House-Way; which is as Impossible to be True, as that Fire
and Water should Ioyn in one and the same Body, to Drown and Burn the World,
Both at Once.

I shall Leave it now to the Reader to Consider, that if he did not Dye by
Other Hands, he Died by his Own; and if there was No Likelihood at all, of his
being Cut off by the Papists, whether there was any Ground or Not, to fear he
might be Destroyed by his Melancholy. Or in fine; Since of Necessity it must be
One of the Two; Whether of the Two was yet the more Probable.

But People are still at a Loss, they say, how to bring him off from That
Ordinary Ejaculation of his, that upon all Discourses of his Uneasiness and
Trouble of Mind, was still the Burden of the Song. Mr. Robinson (afterward Sir
Thomas) gave Evidence [as I have Noted] at Greens Trial, of a Discourse he had
with Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and of Sir Edmunds speaking These Words to him: [
Upon my Conscience I believe I shall be the first Martyr, Trial, pa. 14.] In
short, Mr. Wynnel, Captain Gibbons; his Wife; and Daughter, Coll. Welden, (and
indeed who Not) have heard him speak Many and Many a Time to the same Effect.
Now it is a Strange Thing, if he reckoned himself in Danger from the Papists,
that he should never so much as Mention This but to Otes; Whose very Oath in
the Affirmative; Blasts the Credit of the thing he Swore to: Especially, as it
was Hooked in to serve the Turn of his Plot. A man might very well Content
himself, after what is said Already upon the Ambiguity of This Expression, and
the Weakness of laying more Weight upon it then 'twould bear; to Pass over the
Question without any more ado. But yet though it may seem a Thing Wholly
Frivolous, to Reason upon, there is somewhat in it however, upon the Point of
Curiosity, that may Deserve a Place in This Account of Things, though but for
Common Satisfaction.

Upon taking Tongs and Otes'es Depositions, upon Sept. 28. 1678. (though very
Unwillingly, as appears over and over Already) Sir Godfrey reflected upon it,
that he had made No Formal Discovery of the Pretended Treason; and finding now
that the Business was come to be Public: the Matter being then brought before
the Council, he came to be Every day more and more Sensible of the Danger of
the Misprision, and not without Several Hints, by the By, that he was like to
be called to an Account for it, There being near a Month Past, from his First
Enformation, Sept. 6. without any Regular, or Effectual Notification of the
Matter: And he was the More Frightened upon it, for the Disservice that he did
to the Design of making a Plot on it: for he never Believed one Word of the
Story; and told All People as much, where he thought he might Safely Declare
Himself. So that the Martyrdom he feared, was the being made a Sacrifice to the
Faction. He was Sufficiently Sensible how Greedily the Multitude swallowed This
Bait of a Plot; what Labor was used to make a Parliament Cause on it: And how
Heartily Disposed the Majority, even of That Parliament, were, to Entertain All
Colorable Suggestions, under so Popular a Pretense. It must be added now, that
This Terrible Parliament it Self was to meet upon the 21 th of That October: So
that Sir Edmund had but a Matter of Three Weeks Time to Consider on it. There
was an Unlucky Circumstance More too, in the Kings going to New Market upon the
Second of That October; When the Faction had Effectually the Shuffling,
Cutting, and Dealing of their own Game; and All things working toward a Common
Ruin. There never was a Concurrence of more Critical, and Mortal Accidents
toward the Ruin of One Poor Justice of Peace, then met upon This Single
Occasion; Adding to All the Rest an Hereditary, and an Inseparable Melancholy
to Work upon; a Melancholy that he Complained of long before These Depositions
came into the World; as is Set forth already in the Depositions of Mr. Church:
But upon the Whole Matter, however, the Last day of his Life was the 12 th of
October: The 15 th Day from the bringing of the Plot before the King and
Council; and the 9th from the Meeting of the Parliament.

This was the Pinch of his Condition; His Case lay Open to the Worst of
Constructions, and he was Morally Sure that his Enemies would make the most of
any Advantage against him. The Man was No Fool; and his Head as well as his
Humor, lay for Practice and Business: And who knows if he had Lived 'till the
Meeting of the Parliament, Whether he should not have been brought in as a
Party to the Conspiracy, rather then for a Bare Misprision? For his Royal
Highness was made the Causa sine qua non, of the Plot it self; and the
Communicating of These Enformations to the Duke of York, would never have been
Forgiven him. To Conclude, if he had Survived, he should, in All Likelihood,
have Suffered the Law as a Popish Traitor; Whereas, by This Intervening
Disappointment, he has passed now these several years, for a Protestant Martyr:
So that in Truth, the Parliament were the Papists that He Feared; which agrees
with an Enformation abovementioned of Mrs. Gibbon, Delivered upon Oath, to a
Secretary of State, long before ever I saw the Face of her. See the Particulars
of This Relation, Cap. 20.

Mr. Wynnel Deposes as Follows; That going toward Mr. Goodwins (a Councellor at
Law) with Sir E. B. Godfrey, about the Time of the Lords Commitment to the
Tower; The Enformant was telling Sir Edmund, that the Lords could not be such
Fools as to Think of such a Thing; or What Power had the Pope, in such or Such
a Case? Sir Edmund Replying, No; He has None: The Lords are as Innocent as You
or I: Coleman will Dye; but not the Lords. To which This Enformant said, If so,
Where are we then? Sir Edmund Replying, Otes is Sworn, and is Perjured. This
Enformant bad him then Speak the Truth, and tell the Meaning on it. [Why ( says
Sir Edmund) Consults about a Toleration; Nothing against the King; but there is
a Design upon the Duke of York; and This will come to a Dispute among them. You
may Live to see an End on it, but I shall not.

Mr. Wynnel says further; That upon his asking Sir E B. Godfrey some time why
he was so Melancholy; his Answer has been, that he was Master of a Dangerous
Secret, that would be Fatal to him: That his Security was Otes's Deposition,
that he the said Otes had first Declared it to a Public Minister: And 2ly.
That he came to Sir Edmund by His Direction.

I could add More Instances, but This is a Redundance purely Superogatory; for
the Case is Clear without it.

CHAP. V.
What did Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Friends, Relations, Servants and
Acquaintance think was become of him, from the time of his going away, to the
Time when the Body was found?

RIchard Adams Senior of Lincolns Inn, Esquire, Deposes; October. 4. 1684. That
upon the Saturday Morning, betwixt Six and Seven, being the Day (as he
conceives) Whereupon Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was first Missing; He This
Enformant went to the House of the said Sir Edmund, and Enquiring for him,
received Answer, from some of the House, that he was gone abroad Early in the
Morning: and so This Enformant went from Thence to Westminster, from whence he
Returned, and called at the House of the said Sir Edmund toward Eleven the same
Day, and Enquiring for Sir Edmund again, the People of the House seemed to be
in Great Consternation; which gave Occasion to This Enformant to Enquire what
the Matter was, receiving for Answer, that they had Cause to fear that he was
made away.

Mr. Thomas Wynell Deposes; that having been Intimately acquainted with Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, the said Sir Edmund made a proposal to This Enformant (as
on the behalf of a Friend) for the buying of some houses of this Enformants in
Brewers Yard: And they proceeded so far upon the Agreement, that they applied
themselves, by Consent, to Mr. Goodwin a Councellor at Law, then living near
the Temple-Gate, to draw up the Conveyance between them: and appointed to Dine
together at one Colonel Welden's in York-Buildings, on the Saturday the 12. of
October 1678. To the best of This Enformants Memory; Intending, after Dinner,
to go to Council together to finish the Writings.

This Enformant says further, that coming to the Place and not finding Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey there, he desired Colonel Welden to send his Servant to his
house for him; it being then past Twelve a Clock at Noon. The Servant went to
call the said Sir Edmund, and brought word back that he was not at home: After
which, this Enformant staid for some time Expecting him; and then told Welden
that he would go himself to his house, Whether this Enformant went accordingly.

And says further, that he This Enformant coming toward the Door of the
house, saw the Maidservant of the House (an Elderly Tall Person) Leaning upon
the Rail without the Door: and the Manservant (which he took to be his Clerk,
and his Name, Moor) Leaning against the Door-Post: And both of them appearing
to This Enformant sad, and surpised.

This Enformant did then Demand of them where their Master was; or whether he
was at home or No? To which they, or one of them made Answer, that he was gone
out about two hours before; This Enformant asking them whether he was gone, it
was Answered, that they could not tell: Whereupon, This Enformant said to them,
Your Master Promised to Dine with me to Day at Colonel Welden's, Will he not
be There, think Ye? To which the Man replied, Truly he could not tell. Upon
This the Enformant bad the Servant tell his Master when he came in, that he was
gone to Colonel Welden's, and Expected him There, according to his
appointment. To which the Man Answered, Ay Sir, when I see him, so I will.
There appeared to This Deponent so much Disorder in their Countenances; Their
Manner of speaking, and their Behavior, that it made an Impression of
Heaviness upon him.

Hereupon the Enformant went his way, and in less then an hour returned to
Welden's, and told him he could not find him, and they had best go to Dinner;
for they said he was gone out, and No body knew where he was.

Sir Edmund's Clerk remembers Mr. Wynel's Enquiring for his Master, as above.

Mr. Thomas Burdet Deposes, That He This Enformant has often heard Mr. Thomas
Wynell speak of the very Great Melancholy, and Disorder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey for some short time before he left his House; and particularly, that
upon the very Morning that Sir Edmund went away, Mr. Wynell calling at his
House, saw a Servant, or Servants of the said Family, in a very sad, and
Disconsolate Appearance, at the said Sir Edmund's Door, which gave Mr. Wynell
an Apprehension, as if some Great Mischief had Befallen the said Sir Edmund.

Mary Gibbon the Elder Deposes, That upon the Sunday, the Day after Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey went from his House, Mrs. Pamphlin came to This Enformant,
and Weeping, asked her where Sir Edmund was.

Upon Monday (the Day following) the Two Brothers of the said Sir Edmund came
to This Enformant's House, and Enquired for their Brother; telling her, that he
dined with her the Day before, and lay there all Night. Mr. Michael Godfrey
saying, I am sure he is here; This Enformant Declaring that he was Not; and why
should she deny it, if it were Otherwise? The Brother hereupon asked This
Enformant when she saw him, and what Discourse they had? so This Enformant told
them of his Locking himself up, and of his Discourse; and how much he was out
of Humor: Upon the Hearing whereof, Mr. Michael fell to stamping, and
Crying-out, O Lord! We are Ruined, What shall we do? The Brother Benjamin
lifting up his eyes; Wringing his Hands; and breaking out into Exclamations:
What will become of us! This Enformant asked them then what the Matter was!
they said [Nothing.] But they said he was not at Church, and so they thought he
might have been with Her, telling This Enformant also that she should hear More.

Henry Moor Deposes, That his Master not coming home That Saturday Night, he
went Early the Next day, being Sunday Morning, to the House of Mr. Michael
Godfrey, to acquaint him with his Masters Absence; whereupon the said Mr.
Godfrey brake out into This Expression: [God have Mercy upon us; I pray God we
hear good News of him.]

Let any Man Consider now, upon what Apprehension it was that the Brothers
should be so Transported upon the Story of This Extravagance of the said Sir
Edmund. It will not be said, I hope, that This Wild Behavior of his was a
Symptom of any Danger he lay in from the Papists.

Mary Gibbon Junior Deposes, That some Day betwixt Sir Edmund's Leaving his
House, and the finding of the Body, she This Enformant saw the Two Brothers of
Sir Edmund come into her Fathers House; but she did not hear their Discourse:
only This Enformants Mother told her afterward, that upon some Discourse with
them of the Strange Behavior of their Brother a Matter of Ten Days before,
they brake out into Exclamations, Crying out, they were Ruined; What should
they do! What would become of them!

Mary Gibbon Senior further Deposes, That on Tuesday Morning, the Enformant
came to the House of Sir Edmund, where she found Mrs. Pamphlin Crying, and
saying, We shall never see Sir Edmund More: And asking her what was become of
him, she said, she durst not trust her.

And further says, That about a Fortnight after the Burial of Sir Edmund's
Body, Mrs. Pamphlin came to This Enformant, saying, It is a very sad thing that
I should not be examined about the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey: This
Enformant telling her, the said Pamphlin; If you do know how he came by his
Death, and do not discover it, you will be Damned to All Eternity: The said
Pamphlin replying to this Effect; If his Clerk and I were Examined upon Oath,
we could say a Great Deal, which I will not do Voluntarily; but if I be put to
my Oath, I will speak what I know. The Clerk knows more then you can Imagine,
This Enformant wrote down some Notes of what Mrs. Pamphlin said, which were
Delivered (as this Enformant believes) either to the Lords Committees, or to
the Earl of Shaftsbury. This Enformant well Remembers, that Mr. Pamphlin took
Notice to her of Sir Edmund's being much out of Order some Weeks before his
Death.

Captain Thomas Gibbon Deposes, That upon the Monday after Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey went away, he went to Colonel Weldens, and asked him what he thought
of Sir Edmund? Whose Answer was, I Dare not tell you my Thoughts; for I have
observed him to be much out of his Ordinary Temper, ever since his Examination
of Otes: This Enformant telling his Wife, what he had heard, at his Return.

This Enformant went the Day Following, to Sir Edmund's to know what News;
where Mrs. Pamphlin said, that She could not tell him, but bad him go into the
Kitchen, where the Clerk was, and he would tell him more.

Mary Gibbon Junior, Deposes, That after Sir Edmunds Dead Body was found, and
that in the Time betwixt the Burial of the said Sir Edmund, and the coming in
of Bedloe, and Prance; and before any News of a Discovery how he came by his
Death; the said Pamphlin, came to the House of This Enformants Father, and was
saying; How strange a Thing it was that she should not be examined; For I was
warned (said she) as well as Moor, and Curtis, and they were examined, and I
was not: Pamphlin telling her this Enformant, that they were not willing she
should appear; Meaning, as this Enformant understood her, the Relations of Sir
Edmund; but the said Pamphlin told this Enformant, that upon a Second Warning,
they agreed that she should Appear; but bad her speak sparingly; and telling
her, that she might safely swear, That the Papists had Murdered him. This
Enformant was at that Time waiting upon her Grandmother in her Death-Sickness,
who after the Departure of the said Pamphlin, spoke to the Enformant to this
effect, [Mrs. Pamphlin has made such a Discourse here, that I think you are
bound in Conscience to enform a Magistrate of it; for I am Confident Sir Edmund
killed Himself.] This Enformant Inclining also to have some Justice of the
Peace acquainted with it.

And this Enformant well remembers, that the said Pamphlin asked her, [If Sir
Edmund has Murdered himself, do you think he is damn'd] which she this Enformant
much wondered at; there being no occasion given for such a Question: So that
this Enformant asked the said Pamphlin thereupon, Why do you say these Things to
me? You frighten me; If you know any thing your self, you ought to discover it
to the Next Magistrate. To which the said Pamphlin made Answer, Let Old Moor be
examined wit^ me, and I Will say what I know; for I have no reason to run my self
voluntarily into an Inconveniency: for you know I have a Dependency upon the
Brothers, (which this Enformant understood to be a Pension) and I am loath to
Anger them: But if I be compelled, I Will speak what I know. This Enformant
telling her again, That if she knew any thing, she might be examined in such a
manner, as it might appear a Force upon her: For there was a Severity or a
Persecution that lay heavy upon a Suffering People; and she did not know what
Inconveniences might follow upon it.

Judith Pamphlin Deposes, That soon after Sir Eddmundbury Godfrey's
withdrawing from his House, this Enformant heard the Wife of Sir Edmund's Clark
say, Oh! That ever it should be said that such a Man as Sir Edmund should
Murder Himself! This being spoken some Days before the Dead Body was found.

William Fall, Gent. Deposes, That at the Time when Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
Missing from his House, and to the best of this Enformants Memory, before the
Dead Body of the said Sir Edmund was found; the Two Brothers of the said Sir
Edmund, Merchants in London, came several times to the Lord Chancellor
Nottingham's House in Queenstreet, to speak with his Lordship.

And says further, That the Enformant enquiring of his said Brothers, what was
become of Sir Edmund? He this Enformant apprehended by their Discourse; that
they were in some Apprehension that he had made himself away.

To say Nothing of Mr. Grundy, Mr. Huysman, Mr. Birtby, and Mr. Snells
Reflections, as appears, expressly in their Enformations so soon as ever they
heard the Body was found, upon the Melancholique Walk and Actions of the
Persons, the last Time they saw him.

CHAP. VI.
What Endeavors were Used to lay the Death of Sir E. B. Godfrey upon the
Papists.

THey began early to lay the Foundation of this Imposture, by dealing it up and
down among the People, that somewhere or other Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
Murdered by the Papists: But sometime it was at One House, sometime at
Another; and they were as much Puzzled at First, with the Shifting of the Story
from This Place to That, as Bedloe and Prance were afterward, with the Removing
of the Body; but there was no Confidence, or Industry wanting however toward
Preparing the Multitude to swallow the Cheat: As will appear by the Following
Enformations.

Mr. Thomas Wynell Deposes, That enquiring of Mr. Welden for Sir E. B.
Godfrey, on Saturday, early Afternoon, when Sir Edmund was first Missing; Mr.
Welden looking this Enformant in the Face, said to him, to this effect; Ah! Mr.
Wynell! You will never see him more. This Enformant hereupon demanded of him,
What Ground he had to say so? Adding withal, to this effect, You and I know
very well that it is a common thing for the said Sir Edmund to go out in a
Morning so soon as his Justice Business is over, and not come home till Night;
and no Apprehension all this while of any hurt to befall him. Why should you be
so suspicious then of any Ill, for Two Hours Absence, and at this time of the
day? Unto which the said Welden made Answer to this Purpose; To tell you the
Truth, ( says Mr. Welden) His Brothers have been with me, and are just now
gone: And they say the Papists have been watching for him a long time, and that
now they are very confident they have got him; to which this Enformant
objected, to this effect, Why should the Papists do Him any Hurt? He was never
observed to be an Enemy to them; the said VVelden Persisting in the same
Opinion as before.

This Enformant says moreover, That laying the Circumstances together, of the
Servants appearing at the Door, as if all were not well in the House; The
Discourse of the said VVelden to this Enformant; and a Remarkable Sadness which
this Enformant observed upon the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, Two or Three Days
before; he this Enformant was struck with an extraordinary Apprehension of some
Fatal Disaster upon him.

This Enformant Finally says, that he has often Discoursed all the
Particulars in This Paper mentioned, relating to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, from
Time to Time, in several Companies.

Mr. Thomas Burdet Deposes, That this Enformant well remembers, that Sir E.
B. Godfrey and Mr. Wynell were by Appointment to Dine together That Saturday,
when Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was said to be first Missing. And says, That in an
Afternoon about Two or Three of the Clock, this Enformant met Mr. VVynell not
far from Green-Lane, in the Strand, who said to this Enformant, to this effect.
What have your People done with Sir Edmundbury Godfrey? The Town says you have
Murdered him: To which this Enformant A^swered something with Admiration, That
he knew not what he meant. To which Mr. Wynell Replied, That he had been at Sir
E. B. Godfrey's House, and at Colonel Weldens, where they were to have Dined;
and that it was a Report, that the News of Sir Edmund's being Murdered by the
Papists, came from his Brothers. This Enformant verily believes, that it was
upon That Saturday when Sir Edmund was first Missing, that This Enformant met
Mr. VVynell; the said Mr. VVynell speaking of it as a thing newly told him: And
this Enformant having heard nothing of the said Sir Edmund 's having Absented
himself, till (as above) it was told him by Mr. VVynell.

Richard Adams Deposes, Pursuant to the Discourse above, That he met the Earl,
now Marquis of Powis, at the End of Lombard Street, with whom the Enformant had
some Discourse; and seeing one Mr. Harrison, Nephew to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey,
on the other side of the Way; He this Enformant begged my Lords Pardon, to
speak a Word to That Gentleman, to enquire concerning the Truth of That Report
(Implying some Preceding Discourse of a Report.) Whereupon This Enformant
passed over to Mr. Harrison, enquiring of him the Truth of the Report
concerning Sir Edmundbury Godfrey 's being murdered; who Replied to this
Enformant, That he doubted the Report was too True; and that he was Murdered
by the Papists: And hereupon this Enformant returned to the said Earl of Powis,
and told him what he heard from the said Mr. Harrison.

Mr. Edward Birtby also Deposes, That upon the Thursday after Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey went from his House, this Enformant went out of Town toward
Leicestershire, and came to North-Killworth in the Evening of the Day
Following, where this Enformant being in Company with one Mr. Belgrave, and
some others, about Nine or Ten at Night; while they were there together, came a
Letter to Mr. Belgrave, Dated the Day before, to the Best of This Enformants
Memory; and was brought by the Harborough Post, to North Killworth, being some
Five Mile out of the Post-Road.

Mr. Belgrave read the Contents of the said Letter to the Company, for so much
as concerned an Account of the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; saying
Positively, to the Best of this Enformants Memory, That he was Murdered by
Papists. Whereupon, this Enformant reflected upon his having seen him in
Drury Lane, as aforesaid, and brake out into an Exclamation to this effect, I
pray God he has not Murdered himself; for h^ looked upon the Friday before, as
if he were really Distracted; This Enformant telling the said Company the
Story, as it is above Related. Whereupon Mr. Belgrave observed upon it, That if
this Enformant had seen him so Lately, and heard Nothing of it before he came
out of Town, he Hoped it was not True.

This Enformant says further, That he wondered at the Letters of Thursday 's
Post being brought that Night; for he never Remembered any Letters of That Post,
in the Ordinary Course, to come to Killworth before Saturday.

And further says, That this Enformant Traveling Two or Three Hundred Miles
up and down the Country, before his Return to London, found the same
Intelligence by the same Post in All Places where he came.

And says also, That the Letter before spoken of, to Mr. Belgrave, to the best
of this Enformants Memory, came from a Brother of the said Mr. Belgrave 's in
London, who lives at Present (as this Enformant believes) at Husbands
Bosworth in Leichestershire.

The Reader will observe, I presume, how quick they were in their Intelligence,
and what Care was taken to Change the very Course, and Method of the Post, to
spread it so much the sooner.

Mr. Robert Whitehall Deposes, That upon the Sunday or Monday Next following
the Saturday Whereupon Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was First Missing; being at
Georges Coffee-house in Freemans-yard, a Considerable Citizen told him This
Enformant upon Discourse, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Murdered by the
Papists; and that the Report came from his Brothers, or One of them.

Mary Gibbons the Elder, Deposes, That a Matter of Two Days after Sir Edmunds
Body was found, Two of his Relations, Mrs. H. and Mrs. P. came to This
Enformants House, and told her, that he was Certainly Murdered at the Duke of
Norfolks House, for they were all in Mourning; and there was a Mourning Coach
met in the Night, with Four Horses coming from Primrose-Hill. Mrs. H. desired
This Enformant to speak Favorably of Sir Edmund, saying, that This Enformant
knew more of his Mind then any Body, etc.

This Enformant went to Sir Edmunds House in Hartshorn-Lane the Next day, and
having seen the Body, Mrs. H. asked This Enformant, If she did not Now Believe
that the Papists had Murdered him? This Enformant told her, That she did not
Believe it; for to her This Enformants Knowledge, Sir Edmund had done many
kindnesses for some Papists, that had Lived with her This En formant.

Mary Gibbons Junior Deposes, That upon Talk of This Enformants Mothers coming
to an Examination, one Mrs. H. a Relation of Sir Edmunds, desired This
Enformant, that if her Mother came to be Examined again, that there might be as
little said of Sir Edmund as could be, Whatever she knew: Mrs. H. having said
before that Time, in the Hearing of this Enformant, that Sir Edmund was
Murdered by the Papists; And that they had great Reason to Believe, that he
was Murdered in the Duke of Norfolk's House; for the Duke of Norfolks Mourning
Coach with White-Horses, were Seen to come from Primrose-Hill, the Saturday
that Sir Edmund was Missing.

And this Enformant waited upon her Mother, to one Mrs. G. the Tuesday before
Sir Edmunds Body was found, where Mrs. G. said, that Sir Edmund was Certainly
Murdered by the Papists, They had a Spleen at him, and they had done it.

Judith Pamphlin Deposes, That a Maidservant to a Relation of Sir Edmunds,
whose Name was Jane (to this Enformants Best Remembrance) taking Notice that
this Enformant was to Attend a Committee, to be Examined about the said Sir
Edmund, she the said Servant said unto this Enformant, You may safely Swear
that the Papists Killed him. This Enformant replying, that she would not Swear
to more then she knew.

Mr. William Collinson Deposes, That coming to the Feathers at Charing Cross,
one Sunday Morning in October, 1678. to Drink his Mornings Draught, the
Enformant saw several of the Neighborhood there, and giving them the Time of
the Day, asked them what News? To which some of the Company Replied, Here Is
brave News for you Papists: Sir Edmundbury Godfrey went from his House
yesterday, and did not come home last Night, etc. And it was in All Peoples
Mouths in That Quarter, that he was Murdered by the Papists at Somerset House.

Captain Thomas Paulden Deposes, That being at Mrs. Dukes Coffee-house, next
to Northumberland-House about Three or Four a Clock in the Afternoon, on the
Saturday when Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was first said to be Missing from his
House, there was a Discourse in the said Coffee-House to this Effect, That the
said Sir Edmund said when he went out in the Morning, that if he Lived, he
would be at home again by One a Clock: but not being at that Time heard of, it
was believed that he was killed by the Papists: This Enformant does not
Remember Who they were that said it, but well Remembers, that he himself upon
that Occasion asked the Company, To what End the Papists should Murder him. To
which, it was Replied by some of the Company, That it was so Believed; This
Enformant thereupon Speaking to this Purpose, I am Confident if he be Killed,
that it is either by Thieves, or he has done it Himself.

And further, That this Enformant being on the Thursday following at Night in
the Coffee-house abovesaid, News was brought up into the Coffee-Room, That Sir
Edmundbury Godfreys Body was found; And that there were Two Men on Horseback
Below, that had been at the finding of him: Whereupon, the Company went down
into the Street, and this Enformant among the Rest; Sergeant Ramsey being One
of the Company: This Enformant then seeing the Two Horsemen abovementioned at
the Door, Asked one of them, if he had found Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Body: and
Where? Who Answered, Yes, at Primrose-Hill. This Enformant asking further, in
what Place, and Posture? The said Horsemen making Answer, that they found him
in a Ditch, run through with his own Sword, which appeared a Handful out of
His Back; with his Head downward, and his Heels upward; And (as they said) as
if he had fallen upon his own Sword. There were by this Time Crowds of People
go^ about them, and upon the Horse-man's Speaking the Words Last
abovementioned, there was a Muttering among the People, That These are the
Rogues that Murdered him Themselves, and would make People believe, that he
did it himself.

Mr. White the Coroner, was held in hand by Welden with the same Story of the
Papists; Nay and with so Particular a Note upon it, that the Action was
Precisely laid between the Pall Mall, and Arundel-House, as shall be shown by
and By. But Once for All; The Belief or Dis-belief of This Story was at This
Time become Effectually the Test of a Protestant, or a Papist; and the Credit
of it Promoted by All ways Imaginable By Reports, and Post-Letters, as appears
by Mr. Birtby: By Menaces, Promises and Extreme Cruelties, as in the Case of
Mrs. Gibbons, Walters, Bromwell, Coral, Prance: And in one word; All the
Considerable Iayles of England were Crowded with Instances of this Kind.

CHAP. VII.
How Matters were managed while Sir E. B. Godfrey was missing, toward the
finding out what was become of him.

IT was now Break of Day toward the Opening of a Parliament. Sir Edmund left
his House on the 12 th of October. The Body was found the 17 th. and the
Parliament to Meet on the 21 th. A Popish Plot already a foot, but so Weakly
and Scandalously Supported, that nothing could fall out more Opportunely to the
Present Humor, and Purpose, then a Popish Murder, or at least a Popish
Something else to Second it. This was the Reason, and the Policy of the Sham;
but the Business of the Imposture apart; We are in this Place upon an Enquiry
what was done toward the Discovery of the Truth; and we cannot begin better
then with the Clerks Narrative upon This Subject.

Henry Moor Deposes, That his Master not coming home upon Saturday Night, Mr.
Michael Godfrey obliged him upon Sunday Morning to keep his Masters Absence
very Private, and Secret, and not to Communicate it to any Person, till He and
his Brother came to him in the Afternoon: After which, he this Deponent
returning home to his said Masters House about Nine of the Clock, and before
Morning Service, Mrs. Pamphlin asked this Deponent, Where his Master was? To
whom this Deponent replied, That he was got up, and gone abroad Two Hours
before; which Answer this Deponent did make, being by the said Mr. Michael
Godfrey enjoined Secrecy, as aforesaid. And that on the Same Day, after Evening
Service, Mr. Michael Godfrey, and Mr. Benjamin Godfrey came to their Brothers
House to this Deponent, as Mr. Michael Godfrey had Promised; and then they did
agree to make Enquiry at all Places where they knew the said Sir E. Godfrey did
use to frequent, to make Discovery of him; but withal, did then likewise Oblige
this Deponent to Secrecy: And amongst the Places, where They with This Deponent
did make Enquiry, they went to the House of one Captain Gibbons, and did
enquire of Mrs. Gibbons for him, as This Deponent believes; for as soon as they
came out from Mrs. Gibbons, they told this Deponent that Mrs. Gibbons said he
had not been there That Day; and the same Day they went to my Lady Prats,
living near Charing Cross, and several other Houses, but could not hear any
thing of him, upon which, Both the said Mr. Godfreys commanded him, This
Deponent, to keep his Masters Absence Secret, until the Next Morning, being
Monday, when they would come to this Deponent again; and so they continued
their Search, and Enquiry after his said Master, all That Day, and at Night
they returned home, charging him this Deponent still to keep it Secret: But
that Night, after their Departure, he this Deponent hearing of a great Funeral
that was to be Next Night, he writ to Mr. Michael Godfrey, to know whether it
would not be convenient to have his said Masters Absence Divulged abroad
amongst that Number of People, which would be there together; to which he
returned for Answer, That he should Divulge it at the Funeral; but the next
morning being Tuesday, he was Countermanded by a Messenger from the said Mr.
Michael Godfrey, not to Divulge it, till they both had Communicated it to my
Lord Chancellor, which after they had done, he this Deponent did make known the
Absence of his said Master at the said Funeral.

Here are Five Several Injunctions of Secrecy; And Nothing to be Divulged,
'till the Brothers had been with the Lord Chancellor. Now there may seem to be
Another Secret yet, even in the Mystery of This Secrecy; for they were
enquiring after him all This while, and the Town Rung on it, that he was Gone;
and that the Papists had Murdered him: So that the Secrecy seems to look
rather toward a Concealment of their Opinion what was Become of him, then to
the Concealment of his Absence. But it hangs very strangely together, for
People to run up and down Enquiring after Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and yet not
so much as Own that he is Missing. And a Man might as well Suppose the
Publishing of a Proclamation, or a Hue and Cry, upon the Caution of making No
Words on it, as such an Order given to Enquire up and down after him, upon the
same Condition: which looks like a Design, rather of Concealing One thing, then
of Discovering Another. But however, as to the Inquisitive Part* Heark'ning
after him, was a Thing Natural, and Proper to be done; and as much as Could be
done upon That Occasion. Mrs. Gibbon speaks to the Same Effect.

Mrs. Gibbon Senior Deposes, That upon Tuesday Morning, as she was going down
Stairs from Mrs. Pamphlin, she met Henry Moor, desiring him to tell her the
Truth, how Sir Edmund did, and whether he was Alive, or Not? the said Mr. Moor
Swearing, that he was as well in Health, as he himself.

It was Ordered, That at the Funeral, this Enformant should be led to Church by
the said Sir Edmund's Clark; And This Enformant asked him by the Way, Why he
made such Protestations to her, as aforesaid, that Sir Edmund was Alive? Who
replied, that Sir Edmund's Brothers had commanded him to keep All Things
Private, and Charged him to say so, to Save the Estate.

Judith Pamphlin Deposes, That upon Tuesday Morning after Sir Edmunds Going
away, she asked Henry Moor what was become of his Master? To which the said
Moor replied; To tell you the Truth, We are afraid he is Murdered; and his
Brothers have been with the Lord Chancellor, and my Lord Privy Seal, about it,
and they are to attend the Council this Morning.

Mr. Aaron Pengry Deposes, That about the Time of the Prosecution against Mr.
Pain, Mr. Farewell, and Thompson, about the Letters pretended to be written to
Prance, upon the Account of the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, he This
Enformant being in Company of Several Persons, where mention was made about the
said Prosecution, one of the said Company, to the best of This Informants
Knowledge, said, That the Brothers of the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey had been
to Wait upon the late Lord Chancellor Nottingham, about Saving their Brothers
Estate.

But this Enformant not well remembering who it was that said those words, and
discourse, about two Months since, upon that account being had between This
Enformant and several others in Company, among whom was Mr. William Fall, who
was formerly related to the said Lord High Chancellor: as one of his Gentlemen
attending him, This Enformant asked the said Mr. Fall before the said Company,
Whether he had not Vtter'd such or the like Words; who Answered to him this
Enformant, and the rest of the said Company then present, that he had Declared
as much, and would at any time Testify the same, if occasion should be given,
or Words to that or the like Effect.

Mr. William Fall Deposes, That at the Time when Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
Missing from his House, Two of his Brothers came several times to the Lord
Chancellor Notinghams; and that it was a Common Talk in the Family, that their
Business with the Lord Chancellor was, to beg his Lordships Assistance to
secure their Brother's Estate, in case he should be found to have made Himself
away.

And then again there is an Enformation of Mr. White's the Coroner of
Westminster, that looks a Little This way too.

Robert White Deposes, That this Enformant hearing that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
was Missing, went to Mr. Weldens to Enquire after him, where he found Sir
Edmund's Clark, Sitting by the Fireside in Mr. Welden's Private Room, Smoking
a Pipe of Tobacco. This Enformant reproving him for spending his Time There,
since there was such an Uproar in the Town about his Masters Absence; To which
he gave very little Answer.

And further, That this Enformant then discoursing with Mr. Welden about the
said Sir Edmunds Absence, The said Welden said, He could not tell what to think
of it: And This Enformant Frequenting the House of the said Welden afterward,
to hear what News of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, the said Mr. Welden, at the last
told This Enformant, that he did very much suspect him to be Murdered by the
Papists. And That between the Pall Mall, and Arundel-House; And that if there
were a Search made, he the said Welden doubted not but it would appear so. Upon
which, This Enformant told the said Welden, That if Sir Edmundbury Godfreys
Brother ( This Enformant knowing but of One Brother) had a Desire to have
Search made, that He This Enformant did not Doubt but forthwith to Procure a
Warrant from the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs; being at That Time at the
Sessions House in the Old-Bayly. And then left the said Welden: And soon after,
This Enformant repairing to the said Welden, He asked the said Welden, Whether
he had acquainted Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Brother of What he had told him,
touching a VVarrant to Search; and the said Welden Answered to This Effect; You
talk of Searching, but they are Searching more after something else then Him.
After which This Enformant heard no more of the Matter.

It is now High time to go off from This Point; and the Matter is so Plain,
there will need no Explanation upon the Text; But to do Things in Order, Harry
Moor says, they were upon the Search, and it would do well to Enquire in This
Place, what Discoveries they made, and we shall afterward see how far they
Improved These Discoveries.

Henry Moor Deposes, That He, by the Order of Mr. Michael Godfrey, did go to a
Great Funeral on the Tuesday Night next after the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
was Absent from his House, to Divulge his Absence, and to hear if any Person
among the Number of People that were there, could make any Discovery, or give
any Account of him: And when he was at the said Funeral, and Discovering of the
said Sir Edmunds Absence, there was one Parsons amongst the said Company, who
did then and there Declare, that he met with the said Sir Edmund on the
Saturday Morning before Nine, in St. Martins-Lane, who then enquired of him the
said Parsons, the way to Primrose-Hill; saying further, that he had been
Searching within a Little of the Place where the Body was found.

Judith Pamphlin Deposes, That upon the Next Tuesday after Sir Edmund was
Missing, to the Best of This Enformants Remembrance, Henry Moor the Clark of
Sir Edmund told This Enformant, that one Parsons said to the said Moor, that
upon the Saturday Morning then last Past; He the said Parsons met Sir Edmund in
St. Martins Lane, who Asked the said Parsons the Way to some Woods, which This
Enformant does Not remember; somewhere about Primrose Hill.

Mary Gibbon Senior Deposes, That she had it from Judith Pamphlin, that One
Mr. Parsons, a Coachmaker, told Sir Edmund's Clark, that he met Sir Edmund the
same Saturday when he went away, and Sir Edmund asked him the way to Primrose
Hill.

And says, that Mrs. Pamphlin told This Enformant, that the Clark told her,
that he was within Few Rods of the Body at Primrose Hill the Day before ( being
Monday) when he was in the Search of Sir Edmund.

Now to take These Pieces as they lie; a Body would think by Moors Enformation,
that the First News of his Master had been the Account he had from Parsons at
that Funeral; whereas it Appears, both by the Enformation of Judith Pamphlin,
from the Mouth of Moor, and of Mrs. Gibbon from the Relation of Pamphlin, that
the Clark had been Searching for his Master about Primrose Hill the Day before:
Nay, and from the Clarks own Mouth too, that he had the very Direction from
Parsons Himself; which is most Particularly Confirmed and Enlarged upon, by Mr.
Wheeler.

Mr. Richard Wheeler Deposes, that on Tuesday, (October 15th.) This Enformant
went about Noon to the House of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey ( He having been Missing
ever since Saturday) to enquire if They had heard of him; while the Mace-Bearer
to the Lord Chancellor was talking to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Clark at the
same time; And (as it appeared) being there, upon the same Errand. The Clark
making answer, that they had heard Nothing of him, but what they had from Mr.
Parsons, a Coachmaker, ( then Churchwarden of St. Martin's) and from a Fellow
that was used to Light him home, that was sawing a Piece of Timber in So-Ho
Fields. The same Clark said also, the same Tuesday, that Parsons said at the
Burial, that he walked with Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, up St. Martin's Lane, the
Saturday Morning (October. 12. 1678.) between Eight and Nine of the Clock; and
that much about the same time, the Sawyer saw Sir Edmund in So-Ho; And
Described his Clothes and his Band. And further, that Mr. Cooper, and his
Sister-in-Law, Mrs. Lowen ( now Leeson) coming out of Mr. Cook 's door in St.
Martin's Lane, met Sir Edmund, and spoke to him.

Now the Evidence of Thomas Mason serves to Illustrate and strengthen All the
Rest.

Thomas Mason of Marybone Deposes, that he knew the Person of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey very well; And had Custom'd Him, and one Kemp that was his Partner, for
Coals; and that he This Enformant saw the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey upon the
Saturday, whereon This Enformant heard the said Sir Edmund was first Missing;
That is to say, That He This Enformant (as he was going from London to his own
House) met the said Sir Edmund about Ten a Clock the Saturday Morning
aforesaid; The said Sir Edmund coming toward London, in the Fields, betwixt
Mary-bone Pound, and Mary-bone Street: This Enformant likewise giving the said
Sir Edmund the Time of the Day, Who (as This Enformant Remembers) was All in
Black Clothes.

And says, that as This Enformant was walking with his Wife Under a Hedge near
his House upon the Monday Morning, next after the Saturday abovesaid, about Ten
of the Clock, there came a short Man in Black Clothes, in Appearance about
Fifty Years of Age, to Enquire of This Enformant whether he had seen his
Master, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey in the Fields since Saturday Last; for he had
Lost his Master, and knew not what was become of him; The said Person being
very sad, and te^ling This Enformant, that he was Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's
Clark. This Enformant giving the said Person this Answer; That He This
Enformant did see him upon Saturday ( as aforesaid) and had not seen him since.

He was by Ten a Clock upon the Monday Morning gotten as far as the Halfway
House to Enquire for his Master about Those very Fields, where afterward his
Body was found. Mason told him as above, that he met him upon Saturday going
toward London, and had not seen him since: but This did not Hinder Moor yet,
(as appears by his own Relation) from Going-on and Prosecuting his Search. Now
there were No Arundel-Houses, No Somerset-Houses in That Walk; but his very
Fancy wrought upon him, even Contrary to the Direction of his Reason; for he
would have come back else, and turned his Thought Another way. But the Ghastly
Impression of his Last Farewell upon Saturday Morning stuck so Close to him,
that he thought it more likely to find him in a Ditch, then any where else. His
Business into Those Fields, was, out of All Dispute, to search the Ditches for
him; upon a strong Apprehension that he had killed Himself. It was but Coasting
the Mounds to make the Discovery; And There, Undoubtedly, he Looked for him;
and There, it is Forty to One, he Found him. This Collation of Testimonies makes
Moor's own Enformation, Pamphlin's Enformation, of what Moor and his Wife said
to Her; Mrs. Gibbon's Enformation of what she had from Pamphlin, and Sir
Edmund's Apprehension of himself to be All of a Piece.

There are a Couple of Questions now, that Hang one upon the Link of Another;
which, the Reader, I presume, will Take into his Consideration. First, Why
should Moor make a Countenance, as if he had known Nothing 'till Tuesday Night
at the Burial, of Parson's Talk with his Master upon Saturday morning, when it
appears most Evidently, that he knew it, either upon the Sunday, or Early the
Monday morning before? 2 dly, Why could No Resolution be Taken for the
Divulging of the Secret, (as he calls it) 'till he had spoken with my Lord
Chancellor, and my Lord Privy Seal about it? This looks, as if there had been
an eye rather to the Saving of the Estate, then to the Discovery of a murder;
for what Light could their Lordships give, toward the finding of the Body; Or
what Reason could any man give, for the making of it a Secret? unless they were
afraid that Truth should come out? But I am now coming to an end. Here Is Mr.
Wynel, Captain Gibbon with his Wife and two Daughters; Mr. Wheeler, Mr.
Radcliffe, Harry Moor Himself, and Judith Pamphlin: They speak All of them to
very Great Points; To say Nothing of Forty and Forty Witnesses of
Unquestionable Probity besides: but most of them, rather Collateral, then Point
Blank Evidences. We shall see in good Time, when the main Cause comes to an
Issue, what use shall be made of Their Testimonies.

CHAP. VIII.
When, How, Where, and in What Manner the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
Found; And what passed 'till the Coroners Inquest sat upon the View of it.

ON the 17th. of October, 1678. One Bromwell, and Walters passing toward the
White-house about Three or Four Afternoon, saw a Cane and a Pair of Gloves
lying upon a Bank, on a Ditch side; and Talking of it Afterward at the House,
they went back by Consent, with John Rawson, the Master of the House, to see if
they were there still. See their Enformations at Length, Part 1. Cap. 10. The
Master stooping to take up the Gloves, Discovered a Dead Body; Whereupon they
went Immediately to One Brown, a Constable, to give him Notice of it. Who gives
This following Enformation upon the Matter.

John Brown Deposes, that This Enformant very well knew Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey; And that about Six or Seven of the Clock (to the Best of This
Enformants Memory) on the Thursday Evening, after the said Sir Edmund went from
his House, there came unto This Enformant, into This Enformants House, One
William Bromwell a Baker, and John VValters a Farrier, both of St. Giles's in
the Fields, who told this Enformant that there was a Man Dead in a Ditch, with
a Sword run through him near Primrose-Hill: Making mention likewise of a Stick,
and a Pair of Gloves, a Scabbard, and Belt, that lay there not far from the
Body. Whereupon, this Enformant took several of of the Neighbors to his
Assistance, some on Horseback, and others a-foot, and went forthwith to the
Place where the Body lay; which Place was so Covered with Bushes, and Brambles,
in and about the Ditch, that it was a hard matter to see the Body, till one
were come just upon it.

That having found the Body laid the Length-ways of the Ditch; The Left Hand
under the Head upon the Bottom of the Ditch; The Right Hand a little stretched
out, and touching the Bank on the Right-side; The Knees touching the Bottom of
the Ditch, and his Feet not touching the Ground, but Resting upon the Brambles;
The Pummel of the Sword not reaching to the Bottom of the Ditch; The Body lying
in so Crooked a Posture, keeping it from the Ground; The Periwig and the Hat,
lying in the Bottom of the Ditch, a little before the Body; The Body being thus
found, as aforesaid, this Enformant bestrid the Corpse, as it lay in the Ditch,
and put his Hands about it to find how the Sword was Placed.

That after what is Abovesaid, This Enformant spoke to the Company to Hand the
Body out of the Ditch, this Enformant helping likewise, Himself; and they
removed it about Five or Six Yards, to the best of this Enformants Conjecture,
from the Ditch, where the said Body lay: And that upon the Drawing of the Body
out, some of the Company saying it was a Tall Man, this Enformant reflecting
upon it, said to this Effect, Pray God it be not Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, for he
has been for some time Missing; and some others also had the same
Apprehension. It was then very Dark, and this Enformant Kneeling down to take
the best View of the Face that he could, continued in the Suspicion, but could
no be as yet Positive, that it was the Body of the said Sir Edmund.

This Enformant entered then into a Consideration with the Company, how they
might best get the Body up to the White-House; and concluding that it would
endanger the Breaking the Sword, to carry the Body All the Way with the Sword
in it: It was resolved rather to take out the Sword, which was accordingly done,
having first Cautioned the Company to take particular Notice of every
Circumstance, how the Sword and the Body were. This Enformant hereupon, took
out the Sword, which was somewhat hard in the Drawing, and Crash'd upon the
Bone, in the Plucking of it forth.

And says, That upon this, the Enformant and the Company laid the Body Across
two Watchmens Staves, and so carried it to-Rights up to the White-House, where
they laid him down upon the Floor in the House: And this Enformant caused the
Money, and the Papers, and what was found in the Pockets, to be entered into a
Note, and a Duplicate to be taken thereof, to prevent any Mistakes.

That immediately after taking of the said Notes, the Body was laid upon the
Table, and no doubt any longer but it was the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

This being done, This Enformant gave Order, that the Watchmen that were there
a-foot, should stay with the Body, and not suffer any Meddling with it, till
they should hear further from This Enformant: And so he this Enformant, and the
rest of the Horsemen, (being about Seven in Number) rode away to
Hartshorn-Lane, to the House of the Late Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and enquired
for the Justice: But after Words Passed, a Woman there telling this Enformant,
that the Brothers were above; This Enformant sent to desire to speak with them;
and they came presently down, there being in the Company Mr. Benjamin, and Mr.
Michael Godfrey, one Mr. Plucknet, and one Mr. Ramsy, whom this Enformant saw
to go into the House before him.

And that this Enformant told the said Company, that they had found the Body in
a Ditch near Primrose-Hill, with a Sword through it: And that they had removed
the said Body to the White-House. The said Brothers strictly enquiring of this
Enformant, How he was sure that it was Sir Edmund's Body? Who Replied, That he
knew him very well. The Brothers and Mr. Ramsey had some Discourse by
themselves together; after which, Mr. Plucknet told this Enformant, that he
would go along with him to the Body. Hereupon this Enformant and the said Mr.
Plucknet rode away to the White-House, it being then Ten a Clock, or
thereabouts; Mr. Ramsey telling this Enformant, that he would immediately give
the King Notice of it, and appointed this Enformant to meet him at the Checquer
Inn about One of the Clock.

This Enformant being Demanded, What Persons he can call to Mind of Those that
went with him to Hartshorn-Lane, when he carried the First News of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey's Body being found, to the Brothers there? He makes Answer,
That there was Joseph Girl, William Whitcomb, John James, William Lock, John
Paris; And that all the Persons above mentioned, Assisted, more or less, in the
carrying off the Body from the Ditch where it was found, to the White-House,
and John Rawson, with others, whom he cannot remember.

John Hartwell Deposes, That being told that there was a Person found Dead in
a Ditch in the Parish, with a Sword through the Body, He this Enformant, with
some other Company, went to see the Body where it lay in the Ditch, with a
Sword above a Handful out at the Back: One Hand Extended before him, with the
Face leaning upon it, and the other Hand lying Backwards; A Hat and Periwig
before him; His Cane, Gloves, and Sword lying behind him upon a Bank; A Dark
Colored Stuff Coat on; It was a Tempestuous Night, that they could have No
Light to see the Body by; And that upon This View of the Body, the Constable
desired the People to take Notice, how the Body lay, and how far the Sword was
through him: And thereupon, the said Constable Ordered the Body to be taken out
of the Ditch: And it was accordingly Handed out a matter of Eight or Ten Yards
from the Place.

And that the Sword being as yet in the Body, the Constable either took it, or
ordered it to be taken out of the Body; And so the Body was laid upon Two
Watchmens Staves, and carried up to the Wite House, where the said Body was
laid in the House upon the Floor.

John Rawson, Joseph Girl, John Paris, and others, Speak to the same Effect
about the Finding and Removing of the Body, and the Drawing of the Sword, which
was a way of Proceeding very Extraordinary, and enough, not only to Puzzle the
Inquest upon Examination of the Matter; but to put any Thinking Man hard to it,
to find a Warrantable Reason for what they did; for the Position of the Body in
the Ditch, and the Circumstances that went along with it, would have been the
Best Light the Matter would bear, toward the Guiding of them in their Verdict.
But I am persuaded, that it was an Error without Malice.

The Body however, is now Lodged at the White-House, and the next Thing in the
Course of Law, is to pass a View upon it: But it will do well in the mean time
to see what Matter the Coroner has to work upon.

The Enformation that Mr. Wheeler gives upon this Subject, is very Pertinent,
and very Particular.

Mr. Wheeler Deposes, That on Wednesday, October 16. there was a Vestry in St.
Martins, where this Enformant, Mr. James Supples, and Mr. Wilson were Present.
Upon the Rising, they Adjourned thence to the Fleece Tavern in St. Martins
Lane, and sent Notice to the Churchwardens, Mr. Parsons, and Mr. Monk, that
they were there, and the said Churchwardens came immediately thither; and
presently after them, in came Dean Lloyd, to know what was become of Sir
Edmund; saying, That he had been led into some Mistakes, or to that Effect,
already; but he would make no more if he could help it. It was then said by
some of the Company, that Mr. Radcliffe walked out of London with Sir Edmund
about One of the Clock upon the Saturday before, or about Twelve: Whereupon Dr.
Lloyd said, he would go and enquire of him; but the Company Desired him to
stay, and said they would send for Mr. Radcliffe, which they did, and he came
accordingly: And the said Radcliffe being come, somebody asked him, whether he
walked out of London with Sir Edmund, as is above said? To which the said
Radcliffe replied, No: But that Sir Edmund was at his Door about One of the
Clock That Saturday; for he was Taking in of Goods that came out of London.

Mr. Wheeler was told by Parsons, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Asked him Three
Times that Saturday Morning, in St. Martins Lane, whereabouts Paddington-Woods
were.

The People that are found upon Proof to have seen Sir Edmundbury Godfrey the
Saturday that he went away, are Richard Cooper, Mary Leeson, Joshua Foxley,
John Parsons, All in St. Martins Lane, about Eight or Nine in the Morning. A
Sawyer in So-ho. William Collins, and a Milk-woman in Marybone Fields about
Nine: Tho. Mason about Ten, Met him in the Fields betwixt Marybone-Pound and
Marybone-Street; coming toward London, Joseph Radcliffe, and his Wife, saw him
in the Strand near One: Mont saw him Passing by New Market: Mr. Richard
Bornford saw him about One of the Clock, a very Little Over or Under, Passing
through the Back Gate of Lincolns-Inn-Fields; and observed him to go forward
under the Wall toward the Portugal Row, some Three or Fourscore Paces, as he
Judges: Mr. Stephen Primate of Gray's Inn saw him Walking Cross the Fields
toward Turn-Style, from the Corner of Clare-Market, at, or about Two a Clock,
as he conceives. Thomas Snell saw him some time about Noon, (according to his
Remembrance) passing by the said Snell's House, from Turn-Style in Holborn into
the Red-Lyon-Fields: Mr. Tho. Grundy, and Mr. James Huysman saw him about Two
or Three in the Afternoon near Primrose-Hill, according to their Enformations,
Cap. 2. Part 1. Now in such a Case as This, This Difference of an Hour, More or
Less, upon a Conjecture at such a Distance of Time, breaks no Squares, as any
Man will find upon his Appealing to his own Memory, and Experience, how often
he has been Mistaken himself, Sooner or Later, as much as that comes to, upon a
Present Guess at the time of the Day. But after all the Rest, I must not forget
what one Baker said upon the Sight of the Body a^ the White-House, [That he saw
that Man in a certain Close thereabouts that he Named, upon That Saturday in
the Afternoon, or the Devil in his Clothes. To the Truth of which,

Margaret Rawson Deposes, That this Enformant heard Edward Baker, upon the
View of the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, speak Words to this Effect, to the
Best of this Enformants Memory, Either I saw this Man in my Fathers Forty
Acres-Field upon some Day, which This Enformant does not Remember, or the Devil
in ^is Clothes.

Mr. Thomas Burdet Likewise Deposes, That he was told by the Man and his Wife;
that Lived at That Time in the White-House, That a Person seeing the Body of
Sir E.B. Godfrey, in a Crowd of Other Company, said he had seen that Man at
Three of the Clock upon the Saturday in the Afternoon, in his Fathers
So-many-Acres-Close: (This Enformant having forgotten the Precise Number of the
Acres) And that upon some Question made, he Confirmed it again with an Oath,
That he knew him well enough; and that By God it was either he, or the Devil in
his Clothes.

Here Is Matter in Sight, abundantly enough to Enquire upon; beside infinitely
more, that out of Fear, Faction, and Lazyness, has been Undoubtedly Lost, or
Suppressed; and it Cannot be Imagined, that Any of These Particulars should be
kept so Private as not to come to the Knowledge, either of the Jurors
Themselves or of Those that were Concerned to Search out, and to Subminister
All Fair and Honest Lights toward the Instructing of a Jury; and I am afraid,
that This is The Part of the History that will be found the Important Secret
that was given in Charge not to be Discovered. The Business of Godfrey was at
That Time the Whole Talk of the Town, and the Story of the Brewer, the
Coach-maker, a Nurse, and the Milk-Woman, was the very Pinch of the Discourse:
He was Seen Here by Such a One, There by Such Another, and hardly any Body set
Eye upon him, that did not take Notice of a Troubled Head in his very Look and
Gate; over and above, that even the Course of his Perambulation was not a Iaunt
for any man in his Right mind to Take; Nay, the Distraction of his Thoughts
appeared in the Wanderings, and Irresolutions of his Steps: It did not look like
a Walk either for Pl^asure, or for Business; But rather the Whiling away of so
many hours under the Fluctuation of Sick and Doubting Thoughts, and in a kind
of Conflict (as a Man may say) betwixt his Nature, and his Disease. It Is much
to be Suspected, that at his First Setting out, he had the very Thing in his
Eye, as well as the Place; And that if a Body may Gather any thing, either from
his Melancholy, or from his Enquiring the Way thither, He went Probably to
Those very Fields; for Collins, and the Milk-woman, saw him thereabouts, and
Mason met him then at Ten That Morning, coming back again, which in a
Reasonable Construction was no more then to say, that his Heart had not Served
him to go thorough with his Work That Bout. After his Return; we have him again
in the Strand, New Market, Lincolns-Inn-Back-Gate, the Fields, Turn-Style,
Red-Lyon-Fields; and so forward to the very Next Close to That where the Body
was found; Nay, Mr. Grundy, and Mr. Huysman, lost Sight of him at a
Blind-Passage over a Plank that Struck off directly to the very Ditch; and so
far from any appearance of being Dogged all this while, that it looked as if
Company had almost shunned Him as much, as He shunned Company.

CHAP. IX.
A Jury Summoned to Sit upon the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and some
Difficulty Started about it.

UPon the finding of the Body; the First Thing to be done according to Reason,
Equity, and Practice, should have been the Securing of it 'till a Formal View
might have been taken of the Body it Self, and every thing about it, or
Relating to it, in the very same State, and under the very same Circumstances
wherein it was found. Descriptions, or Reports, upon either Fancy, or Memory,
are Short and Faint; Compared with the Lights we receive from Visible Effects,
Operations, and Dispositions of Things in a Course of Nature: But the Body
being Removed, the Sword taken out, The Place it self Trampled upon, and
Disordered; The True Judgment of the Case lay at the Mercy of the Reporters; So
that they might Represent, Alter, Disguise, Add, or Diminish as they pleased.
The Jury in short, were fain to Content Themselves with such an Account of the
Matter, as the Constable, and his Assistants thought fit to give them; or
perhaps as they were able to give them: Considering that All This was done in a
Dark Tempestuous Night, without either Link, Lanthorn, or the Help of any other
Light whatsoever. There was Great Stress laid upon it, that they saw No Blood in
the Ditch; No Mark of the Pummel of the Sword: when yet if there had been both
the One, and the Other, it could hardly be Expected, after so much muddling of
the Earth to get the Body out, that there should remain any Sign of Either. Or
however, if they had a Mind to be Partial, there was Pretense Enough for the
Hiding, and the Smothering of it, without any Color of Suspicion. Nay, and the
Constable was half Obliged to Palliate the Business, even in his own Defense;
and as some sort of Atonement for so Unwarrantable a Proceeding. In few words,
the Judgment of the Case, Depended greatly upon the Particulars of the
Relation: Insomuch, that upon being found in One Posture, he would have been
thought to have killed Himself, and the Presumption would have been as Strong
in Another Case, that he had been Murdered by some body else. This
Irregularity would lie Open to very strong Exceptions, if a Body should Measure
the Government of This Part of the Story, by the Manage of the Rest: but I am
verily persuaded, that the Constables Fault in Carrying off the Body, was only
a Rash, and an Officious Ignorance, without any sort of Malice.

But to take Things de been esse, and as we find them: The Body is now at the
White-House; Brown the Constable has given the Brothers Notice of it at
Hartshorn-Lane, and brought Mr. Plucknet back with him ^o see it upon the Place.

Brown Deposes, That Mr. Plucknet, casting his Eyes upon the Face, Cried out
presently, This is my Brother Godfrey; and they immediately resolved to go down
with a Candle and Lanthorn to the Place where the Body was found: The said Mr.
Plucknet, This Enformant, and one Rawson, the Master of the White-House, going
down together.

This Enformant, after Viewing the Body, and the Place where it was found, went
with Mr. Plucknet to the Checquer-Inn at Charing Cross ( According to an
Appointment mentioned Cap. 8. (being near Two in the Morning) where Mr. Ramsey
met according to his Appointment, and told This Enformant, That he had Informed
his Majesty of the Matter, and that This Enformant need Trouble himself no
further, but that a Coroner should be ordered to come to This Enformant, Early
the same Morning; which he did, and brought This Enformant a Warrant for the
Summoning of a Jury to go forthwith to the White-house, and Sit upon the Body
aforesaid: The Jurors Names being as follows.

St. Giles's.
Mr. Tho. Harris. Mr. Philip Wine. Mr. John Cowsey. Mr. William Collens. Mr.
Tho. Woollam. Mr. John Carvel. Mr. Anthony Friar. Mr. Christ. Jarvis. Mr.
Robert Trotton.
Mary-bone.
Mr. Joseph Girl. Mr. John Hartwell. Mr. William Lock. Mr. John Owen. Mr.
Simon Standever. Mr. Thomas Mason. Mr. Paul Harding.
Padington.
Mr. Matthew Haines. Mr. John Davies.
And Says, That the Jury met accordingly at the White-House, and after Sitting
a While, they Adjourned without Coming to a Verdict.

The Jury Met, we See; but could not come to an Agreement That Meeting; for
what Reason they Adjourned; and upon what Grounds they proceeded afterward to a
Verdict, shall be seen in the Proper Place: But it may be Reasonably Collected
yet, that there was Somewhat more then Ordinary in the Wind, from the Earnest
Application that was made for the Joining of Mr. White the Coroner of
Westminster, to the Assistance of Mr. Cooper, who was then Sitting upon the
Body: And the Presumption is so much the stronger, because they were so far
Entered, and so much Divided upon the Matter before them; which might seem to
Insinuate either the Partiality of a Practice, or a Nicety in the Question; and
taking it either the One way, or the Other, it had the Face of a very Honest,
and a very Seasonable Council. But the Fact will be Better Set forth in the
Following Enformation.

Robert White Deposes, That upon the Discovery of the Body of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, there were Two Persons of the Acquaintance of the said Sir Edmund, To
wit; One Wigg a Grocer; and one Bookey (or some such Name) a Linnen-Draper; Who
came together to the House of Their Enformant; And told him, that they were much
Troubled; And so were diverse others of the Parish, that This Enformant was not
the Coroner to sit upon the said Body: And then Desired This Enformant very
Pressingly to Enquire into the Business: To which, This Enformant told them,
that he did not Love to Thrust himself into Such a Business, without the
request of the Coroner. But the aforesaid Persons not being Satisfied with This
Answer, and still Pressing him to be Concerned in the Enquiry; This Enformant
told them, That if the Brother of the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, should
desire This Enformant to be Assisting to him the said Brother, that then This
Enformant would be willing to Assist. Whereupon the said Wigg and Bookey took
their Leaves of This Enformant, and told him that they would Endeavor with all
Expedition to Speak to the Brother of the said Sir Edmund about it. And within
an hour or two after, This Enformant had Notice brought him to his House,
Desiring him to be at the Greyhound-Tavern in the Strand, about Two or Three a
Clock That Saturday in the Afternoon: And This Enformant went thither
accordingly, where he found Mr. Wigg, and Mr. Bookey, and staid with him 'till
a Certain Gentleman came to him, whom he took to be Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's
Brother, who took This Enformant into a Coach, and away they went together to a
House in St. Giles'es, where the Coroner, and his Inquest were together. Then
this Enformant desired the said Brother to Acquaint the Coroner, that He this
Enformant was there Present; And the said Brother Whispered to the Coroner in
This Enformant's Presence; but This Enformant did not hear what he said. And
the said Brother returning presently to This Enformant, told him, that the
Coroner did not desire his being there. Whereupon This Enformant went down; Sir
Edmund's said Brother following, who gave This Enformant a Guinnea at the Door,
for his Trouble, and so This Enformant went away.

These Two Persons, Wigg and Bookey are since Dead; but they have left a Good
Name behind them, for Men of Substance, and Reputation; and it was at the
Common Instance of Diverse Others of the Parishioners too, that This Desire or
Proposition was set afoot; and the very Hint of it does Necessarily presume
some Dissatisfaction they had in the Former way of Proceedings But the Business
went forward Never the Less; And the Neighborhood of Paddington it self was as
Little Pleased after the Verdict, as Others were Before: and they Muttered at
it sufficiently, so far as they durst, but the Barbarous Usage of Bromwell and
Walters, for only Finding the Body, Tied up other Peoples Tongues from speaking
their Thoughts outright in so Dangerous a Story.

This was a Cause, perchance, that in a Reasonable Prospect of the Issue of it,
was to have as Powerful an Influence upon the Honor, and Safety of the King
and his Government, as ever any Disaster since the Creation, that appeared to
be so Little and Inconsiderable, in sight; and therefore No Care could have
been too much, for the bringing of This Matter to a Clear Light: In respect
either of the Openness, and Candor of the Proceeding; a strict, and Industrious
Enquiry; All Warrantable Ways and Means of gaining Full, and Credible
Enformations: The Pertinence and Sufficiency of the Proofs: The Qualification
of the Witnesses; and the like. To Conclude, a Man methinks should be Glad, and
Forward, in an Instance of This Quality, to take in what Help he Can, fairly,
to Assist him in the Scrutiny toward the Discharge of his Conscience: and to
Secure himself of a safe Appeal from the Censure and Envy that commonly Attends
Resolutions of This Nature.

CHAP. X.
The Subject of the Debate; and First of the Position of the Body, as it lay in
the Ditch.

THE Cause being now before the Jury, we shall speak to the several Parts of it
in Order, and Begin with a Consideration of the Position of the Body in the
Ditch, as we have it by Tradition from the Constable, and his Assistants. The
Description of it in, Mr. Pain, and Mr. Farwell's First Letter, to Mr. Miles
Prance, is Allowed, without Contradiction, to be exactly Correct, and Just, and
therefore I cannot do Better, then to Deliver it to the World as I find it
ready drawn to my hand.

His Breast was Vnbutton'd, his Wastcoat, and Shirt put by, his Sword run in
under his Left Pap, next his Skin, the Point Coming out at his Right Shoulder,
about Six Inches, his Left Arm doubled under him, (on which his Head seemed to
Lean) And his Right Arm, stiff, stretched out upon the Bank; his Belly and
Breast being supported by the side of the Bank; his Knees Knit together, and
with his Hips a little Bending, or Doubling under him.

No Painter could have drawn a Man that had Cast himself in a Ditch upon his
own Sword, more according to Nature, then the Publisher of This Description has
done This Unhappy Person: Neither was it Morally Possible, for People in the
Dark to Dispose of a Body, and every Part of it, into so Proper and Congr^ous a
Position. And it was as Little Possible, to bring a Dead Body and the several
Parts of it, to Comply with the Circumstances of This Figure. His Right Arm was
stiff, and his Left Arm doubled under him in the Ditch; and afterward, upon the
Table, in the White-house, Both Arms so stiff, that Fisher was fain to Tear off
the shirt, when he helped to strip him.

Let but any Man Fancy to himself now a Lively Image of This Disposition of the
Body, and the several Parts of it; and say if he thinks it possible, for People
(Nay, and it was in the Dark too) to Place every Thing in a Posture so Proper,
and so Congruous to the Occasion. No Painter could have Designed so Natural a
Resolution as This Chance-Cast of Prances, dropped into. [ They Threw him into a
Ditch, (says Prance) and Laid his Gloves and Other Things upon the Bank, Trial,
fol. 20.] So that there was more Care taken, it seems, of his Trinkets, then of
his Body. And it was not All, Neither, that Every Line and Point in the
Composition of That Figure, seemed to speak as Plainly as the Voice of Nature
it self could have done; that he died upon That Spot: But the Whole World could
not have put his Head, Neck, Body, and Limbs, into That Position, if Death had
Not Left him just in That Manner, and in That Place where afterward they Found
him. The Witnesses will have it that the Murderers Conveyed the Body from
Somerset House to the Ditch; and There left him (as is said Already) with his
Money in his Pocket, that it might be thought that he Killed Himself. Now if the
Whole Pretense of the Somerset House Murder was an Imposture, as Truth it self
is not more Certain; it is by their own Argument, a very Reasonable Thing, to
Believe, upon This appearance of Matters, that he did Kill Himself; Unless they
can Produce some Color at lea^t, that some body else Killed him; for Never was
a Thing better Proved by Secondary Circumstances, then That he Threw Himself
upon his Own Sword. And no Man can Doubt it, that Considers the Contradictions
of the Evidence; the Distance betwixt Somerset House and Primrose-hill; The
Bearers that Carried him; Their Accoutrements; The Watches, and the Almost
Impassable Difficulties in the Way; The Chairing of him One Half of his
Journey, and the Horsing of him The Other. To say Nothing of a Thousand Fopperies
more to come, that were Utterly as Incredible, as any of the Rest.

The First Question, Naturally in All These Cases, is the Condition, and the
Posture of the Body: And so, What Evidence of any Weapon, Instrument, or
Accident, by which the Person might come or be brought to his end: And whether
by Himself, or by Another Hand. After These Enquiries, the Circumstances to be
Well-weighed; and all such Witnesses called in to give Evidence, as were either
of his Relations, or Familiar Acquaintances, or otherwise supposed, or Presumed
to be most Privy to his Affairs: either in General, or with a Regard to the
Particular that is here in Question. It is a very Great Light (as I was a
saying) that may be taken from such a Description of the State, and Appearance
of the Body, as the Jury had before them: There are some Mortal Hurts, or
Wounds that a Body can not be supposed to have given Himself: There are some
Others of so special an Application, and Direction, that One can hardly believe
them to have been given by Another Hand. Now it is very Remarkable, that This
Consideration, for ought that I have been hitherto able to Learn, was never Yet
brought upon the Carpet; either before the Coroner, or in Truth, at the King's
Bench Bar, at the Trial of the Pretended Murderers; But in Both Places they
leapt over the Preliminaries in the Ditch, saving only the Two Negatives, that
there was No Blood found there; nor any Dint of the Pummel of the Sword. [Pray
(says Mr. Recorder to the Constable) in what Posture did You find Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey? [Mr. Brown] I found him my Lord in a Ditch, with his Sword
thorough him, and the end of it was Two handfuls out of his back. Green's
Trial, pa. 35.] Now This was a very short Answer, to a Home Question; And
Nothing at all to the Posture, but only to the Weapon, and the Wound. If Brown
had come up to the Interrogatory, He should have said that he lay Greveling
Upon That Sword; and he should have given the Court an Account of Twenty Other
What Is and Hows Beside; but the Posture, and all that belonged to it, was Blown
off presently, and the Eyes and the Thoughts of the People Carried away, to the
Question of Blood, or No Blood, in the Ditch; And to the Gold and Silver that
was Left in his Pocket, to Persuade the World that he Killed Himself; and that
the Killers of him made more Conscience of Picking a Pocket, then of Committing
a Murder. Nay Brown has worded his Deposition in the Next Page, as if he were
Delivering a Verdict, rather then an Evidence; where he Determines the Point,
in saying, That They had run it into another Place, but that happened to be
against a Rib: But we shall let That pass for a Slip too, as we did the Former.
After This, They called in Two Surgeons to their Aid, but they were upon a View
of the Body still, as it lay upon the Table, not as 'twas found in the Ditch;
and therefore to say no more of it, they were extremely short in Passing over
the Business of the Ditch; which, in Effect, was the Best Guide they had to the
Truth of the Matter, and the most Convincing Part of their Evidence. The Other
Scruples, were, at the Fairest, but Dubious, and Confounded with Incoherences,
and Vnlikelyhoods in abundance; whereas the Position of the Body, and the Parts
of it in the Ditch, was so certain an Indication of his Dying by his Own Sword,
that they might have Counterfeited Nature in any thing else, as well as in That
Figure: Beside, that the Wound could very hardly have been Given him by Another
Hand; for it passed from under the Left Pap through the Blade, or some Bony
Part of his Left Shoulder: Insomuch, that in Brown's own Words, It was somewhat
hard in the Drawing, and Crash'd upon the Bone in the Plucking of it forth, See
Chap. 8. There lies One Objection in the Way, and it is Easily Answered. The
Pummel of the Sword, as Brown says, Did not touch the Bottom of the Ditch; but
Imputes it to the Crooked Posture of his Body, and the Thickness of the Bushes
upon the Place. Now, if the Pummel of the Sword was Pitched upon the Side of
the Ditch, it could not be expected that it should still Rest there after the
doing of the Execution; for what with the Preponderating Weight of his Body,
and the Struggling of Nature upon the Last Convulsion, it must of Necessity,
remove: And then his Body being Otherwise Supported by his Knees at the Bottom
of the Ditch, and the Weight of it bearing upon his Left Arm, lying Doubled
under his Head, the Pummel of the Sword could not well touch the Bottom of the
Ditch. But Mr. Skillarne, one of the Surgeons that Assisted upon the View of
the Body, Speaks most Expressly to this Part of the Question.

Zachariah Skillarne Deposes, That he this Enformant taking a strict View of
the Ditch where Sir Edmund 's Body was found, he observed an Impression upon
the Side of of the Ditch, about a Foot above the Bottom of it, according to the
Best Judgment this Enformant is able to make of it, which he took to be the
Dint of the Pummel of the Sword.

This is a Great Deal more then Needed, for the Killing of a Dead Cause: But
the Plain Short of the Matter in fine, is neither Better nor Worse, then This.
If the Question of the Ditch has been Omitted, as a Point forgotten, it is such
Another Slip as the Point that the Atheistical Penitent forgot in his
Confession, which was, That he did not Believe in God; for it was the Key of
the Whole Work. If it was passed over as a Thing not Worth the minding, it was
a Case of Blood, and might have born the Charge of Interrogatory, and Debate:
Especially when so many Lives Depended upon the Consequence of a Right, or a
Mistaken Sentence: But if it was neither of These Two, it was a Matter at That
Time, perhaps, too Hot to be Handled; and it is a Dangerous Thing for People to
be Over-Inquisitive into the Truth of a Matter that is Designed for an
Imposture. We shall pass now from what they Did Not, to what they Did, and so
to the Next Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
The Jury found Sir E. B. Godfrey to be Strangled, and not Killed with the
Sword: The Surgeons were of the same Opinion, and gave their Reasons for it.

UPON the Evidence and View of the Body of Sir E. B. Godfrey at the
White-House, it appeared, upon the Main, that it was found at such a Time and
Place, and with his own Sword thorough it. They observed the Limberness of the
Neck, and the Two Circles about it: His Breast very much Discolored, as if it
had been Beaten, or Bruised; Two Wounds under his Left Pap: One stopped at a Rib;
the Other quite thorough the Body: They laid Great Weight upon it, that there
was No Blood found in the Ditch; and upon the main Issue, Whether he Died by
the Wound, or by Suffocation; or whether by his own Hand, or by some Other
Bodies: After a Long Debate, and a Great Deal of Iangling, in Due Course and
Form: The Coroner and his Inquest took the Surgeons Advice along with them, and
in the Conclusion came to This Result.

That certain Persons to the Jurors unknown, a Certain Piece of Linen Cloth of
No Value, about the Neck of Sir Edmundbury Godftey, Then, and There,
Feloniously, Wilfully, and of their Malice before thought, did Tie and Fasten;
and therewith the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, Feloniously, Wilfully, and of
their Malice before thought, did Suffocate and Strangle, of which said
Suffocaeion, and Strangling, He the said Sir Edm^ndbury Godfrey Then and There
Instantly Died.

This is according to a Printed Copy of the Verdict published by Ianeway in
1682. on the Behalf of the Prosecutors of Mr. Pain and Mr. Farewell, for
Publishing certain Letters upon This Subject, directed to Miles Prance. I never
heard the Truth of the Copy Questioned: Beside, that when the Business was
fresh, the Story was in every Bodies Mouth, that he was strangled with a Linen
Cloth; and no other way of Suffocation so much as mentioned: And That was the
True Reason, of Bedloe's Stifling him with a Pillow; to Answer the Suffocation;
and of Prance's doing it with a Twisted Handkecther, to Answer the Linen
Cloth, which Bedloe afterward, very Discreetly turned into a Crevat; By the
Token, [ It was so straight that he could not get his Finger in.] Now the
Inquisition taken by the Coroner of Middlesex, upon the View of the Body of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, according to a True Copy of it out of the Crown Office,
which was Sworn and read in Court, upon the Trial of the Gentlemen before
mentioned, says, that he was Strangled with a Cord, fol. 8. by Persons Unknown:
But Right or Wrong, it must be Strangling at Last; for there was no way but
That to bring him off from Killing Himself, which would have spoiled more Plots
then One: though it was a Huge way about, for People to Choke him at
Somerset House, and then carry him Two Mile out of Town at Midnight to run his
Sword through him at Primrose-Hill for a Pretense; When there were so many
convenient Boughs, and Beams, to have done his Work Better Cheap, nearer Home;
The Trussing of him up to one of the Timbers in the New Unfinished House, where
Prance swears he left the Chair, when they put him a Horseback, would have born
a much better Countenance of his Killing Himself, then the Leaving of his Body
in a Ditch, with the Marks of Two Several Deaths upon it at Once. When I say
[of Two Several Deaths] which Implies the Swallowing of Things Inconsistent; I
reflect no Reproach, either upon the Surgeons, or upon the Jurors; for the
Former Judged according to Common Appearances; and the Latter were only
overruled by the Opinions of Men that spoke in their own Profession. I do not
say yet, that there was not a Secret Practice, and Manage that ran through this
whole Affair from one End to the Other; but Time, and Consideration, upon the
Opening of the Fact will better Discover that Mystery. The Root, in short, of
this Whole Miscarriage, was the removing of the Body; Of which we have spoken
sufficiently in the Last Foregoing Chapter. But now to the Merits of the Cause.

The Surgeons were of Opinion, upon the View of the Body at the White House
(and in Truth for want of a View of it in the Ditch) that Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was Strangled, and Not Killed by the Sword. The Jurors were Guided by
the Surgeons, and accordingly they Agreed upon a Verdict. It will be well, in
This Place, to consider the Matter of Fact, as it lay before them; their
Judgments upon it, and the Inducements that moved them to Agree upon the
abovementioned Verdict. This will be best done, out of their Own Mouths. And
to take the Matter in Order, We'll see first what they Delivered at the
Coroners Inquest. 2 ly. The Evidence they gave at the Trials of Green, Berry,
and Hill. And 3 ly. The Short of what was Delivered at the Trial of Mr. Pain,
and Mr. Farwell. I call it a Trial, with a Respect to the Sacredness of the Seat
of Justice; though the Formalities of the Court were Interrupted, and the
Dignity of the Tribunal Affronted, with such Clamours, and Insults from the
Rabble, that a Man might Honestly enough, at a Distance, have taken it for a
Bair-Bating.

The Enformation of Zacharias Skillarne, of the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, Surgeon, taken upon Oath 18th. Day of October, 1678. before Me.
HE says, That he being sent for as a Surgeon, to search the Body of Sir
Edmund Godfrey, did in the Presence of the Coroner and Jury, Search the same;
and finds, that he was strangled; And that he has received some Violent Blow
upon the top of his Breast; and this Enformant verily believes that the said
Sir Edmund did Not Dye of the Wound through his Body.

Zacharias Skillarn Surgeon, being further Examined, says, That when he
Searched Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Body, he found that his Neck had been Twisted
toward the Left Side; which was One of the Occasions of his Death, as This
Enformant believes.

Jo. Cowper, Coroner. Zac. Skillarn.


The Enformation of Nicholas Cambridge of St. Giles in the Fields, Surgeon,
taken upon Oath the same Day and Year before Me.
This Enformant says the same.

Jo. Cowper, Coroner. Nicholas Cambridge.


Here Is the Judgment of the Surgeons upon Oath, before the Coroner, October. 18,
19. 1678. and their Evidence was much thereabouts, afterward, at the Trial of
the Pretended Murderers, Feb. 10. 1678/9. But the Fairest way will be to
Deliver the Colloquy at Large, for so much a concerns This Subject.

I shall only take Notice of One Artificial Insinuation by the Way. [ We Desire
(says Mr. Attorney) to call the Surgeons that Viewed and OPENED the Body, Mr.
Skillarn, and Mr. Cambridge, Trial. fol. 30.] Now this was to possess the
Audience with a Full Persuasion of the most Reasonable Thing in the World, and
that the Body had been Opened Indeed. Whereas there was No Opening of the Body;
but on the contrary, the Thing was Moved and Desired, but the Brothers would
not Permit it; and Mr. Hobbs (as he told me very Frankly, with his own Lips)
was Absolutely for it; for, says he, upon the Opening of the Body, you should
have known as well what Death he Died, as if you had seen it. But now to the
Evidence.

Mr. At. G. Did you observe his Breast? how was it?


Mr. Skillarn.] His Breast was All beaten with some Obtuse Weapon, either with
the Feet, or Hands, or Something.


Mr. At. G.] Did you observe his Neck?


Mr. Skillarn.] Yes, It was Distorted.


Mr. At. G.] How far?


Mr. Skillarn.] You might have taken the Chin, and have set it upon either
Shoulder.


Mr. At. G.] Did you Observe the Wound?


Mr. Skillarn. Yes I did. It went in at one place, and Stopped at a Rib; the
Other Place, it was quite through the Body.


Mr. At. G.] Do you think he was killed by That Wound?


Mr. Skillarn. No; for then there would have been some Evacuation of Blood,
which there was Not: And besides; his Bosom was open, and he had a Flannel
Wastcoat and a Shirt on; and neither Those, nor any of his Clothes were
Penetrated.


Mr. At. Gen.] But are you Sure his Neck had been Broken?


Mr. Skillarn.] Yes, I am sure.


Mr. At. G.] Because some have been of Opinion, that he Hanged Himself, and
his Relations to Save his Estate, run him through; I would desire to ask the
Surgeon what he Thinks of it.


M. Skillarn.] There was more done to his Neck then an Ordinary Suffocation;
the Wound went through his very Heart; and there would have appeared some
Blood, if it had been done quickly after his Death.


Mr. At. G.] Did it appear by the View of the Body, that he was Strangled or
Hanged?


Mr. Skillarn.] He was a Lean Man, and his Muscles, if he had died of the
Wound, would have been Turgid; And Then again, All Strangled People never
Swell, because there is a Sudden Deprivation of all the Spirits, and a hindering
of the Circulation of the Blood.


Mr. At. G.] How long do you believe he might be dead before you saw him?


Mr. Skillarn.] I believe, four or five days. And they might have kept him a
Week, and he never Swelled at All, being a Lean Man. And when we Ripped him up,
he began for to Putrify; we made two Incisions to give it Vent; and the Liquor
that was in his Body did a Little Smell. The very Lean Flesh was so near turned
into Putrefaction, that it Stuck to the Instrument when we Cut it.


Mr. Recorder.] My Lord, here is another Surgeon, Mr. Cambridge; Pray Sir
are you Sworn?


Mr. Cambridge.] Yes, I am.


Mr. Recorder.] When did you see the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey?


Mr. Cambridge.] Upon Friday; the very day the Gentleman did. I found his Neck
Dislocated, and his Breast very much Beaten, and Bruised. And I found Two
Punctures under his left Pap; the one went against the Rib, the other quite
through the Body under the Left Pap.


Mr. At. G. Do you believe That Wound was the Occasion of his Death?


Mr. Cambridge.] No; I believe it was given him after his Death.


L. C. J.] And his Neck was Broke?


Mr. Cambridge.] His Neck was Dislocated, Sir.


The Matter here Under Consideration was the Distortion of his Neck, His
Bruises; No Evacuation of Blood; The Appearance of his Muscles; Insomuch, that
they both Agree that the Wound was given him after his Death; And the Bruises
are presumed to have been Occasioned by the Blows he received from the
Murderers upon Struggling to Defend himself. The Reader is here to take
Notice, that Mr. Skillarne, and Cambridge, were the Two only Surgeons that were
taken in for Assistants to the Coroner. But however, that there were others
Call'd-in who saw him by the By, to give Evidence afterward upon a Trial at
Guildhall, June 20. 1682. As Mr. Hobbs, The Two Mr. Chaces, Father and Son; Mr.
Lazenby. Mr. Hobb'es Part was This.

L. C. Justice.] Had you any doubt whether he was Murdered?


Mr. Hobbs.] Indeed my Lord, I thought he was Strangled; That was my Opinion; I
cannot tell Whether I was Mistaken. I said to Dr. Goodal, it would be very well
if Mr. Godfrey would send for a Surgeon, and a Physician from the Court, and
Others from the City, to SATISFY ALL PERSONS.


Mr. Farewell.] What Color was his Face?


Mr. Hobbs.] My Lord, it was Bloated.


L. C. J. Did it look as if Violence had been Used to him?


Mr. Hobbs.] Ay my Lord; and the Bloody Vessels of his Eyes were so full, as if
he had been Troubled with Sore Eyes. Trial of Nathaniel Thompson, etc. fol. 23,
24.


The Evidence that the Two Mr. Chaces gave upon the Matter here in Question,
was to This Effect. Mr. Chase the Son, upon Friday Morning Viewed the Ditch,
and saw No Blood in it. He saw the Body in the House; Two Wounds; A Contusion on
the Left Ear. He Believed he was Strangled, and those Injuries done after he
was Dead.

Mr. Chase the Father saw the Body at the White-House on Friday; a Contusion,
and Two Wounds; And the Next day he saw a Swelling on his Left Ear, as if a
Knot had been Tied, fol. 24.

Mr. Lazenby took him to be Strangled, and gave his Reasons. There was Blood
Four Yards from the Ditch, that Smelt as Strong as if he had been Dead a
Fortnight; He Believed he was Strangled: His Stomach and Breast were much
Discolored, and Black, and his Mouth Discolored. He went up-stairs to Drink a
Glass of Beer, and was Called down again to see Two Great Creases about his
Neck, being told that young Mr. Chase had Vnbutton'd the Collar. So being come
down, he put the Collar together, and Perceived the Collar made a Mark, like a
Straight Ring upon a Finger; the Neck being Swelled above the Collar, and
Below, by the Strangling with a Chord, or Cloth, Trial, fol. 25, 26.

I must observe here by the way now, that my Citations are from a Trial Printed
by the Lord Chief Justice Pemberton's Order. There was Another Pretended
Account of the same Trial: Published without Order, and said to be Printed for
William Mason; Wherein by way of Abstract, the Evidence against the Prisoners
is strained, and Falsified, and being much Harder upon them, then That in the
Authentic Trial, it is to be presumed, that for the Honor of the Court,
Nothing was Omitted that might give Reputation to the Justice of the Proceeding.

I must take Notice again, that there is an Appendix of Affidavits and
Observations Annexed to the Licensed Trial in the Course of Signature, and
Folio, to support the Credit of Prance's Evidence, which looks as if the Whole
had been Printed by the same Authority; Whereas my Lord Chief Justice only
Licensed the Trial. These surreptitious Pieces are of No Weight; and it is but
reason to Reject what is Spurious on the one side, as it is Fair to Allow the
Uttermost Force of All that has been, or can be said on the Other. There was a
Great stir made about Fly-blows, or No Fly-blows, and whether his eyes were
shut, or Open. But I shall Touch upon Those Points as they fall in My Way,
without laying more stress upon the Matter then it is VVorth.

To do Right to All People, and to All Things; and to All Purposes, I must
Recommend here one Note to the Reader, upon the Testimonies Delivered, and as
they are here represented by the Gentlemen above Named. They do Not speak to
the Whole History of the Business, according to the Literal strictness of the
Oath, or Duty of an Evidence, so as to Expatiate upon All the Minutes of their
Knowledge, or Thoughts, as to the Thing in Question, but according to the
Equity, and the Intent of Public Justice; For the Court puts the Questions;
and it is their Part, Truly to Answer them, without running into Matters
Foreign to the Interrogatory. They Believed, upon what they had in Sight, that
he was strangled; and so That was a safe, and Convenient Question: and the
Signs of it about his Neck, were improved in favor of That Opinion; if he had
Died of the Wound, they say, there would have been a Great Evacuation of Blood;
and so the Question upon That Point, was, in a Manner Restrained to the Ditch:
only some superficial Enquiries about the Dreining of it at the White-house
into the Celler, and the like: As if the Evacuation of a Gallon of Blood, in
Another Place, were not as Competent a Ground to Conclude upon, as One Drop of
Blood in the Ditch: But if These Gentlemen had had the Body before them, in the
Ditch, as they had it in the House, they would never have troubled themselves,
with his Neck; his Bruises, or his Circles, having so Demonstrative a Certainty
of the True Cause of his Death, before them: For there was not any Part about
him; Not so much as a Finger, that they would not have read the Workings of
Nature in. There would have been No Doubt, in fine, Whether he Died by a Sword,
or by a Crevat; but Who Killed him might perchance have Yielded Matter for
Another Question, if they could have thought it Possible for Mortal Hands to
have Drawn so Accurate, and Natural a Counterfeit of a Man that had Killed
Himself. To Conclude; the Surgeons were Consulted in their Faculty, upon what
Appeared to Them, without any Obligation upon them to Pronounce upon a Fact
that was Wholly out of their Ken: As if a Man should ask the Judgment of the
College of Physicians, concerning such or such a Disease. They may be Great
Philosophers, and Doctors, and yet Mistake the Distemper; and much more liable
were These Gentlemen to a Mistake, upon the Judgment of This Iustice's Death.
In one Word more; This Evidence was Effectually, but the Repeating of a Lesson,
and the saying of the same Things over again, which they had Declared before:
They were, in Truth, Leading Questions that Required Following Answers; and, as
it happened, there was not One Interrogatory that came near the Quick. I will
add one Word more; and so make an end of This Chapter. I am, my self,
Persuaded, that there were such Signs of Suffocation, as if his Body had been
found Hung up in a Room with a Sword thorough it, and an Effusion of Blood upon
the Floor too, supposing the Wound before he was quite Dead, one might have at
least divided the Death, betwixt the Sword, and the Halter: But upon the
finding of a Sword through a Body in a Ditch, and in such a Position too; and
No visible, or Hardly Imaginable Hanging in the Case; to Conclude, that he was
strangled, and that the Sword had No Part in his Death, was a Thing, that Most
Infallibly These Gentlemen would never have Agreed to, at least 'till they had
satisfied themselves that there was No Possibility of any Other Cause for Those
Signs of Suffocation; and 'till they had fully Considered, whether there Might
not be something of Equivalence to such a Suffocation, in the Circumstances of
the State, and Condition wherein they found him.

CHAP. XII.
The Iuror's Reasons for the Verdict they gave, upon the View of Sir E. B.
Godfrey's Body.

THomas Harris Deposes, That He this Enformant, some few Days after Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey went Last from his House, heard that he was Missing; And
says, That the said Sir Edmund's Body being found Dead in a Ditch, at, or near
Prim-rose-Hill, He this Enformant was Summoned upon the Coroners Inquest to
attend at the White-House, near the said Primrose-Hill, where there were Two
Persons supposed to be Surgeons, to View, and to Probe the Body. The One's Name
was Cambridge; The Other this Enformant does not know. The said Surgeons, upon
Examining the Body, found Two Wounds, which they said they Believed were given
after the Body was Dead. And observing a Streak about his Neck, they said they
Believed he was First Suffocated, and some time afterward, run Through. And
this Enformant did not take Notice of any other Surgeons there, then Those
Aforesaid. The matter was there Debated by the Jurors, who were not as yet
satisfied how he should come to his End: There being Evidence of the Place, and
the Manner of finding him, but None of the Particular Manner of his Death. So
that the Jury Adjourned till they should have a Further Summons.

Upon Saturday the Day following, the Jury met again at the Rose and Crown in
St. Giles's in the Fields, where they came, after a Long Debate, to a Verdict,
Agreeing, that the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Strangled by Persons
Unknown, etc.

And being further asked, How it came to pass, that this Enformant, and the
Jury, not being satisfied in the Manner of the said Sir Edmund's Death, by any
Proofs at the White-House, they came Now to be better Satisfied therein, at the
Rose and Crown, then they were Before: To which, this Enformant makes Answer,
That an Oylman, and Some Others made Oath, That they saw him in the Strand
about Twelve or One upon the Day that he was First Missing.

And being further Asked, How they came to find him Strangled with a Linen
Cloth, when there was No Linen Cloth found, and not rather Killed with his own
Sword, which was found through him: This Enformant Answers, That the Surgeons
told them, That if he had been run through first, there could never have been a
Suffocation Afterward.

John Cowsey Deposes, That there were Two Surgeons called to View, and Examine
the Body, who gave their Opinions upon Oath, (to the best of this Enformants
Memory) that he was Suffocated, which they Gathered from a Circle about his
Neck, and the settling of the Blood about his Breast.

They did not come to a Verdict at That Meeting; But the Coroner told them,
that for several Reasons, they should at present Adjourn.

After the Adjournment abovesaid, the Jury met at the Rose and Crown in St.
Giles's in the Fields, the next Day, where they stayed till very Late That
Night, before they gave up their Verdict.

And this Enformant being Interrogated, if they found a Linen Cloth about him:
This Enformant Answers, That he neither saw, nor heard of any.

And this Enformant being Interrogated, if there was any Proof made to the Jury
of the Body being found Dead with a Sword through it, This Enformant makes
Answer, That it was Proved upon Oath.

And This Enformant being further Interrogated, how they came to find him
Strangled with a Linen Cloth, when no Linen Cloth there appeared; and why
they did not find him to Dye of his Wounds, when 'twas Proved upon Oath, that
the Body was found with a Sword through it? He this Enformant makes Answer,
That by the Opinion of the Surgeons, and the Appearance of the Body, they
Judged that he was Strangled. And touching the Wound given by the Sword, this
Enformant Judged that the Wound could not be his Death; because he saw No Blood
follow.

Joseph Girl Deposes, That being Summoned, etc. One Mrs. Blithe, amd her Man
of St. Giles's, made Oath, They, or One of them had been upon Wednesday up and
down thereabouts (where the Body was found) looking for a Calf newly fallen;
And that at that time, they did not see any Dead Body. This being Wednesday
when Sir E. B. Godfrey was Missing. And says, That the Jurors complained much
of waiting so long, and Desired to be Dismissed; but the Coroner, John Cowper,
urged the staying of it out, till they should see what Evidence would come in.

Thomas Woollams Deposes, That he was Summoned, etc. And that there were Two
Surgeons with the Jury, upon the View of the Body; Who, upon Examination of the
Circumstances, Declared upon their Oaths, That they Believed the Body was
Suffocated; Giving these Reasons for it, that there was a Circle about the
Neck; The Blood was Settled within the Skin, and his Neck seemed to be Wrenched.
They did not come to a Verdict at That Sitting; but put it off to another
Sitting.

Simon Standever Deposes, that he being Summoned, etc. and the Jury Sworn,
they went All, or the greater Part of them, and this Enformant, one of the
Number, to View the Place where the Body was found; and so Returned to Sit upon
the Body. There were Two Persons, one Cambridge, a Surgeon, and Another Person
Unknown to this Enformant, who they said was a Surgeon also, to View, and to
Examine the said Body, who Delivered their Opinion upon their Oaths, That they
Believed that the said Sir Edmund did Not Dye of the Wound by the Sword; but
that he was Strangled: For his Breast was Black and Bruised; And there was a
List about his Neck: His Neck Limber, and his Chin turned upon his Left
Shoulder, to the best of This Enformants Memory. That by This Opinion of the
Surgeons, and their declaring that he did not Dye by the Wound of the Sword,
This Enformant, and others of the Jury (as he Believes) were Persuaded to be of
the same Opinion, That he did not Dye of the Wound of the Sword.

And This Enformant says, That they did not come to a Verdict at the
White-House; But there being a great Crowd of People, and No Evidence as yet
appearing (as this Enformant Remembers) but the Two Surgeons, and Mr. Collins,
who said that he saw him on the Day that he was First Missing about Nine or Ten
a Clock in the Morning, near a Barn of the said Mr. Collins's, hard by Marybone
Church; the Jury was coming at that time to a Verdict. That the Day following,
in the Afternoon, the said Jury met at the Rose and Crown in St. Giles's in the
Fields, where they sat from the Afternoon, till past Midnight, before they
gave up their Verdict.

This Enformant being Interrogated, what Evidence they had at the Rose and
Crown, more then they had before at the White-House, to make them think that
the Sword was not the Cause of his Death: This Enformant Answers, That a
Shopkeeper, with his Wife, and some body else, gave Enformation upon Oath,
That they had seen the said Sir Edmund at the Door of the said Shopkeeper;
about Twelve a Clock at Noon the First Day that Sir Edmund was Missing; by
which, it appeared, that the said Sir Edmund was back again in London, after
Mr. Collins had seen him about Marybone.

Anthony Friar Deposes, being Summoned, etc. That there were Two Persons, said
to be Surgeons, that had the View of, and the Probing of the Body. The Name of
the One was Nicholas Cambridge, but the Name of the Other this Enformant does
not Remember: And that upon the Probing of the said Body, they gave their
Opinion that the Wounds were made after he was Dead; which, to This Enformants
Remembrance, Moved This Enformant, and Others, to be of the same Opinion too.

And this Enformant says, That the Surgeons aforesaid were with the Jury again
at the Rose and Crown, (to the best of his Knowledge;) And that the said
Surgeons Declared they Believed he was Strangled with a Napkin, or Some such
Thing, which this Enformant says, was the Only Reason, together with the
Circle about his Neck, that Induced This Enformant to be of That Opinion.

Robert Trotton being Summoned, etc. Deposes, That being asked upon what
Evidence they found the said Sir Edmund to be Strangled with a Linen Cloth,
the Body being found with a Sword through it, and no Linen Cloth appearing,
This Enformant makes Answer, That He and the Jury could not tell what to Think
on it, it was so Ticklish a Business: But the Two Surgeons, One Nicholas
Cambridge, and Another, saying, that it was done by some Linen Cloth, Swayed
the Jury to find it so. And that This Enformant verily Believes, that if the
said Surgeons had not given their Opinions, that he was killed by a Linen
Cloth, the Jury would have given up the Verdict, that it was done with his own
Sword.

And further, That this Enformant does not Remember any more Surgeons upon the
View of the Body with the Jurors, then the Two before spoken of: And he
Remembers that the said Surgeons were with the Jury, both at the White-House,
and at the Rose and Crown; And that the Jurors were strongly of Opinion that
the said Sir Edmund was Killed with the Sword that was found in his Body, 'till
the Earnestness of the Surgeons Prevailed upon them, to give their Verdict
Another way.

John Davis Deposes, That this Enformant was Summoned to appear upon the
Coroners Inquest at the White-House near Primrose-Hill; And there to sit upon
the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, which was found Dead near that Place: And
This Enformant went thither accordingly, where He this Enformant saw the said
Body lying upon the Table: And likewise saw Two Persons there, which he took to
be Surgeons.

And says, That the said Jurors were discoursing how the said Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey came by his End: And that This Enformant did not understand by any
thing he heard there, nor did he ever understand how the said Sir Edmund came
by his Death.

And that the said Jury was Adjourned from the White-House; and likewise that
the Coroner there Declared, that the said Body might be buried.

And this Enformant remembers, that the said Jury sat again at the Rose and
Crown in St. Giles's in the Fields; And that there they sat Late in the Night,
'till they delivered up their Verdict.

And says, That this Enformant, by all that Passed There, could not understand
how the said Sir Edmund came by his Death; Neither did he find by any of his
Fellow-Iurors, how he came by his Death.

And This Enformant Remembers, that in Discoursing upon the said Body; Some
were of Opinion that he Murdered Himself; Others, that it was done by the
Hands of some Other Person, or Persons.

Philip Wyanes Deposes, being Summoned, etc. That there was One Cambridge a
Surgeon there; and Another Person who they say was a Professed Surgeon, whom
This Enformant did not know, which Two Surgeons did upon their Oaths take a
View of, and Examine the Body, Lancing the Breast, and the Neck, Declaring
their Opinions upon the View and Examination of the said Body; That it was
Impossible for the said Sir Edmund to do That of Himself, but that it was done
by other Hands; And that he Died by Suffocating, by something that was Broad,
the Circle it Self being very Broad. The Crowd of People being very Great, and
the Jurors desirous to get what Enformation they could they were Adjourned for
that Time without coming to a Verdict.

The Jury met Next at the Rose and Crown at St. Giles's in the Fields, Where
they sat from the Afternoon 'till about Midnight, before they gave up their
Verdict; The Two Surgeons before Spoken of, Continuing in the same Opinion that
they were before.

And This Enformant being Interrogated, what Objections were Moved upon the
Debate before they came to a Verdict, Makes Answer, That some said perhaps he
might Murder Himself; some that perhaps the Sword might Kill him; Others that
he was Strangled: But they All Agreed at last in the same Verdict.

Thomas Mason Deposes, being Summoned, That there was one Cambridge a Surgeon
to view the Body; And Likewise Another Person Unknown to this Enformant, who
they said was a Surgeon; which said Surgeons gave their Opinion, that the Sword
was not the Death of him; But that he was Strangled. That there was a Debate
upon the Matter; But the Press being Troublesome, and the Persons that found
the Body, not Present, the Jury brake up from the White-House.

That on the Next day, being Saturday, the Jury Met at the Rose and Crown in
St. Giles's in the Fields, about Five in the Afternoon; And that they sat 'til
Four in the Morning, before they Agreed upon the Verdict.

And moreover, This Enformant says, That the said Radcliffe and his Wife Swore
they saw him about One a Clock, on the aforesaid Saturday, when Sir Edmund was
first Missing, and Asked him to Dine with them.

Thomas Hartwell Deposes, being Summoned, etc. That the Neck of the said Body
being so Limber, that it would not lie Upright upon the Table; This Enformant
Believes (to the Best of his Memory) that there were Surgeons sent for; And
that there came two Persons, One Cambridge, whom This Enformant knew to be a
Surgeon, and the Other This Enformant did not know; The said Surgeons feeling,
and viewing the Body about the Neck, and finding the Neck to be Limber, and a
Green List round it, They the said Surgeons gave their Opinions that the said
Body was Strangled.

This Enformant further says, That upon the Surgeons Declaring Themselves in
Manner as Aforesaid, He This Enformant was Induced to be of That Opinion: But
the Crowd being very Great, and the Jury desiring to be better Enform'd, they
Rose without Coming to a Verdict.

And this Enformant says, That the Iuries next Meeting was at the Rose and
Crown in St. Giles'es in the Fields, where they had a Long Debate before they
gave up their Verdict.

This Enformant remembers, that there was Sometime or other a Dispute betwixt
the Two Coroners, but does not remember upon what Point, nor the Circumstances
of the Dispute; Neither can he be Positive, that it was about the Body that was
there in Question.

And says, That the Surgeons gave for the Reason of their Opinions, that the
Neck was Limber, and Broken, And a Circle of Blood Settled about the Neck; And
That This Enformant Believes, that the Jury relied upon the Surgeons Opinion,
believing that they Understood the Matter better then the Jurors. The Surgeons
also saying, That they Believed he was Strangled with a Cloth, the Circle would
not have been so Broad else.

I am Now to Observe, upon This Evidence, First, That the Verdict was not
Carried so Clear as the World has been made to Believe: For after so many Hours
Sitting at the White-House upon the Friday, they were forced to Adjourn the
Debate to the Rose and Crown in St. Giles's, and to make Another Days Work
on it; Nay, and it was far into Sunday Morning too, before they Agreed their
Verdict.

It must not be passed over in the Second Place, What was the True Reason of
their putting it off. Harris said the Jury were not satisfied, and so
Adjourned. Cowsey says, they could not agree That Point, and the Coroner
Adjourned for several Reasons [Best known to Himself.] Wyanes says, they
Adjourned for Better Enformation; And so says Hartwell. But they Adjourned, in
fine, for want of Full Enformation. They came next day together again,
according to that Adjournment, and sat out the Debate 'till it came to a
Verdict, which presumes that they had now gotten the Better Enformation, which
they wanted before: And what That Enformation was, is the Thing next to be
Considered.

CHAP. XIII.
The Jury Adjourned the Debate for want of Evidence: Quere what Better Evidence
they had the Next Day when they came to a Verdict, than was Produced the Day
before?

THE Question in Debate is shortly This: By What Death, or by What Hand Sir E.
B. Godfrey Died. The Jury were Divided, the First Day for want of Competent
Enformation; and their Coming to a Resolution the day following, Supposes an
Additional, or a Supplemental Evidence, which must be either in Proof of Fact,
or upon the Force of Fair Inference, or Pregnant Presumption: so that in a
Train of Thought it comes Naturally now to be Inquired into, what New
Inducements or Enformations, they received, the Second day toward the
Presumption of his being Strangled, over and above what they had the Day
before. The Business of the Wounds given after he was Dead, the Streak or
Circle about his Neck; the Settling of his Blood about the Breast, the Wrenching
and the Limberness of his Neck; No Evacuation of Blood; These were the
Circumstances, as Appears by the Jurors Themselves, that the Surgeons Declared
to be the Reasons, why they Concluded him to be Strangled; And it must be with
a Napkin or some Linen Cloth, they said, to Answer the Breadth of the List
about his Neck. Now if the Jurors had All This before them on the Friday, And
that Neither the Opinion of the Surgeons, nor the View of the Body, nor Both
Together could Prevail upon the Jury That Day to find him Strangled; the Same
Reasons over again, Unless otherwise and better Supported, cannot be Decently
Understood to have had more Power upon their Minds, and Understanding upon the
Saturday then they had on Friday: So that the Jurors are Now to tell us what
Wonderful Revelation they had the Day Following, to Clear This Mystery; Only a
Word or Two, Previous to That Point.

William Collins and Thomas Mason, Both Jurymen saw Sir Edmund That Saturday
Morning, The Former about Nine of the Clock talking with a Milk-woman near
Paddington; The Other coming from Paddington-Ward, toward London, about Eleven,
That Morning. We shall now see what it was that Swayed the Verdict.

They were moved to the Verdict (says Mr. Harris) by an Oylman, and Others that
saw him at Twelve. They sat Long (says Mr. Standever) and an Oylman and his
Wife showed he was come back again. Mr. Mason says the same Thing too.

Now the Question was, upon the Evidence before the Jury, whether he was
Strangled, or Killed with a Sword. They could not, it seems, agree upon the
Matter, 'till they found that Mr. Radcliffe, and Others had Seen him about One
of the Clock in the Strand near Charing Cross That day that Collins had Seen
him near Paddington in the Morning: and from hence they draw a Conclusion, he
was Strangled. And why might they not as reasonably have Inferred from the
Proof of his Coming back again, that he Died by the Sword, as by the Linen
Cloth? Beside that it was in Every bodies Mouth, before ever they came to a
Verdict, that Several People had seen him in his way toward Paddington back
again: But we shall have a Better Occasion to look into This Particular, when
we come to Discourse of the Witnesses that were made use of, and of Those that
were Not, and into the Merits of That Evidence. In the Mean While, the Jurors
were, in Effect, Totally led by the Surgeons.

The Surgeons told us so (says Mr. Harris) The Surgeons Judged him strangled,
says Mr. Cowsey: And so says Mr. Woollams: The Opinion of the Surgeons swayed
the Jury, says Mr. Standever. The Surgeons Opinion moved Mr. Friar, Mr.
Trotton, and effectually, All the Rest.

But All This had no Effect upon the Jury the First day; Nay the Jurors (says
Mr. Trotton) were strongly of opinion that he was killed with the Sword, 'till
the Earnestness of the Surgeons prevailed with them to give their Verdict
Another way. Mr. Davies Declares that Neither He nor Any of his Fellow-Iurors
were satisfied in the Business. But some would have it that he Killed Himself;
Others, that he was Murdered by some body else.

So much for the Point of the Surgeons leading the Jury; and it remains now to
Examine the Weight of Those Reasons that Wrought upon the Surgeons, which I
shall Handle with All due respects to their Abilities, to their Integrity, and
to their Profession. Let me be Understood here, to Comprehend All Those Persons
of Name and of Mark, that have Delivered their thoughts upon This Subject,
occasionally, and by the By, as well as Those Gentlemen that Assisted more
Immediately to the Attending of This Office. To say the Plain Truth of the
Matter, the Surgeons had but half a sight of the Case, and Consequently, could
make but half a Judgment upon the Thing in Question. Nothing is more Ordinary,
then for Learned and Practical Physicians, upon a Consult to say, If I had
known, or seen This or That Accident, I should have taken it to have been such
or such a Disease; and most Undoubtedly, (as I have Hinted already) they would
have made quite Another Judgment upon the Body in the Ditch, then they did upon
the Table. But to give as much as can be Granted, or I might have said as much
as can be Demanded in the then Present state of Things; The very Conjecture, or
Probability of a Suffocation, was as much almost, as the Matter would bear; And
it had need of being very well seconded, even to Warrant the Sentence of a Bare
Likelihood. As for Instance, now.

There is Great Weight laid upon the Limberness, the Twisting, or the Wrenching
of the Neck, as some of the Jurors have worded it; or the Dislocating of it,
according to the Surgeons. They All spoke of Greens Twisting his Neck, says
Prance, Trial, fol. 17.] And from hence they Infer that he was strangled. Now
the Fallacy of This Inference lies so open, that Every Nurse, and Searcher here
about the Town is Infinitely better able to speak to it, upon Experience, then
the Whole Council of Surgeons Hall can pretend to; if they take upon them to
speak only by Book.

Robert White Deposes, that being desired to speak his Observations upon Dead
Bodies, Concerning the Limberness of their Necks, as if their Necks were
Broken; and whether or No he has taken Notice of such a Limberness of the Neck
in Ordinary Cases; He This Enformant makes Answer, That he has seen several
Bodies, which upon the First Apprehension seemed to have their Necks Broken,
and Dislocated; but that upon Examination of Evidence, He This Enformant has
found the Necks of several Bodies to be very Loose and Limber, that have been
Destroyed by Wounds in Other Places.

Mary Smith, and Sarah Moreton, Searchers of the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, Jointly Depose, that These Enformants being asked whether in their
Observation of Bodies that Dye a Natural Death, they These Enformants find the
Necks of such Bodies as aforesaid, either Stiff, or Limber: They make Answer,
that they find the Necks of such Bodies both Ways; some, Stiff; and some,
Limber: And that they these Enformants, in token of the Truth of This, their
Observation, do Jointly affirm, That it is a Common saying among the Generality
of People, That if the Neck of the Corpse be Loose, some others will shortly Dye
out of the Family.

And further the Enformants being asked, in what Manner they find the Looseness
of the Neck in Those Bodies, where the Neck is Limber as aforesaid; They make
Answer, That they find the Necks, some Limberer then Others, and very often
that the Chin will be turned from shoulder to shoulder, and that it will Waggle
to and fro.

And These Enformants Jointly say, that when they have come to search Bodies
that have been a Day Dead or so; And that they have found the Head Leaning upon
the shoulder or Body, in an Ill Posture; It is a hard thing to put it in Order;
But when they come soon after the Body is Dead, it is much Easier to put it in
Order.

And they say Jointly likewise, that they find such Bodies as aforesaid, some
Limber and some Stiff, but (as they Believe) Ten Bodies Stiff for One Limber.

And they say Jointly, that they have seen a Corpse whereof the Neck was Broken,
and that the Chin was turned directly behind upon the Back.

Alice Weeks, and Elizabeth Belcher, Searchers of the Parish of St. Giles's in
the Fields Jointly Depose, that being asked whether in their Observation of
Bodies that Dye a Natural Death; They These Enformants find the Necks of such
Bodies as aforesaid, either Stiff, or Limber; They make Answer, that they find
the Necks of such Bodies, Both VVays, some stiff, and some limber: And that
they these Enformants, in token of the Truth of this their Observation, do
Jointly Affirm, that it is a Common saying among the Generality of People, that
if the Neck of the Corpse be Loose, some others will shortly Dye out of the
Family.

And further; These Enformants being Asked in what Manner they find the
Looseness of the Neck in Those Bodies, Where the Neck is Limber, as aforesaid;
They make answer, That they find the Necks some Limberer then others, and very
often that the Chin will be turned from Shoulder to Shoulder, and that it will
Waggle to and Fro.

And These Enformants Jointly say, that when they have come to search Bodies,
that have been a Day Dead or so; And that they have found the Head Leaning upon
the Shoulder, or the Body in an Ill Posture, it is a hard thing to put it in
Order: But when they come soon after the Body is Dead, it is much Easier to put
it in Order.

And they say Jointly likewise, that they find such Bodies as aforesaid, some
Limber, and some Stiff, but (as they believe) Ten Bodies Stiff for one Limber.

Alice Weeks Deposes apart, that going to search the Body of a Child, she
found the Neck of it Broken, and that the Chin of the said Child was Turned
quite round to the Back.

This Account of the Searchers, agrees exactly, as well in the Negative as in
the Affirmative with the Story of Sir Godfrey's Body. All People agree that
they Could and did Turn the Chin from Shoulder to Shoulder; but there is Not a
Word of turning it about to the Back, which the Searchers observed, might have
been done, if the Neck was Broken; and Undoubtedly, they that turned it to the
Shoulder, if it had not stopped There, would have gone further in it.

But then the Streaks, the Lists and the Creases about the Neck, as they call
them, were looked upon as strong Presumptions that he Died by Suffocation, not
so much as Accidents, simply Arising from the Choking of him, as the
Impression, that the straining of the Rope or Linen Cloth with which he was
strangled, had Left behind it upon the Part.

I had a Fair Occasion of some Discourse upon This Point with Mr. Hobbs, who
had not seen the Body, it seems, either in the Ditch, or at the White-House,
but only after the Removal of it to Hartshorn-Lane. He told me that upon the
View of the Body, he thought it to be Strangled. My Answer, I remember, was
This, in Effect, that I my self was Partly of That Opinion; for considering the
Depth, the Straitness, and the Stiffness of his Collar, and the Pressing of his
Throat upon it, which, of Necessity, must bear hard in That Position of his
Body: The very Force and Oppression of the Posture he was found in, would have
been Sufficient, in a very short time, to have Choked him, even without his
Wounds; but the Suffocation then followed the Sword, not the Sword the
Suffocation, and the One Produced the Accidents of the Other. The Gentleman,
for the Purpose, fell upon his Sword; The Stab was Mortal; but the Fall yet
cast the Body into such a Disposition of the Several Parts of it, that it
Superinduced the Signs of Strangling, over and above the Deadly Effect of the
Wound: So that it stands with very good Reason, that he might be Really Killed
with the Sword, and yet at the same time appear to be Choked: And under
favor, the Scene of the Ditch, duly considered, the Presumptions were Twenty
times more, and stronger for the Former, then for the Latter. Mr. Hobbs was
pleased to Agree in Opinion, that such a Collar, and such Circumstances might
well be the Cause of such an Appearance: But we will see now what Mr. Skillarne
and Mr. Lasinby say to the Matter.

Zachariah Skillarne Deposes, That upon the Friday Morning Early, being the
Next Day to the Evening whereon the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was found,
This Enformant heard a Rumor of the finding of the said Body, and the Place
where 'twas found. And that soon afterward, on the same Morning, he This
Enformant by a Message from the Two Brothers of the said Sir Edmund, was given
to understand that they Desired his Company to go along with them to View the
Body; And He This Enformant went accordingly, in a Coach with the Brothers
aforesaid, as near as they could come to the White-House; And there they
Alighted, This Enformant with One of the Brothers, going a-foot to the Place
where they were told the said Body was Found.

This Enformant observed the Limbs of the Body to be Loose, and No Stiffness
upon them; Having also observed, that the Bodies of Persons that are Hanged, or
Strangled, are always Limber; Whereas Bodies that Dye a Natural Death, are
always Stiff, except in Apoplexies. There was also one Mr. Cambridge upon the
View of the said Body, who Agreed in Opinion with this Enformant.

This Enformant being asked, what Induced him to Believe that the said Body was
Strangled: He This Enformant gave these following Reasons. The Person Living
being a Man of a Pale Countenance, His Cheeks Flaccid, His Lips Thin, His Nose
Sharp, and his Eyes Hollow: The said Sir Edmund being Dead, his Lips and Cheeks
were Turgid, and Tumefy'd, His Nose bigger, and Red; His Eyes Prominent, and a
Circle about his Neck.

Richard Lasinby Surgeon, Deposes, That this Enformant went with some Company
out of Curiosity to see the Dead Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, at the
White-House near Primrose-Hill, where it lay upon the Table the Collar not as
yet Unbutton'd: But this Enformant going out of the Room to refresh Himself
after his Walk, and leaving a Crowd of People there, was soon after called back
again to see the Neck of the said Sir Edmund, his Collar being Then Unbutton'd.

And this Enformant upon his Return, being asked what he thought of the Two
Marks above and below, being just the Breadth of the Collar, which was a Deep
Stiff Collar; It being Suggested to this Enformant, that they were the Marks of
Ropes; He this Enformant gave his Opinion, that they were the Marks of the
Edges of the Collar, and that the Swelling of the Neck, and the Breast was so
Great above and below the Collar, that it occasioned Those Marks like a Ring
upon a Swollen Finger.

And this Enformant having seen the Dead Body as aforesaid, and spoken his
Thoughts upon it, went out of the Room again, and after sometime passing
backward through the said Room, he this Enformant observed, that the Swelling
of the Breast had Discharged it self into the Lower Crease, so that the Crease
was hardly Perceivable. The Face all this While was Ruddy and Swelled,
excepting Two Places, one by his Mouth, and Another by his Temples, that seemed
to have a Degree of Putrefaction.

And says, That the Breast was turned Greenish, and so Mortified, (considering
the Season of the Year) that it might seem rather to have been Dead a Month,
then so short a Time as he was Missing.

Now for so much as concerns the Collar, and the Circles, it is made a Clear
Case here, by the Disappearing of the Lower Circle upon the Vnbuttoning of the
Collar, that the One caused the Other: The Creases just Answering the Depth of
the Collar.

Sarah Moreton One of the Searchers of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields,
Deposes, That thy Enformant, and her Partner, Mary Smith, being sent for to
see the Body of a Dead Child, about Two Years since, this Enformant, and her
said Partner, looking upon the said Child, said it Died of the Rickets:
Whereupon the Landlady said to this Enformant, to this effect, The Child is
Murdered; The Father and Mother have thrown it against the Ground, and killed
it, showing to this Enformant a Looseness of the Neck.

And says, That after This, there was a Jury Met to Sit upon the Death of the
Child; and the Jurors Considering the Limberness of the Neck, concluded, that
the Neck was Broke; After which, they sent to this Enformant, and her Partner,
to View the Body once again; who continued in Opinion, that the Neck of it was
Not Broken: Whereupon a Surgeon was sent for, who upon a Full Examination of
the Matter, found that the Neck was Not Broken. The Reason they gave why the
Neck was Broken, was, because they could remove the Chin from Shoulder to
Shoulder, by the Great Looseness of the Neck: But this Enformant and her
Partner satisfied them, that such a Limberness of the Neck was an Ordinary
Case; and that if the Neck had been Broke, they might have turned the Chin
behind to the Back; which this Enformant sh^wd them was not to be done by This
Child: So that they found it to Dye of a Natural Death, and the Parents came
into no further Trouble about it.

Mr. Skillarne gives other Reasons still, for his Opinion that he was
Strangled. Now if he lay in a Strangling Posture, there must be Strangling
Accidents Expected upon him; And if that be Admitted, it was a Filthy way
about, to have him Strangled somewhere else, and then brought to the Ditch,
when he might have been as well Strangled as he lay in the Ditch: And after All
This, there is not so much as the Least Glimpse of Light all This while, of his
being Killed, either by any Other Hand, or in any Other Place. As to the
Settling of the Blood in his Breast, and the Resemblance of Bruises
thereabouts, it was but Natural; what with the Damp of the Earth, and the
Course of the Blood that way, that Those Parts which were nearest the Orifice
of the Wound should Putrify First.

It made a Mighty Noise, I remember, the Dispute whether his Eyes were Shut or
Open, and whether they were Fly-blown, or Not. Mr. Hassard, and several Others
found his Eyes Shut; Mr. Skillarne, etc. found them Open, and Both, True,
Undoubtedly, as they might be Tampered with: But for Fly-blows upon the 18 th.
of October (though it was Sworn Point Blank over and over) the very Fancy of
Fly-blows at That time of the Year, was Laughed at, and Hissed out of All
Company, and Credit. And yet this very Year, a pretty way into November, having
the Honor to Dine with a Noble Person of a Character every Way Answerable to
the Dignity of his Title: The Side-Bord, Cistern, and Table-basket, were so
Pestered with Swarms, I dare say of Thousands of Flies, that I desired a
Particular Notice might be Taken of the Thing, and of the Time, in
Contradiction to the Frivolous Exceptions that were made to that part of the
Evidence in the Case of Godfrey. There was great Notice taken too, of the
Cleanness of his Shoes. Now they were not only Clean, but Shining; as any Man's
will be, upon such a Walk, where the Grass wipes them every Step he sets: And
Mr. Yeamans Deposes, That his Shoes were very Clean, and several Blades of
Grass sticking about the Seems.

Mr. Collinson Deposes, as to the Weather, That it was Fair, Dry Weather All
that Week till Thursday, when there was a Great Shower of Hail. This he
remembers, by the Token that the Sickness and Death of his Wife at Marybone
about that Time, caused him to Travel Early and Late, upon that Occasion.

Mr. Audley Deposes, That the Saturday when Sir Edmund was first Missing, was
a very Fair, Sun-shiny Day. This Enformant having a Country House at
Hamersmith, walked home on Foot that Saturday, and the Way was very Dry, and
Clean, which he well remembers by Sir Edmund 's being Missing That Day.

Now his Shoes could never have been Thus Clean, if he had been brought Thither
a Horseback; or any way but a-foot; for (as some Body well observed) the Walk
had as good as Glazed them; So that the Force of the Inference lies strong the
Other Way: Or if his Shoes Ought to have been Dirty with going thither a-foot
to Destroy himself, Why did not the Murderers Daub and make them Dirty, for
the better Color of the Cheat? But let the Matter be as it will, it is not
Tanti, to argue whether it were so or no. The Question indeed of Blood, or No
Blood, is of more Importance; and though there is already so much said upon it,
there is yet so much More, to be said upon it, that it will deserve a Chapter by
it self.

CHAP. XIV.
Blood or No Blood, was the main Point in Issue, though the least part of the
Question, either at the Inquest, or at the Trials.

THE Business of the Fly-blows, and of the Eyes shut or open, will bear
Inferences Plausible enough, to Puzzle a Debate; but they are Circumstances,
rather of Curiosity, and Caprice, then of Weight. The Limberness of the Neck,
and the Circles about it, might pass well enough in the Description of a Body
that had been Strangled in Sight; but it does not follow, by any Means, because
it was certainly the Rope that caused the Limberness, and made that Mark; that
therefore every such Limberness, and every such Mark must have been Caused by a
Rope; for a Stiff Collar, as one may Place the Body, and the Neck of a Man,
will as surely Strangle him in a Ditch, as a Halter will do upon a Gibbet: And
the Sword that brings down the Body, and the Parts of it to such a Position,
does the same Office one way, that the Executioner does Another: So that if I
Grant but a Likely Possibility of an Antecedent Suffocation, it is the Uttermost
that the Case will admit; and so far at last, from being a Warrantable Ground
for a Conclusion, that it will scarce amount to a Competent Foundation for a
Bare Conjecture. But we have spoken abundantly to These Particulars, in the Two
Last Chapters; And so to the Imaginary Blows and Bruises, and the Cleanness of
his Shoes. In one Word; Sir Edmund died a kind of a Complicated Death: The
Sword and the Collar, in Appearance, had Both their Parts in it, and either of
them would have done the Work, without the Other; But the Main Stress of the
Cause is yet to come. It Is objected that the Signs of being Strangled were
Evident; but that there appeared nothing more then the Sword through the Body
to Induce any Man to Believe that he Died of the Wound. The Sword was run
through him after he was Dead, they say, there would have been Blood else, and
so they have cast the Question upon This Issue, Was there any Blood or No?

The Jury, we find, were led by the Surgeons; and the Surgeons, by the Blood,
or No Blood. Mr. Skillarne delivered himself like a Just Man, and a Master of
his Profession, All that was Possible. I took him to be Strangled, (says he)
and gives his Reasons (as in the last Paragraph of his Enformation, in the
Foregoing Chapter.) But then a little further to Qualify the Matter.

Zachariah Skillarne Deposes, That He This Enformant being asked what Reasons
Moved him to be of Opinion that Sir Edmund was Not Killed with the Sword, He
this Enformant makes Answer, Because there was no greater Flux of Blood, which
is the ONLY Reason, to the best of his Memory, that Moved This Enformant to be
of That Judgment.

Now if This was the ONLY Reason, for his such Opinion, as He Himself Declares
it was, there will be No Reason at all to believe it, when This Reason shall be
Removed: And then Mr. Cambridge's Opinion falls, in Consequence, having sworn
Himself of the same Judgment with Mr. Skillarne. It would be Endless to set
down All the Enformations at Length that have been delivered upon Oath upon
This Occasion: So that I shall only Sum up the most Material Parts of them, in
Abstract, and refer any Man that doubts the Candor of the Report, to the
Originals Themselves, which I have Deposited in the Paper-Office for the
Perpetual Memory of the Truth of This Matter. I shall begin with the Jurors,
and so to the Surgeons, and then to Other Testimonies of Credit, that speak
Unanimously to This Point.

Thomas Woollams Deposes, That he saw the Body laid at Length, upon a Table,
at the White-House, and (as he remembers) a Stain upon his Flannel, or Holland
Shirt, which he took to be Waterish Blood. That this Enformant went down to see
the Place, where the said Body was found: And that he being showed the Place,
where this Enformant was told the Sword was taken out of the Body; He this
Enformant heard some of the Company say, that upon the Pulling out of the
Sword, there came out some Watery stuff mixed with Blood; And that this Enformant
saw something of That Kind upon the Ground there, to the best of his
Remembrance.

Philip Wyanes Deposes, That being Summond, etc. He This Enformant went to the
White-house, and saw the Dead Body laid there upon a Table, and saw the Flannel
shirt stained with a kind of Watrish Blood; and that going down to the Place
where they said the Sword was taken out, This Enformant did there see a kind of
Watrish Blood upon the Ground.

William Collins Deposes, That the Body had an offensive Smell, and that the
Shirt was Bloody, and that some Blood came from it, as This Enformant was told,
when they took out the Sword.

Robert Trotton being Summoned, etc. Deposes, That he was showed the Place
where they said they took the Sword out of the Body, and saw Blood, and at a
Style or Posts in the Way; which they said came from the Body.

Thomas Mason being Summoned, etc. Deposes, That he saw the Body laid upon a
Table in the White-house and Watrish Blood upon his Linen.

Joseph Girl being Summond, etc. Deposes, That while the Body of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was lying upon a Table in the White-house, This Enformant
observed a Great Quantity of Blood to Issue from the Body, about a Gallon, as
he This Enformant believes.

Here are half a Dozen of the Jurors Themselves, that Swear to the Blood,
though it was Carried upon the Two Verdicts, as if there had been No Blood at
All; and that the Sword had been run through him after he was Dead. We'll
proceed now to the Testimony of the Surgeons, and of others well versed in
Matters of that Quality.

Mr. Richard Lasinby Deposes, That the Shirt was Bloody and Foetid; and Blood
likewise on the Place where they said the Sword was taken out.

Mr. Skillarne Deposes, That he took a View of the Ditch, where the Dead Body
was found, and could not see any Blood; But upon the Place where the Body was
Removed, and where they drew out the Sword; This Enformant saw the Grass
stained with a Watery Blood, and Smelling to it, found it to be Offensive, and
Putrified. And This Enformant Passing further, in the Direct way toward the
White-house, He This Enformant observed at some Posts that were set up in the
Way, that one of the Posts was Stained with such a kind of Watrish Blood as
before; And from thence, This Enformant passed forward to the White-house,
where he saw the said Body lie upon a Table, in a Black Mixed Chamblet Coat;
Another Coat Doublet and Breeches Black, no Band, a Deep Stiff Collar, and the
Body lying at Length upon the Back; His Eyes Open, The Face Swelled; The Body
upon the Breast appearing to be Bruised; The Neck Distorted, and so Limber that
This Enformant Removed the Chin from One Shoulder to the Other. There was a
Circle about the Neck; And upon This Enformants Opening it with an Incision
Knife, the Blood appeared to be Coagulated. This Enformant saw No Blood upon
the Body, Before; but on the Back of it there was a Stained Watrish Blood. And
This Enformant Observed, that upon Raising the Body, there Drained a Bloody
Serum from it, upon the Table, and so down upon the Floor.

Mr. James Chase Deposes, That he saw some Blood upon the Place, where they
said the Sword was taken out, and the Constable being upon the Place, told This
Enformant, that it was of the Blood that Followed the Sword from the Wound,
when he drew it out of the Body.

Mr. James Huyseman Deposes, That the Woman of the White-house told him, that
the Blood Drein'd from the Body as it lay upon the Table, into the Cellar, and
that Clots of Blood were found about the Body.

Mr. Brown the Constable Deposes, That upon Drawing the Sword out of the Body
(in the Dark,) he heard somewhat come Gubbling out of the Wound, and fall
Spattering upon the Ground.

John Rawson Deposes, That upon the Night when the Body was found, he went
down with a Candle and Lanthorn, to the Place where the said Body was found:
And going first to the Ditch, they could not Discern any Blood at All; but that
upon the Place, where the Sword was drawn out, they found Blood and Watery Stuff
up and down upon the Grass, and so Upon the Posts in the Passage, and upon the
Cheek of the Door, going into the House, and so likewise upon the Floor, where
the Body was First laid, and afterward upon the Table where it was Removed.

Margaret Rawson Deposes, That the Body being laid upon the Table, she This
Enformant saw Blood and Watery Matter that had Dropped from the Table, and passed
through the Cellar, and dropped on some Bottles that were there.

John Paris Deposes, That he saw the Body lie Upon the Floor at the
White-house, and that there ran Blood and Watery Matter from the said Body upon
the Floor.

Mr. John Hassard Deposes, That This Enformant heard that Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was Missing from his House some Days before the Dead Body was found.
And that upon the Morning next after the Day the said Body was said to be
found, He This Enformant being at a Coffee-House, heard the News; And at the
request of Mr. John Farewell, He this Enformant went along with him to see the
Body: And This Enformant coming to the Place where the said Body was found, and
viewing the Place, Thought it a Hard Matter to bring a Body thither with a
Horse.

And that This being Early in the Morning, some Snow that had fallen the Night
before, was yet seen upon the Ground. And that upon the Place where it was said
that the Sword was pulled out of the Body, there was Snow upon the Grass; But
upon some other Places near it, the Blood that was said to come out of the Body
was seen there upon the Ground in a Considerable Quantity; And (as This
Enformant Believes) the Snow Melted upon it.

And likewise that Passing by some Posts in the Way to the White-house, where
the Body then lay, This Enformant saw near the said Posts a Quantity of Watery
Blood, which This Enformant Judged to have Issued from the Body, in the
Carrying it over.

And This Enformant coming up to the White-House, where the Body lay upon a
Table, He This Enformant, Immediately upon the Sight of the Body, said, This is
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. His Coat was a Dark Brown Chamblet, His Shoes very
Clean, Top and Bottom, His Eyes Shut, And something about the Eye-Lashes, that
seemed to This Enformant to be Fly-Blows. His Bossom was Open, His Shirt
Stained with Blood, And a Kind of Watery Blood that dropped from him upon the
Floor; all This to the Best of his Knowledge, and Memory.

William Batson Deposes, That going from the White-house toward the Place
where This Enformant was told the Body Lay; He This Enformant, with the
Company, Saw, near a Gap in the Passage, some Blood lying on the Ground; This
Enformant being told, that the Body was brought from the Place where it was
found, That way. And This Enformant going further, saw (as he Believes) a
Greater Quantity of Blood, where the Grass was Stained with it, being the Place
( as This Enformant believes) whereunto the said Body was Removed out of the
Ditch; And This Enformant Believes, that upon taking the Sword out of the
Body, the Blood might there Issue out.

James Goweth Deposes, That hearing several Years since, that Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey ( whom This Enformant well knew) had been Missing some time from his
House, And that his Body was found some where out of Town, ( But the Day, the
Month, or the Year, This Enformant does not perfectly remember) He This
Enformant went in Company with one Mr. William Batson, and a Servant of Mr.
William Pilkingtons, to see the Body, which they found Early in the Morning,
at the VVhite-house beyond Primrose-Hill, where it lay in the Clothes upon the
Table.

And that This Enformant, having a Curiosity to see the Body of the said Sir
Edmund, Unbutton'd a Loose Coat he had on, and Another Coat Under it; and so to
the Shirt, Opened his Shirt and saw Blood upon it; with Two VVounds by his Left
Pap; But no Sword at That Time in the Body.

And that This Enformant having seen, and Observed the said Body, agreed with a
Fellow to show the Place where he was found, and Paid him for his Pains: the
said Guide leading This Enformant, and the Company the same way (as he said) by
which they brought the Body. This Enformant remembers, that there was a Style,
or Posts by the way, At, or near which Place, there was a Great Quantity of
Blood, as This Enformant and the Company took it to be, as if it had been
Poured out of a Basin. This Enformant and the Company going from thence toward
the Place, where he was found, and within a Matter of Thirty or Forty Foot of
the Place, where the Guide said the Body was found; there was a Great Quantity
of Blood lying in the same Manner as the Other, and rather more in Quantity
then the Former.

And This Enformant says, that being come to the Ditch, Mr. Batson was of
Opinion that there was some Blood in the Ditch, as he has said to this
Enformant several Times since; But This Enformant dares not be Positive, that
he saw any, though he saw something which he Doubted, whether it might be Blood
or No.

Edward Fisher Deposes, that the Day after the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
was found, This Enformant was Going about Nine or Ten in the Morning to My Lord
Wottons for Orders about Work, and heard by the Way, that the Body of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was found, and Carried to the White-House in St. John's
Wood: This Enformant went forward to My Lord Wotton's, and returning about Two
or Three in the Afternoon, took the White-House in his way: And coming thither,
This Enformant found the Coroner, and Jury there, to view the Body, who went up
Stairs, while This Enformant went into a Low Room, where the Body lay.

That as This Enformant was looking upon the Body, there came in a Man with a
drawn Sword in his Hand, who said, he was the Constable, and that he took that
Sword out of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Body, Describing the Manner of Sir Edmund
's lying upon his Face, and the Sword about Six Inches through his Body. The
Constable, upon This, said, that the Coroner desired the Body should be stripped,
and entreated the Company to lend him a Hand to do it: Whereupon, This
Enformant with Two Others Assisted him in the stripping of the Body; This
Enformant observing his Neck to be Limber, a Blackness about his Breast, and
upon the stripping him of his shirt, found it to be All Bloody in the Back; And
the smell of the Body very Noysom, and Offensive.

And says likewise, that the Arms were so stiff, that they were forced to Tear
off his shirt.

Thomas Burdet Deposes, That the Woman of the White-House told him This
Enformant, that the Blood ran from Sir Edmund's Body from the Table on to the
Floor; and so from the Floor into the Celler; And she took This Enformant into
the Celler, and showed him the Ground stained with the Blood.

Mr. Yeomans Deposes, that he found the Body lying upon a Table at the
White-House, and Watrish Blood running from the Body on the Floor.

Mr. Collinson Deposes, that he Observed Drops of Blood in several Places of
the Path where the Body was Carried, as if a Man had Walked with his Nose
Bleeding; but that at some Posts in the Way, there was Blood seen in a Great
Quantity.

After These Proofs of Blood, and of Blood too, in such a Quantity, as more
could not be Expected from a Body Under Those Circumstances; nor more
Undeniable Evidences of it; (for the Sword stopped the Forepart of the Wound as
Tight, as a Tap) After All This, I say; and an Appeal that a Man might safely
make to the Consciences of Thousands of People that might be added to the Open
and Avowed Witnesses of This Truth; It will be but Fair Yet, at last, to see
how This Question of the Blood was Managed, and what was said on the Other
side, to bear the World down, that there was No such evacuation; for the [Bloud
or No Bloud] was the same Thing, with Guilty or Not Guilty.

It is very Remarkable, that in the Coroner's Examinations, the very Word of
[BLOUD] is not so much as Mentioned: And in Truth, it was not safe to Insist
upon it, because the Jurors were Conscious to Themselves, that there was a
Great Deal of Blood: (as I have already Proved upon Six of them) and the same
may be reasonably presumed of All the rest. Now the Jurors would never have
agreed upon a Verdict, wherein they should every Man of 'em have given the Lie
to his own Knowledge and Conscience; for they might as well have said, we know
upon Ocular Certainty, that there was Blood in a Great Quantity; and yet we
will Discharge our selves upon our Oaths, in Declaring that We believe there
was None; and therefore Recourse is had to the Twisting of his Neck, and the
Blows upon his Breast for the Cause of his Death.

And so we find it upon the Trial, where it is the Crevat, or the Twisted
Handkercher that does the Feat still; not the Sword. Was he bloody? (says the
L. C. Justice) [ Mr. Brown] There was No Blood at All; There was No Blood in
the Ditch. fol. 35. And so the Enquiry went off Immediately, to the Sword, the
Bruises; The Looseness of the Neck; the Stick, and Gloves; the Money in his
Pocket, fol. 36. and not One Word More to the Constable, of the Blood, though
that same No Blood in the Ditch, Considering that the Question was not
restrained to the Ditch, Imports a ^ind of Emphatical Exception, as who should
say, there was No Blood in the Ditch, but there was Blood else where. We find
in Goweth's Enformation, it is true, that Batson told him he thought he saw
Blood in the Ditch; and that Goweth himself was Half of That Opinion, though he
would not be Positive in it. It will be here Objected that This Admittance
Overthrows what I have said Already of the Swords Closing the Wound, so that No
Blood could pass; And if a Little, why not More? Now This Cavil Concludes
mightily for My Purpose, for the same Thing might be Objected in the Case of
his Shirt, and Flannel, How came it at All to be stained; And why no More on it?
The Answer lies very Plain, and Open; The Orifice of the Mortal Wound was
Closed; but the Puncture (as Cambridge calls it) that stopped upon the Rib, was
Open, and thence came This Blood. There might be some Little Draining from the
Other, but Not Considerable, and the Clots that were found about him came from
his Back, where the Point had Wriggled out its way through the Bone, and could
not so well secure the Passage.

After Brown the Constable, had given his Evidence, the Surgeons were Called,
and Questioned about his Bruises; The Distortion and Looseness of his Neck; and
Then, Mr. Attorney Asked Mr. Skillarne, if he thought he was killed by the
Wound? [Mr. Skillarne] No, for then there would have been some Evacuation of
Blood, which there was not; Meaning, I suppose, an Evacuation, While the Blood
was Warm, and Fluid. Not Reflecting upon the Swords stopping the Course of it.
One of the King's Council, upon This, Leads him off from the blood again, to
the Neck. Are You sure (says he) his Neck had been Broken? Yes I am sure says
Mr. Skillarne; And then again of Himself; [ The Wound (says he) went through
his very Heart, and there would have been some Blood, if it had been done
quickly after his Death. Cambridge, in fine, Assented to the Opinion of Mr.
Skillarne, without one Word more about the Blood; And the whole Stress was laid
upon the Signs of being Strangled, or Hanged. fol. 37, 38.

The Light it self is not more Open to the Eyes of any Man, then is the
Evidence of the Truth and Reason of This Affair: But there will be Place and
Occasion by and by to make it yet Clearer.

CHAP. XV.
The Enformations before the Coroner Examined, and not One Word in them to the
Point in Issue.

THere are many Cases wherein the Truth may be Covered, or Intricated, and the
Reason of a Thing lie out of Sight: But for Errors of Inadvertency, Credulity,
Frailty, or Good Nature, it is no more then Common Justice, for Flesh and Blood
to bear with Humane Infirmity: But if People are Resolved to shut their Eyes
against the Sun; to be Deaf to all Profitable Counsels, and Necessary
Instructions; and not only to Neglect, Contemn, or Refuse, but also to Stifle,
Discountenance, and Oppose the Honest Means of Arriving at the Certain
Knowledge of Things; Let it be in Fact; Let it be in Opinion; Let it be Where,
How; or let the Case be What it will, there is No Excuse for That sort of
Ignorance: But in few Words, the Present Point is Briefly This.

There Is a Body found in a Ditch, with a Sword thorough it: The Constable
removes This Body in the Night to a Neighbour-House: An Inquisition Passes upon
it: And No Light to a Discovery how the Person came to his End, but what Arises
from the Sight of it upon a Table, and from the Imperfect Relation of those
that took it out of the Ditch; who could say Nothing to it neither, but by
Guess and Groping; for it was so Dark, that there was no discerning one Thing
from Another. The Jurors were now to consider, how this Man came by his Death:
And having nothing else to Work upon, as I was saying, but the Constable's
Report on the business of the Ditch; and what further might be Collected from a
View of the Body; the Subject Matter of Enquiry was Altogether Surgeons-Work;
for there were Wounds, Bruises, Tumors, Marks of Strangling, and the
Appearance of a Broken Neck in the Case: Now taking for Granted, that Sir
Godfrey died a Violent Death, it was a Point wholly out of their Cognizance,
and fitter for a Consult of Doctors, than a Panel of Jurors to determine: Two
Surgeons were hereupon called to their Assistance, by whose Opinions they were
overruled to find him Strangled; or by Way of Explanation, that he died rather
a Dry Death, then a Bloody; for, That was the Stress of the Question. If there
was no Flux of Blood, it is likely he was Strangled: If there was Any, it is
certain that he Died of his Wounds: So that the Verdict was carried in favor
of a Possibility, against a Point Blank Demonstration; for Blood there was in
Abundance, as is already Proved, and Over Proved, in the Last Chapter. The
Coroner and the Jurors knew there was Blood; Nay, and there were Inferences
drawn from the Evidences of That Blood, against the finding of him Strangled.
And

Mr. Friar Deposes (being one of the Inquest) that as he believes there was
Discourse, and Argument among the Jurors to This Effect, That there was Blood
came out of the Body, which could not have been, if the Sword had gone through
the Body after it had been Dead.

This Point stuck, the First Day, and held 'em tack too the Next; 'till Sunday
Morning, without any New Matter, either of Proof, or Presumption, that looked
toward the Strangling of him, though the Adjournment was said to be purely for
Further Evidence. But in the Conclusion, the Limberness of the Neck, and the
Two Circles Carried it against the Sword through the Heart of him: Now Those
Two Circles were so far One from Another, that they were fain to Reconcile the
Distance, by the Fancy of a Linen Cloth, or something that was Broad, to Cover
the Interval, and to do the Office of a Halter. They were, in short, Mightily
at a Loss, what to do with These Two Circles; for if they would make them Marks
of Suffocation, they must either Both be so, or Neither, being Manifestly
Effects of one and the same Cause; That is to say, the Pinching of a Deep Stiff
Collar that made Those Streaks with the Two Edges of it, as Mr. Lasinby
Demonstrates the Thing, by bringing the Two Ends of the Collar together, and
then showing how exactly the One Answered the Other. They found it a Chord
however upon the Inquisition, and so rendered it, Effectually, a Rope, in Law,
and a Linen Cloth, in Equity. But in the Conclusion, there was at last a
Verdict obtained, without Mentioning any Blood at all, for so much as appears
at least upon the Coroners Copy of the Enformations; which I have received
according to Order from the Hand of Mr. Cowper the Coroner, for the True Copies
of all that were by him taken in Writing upon This Matter: And they shall be
hereafter Exhibited, in their Due Place, and Season.

Having thus far Cleared our Way, by a Particular, as well as a General Account
of Things, toward the Forming of a True Judgment upon the Equity of This
Proceeding; We are now Entering upon such a Chain of Thoughts, as, in the very
Order of Reasoning, will Naturally Lead us to a Full Understanding of the
Merits of the Cause.

The King has lost a Subject; and the First Question is, What Death did he Dye?
2 ly. What Means or Evidence toward the Instructing of a Jury upon such an
Enquiry? Of These Two Points we have said more then Enough, perhaps, Already? 3
ly. Whether or no were Those Proofs Sufficient, and Improved to the Utmost,
according to the Coroners best Skill and Knowledge, toward the finding out of
the Truth? 4 ly. Whether or no were there Any Witnesses left Vnsummon'd, that
in Manifest Probability might have given more Light to the Truth of the Fact,
then Others that they made use of? The Third Point in the Range of This
Distribution, is to be the First now in the Order of my Discourse. There are
Two Branches of it; The Competency of the Means, and the Best Improvement of
Those Means toward the Common End. As to the former, The Main Question is
This; Did he Dye of a Wound, or was he Strangled? And then, Was there any
Blood, or Not? For Blood or No Blood, was the Certain Indication, either of the
One, or the Other? If there was a Considerable Flux of Blood, there could not
be a more Demonstrative Proof in the Case; for Mr. Skillarne Himself Declares,
and Deposes upon Oath, that There being no greater a Flux of Blood was the ONLY
Reason, that Moved him to be of Opinion, that Sir Edmund was not Killed with
the Sword; But if there was such a Flux of Blood in sight; though he did not
take Notice of it, in so great a Quantity; and that it was not only Proved upon
Oath, but the Jurors Themselves were likewise Ocular Witnesses of it, there
could not be a more Convincing Evidence in the World, then this Discharge of
Blood, that the Sword was the Death of him. To say Nothing of Twenty other
Convincing Circumstances in favor of that Opinion. But what signifies
Sufficiency of Evidence without the Application of it; Or the Flutter that many
People make in pretending to Search after a Truth that they would be Loath to
find? Whether or no there was any thing of this in the Subject of Their
Enquiry, will best appear from an Inspection into the Measures, and the Methods
of their Proceeding; That is to say, with a respect to the Choice of the
Matter; The Tendency, and the Direction of the Questions; and the Biass of the
Debate. Now there is a Right and a Wrong, as well Antecedently to a Conclusion,
as in the Last Sentence and Result it self. There may be Concealing,
Qualifying, Suppressing, Disguising, Misrepresenting, Paradoxing, laying more
or less Weight upon a thing then belongs to it, etc. In all which Cases, a False
Medium, purposely Interposed, is a Greater Iniquity then a Mistaken Judgment.

I was a Speaking of the Enformations taken before Mr. Cowper, one of his
Majesty's Coroners for the County of Middlesex upon the Subject of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey's Death: And it is in Those Papers that we are reasonably to
look for the Stress of the Matter in Debate, and the Ground of the Final
Resolution: Nay, and the Good Faith of the Very Manage of the Cause, will in
some Degree appear from the Matter of the Examinations, or from the Loose or
Strict Sifting of the Witnesses. I shall begin with the Enformations of Mr.
Skillarne, and Mr. Cambridge, and so proceed from One to Another, with a Note
Upon them as I go: Saving only that I shall reserve the Depositions of John
Brown, Henry Moor, Joseph Radcliffe, and his Wife, with Mary, the Wife of
Captain Tho. Gibbon, to be Treated of in like Manner, but in Chapters by
Themselves.

The Enformation of Zacharias Skillarne, of the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, Surgeon, taken upon Oath the 18th. Day of October, Ann. Dom. 1678.
before me.
Midd. ss.
HE says, That he being sent for as a Surgeon, to search the Body of Sir
Edmund Godfrey, did in the Presence of the Coroner and Jury, search the same,
and finds that he was Strangled; And that he has Received some Violent Blow
upon the Top of his Breast; And this Enformant verily believes, that the said
Sir Edmund did Not Dye of the VVound through his Body.

Jo. Cowper, Coroner. Zac. Skillarne.


The Enformation of Nicholas Cambridge of St. Giles in the Fields, Surgeon,
taken upon Oath the same Day and Year before me.
This Enformant says the same.

Jo. Cowper, Coroner. Nicholas Cambridge.


Zacharias Skillarne Surgeon, being further Examined, says, That when he
Searched Sir Edmund Godfrey's Body, he found that his Neck had been Twisted
toward the Left Side, which was one of the Occasions of his Death, as this
Enformant believes.

Jo. Cowper, Coroner. Zac. Skillarne.


I can only Observe over again, upon These Depositions, what, in Effect, I have
observed before: which is that the Single Thing Necessary to be Mentioned, for
the Full Enformation and Direction of the Jury is left out; for There Is not one
word of the Blood: And that would have been an Infallible Proof of his Dying by
the Sword, and Not by Strangling: Whereas the Suppressing of That Indubitable
Evidence for the Wound, turned the Verdict Clean Contrary, and made him to be
Strangled, and not to Dye by the Sword. I Will take Six or Seven of the rest now
in order, and then Speak to'em Altogether.

Midd. ss.
John Wilson of St. Martins Sadler, being Sworn and Examined, says, That Sir
Edmund Godfrey, about a Fortnight last Past, was Talking with one Mr. Harris,
and then told this Enformant, that he was in Danger for what he had Acted for
the Discovering the late Plot against his Majesty: and that he thought that
some of the Postmasters were to blame, in not Intercepting some Pacquets; or
Words to the same purpose.

Jo. Cowper Coroner. John. Wilson.


Thomas Morgan, being Sworn and Examined, says, That on Thursday last, about
Twelve of the Clock, he was at the Pond near the Ditch where Sir Edmund Godfrey
was found Dead, and does believe, that if Sir Edmunds Belt, Gloves and Cane,
had layn where they were found, this Enformant should have seen them.

Jo. Cowper Coroner. Tho. Morgan.


The Enformation of William Bromwell, John Walters, and John Rawson taken upon
Oath the same Day and Year.
THEY say that on Thursday the Seventeenth day of October instant, about Five
of the Clock, they found a Scabbard and a pair of Gloves, and a Cane lying upon
the Ground; and looking farther, they found a Person lying in a Ditch. And
afterward they were Enform'd that it was Sir Edmund Godfrey, and his Sword was
thrust through his Body.

William Bromwell. John Walter. The Mark of R John Rawson.


Midd. ss.
Caleb Wind, and Richard Duke, being both Sworn and Examined, do say, that on
Saturday last being the Twelfth of October instant, they saw Sir Edmund Godfrey
talking with Mr. Radcliff, near Mr. Radcliffs, about one of the Clock.

Jo. Cowper Coroner. Caleb VVinde. Richard Duke.


Now in One Word, to the Enformations above. What Is All This to a Sword or a
Rope? To a Cravat, a Handkercher, a Linen Cloth, or what ever else of That
kind the Reader pleases? The Sadler says right, that he was in Danger about
Tong's and Otes's Enformations: But his Apprehension (as I have said else
where) was from the Parliament, not from the Papists; and in Truth, for
Concealing the Pretended Plot, not for Discovering it; Unless for doing both
the One and the Other, in the Wrong Place: He has a Touch about the
Postmasters, and the Pacquets, which is only the Hint of a Story that he had
gotten by Halves, concerning the Windsor-Letters; which Imposture was as Yet a
Mystery; for it was Early days with the Plot, when These Matters were a Brewing.

Morgan Comes Next, and Deposes; that he was at the Pond, etc. upon Thursday
about Noon, and saw No Gloves nor Stick: And so it is Inferred that they were
not There, because Morgan did not see them: Whereas if He was on One Side of
the Pond, and the Things on the Other, the Bushes were so Thick, it was Morally
Impossible that he should see them. Besides, that the supposing they were Not
there, makes the Matter Worse; for what becomes of Prance, and Bedloes Evidence
then; that Swear the Body was carried thither Before? Or to make short on it.
What Is All This to the Question of Strangling; whether they were There or Not?

The Oath of Brumwell, Walters and Rawson is as Little to the Purpose too as
any of the Rest: Though I Cannot but take Notice of the Wording of the Last
Line on it i. e. [His Sword was Thrust through his Body.] as who should say, He
did not do it Himself. And so for the Deposition of Wind, and Dukes, seeing him
at Twelve upon Saturday talking with Radcliffe; it is Utterly Foreign to the
Business. They found that he had been toward Mary-bone; And was Now come Back
again, And What Is his Coming Back again, to the finding of him Suffocated? And
so to Fancy him Strangled in London, and his Body Carried off, and Thrown in a
Ditch, Two Mile out of Town, with his Sword through it; what was this Conceit,
but an Anticipation of the Imposture of Bedloe and Prance that followed upon
it? To Speak Plainly to the Reason of the Thing, and to the Likelihood of the
Case, Sir Edmund Carried out a Foreboding Countenance in the Morning with him'
His Friends and Relations took Notice, that for a Fortnight before he went
away, his Melancholy grew Stronger and Stronger upon him, in Proportion to the
Nearer, and Nearer Approach of the Parliament. His Domestiques were Startled at
his Behavior, both Overnight, and the Next Morning when he went away: His
Head ran upon Padington-Woods, and Thither he Asked the Way, and Thither he
Went, and came Back, and, out of All Doubt, went Again, and did the Unhappy
Work in the Afternoon, that he went for in the Morning.

To look back once again upon These Depositions; they were so far, in the very
Nature and Quality of them, from any Pretense of giving Light how Sir Edmund
came by his Death, that I Cannot gather from This Evidence, so much as the Sign
of any one Question that Pointed that Way. Nay, on the Contrary, the
Enformations are so Short, even where there was Place for such a Question, that
it had a Countenance, as if some Care had been taken Not to look too Narrowly
into it. As in the Instance of Mr. Skillarne, and so of Brumwell, Walters, and
Rawson. Would they know whether Sir Edmund was killed with the Sword or No?
What had they more to do, then to Examine whether there was any Flux of Blood
or No; which would have brought the Matter to a short, and a Certain Issue:
Nay, and which makes it look Worse Yet, it was Mightyly Insisted, and Dilated
upon in the Debate, and Yet not One Word on it in the Evidence. It is Manifest,
that the Marks of Strangling, both Might and Did Deceive them: though the Most
that could be made of them amounted but to Bare Likelyhoods at Best; but as
they were Complicated with other Circumstances, Wholly Improbable. Now Mr.
Skillarne Casts the Main Cause upon This Point; [ Blood, or No Blood.] He
Himself saw Some, but not Enough, it Seems. The Jurors, even According to their
Depositions, saw Blood in Abundance; And there were Hundreds and Thousands that
could have said as much. Walters and Rawson were Examined to the Gloves, and
the Cane, but Not a Word again of the Blood, Though Rawson could have said
very much to it: Nor One Syllable of the Posture neither; though These Three
that Saw the Body in the Light, could have Spoken far more Expressly to it, then
the Constable that came Afterward, and Grop'd it out in the Dark. But in fine,
the Question was Shifted, from the Undeniable Proof of his Dying by the Wound,
to the Probability of his being Strangled: which was a Safe way; for the Jurors
would have been able to Prove the One, and they could not Disprove the Other.
It would have been a Question Pertinent enough, to Ask what Opinion the People
had Generally of the Matter; While the Body was at the White-house? The Jurors
Themselves Tugged Hard for it, to Find him Felo de se.

Mr. Collinson Deposes, That the People taking Notice of the Ditch, how it was
Almost Covered with Shrubs and Bushes, said One to Another, What a Cunning
Place has he found out, and were of Opinion that He fell upon his own Sword.

CHAP. XVI.
The Coroners Enformations further Examined; and not One Word in them of Blood,
the Posture, or Any thing else Material to the Question.

IF a Plentiful Discharge of Blood ought to pass for a sufficient Evidence in
the Case of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, that he Died by the Wound; And if That
Effusion of Blood was sufficiently Proved to the Coroner and his Inquest; (as
there is No Doubt to be made either of the One or of the Other) the Point here
in hand is already Cleared, and resolved, in the Affirmative, that the Coroner
had a Competency of Means before him, for the Discovery of the True Cause of
his Death: But how far These Means were Improved, toward a full and Effectual
Discovery: And how it came to pass that the Best was not made of them, is the
Thing that we have now Under Consideration. Touching the Enformations spoken
of, and Recited, in the Last Chapter; as there was Nothing of Satisfaction to
be Expected from the Greater Part of the Witnesses; so Neither does it appear
that there was Any thing Proposed toward the Main Business of the Enquiry, to
any of the Rest: So that it seems to be Time Lost One Way, and Opportunity,
Another. To say the Truth, Those Papers would not be worth the Ink we have
Bestowed upon 'em, if it were not for the Remaining Enformations that are Yet
to Follow; which Enformations might serve, of Themselves, even without any
other Guide, for a Key to let a Man into the Whole Mystery: They are All of a
Cast; All in the same Cause; and therefore I shall Deliver them over to the
World Entire as they came to Me: Though to keep within some reasonable Compass,
I have Divided them into several Chapters.

The Reader is still to be Minded, that [ How Sir Edmundbury Godfrey came by
his Death] is the Capital Question. The Coroner is upon the View; and we are
here upon the Evidence that was Given, and the Witnesses that Gave it. We shall
see what use was made of them; and how far This Scrutiny was Managed, according
to the Intent of the Inquisition, and to the Best of the Coroner's Skill and
Knowledge.

The Enformation of John Brown, taken upon Oath the same Day and Year (October.
18. 1678.) before me.
HE says, that on Thursday the 17th. of October Instant, about Six of the
Clock in the Afternoon, William Brumwell, John VValters, and John Rawson came
to his House and told him that they had found a Gentleman in a Ditch dead; and
This Enformant went with them, and there found Sir Edmundbury Godfrey lying
Dead, with his Sword through his Body: and his Shoes were very Clean: and this
Enformant believes that he could not have Walked thither, but that his Shoes
would have been more Dirty: And as he lay, his Sword would have made some
Impression in the Dirt if he had flung himself upon his Sword, the Dirt being
very soft.

Jo. Cowper Coroner. John Brown.

I further Attest, that when I took up Sir Edmund Godfrey out of the Ditch, he
had not any Band about his Neck.

Jo. Cowper Coroner. John Brown.




Here Is not one Syllable in These Enformations that could be of any Service to
the End they Were or Ought to have been taken for; Nor any Thing in them but
what is either Insignificant, or Partial.

Brown the Constable was told of a Gentleman found Dead in a Ditch; He went to
the Place, with Those that told him, and there found Sir Edmund Godfrey lying
Dead with his Sword through his Body; and when he took him out of the Ditch, he
had Not any Band about his Neck.

And why [ lying Dead] with his Sword through his Body, unless to Bespeak a
False Understanding of the Matter, and to Insinuate that some body else had
Murdered him; and so either Cast or Left him there? This is the Genuine
Countenance of it, and No Man that looks no further into it can take it
otherwise. So that here is Truth Misrepresented, the Reason of the Thing
Disguised, Honest Men Misled; and (All at Once) Common Justice most Notoriously
Abused. Let a Man but lay his Hand upon his Heart Now, and set himself to
compare the Naked simplicity of the True Matter, of Fact with This way of
Wording the Report that is made use of to Cover it.

Here Is a Body found in a Ditch, with a Wound Under the left Pap, and the Point
of a Sword so many Inches through the Blade of the right Shoulder; The Right
Arm stiff-stretch'd upon the Bank; the Left arm Doubled under it, and the Head
leaning upon it.

Would any Man pass the same Judgment now upon the Death of the same Man,
under the Appearance of Two so Differing Evidences? And yet they are Both upon
the Credit of the same Testimony: Only the One was Calculated for the Jury, and
the Other for the Truth of the Fact; which Latter Deposition we have had
already. I do not say Yet that there is any Contradiction in This Diversity;
but the Evidence is suited to the Question: and then there is a Latitude for
Words and Phrases, that may seem to speak One Thing, and Import Another: As his
Lying Dead in the Ditch, sounds as if he had been killed, and Thrown there;
which is only a Cast of the Clerk's skill for the Better Color of an Ill
Business. And what is his Descanting then upon the Cleanness of his Shoes, and
the Print of the Pummel of his Sword, but the Encroachment of a Witness upon
the Office of a Iuror: Or effectually, What Is the whole Enformation but an
Answer to such Leading Questions as make the Depositions look liker an
Argument, then a Testimony? Now Brown Applies his Answers to the respective
Interrogatories, and if he fell short, it was the Examiner's Fault not His. And
so for the taking of him up without a Band: it was Just as much to the Purpose
as if he had Whistled. The single Business of their Enquiry, was to Learn what
Death the Justice Died; and whether strangled, or not: so that All This was not
One Jot to the Point, unless they would draw Inferences from the Soles of his
Shoes to the Circles about his Neck.

Now to an Ordinary Bodies Thinking, Brown might have been Catechized upon
Matters Infinitely more Instructive to the Jurors then any thing that appears
hitherto from These Enformations. Brown could have told of the Crashing of the
Sword through the Bone, the Gubbling of the Blood that came out, and the
spattering Noise it made upon the Ground at the Drawing of it. And This was No
more, then what was well Enough Known too; but for Solemnities sake, there must
be somewhat upon Record Transmitted to Aftertimes, in Honor of the Cause, and
for the Perpetual Memory of the Thing; In which Case, the Blood, the Posture,
and some other Dangerous Circumstances were found Convenient, by the Managers
of That season, to be better Out then In.

The Next Enformation is Harry Moors: an Old Servant in the Family; the Clark;
and, not a little, the Confident of the late Sir Edmundbury Godfrey: for he was
Inward with him in Most of his Privacies; he was the last Man too that saw him
at his House the Morning he went away: And the Person Principally employed by
the Brothers to Look, and Hearken after him, from the first Hour of his
Missing, to the finding of the Body. In One word, he was the likeliest Man
alive to set them right in their Business. It is to be Noted also, that the
Brothers were Intimate with the Coroners; and Both, or One of them, from First
to last, no less Assiduous with the Inquest. So that Moor could probably speak
to a Thousand Particular Things that no Body else perhaps might take any Notice
of. Now what ever he knew, to be sure, the Brothers Knew; And what ever They
knew, as to This Matter, it is to be Honestly Presumed that the Coroner knew;
Insomuch, that they had All the Intelligence among them, which the Brothers,
the Coroner, and the Clerk could Contribute, Jointly, or Severally to the
bringing of the Point to a Fair Issue. We shall see now in the Next Chapter,
what Use was made of Moors Testimony, and how they Squeezed him upon the
Examination, to Draw from him the Uttermost of his Knowledge upon Those
Necessary Points, which they knew he could speak to. To Conclude, He did
Certainly know a Great Deal; The Brothers and the Coroner did Both, Certainly
know that he Did so: And it must be then Considered, that he did Probably know
More Yet, then they could Certainly Charge upon him; and therefore it was Their
Part to have him Examined to the Probabilities, as well as to the Certainties.
A Plain, Blunt Enquiry upon These Heads, will do a Great deal toward the
satisfying of the World, whether the Mighty Clutter that has been made here
about sifting, and searching, was Banter, or Earnest.

CHAP. XVII.
Notes upon the Mysterious Examination of Henry Moor, Clerk to Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey.

HEre was a Jury Summoned and brought together upon the View of a Dead Body;
Consultations and Debates in Form; Surgeons and Witnesses Advised withal, and
Examined; And All upon a Short Question, Whether the Person Died of the Wound,
or of a Suffocation? And whether Felo de se, or Not? Among other Evidences,
they Pitched upon Harry Moor for One, to give the best Account he could, about
the Death of his Master: Wherein, it falls in Course to be considered, How far
Moor was certainly Privy to Matters; What Points he could speak to; How far
the Brothers, the Coroner, and several of the Jurors Themselves were Enform'd
of his Knowledge of Things; and how far, in fine, he was There Interrogated
upon Those Special Matters, which They Themselves knew Necessary to be Cleared,
toward the Discovery of the Truth; and which they had Reason to Presume, and to
Believe, that Moor was able to give a very Good Account of. I shall be forced
upon This Occasion, to Deliver the Substance over again, of some Depositions
that I have made use of in Parcels already; but to Differing Purposes: For the
Question in Those Cases was properly the Truth of the Fact, whereas we are now
upon the Candor and Equity of the Proceeding.

William Collins, one of the Jurors, saw Sir Godfrey upon Saturday Morning,
talking with a Milk-woman near Marybone-Conduit. Thomas Mason of Marybone,
Another of the Jurors, on the same Morning met Sir Edmund afterward, betwixt
Marybon^-Pound and Marybone-Street, coming back again for London.

Upon the Monday following, Moor walked out in the Morning to look his Master,
and seeing Mr. Mason by the way, near his own House, Asked him, If he had seen
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey in the Fields since Saturday? For he had lost his
Master, and knew not what was become of him: Whose Answer was, That he had seen
him on Saturday Morning, as above, and not since. It is here to be Noted, that
Moor had heard of his Master on Monday Morning, though the Family gave it out,
That the first Tidings they had of him was from Parsons, a Coach-maker at a
Funeral on Tuesday Night; which Account was, That upon Saturday Morning he met
Sir Edmund in St. Martins-Lane, who asked him the Way to Padington Woods, or
thereabouts; And the Whole Story thus far, was well known to the Brothers and
the Coroners.

On the same Saturday he went away, Mr. Radcliffe had him by the Hand at his
own Door in the Strand, about Twelve or One; And Great Use was made of that
Evidence, to Induce a Verdict, that he was Strangled; for they Inferred, that
he was Not Killed in the Ditch; because he was come back again: Now that
Inference would have held as good, (and consequently that Verdict) in the Case
of Mason, (who undoubtedly told the Jury the Story of his Coming back again
before they Adjourned) So that they got not one Grain of Intelligence to This
Purpose at the Rose and Crown, more then they had before at the White-House.
But to return to the Clerk again. Moor took Notice of his Masters Great
Discontent, and Disorder, (in his Own Words) after the taking of Otes's
Enformations: He could not be Ignorant of the Freak of his Burning so many
Papers upon Friday Night; as he made express remarks upon his Distracted
Starts, Look^* Actions and Gestures, That Last Saturday Morning. He told Judith
Pamphlin, one of the Family, that he was afraid he was Murdered: His Wife
Exclaiming, O that ever it should be said that such a Man as Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey Murdered himself! Pamphlin raving at the same rate, and telling
Captain Gibbon, his Lady, and his Daughters, over and over, that Moor knew a
great deal; and if Moor were examined, he could say much. He Declared it
himself that he had been to Search for his Master, and within a Few Rods too of
the Place where the Body was found; And he Delivered the same thing upon Oath
before Two of his Majesty's Justices for the Isle of Ely: It cannot be
Imagined, that the Brothers, all this while, were Strangers to these
Circumstances; Especially considering the Part they had in the Manage of the
whole Transaction: Upon the Monday after his going away, they went to Mrs.
Gibbons, to enquire for him; and upon her Relation of Sir Edmund's Wild
Behavior the Last time she saw him, they both brake out into Violent
Exclaymings, Lord! What will become of us!

Upon Sunday Morning Early, Moor went to the House of Mr. Michael Godfrey, and
told him that his Master did not come home last Night. God have Mercy upon as
(says the Brother)* Pray God we hear Good News of him: And Enjoined Moor not to
tell any Creature of his Absence, till he Himself, or his Brothers should come
to him in the Afternoon. They came accordingly, and Agreed to enquire every
where after him, but all under the Seal of Secrecy still: And so he was to keep
it close 'till Monday Morning, and Then, till Night; and so 'till Tuesday
Morning, 'till the Brothers should have been with my Lord Chancellor; and upon
Tuesday Night they Divulged it at a Funeral. These Repeated Injunctions of
Secrecy, would puzzle the Mayor of Quinborough, and his Brethren, to find a
current Reason for. They do as good as Cry, Seek, but do not Find. And why
Again, Say nothing till we have been with my Lord Chancellor? The Caution, in
Truth, might be Prudential enough, in case of his Laying Violent Hands upon
himself; but supposing him to be Murdered by a Malicious Practice, or by
Assassins, it would have been a Point of Public Duty, to Honor and Justice,
and an Office of Humanity, Natural Affection, and Respect to the Defunct,
Immediately to have spread the Story of it as far as the Post, and Common Fame
could carry it. But there is Another Passage yet behind, to the same Point, that
makes the Business still more and more Suspicious.

Mr. Wheeler Deposes, That on Wednesday, October 16. 1678. being in Company
with one Mr. Parsons, Mr. Monk, and others, he asked Parsons, What Discourse he
had with Sir Edmundbury Godfrey in St. Martins Lane upon Saturday Last?
[Parsons.] It Is no matter. [Wheeler.] What? a Justice Lost, and You the Last
Man in his Company, and not declare what Discourse you had? [Parsons.] Let Mr.
Monk tell. To which, Mr. Monk said, What have I to do to tell your Discourse?
And thereupon, this Enformant said to Mr. Parsons, If you will not do it here,
you shall do it somewhere else: And then Mr. Parsons said, That Sir Edmund
asked him three times whereabout Paddington Woods were; And that he himself
asked Sir Edmund if he were buying a Parcel of Land? To which, Sir Edmund
replied, No. This Enformant asked the said Parsons, What other Discourse
Passed? Who Answered him, None; For Sir Edmund was sparing in his Speech. This
Enformant putting it further to the said Parsons, Why he was so Loath to tell
the Discourse: Parsons made Answer, because Sir Edmund 's Clark Desired him to
say Nothing on it.

Upon the Whole matter, The Brothers Tied up Moor to Secrecy, and Moor Tied up
Parsons, and there appears No other Reason in Sight, either for the one or for
the other, then a Desire to keep it Private: which sounds just as much as an
Unwillingness to have it known what was become of him; only the Brothers took
care that he should not be Missed at Home, and the Clark that he should not be
found abroad; for his Question to Parsons, was the only Light they had so
Early, which way to Enquire after him, and Moor took the Hint upon it.

After All This said and Proved, it is not for Any Man to Doubt, either that
Moor Knew, or was likely to know as much of This Private History as any Man: Or
of the Brothers knowing as much as Moor Could Tell them: And This being taken
for Granted, a Man Methinks might Fancy such Interrogatories to be put to Moor,
as might Reasonably open the Way to a Discovery. As for Example now; Directing
the Discourse To the Clerk.

Here Is the Body of your Dead Master now upon the Table before us; And the
Question is How he came by his Death: You have been Constantly near about him,
and in his Business; Did You Observe Any Quarrel he had, or Any Desperate
Discontent upon him, and for what Cause or Reason? Have You Observed him to be
more out of Humor of Late, then he was formerly; And Since what Time, and upon
what Occasion? Your Master went away from his House upon Saturday Morning Last:
How was he the Day before? Did You observe any Bussle of People more then
Ordinary about him? How did You find him the Morning that he went away? Did You
Gather Any thing from his Looks, Words, or Actions to give you an Ill-Boding
of him? Mr. Parsons, it seems, Spoke with him in St. Martins-Lane, That
Saturday Morning, and Sir Edmund asked him the way to Paddington-woods: And Mr.
Parsons told You of it, they say: VVh^n did he tell you This? And What Did he
tell you of it? Did any body Else tell you of it before? And What did they
tell You? And what did You Do upon their Telling it? Now we have reason to
Believe that he went his Way to the Place that he Inquired for; because Mr.
Collins here, one of the Jurors, Saw him afterward talking with a Milk-woman
thereabouts: And here is Another of the Inquest, Mr. Mason, that Saw him after
This too, going Back again; And he saw You Your Self too, on the Monday Morning
following, going Thitherward to Look for him. The Talk is, that Parsons did not
tell You of This 'till Tuesday Night: How came You then to look for him
thereabouts upon Monday Morning? But You did go to Look for him However, and it
comes from Your own Mouth that You were within a Little of finding him. Where
did You Look? And How Near were You to the finding of him? You did not Look for
him among the Birds in the Bushes; and You could not expect to find him Picking
of Sallads among the Cattle; If You looked for him in the Ditches, What made
You look for him There? Did You find Any thing to make You Suspect he had made
Himself away? Parsons told You that he Asked the Way to the Woods; but not to
the Ditches: So that the Woods were No Light to Direct You to the Ditch,
without some Dark reflection upon a Troubled Mind. Or if you Did Search the
Ditches, how far did You go? And how came You to Stop Short, and leave the
Closest Hiding-Places Yet Unsearch'd, Behind ye? But upon Your Oath, Did You
Find the Body at Last, or Not? How came You to tell Pamphlin, You feared he was
Murdered? How Came Your Wife, and Pamphlin to Speak Familiarly of it; before
the finding of the Body, as if they feared he had Killed Himself? Pamphlin
would say frequently, If the Clerk were Examined he could Speak Much. These
Stories are All over the Town already; And that You Your Self owned such
Thoughts of the Business as You were affr^id to tell. Were You Enjoined Secrecy
by Any Body betwixt Your Masters going away, and the finding of the Body? By
Whom? What were the Things You were to keep Private? And what reasons were
given; Or what do You ^magine were the Reasons, of that Caution of Privacy? Was
there Any thing of Saving the Estate in the Case? What was the True Reason of
Your bidding Parsons to say Nothing of his Discourse with Your Master That
Morning?

Here Is a Great Deal of This that is known to the Jury, Already, The Brothers
are able to say more; and You Your Self, without Peradventure, know Most of
All. We Expect a Distinct Answer to Every Particular, So Help You God.

Now, These were Points Necessary to be Inquired into; and the Necessity of
That Enquiry lay so Open, that a Man could hardly Miss a Great many of them,
Unless he would shut his Eyes, and go out of the way on purpose. They knew he
went about to Search for his Master: and Certainly it was Worth the While to
put the Quaere whether he found him or Not. Nay the very Silence, upon that
Question, makes it Suspicious that he had found him. I had almost forgot a
Deposition that I have of a very Honest Gentleman upon this Subject.

Gabriel Cox Deposes, That about the time when Mr. Fitz-Harris would have
laid the Business of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey at the Door of the Earl of Danby,
Mr. Benjamin Godfrey came to this Enformant and spoke to Him This Enformant
about it. Upon This Occasion, the Enformant Entered into a Discourse about the
Death of Sir Edmund; telling the said Mr. Godfrey, that it was a strange Thing
to bring in an Infamous Wench, as they did, for a Witness at the Trial; and
under the Countenance of a Servant in the Family, which she never was, but only
did Iobbs of Chare-Work there; and to leave out Moor the Clark, that would have
been a Witness of some Credit, and could have spoke much to the Matter: To
which the said Mr. Godfrey made Answer, that Alas! the Old Fellow knew Nothing;
And so they Parted. After which, This Enformant never heard any thing further
from the said Mr. Godfrey.

And then it would not have been Amiss to have Summoned the Milk-Woman Neither;
but for Brevities sake (as the Matter was ordered) Three or Four Lines did the
Whole Work, according to a True Copy of the Enformation here Under Following.

The Examination of Henry Moor taken and Acknowledged the same Day and Year
upon Oath.
HE says, That when Sir Edmund Godfrey went last from his House, which was on
Saturday last about Nine of the Clock in the Morning, he had then a Laced Band
about his Neck.

Jo. Cowper Coroner. Henry Moor.


In One Word, the Logic of the Proceeding is This; Either Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was Killed with a Sword or Strangled with a Rope; But Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey went out with a Laced Band, Ergo he was Suffocatus and Strangulatus;
Anglice Choked and Strangled, cum una Pecia Funis, Anglice Rope. And so here is
a very Honest Account of the Premises and the Conclusion.

CHAP. XVIII.
A very Pertinent Evidence of Joseph Radcliffes made Worse then Nothing.

Mr. Joseph Radcliffe was of the Neighborhood and Acquaintance of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, and a Man of Substance and Credit in the Parish: It was his
fortune to have Sir Edmund by the Hand before his own Door, about one of the
Clock on the Saturday when he went last from his House. From That time forward,
no body could hear what was become of him; but by Flying, and Uncertain
Reports, 'till the Thursday following, when his Body was found Dead, toward the
Evening in a Ditch near Primrose-Hill. A Jury was hereupon Summoned, which met
the Next Day at the White-house; from whence, After some Hours Debate upon the
Matter in View, and the Examining of Witnesses, they Adjourned to the Next day,
and at the Rose and Crown in St. Giles's, they agreed upon their Verdict.
Thither it was that Mr. Joseph Radcliffe and his Wife were Summoned to give
Evidence upon the Matter in Question: and Such as it was, there was Great
Stress laid upon it, for Clearing the Point in Issue. And there let it rest
'till we come to the Enformations Themselves.

The Town was at That Time full of the Discourse of Sir Godfreys Strange
Carriage lately, at Mrs Gibbons's, and the odness of his Behavior at St.
Martins-Vestry the Day before: and in short, Considering the Familiar
Conversation betwixt them; The Frequency of their Meetings about
Parish-Business; and Especially the Chance-Encounter in the Strand before
Spoken of, Mr. Radcliffe might appear a very Proper Witness to be Examined upon
This Occasion; as a Person likely enough in many Respects to know somewhat of
the Privacies of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. Briefly, He and his Wife were
Examined; but upon what Pretense, and to what Purpose, will be better seen in
the Following Enformations.

Midd. ss. The Enformation of Joseph Radcliffe of St. Martins in the Fields
taken upon Oath the 19th Day of October. 1678. before Me.
HE says, that on Friday was Seven-night, there was a Vestry held for St.
Martin's Parish, at which Sir Edmund Godfrey was, and after the Vestry broke up
there was a perfect Account made up and Discharged betwixt Sir Edmund Godfrey
and St. Martins Parish touching 4 l. received by Sir Edmund of Mr. Bradbury
late Surveyor of the Highways, whereof 40 s. was paid back to Mr. Bradbury by
Sir Edmund, by the Consent of some of the Vestry, and the other 40 s. he paid
to this Enformant, whereof this Deponent paid Sir Edmund 13 s. which he had
formerly laid out about the Highway of St. Martins Parish, and the other 27 s.
this Enformant has in his Custody, for the use of the said Parish. And this
Enformant further says, That during the Time he was Churchwarden in his last
Year 1677. he Stated the Accounts of St. Martins Parish and found the Parish
Debtor to Sir Edmund about 148 l of which he Paid him 100 l. and the remainder
has been Since paid by his Successor Charles Monck; and on Friday was
Seven-night, Sir Edmund was in This Enformants Company, with Mr. Heames till
about Nine of the Clock, and was in a Pleasant good Even Humor and Temper, and
This Enformant verily believes that he saw him passing by this Enformants door,
about One of the Clock on the Morrow, being Saturday the Twelfth of this
Instant.

Jo. Cowper Coroner. J. Radcliffe.

ss. Eleanor Radcliffe, Wife of the said Joseph, says, that on Saturday Last
about One of the Clock Sir Edmund Godfrey passed by her House.

Jo. Cowper Coroner. Eleanor Radcliffe.




Here 's a Parish-Reck'ning brought in Evidence upon Oath, to Prove that Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was Strangled: No body knew When, Where, or by Whom: And an
Argument drawn in Confirmation of it, from his being seen Alive at such an Hour
of the Day: The First Day's Debate held a Long Tugg upon Killing Himself, or
being Killed; and when they could not Carry it for the Latter, That Bout, they
Adjourned, and This was the Evidence that did the Feat upon the Second Meeting:
though not one Syllable of Force in it more then what was Testified at the
White-House. It seems a Wonderful Thing, that to Questions, that were put so
much Beside One Purpose, Answers should be given that lay so Pat for the Other,
[He was in a Pleasant, Good, Even, Humor and Temper the Night Before.] That is
to say, he was not in a Mind to Destroy himself. Brown Represents him lying
Dead in a Ditch; As who should say, He did not do it Himself; Nay he
Philosophizes upon the Cleanness of his Shoes too; And Reasons upon it, that he
did not Fling himself upon his Sword; for he should have Seen the Print of the
Pummel then. Morgan was near the Pond, and Saw No Body. Brumwells and Walters
Enformation is Worded, that his Sword Was Thrust through his Body, though
Bromwell very lately made Exceptions to Those Words [Was Thrust] through his
Body, at the Reading of it: And says further, that they gave an Account also of
the Posture they found him in, though here is No Mention of it at All. Now it
falls out Unluckily, that Every Bowl should be made to carry the same Biass.
But This Enformation yet before the Coroner under Such Circumstances, shall not
Divert Me from Confronting it with Another of a Later Date from the Same Hand:
Nay, And That shall be Backed with Another too; and it will be Then time to
pass some Reflections upon the Whole.

Midd. and West. ss. The Enformation of Joseph Radcliffe of the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields, Oyle-Man, Taken Upon Oath May 11. 1686.
Says, That there was a Vestry held in the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, upon the 11th of October. 1678. being Friday, where This Enformant was
present, and that a Little before the rising of the said Vestry, toward the
Evening, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey came Hastily in, and took his Usual Place; and
as the Vestry was about to Rise, the said Sir Edmund went out of the Room, and
Called to This Enformant to go along with him, which he did accordingly. As
they were upon the Way, he told This Enformant that he feared he had done Harry
Bradbury Wrong, and was resolved to Right him That Night, and so desired This
Enformant to Assist him therein. The said Sir Edmund then looking behind him,
and seeing Mr. James Hemes, Another of the Vestry, he took him along with him,
This Enformant going along with them to Colonel Weldens.

And that being come to the said Collonel's, Sir Edmund desired This Enformant
to help him off with his Coat, who Minded him that the Weather was Cold: Sir
Edmund replying, However he would have it off. This Enformant helped him off
with it, and Sir Edmund then took it, and threw it on to the Window, and then
went and seated himself at a Table at the Other End of the Room: This Enformant
observing something Extraordinary in the Manner of the Thing; and sitting down
at the same Table next to him, Asked him what it was that Troubled him about
the said Harry Bradbury? Sir Edmund Answering, that he had made Bradbury pay
Forty Shillings for Another bodies Fault; and that if This Enformant would
Agree to it, he should be Repaid the Forty Shillings: Whereupon, by Consent,
Mr. Bradbury was sent for. And Sir Edmund did then tell This Enformant that he
had some Parish-Mony in his Hand, and that he would put the said Money into the
Hands of This Enformant, (who had been lately Churchwarden, and had some
Parish Accounts in his Hands) Desiring This Enformant to Pay Mr. Bradbury the
Forty Shillings out of the said Money; Sir Edmund thereupon Delivering the Money
he had in his hands, to This Enformant, who paid Mr. Bradbury, when he came,
the Forty Shillings aforesaid. This Enformant hereupon said to Sir Edmund, You
are in a very good Mind. Who Replied, Yes, I am resolved to settle All my
Business to Night; and the Accounts shall be brought in Your Name, and Not in
Mine.

This Enformant observing that he Passed from One Thing to Another; Asked him
if he had done Now? Whose Answer was, that he had not done Yet; saying
thereupon, that he used to give Ten Shillings a Week to the Poor in Bread, and
that he that had Baked it Hitherto should do it No Longer; Mr. Bradbury, upon
That, (being a Baker) Asked him if he should do it? Sir Edmund asking This
Enformant what he would Advise; who told him, that he was the Master of his own
Charity; Sir Edmund saying then, that Mr. Bradbury should do it, and that he
Would Charge, or that he Had Charged it by his Will, to be paid out of the Rent
of some Houses that he had in Westminster. This Enformant asking him again, Sir
Edmund have you done Now? Sir Edmund saying No, I have not done Yet; for the
Parish is now in My Debt, and so Reckoned an odd Sum which This Enformant
paid him upon the Place. This Enformant asked him a Third Time, if he had done
Yet; Sir Edmund replying Yes: and Clapping his Hand upon his Breast, said, that
Now he was at Quiet: After which, Sir Edmund rose up, and Desired This
Enformant to Help him on with his Coat, which he did. The said Sir Edmund
repeating that his Conscience was Clear.

And further; that as they were drinking a Glass of Beer, This Enformant Asked
the said Sir Edmund, What News; Who made Answer, That in a short time, You will
hear of the Death of Somebody, or the Murder, (This Enformant does not
remember which of the Two Words) Sir Edmund saying that he was Confident He
Himself should be the First. Whereupon Mr. Hemes aforesaid Desired him if he
feared any such Thing, that he would not go abroad without Company: Sir Edmund
Answering, that his Conscience was Clear, that he Cared for No Company, and
that he Feared No Body.

And This Enformant being Interrogated concerning the Evening of so many
accounts, whether he had had any Discourse with the said Sir Edmund about Those
Accounts before? He This Enformant Answers, that there had been no such
Discourse, and that he never knew any thing of that Nature done in so sudden a
manner before.

And further says, That about one of the Clock on the Next Day, being
Saturday, the said Sir Edmund Passing by the Door of This Enformant, He this
Enformant asked him to come in, and Dine with him; but he said he was in have,
and could not stay; and so having this Enformant by the Hand, he took away his
Hand, and went hastily away, speaking very earnestly, insomuch that this
Enformant wondered at it, he having been usually Freer, and Easier with This
Enformant.

This Enformant refers himself upon the Matters contained in this
Enformation, to the best of his Knowledge and Memory.

Jurat. die and Anno Supradicto coram me.

To. L'Estrange.


J. Radcliffe.

The Reader will find little in This Enformation to the Tune of the Pleasant,
Good, Even Humor and Temper, in the Enformation before the Coroner. There Is
too much on it, to be Natural, and the Synonymals one upon the Neck of Another,
savor more of the Skill of the Clark, then of the Faith of the Reporter. In
which Case, many times there goes but the Dash of a Pen to the Mending of a
Short Evidence.

The Second Deposition of Mr. Radcliffe seems to me to have a great many
Notable Passages in it. Sir E.G. had a Mind to make even with the World. The
Fit took him at That Instant, and all must be done That Night. Bradbury was to
have his Forty Shillings; The Parish Accounts to be Adjusted in All Have; He
told the Company what Care he had taken for the Continuance of his Charity: And
now (says he, clapping his Hand upon his Breast) I am at Quiet; Called for his
Coat, and went over with it again; My Conscience is Clear. His Motions, and his
Actions in the Room; The Vehemence of his Words; His Hudling of so many things
over in such a Disorder; His Starting from one thing to Another, and all to be
Dispatched upon That Point of Time: And then the Winding up of theConversation
with a Foreboding of his Death or Murder; The Company might be well allowed to
Judge, and to Observe, These Things Considered that there was somewhat very
Extraordinary in his Mind.

Upon the Comparing of These Two Enformations it seems very remarkable, that
the Former delivers it as the Opinion of Mr. Radcliffe, that Sir Godfrey was
Last Night in a Pleasant Good Even Humor and Temper; when the Latter, in Fact,
sets him forth to have been the Clean Contrary: So that the Whole Story of the
Disorder is not only Omitted, but Apparently Contradicted by the Other
Insinuation. The Question is, How Godfrey came by his Death; and what Radcliffe
could say toward the Clearing of That Matter. Now the Jury being Divided
whether he Destroyed Himself, or was Murdered by Other People, it was a thing
very much to their Purpose, to Enform themselves what Humor he was in, either
soon before, or upon his going away. The Question was put to Radcliffe about
the seeing of him That Saturday, and what he could say further to the Matter
they had before them. The Coroners Enformation says, he verily Believes he saw
him; In the Other, he Swears that he had him by the Hand, and Invited him to
Dinner; Nay, and Mr. Radcliffe calls to mind that heObjected at that very Time
to the Expression. Why, says he, it is More then Believing; for I Know it: And
some body made Answer, If you Know it, you Believe it. It is observable again,
that there was a most Industrious Separation in the Examination before the
Coroner of some Parts of the Story from the Rest; and particularly, that Those
Passages were made use of, that were not one jot to the Purpose; and others
left out, that in All Appearance would have given the Jurors the Best Light
they had, toward the Governing of the following Verdict. What was the Account,
or Discount among the Parish-Officers to the Question of Felo de se, or Not?
That Account, Barely, I mean, without Godfrey's Part in the Disorderly
Circumstances that Attended it. The Charge and Discharge, of it self, was
utterly Impertinent; but the Other could not be well Understood, but in Company
with the Relation it had to the Business of the Reck'nings, Bradbury's Forty
Shillings; The Settling of his Charity; And All must be Finished That Night too;
which seems to Imply an Apprehension he had, that he should never Live to
Another Opportunity of doing it. Now This was the Point that should have been
Pressed, Inculcated, and Insisted upon; and it would have done much better to
have laid the Fact at Length before the Jury, without any Gloss upon it, on the
One Hand, then to Deliver a Partial, and an Ungrounded Opinion, without so much
as one Syllable of the Plain Truth of Fact, on the Other. The whole Matter
under Deliberation resolves shortly in to This; Was Sir Godfrey under any
Trouble, and Distress of Thought, or Not? This is the Truth of the Story, says
the One Side; And let the Jurors Judge upon it whether he Was, or No. Now the
Other side is for giving the Opinion, without the Story; And it was Prudently
done; for the Naked Narrative of the Fact, and That Judgment of his Even Humor
could never have stood together.

I was afraid least this Diversity of Countenance from the same Person, might
prove Injurious, either to the Cause, or to the Witness, if I should let it go
off Thus without something of an Explanatory Animadversion upon it: Wherefore I
communicated the Matter to Mr. Radcliffe Himself, who told me that he would
suddenly give me a Plain Account of the Whole Affair; and I received from him
in his own Handwriting the Declaratory Enformation here following upon That
Subject.

The Enformation of Joseph Radcliffe of the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, Oylman, taken upon Oath, Jan. 10. 1687/8.
THAT when he was Examined by John Cowper, Coroner of Middlesex, concerning Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, on the 19th. day of October, 1678. He this Deponent did
tell the said Coroner and his Jury All the Passages that he had observed in Sir
Edmund Godfrey on the 11th. and 12th. Days of the same Month, which was as near
as this Deponent can declare the very same. This Deponent did declare to Sir
Roger L'Estrange, when he was Examined by the said Sir Roger concerning Sir E.
B. Godfrey on the 11th. day of May, 1686. But Three or Four of the said
Coroners Jury, did often Thwart and Interrupt this Deponent in his Enformation,
and said it was too Long, and they would not stay, or could not stay, while
that Long Discourse could be writ, and desired the Coroner to Abbreviate the
Discourse, and take so much of it as he thought fit; which he did do, in Manner
and Form, as it is to be seen under This Deponents Hand. But this Enformant
remembers withal, that at the same time, some of the Jurors were Earnest to
have the Whole Evidence Taken; but were Overruled by the Persons aforesaid.

Now According to the way of Abbreviation in Those Days, they took That, which
was good for Nothing, and threw out the Rest. But to say a Word now to the
Reason of the Thing, as well as to the Evidence: A Man can very hardly Imagine,
how Mr. Radcliffe should give them the History of the Accounts, without the
Connection of Sir Edmund's Calling for This, and for That; and his Distracted
Manner of Skipping from One Thing to Another: So that All the Extravagances
were Omitted upon Choice. Now if it be reasonable to believe, that Mr.
Radcliffe told the Coroner the Circumstances that Passed at That Meeting, it is
hardly Credible, that he should conclude Sir Edmund's Pleasant Even Humor;
from a Behavior that carried along with it so many Proofs of the Contrary: So
that the Qualification might be Possibly the Clarks Comment upon Mr.
Radcliffe's Text. But there are Two Questions here that will Naturally Occur.
First, Was that Mr. Radcliffe's Evidence, or Not? 2ly. Was it True, or Not
True, that he was upon That Friday, so Easy, and so Well disposed? As to the
Former, Mr. Radcliffe is too much a Man of Sense, to Describe a Person in the
very Paroxisme of a Sickly Freak; and at the same Time to give Those Transports
the Character of a Pleasant Even Temper. And now for the Other Point of Whether
True or False. His Distemper was so evident, and well known, that his Behavior
on That Friday was become Town-Talk: He put One Whole Family to their Wits End
almost, at the Sight of him. That very Friday at Noon, Mrs. Birtby, Blessed her
self, at the very Walk, Action, and Looks of the Man that Afternoon in
Drury Lane, when she knew not who he was. He was going from thence to a Vestry
in St. Martins, and called at Mr. Bradburies, whose Evidence we shall here find
Exactly to agree with Mr. Radcliffe's, in a Confirmation of his very Great
Trouble and Discontent that Day.

Midd. and West. ss. The Enformation of Henry Bradbury of the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields, taken upon Oath, January 10. 1687/8.
SAYS, That upon Friday (the Day before Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was first
missing from his House) about, or near Five of the Clock in the Afternoon, the
said Sir Edmund came to the House of this Enformant, and said, he was going to
the Vestry, and that he would make up certain Accounts Relating to this
Enformant, telling him, that after the Vestry should be over, he would go to
Colonel Weldens, and send for this Enformant, to see that some Order might be
taken about it.

He came through the House to this Enformant in a very Unusual Manner; And this
Enformant observed such Signs of Trouble, and Discontent in him, that it made
this Enformant at that present very much wonder what should be the meaning of
it.

And says, That the said Sir Edmund went his way (as this Enformant believes)
to the Vestry; and about an hour after, one came to this Enformant, telling
him, that the said Sir Edmund and Mr. Radcliffe desired to see him at Colonel
Weldens, whether this Enformant went, and there found Sir Edmundbury Godfrey,
Mr. Radcliffe, and Mr. Hemes; and then the said Sir Edmund and Mr. Radcliffe
set all the Accounts right before spoken of.

This Enformant was there (as he believes) an Hour or two in the Company; and
remembereth very well that he appeared to this Enformant in very Great Disorder
still, and rather worse then at the House of this Enformant; the said Sir
Edmund desiring Mr. Radcliffe, upon his going away, to Help him on with his
Coat.

Jurat' die and Anno Supradicto coram me.

R. L'Estrange.


Henry Bradbury.

And then there was Mr. Wheeler, Captain Bridal (as will be seen in his
Enformation) Mr. Herringman, and others, at a Vestry in St. Martins, where Sir
Edmund behaved himself at such a Rate, that every Bodies Eye was upon him: And
it was in every Bodies Mouth after the Adjournment, What should Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey Ail.

Walter Bridal, Esquire Deposes, That upon the Friday, next before the Saturday,
when Sir E. Godfrey was said to go last from his House; This Enformant was
present at a Vestry, then held in St. Martins Parish (being a Member thereof;)
And that the said Sir Edmund (being likewise a Member thereof) came in, and sat
down; and contrary to his usual Practice, said Little, or Nothing. This
Enformant observing at the same Time something Ghastly in his Countenance, and
Wondered what might be the Matter.

And that upon the Vestry breaking up, This Enformant with several Others of
the Vestry withdrew to a Tavern, the said Sir Edmund being gone off another
Way; And being together at the said Tavern, the Company fell into Discourse
about him, and wondered at his Ghastly Looks.

From thence (according to Mr. Racliffe's Enformation) he went to York
Buildings: And it is not likely that he should leap all of a sudden out of so
Dismal a Melancholy, as is Proved upon him, into that Pleasant Humor, as it
stands before the Coroner. Nay, and he goes Home after this too, and burns as
many Papers at Haphazzard, as his Servant Pamphlins Apron would hold: But they
kept Aloof still from the Argument of his Melancholy; And what ever Evidence
struck in upon That Topique, was sure to be Cramped and Baffled.

There remains yet the Evidence of Mrs. Mary Gibbon, which in Truth does not
stand so properly upon the File of the Enformations taken before the Coroner,
though it comes to me for one of That Number. There Is No Date to it, nor any
thing to distinguish it from those that were sworn before the Inquest: But I
find that it was Taken upon Sunday, October 20. 1678. After the Jury had
Delivered up their Verdict. It would have done well however, if it might have
passed for one of the Enformations that came in Due Season; because it looked
Ill-Favouredly to take in Iohn-a-Nokes, and Iohn-a-Styles, and I know not whom,
to I know not what, and leave a Family so well known for Sir Edmundbury
Godfreys Intimate Friends; and in particular to leave so Material a Witness as
this same Mrs. Gibbons wholly Vnexamin'd. But I shall find a Place for This
Witness among those that were left Vnsummon'd; and, in Probability, could have
said more to the Purpose then All the Rest.

We have had Ill Luck hitherto with these Enformations; for they run all the
same way; All Suppressions and Misunderstandings are still in Favor of the
same side; But it is One Thing not to Improve the Means of finding a Truth; and
Another Thing to Stifle, or to Oppose Those Means. As for Instance now in the
Next Chapter.

CHAP. XIX.
The Opening of the Body had certainly Discovered the Cause of Sir E. B. G.'s
Death: And it was Advised and Propounded by Doctors, Friends, and Surgeons, but
Rejected.

THE Alliance that was by this time Contracted betwixt the Pretended Murder,
and the Pretended Plot, had made the Credit of the Story so Sacred, that there
was No Touching of the One, without giving a Box of the Ear to the Other; and
consequently, no Longer any Way, or Hope left, of Arriving at the Truth, but by
breaking in upon Principalities and Powers. Under the Awe of This Influence it
was, that Evidences were Shortened, or Stretched, or Smothered, or Baffled, in
favor of the Imposture; and No Relief in the Case, but that of a Dutch Appeal,
from mine Host in the Inn, to Mijn Here upon the Bench, where he does Himself
Right, in the Quality, of both a Judge and a Party, in the same Person. There
will be the less Need of Amplifying in this Place upon Particular Instances of
Persons, Practices, and Methods, in Regard that I have already spent one Whole
Chapter at Large upon This Subject, Part. I. Cap. 10. But there was one Passage
upon This Occasion, that must not be either Omitted, or Forgotten.

There was one General Rule to Walk by, which was to make every Man a Papist,
that Crossed the Designs of the Then Prevailing Faction; and after the Fastening
of That Brand upon him, it was but the Lip-labor of Kissing a Book to Swear
him into a Traitor; for they Managed their Treasons, as Dyers do their Colors;
that first lay on one, to make the Stuff take to other. This was the Snare that
was set for Mr. Richard Wheeler, a Man of Sense, Credit, and Estate; but he was
too Nimble for 'em, and so they snapt Short. The Relation of it will be best in
his own Words.

Richard Wheeler Deposes, That on Friday Morning (October 18.) the Day after
Sir Edmund's Body was found; Mr. Cowper, having been (as this Enformant heard)
to see the Body, came into the Exchange, and told how Sir Edmund was Wheedled
out, and Murdered in such a Place: For that Mr. Collins the Brewer had met him
in Marybone-Fields: Hereupon, this Enformant Declaring what Cowper had said;
and What He Himself had Observed,

That upon the Monday Morning, this Enformant going to his Shop, one Mr.
Templer said to this Enformant, There are Rods in Piss for you. To which this
Enformant replied, For what? Saying he had done no Man any Wrong: The said Mr.
Templer replying, Sir Edmunds Brothers have been here, to enquire what Religion
you are of. Upon which this Enformant came into the Exchange, and met Mr.
Cowper, telling him what Mr. Templer had said; and saying that he the said
Cowper must Clear himself: For he this Enformant had Witnesses enough to prove
what he had said. Whereupon Cowper asked this Enforformant what he should do?
To which this Enformant asked him, Do you know who told you so? Cowper said,
Yes, I do. Why then, said this Enformant, I Will go along with you to him, being
told it was an Ale-house-Keeper in So-ho: So this Enformant and Mr. Cowper went
to the said Ale-house-Keeper, where this Enformant took Occasion to say, that
they were going to see the Place where Sir Edmund's Body Lay, to which, the
Ale-house-keeper said, That Sir Edmund was wheedled out, and Murdered; for Mr.
Collins said, That he met Sir Edmund that Saturday in Mary-bone Fields.
Whereupon, This Enformant, Mr. Cowper, and the Alehouse Keeper, went All Three
to Mr. Collins, and found him at Home; who told them, that he did meet with
him, as aforesaid, Talking with a Milk-woman, And that he said, Good Morrow Sir
Edmund, who replied, Good Morrow Mr. Collins. This Enformant then asked Mr.
Collins, ( being One of the Coroner's Inquest) how he came to Find him
Murdered: To which He replied, that Mr. Radcliffe and his Servant, and his
next Neighbor's Servant, swore him to be at Radcliff's Door, at One of the
Clock upon the Saturday. This Enformant did then ask the said Collins, Whether
or No he Summoned the Milk-woman? who told him No. How should they find her?
This Enformant Objecting it to him, that for a Crown, or such a Matter, he
might have found her out.

This was according to the Scheme of the Politiques of That Season. Will
Wheeler be meddling with Our Primrose-hill Matters? What Religion is he of? This
is only Demurring to My Clyents Beard (as a Lawyer of Famous Memory has it) and
not one Hair to the Matter in Question. Had they been but Half as Inquisitive
after Collin's Milkwoman, as they were about Mr. Wheeler's Religion, it would
have been much more to Common Satisfaction: But every thing was Distorted and
Improved (if it may be said so) the Wrong Way. The Advice of Surgeons was not
only Reasonable, but Necessary, in a Matter where there fell so many Important
Circumstances under their Peculiar Cognizance: But the Removal of the Body, and
the Drawing the Sword out; had so Confounded the Signs and Accidents they were
to have formed a Judgment upon, that there was scarce Room for any more then
the Bare Conjectural Suspicion of a Possible Strangulation: But now as the
Surgeons Opinion was taken upon the Main, as to the Probable Cause of his
Death, it would have been Well, if Those that had the Care and Power of the
Body, after the Verdict, had found it as reasonable to Comply with the Council,
and Importunity of Friends, as well as of Men of Art, toward as Certain a
Discovery of the Truth of the Matter, as if they had been Eyewitnesses of the
Execution. The Opening of the Body is the Expedient that I speak of; which, as
I am Credibly Enform'd, was Moved and Insisted upon by some of the Inquest upon
the Debate, however it come to be Carried in the Negative.

There was the King's Life, the Peace of his Dominions, An Imperial Monarchy;
The Prerogative of the Royal Family; Religion, Liberty and Property all (in a
Great Measure) at stake upon the Issue of This Question. Now it must be some
Consideration of Mighty Weight sure; some Greater Good on the One side, then
the Preservation of All These Sacred Interests was Worth; Or some Greater Evil,
on the other, then the Embroyling, and Confounding of them All, that could with
any Color of Justice, or Reason, stand in Competition with the Consequences of
Denying This Request; We saw how Near the Mistake of This Matter came to the
Destroying of Three Kingdoms: And All for want of Clearing This One Point. And
now to Balance all These Hazards, let but the World Produce One Colorable
Pretense for the refusal of it; and I will Allow Bedloes, and Prances
Depositions to be as Authentic as the Truest of Oracles. Where Is the
Dishonor, the Inconvenience, the Trouble, the Unlawfulness: Nay, or so much as
the Least Scruple either in Reputation, or in Conscience, in Consenting to the
Opening of a Dead Body? It Is done in some Cases, upon the Account of Decency
and respect; in Others, out of Curiosity, and Experiment; In some again, to
find out what Disease the Man Died of; and the Business was Here, to have
Gathered from it by what Sort of Violence he came to his Death. I have Beat my
Head upon it, and when People will be running me down, that the Only reason for
Refusing the Only Means of knowing Certainly how Sir Edmund came by his Death;
could be No other then because they would not have it known; If I were to Dye,
I cannot find so much as one Color of an Answer to it. But I am now Coming to
show, that the Thing was Proposed, and Rejected.

The Opening of the Body was Desired by Dr. Lloyd, (the Present Bishop of St.
Asaph) and by Dr. Goodall; and his Lordship gives This Account of it, that [
The Brothers or One of them would not Hearken to This Proposal; He said that
None had ever Yet been Opened of their Family, and that it was not Necessary
for the Keeping of the Body, for so short a Time as they intended to Keep it.]
This Account bears Date, April 16. 1686.

I shall Second the Enformation Above, with some other Testimonies of Undoubted
Truth, and Weight in further Proof of the same Matter.

The Enformation of Dr. Charles Goodall of St. Martins in the Fields, Taken
upon Oath, April 9. 1686.
SAYS, That at the Time when the Dead Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey lay
Exposed at his House in Hartshorn Lane, This Enformant having seen the said
Body, had some Discourse about it, to the Best of his Remembrance, with Mr.
Thomas Hobbs, who did both Agree in Opinion, that it would be a Great
Satisfaction to the World to have the Body Opened.

And This Enformant did think it so Necessary to be done, that he Requested the
Dean of Bangor to use his Interest with the Brothers, or One of them; to
Consent to the Opening of the Body; that it might be Inspected by Physicians,
and Surgeons; The said Dean very much Approving of the Proposal; And telling
This Enformant afterward, that he had Earnestly Pressed the Matter to One of
the Brothers, if not Both, Who (as the Dean told This Enformant) did not think
fit to have it done. This Enformant being Induced to a More then Ordinary
Earnestness of Desire to have the Body opened, upon This Consideration, that it
was the Way to prevent Clamor, and to give some Reasonable Satisfaction,
whether he Died of the Wound or of Suffocation.

The Enformation of Mr. Thomas Hobbs of the Parish of St. Clements Danes,
Surgeon, Taken upon Oath, April 8th. 1686.
SAYS, That This Enformant being Interrogated, Whether or No, he knew of any
Proposal made for the Opening of the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, While the
said Body lay at the House of the Late Sir Edmund? He This Enformant makes
Answer, That to the Best of This Enformants Memory, He Himself upon Discourse
with Dr. Goodall about the Death of the said Sir Edmund; This Enformant spoke
to Dr. Goodall (He This Enformant having newly seen the Body) to This Effect:
This Business of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey makes a Great deal of Noise; And I
think it would do well for General satisfaction, if a Physician and Surgeon
from the Court, and some Eminent Physician and Surgeon from the City, should
Ioyn in the Opening, and Inspecting the Body. By which means they might have
known how he came by his Death. To which Dr. Goodall agreed, as a very
Reasonable Thing, and said he would propound it: And the said Doctor told This
Enformant afterward, that he had Propounded it (as This Enformant remembers) to
Dr. Lloyd; Dr. Goodall telling This Enformant also, that the said Dr. Lloyd had
Propounded it to the Brothers, whose Answer was to This Purpose, That the
Coroners Inquest had found it Murder, and they would not Trouble Themselves
any further: All which This Enformant Delivers to the Best of his Knowledge and
Memory.

There was a Time, when the stabbing Question was, [ Ay, but who Murdered Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey?] Now What if a Man should Answer it with a Another
Question! Ay, but who were They that might have known and Would not, how he
came by his Death?] Nay, the very Sword it self would have told Tales, if the
Question had but been put to it; but I look upon That Omission as a Thing not
Thought of. I have Caused several Sword-Cutlers, and Men of Skill and
Experience in their Business, to be Consulted about This Point; and not with
any Leading Questions Neither; but Barely, and Simply, What Color will the
Warm Blood of a Man leave upon the Blade of a Sword, and how shall a Body know
it from any Other sort of Rust? To which I have received This Account.

We the Subscribers hereof, do Affirm, and Declare, and are ready to Attest
upon Oath, that according to our Observation, the Blade of a Sword that has
been Thrust into the Body of a Living Man, is of a Different Color from a
Blade that is Cankered with rust, upon Water or any Ordinary Wetting of it; and
that if the Sword be Wiped, upon the Drawing of it out of the Body, It will
have a kind of a Dark Lead Color; but Otherwise it will Look like a redder
kind of Rust.

John Hill. Joseph Smith. Rich. Hayes.


We Will See now as Briefly as we can, how far the Observation of Several of the
Jurors Themselves agrees with This Judgment of the Sword-Cutlers.

John Cowsey Deposes, That upon an Exact view of the Sword, This Enformant
Observed That Part of the Blade, which was in the Body, to be Discolored, as
if it had been Stained with Blood and Water.

Thomas Woollams Deposes, That he took Particular Notice of the Sword which
was said upon Oath to be taken out of the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and
that he Observed the Color of That Part which had been in the Body to be
Darker then the rest.

Simon Standever Deposes, That he Observed the Color of the Sword as it lay
before the Jury, and found that That Part of the Sword that was in the Body was
quite of Another Color then the rest that was out of the Body.

Thomas Mason Deposes, That he Observed the Sword, as it was showed to the
Jury, to be of a kind of Lead Color, so far as it was in the Body, and
Distinguishable from the Other Parts of the Sword.

John Hartwell Deposes, That he Observed the Sword to be of a kind of a
Blackish Blew, or Lead Color, so far as it was in the Body, and of a Color
Distinguishable from other Parts of the Sword.

We have had Such a Superabundance of more Pregnant and Convincing Arguments
and Evidences, that I should not so much as have Mentioned This Particular, but
that there is somewhat of Curiosity in it as well as of Use.

We have now passed through the Several Points in order, as they were laid down
in the Course of our Distribution concerning the Sufficiency of the Proofs
Produced; The Sincerity of making the Best of them in Matters whereof the
Examiners had Certain Knowledge; the Competency of the Witnesses that were
Summoned, and the Best Emprovement also of what they Did say, and of what in
Likelihood, and Reason they might be able to say More. I shall pass now to a
Consideration of some Witnesses that were not Summoned, and might have been
more Serviceable, in Common Probability, to the Satisfaction of the Jury, upon
the Enquiry they had Then before them, then any of the rest.

CHAP. XX.
Mrs. Gibbon's Enformation Compared with the Coroners Report, and the Matter
submitted to All Indifferent Men, whether the Design throughout was to Discover
the Truth, or to Stifle it. With an Appendix for a Conclusion.

Here Is a Subject, a Magistrate, a Master, a Friend, a Relation, and an
Acquaintance, Lost in the Person of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and All these
Circumstances are to be Consulted toward the finding out what is become of him:
Now in Order to such a Discovery, a Man Naturally Bethinks himself somewhat to
This Purpose; What Confidences had he? What Haunts? What Persons were Most
Privy to his Affairs, his Ways, and Humors? What Servants? Who saw him when he
went away from his House? Who saw him Afterward? In whose Company was he Last?
etc. There Is Nothing more Familiar, or Reasonable, then such Enquiries as
These, provided they be made in the Proper Place, and Applied to the Right
Persons: So that the Brothers were well advised, upon the First Missing of him,
to go to Coll. Weldens; (his Common Baiting-Place) to hearken after him. His
Servant Pamphlin goes the Next day to Mrs. Gibbons, upon the same Errand; and
so did the Brothers on the Monday, as one of Sir Edmunds Ancient, and
Particular Friends. It is to be taken for Granted, that they did not Forget to
Examine Sir Edmunds Domestiques, What They Knew; What they Thought; What they
Observed; and it is as Little to be Doubted, that the Servants gave them All
the Lights they could, upon such Questions. The reason of the Thing Carried
them still forward upon the same Train of Likely-hoods, to Enquire of Parsons,
Mason, Collins, and the Milk-woman, to Learn what he said, What he Did, How he
Looked, Which way he Went, etc. and who knows but Such a Trayle might have
brought them to the Ditch where he was found? But, to the Admiration of All
People, we do not find that any One of All These Persons ( Harry Moor only
Excepted, with his Laced Band) was Formally, and Publicly Examined about This
Matter; Nor so much as one Question put, with any sort of Tendency, or the
Least Appearance of Good Will, toward an Effectual Discovery, as we have
already Set forth, in an Orderly Series of Observations upon This Topique: And
there Needs No Better Proof of This Assertion, then the Testimony of the
Enformations Themselves.

I find ('it is true) an Enformation of Mrs. Gibbons among the Coroners Papers;
but the Verdict was over before it was Taken. It was by Command, not by Choice;
and how it was Managed, will appear upon a Collation of other Circumstances
with the Enformation.

It was, it seems, by the Special Order of my Lord Chancellor Nottingham, that
Mr. Cowper the Coroner took This Enformation of Mrs. Gibbon; and his Direction
(as he told her) was to Examine her upon Oath, what Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Said
to her, about a Fortnight before his Death. (As we shall see by and by.) This
gives to Understand that the Matter in Question was a Thing of very great
Importance, for his Lordship would never have thought the Cause worth a Review,
if he had not been told something very Extraordinary concerning That Encounter.
Now to Expound the Story, there was a very remarkable Passage, upon a Visit
that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey made to Mrs. Gibbons on Tuesday, the First of
October 1678. And That's the Busness the Coroner was now to take an Account of.
But This Enformation has had the Fortune, I perceive, of the rest of it is
Fellows, to come into the World Lame, and Imperfect; to the Degree of Defeating
the very Intent of the Examination. But briefly, Whatever it was, the Coroner
Undoubtedly Attended my Lord Chancellor with a Copy of the Enformation, and an
Answerable Report upon the Whole Matter, as here under-follows.

Midd. ss. The Enformation of Mary Wife of Thomas Gibbon Esquire taken upon Oath
before me.
SHE says, That about a fortnight last past, in an Afternoon, Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey came to her House in Old Southampton Buildings, and upon Discourse with
her, Asked her if she did not hear that he was to be Hanged, for not
discovering the Plot against his Majesty, for that He the said Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey had taken the Examination of one Otes and one Tongue, touching the same,
the 6th day of September, and had not Discovered it to any Person living;
whereupon this Enformant asked the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey why he had not
acquainted the Duke of York, or the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord Treasurer with
the same; and Then This Enformant told the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, that
she Supposed that what he then said was but in Jest, touching his being Hanged;
Whereupon he replied, that he had not told Sir William Jones thereof, although
he had been at the said Sir William Jones his House Several times since; and
then told this Enformant, that the King and Council knew of the Plot, before
his Majesty went to Windsor, which was about a Month before he took the said
Examination. Whereupon this Enformant asked him if he thought there was Really
any Plot intended against his Majesty? To which he replied, that surely there
Was, but that Otes had Sworn Somewhat more then was True, and therefore the
Papists would find so much favor as to have All things that Otes had Sworn, to
be thought Lies, and Then This Deponents Brother, Coll* Rooke, came into the
Room, and then the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey took his Leave of This
Enformant* saying, that he was to Go to the Lord Chief Justice about Business,
and said that he would Call on This Enformant some other Time, and Tell her
More: and Since That Time she has not seen Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and farther
says not

Jo. Cowper Coroner. Mary Gibbon.


There will be no great need of a Key to uncypher This Mystery, if the Reader
shall but duly Consider the Matter before him, upon Comparing other
Enformations of Mrs. Gibbons, with This before the Coroner. There Is One that
Speaks, Almost peculiarly, to This Subject; and Another, that is more General,
and at Large; but I shall take so much of them as is for the Present purpose, and
Begin with the Former.

Mary Gibbon Senior Deposes, That she this Enformant being Interrogated about
the Occasion, the Time, and the Subject Matter of the Enformation she Delivered
to Mr. Cowper, one of the Middlesex Coroners, concerning Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, Answers as hereafter Follows, to the Best of her Knowledge and
Memory.

That upon the next Sunday after the finding of the Body of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, the Coroners Inquest having Already Delivered up their Verdict; the
said Mr. Cowper came to This Enformant at her House in Old Southampton
Buildings in the Afternoon, and spoke to this Enformant to this Effect. Mrs.
Gibbon, I come from My Lord Chancellors to take Your Examination, and you are
to tell me upon Oath when you saw Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Last, and what he Said
to You.

This Enformant told him, that the said Sir Edmund came to her House in a very
strange Manner, upon Tuesday last was Senight, in a Discontented, Melancholique
Humor as ever This Enformant Observed in Any Body: He took This Enformant into
a Chamber Alone, Bolted the Door, Asked This Enformant if she heard the News,
for it was All over the Town that he was to be Hanged. This Enformant being in
a Great Trouble and Amazement at This Language, and Behavior, said Something
to him to This Effect, The Lord Bless us, Sir What do you Mean? For What?
Whereupon, the said Sir Edmund told This Enformant, that he had Taken Otes and
Tong's Enformations, and kept'em a Month by him without Discovery, but that
Otes had Forsworn Himself.

This Enformant Says in short, that she told the said Coroner the Story of Sir
Edmunds Distracted Manner of Behavior, in all the Considerable Passages, as
she had formerly Delivered them to Sir Leoline Jenkins.

And This Enformant being further Interrogated, Whether she thought the said
Sir Edmund was in Jest or in Earnest? Or if there was any thing said of the
Papists being in favor; And what Questions the Coroner Asked her concerning
Sir Edmunds Melancholy.

She this Enformant makes Answer, That she was so far from thinking he Iested,
that his Way of Behavior Frighted her, as the very Relation of it Frighted the
Brothers but the Monday before: Whereof This Enformant gave a Particular
Account to the said Coroner. And that This Enformant remembers No Discourse at
All of the Papists being in favor; and Moreover, that the said Coroner put No
further Questions to This Enformant, about Sir Edmunds Melancholy, then a
Gene^al Question, In what Humor he was, without showing Any Particular Desire
to be Enform'd That Way; but Repeating to This Enformant, that His Order was to
Examine her concerning what Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Said to her: the said
Coroner Writing all the While that This Enformant was Under Examination.

This Enformant being likewise Asked Whether or No she Signed the said
Enformation taken by Mr. Cowper? She makes Answer, that she remembers that
she was alone in the Parlour with Mr. Cowper, and that she had not her
Spectales Below; her Mother being Just a dying in the same House; and she her
self in Great Distraction. To the Best of her Memory, she This Enformant, being
in Confusion, did not Read it, but upon the Coroners Reading of it that she Set
her Hand to it.

This Enformant being also Asked if any Questions were put to her about the
Manner of his Death, she This Enformant does not remember any Questions that
Pointed That Way. But says, That since the Heat, and the Talk of this Busness
was over, This Enformant went one Day with one Mrs. Cross, and the Widow of Mr.
Green that Suffered, to the White-house; This Enformants Husband being also in
the Company, to see the Place where Sir Edmunds Body was found, and agreed
beforehand to Ask the Woman of the House some Questions by the By to find what
she thought of the Matter. This Enformant said, to the Woman of the House, in
Discourse, What! You have had a Justice Murdered here hard by, by the Papists.
To which the said Woman made Answer to This Effect, Do not you Deceive your
Self: I believe he rather Murdered Himself; How should the Blood follow the
Sword else, when it fell upon the Grass? And then when he was laid upon My
Table, The Blood ran down through the Floor upon the Bottles in the Cellar.

This Enformant well remembers, that on the Next Day after the Body was
brought home, a Gentlewoman, that is a Near Relation to That Family, and Yet
Living, called upon This Enformant to go along with her, to see how Sir Edmund
had been Murdered by the Papists: And they took This Enformants Daughter Mary
along with them; the said Gentlewoman saying, You may see here by the Wax that
he was Murdered in a House; Whereupon This Enformants Daughter, with her Thumb,
Fillip't-it-off, and showed her that it was only Dirt.

Upon Comparing These Two Enformations, The Coroners will be found to be only
the Shell of the other. That is to say, a Body may see the same Lines and
Traces in it, but it Carries Quite Another Countenance. Upon Discourse with her,
(says Mr. Cowper) he asked, etc. as if it had been a Question that fell in by
the By, as who should say [ Now I think on it, or so] Whereas Mrs. Gibbon tells
us of his taking her Alone, Bolting the Door; His being in much Trouble and
Disorder; and then Asking-her the Question, and telling her what an Vproar the
Whole Town was in about it: which First makes it more then a Jesting Matter,
(as the Coroner Seems to take it) and Then shows that the venting of his Mind
was the Chief Business of the Visit. But can Any Man Imagine that Mrs. Gibbon
should take the Passion it Self from the Life, to be but in jest, when the Bare
Story of it scared the Two Brothers well Nigh out of their Wits? Why, Mrs.
Gibbon must have been the Madder of the Two, to tell the Coroner how much she
was Amazed at the Extravagance, and how the Brothers were Transported almost
out of Themselves upon the Hearing of it, and yet at the same Time, that she
took all but for Fooling: But the Coroners Enformation Takes a Singular Care
all this while, either to Mince, or to Suppress whatever comes in his Way, that
is not for his Purpose. Otes, he says, had Sworn somewhat More then was True;
And that therefore the Papists would find so much favor as to have All his
Stories taken for Lies. Now This is a Passage that Skews toward the Coloring
of the Pretended Plot, whereas the Other makes No Bones of Saying that Otes
Forswore Himself, and Utterly Denies any Such Mention of the Papists. And the
Plot would come to Nothing. In the Coroners Enformation, Sir Godfrey goes his
Way, Promises to come again, and tell her more, but that she never Saw him
afterward. Now the other, as it refers to Another Enformation delivered to Mr.
Secretary Ienkins, gives to Understand that he Did come again, and went away in
a Freak: So that in fine, the Coroners Enformation, as it is drawn, is only the
Carcass of the Discourse, without any Soul or Meaning. And there is Not One Word
Neither, of the Account Mrs. Gibbon gave of his very Ill Humor, and Disorder.
We shall go forward now to her Depositions before the Sec^etary.

Mary the Wife of Captain Thomas Gibbon Deposes, That there was a Long and
Particular Intimacy and Friendship betwixt the Two Families of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey and This Enformant; And that the said Sir Edmund made her frequent
Visits at her House in Old Southampton Buildings; Acquainting her Many times
with Things that Troubled him; and for some time before his Death, he came to
her, at least, once a Week, and upon the Tuesday was Senight, before the
Saturday when he went Last away from his House, he came to This Enformants, and
desired to Speak with her alone; she being then in her Mothers Chamber with her
Husband and her Brother (Coll. William Rook) her Mother lying at That Time upon
her Death Bed, she went with Sir Edmund into Another Chamber, when being
Entered, the said Sir Edmund Bolted the Door, and appearing to be much
Troubled, and out of Order: Asked her if she had not heard that he was to be
Hanged, for (says he) All the Town is in an Vproar about me. Then she Asked him
for what? To which he replied, That he having taken Otes's and Tongs
Examinations, a Month a-go, and though he had been often at Dinner Since at My
Lord Chancellors, and Sir William Jones's, Yet he never had Discovered the Plot
they had Sworn to; she asked him, what Plot? And he said, That Otes had
forsworn himself, and it would come to Nothing. Just upon This, Coll. Rook
Called the Enformant away, and thereupon Sir Edmund went his Way too; telling
her at Parting, that he would come to her again the Next Day, and would tell
her more. Sir Edmund came accordingly, when the Enformant being Bareheaded,
told him she would wait upon him Immediately, but before she could put on her
Hood, and come back, he was gone his way. He sent to the Enformant in the Last
Week when he went away, ( to the Best of her Memory,) to come to him; but her
Mother being Dying, she could not Leave her: but the Enformant however ordered
her Daughter to go to him Early upon Saturday Morning, and Invite him to
Dinner: who brought word back that she was there by Eight, but Pamphlin told
her he was gone out an hour before.

We are now got over the Question of the Means, and the Witnesses that the
Coroner had before him; the Competency of Those Means, and how far they were
Improved toward the Clearing of the Truth. The Next and Last Point will be, to
Enquire, Whether there were not as Good Witnesses left out, or perhaps Better,
and More Likely to Bolt out the Truth, then any of Those that were Taken in,
saving Harry Moor only, who though Qualified by his Station, and Employment,
for a Probability of knowing More then Another Man; was Yet so Crampt by
Restraining his Evidence to the Nonsensical Question of his Masters Laced Band,
that he was as good as No Witness at All.

There are Certain Main Points, that in a Course of Reason, and Method, are
properly to be taken into Consideration upon the Matter that we have now before
us. First, What was the Question? Secondly, What were the Points Necessary to
be Known, toward the resolving of That Question? Thirdly, What Sort of Men were
the Most Likely to give Light to a Resolution upon it? Fourthly, Who were the
Persons that to the Certain Knowledge, or Reasonable Presumption of the
Brothers, or of the Coroner, were able to Speak Effectually to This Matter? And
so by Degrees, were Those People Summoned to give Evidence? Or if not, Why was
it Omitted?

To the First Point, Felo de se, or Not? was the Question. Secondly, Was there
Any Blood followed the Sword? If so, it is Concluded that he Died of the Wound:
And not of Suffocation. Was he in Any Danger; In any Fear, either of Others, or
of Himself? Had he any Quarrel, or any Desperate Melancholy upon him? Thirdly,
As I have said Formerly, his Domestiques, his Relations, his Familiar Friends
and Acquaintance, and other Chance-Witnesses, that either out of Curiosity, or
by Accident, came to the Knowledge, and Observation of any thing concerning him
by the By. These were the Men, in General, that were properly to be Examined.
And then Fourthly, in Particular, as to the Persons, who but Mrs. Gibbons in
the First Place? a Person to whom the whole Family applied themselves in
Private for Enformation. The Person that they desired would Speak Sparingly,
when she came to be Examined. The Person that told the Brothers such a Story of
him, the Fourth Day before the Body was found, as Manifestly gave them a
Foreboding of what was become of him. The Brothers were at their Wits End for
fear of his Desperate Melancholy; An Apprehension that was Nothing akin to the
Dread of a Violence from any Other Hand. The Brothers knew well enough the
Impression that the Conceit of his Fathers Melancholy had upon him; and that
Captain Gibbon and the Daughters of the Family, were Privy to Several Fits of
his Distemper: And what Opinion, Colonel Welden, and his own Servants had, of
his Deep, and Inconsolable Discontents. The Brothers had all along the Secret
History of Moor's Discoveries, and Intelligences; Contingent Evidences, and
Enformations, over and above. There was not One, in fine, of These Persons
Summoned; And I cannot find any One Reason in the World for the Omission; but
what I am very Unwilling to Believe, That is to say, the Smothering of the
Truth; for the Managers, I perceive, have Industriously either Avoided, or
Disguised the Two Certain Ways of Deciding This Question. First, The Discovery
of the Blood, which is already made Manifest as the Light. 2 ly. There has not
been so much as One Question put about his Melancholy, on the One Hand; Nor One
Syllable of Enformation concerning that Melancholy that has not been
Discountenanced; And (if not Punished) at Least, Ridiculed, on the Other. Now
to Conclude, If These Two Points, well-prov'd, would have brought it to a Clear
Issue; it is, beyond all Controversy, that the Blood has been made out past
Contradiction already; and that what These People could have said, to the
Evidencing of a deep, and a dangerous Discontent, would have as Amply made out
the Other: These Things they did Certainly KNOW, and Would not Know; and This
was the Blindness, undoubtedly, of those that Would Not see.

I have here Discharged my Conscience, and my Duty, with a most Affectionate,
and Impartial Respect to Truth, and Justice; And I have done it according to
the Best of my Skill, and Understanding; without Gratifying any Passion, or
Interest; and without Leaning either to the Right Hand, or to the Left; as I
shall Answer for it at the Last Day.

The Two Main Points in the Case of This Discourse, are These: First, Was Sir
E. B. Godfrey Murdered at Somerset House, according to the Evidence of Bedloe
and Prance, or was he Not? Whoever says, or thinks he Was, must Remove Forty
Contradictions and Impossibilities out of the way, before any Man can pretend
to Believe it. If he was Not, there is the Blood of Three Innocent Men to Answer
for, that was Shed upon That Perjury. Now if he Was again, There Is the King,
the Queen Consort, that then was, and now Queen Dowager, the Lord Bellassis,
etc. These were All Expressly in it; but then by Complication, and Confederacy:
Whoever was in the Plot, was more or less a Friend to the Murder; And Bedloe
Swears that Every considerable Papist in England was under an Oath of Secrecy
to Conceal it. But once again now; If he was Not Murdered there, as they swore
he Was; What Reparation for the Honor of so many Illustrious Names as will be
delivered over to After-Ages in Depositions, Iournals, and other Records, under
the Blot of This Infamy?

To Obviate These Two Questions, I have Divided This Tract into Two Parts. In
the Former, the Forgery is laid so Open, that I dare Defy the History of the
whole World, to produce Any One Cause, wherever a False Oath Imposed an Abuse
upon a Court of Justice, which was Afterward so Unanswerably Disproved, and by
so many several Ways. The First Part, in short, Discharges Somerset House of
the Murder. The Question of the Second, is, Felo de se, or Not? And if Sir
William Iones's [Circumstances] and [Concurrent Testimonies.] Greens Trial,
page 72. may but pass for as Good Evidence on the Behalf of Truth, as for the
Support of an Imposture, the Felo de se is much clearer in This Case, then the
Popish Murder was in the Other.

I have not passed over Any Thing hitherto, that I found worth a Notice; but in
regard that Men that have Least to say, are apt to make the Most of a Little;
and that there are yet remaining Untouched some Popular Stories, that have
obtained among the Multitude: I shall Subjoyn an Appendix, upon Those Points to
what I have said Already, and so Conclude.

APPENDIX
PRANCE's History of the Merry-meeting at the Queen's-Head at Bow, where was
Lauson, Vernatti, Girald, Dethick, and Himself, is a Sham of the same Batch
with the rest of his Works; and the Perjury confessed. Mr. Vernatti has Fairly
and Legally Acquitted Himself; and Mr. Dethick has been pleased to give the
Following Account of That Days Meeting, Signed with his own Hand.

The Attestation of George Dethick Esquire about the Meeting of the Pretended
Plotters at Bow.
THAT about the Seventh day of November 1678. One Mr. Vernatti sent a Note for
me, desiring my Company at the Queens Head-Tavern at Bow, where accordingly I
came and found there Mr. Vernatti, Mr. Lewson, and One Other Person, which
since I have been Informed was Mr. Miles Prance, and no body else, Except the
Master of the House, who came to us, where we Dined. And I do well remember
that Prance a little before Dinner had some Discourse with the Drawer for
Standing at the Door, at which I was somewhat concerned, and being a Stranger
to Prance, told him we had No Business that we Cared who knew, and that I was
well known to the Master of the House; upon which I Opened the Door, and so it
remained all the while we remained there: during which time, there was not a
Paper read, or account given of any Matter relating to the Murder of Sir
Edmund Godfrey; nor so much at his Name Mentioned, to the Best of my
Remembrance; but I do remember there were some Verses Written and Read, by Mr.
Vernatti, but what they were I cannot possibly say.

Likewise to the Best of my Remembrance I never saw Mr. Miles Prance either
before, or since That Time.

George Dethick.

There was a Great Talk in Those Days too, about one Iennings, a Cow-keeper,
that was Taken up, and Charged for Advising Bromwel, Walters, and Rawson, that
first found the Body, to take no further Notice of it, but rather let some body
else find it out; for nothing would come of it but Trouble. It appears upon the
Depositions of the Three Persons above Named, that Iennings did speak Words to
that Effect; and Iennings himself owns the speaking of the Words; but Deposes
withal, as follows.

Edward Iennings Deposes, That he had never seen nor heard of that Body before
they told him of it. And says, That in the Spring following he was committed
to New Prison upon the Oath of his Wife, that he brought home a Band, and said
it was the Band of Sir E. Godfrey. He continued a Prisoner there, a Month,
within Two Days, to the best of his Remembrance. And says, That the
Under-keeper of the said Prison told him, that among other Persons that came
there to him, there was one of the Brothers of the said Sir Edmund, Prance, and
Otes.

There went a Hot Report of Cattle taken away from him, and of the Business
being made up, and his Cattle Restored again, no body knew how. I have met with
many sober People that laid a great Stress upon This Story; but, for my own
Part, I could never find any thing in it to build upon.

The Staffordshire Letter of Intelligence about the Death of Sir E. B. Godfrey,
made a mighty Noise in the Trial of the Jesuits, and of my Lord Stafford:
Insomuch, that Challenges were made to all the Papists in England to wipe off
that Evidence: and the Weight, effectually, of the whole Cause was thrown upon
that Issue. Mr. Evers (as Dugdale Swears) received a Letter from London at
Tixhall upon Monday, October. 14. 1678. bearing Date, Saturday the 12 th. with
These Words in it, [This Night Sir E.B.G. is Dispatched.] Lord Staffords Trial,
fol. 22. And this Evidence was Backed by several other Testimonies, 134, 135,
136, and 137. of the said Trial: And so likewise in the Trial of the Five
Jesuits. Now the Force of the Inference was This: The Body was not found till
Thursday the 17 th. And how should any Man that was not privy to the Murder,
give such an Account of it upon Saturday the 12 th? For they had the News of it
in Staffordshire upon the Monday. I shall only Refer the Reader to the Sixth
Chapter of this Second Part, 199. for a Full, and Final Answer, where he shall
find a Report Raised, and Industriously spread on the very Saturday Sir Edmund
went away upon; that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Murdered by the Papists; so
that the Saturdays-Post might well carry the News into Staffordshire by Monday.
There was Notable Clashing, I remember, about the Credit of the Staffordshire
Evidence, that was given upon This Point: But if the Rumor was so Rife about
the Town upon the Saturday, it is All a Case to me, whether they had it in
Staffordshire, or Not; for if they had it Not, they might have had it; which is
the same Thing as to the Reason of the Case, though not to the Truth of the
Fact.

The Drops of Wax upon the Clothes, and Stockings, which Elizabeth Curtis (or
Draper) swears to, are never the more Credible for her Testimony; because we
have already proved her to be Forsworn; both by Judith Pamphlin, and Avis
Warrier, in the Business of Green and Hill, cap. 13. And another Falsity out of
her own Mouth, about Greens speaking First French, and Afterward English in
the Council-Chamber-Deposition; and First English, and Afterward French, at
the Trial. See the same Chapter, p. 152. And She Is little better then Forsworn
again, in delivering her Evidence upon Oath, as the Servant of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey; which she never was; neither was it fair to set her up for a Witness,
in the Quality of Sir Edmund's Servant, by Those that knew she never was so.
Not but that there might be Drops of Wax too, but how they came There, will be
the Question; for when Mrs. Gibbon and her Daughter, together with a Kinswoman
of Sir Edmunds, were to see the Body in Hartshorn-Lane, the Day after it was
brought home, the pretended Drops of Wax upon the Filliping, were found to be
only Dirt, as is already set forth in the Last Chapter. And after this
Disappointment, if there had been any such Drops, they would undoubtedly have
been found out. But this Mistake might put it in their Heads perhaps, to bestow
the Drippings of a Wax-Candle here and there about him, as they saw convenient;
for the Wax upon his Cloths (as Proofs went then-a-days) made a very
Substantial Corroborating Argument of the Body's being laid under the Altar.
But Wax, or No Wax, comes all to a Point, if the main Cause be Detected for a
Sham; for the Somerset-house-murther, and the Somerset-house-wax are Fillip'd
off Both together; and it was for the Tapers sake undoubtedly, that this Sham
was Contrived. I shall now take Notice of some of their Extraordinary
Affidavits, which, how Vnconcluding soever, passed for Matters of Moment yet
with the Common People.

Nathaniel Thompson, etc. were Tried at Guildhall, on Tuesday, June 24. 1682.
upon an Enformation, for Writing, Printing, and Publishing Libels, by way of
Letters, and other Prints, Reflecting upon the Justice of the Nation in the
Proceedings against the Murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; and they were
found Guilty of the Enformation.

Upon the 3 d. of July, 1682. (according to the Licensed Trial) Thompson, etc.
were brought up by Rule to the Bar of the Court of King's Bench, to receive
their Judgment; upon which 3 d. day of July an Affidavit of Richard Spence was
read, bearing Date the 10 th. of the same July. (Whether this was the Printers,
or the Compilers Mistake, it does not much matter.) But the short of the
Enformation is This.

That Passing by the Watergate of Somerset House, October 10. 1678. about
Seven at Night, there were Five or Six Men standing together there, who laid
hold of this Deponent as he was passing by them; and they taking hold of both
this Deponents Arms, Dragged him down about a Yard within the Watergate of
Somerset House, it being dark; but one of the said Men, which this Deponent
believes to have been Hill (for that this Deponent knew Hill very well, as also
his Master Dr. Godden) Cried out, and said, This is not He; upon which, they
immediately let this Deponent go.

10. July 1682.
Jurat' coram me

VV. Dolben.


Richard Spence.

Mr. Spence, it is true, did probably know Hill and his Master, as we shall see
farther by and by. But in the mean Time, it is Remarkable, that he has Pitched
upon Prance's Just Number of Murderers, (Six;) Prance's Watergate; and that
These Ruffians should Seize a Man so like Sir E. B. Godfrey for Sir E. B.
Godfrey, when 'twas so Dark, they could hardly know One Face from Another. If
he had but called out for Help, they had certainly been Taken (unless we shall
suppose that They only could see the Man, and No Body else See Them.) 'Twas a
strange Thing, that No Place but Somerset-House-Water-Gate, could serve for the
Surprise. But to be Short, and to make the Most on it; Here was One Man taken
for Another; Seized, and let go again; and This Man, for the Purpose, Like Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey (though I am told otherwise:) And what is the Inference at
last now, but that These Men were either Bedloe's, or Prance's Assassins, that
lay upon the Catch there for Godfrey? Where was This Evidence of Mr. Spence's
at Green's Trial: Or how came it Now to be Bolted, upon This Occasion?

There was a Little Affair at That Time in hand, about the Lease of a House,
which Mr. Spence had for a Term of Years in Trust from Mrs. Broadstreet. There
was some Arriere Incurred, and a Prosecution upon it for the Money; And while
This Dispute was a-foot, the Story of Mr. Spence's being laid hold of, and
dragged into Somerset House, came to Light: I shall look no further into it; for
the Further, the Worse.

Mr. Spence's Affidavit, is followed with Another of John Okeley, the Servant
of Robert Breedon, of Hartshorn-Lane, who makes Oath, That upon Saturday,
October 12. 1678. going homewards to his Master Breedons House, coming by
Somerset House in the Strand; when he came near the Gate of that House, which
leads down to the Waterside, commonly called the Watergate, about Nine at
Night, ^e there saw Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and passed close by him, and put
off his Hat to him; and Sir E. B. Godfrey put off his Hat again to Him; and
after that the Deponent had passed beyond Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, He the
Deponent turned about, and looked upon him again, and Sir Edmundbury Godfrey
stood still, and there was a Man or Two near Sir Edmund.

This Affidavit was Sworn, June 22. before the Lord Mayor; and sworn to again
the 1st. of July; 1682. before Judge Dolben, and is left Filled up in the
Crown-Office* Thompsons Trial, 33, 34, 35.

After These, there follows an Appendix, containing several Other Affidavits,
in Further Confirmation (as is Pretended) of the Testimony of Mr. Miles Prance.

Harry Moor Swears, That the Report of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey 's Hanging
Himself, and of Moors saying, that He cut him down, is utterly False. Trial, p.
41.

And after This follows Another Enformation, of Justice Baalam, that the
Above-written Affidavit is True. Ibid. June 28. 1681.

Elizabeth Dekin Swears, That her Fellow Servants John Oakley told her, while
Sir Edmund was Missing, of his seeing Sir Edmund about Nine, That Saturday
Night, near the Watergate at Somerset House.

Robert Breedon follows it with another Deposition, that Elizabeth Dekin told
him, as above, what John Oakley said, June 22. 1682. p. 44.

Ralph Oakley Swears, That John Oakley told him of seeing Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey as aforesaid, July 4. 1682. p. 45. And Robert Oakley, the Father of
John, Deposes, that his Son told him the same Story. Ibid.

Here Is a Clutter of Six Affidavits to Two Points. The First Two to Moor's
Purging himself of a Scandalous Report: The Other Four to John Oakley's saying
that he saw Sir E. B. Godfrey. Moor's Point is nothing at all to the Present
Business; and the Rest is only Hearsay, without Proof. 'Twas Dark, and what if
Oakley mistook the Man? And Being Dark, 'twas a Wonder he should know him at
all; Especially, following, and passing by him; and then, looking back again.
It was a Mighty Lucky thing too, that Spence should be Dragged in by Six Men at
the Watergate, on the Thursday, about Seven in the Evening, and that John
Oakley should stumble upon him at the Watergate too, about Nine on the
Saturday; and that in Both Those Dark Nights, Both these Witnesses should have
the Hap to See him at the same Place, and to know him. And how came John Oakley
to take Notice that there was a Man or Two near Sir Edmund? What was That
Circumstance to His Story; when, at that Hour, it could hardly be Other; but it
Nicks Prance's Evidence however; for there were the Doggers, and there was the
Watergate; and That the Place of Ambush; though the Dark Passage into
Hartshorn-Lane would have been a Post worth Forty on it, for That Purpose.

Benjamin Man makes Oath, That the Turn-key of the Gate House, telling this
Enformant that Green was Charged with the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey;
the Deponent, Reading of it, Turned to Mr. Green, and said, I did not think to
have found you such a Man; Whereupon Green Replied, [I am a Dead Man] or Words
to That Purpose. Sworn July 3. 1682. Trial, p. 47.

And what Difference in the Case of this Poor Creature, betwixt saying, I am a
Dead Man; and saying, There Is no Fence for Perjury. But the killing Affidavit
is, That which follows.

Robert Fawcet of Marybone, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire. makes Oath; That
Tuesday the 15th. of October, 1678. (being the Tuesday after that Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was Missing) he This Deponent was a Hunting with his Pack of
Hounds at the very Place where the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
afterward found, and Beat that very Place with his Hounds, and the Body was
not then there, nor any Gloves, nor Cane thereabout. The said Deponent further
says, That the same Day Mr. Henry Harwood requested Him This Deponent, that he
would let him have his Hounds the next day after, being Wednesday, and he would
find that Hare, which they could not find on Tuesday; or Words to that Purpose.
And This Deponent further says, That He the said Harwood has several Times
since Affirmed, That he did accordingly Hunt in the same Place, and Beat the
same Ditch, and said, that the Body was not there That Wednesday at Noon, which
said Henry Harwood is now Newly Dead.

1. die Iulii, 1682.
Jur. Coram me

W. Dolben.


Robert Fawcet.

To take the Matter now according to the Fact, as it is here Deposed. First, If
the Huntsmen were on the Wrong side of the Ditch, the Thicket of Bushes and
Brambles was so Close, that it was Morally Impossible to see, either the Body
or the Gloves where they lay. 2 dly, Though a Man in This Case of the Ditch,
may Allow the Noses of the Dogs, Compared with the Tongues of the Witnesses,
that swore the Murder at Somerset House, to be much the more Credible
Evidence; It would be a Dangerous Conclusion yet, to Pronounce, that the Body
was Not there, because the Dogs did not Find it there; and to Raise an
Argument, from That Presumption, of the Bodies Not being in the Ditch, that
Therefore Sir Edmund was Murdered at Somerset House. So that I shall very
Fairly Divide the Matter; That it was likely enough they should have found the
Body, but Not Impossible for 'em to Miss it; And according to Common Course of
speech, the Beating of that very Place must be intended of That Field, or of
That Ditch at Large; for it cannot be Imagined, that they Hunted Every Inch of
Ground within That Compass: Or that when Men Beat to start a Hare, they stand
Poring at every thing, as if they were looking for her in her Form. So that in
the Candor, and Equity of Construction, [There was not any Gloves nor Cane
thereabouts] must be Intended, and Ought to be Taken No otherwise, then with
This Qualification; That is to say, We were a Hunting and Beating upon That
Place, upon Tuesday, and there was No Dead Body, Gloves, or Cane, that we saw.
For such a Negative amounts only to a Presumption. And whether shall we rather
Believe now; the Dogs that did Not see him there, upon Tuesday and Wednesday;
or Baker, that swore He saw him hard By there, upon Saturday in the Afternoon,
or the Devil in his Clothes. To say Nothing (more then is said already p.
175.176.) of Mr. Huysman's, and Mr. Grundy's Observations upon a Person
sauntring in Those Fields on Saturday Afternoon, in All Points Answering the
Description of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. There was a Discovery made, it is True,
of a dead Body in a Wood near High-Gate, in February 1686. by the very Dogs
(as I remember) of This Mr. Fawcet; But as they Chopped upon it at Last: So they
Missed it for at least Six Weeks before, after many and many a Time Beating the
same Wood.

This Enformation of Mr. Fawcet bears Date the 1. of July, 1682. And it is a
Wonder that No Public Notice was taken on it sooner, either before the
Coroner, or at Green's Trial; for Mr. Fawcet was in Commission of the Peace,
and Lived in the same Parish, saw the Body at the White-house, and had the
Curiosity to View the Place where it was Found; Nay he Discoursed the Business
of his Dogs, upon That Occasion; As I have it upon the Oath of a very Honest
Gentleman.

Mr. William Collinson Deposes, That being at the White-house upon
Friday-morning, the Day after Sir Edmund's Body was found, while the Body lay
upon the Table there; the Woman of the said House, said to This Enformant,
[There's One of them that Helped to bring him up:] Pointing to the said Person.
One Mr. Fawcet being then come into the Room, spoke to That Person to show him
the Place where the said Body was found: and so they went down together, and
This Enformant along with them: The Guide showing the Place, where, and
Describing in What Posture the Body Lay, after This Manner. The Body lay (as
the Guide told the Company) with his Head Low, and toward the High Bank, with
his Heels turned up against the other, His Coat Vnbutton'd, and his Shirt put
aside; and the Sword came a Good way thorough him about the Shoulder Blade.

Upon sight of a Considerable Quantity of Blood, that lay some Yards from the
Ditch, Mr. Fawcet Asked how That Blood came there? The Guide before spoken of,
said, that the Sword was taken out there, and the Blood Followed it: Mr. Fawcet
Wondering at it; Asked, Why they Meddled with the Body, before the Coroner
came? To which the Man Answered, they made a Great Busle about it; and we could
not Carry the Body without taking out the Sword. Mr. Fawcet said also, ['Tis
strange, that being Hunting about These Grounds, we should make No Discovery of
the Body.

It will be Time now to look back upon what I have Written; To Compare the
Evidences, Likelyhoods, Appearances, and Pre^ences, of the One side, with Those
of the Other; To Examine the Good Faith, and the Fair Dealing, on Both Hands;
And in fine, upon a Summary Review of the Whole, to Wind up my Matters in as
Few Words as I can.

In the Former Part of This Discourse, the First Chapter is a Bare Narrative of
Godfrey's coming to a Violent Death; and Bedloes and Prances setting-up for the
Discoverers of the Murder. 2dly, Why, and How, they made a Plot on it. 3dly,
And Swore to it. 4. How the Plot and the Murder were Incorporated. 5. The
Clashing of the Witnesses. 6. Bedloes Inconsistency with Himself. 7. The
Taking-up, and the Manage of Prance. 8. Prance's secret History, and Usage, for
Thirteen Days, wherein he Renounced to any Knowledge, either of the Plot, or
the Murder, (according to his First Evidence). 9. How he went off again. 10.
How People were Used; to Encourage False, and to Discourage Honest Witnesses.
11. and 12. Notes upon Bedloes, and Prance's Evidence, and upon their
Character. 13. Their Depositions, Impossible to be True. 14. The story of
Somerset House, and of the Ditch, never to be Reconciled. 15. No Plot, No
Murder; The One being Founded upon the Other.

Now laying all This together; That is to say, The Sham of the making a Plot
on it; The Flagitious Improbity of the Witnesses, Their Contradictions to
Themselves, and to One Another; Their Evidence in the several Parts of it,
neither Likely, Credible, nor so much as Possible; The Notorious, and the
Infamous Practice of Countenancing Impostures, and of smothering the Truth;
They might as well have Charged Prance with the Murder of Abel; or Cain with
the Pillows, or the Crevats at Somerset House: and the One would have been just
as Competent a Testimony as the Other. That is to say; as the Other would Now
appear to be, after the Revelation of That Part of the Mystery of Iniquity,
that lay in the Dark, Before.

After the Proofs made out in the First Part, that Bedloe's and Prance's
History of the Somerset House Murder, was only a Ridiculous, and a Malicious
Fiction; the Main scope of the second Part is little more then Deliberative, in
what Manner, and Place; and by what Means and Hand he came to his End:
Wherein, I have first Sir William Iones's Opinion to justify me in the Law,
and Equity of my Reasonings, and Conclusions. 2dly, I prove Sir Edmund's Dismal
Melancholy That Saturday, when he left his House. 3dly, What Others thought of
it. 4thly, What He Himself Thought of it before he went away. 5thly, What his
Friends thought was become of him, when he was Missing. 6thly, They would have
him Murdered by Papists, before he was Dead. 7. The Care taken to Conceal his
Death, instead of finding it out. From 8. to 15. How the Inquest was Labored,
upon Points Clear from the Matter; and All Necessary Enquiries, so far as
Possible, set aside. 15. 16.17.18.20. Not One Word in the Coroner's
Enformations to the Proper Subject of the Enquiry. 19. The Opening of the Body
Ordered, but Opposed and Rejected though a Certain Means of Discovering the
Truth.

So that upon the whole Matter at last, we have here Sir Edmund's Confession of
his Own Melancholy, and his Dread of it; the Opinion of his Friends, Relations,
and Servants; The Ground, and the Reason of his Fears laid Open; Proofs of his
Own Forebodings, both in Words, and in Actions, Undenyably made out: Charges of
Privacy given, to Hinder the Means of Discovering it. Not One Creature
Examined, that was likely to give any Account of him; nor One Question put, and
the Answer made use of, that any Man could be the Wiser for. The Business of
the Blood, and of the Posture, totally suppressed; which would Infallibly have
Cleared the Point of his Dying by the Sword; And Nothing Opposed, on the Other
side, to Balance This Harmony of Evidences, Reasonings, and Presumptions; but
the Limberness, and the Distortion of the Neck, which every Nurse, and
Searcher, could have told them was a Common Accident in Cases of a Natural
Death.

FOR the Further service and Convenience of the Reader, I shall here Subjoyn a
Catalogue of the Principal Enformations, Depositions, and Attestations that are
made use of in This Book; by way either of Evidence, Argument, or Illustration,
toward an Eviction of the Truth. For the sake of Clearness and Order, I shall
Range the Papers under Three Heads. The first Classis Containing an Enumeration
of All Those Depositions, and Testimonials which I have here Produced, in
favor of the Opinion, which I take upon me to Defend. And these Original
Papers, I have Deposited in the Paper-Office, for the Satisfaction of Any Man
that has a Curiosity to Learn whether they be Authentic or not. Whether they
are Truly Rendered, Pertinently Applied, or Competent to the Purpose they were
Intended for, let the Reader Judge. I have Lodged in the Second Place, the
Enformations that were taken by the Coroner, upon the View of Sir Edmunds Body.
And in the Third, I have given A Promiscuous Account of the several Depositions
of Bedloe and Prance, with Other snatches of Evidences, that were Produced to
support their Testimony: with References upon the Whole to the Page where they
are to be found.

The First CATALOGVE.
A.
ADams Richard Esquire Lincolns Inn. Page 188.197 Angus Adam Clerk. 88 Audley Paul
Painter Stayner, St. Dunstans in the West. 261
B.
Batson William Barber-Surgeon, London. p. 269 Belcher Eliz. Searcher, St.
Giles's in the Fields. 255 Birtby Edward Gent. St. Giles's in the Fields.
178.197 Boys William. 65.75 Bornford Richard Esquire Lincolns Inn. 218 Bradbury
Henry Baker. 309 Brewer Hester. 6 Bridal Walter Esquire 310 Broadstreet Ann. 136
Brown John Constable, Victualler, St. Giles in the Fields. 212, 222, 267
Brumwell Will. Baker, St. Giles's in the Fields. 97 Burdet Thomas Gent. 190,
196, 219, 271
C.
Chase James Apothecary, Covent Garden p. 266 Church Will. Gent. Inner Temple
182 Collins Will. Brewer, St. Giles's in the Fields. 252, 265, 290 Collinson
Will. Gent. St. James's 200, 261.271, 284, 342 Cook Philip, St. Giles's in the
Fields. 77 Cooper John Coroner. Cooper Richard, Milliner, Exchange 172 Coral
Francis Coachman. 102 Coral Margaret. Cowsey John of St. Giles's in the Fields.
243, 319 Cox Gabriel Linen Draper, Covent Garden. 296 Cutler Thomas Victualer,
Savoy. 137
D.
Davies John Shoemaker, of Paddington. p. 247 Dethick George Esquire 333
E.
Edwards Samuel Victualer, St. James's. p.
F.
Fall William Esquire St. Giles's in the Fields. p. 194.206 Fisher Edw. Sadler,
London. 270 Flayman Ann. Foxley Joshua Gent. St. Martins in the Fields. Friar
Anthony Cordwayner, St. Giles's in the Fields. 246.275
G.
Gibbon Tho. Captain. p. 180, 192 Gibbon Mary Sen. 101, 179, 180, 181, 190,
191, 199, 205, 208, 324, 328 Gibbon Mary Iun. 179, 181, 182, 190, 191, 193, 199
Giles Walter Shoemaker. Girl Joseph, Kings Bench. 216, 244, 265 Goffe Robert
Goodall Charles M. D. St. Martins in the Fields. 316 Goweth James Ioyner, Land.
269 Grundy Tho. Gent. Westminster. 174
H.
Haddon Thomas Perriwig-maker, St. Giles's. p. Harris Thomas Cheesmonger. 242
Hartwell John Wheelwright, Marybone. 215, 249, 319 Hassard John Vintner. 268
Hayes Richard Sword-Cutler. 318 Hill John Sword-Cutler. 318 Hill Eliz. Widow,
St. Clements-Danes. 135 Hills Christopher Shoemaker, Sa^voy. Hobbs Thomas
Surgeon, St. Clements Danes. 317 Huysman James Painter, St. Martins in the
Fields. 175 267
J.
Jennings Edward Cowkeeper. 333
L.
Lasinby Richard Surgeon, Co^vent Garden. p. 258 Leeson Mary Pewterer, St.
Martins in the Fields. 173 Leigh Lucy, St. Giles's in the Fields L'Loyd Bishop
of St. Asaph. 82.87
M.
Mason Thomas Gardner, of Marybone. p. 209, 248, 252, 265.319 Merydale John St.
Giles's in the F. Milward Thomas Esquire of Grays Inn. Moor Henry of Little-Port.
171, 191, 203, 207 Moreton Sarah Searcher, of St. Martins in the Fields.
254.259
N.
Newens Elizabeth, London. p. 77
O.
Oswald John, Clark. p. 89
P.
Pamphlin Judith, St. Martins in the Fields, 191, 194, 200, 205, 208 Paris John
of Marybone, 216, 267 Parsons John, Coachmaker, of St. Annes. Paulden, Captain,
St. Giles's. 200 Pengry Aaron, Esquire 205 Prance Miles 126 Preston Mary, St.
Clements Danes 76 Primat Stephen, Esquire Grays Inn 218
R.
Radcliffe Joseph, Oylman, St. Martins in the Fields p. 178, 300, 301, 307
Rawson John, Hamstead 216, 267 Rawson Margaret 218, 267 Richardson George,
Beadle.
S.
Skillarne Zachariah, Chyrurgeon, St. Martins in the Fields p. 230, 234, 235,
257, 263, 266. Smith John, St. Dunstans in the West Smith Joseph, Sword-cutler
318 Smith Mary, Searcher 254 Snell Thomas, Grocer 174 Standever Simon,
Cordwayner, Marybone 244, 319
T.
Trotton Robert, Tailor, St. Giles's in the Fields p. 246, 265
U.
Urwin William, Coffee-man
W.
Wallis Catharine, Norfolk p. 77 Walters John, Farrier, St. Giles 's in the
Fields p. 99. Warrier Avis, St. Martins in the Fields 142 Warrier James,
Tailor, St. Martins in the Fields 137 Weeks Alice, Searcher, St. Giles 's in
the Fields 255, 256 Wheeler Richard, Hosier, New Exchange 177, 209, 217* 293,
313 White Robert, Gent. Westminster. 199 Whitfield Tho. Gent. 146 Whitfield Robert
148 Whitehall Rob. Gent. Southw. 199 Woollams Thomas, of St. Giles 's in the
Fields, Chandler. 244, 264, 319 Wyanes Philip, Pump-maker, St. Giles 's in the
Fields 248, 265 Wynel Tho. Esquire Cranbrok Essex, 180, 187, 183, 195.
Y.
Yeomans Edmund, Millener p. 171
II. Enformations before the Coroner.
ZAch. Skillarne 279 Zach. Skillarne 279 Nicholas Cambridge Ibid. John Wilson
280 Tho. Morgan 280 W. Bromwell 281 John Walter 281 John Rawson 281 Caleb Wind
281 Richard Duke 281 John Brown 286 John Brown 286 Henry Moor 297 Joseph
Radcliffe 299 Eleanor Radcliffe 300 Mary Gibbon 322
III. Depositions and Reports, promiscuously as they Occur.
BEdloe's Narrative at the Lords Bar, Nov. 8. 1678. p. 16 His further
Examination, Nov. 12. 1678. 19 His Enformation, Nov. 18. 1678. 19 His
Enformation before the Council, June 24. 1679. 20 His first Appearance to his
Majesty, Nov. 7. 1678. His Narrative to the Lords* Nov. 12. 1678. 29 His
Deposition in the Council Chamger, June 24. 1679. 37 His Evidences compared. 44
Prance's first Deposition before the Lords Committee, Dec. 21. 1678. p. 43 His
Enformation to the Committee of Secrecy. 55 His Deposition to the Duke of
Monmouth, and my Lord Ossory 57 His Denial of his Evidence before the Council.
61 His Evidence of the Murder, Dec. 24. 1678. 163
Boyce's Enformation about Prance to the Lords Committees, Jan. 2. 1678/9.
65.69 Captain Richardson's Account of Prance to the Lords, Jan. 3. 1678/9. 66,
70 Charles Cowper's Account of Prance 67, 68, 69, 70, 71 Prance's Enformation
to the Earl of Shaftsbury 80, 81 The Enformation of Mrs. Mary Tilden, 137.
Catharine Lee, 137. Nicholas Cambridge, 151, 235. Eliz. Curtis at the Trial,
151. Eliz. Curtis to the Lords Committees, Jan. 8. 1678/9. Richard Spence, 336.
John Okeley, 337. Henry Moor. Justice Balaam. Elizabeth Dekin. Robert Breedon.
Ralph Oakley, 338. Benjamin Man, 339. Robert Fawcet, 339.
THE END.

