A DISCOURSE ON THE PRINCIPLES OF CHIROMANCY.

By Monsieur de la CHAMBER, Counselor to the King of France in his Counsels,
and his Physician in ordinary.

Englished by a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, and are to be sold by Tho. Basset, at his
Shop in St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1658.

An Advertisement TO THE READER.
THe Discourse I present was not as you may imagine, a Design made for Pastime,
or which I undertook merely to satisfy the curiosity of one of my Friends;
besides the care I took to content him, I intended to free my self from the
Obligation I had contracted with the Public; and I did believe that with one
and the same thing I might pay a Debt, and make a Present. If you remember,
Reader its long since I engaged my self to bring to light, The Art to know Men,
whereof I have already published some Treatises; and as a Debtor that has
Credit, because I could not pay all in ready Coin, I endeavor by degrees to
acquit my self as it comes into my hands; its without doubt in the same bond
with that of my great Debt, since its part of those Preliminary Discourses,
which serve as an Introduction to the whole Science; for as it is composed of
several Pieces, and that Metoposcopy and Chiromancy are not the least
considerable; this work examines the Principles thereof, and in my opinion
demonstrates by Solid Reasons and Observations drawn from Physic, that they
are far better established then til this present most men have believed. Its
very likely, that the search of so hidden a thing, wherein Cardan, Appomensis,
Achillinus, Patricius, and so many other great Men have labored with so little
success, may provoke you to the curiosity, to know how well I may have
succeeded herein; nay I ought even to hope, that if I do not altogether
satisfy thee, the difficulty of the undertaking, and the courage I had to
attempt it, will cause me somewhat to deserve thy approbation, or at least
excuse; nay, I must require one of them, if thou desire from me those other
Treatises which with this are to make their Entry and to be the Frontispiece to
that Miraculous Art which I have promised; otherwise thou will exempt me from
the pains I should take to finish them, and thy self from the troubleto read
them.

TO Mr. BEJET Doctor in Physic.
SIR,
WHen you solicited me to set down in writing the entertainment which we had
together touching Chiromancy; and that you endeavored to persuade me, that the
public ought not to be deprived of what you heard me speak on that subject; I
remember my self of what Socrates his friends desired of him, that he would
give leave his picture might be drawn, and the confusion he was in after he had
satisfied their desire; for before, those defects which Nature had placed in
his face, were scarce minded till then, when presently they began to find them
out, and after they were presented on the cloth, they were even decided. The
same without doubt will happen to me, when I shall commend to paper those
Discourses, the recital whereof you assured me was so pleasant unto you. They
will no longer have the grace of novelty, which then they had. They will not be
accompanied with those delights of walking, and conversation which rendered them
graceful; and appearing now to the eyes, whose judgment is far more severe then
that of the ears, they will have no defect which will not be remarkable, and
which will not burden me with shame and regret for having obeyed you. What
will then become of me when I shall have other Judges besides you, who are my
friend, and who are curious in those kind of Sciences? and when I shall find
amongst the public all minds preoccupied with the opinion that they are but
vain knowledges, all whose promises and principles are but imaginary?
Notwithstanding all these dangers wherein you engage me, I shall satisfy your
desire, and remit those things that I then told you for a divertisement to a
more serious Examen: For after this second trial which you are to make, if you
judge them of good allay, I shall never doubt but that they may and ought to be
admitted into the commerce of learning. And certainly, if there be any thing
that is reasonable in those conjectures which I have made, and if at least they
may but bring forth the suspicion of a Truth, which has hitherto been unknown,
it is fit to give the public notice, were it but to provoke such who labor in
search of those wonders, which God has hidden in man, to make a more ample
discovery of this, and to add hereunto their observations, who may perfect what
I have but begun. For how base and vile soever Chiromancy is, Philosophy may
find subjects therein not unworthy of her highest and noblest meditations; She
disdains not to descend to the more obscure Arts to enlighten them, and like
the light of the Sun, which mixeth it self with all impure things, without
corrupting it self, and draws from them vapors which it elevates, even to the
highest Regions of the Air, she abaseth herself without blemishing her dignity
to the lowest effects of Nature and of Art, and draws from thence knowledges
which she may place in the rank of most sublime speculations. And without doubt
although I am none of those by whom she may bring to pass such great designs;
Yet I believe I have met with something which is not unworthy of her cares, and
which ought not only to content the curiosity of all those who love
Chiromancy, but which may also serve for the use of Physic; for if I can but
establish this Principle, That every noble part has a certain place in the
hand that is affected to it, and with which it has a conciliation and a
particular Simpathy; Besides that, this will be a great prejudication for the
disposition of the Planets, which this Science has collocated in the same
places, and whereof it has made the chief foundation of all its rules. Stong
presumptions may be also drawn from thence, to judge of the good or ill
disposition of the principles of life which may be known by the hand, and that
amongst the other parts of the body there are, as there are in this, relations
and Simpathies, which depend not on the distributions of the vessels, nor from
the structure which they have, but from a secret consent which ties and
associates them together; which will be no small secret for letting blood, and
for applying remedies to certain places, as shall be said hereafter.

To the establishment therefore of this great Principle, I shall now employ my
self. For to defend to the particular Rules of this Science, and to give the
reasons of them, as you have heard me on some of them; besides that it were to
offend the severity of Philosophy, to amuse it about such things which are for
the most part false or uncertain, being not verified by just Observations; it
were to much to flatter the blindeness of those who afford them more faith then
they deserve, and even to abuse the time which our employments require.

But that you may not complain of this fore-shortning, I shall add to those
Discourses which I entertain you with all those Reasons which at first made me
have a suspicion, that there was some truth in Chiromancy, and that it might
have more assured grounds then many have imagined; And I doubt not but they
will produce the same effect in the minds of such who will consider them,
without preoccupation, since those very things which ought to render them
suspected, and give a repulse to those who would employ themselves therein, are
those which may authorize it, and breed a desire in them to have the knowledge
thereof.

In effect, as the first and principal Foundation of Chiromancy is the
disposition of the Planets, which it has diversely placed in the Hand; for it
has placed Jupiter on the forefinger, called the Index, Saturn on the next,
the Sun on the third, Mercury on the fourth, Venus on the thumb, and the Moon
on its inferior part. This foundation I say which overthrows the natural order
of the Planets, and which consequently rather seems to be the Capritio of the
first Inventors of this Science, then any reason they had to rank them so, is
far from rendering it suspected of falsehood; from thence I conceive it rather
one of those things which affords us the first suspicions of the truth thereof.
For the Humane Soul, which is so great a lover of proportion, and which never
fails to adorn and enrich her imaginations, wheresoever she can insinuate it,
cannot have forgotten it here without cause, and that she has been forced by
the truth of experiences which have been made, to change the order of the
Planets, which it has so exactly preserved in Metaposcopy, and in a thousand
other occasions, where it had the liberty of application: And without doubt,
were it a pure imagination, it would have been more easy, and more reasonable
to have placed Saturn on the forefinger, Jupiter on the second, the Sun on
the fourth, and so to have followed that order which the Stars observe among
themselves, then so to transpose them as they have. Now if they were to have
been changed, it seems it would have been more fit to have made the greatest
finger govern by the greatest Star, or to have assigned it that which was most
moveable, rather then the third, which is least active.

So that there is a great probability, that so extraordinary a disposition of
the Planets is not the work of their fancies who first found out this Science,
but of that necessity which they had to follow the reasons and experiences
which marked out this truth.

But the observation which Aristotle reports in his History of Animals,
increases this first suspicion. For in that incomparable work, wherein we may
say Nature has discovered and explicated her self, He assure us, that there
are lines in the hand, which according as they are long or short, remark the
length or shortness of life. And as this is one of the first of the rules of
Chiromancy, its to be believed that he was not ignorant of it, and that that
admirable man would not introduce into a History, which was to be one of the
fairest Pictures of Nature, any thing that was doubtful of the Truth whereof he
was not well assured. That if it be certain, as experience has since confirmed
it, there is no reasonable person who will not judge but the hand ought to have
a stronger connection with the principles of life then all the rest of the
exterior parts whereon these marks are not to be found. That these mark are the
effects whereby the good or ill disposition of those principles from whence
they proceed, ought to be made known. And finally, that in this part there are
wonders which hitherto are not well known; and that if we could find out the
knowledge of them, we might perhaps discover that which Chiromancy boasts of.

To conclude, He that would but mind that those lines which are in the hand,
are in all men different: That in one person they change from time to time, and
that all this diversity can proceed from no other internal or external cause
which is known to us; he must be constrained to confess, that all these
characters are the effects of some secret influence which imprints them on that
part; and that Nature doing nothing in vain, they are for particular use, and
at least mark the alteration which is in those principles which produce them.
For to refer those impressions to the articulation or motion of the Hand, as
some have, is what cannot be maintained; seeing articulations are equal to all
men, who nevertheless have all unequal Lines. That there are many where no
articulation is, as in the space which is betwixt the joints of the Finger;
that Children new born, and who all shut their hand after one manner, without
almost making any motion, yet have many Lines which are different in every of
them. That those who exercise the same Art, and consequently ought near upon to
make the like motions, yet have them as different as if they were of a contrary
profession: That in the same person they change, although there be no change in
his manner of living. And that lastly in the Forehead, where there is no
articulation, and that all men move it after one manner, there are the like
Lines which have the same diversity as those of the Hand. We may further add to
these considerations, the antiquity of Chiromancy, which must have been in use
before Aristotle, since what he speaks of the Lines of the Hands is one of its
Observations and Rules the exercise which it has given to so many learned men,
who have employed themselves therein, and have even honored it with their
Writings and those wonderful judgments which have been made according to its
maxims. For in what rises even to astonishment, that of Forty five persons
whom Cocles thereby had forseen should die by a violent death, Cardan observes
that in his time there were but two which were yet alive, to whom this
mischance happened not.

But freely to speak the Truth hereof, these are as we have already observed
but light suspicions, which conclude not the certainty of this Science. For as
concerning the order of the Planets which it has inverted, that makes us
presume it did it not without reason; But the question still remain undecided,
to wit, whether it be true, That those stars have any power on the Hand? and
whether every one has his particular place which is affected with it? The
Authority of Aristotle may also be contested; And all that diversity of Lines
may also have other causes, and be of other uses then what Chiromancy gives
them. Moreover how ancient soever it be, there have been old errors which have
abused all the passages; and although it has been cultivated by great spirits
in all times, there have been some who have amused themselves on curiosities,
as vain as this may be. Finally all those witnesses and examples which are
produced in its defense, ought not to have more weight then those of Geomancy,
Oenomancy, and other such like Divinations may boast of, which are all
imaginary and superstitious, and yet want neither their professors, nor success
in those judgments which they make.

On the other side all these latter reasons do not altogether condemn it, and
effect nothing against it but that they render it doubtful, leaving the mind in
uncertainty of what it ought to believe, and desirous to clear it self therein.

Now the only means to attain this, is to examine the principles, and to see
by what reasons it may be maintained. For if there are any which are certain,
and well established, there in my opinion can be no man that has reason,
joining the former suspicions with the Truth of these principles, but must
confess, that if the Science which is built thereupon is not yet ascertained,
it may become so by those diligent and exact observations which may be added
thereunto; and if it cannot promise all what Astrology causes it to hope for
from the Stars which it has placed in the hands, yet at least it may judge of
the good or ill disposition of the inward parts which Sympathize with it and
thereby make great discoveries for the preservation of health, and for the cure
of diseases. For were it restrained within those limits, and that she could
brag of nothing else, it would still be a very considerable Science, which from
the excellency of its knowledge, and from the profit it might advance, were
worthy of the curiosity of the most severe Philosophers, and of all those who
apply themselves to the search of Natures wonders.

These were the considerations which I had before I came to the Examen of that
Principle, which I before spoke of, which to speak the truth is the principal
foundation whereon the disposition of the Planets on the several parts of the
hand is upheld, and almost the only Source whence all the judgments which
Chiromancy can promise are deduced.

The Method which I have observed, is to show;
1. THat there are some Situations more noble then others.

2. That the most noble situations are destined for the most excellent parts,
and that the excellency of the parts is drawn from the profit they bring.

3. What profit the hands afford.

4. That the right hand is more noble then the left.

5. That Motion begins on the right side.

6. That the hands have a greater share of natural heat.

7. That the hands have most communication with the noble parts.

8. That the noble parts dispense secret virtues to the hands.

9. That Nature confounds not the virtues: and consequently,

10. That the virtues of the parts are not received in the same places of the
hend.

11. That the Liver sympathizeth with the forefinger.

12. That the Heart sympathizeth with the third finger.

13. That the Spleen sympathizeth with the middle-finger.

14. That all the inward parts sympathize with the other parts of the hand.

15. That the face is an abridgement of all the outward arts.

16. That all the parts sympathize with one another; And

17. That the distribution of the veins which Hippocrates made to discern this
sympathy, was neither understood by Aristotle nor by Galen.

18. Whence that due observation of Nature in her evacuations.

19. That he Stars rule in the several parts of the hand.

20. That the Stars govern the inward parts.

21. That the Moon governs the brain.

22. That the Sun governs the heart.

23. That the rest of the Planets govern the other inferior parts.

24. That the Principles established do very much regulate many doubtful
things in Chiromancy.

Article I.
TO give a solid beginning to this Enquiry, we must observe, that there are
three orders of Situation, in which all the parts of Animals, excepting the
Heart, are found to be placed, Above, Below, the Right and Left side, Before
and Behind: But they are equal neither originally, nor in dignity, and there
is a diversity of perfection, not only amongst them, but even also in those
terms and differences whereof they are composed: For the Fore and Hinder-part
are more Noble then the Right or the Left side, and they then the Upper or
Lower; but yet the Forepart is more Noble then the Hinder, the Right then the
Left, and the Upper then Lower.

The Reason of this diversity first comes from that their three orders of
Position answer to those three dimensions which are to be found in all natural
bodies, length, breadth and depth, as they answer to the three Species of
quantity which are in all Mathematical bodies, the Line, the Surface, and the
Solid. For the Line designs the Length, the Length produces Highand Low; from
the Surface comes the Breadth, and from that Right and Left; and the Solid
produces depth, as from the depth comes the Fore and Hinder-parts. Now the
Line is by nature first, and more simple then the Surface, and this then the
Solid; Length also naturally precedes Breadth, and this is before the Depth;
and in pursuit, this order of Situation of high and low is more simple, and
before that of Right and Left, as that is in respect of Before and Behind; So
that Nature making always its progress from things which are less perfect to
those which are more so, it follows, not only that the Line and Length are
less perfect then the Solid and the Depth; But also that the same diversity is
to be found in the order of Situation, which answers every one of them; and
that consequently, the Fore and the Hinder-part are more noble; that of the
Right and Left is so after it, and that of Upper-most and Lowermost is less, so
as the first and most simple of all.

In effect, we see that all things have been distributed to bodies according to
the excellency which they ought to have: For those which live first grow in
length, and perfecting themselves, they acquire largeness and profundity.
Plants indeed have Hight and Lowness, but are deprived of Right and Left, of
Before and Behind. Animals only possess these differences, although some have
them not all, it being only reserved for those whose parts are better
distinguished, and whose motion is more regular.

Yet this signifies not, but that all these kinds of Situation may be in
bodies purely natural, but they are uncertain, and strangers having no internal
principle which fixes and determines them, and its only in relation to things
animated, that they are to be observed therein; for what is the upper or
forepart of a pillar, may be the Basis and hinder-part, and that which is on
the right, without ever changing place, may be placed on the left. But it is
not so with living and animate things, in which all the differences of
situation which their parts have are invariable, being fixed and determinate by
the virtues and operations of the Soul: And thus much concerning the kinds of
situation compared amongst themselves.

But he that should consider the terms and differences of which they are all
composed, will always find, that there is one which is more noble then the
rest; because its the Principle, and the Principle is more excellent then what
depends on it; for the Upper is principle of the Lower, the Right of the Left,
as the Fore is of the Hinder-part. In effect, the beginning is a kind of
principle, and the beginnings of the three principal operations of the Soul are
made in these three different situations; for Nutrition begins from Above,
Motion from the Right, and Sense from before. And of a truth, the Mouth which
is the first door of those aliments, whence they are afterward distributed
through the whole body, is the Upper Part of all creatures, as the Root is that
of Plants, whence it is that the Latin Tongue calls those Roots which are deep,
high; And it has been said, that Man was a Tree reversed, not because his
hairs are upmost, which have some resemblance with Moss, and (...) downwards.

But because that his Mouth is directly opposite to that of Trees; for it is
without doubt, that the Root is the Mouth of Plants, since they thereby take
their nourishment, and that from thence its carried to all its other parts.
Sense also begins Before; for besides the Sense of touching, whose right it is
to be dispersed over all the parts of an Animal, all the rest of the Senses are
placed Before; because the Senses are to conduct and regulate Motion, which is
ever made forward, and which commenceth on the right side, as we shall show
hereafter; whence it follows, the Upper, Right and Fore-side are the Principles
of the rest, and consequently more noble then they.

Article II.
NOw Nature always holds this Maxim, that it places the most excellent
things in those places which are most noble, as may be seen in that order
wherein she has disposed all the principal parts of the Universe; and
therefore it must needs be, that in Man, who is the Epitomy and Abridgement of
the World, the parts must also have a rank conformable to their dignity; And we
may say, not only that the most excellent have the most noble situation, but
also that those which have the most noble situation, are the most excellent.
For from thence it follows, that the Hands, which are the highest, are more
excellent then the Feet, which are the lowest; and that Hand which is on the
right side, then that on the left. But as the excellency of the parts is drawn
from the profit which they afford the Creature, we must enquire according to
the Design which we have undertaken, to what use the hands are, wherein they
are of more use then the Feet, and what use there is made of the right more
then of left.

Article III.
FIrst, its certain that all Creatures which are composed of blood, and which
for that reason are called perfect, have been provided with some organs to
remove themselves from place to place, which answer those four first
differences of situation which we observed, to wit, upwards and downwards to
the right and left; For these were no instruments which answer the two latter,
to wit, Before and Behind, there being no beast which naturally moves
backward, and the rest of the Organs are sufficient to satisfy that motion
which is made forwards, as experience witnesses. This truth appears in all
kinds of perfect Animals, since most part of those which are Terrestial are
four-footed; Birds have two, with two wings; Fishes have four to smim withal,
and Serpents make four several plights as they crawle. And all these parts are
so necessary unto them for that progressive motion which is natural unto them,
that if they wanted any one of them they could not perform it without pain; for
Birds cannot well fly when their legs are broken, nor Fishes smim when they
have lost a fin, nor Serpents creep, if you cut off those parts of their bodies
which make the last plights of their motions. Whence we must conclude, that the
Hands which are in the rank of those four instruments, which are destined for
progressive motion, serve to that of Man, and were he deprived of them, he
could never perform this motion with so much facility. Indeed a Man cannot run
without a great deal of trouble when his Hands are tied; we shut and clinch our
fists when we would jump, and in our ordinary walk, the arm always retires
back when the foot of the same side advances; whereto may be added, that in
Infancy they serve the feet, that when we fall we cannot rise up our selves
without them, or if we must rise or defend difficult places, they are no less
useful then our feet; which are evident signs that these parts contribute to
the progressive motion of Man.

But as Nature is a great House-wife of those things which she makes, and that
she gets all the services she can from them, she contents her self not with
this employment which she gives the Hands; she has also destined them to so
many other purposes, that its almost impossible to reckon or remark them; so
that we have been constrained to bring them in parallel with the understanding,
and to say, that as that was the form of forms, having them all in its power;
the Hands also were the instrument of instruments, having alone the virtues of
all the rest; for its by them that man takes and keeps those things which are
necessary and pleasant; its by them that he defends himself, and overcomes
those which are hurtful or mischievous;

To conclude, they are the principle workers of all Arts, and the general
instruments which the mind uses to bring forth its fashion, and most
profitable inventions; and without doubt, they give Man so great an advantage
above all other Creatures, that if we cannot say as that ancient Philosopher
did, that he is wise, because he has hands, yet may we assure it, that he
appears wise, because he has hands: And now we need not wonder that they have
been placed in the highest place, as being the most honorable place; and that
Nature has brought them as near as she could to the seat of Reason and of the
Senses, with which they have so much commerce, and so great a tie.

Article IV.
BUt although she has placed them in the same rank, in that respect, yet are
they not therefore of the same consideration. She treats the Right as the
elder, and the first in dignity: For if the most active are the most excellent,
and most considerable things, the Right Hand being stronger, and more agile
then the Left, must also be more excellent: Now it has more strength and
agility, because it has more heat, which is the Source of those qualities; and
it has more heat, [ Aristotle 3. de part.] not only because it is of the same
side with the right Ventricle of the heart where the blood is hottest and most
boiling, not only because the Liver, which is the Source of blood, is nearer
unto it, not only because the veins of all the right parts are more full
according to Hippocrates, but also because it is placed on the Right side,
where Motion ought always to begin.

For as the Spirits are the principal Organs of all the Actions of the body,
and that Nature send them more abundantly, where they ought to be strongest,
and most painful; we need not doubt but motion being to begin on the right
side, and all those preparatives which are necessary for it, and the principal
effect it requires, being to be done in that place; there must needs be a
greater quantity of spirits flowing thither, which heat and fortify it by the
heat it carries along with it, and by those secret influences of those
principles of life which she communicates unto it; whence it comes that the
parts themselves which serve nothing at all to motion, and are on that side,
resent that force and that vigor which was destined for that only action; for
the right eye is stronger, and more exact then the left; and the rectitude of
the sight which is made by both together, depends absolutely from it; all those
Organs which serve for generation, and are on that side, form males, and those
on the left females; and speaking generally, sickness most commonly assaults
the left parts, as those which have least heat, and consequently are weakest.

Article V.
NOw that Motion naturally begins on the right side, is a truth which connot be
contested, if we consider what is done in all Animals; for the four-footed
begin to go with the right foot forwards; others which have but two always
lift up the right first; a man can better bear a burden on his left then on
the right shoulder, because the principle of motion must be free and
undisturbed: And Painters never forget in the posture they place their Figures
in, to make them keep their left foot foremost, as commonly we do when we stand
upright; forasmuch as it is that posture which brings the body to a condition
to move when it would march. There are even Creature to be found, who by reason
of their figure, could not have those differences of Right and Left, as
Purple-shel fish, and all the rest whose shells are in form of a Snails, yet are
they not deprived of Right, because when they ought to move, they must
necessarily have the principle of motion.

All these truths being thus therefore established, to wit, that there are
places and parts in the body, which are more and less noble; that the most
noble are destined there to place the most excellent parts; that the excellency
of the parts is deduced from the profit they afford, and that consequently the
hands, who for several services which they render, are placed on high, as in
the most noble place, ought to be more excellent then the Feet:

It remains now that we should show that they receive a most considerable
assistance from the principles of life; and that all the noble parts
communicate unto them some greater virtue then to any other whatsoever.

Article VI.
TO which purpose we must first observe, that Nature has more care of those
parts which are the most excellent; that she commonly forms them first, and
that she uses more art in making them, and more foresight in preserving them,
then she does in the rest. This appears in the order she keeps at their first
conformation. For after the Heart and the Brain, which she first rudely forms,
the eyes which without doubt are the most delicate and the most noble Organs,
appear before all the rest of the parts, even before there is any sign of the
Liver, Spleen or Reins. The Mouth in all Creatures is also one of the first
formed after the eyes; the Organs of the progressive Motion are afterward
seen, and then we observe the Liver, the Spleen, and the rest of the bowels, as
the last and most exact observations on Anatomy witness; Besides, we see that
the higher parts are sooner finished, and that in Children they are greater and
stronger then the lower; whence it is that they have all the same proportion
which is in the stature of Dwarfs, and that they cannot go, by reason their
legs are too short and too weak.

Now its certain, that all the care which Nature takes, either in forming them
first, or in advancing their perfection, depends from the natural heat which
she communicates in greater abundance; for it is the general instrument of all
her actions, and the true subject wherein all her faculties recide; So that if
there are parts which are first formed, it must needs be that the first portion
of this heat which is always most pure, and of most efficacy in its Scource,
must have been dispensed unto them; and if they perfect themselves before the
rest, it must be by a particular application of this quality, which acts
therein more strongly then in any other part, and which for that cause is
continually supplied by the influence of the Spirits which augment and fortify
it: whence it follows, that the hands, which are formed before so many parts,
and which are sooner found perfect and complete then the feet, have also had a
more advantageous share of natural heat, and a more ample distribution of the
Spirits then they have had.

Article VII.
BUt if we will consider these parts in a more perfect condition, and in a time
when they are able to perform the principal functions which they are destined
unto; its certain, that the Heart, the Liver, and the Brain do communicate them
some greater virtue then they do to the rest of the parts; for besides, the
actions of a natural and sensitive life which they have in common with them,
progressive motion is particularly reserved unto them. So that to perform this
action, wherein is more pains, and whereto more strength is required, they need
have a greater help, and a stronger influence from those principal Members,
then is necessary for the rest of the actions of life. So they must have more
blood, more heat, and more spirits; more blood to render their consistence more
firm, more natural heat to inspire more strength in them, and more animal
spirits to give them beyond Sense the motive faculty: for without those
conditions, those Organs were useless, and no motions could be made. In a word,
since the instruments are no instruments but by the virtue which they draw from
the cause which imploys them; it must needs be that those parts which are
instruments of motion, must receive also from the principles of motion that
virtue which make them act, and consequently, they must have this virtue more
then the rest; they have more spirits to afford in them, they have therefore
also more communication with those noble parts, which are the Sources of the
spirits and of this virtue.

This reason is indeed common to the hands and feet in respect of the other
parts; but if we add hereunto the advantage which the higher situation has
above the lower, the excellency of the parts there placed, and those particular
cares which Nature takes of them, as we have shown, it will make it apparent,
that in this distribution of spirits and of virtue, the hands have had the
greater share, and consequently, that they have more communication with the
noble parts then the feet, or any other member whatsoever.

Article VIII.
BUt besides this communication which they have with them, by means of the
veins, arteries, and nerves, there are others more secret, which have more
obscure ways and passages, and yet more clearly discover the truth which we
seek; for if it be true that the lines in the hand observe the length and the
shortness of life, according as they are long and short, as Aristotle and
experience teach us; There must not only be a greater relation, and a stronger
tie of the principles of life with it, then there is with all the rest of the
parts, where these marks are not to be found; but its also necessary, that the
noble parts, which are the Sources wherein these principles of life are shut
up, should communicate unto it some secret influence, which can have no
relation to those common and manifest virtues, which it receives from them;
since the blood nor the spirits, the heat nor motion which they distribute unto
it, serves not at all to render those lines long or short, or to mark the
length or shortness of life.

Article IX.
THat secret Sympathy which is betwixt the hand and the noble parts being then
presupposed, until we can more fully prove it by more just and particular
observations, we must establish it for a certain principle, that Nature never
confounds the virtues, principally those which are formal and specific, which
have never so little opposition amongst themselves, and that she ever as much
as she can separates them: for without producing the maxims of Astrology,
which has divided Heaven into so many Planets and Stars, into so many Signs
and Houses different in virtue, there is no order of things in the Universe
wherein this truth is not acknowledged. Amongst perfect Animals, the qualities
which are necessary to generation have been divided into two Sexes; in every of
them the faculties which govern life have every one their particular seat; and
all the Senses have their proper Organs, and their functions separated. Examine
Plants, Minerals and Stones, and you shall find the same distinction, and
without troubling our selves to sever them, as we might: It will be sufficient
to observe in the Lodestone, where it is so sensible, that without blindness
of stupidity we need not doubt of it; for in a Homogene body whose composition
is every way equal, and wherein it seems that all the parts ought to have the
same power; yet its certain, that there are some which have been partakers of
magnetic qualities, and that there are two Poles where they have been
separately placed: and if what has been lately pretended to have been
observed, is true, that there is a first Meridian in this stone, all the rest
must be so too, and consequently, they must every one have a different
inclination. So true it is, that Nature loves to separate Virtues, as it is
that she hates Confusion and Mixture: In effect, did she not exactly observe
this order, things would often be done contrary to design, one quality would
destroy another, and effects would not answer their causes, nor the end they
are destined unto.

Article X.
IF this be so, and if there are particular Virtues which the noble parts
communicate to the Hand, they must not confound themselves together; they must
not be placed in the same part; and therefore there must be a place destined
for that of the Liver, another for that of the Heart, and so for all the rest.

But the greatest difficulty is, in what parts and particular places these
influences are received; for although Chiromancy assures us, that the
forefinger has a sympathy with the Liver, the second with the Spleen, the
third with the heart etc. Yet it produces no convincing proof of this truth;
and what experiences so ever it produces to maintain it, they still leave
those in doubt, who will not be satisfied with their reasons, and they seem
often to be fancies and grocesios in the Mind, forged only by humane
curiosity; and of a truth, who ever could well have established this sympathy
by other observations, then those which are fetched from the stock of
Chiromancy; and had Medicine or some other part of Physic furnished them, he
might have boasted to have discovered the Mystery of this Science, and to have
found the only foundation whereon the truth of all the rest was grounded: for
my part, I pretend not to produce all those which are necessary to make a full
proof thereof; yet I believe I have some which may commence it, and which
having demonstrated one part, will leave an invincible presumption for all the
rest, with hopes that a man might after a diligent observation of what happens
to that admirable Organ, perfect the same.

Article XI.
THe first which we therefore ought to propose, is to show the consent and
sympathy which the Liver has with the forefinger, called the Index, and this
is drawn from Physic, which teaches us that Leprosy has its Source and
principal Seat in the Liver; and that one of the first signs whereby it is
first made known appears on that finger: for when all the Muscles of the hand,
and even all the body are sull and juycy, those which serve for the motion of
that finger are dried and withered; principally that which is in the Thenar,
that is to say, in the space which is betwixt that finger and the thumb,
wherein all what is fleshy wastes it self, and nothing remains but the skin and
fibers which lie flatted to the bones.

Now this cannot thus happen but that there must be some Analogy, and some
secret commerce betwixt the Liver and that part, since it is one of the first
which resents the alteration which is made in its substance, it being truly
said, that there is no disease which so much corrups the nature of the Liver,
and destroys not only its virtue, but even its substance as this, which for
that cause is called the universal Cancer of the Liver, and of all the mass of
blood; Galen was without doubt ignorant of this sympathy, which ratiocination
alone could never have discovered, whereas to have been instructed therein, it
must have been revealed to him in a dream; for he reports, that having been
assaulted by a violent grief, which caused him to fear an impostune in the
Liver, he was in his sleep advised to cause that Artery to be opened, which
runs all along that finger; and that this remedy in an instant appeased the
grief which he had resented for a long time before; which evidently witnesses,
that there is some particular communication betwixt those two parts, and some
secret friendship which binds them together.

Article XII.
THe second Observation is to show that also which the Heart has with the
third, which is called the Ring-finger, because we there usually wear Rings;
for it is a wonderful thing, when the Gout falls on the hands, it is the last
finger it assaults, and Levinus reports, that in all those whom he has seen
labor of that disease, their third finger of the left hand was always free,
whilst all the rest were cruelly tormented with grief and inflammation.

Now as the parts resist sickness more or less, according as they have more or
less strength, and that strength depends from the more or less of natural heat
which they have; this finger must needs have more of it then the rest, since it
resists ill more then they can. And because its share of natural heat comes
either from the first conformation of the parts, or from the influence which
the principle of heat communicates unto them; and that there is no likelihood
but that this finger which has the same structure, and the same composition as
the rest have, must have more of that first and original heat which is given
unto it at the birth; it follows, that that which it has comes from the
influence which the principle of the heat sends unto it more abundantly then
unto the rest: And consequently, it has more communication, more dependence,
and more connection with the heart, which without dispute is the principle of
heat, then all the rest of the fingers together have.

This Sympathy was not unknown to Antiquity, and History teaches us, that of
old Physicians did believe that this finger had some cordial virtue, being used
privatively from all the rest, to those Medicaments which they put into their
potions and Antidotes; whence it is they have called it the Medical finger,
which the Latin retains; and that its one of the reasons for which it ever
wore rings; and that diverse apply remedies for the weakness of the heart, as
Levinus says he has often experienced, and for the cure of intermitting
fevers, as some still do with good success; its also long since that men have
been troubled to find the cause of that Intelligence, and of the relation
which is betwixt those two parts. For some, as Appian in Aulus Gellius, say,
that there is a nerve that proceeds from the heart, and ends in that finger;
others have affirmed, that it was an artery which made this colliation, and
that its manifestly felt beat in women that lie in, in those which are tired
with labor, and in all those diseases wherein the heart labors.

But although this latter opinion be the more probable, yet it clears not quite
the difficulty, because all the other fingers have an artery as well as that,
which comes from the same branch, and from the same Source as that, adding also
that it is not necessary that there should be manifest conduits to carry these
virtues: Nature, as Hippocrates says, making ways and secret paths, not only
to give a passage to its faculties, but even to the humors themselves which she
would drive out.

Article XIII.
I Could add for a third Observation The Sympathy betwixt the Spleen and the
middle-finger, the wonderful effects which the opening of the Salvarella
produces in the diseases of the Speen: For this vein commonly betwixt the
middle and the third finger, as Hippocrates says, or betwixt this and the
little one, sending up some branches to the Medium, we may very probably
believe, that the virtue of the Spleen is through that vein carried to that
finger, and that the third being occupied by the influence of the Heart, it
cannot receive that of the Spleen, if it be true that the virtues confound not
themselves, as we have demonstrated. In effect, what ever our new Practitioners
say, Experience joined with the authority of the first Masters of the Art is
stronger then all those reasons which they can produce; for besides that it is
dangerous to submit all the Rules of Physic to ratiocination, which is often
weak and deceitful, and to forsake the opinion of the Ancients, who have been
more just observers of things then those which came after them; I may say of a
truth, that having more then threescore times made overture of that vein in
quartain Agues, it never failed, after due preparations, either to cause the
Fever to cease, or to make the fits the lighter. Let them not go about to
reason on the distribution or greatness of the vessels; as the same stock may
have several branches which have not the same virtue, and that some of them
bear flowers or fruits, and others which have none; So although all the veins
of the Arm and of the hand come from the same stock, yet have they not the same
employments, and are but Channels whereby several faculties may flow; so that
that which the Spleen sends may wholly pass to the Salvarella, without
imparting it self to the rest; even as the parts discharge themselves only on
those which are particularly affected with them, although they have connection
with others by their vessels, and by their situation, whence those several
transports of humors, and those changes which sickness makes from one place to
another, happens, as hereafter we shall more amply declare.

As for the largeness of the veins which render the evacuation the more
profitable then are those of the small ones, its a true thing when its
necessary to diminish the universal fullness of the body; but to discharge a
small part the least often, so as they are near unto, and that they have some
secret society with it, perform it with more safety, and with more efficacy
then the greater: In fine, since it is a received opinion from all times, that
the opening of that vein is profitable to the diseases of the Spleen, as may be
seen in the writings of Hippocrates, of Gaien, and of all the Arabians; its not
probable it should have been approved by such great men, and should have
outlived so many ages, and have come to us, without having been maintained by
experience, since reason could give us no foundation for such a belief; and if
by this means this remedy has been made known, we ought not strictly to
examine the reasons no more then the purgative faculties, or any other
specific virtues which Physic abounds withal.

To return again to the first proof which we have left; we said, that this
observation might be made use of, to establish the sympathy of the Spleen with
the second finger; we might also add the History which Hippocrates reports in
the fourth of the Popular Diseases, of the woman whose Hypocondryes were so
straightened, and her respiration so hindered, to whom there happened on the
eleaventh day a fluxion and inflammation on that same finger, whereby for a
time she found her self eased, although afterward the violence of the fever
and impostume which was formed in her bowels, brought her to her death. Whence
we may conjecture, that a portion of that humor which was in the Spleen,
discharged it self on the finger, as on a part which had connection and consent
with it, and that this little discharge afforded her some ease; but because all
the cause of the ill could not be contained in so small a room, the rest of it
caused the imposthumation whereof she died; yet to speak freely, these are but
conjectures which we bring in parallel with the foregoing observations, which
seem demonstrations of the Truth which we seek.

Article XIV.
ANd it were to be wished that we had the like, to show distinctly the rest of
those sympathies which the other interior parts have with other parts of the
Hand: But from the negligence men have had to find them, we are obliged still
to speak truth, that since those of the Heart and Liver are not to be doubted,
the rest must needs be so, although they appear not so manifestly unto us; and
that not only the Brain and other parts which have a public and principal
function, as well as the Heart and Liver, but also the Spleen, the Stomach, the
Lungs, the Kidneys, and perhaps others also have every one in the Hand their
proper and affected place, with which they have consent and communication.

Article XV.
SO that we may affirm, and for a proof of this secret intelligence which the
parts have one with another, and for the honor of that whereof we discourse,
that the Hand and the Face contain an abridgement of all the parts of the Body;
for this is an Epitomy of all the outward Members, having no part which has
not its particular and manifest relation with some one of them, as that also
has of all the interior parts, having no place which has not its colligation
and sympathy with some one of them: And without doubt, its one of the principal
reasons for which they have both had a constitution of hides altogether
particular, and that the skin which is everywhere else separate from the
Muscles, is so united to that, that its impossible to be separated: Nature
which has destined those parts to be as it were Looking-glasses wherein all
the rest ought to be represented, would in them have the flesh join to the
hide, that the impression which it receives of the neves, veins and arteries
which are shed abroad in them, might the more easily communicate it self, and
appear the more readily outward. That which is also to be found in the Soles
of the Feet, which in some manner participate the same advantages which the
hands have, and whereon Podomancy has been established, which promises the
same things that Chiromancy does, but with less success, for those reasons
which we shall deduce; Howsoever it be, its an admirable thing, and in my
opinion, not enough considered, that there is none of the marks on the Face,
which we commonly call Moles, but another is to be found in some part of the
Body certain and determined, which particularly answers thereunto; for if any
be on the forehead, there will be another on the breast, and according as that
is in the middle, high or low, on this or that side, this will have the same
difference in its situation; for one on the cheeks, you shall have another on
the thighs; if on the brows, another will be on the shoulders; if on the ears,
another on the arms, and so for the rest. Now we cannot say that this
correspondence is simply in those marks, since all of them are formed of the
same matter, and that consequently they cannot have more relation one with
another, but they must be in the very same parts; and that the society which
they have together must be the cause that the one cannot be marked, but its
correspondent must at the same time suffer the same impression; we see
likewise, that besides the secret consent which they may have together, a
sensible and manifest relation in the situation, and in the structure which
they have; for the breast, which is that part of the body which is below the
head the most flat and bony, answers directly to the forehead, which has the
same qualities; the thighs which are on the sides, and are very fleshy, relate
to the cheeks which are even so; the brows to the shoulders, by reason of the
eminency which both of them have; the ears to the arms; being both advanced,
and as it were without the work; and so of the rest.

Yet all this signifies not that this resemblance is the true Source of this
sympathy; its neither just nor exact enough to produce such like effects; and
its necessary there should be some secret bond which binds these parts one with
another, and which must be the principal cause of this wonderful har money which
is amongst them, whereof these natural Characters are unreproachable witnesses.

Article XVI.
BUt it is not only betwixt the exterior and manifest parts that this society
is to be found; there is yet another which is more general, which was known by
Hippocrates, and serves for the groundwork of that ingenious division of the
veins which he has made in his Book of Bones; for that admirable person,
having considered the several transports of humors, and change of diseases,
which so often happens of some certain parts to others, has observed those
veins whereby it might be effected, and which were to be opened for their cure;
and to observe a method which might avoid confusion, he established several
Heads, and as it were diverse Articles, in which he began the distribution of
those vessels; for he placed the first at the Heart, the second at the Reins,
the third at the Liver, the fourth at the eyes, the fifth at the Head, whence
he makes four pair of veins to issue, which afterward spread themselves into
several places.

Article XVII.
NOt that he did believe that those were the first Sources whence the veins
draw their origin, as Aristotle, Galen, and almost all their Sectators have
imposed it on him, since he knew that they were all rooted in the Liver, whence
they distribute themselves to all the parts of the body, to convey nourishment
unto them; as in pursuit he makes it appear in the distribution which he makes
of the Hepatick vein, and what he has also reported in his second Book of
Popular Diseases; but it was to remark the consent which there was betwixt
those five parts with the rest, and those sicknesses and symptoms which they
mutually communicated to one another.

So when he says that the left eye receives a vein from the right eye, and this
one from the left; this must not be literally taken, as if they truly took
their origin from those parts; but its to show that the diseases of one eye
are communicable to the other, as if they had veins which carried them directly
thither. Its truly by the means of veins that this communication is made, and
these veins part even from a common branch; but its so far off from the eyes,
that we cannot precisely say, that they send veins to one another, unless it be
in consideration of the sympathy which is betwixt them. And this is so true,
that often even he considers not the continuity of the veins in the
distribution which he makes, since he shows that the Head and the Lungs have a
consent with the Spleen, although the veins of the Spleen are not united nor
continued with those of these parts: because its sufficient for the consent he
speaks of, that these veins should have communication together by some means or
other, as shall be said hereafter.

But the more particularly to make the secret and profit of this admirable
distribution appear, we shall examine some of the Articles: for when he
teaches us, that of these four pair of veins which issue from the Head, there
is one which has two branches which passes from the Temples, and descends into
the Lungs, whence the one passes from the right side to the left, and goes
into the Spleen, and into the left Rein, and the other parts from the left
side, and goes to the Liver and right Rein, and then they end both in the
Hemorroid veins. Does he not thereby demonstrate, not only why the opening of
the Hemorroids serves to the Nephriticks, and to those who have the Plurisie
and Peripneunomy, but why also their suppression causes the Dropsy and the
Ptisick? for although there are other places wherein it seems that the reflux
of the blood which they contain, might be made; yet the consent they have with
the Liver and the Lungs, is the cause that it is not elsewhere effected: And
without doubt, those branches which descending go from the right to the left,
and from the left to the right, observe the cause which we have so unprofitably
sought, why those imposthumes which are made from above downwards, are not
always found on the same side where the Source of the Disease is, but
sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left; although those which are
made from below upwards keep still the rectitude of the part wherein the seat
of the malady is; for without this distribution of veins its impossible to give
a reason of all their accidents.

Without which we should not yet know why the Breast and Genitals have so great
a correspondence betwixt them; that the Cough cease when they are tumified;
that the swelling dissipates when the Cough comes, and that even the swelling
of the veins, which happens unto them, corrects those defects which render the
voice wheazing and shrill.

To conclude, its the only secret whereby Natures ways are discovered in the
transport of the humors which she makes from one part to another, and to
discern those veins which are to be opened in every sickness. For although they
have all one root, although many of them have common branches which equally
ought to distribute unto them the blood and humors which they contain; yet the
correspondence and friendship which is betwixt the parts, obliges Nature to
drive them rather through one vein then another, and choosing that which is
most fit for it, she leaves the rest which are near unto it, and have the same
origin.

This evidently appears in the sympathy which we have before urged with such
conducing examples; for very probably its through the veins and arteries that
this secret virtue runs which the Heart and Liver communicates to some of the
fingers, whilst the rest of those which are of the Hand are not therein
employed; and although they issue out of the same branch, yet there is but one
which bears this virtue from the heart, and another that of the Liver;
otherwise there would be no determinate place to receive their influence, and
all the fingers of the hand which have veins and arteries, would equally
receive it, which is contrary to experience.

To speak the truth also, all these Vessels are but Channels and Conduits,
which cannot, more then those of Fountains, give any motion to the humors, but
its the spirits only which carry and draw them to those places whereto they
are ordered; and as the consent which the Members have one with another is
entertained by means of those spirits, we cannot doubt but the blood wherewith
they are mixed goes not as they do from one part to another, and but that in
pursuit it makes that admirable Harmony of the veins which Hippocrates has
observed.

For without doubt, this is the Foundation whereon he and the ancient Masters
in Physic have observed in one and the same Member, veins which had
correspondence with several parts; as in the arm, the Cephalic, the Hepatick,
and the Splenetick, which they have always opened of course in the particular
diseases of those parts, not sticking at those weak reasons which the
inspection of bodies and love of novelty has since authorized.

Article XVIII.
ANd certainly had we not had recourse to this direction of the Spirits, we
should never have been able to have given a reason for the rectitude which
Nature observes in her motions when she is absolute Mistress thereof, and whom
Physic imitates in the evacuations which it ordains; for when by the
inflammations of the Liver the right ear grows red; that ulcers happen on the
right hand or foot; that we bleed out of the right nostril, or that there is an
imposthume in the right ear; and that on the contrary, all the same accidents
happen on the left side, from the inflammations of the Spleen; when I say
Physic commands us to let blood on the same side the malady is, and teaches
us, that all the evacuations which are made on the contrary side are dangerous,
if made of themselves, or useless if done by Art. What other reason is there of
this regularity which can satisfy the mind more then this which we have
produced? for what is said of the right fibers which enter into the composition
of the vessels, whereby some will have the humors to be drawn, its altogether
impertinent; since they are unable to make this attraction, as we have
elsewhere demonstrated. That they are equally on all the sides of the vessels,
and consequently cannot determine the motion of the humors to the one sooner
then to another; that there are not always fibers to favor this rectitude,
since from the Spleen to the left nostril there can be none, the veins of the
nose proceeding from the vena cava, with which the Spleen has no connection:
and that in fine, the humors which we find out of the vessels, those simple
vapors and qualities communicate themselves, from one part to another, after
the same manner, without need of any fibers to agitate the business, and which
if there were any, would be useless for the transporting of vapors and
qualities.

To say also that this is done by secret conduits which are to be found in the
flesh, and which move from below upwards, whereof those which are on the one
side have no communication with those on the other: Its a pure imagination
which has no probability, since these evacuations are most commonly made by
the veins; and that the humors which run by those secret Conduits must enter
into the veins, where notwithstanding there are no passages, there must also
Conduits be found which must go cross, since the humors sometimes go from the
right side to the left, sometimes from the fore to the hinder parts, and most
commonly from the center to the circumference. Beyond all, in either of these
opinions we cannot see what the danger would be, were not this rectitude
observed in the evacuation of humors.

But supposing that its done by the direction of the spirits, its easy to
judge that Nature must be very highly oppressed when she observes not that order
which was prescribed unto her; and when she wanders from her ordinary road, to
fly from the Enemy which presses her; for its the reason for which those
motions which she makes in sharp Fevers in equal days are very dangerous;
because its a sign of the violence which she suffers, and of the disorder
wherein the greatness of the ill has cast her, which makes her forget the odd
days in which she ought to assault choler, which is the cause of those
diseases.

However it be, the rectitude we mentioned, infallibly comes from the spirits,
which lead the humors within the compass of one half of the body, without
carrying them to one another, unless there be some great impediment; for Nature
takes so much care for the preservation of living and animal things, that she
has divided them all into two halfs; that if it happened the one should suffer
any alteration, the other might save it self therefrom, and so preserve in that
the Nature of the whole: Now this division is real and manifest in some
subjects, as in grains and seeds of Plants, which all are composed of two
portions, which may be separated, and in all the Members of Animals which have
them double; in others it is obscure, and appears not in an actual separation
of the parts, but only in the operations, which show that they have every one
of them their distinct jurisdiction, and their different interests, as that is
whereof we speak, which distinguishes the body into two halfs, the one of
which is right, the other left; such also is that which is to be found in those
members which are but One, as the Brain, the Tongue, the Nose, etc. where we
often see the one half assaulted by an ill, and the other exempt from it,
although in themselves there is not any separation.

If it therefore be true, that Nature to preserve the one half of the body,
charge the other with all the disorder which happens unto it, and hinders
those humors which afflict it from issuing out of their bounds, to cast it self
on the other; we cannot doubt but the Spirits which are the first and principal
Organs will serve her in this undertaking, and but that it is they which carry
the humors from one place to another in the compass prescribed unto them by her.

So that if it should happen that to make this transport it were necessary to
make use of the veins which are on the other side, they for that forget not
Natures design, nor those orders which they have received, and do but only
pass, if we may so speak, into the neighbors limits, to arrive at that place
whereto they ought to come. Thus when to discharge the Spleen from those humors
which incommodate it, a bleeding of the Nose happens to the left nostril; they
must of necessity pass from the veins of the Spleen into the vena cava, which
is on the right side; but the spirits know how so to direct them, that they at
last return to the same line, and into that half of the body wherein the Spleen
resides: But its to enter too far into the secrets of Physic; its sufficient
to say that the communication which the veins have one with another in that
ingenious distribution which Hippocrates has made, proceeds from the Spirits
which carry the humors from one to another, according to the relation and
consent which the parts have together, or according to that rectitude which
they keep amongst themselves.

Article XIX.
TO return to the sympathy which the inward members have with the parts of the
hand, I conceive that the reasons which we have deduced to maintain it, if they
do not altogether convince the most opinionated, yet will they at least leave
in their minds great suspicion of the truth thereof: And I doubt not but
Chiromancy ought to rest satisfied, since they establish what til now was
unknown unto it, the principal of its foundations; and that it will afterward
be easy for it to uphold it with the maxims of Astrology, which is to furnish
it with the most part of its rules, and be security for the greatest of its
promises.

In effect, if it be true that the inward parts are governed by the Planets,
and that they receive from the Stars some particular influence, as Astrology
teaches; it must needs be, that with the virtue which those parts send to the
hand, that which the Planets communicate unto them, must also be carried unto
them. And at the same finger where the heart for an example causes an
influence of its vettue; that Planet which has the direction of the heart must
also dispense his: It being not probable that this should stop at the heart,
whilst that dispenceth to the hands what is proper and natural unto it. Since
supposing the truth of celestial influences we must say, that of these two
virtues, there is but one contracted, which is the only essential disposition
and specific property of every part. Now so it is, that in a conclusion in
Astrology proved by its principles and observations, that the Liver is governed
by Jupiter, the Spleen by Saturn, the heart by the Sun, and so for the rest.
The first finger must therefore be be governed by Jupiter, the second by
Saturn, the third by the Sun, etc. since these principal parts have a
sympathy, and consent with those fingers and communicate with them the virtue
which they have; neither need we wonder, that Chiromancy has changed the order
of the Planets in the hand, nor ask why it has rather placed Jupiter on the
forefinger, and the Sun on the third, then in any other place, because the
nature of the Heart and Liver, and the sympathy which they have with those
fingers, has remarked those places, as the particular houses which these
Planets have in the Hand, as they have in Heaven those which are affected unto
them.

All the difficulty reduces it self to this point, to know whether these stars
do only govern the principal parts of the body, and whether they communicate
any secret virtue unto them, which causes the good or ill disposition which
they have.

But to urge this question as far as it might go, and to examine all the
consequences and circumstances with that severity which Philosophy has used in
these matters: besides that, it were to put to Arbitration those truths which
Astrology places in the rank of things already judged, which its most
opinionated Enemies are for the most part forced to confess:

This would require a Discouse which would pass the bounds of our design, and
offend the very method wherewith all Sciences should be treated; for it will
not give us leave to doubt or convert those things which we meet with in it,
and particularly defends us to censure the Principles whereupon they are
established, and make those pass for current which are taken from the
conclusions of superior Sciences, how doubtful soever they are, with the same
privilege as the Maxims and common Notions of the Mathematics prevail. Its
sufficient for Chiromancy that Physic maintains its first foundation; all what
it receives afterward from Astrology may be allowed it, or at least brought to
a pause, until we examine the grounds of Astrology it self.

Article XX.
YEt that we may not leave a suspicion that those conclusions which are drawn
from thence for its principles, are altogether imaginary, and contrary to the
truth; we shall make it appear by some observations which cannot be disputed,
that there are parts of the body under the particular direction of some of the
Planets; and this will be nothing difficult for some of them; and although
rejecting those experiences wherewith Astrology might furnish us on this
occasion, we have not enough of others to make an absolute proof of this Truth,
yet the first may seem to prejudge the rest, and will leave a well founded
conjecture for us to believe, that every member is governed by one of those
Stars, and that that Principle which Astrology has made for Chiromancy is not
ill established.

Article XXI.
LEts therefore begin with the Brain. No man will contest, but that the Moon
has a secret Empire over it, and but that she makes it more manifestly
sensible of her power, then any of the rest; for it swells and falls,
increases and diminishes according as that Star is in the full or wain: for
which cause, Physic which is not ignorant of these changes, takes care that
the trepanning which she appoints, be made with the greatest precaution at the
full of the Moon, because it then knows the Brain is also full, and so drawing
these membranes which environ nearer to the bone, it brings them in danger of
being the more easily touched by the Instrument. But the diseases of that part
which have their accesses and fits according to the course of the Moon,
evidently show the Ligature and Sympathy which is betwixt them. For there are
some which follow her motions so regularly, that they might be the Ephemerides
thereof; and although she be under the Horizon, although the sick person
endeavor by all means to shelter himself from her influences, yet all this
hinders her not from the overflowing of a Flux, which at a set time happens at
the change of her quarters, which he is sensible of without observing them in
the Heavens, or in the Almanac. The assaults of the Epilepsy, do they not
commonly follow the motions of that Planet? Are there not species of folly
which we call Lunaticks? and have not Horses diseases in the head which bear
that name, because both the one and the other of them follow the motions of the
Moon? In fine, do we not know that the rays of that Star cause opinionated
Fluxions, and makes persons to love their complexions, if their faces are long
exposed, principally in their sleep. Now all these effects can relate to
nothing but its influences, because they often happen when she is hidden under
the Earth, and in that condition, neither her light, nor the magnetic virtue
which is attributed to her, cannot works on us; neither do we doubt the truth
of these secret qualities, after those many observations which have been made
of an infinite many effects which they have produced. And amongst other, the
flowing of the Sea, which without dispute follows the motion of the Moon,
beginning ever when she rises in our Horizon, or on that of the Antipodes, and
having its greatest force when she has attained their or our Meridian: For if
we can demonstrate, as it were easy to do, would this place admit the length
of the Discourse we should make; if we can I say demonstrate, that the Flood
can proceed neither from the motion of the Earth, nor from the light of the
Stars, nor from any magnetic virtue, nor by the impulsion of the Moon, nor by
the rarefaction which heat causes on the water, there can nothing but these
influences remain which can be the cause of this admirable Motion; and which
without doubt is so also of all those accidents which we have now observed.

Article XXII.
IF it be acknowledged in that Star, and if it be from them that we have the
direction of one of the principal parts of the body, we cannot doubt but that
the Sun who is King, and as it were the father of all therest of the Planets,
must also have some which are more powerful; and but that he who concurs to
the generation of all things, has reserved to himself the first and most noble
parts of Animals, to have the conduct thereof, and communicates his virtues
thereunto. Its not to be doubted but that he has chosen the heart for his
throne, and for the place of his exaltation; he resides there as he is in
Heaven in the midst of all the Stars, I would say of all the members of the
body which are governed by the Planets. From thence it gives the influence of
its virtue to all the parts of the little world, and if in its course it happen
to suffer any malignant aspect, that member is sensible of it, and suffers with
the disorders of its Sovereign. It has been indeed observed that those who are
sick suffer an extraordinary weakness during the Eclipses of the Sun, and that
even those who are of a delicate complexion sensibly resent in themselves the
effect of this constellation: moreover, the vital faculty becomes so
languishing in the Solstices and Equinoctials, and when malignant Stars rise
with him, that Hippocrates has forbidden us at such times to make use of any
remedy till after ten days. But we must not here forget an observation which
that incomparable man has written in his Book of Dreams, which will not only
show the Sympathy which is betwixt the Heart and the Sun, but also that which
the Moon and the Stars have with the rest of the parts; for after having
supposed that the Sun has relation with the middle of the body, the Moon with
those ranges which are in it, and the Stars with the inward parts; he says,
that if these Stars appear in a dream with that purity and regularity of
motion, which is natural unto them, its a sign of perfect health, and that
there is nothing in the body, which follows not that order and rule which
Nature requires: But if we see any one which obscures it self, which
disappears, or which is stopped in its course, its a sign of a sickness which is
come to those parts, which answer every one of them; for if these disorders
happen to the Stars, the sicknesses will be contracted into the habit of the
body; if in the Moon, in the cavities of the body; but if it be in the Sun, it
will be the stronger and harder to be cured, as that which assaults the
principle of life. The middle he speaks of, is to be understood only of the
vital parts which comprehend the Heart and those parts which environ it.

Now if this be true, as reason and experience have so often since confirmed
it, we must thence conclude, that since the imagination forms in its dreams all
these images of the Sun to represent the good or ill disposition of the Heart;
Its necessary that it should have some foundation to join together two things,
which are so different in themselves, and that in this part it find solar
qualities, which may serve as a model to those figures and pictures which it
makes of that Star: In a word, the particular influences which the Heart
receives from the Sun, are the originals on which the Soul sleeping takes all
those admiral copies; otherwise, why should it not do so for some other member?
and why in an inflammation of the Liver for example, where heat is at that time
greater then in the rest of the body, should it not represent to it self that
Star which is the Source of all the heat in the world, as well as it does in
the lesser alterations of the Heart? Certainly, in this part there are virtues
so strange and hidden, that its impossible to relate them to the Elements; For
that it often resists flame without being able to be consumed; that it will not
grow soft in boiling, unless you take off its ears; that some fish can never be
crooked, if it be left in their body; these are effects which are so particular
unto it, and of which its so hard to render a reason by manifect qualities, and
that it gives way for us to presume that those it has, are of a higher order,
and have relation, as Aristotle says, to the Element of the Stars.

Now if the influence which the Heart receives from the Sun is a cause that
these dreams represent themselves by the images of this Planet, the several
dispositions the heart is in, must needs cause the same from the Moon, and from
other Stars, in relation to the cavities of the body and exterior parts; and
thence it is, that without doubt Astrology has placed under the direction of
the Moon, the Brain, the Stomach, the Intestines, the Bladder and the Matrix,
which are the most considerable cavities of the body; but also that it has
distributed all the outward parts, to all the signs of the Zodiac, having
first founded it on this doctrine of Hippocrates, whereto it has since added
its own experiences.

Article XXIII.
AFter all these reasons, we need not doubt but that the other Planets also
have their particular influences, and that they govern but as they do, some
particular parts of the body; But Philosophy has taken so little care to take
observations thereof, that besides those which Astrology furnishes us withal
we have none which do observe the direction which Jupiter has on the Liver,
that which Saturn has on the Spleen, etc. unless you will place in this rank
those scars and moles which are to be found naturally imprinted on those parts.
For its assured, that he at whose birth Saturn rules has commonly one of
these marks on the region of the Spleen; if it be Jupiter, on that of the
Liver; if Venus, on the secret parts, and there is another betwixt the brows;
for which cause Dares Phrygius in the Picture which he made of the fair Hellen,
said that she had one betwixt her brows, which Cornelius Nepos has expressed
in these two fair Verses; Sola supercili is nubes inter flua rar is,
Audaci macula tenues discriminat arius.
But I esteem not these observations just enough, nor sufficiently confirmed by
experience to draw a certain proof of what we pretend; it shall suffice us to
say, that until there be a more exact inquiry made, the Sun and the Moon, who
without difficulty command the Heart and the Brain, shall serve out of a
prejudgment to make us believe that the rest of the Planets have an empire over
those Members which Astrology has submitted them unto; and consequently we may
conclude, that that Principle which it has assigned Chiromancy is not without
foundation, and that it may maintain a great many of the promises which it has
made.

Article XXIV.
THese are the reasons on which I did believe the establishment might be made,
which might also serve to regulate many things which are not yet agreed on in
the practice of this Art, to observe the causes of diverse effects which are to
be found therein; and if I do not deceive my self, they will prepare the mind
to believe, that Metoposcopy wants no more then this foundation to makes it an
Art, and to maintain the truth of its maxims: for if the noble parts have so
great a connection with the hand, they in all probability ought to have a
greater with the face, which is the abridgement of all the body, the seat of
the Senses, and the Souls mirror; and if virtues do not confound themselves, as
has been shown, every one may have, as in the Hand, its proper and affected
place; that of the Heart will be admitted into one place, that of the Liver
into another, and so for the rest; and consequently the same Planets which
command those parts will govern the same places, and will there leave the marks
of the good or ill influences which they have shed abroad through the principal
members of the Body. But so curious a matter, and so carelessly examined,
requires a particular Discourse as well as this, and with this had need of new
observations to confirm the truth thereof: Perhaps I shall have one day time to
communicate these unto you, which I have observed, and to show you, that the
whole man appears in the face; we may say that Man has not been well known,
since we have not known those wonders which are in his face. Resuming therefore
our former discourse, I said, that those reasons which we had deduced, regulate
many things which are doubtful in the practice of this Art; for there are some
which hold, that we must not stop at the inspection of the Hands; and that that
of the Feet is also necessary; that the left Hand ought to be considered in
women, and of those who are born in the night; and the right in men, and of
those who are born by day: But the advantages which the Hands have above the
Feet clearly show that the inspection of these is altogether useless, and that
there is to be seen in the Hands all what can be expected from this kind of
knowledge. Moreover, the right Hand being more noble then the left, in what
sense soever it be, and at what time soever we are born, ought to be more
considered then this; principally for what concerns the Heart, the Liver, and
the Brain, which have most communication with it; but the left carries it
beyond the other in respect of the Spleen and the other parts which are on the
same side, by reason of that power which rectitude has in those encounters.
Finally, what we have said of the length, breadth and depth, affords causes for
that diversity which is to be found in the lines; for those which are simple
show that the virtue is weak, the length being the first essay it makes; those
which are crossed witness that its stronger, being extended in breadth; and
that it has performed its last endeavor in those which are deep. But I am not
awares, that I insensibly enter into the particularities of those things which
I intended to avoid; I fear even least I have too much explicated my self on
the generals, and lest I should make some believe by the certainty I which find
in them, that I give the same credit to particulars; yet am I very far from
that thought. I do indeed lay the foundation of a Science which seems to me
sufficiently solid, but I do not find materials to finish the building: for
the greatest part of these Rules and Preceps whereof the structure is to be
made are not well established, the experiences which maintain them are not
sufficiently verified, and we had need of a new provision of observations,
which ought to be made with all necessary exactness and certainty, to give it
such a form and solidity as Art and Science require. But whence should this be
expected, since that those who could do it, would not employ themselves
therein? and when should we hope for it, since there is so much to be done, and
so much difficulty in the well doing thereof?

Yet were there any who would employ themselves therein, and who might not
despair, but that they were able sufficiently to provide for the expense of so
great an edifice; they will in my opinion be obliged to you for having engaged
me in maintaining their work, and designing for them the foundation which they
were to build upon; and even I dare tell you, you are also obliged to me. For
if you consider my employments, and my ordinary studies, you may easily
perceive how far I have swerved from them to follow your inclinations, and that
I could not render you a more assured proof of the friendship I have for you,
then by exposing my self to censure, to satisfy your curiosity; I ought not
apprehend yours, because I know it will be favorable toward me; but I fear
that of the Public, from whom we must never expect favor, and whose
judgments are always most severe, and sometimes unjust: make me not therefore
appear before that rude Tribunal, unless you are very well assured that I shall
avoid the punishment of timorous writers, and hazard not without a great
precaution that little esteem which good fortune has acquired for me, and for
the preservation whereof, in my opinion, you ought to interest your self, since
you know that I am,

SIR, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, LA. CHAMBER.
From Paris this first of January. 1653.
FINIS.

