A WORD CONCERNING LIBELS AND LIBELLERS, Humbly Presented To the Right
Honorable Sir John Moor, Lord Mayor of London, and the Right Worshipful the
Aldermen his Brethren.

By Roger L' Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brom at the Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1681.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Moor, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and to the Right Worshipful, the Aldermen, his Brethren.
BEing given to understand that your Lordship and the Court of Aldermen have
lately taken into consideration the business of Seditious Libells, and Papers;
and that for want of particular Enformation, the matter proceeded no further at
that time, then to a General Admonition; which extended to the Innocent, as
well as to the Guilty, through the False and Malicious Practices of the
Criminalls, for the Involving of both forts under the same Scandal, and
Condemnation; I reckon it my duty to the King, the Church, the City, to every
Honest man, and in the last place, to my Self, to present your Lordship and the
Bench of Aldermen your Brethren, with the means of distinguishing the One from
the Other; In full assurance, that your Loyalty, Generosity, and Wisdom; your
love of Truth, Peace, and Common Equity, will dispose you to Vindicate his
Majesty's Crown and Dignity; the Royal Family, the honor of the Government,
and all that is Sacred in humane Society, against all Insults whatsoever; and
Cause Exemplary Justice to be done upon such Offenders in these Cases, as shall
be found properly under your Authority, and Jurisdiction. I shall not Clog this
Paper with Instances, either superfluous, or of Ancient Date; but keep my self
within compass, both for Time, and Bulk; Citing the Book, and the Page; still
as I go along with the Publishers Name in the Margent. And it will likewise
appear from the Pamphlets themselves, that there is a Formed Conspiracy against
both Church and State, for the destruction of the Whole, and of every Part of
it, Root and Branch.

The Book that deserves the first place in this consideration, John Kidgel^,
and Richard Baldwin.
was printed for John Kidgel, at the Atlas in Cornhill 1682. and published by
Rich^rd Baldwin, in the Old-Bayly: A Bold, and a Common Agent for the promoting
of Sedition; and it carries the design, in the very Title, and Face on it. [
Rights of the Kingdom, or Customs of our Ancestors, touching the Duty, Power,
Election or Succession of our Kings, and Parliaments, Our TRVE Liberty, DUE
Allegiance, Three Estates, THEIR Legislative Power, Original, Judicial, and
Executive; with the Militia: Freely discussed, through the British, Saxon,
Norman Laws and Histories]

This Gallimawfrey of Fragments was first published in 1649. in favor of
Cromwells Proceeding, and Government: the main Stress of the Discourse, resting
upon these two Points. First, that the Late King was lawfully put to death.
Secondly, that the English Monarchy is not Hereditary, but Elective: And so the
Author, by Presidents, either Impertinent, Unwarrantable, Perverted, or
misapplied, supports his Pretensions the best he can.

Finding this Treasonous Piece to be now Reprinted, I could not but bethink my
self To what end? And this Curiosity put me upon comparing the Two Editions, to
see, how far they Agreed; wherein they Differed: or whether this Latter
Impression were the very same with the Original. Upon the Examination, I find
several sly Variations, and Additions, and many things Omitted in the Latter
Copy; which gives first to understand that this is not the work of a
Bookseller, or Printer, for profit; but a Regular, and Industrious Disposition
of the matter for some other purpose: And what that Purpose is may be easily
gathered from the Pulse and Biass of the Treatise; For the Omissions, though
Many, and Large are only such as apply the Arguments for the Sovereign Power of
a Parliament or the People, to the Defense of the Late Kings Murder; or else
such as strike so directly at the Subversion of the Monarchy; that the Age is
not as yet either so Mad, or so Wicked as to bear it: But his Arguments, and
Reasonings all this while, for the Peoples Right of Calling their Kings to an
Account, remain Whole, and Untouched; So that his Maintenance of the Peoples
Power over the King, even to the Deposing and putting of him to Death, stands
as good against this King as it did against his Father; and speaks the
Publisher and the Author to be both of a mind in the Case. In One word, the two
Pos^ions of this Villainous Book, are the Two Pillars of the Associating Plot.
And if the Faction can but first persuade the Multitude, that if the King will
not do as the People would have him, the People may deal with the King as they
please: And Secondly, That this is an Elective Monarchy; there is the King's,
the Duke of York's, and the Governments business done at a Blow. But I shall
leave the Author to Expound his own meaning in three or four passages omitted
in this new Edition.

I cannot see ( says he) why it should be a Crime for any to desire that an
Action of such Concernment ( putting the King to death) might be fully Cleared
to be Just, and acted Justly. Page 2. And again.

I would gladly have spoken all that I justly might, to have saved him from
death, till I had seen that his Life could not consist with Peoples Peace and
Safety, which I may acknowledge to be the Supreme, and Highest Law Humane, P.
3. Further,

My work shall be to Enquire of matters of Law: And how by the Laws and Customs
of this Kingdom, it may be known, Adjudged and Declared what is the Duty of our
King, and whether he has done it or not; and in case of failure, how it may be
judged, who they be that must determine it, so that the Subject may and should
be quiet, and submit to such an Act Judicial and Conclusive. Page 4. Once
again.

It may seem a short work and soon said when the King breaks his Trust, the
Parliament must Judge him, and when the Lords refuse, the Commons might and
must, because it was Necessity; but I am loath to hide my self in a Dark Chaos,
I had rather see it Cleared in the Open Sun. P. 4.

This is sufficient to show the Opinion, and the Drift of the Author; wherein
he declares himself, that the Late King was Justly put to death, and undertakes
by Law and Reason to prove it; So that his Pretended Proofs being now Exposed
to the Public, by Kidgell, and Baldwin, in the very same terms with the
Original, must necessarily render the Late Publishers as Guilty as the Author.
There runs a Vein of Sedition through the whole Tract; but some Few Instances
out of this late Impression shall serve the Turn.

[ Let us Discuss it (says he) by Law and Reason, what is our Legal Fcalty;
how made, how Limited, how kept, or how DISSOLVED. P. 11.] So that our
Allegiance may be Dissolved, it seems, and is only Conditional. And again.
[Allegeance was ad Legem to the Laws, the Kingdom, and the Kingdoms good, or
Profit, together with the King. P. 18.] We Will see now what he says to the Point
of Election or Succession. [ In the time (says he) of Hen. 1. and Hen. 2. there
were some Special Acts of Parliament for settling the Crown on Maud the
Empress, or her Issue. P. 24. -- But all such Acts (for Tying the Crown to such
or such a Family) do not Evince a Former Right of Succession. P. 25. -- And
then further [ I say not (says he Ibid.) how often it has been adjudg'd that
Affirmative Statutes do not annull the Common Law; and that one may Prescribe
against a Statute Negative, but in Affirmance of the Common Law, -- So that if
an English King was Elective by the Common Law, the Kingdom might Prescribe
against Late Statutes, which might Err much more then they could Oblige All
Future Parliaments, but they might still be free and most of all in what was
due before by Common Law. Ibid.] And moreover P. 75. He grounds his Pretense
upon the Speech of Hubert at the Coronation of King John (an Excellent
President for his turn) [ It is well known to you all that no man has Right of
Succession to this Crown, Except, that by Unanimous Consent of the Kingdom,
with Invocation on the Holy Ghost, he be Elected from his own Deserts; but if
any of the last Kings race be more worthy and better then others, his Election
is more Proper, or more Reasonable, as it now is in Earl John here present. --
Which (says he, Ibid.) seems most rightly to State the nature of Succession
as it was in this Kingdom. So that all did amount but to this, That if a King
had such Children; so Qualified, and so Educated, that they were above others
in Virtue, Wisdom, and True worth ( or at least Caeteris Pares) they were the
most likely Candidates for the Crown.] So that his Malicious Imposture resolves
at last wholly into this. He sets the Parliament and the People above the King;
and makes the Government Elective, by the Common Law, and from thence Concludes
all those Statutes that Assert the Kings Sole Sovereignty, and the Right of
Hereditary Succession, as Nullities, for then Repugnance thereunto.

'^is true that Care, and Janeway; (for they are both one in the Impartial)
have published Number. 82. a Rude Advertisement, as if Baldwin had not publish*d
this Book; Whereas O^e or ^wo of Baldwins Servants were taken at One a Clock on
a Sunday Morning Posting up the Title Pages; which is as much a Publishing
them, as if he had sold them Openly in his own shop: Beside, that it is probable
he knew the Malice of the Book, by the Close, and Unseasonable course he took
for the Notifying and dispersing of it. I have been forced to speak at large
upon This; but I shall be shorter in the rest, and go on a little upon the same
Head of Sedition.

[ All Considering People will now see that Conventiclers are not punish*d and
ruined for holding Conventicles; Richard Baldwin.
but for being zealous for the Protestant Religion, and Government by advice of
Parliament, against Popery, and Clandestine Arbitrary Counsels.] Postscript to
Remarques upon Sr. William Smiths Speech at Hicks Hall; Published by Baldwin
again.

Here is first a Vote of the Commons, set up above the Authority of several
Established Laws. 2 ly. The King himself charged with a design of Suppressing
the Protestant Religion, and Advancing the Interest of Popery, in Requiring the
Execution of 'em; and with Clandestine Arbitrary Counsels, over and above.

Double your Watches (says Janeway in his Vox Patriae) Chain up the Streets of
the City day and night. Richard Janeway.
Suffer not any Body of Armed Soldiers, Greater, or Less (other then the
Trained Bands of this City) to march through any part of the City, P 1.]

Here Is a Proposal of keeping his Majesty out of Louden by Force, and the
Rebels did his Father out of Hall: and the Printing of this Paper can have no
other End, then to Invite and Encourage the Nation into a Tumult. And what is
the Ground of this Audacious Proposal, but the [ Surprising Prorogation of the
Parliament. Ibid.] So that the King shall not Exercise the undoubted
'Prerogatives of his Royal Authority, upon pain of Janeways denoun^ing War
against him.

In the same Libell P. 17 he has a Pretended Address from Suffex to the Knights
of the Shire, Richard Janeway.
declaring that [ they will stand by and defend them with their Lives and
Fortunes in doing whatsoever they shall judge necessary for the Peace, Safety,
and Prosperity of the Nation (if any danger should threaten them.) And the
People of Winchelsea undertake as far to their Burgesses, P. 20. Thereby
disowning their duty to their Sovereign, and transferring their Allegiance to
their Fellow Subjects. The Burden of the Song from one end to the other of this
Pamphlet being the Exclusion of his Royal Highness, and Barring the Kings
Supply, with an intermixture of demanding the Artillery, the Militia, the
Regulation of Courts Ecclesiastical, and Civil, a Bill of Association; the
disposing of all Public Offices and Charges, etc.

The Sheriffs Case makes [ King, Lords, and Commons, Supposed by Baldwyn.
to be a Corporation] which amounts to no less then a 'Deposing of the King.

[ That Bugbear Passive-Obedience ( says Jo.Starkey in the Character of a
Popish Successor. John Starkey.
P. 20.) is a Notion crept into the world, and most zealously, and perhaps as
Ignorantly defended.] What is this but a Papal Absolution? But then in the
Second Part P. 34. the Nail is driven to the Head. [ Have we not bad a Late
King of Portugal Deposed, as Delirious and Frantic, and consequently rendered
by Law Incapable of Reigning; and all this done by his own Subjects, and those
of his own Religion, without the least Reflection of Treason or Rebellion, or
the Aspersion of Lifting a hand against the Lords Anointed?] What is this but
to tell the People, that there needs no more to the Deposing of a Prince, then
the Outcry of the Multitude, that he is not fit to Govern?

These Outrages upon the Laws of God and man will never find Protection within
the Walls of this Loyal City; And this License is not more the Shame of the
Government, then the Vile Instruments are in truth the Dishonor of Mankind.

The Desperate Practices, Declarations and Positions of the Scottish
Covenanters, even to the barefaced avowing of it to be their Duty to destroy
the King, the Royal Family, and the Persons as well as the Order of the
Bishops, is too notorious to be either Concealed, Palliated, or Denied; which
put the Government, in Conclusion, upon a Test; as the only Expedient for the
securing both of the Church and State, against the Violent, and Impious
Machinations of those Diabolical Spirits; and (in effect) for preserving the
Peace of the Two Kingdoms. Just now, upon this very Instant of Time, when the
Scottish Faction were Meditating New Commotions; out comes Curtis's Cheat, and
Mockery of the Arraignment, Trial, Langley Curtis.
and Condemnation of a Dog for refusing the Test, and the whole Process
Ridiculed in the very Form and Terms of the Law; and Dressed up in so
Contemptuous a manner that nothing was ever more Rudely and Spitefully treated
then the Kings Authority, and the Wisdom of the Scottish Nation in that Act of
State.

After these Affronts upon the King himself, it is not to be expected that they
should treat his Royal Highness, at a Civiller rate: But how this Privilege of
Questioning Sovereign Authority; Discharging Subjects of their AllegJance; and
Disposing of the Crowns of Princes, comes to be the Subject of every Mean, and
Mercecenary Pen; will be taken I hope into a seasonable Consideration.

One of the most Seditious Impostures that has yet seen the Light, Hen. Care.
was a Libel that passed under the Title of [ Bedlo's Narrative of the Fires,]
which was almost wholly, and Verbatim taken out of other Scandalous Libels of
Former Date, and Fobb'd upon the Nation under the Name, and Authority of one of
the Kings Witnesses. Care put it together, and it was Printed in Bedlo's
Absence. The main Scope of the Pamphlet, was to possess the People as if the
Duke of York, the Guards, and the Court-Party, had Countenanced, and Promoted
the Conflagration. [ The Kings Lifeguard ( he says) rescued a Man that was
taken in the Act of Firing a House. Page 9.] And again [ One of the Lifeguard
threw Fireballs into a Woman's Lapp. Page 10.] [The Duke of York too a
Frenchman into his Custody, and said I will secure him, but he was heard of no
more, Ibid.:] Four Life-Guard-men rescued another Frenchman, etc. Ibid.]
Another Frenchman carried before the D. of Y. and heard of no more. Page 11.
And so another in like manner. Page 13. There Is another Charged with Burning
the City, and his Father is said to answer for him; [ My Son does nothing but
what he has a Patent from the King for. Page 11.]

In the Popish Courant of Jan. 14. 1680. Hen. Care. Langley Curtis.
The same Henry Care and Langley Curtis kill two Birds with one Stone. [ It Is
certain every Papist is ( Implicitly at least) a Rebel, and a Traitor.] Here Is
no Exception of either Queen, or Duke, nor of the very Preservers of his Sacred
Majesty, when the Rebellious Schismatics pursued him, to Murder him. Nay,
it is so far from an Exception, that he points with his Finger to That he would
be at. [ If ever (says the Courantier a little below) we get a Popish Successor
into the Saddle, and the Black Tantivy-men, to hold the Stirrup, whilst his
Holiness rides the dull Beasts at Pleasure, We'll burn all the Heretical Dogs,
etc.] so that it seems we have a Popish Clergy too as well as a Popish
Successor. And then to Finish his Complement, July 22. 1681. [We have ( says
he) got a New Fry of Churchmen, prepared by Hobbs, and the Playhouse, that
care not a farthing for any Religion, provided they may but Swagger and
Domineer, and Swear, and Damn, and Drink Healths with a Huzza.]

I shall only take a Taste here, Jo. Starkey.
of that Venomous [ Character of a Popish Successor.] Though sufficient to give
any Honest man Horror for the very Syllables of it, but much more to see such
Daring Insolences pass Unpunished. He calls his Royal Highness Page 10. [ the
Greatest, and only Grievance of the Nation; the Universal Object of their Hate
and Fear, and the Subject of their Clamours, and CURSES. And a little further,
with as much Malice to the King as to the Duke, he pronounces his Majesty as
good as lost for his Friendship (as he Expresses it) to [ that One GANGREEND
Branch of Royalty.] This is a Subject too Foul to Enlarge upon, and I make no
question, but those Generous and Loyal Magistrates that Entertained so
Honorable an Indignation for a Brutal Outrage upon the Duke's Picture will be
answerably sensible of these Affronts upon Common Morality, and Justice; and
the Honor of their Sovereign in the Person of his Royal Brother.

How does Janeway Rage in his Vox Patriae against The Wretched Pensioners in
Page 2. Janeway.
Those Execrable Villains that by receiving Pensions betrayed our Trusts, and
our Libertys in the Late Long Parliament, Page 17.] [ Those Abominable
Monsters. Page 20.] And what were these Pensioners at last; but a List of
Honest Gentlemen, Proscribed as the StraffordJans were, upon the Entrance into
the late Rebellion; for Adhering to their Consciences, and their Duty's. Diverse
Privy Counselors, and other Persons of Value and Credit, in their Stations,
and of Unquestionable Worth, in the Opinion of all that ever knew them?

And the Addressers are to be served with the same Sauce too. Rich. Baldwin.
[ A Popish and Arbitrary Design at the Bottom. Baldwin's tendency of
Addresses.F Page 9.] [ The Scum and Refuse of the Places where they live. Page
12.] Though the most Eminent Subjects of the Nation. [ Some little Bankrupt
Tradesmen; a Scandalous and Disgraced Attorney, one whose Necessity Exposes him
to be Biassed by Crusts of Bread and Pots of Ale. Ibid.] And now to Janeway and
Care in Conjunction.

[Most of the Subscribers (says the Impartial. Numb. 15.) are RuffJans, Care,
and Janeway.
and Beggarly Vermin, drawn in by Pots of Ale, and not Apprentices] and there is
nothing scapes better that falls in their way. And the Impartial again, Numb.
16.

[ Alderman Pilkington, Care and Janeway.
and Mr. Shute are fit Persons to Serve the City next Year in Quality of
Sheriffs, etc. -- But there are a Pack of People that scarce know what they
would have; Most Industriously Endeavoring, by Caballs, and Drunken, Factious
Clubs, to pull up some other Persons, etc.] This is to say, in short; that
whosoever gives his Vote for any other man is a Drunken, Factious Rascal.

What work has Janeway made, Janeway and Care.
( Impartial. Numb. 47.) With a Scandalous, and Malicious Forgery of a Debaucht
committed upon Michaelmas day last, in the Church of All-hallows Staining, and
the Story False from one end to the other! But it was the Spleen of the
Faction, when they could not disappoint the Election, (though by the Meanest
Practices Imaginable) to be Revenged upon those Honest Gentlemen that were
desirous, by Ringing the Bells, to welcome the Person Elected into his Office.

It would be Endless, (and truly as Needless) to run through the History of the
Scandals upon all those Places, and Persons, that have Acted Dutifully and
Affectionately for the Common Serof the Church and the Crown. Is not the King
Twitted for his Venison to some of the Addressers? Is not Norwich, Bristol,
etc. Charged with Designs of Setting up Popery and Arbitrary Power? The
Artillery Company of Bristol, Blasted as an Illegal Usurpation, and Calumniated
for a Private Test, as if there were a Popish Con^piracy in the Bottom of it?
Let but any Man open his Mouth for the King and the Government, and he is
presently a Bogg-Trotter, a Witness in such a Cause, a Jury-man in such a One,
a Judge in another; and Branded for all the Villainies which that Sink of
Infamy, the Faction can throw upon him. A Turn-Coat, a Fiddler, a Beggarly
Rascal; a Drunken, Blaspheming Wretch; a Sworn Papist: One that has Whor'd his
Mother, Betrayed his Prince, and in short; it is but Raking of Hell for a
Catalogue of the most Damning Sins that ever carried any man thither to furnish
out the Character of a Person that Honestly Interposes betwixt Religion, and
Sacrilege, betwixt Sedition and the Laws; betwixt the Prince and the Regicide,
and betwixt Order, and Confusion.

Neither are the King's Ministers, Rich. Baldwin.
Magistrates, Justices, Juries, and Witnesses, nay, the King himself one jot
more respectfully handled in Baldwin's two Parts of the No Protestant Plot; and
the Scandals run through from one end to the other.

Janeway (in his strange News from Hicks's Hall) calls the Middlesex Justices,
Janeway.
Adulterers, Whore-mongers, Swearers, Drunkards, Janeway.
Cheats, Page 6. and Janeway again in his Ignoramus Justices (but of the other
day) takes upon him to Arraign and Declare Law, and to Juggle the People into a
Misunderstanding and Contempt of all those wholesome Statutes which the Wisdom
of our Forefathers has provided for the Security of the Protestant Religion,
and the Peace of the Kingdom: With this Saucy Reflection upon the Bench in the
very Title Page [ Some Directions to the Officers that may be Threatened, or
Persuaded to Act by such Umwarrantable Orders from such IGNORAMUS JUSTICES.]

It is the Opinion of Men well versed in the Trade of Book-Selling, that there
has not been so little as 30000 Ream of Paper spent upon this Seditious
Subject, in this Late Liberty of the Press. But I shall stop here, with an
Humble Recommendation of the whole Matter to the Right Honorable your
Lordship, and to the Right Worshipful the Aldermen your Brethren. I shall not
need to suggest that the Government of the City can never be fafe, while That
of the Kingdom; is in danger for it was notoriously the Effect of this
intolerable License, that subjected the Regular Authority of the City to
Arbitrary Armies and Committees; that stripped the Magistracy of their
Privileges and Ornaments, and set up Thimble-makers, Dray-men and Cobblers for
their Lords and Masters. I need not mind your Lordship of the Agreement betwixt
the Past and Present Degrees, Methods and Pretenses of Proceeding, betwixt
their Godly Party, and our True Protestants, falsely so called; nay, I have
heard of the same Faces now at work again, under the same Vizors. It is not a
thing forgotten, that when the fear of Tyranny was pretended, the very
Pretenders to those Fears exercised the most Barbarous Tyranny in Nature,
themselves; nor was there ever so Base and Scandalous a Vassallage, as that
which the unwary Multitude drew upon themselves under the hope of Liberty. The
apprehensions of Popery Vanished in the Destruction of the Canonical Clergy;
the setting up of a Preaching Ministry concluded in the Plundering, Ejecting,
Sequestring, etc. All the Orthodox and Loyal Divines of the Kingdom; turning
the Churches into Stables, and supplying the Pulpits with Red-Coats and
Mechanics; Consecrating at last, the Pretended Purity of the Gospel with the
most UnchristJan Outrages of a Barbarous Sacrilege. A Tory is the Name now, for
a Popish Dog, or a Malignant of Forty One: And the Insolency of the Rabble
upon Captain Griffith, in November last, when they cried Kill him; he is a Tory,
Kill him; knowing him at the same time to be an Officer of the Lieutenancy, an
Ancient Common Council-man, and at that instant, upon his Duty, and within his
own Precinct. That Insolence (with submission) looks like an Earnest of their
good Will to the subverting of the Government in General, and that of the City
in particular; and an Essay toward the accomplishing of that Work. To say
nothing of other Inconveniences that may arise by Forcing men upon Personal
Revenges, unless these Scandalous Liberties may be Adverted upon by Public
Justice.

Having here laid before your Lordship both the Quality of the Crimes
suggested, and the Names of several of the Criminals; and all of them Persons
too, within the reach of your Command: It is not so much L'Estrange, as the
Common Voice of an Injured Government and People that makes this Application.

But I am further to represent to your Lordship, that at the same time, while
these Libellous Papers and Agents go Scotfree, the Authors and Publishers of
other Books and Papers, whose Business is only to vindicate the Government from
the Forgeries, Calumnies, Malice and Sedition of the Daily Libels of Care,
Curtis, Janeway, Baldwin, etc. are Presented, and the Bills found; as Mrs Brom
particularly, for the Observator, by a a c^rtain Grand Jury, who, according to
their Oath, could neither see, nor hear of any thing on the other hand; while
yet at the same time, almost every Stall is covered, and every Coffee-House
furnished with Newspapers and Pamphlets (both written and Printed) of Personal
Scandal, Schism and Treason. But I shall now desire your Lordship and your
Right Worshipful Brethren to take Notice what it is that the Animals of this
Age call the Favoring of Popery, and the Creating of Misunderstanding betwixt
His Majesty and People.

The Observator, Number. 27. (after some Remarks upon the Practices and Positions
of a Phanatical Party) says to this purpose; [ Never Mince the Matter; but
instead of Demanding This or That, under a Disguise, speak plain, and put the
Sense of the Party into the Form of a Petition:] And then follows the Petition
at length, in these very Syllables.

Your Majesty's most Humble and Obedient Subjects, having suffered many
Disappointments, by reason both of Short and of Long Parliaments; and the late
Executing of the Law against Dissenters; the Pretenses of Tyranny and Popery
being grown stale, the Popish Plot drawn almost to the Dregs; and the Eyes of
the People so far open, that they begin to see their Friends from their
Enemies; to the Disheartning of All True Protestants, and the Encouraging of
the Sons of the Church: We your Majesty's Dissenting Subjects, being thereby
brought unto so low a state, that without a Timely Relief, We the Godly People
of the Land, must inevitably Perish.

May it please your Majesty to Grant the Right of Calling and Dissolving
Parliaments, Entering into Associations, Leagues and Covenants; the Power of the
Militia, War and Peace, Life and Death, the Authority of Enacting, Suspending
and Repealing Laws, to be in your Liege People the Commons of England. And
these Things being Granted, (whereof your Petitioners stand in great need) if
your Majesty wants either Men or Moneys, for the Support of Your Royal Dignity
and Government, your Majesty shall see what we your Loyal Petitioners will do
for you. The Observator abovementioned, concludes in these Words; [ All the
Rest is Cant and Gibberish; but This is English.] This Personated Petition is
no more, in fine, than a Compendium of their Demands and Cemplaints, dressed up
in their own Hypocritical Terms: So that the Sedition lies in the Defending of
the King's Crown and Dignity, and the Laws of the Land; which necessarily
implies an Allowance and Justification of the Libellous Opposers of the
Government.

FINIS.

