THE HISTORY OF LEARNING: OR, AN ABSTRACT Of Several BOOKS Lately Published, as
well abroad, as at home.

By one of the Two Authors of the Universal and Historical Bibliotheque.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Swalle, and Timothy Child, at the Unicorn at the
West End of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1691.

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of DORSET and MIDDLESEX, Lord Chamberlain of
Their Majesty's Household.
My Lord,
THis Work does every way belong to your Lordship; for besides the many
Obligations your Honor has been pleased to lay upon me, and to advise me to
the composing of it, I know not a Person more universally Learned, and more
capable of Judging all sorts of Learned Writings. I doubt not, My Lord, but
your wonted Goodness and Affability will vouchsafe me a favorable Acceptance
of this Present: Though I must acknowledge it is with some Reluctance that I
make it. There is so much difficulty in making Abstracts, and one finds so
rarely wherewith at the same time to Please and Instruct, that I can hardly
hope I have done any thing worthy to be Presented to so delicate a Judgment as
your Lordship's. I have been unfortunate in that I write not in my own
Language; by which Means some Improprieties may escape, of which I am ignorant,
and which I hope your Lordship will pardon.

I presume to offer this Essay to your Lordship, partly because I have the
Honor to be known to your Lordship by other Works; and that I hope, under your
Lordships Patronage, to be assisted for the Future, from Men of Parts and
Learning, with something more considerable, and more deserving your Lordships
perusal. I am, with all Duty and Respect,

My LORD, Your Lordships Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, J. D. de La
Crose.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Essay is not as one lately Published, a Translation of the
Journals Printed abroad; but a real Abstract taken from the best Books lately
Printed both at home and abroad; which, if it finds Encouragement, shall be
continued as often as Matter occurs, Monthly, or otherwise.

'Twill be unnecessary that I enlarge upon the great Use and Advantage of these
sort of Works; the great Encouragement they have received in Holland, France,
Germany, etc. does sufficiently evidence their Worth, and seem to reproach us
for having so long neglected it. It Is true, it has been twice attempted here;
but those having been barely Translations, and the Readers generally
understanding the Original, seems to be the Reason they were no better received.

But not to detain the Reader too long, I shall pass over what might be more
said upon this Occasion, and proceed to give an Account of my Design in as few
Words as may be.

I design then to Publish an Abridgment of all new Books as they shall appear
in the World; to which purpose, I shall keep a Correspondence abroad, in order
to the being furnished with every thing rare with the first. But in regard this
Design is of too large extent; that is, the abridging of every Book that is
Published; especially in this Age, where so many trifling Impertinencies. pass
the Press, I shall choose only such, to insert in this Work, as may most deserve
the perusal of the Studious Reader. I shall enlarge upon such as shall publish
any Novelty to the World, and such as discourse the most rationally upon any
Subject; and shall endeavor to mark out the most considerable Passages, and
the Places best writ of every Author. The Reader must excuse me, if I omit
giving a Judgment upon the Style and Language of Authors; which I shall avoid,
and choose rather to give Account of Things than Words. I shall also, as little
as possible, take any Side in the Disputes of Learned Men; or if it should
happen that I adhere to one Party in such Disputes, I hope the Ingenious Reader
will believe it to be the Force of Reason and Truth that draws me to its side.
As for those Authors that fill the World with Books ill digested, and wherein
there is nothing to be learned, they ought to esteem it a Favor in being
passed over in silence. Manuals of Devotions, and Sermons we shall but rarely
take notice of; they being of such general Use, so well known, and read almost
in as little time as an Abstract. Dictionaries, Collections, Abridgments, and
such like, the Authors must pardon us if we take no notice of: Also, Law Books,
Treatises of Practical Physic, or any thing too particular in one Faculty,
will be improper for us to speak of; for though they may be excellent in their
kind, yet their Abridgment will appear but tedious and dull to any not of that
Profession. But I would not be thought, upon this Pretense, to excuse my self
from abstracting such ingenious Treatises as shall be Published, in Anatomy,
Natural Philosophy, Mathematics, etc. For though such Abstracts may indeed be
unpleasant to such as understand them not, they must bear with the Evil, and
remedy it, by turning over the Leaf, to a Place that pleases them better; for
in a Work of this Nature, which is writ for all the World, and every
Profession, such inconveniences cannot be avoided. And thus having given an
Account of our Design, we doubt not, but all Learned and Ingenious Gentlemen
will assist and promote it, by communicating to us such things as may be
convenient to insert in this our Journal; which, if at any time they please to
direct to the Publisher, they shall be thankfully received, and Published
accordingly: By this we mean, in such Cases where a Person may have made any
Discovery in Natural Philosophy, Physic, Mathematics, Critic, or the like,
and would not give themselves the Trouble of Writing a Treatise upon it, if
they please to communicate it to us, we shall give it place in our Journal, and
preserve and publish it to the World, better by far than if it was Printed by
it self. Which Advertisement, considering the present discontinuance of the
Philosophical Transactions, will not, we hope, seem impertinent to the Learned
World.

The Reader must excuse the Imperfection of this first Essay, it being but a
rude Dranght of what we intend for the Future, if the Author be so happy to see
his Labor encouraged, and his Design favored by the Approbation of Worthy
Persons.

This is all we thought necessary to tell the Public at present; only this we
have further to say, That the Abstract of the Phytographia is of another Hand,
and that through Inadvertency we sent the Copy to the Printer's, without having
digested it into proper Order; but the like Fault shall happen no more.

We have added at the End a Catalogue of some Books which we intend for the
next; together with some others, most eminently recommendable to the Learned.

The CONTENTS.
I. History of Lewis the Great, taken from the Medals, etc. Character of this
Book. The French King's Religion toward his Allies. Of his giving Peace to
Europe, and taking 200 Cities by Storm. The immortal Man. French Protestants
how reconciled to the Church of Rome. Blasphemies of the French Panegyrists.
Page 1. II. A New Bibliotheque of Ecclesiastical Authors. An History of the
Author and his Book. Canonical Scriptures. Ancient Liturgies; whether St. Denis
was ever in France? What Honor is due to the Saints? No Bishop of Bishops.
Doctrine of the Three first Centuries. Of the Power of Councils, Invocation of
Saints, Worship of Images, and Celibacy. Page 2. III. Horatius Rodellii.
Whether Mecoenas was descended from the Kings of Etrury, Deus esse, Oculo
irretorto, Descendere Vinum. Page 14. IV. The Comedies of Terentius, by Madam
D'Acier. Character of Plautus and Terentius, and their Comedies. Contaminare.
New Explication of a perplexed Passage in the Andria. Page 19. V. Cornelius
Nepos, Nic. Courtin. Page 23. VI. Juvenalis and Persius Lud. Pratei. Passage of
Persius explained. Page 3. VII. A Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy. Opinions of
the Independents. Page 25. VIII. Description of the United Netherlands, etc.
Usefulness of Travels. London bigger than all the Cities of Holland together.
Page 27. IX. Vauban's New Method of Fortification. Character and Contents of
this Book Original of Fortification. Situation of Places to be fortified.
Orillon, Flank retired, Bastion, etc. Page 28. X. Haver's Osteologia Nova, An
Idea of the Formation of the Foetus, of the Periosteum, the Bones and the
Teeth. Of Growth and Nourishment. Of the Marrow. Of the Mucilage and
Mucilaginous Kernels. Of the Cartilages. Page 33. 2. Ruyschius Observationes
Anatomico-Chirurgicae. Wonderful Cure of an Aneurisma. Of the Membrant Hymen.
Page 46. XI. Leonardi Plukenetii Phytographia. Page 42. XII. Praxis
Mayerniana.. Whether the Smoke of Tobacco can reach the Brain? Page 47. XIII.
Richerius, De Potestate Ecclesiae. Votes of the Third Estate in France against
the Pope's Power. The Doctrine and Practice of the Gallican Church, proved
agreeable with them. Rules to examine whether a Doctrine be orthodox or no?
Whether it be lawful for the People to depose Princes? Of Ecclesiastical Power,
and Excommication. Sentiments of Marsilius of Padua. Blasphemy of Pope Gregory
VII. against Royal Dignity. Page 48. XIV. An Universal Analysis of Equations
Page 53. XV. Leybourn's Cursus Mathematicus. How to know the Length of the Way
which a Vessel makes. XVI. Some Observations made in the great Congregation of
Waters, communicated by the Honorable R. Boil. That Sta-water is colder on
the deep below, than by the Surface. Page 58. XVII. Inscriptionum Antiquarum
Sylloge. Whether the Daughter of the first Christian Emperor builded a Church
to S. Agnes? Whether the Idolatry of the Heathens be excusable? Page 59. XVIII.
The Falsehood of Humane Virtues. Whether Subjects may rebel against their Kings?
Page 62.
THE HISTORY OF LEARNING.
I. HISTOIRE DU ROY LOUYS LE GRAND, par les Medailles, Emblemes, Devises etc.
History of Lewis the Great; Taken from the Medals, Emblems, Devices,
Inscriptions, Armories, and other Public Monuments, Collected and Explained by
Father CLAUDIUS FRANCIS MENESTRIER Jesuit. A new Edition augmented with five
Plates. Fol. Paris, 1691. F. 64.
IF the Contents of this Work were answerable to its Title, and if the Author
had given us an exact and continued History of the Exploits of his Hero, and
had proved the most remarkable Actions that were performed under his Reign, by
the Medals that were coined, and other public Monuments that were erected on
that occasion, it would without doubt have been a very useful Book; but nothing
of all this is to be found therein, for the Medals are confusedly placed, the
order of time, which is the most principal matter in a History, is not well
observed, and instead of a Commentary, there is only a licentious
Interpretation of the Latin Inscriptions, or some other trivial Circumstances,
and that too but very rarely; insomuch that it can neither be esteemed as an
History nor a Panegyric, but a gross and imperfect Collection of whatsoever
could be invented by Flattery, to aggrandize the Idea of a Prince that delights
in Vainglory, and is perhaps too much addicted to the love of popular
applause, And indeed, what can be devised more vain than the Medal 25.5.
wherein he is represented in the midst of the Cities of Genoua and Luxemburg,
turning the Globe of the World, on the point of his Sword, with this Motto,
Quod libet licet* I do whatsoever I think fit.

Although the Character of a Jesuit and a Panegyrist does not well agree with
that of a sincere Writer; never heless we are induced to believe that Father
Menetrier has found it to be a very difficult task, to produce these Medals as
undoubted proofs of the Historical matters and facts related by him; as being
conscious to himself that the greatest part of them were founded only on
Hyperbolical exaggerations, or on the false reports of hired News mongers. As
for example, it is well known to all the World, that in the War that happened
between England and Holland, in the Year 1666, France amused this Commonwealth
with feigned Succors; that those few French Vessels that joined with de
Ruyter, served only to molest and perplex him, by breaking all his measures, or
giving an account thereof to the Enemies; and that the Forces that were sent
thither by Land, marched only to epsy out the Country, and to contrive
intrigues and plots against them, as it afterward appeared by the design which
was discovered in the Year 1672. Therefore we may very well turn the reverse of
the Medal, and instead of f. 13.2.
Batavis terra marique desensis. Religio foederum, put Batavis terra marique
proditis. Derisio foederum.

There are others likewise that are absolutely repugnant to evident matters of
fact; particularly, that which is consecrated to Lewis the Great, for granting
peace p. 26.3.
to the Hollanders whom he had Conquered, to the Germans whom he had every
where Vanquished, and almost to all Europe that had combined together against
him: For without reckoning Switzerland, Italy, and the most part of the Princes
of Germany, Poland, and Moscovy, who were not engaged in this quarrel; France
was assisted by England, Sweeden, and the Bishop of Colen and Munster, through
whose Territories they attacked the Hollanders at unawares. Moreover in the
beginning of the War, all Europe seemed unanimously to concur in promoting the
ruin of the United Provinces; since Spain opened a passage to their Enemies,
and the Emperor for a long time stood still as it were a Spectator; to which
if we add the Intelligence that the French obtained within the Country, and the
Cowardice of some of those that had the Command of the Principal Posts, it may
well be concluded from thence, that these Conquests are not so Glorious as they
would have them to be believed. But on the contrary, there accrues to King
William Everlasting Glory, which cannot be eclipsed by the most inveterate
Envy, for rescuing by his Valor and Prudence, at the Age of about 22 Years,
four Great Provinces out of the Hands of so Haughty and Potent an Enemy; and
restoring his Country, that was almost ruined, to its Primitive state and
luster.

These are matters of fact that cannot be called in question, but we shall
leave it to the Readers judgment to determine, whether these are of the like
nature that afford the Subject of this Medal f. 28.
Victori perpetuo. Ob expugnatas Vrbes ducentas. To the Eternal Conqueror for
having taken by Storm 200 Cities. I know not how it can be affirmed that Cities
which have surrendered themselves, as soon as the Enemy appeared before their
Gates; or those that went forth to meet him, and to deliver their Keys into his
possession, were taken by force of Arms: [expugnatae.] But I am of opinion that
it would be very difficult to reckon up twenty, whereof the French King has
made himself Master after another manner, at least before the breaking of the
Truce.

The word Perpetuus, which Father Menetrier translates Eternal, calls to my
remembrance the f. 2^.6.
Viro Immortali, and the 10.6.27.6.
Aeternitas Imperii Gallici. The former Epithete has been generally exploded,
and it has been very ill resented that they durst presume to call Lewis the
XIV. The Immortal Man: The Eternity of the French Empire does not appear to me
to be more tolerable, and to say the truth, both the Expressions savor too
much of Paganism and Blasphemy; as well as this Counter, wherein Joshua is
represented giving a Signal to the Sun to stop, and the French King doing the
like to the New Moon, with these words f. 37.42.
Solemn ille, hic Lunam sistit, and under the Medal Germaniae Pax. However, the
Germans are not willing to allow that his most Christian Majesty should assume
to himself the Glory of setting Bounds to the Progress of the Turks, and of
restoring Peace to the Empire; but if this power be disputed, none will deny
him the honor of exciting those Insidels to break the Truce with the Emperor,
and of furnishing them with Officers, Arms, and Ammunition.

Amongst so many prevarications, it was not expected to find a public
Affirmation of a matter of fact, which the French Writers have for a long time
disowned, that is to say, that the Protestants of that Kingdom had not been
reconciled to the Communion of the Church of Rome, but by making use of the
utmost extremity. For what else can be meant by f. 50.
the labors of Hercules placed in the Constellations: The Thunder with these
words, Deorum jura tuetur; the Giants crushed to pieces under the Mountains;
the Hydra slain; the heads of this Monster severed and burnt; Trees cut down;
and their Branches lopt off. Nay they confess, that those pretended Conversions
could not be otherwise performed; in a Device, the Body whereof is the Gordian
Knot cut asunder with a Sword, and the Motto Frustra tentassent alii: Others
would have attempted it in vain.

And Father Menetrier ingeniously explains the meaning of it, without any
evasion, having caused the f. ^^.
Titles of 36 Declarations published at several times against the Reformed, to
be engraved on a Plate.

The Printers of Holland have added to their Edition of this Work, five new
Plates, comprehending diverse very Satirical Emblems and Devices, which I shall
not here mention: but only observe, that one M^dal grossly reflects on the
Honor of the English. Notwithstanding this Book taken all together, deserves a
place in the Library of the ingenious, not only on the account of several
public Monuments therein contained, as the prospect of the Square called la
Place des Victoires, the Obelisk of Arles, etc. but also in regard that there
are inserted the Arms of the Principal Houses or Families of France, of the
Prinees, Dukes, Prelates, and other Noblemen of the Order of the Holy Ghost,
together with those of the Marshals of France, of the Colonels and other
Military Officers, as also those of the Regiments that have been lately raised,
and lastly those of the Presidents of the Sovereign Courts. I shall add one
Inscription, worthy to be Printed in the next Edition of the Jesuits Book, and
made upon the Building Versailles.

Hic fuit ante Chaos, dixisti and Regia Verbo,
Fit Ludovice tuo, sic fa^ta est machina Mundi.
Which may be properly Paraphrased in English thus.

That the Eternal Word the World should frame,
A Wonder 'twas, till Lewis did the same.
II. NOUVELLE BIBLIOTHEQUE DES AUTHEURS ECCLESIASTIQUES, etc. Or, a new Library
of Eccle scastical Authors, containing the History of their Lives, a Catalogue
and Chronology of their Writings, and an Epitome of whatsoever is comprehended
therein, together with diverse Critical Reflections on their Style and Doctrine,
as also an Account of the several Editions of their Works. In five Volumes in
Quarto, which complete the History of the six first Ages of the Church Printed
at Mons, and to be Sold in London by Abel Swall, and Timothy Child at the
Unicorn in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1692. the 1. Vol. page 342.
THis Work has been every where so much talked of, and has been generally so
well esteemed among the Learned, that although this is only a second Edition,
and a large account has been already given of the two first Volumes in the
Bibliotheque Vniverselle; nevertheless we are persuaded that it will not be
altogether unacceptable to the ingenious of our own Nation, who perhaps have
not seen it, or at least have received but little information concerning the
Subject and design thereof, to represent to them a more particular Character
both of the Author and the Book.

Mr. Du Pin is a Professor of Divinity in the College of Sorbonne, who
according to the Testimony of diverse learned Vide Ca^e. Pres. H^sl. L^tter.
Men, and even that of his own Works, has been for a long time addicted to the
Study of Ecclesiastical Antiquity. And as he is a man of great Parts, and
endued wi^h a clear and sound Judgment; it may be easily imagn'd, that by
frequent reading, he has discovered many things that are Contrary to the
Doctrine and Practice of that Church wherein he has been Educated. But in a
Society which cannot endure to be Contradicted in the least matter, and that
hates even the very Name of Reformation, it was dangerous to Communicate his
Discoveries to the World, at least until some favorable opportunity did enable
him to use a greater Liberty. It is probable that as soon as the Controversies
between France, and the Court of Rome, concerning the Regalia, and the
nomination to great Benefices began to arise, Mr. Du Pin was incited to publish
his Remarks, but observing judiciously that this cont^st would not be soon
appeased, under a Prince so jealous of his Honor and Right, as Lewis XIV. and
a Pope so obstinate as Innocent. XI. he judged it to be expedient to afford
them longer time to be exasperated one against another; to the end that he
might be more secure, and might discourse more freely and with greater weight
concerning the matters.

The event happened as the Author had foreseen; for the Pope vindicated the
persecuted Jansenists, either as being of their opinion, or designing by the
Public expressing of a Compassion that cost him nothing, to strengthen his
party with the acce^ssion of so considerable a number of Learned Divines, and
of he best Writers in France. Whereupon the King being incense^d that his
Holiness should attempt as it were to prescribe Laws to him, and should
endeavor to withdraw his Subjects from their Allegiance to him, took other
measures, and having Summoned an Assembly of his Clergy, In the Year 1682.
caused it to be declared therein, 1. That the Pope has no Authority directly
or indirectly over the Temporalities of Kings. 2. That much less has he any
power to depose them. 3. That he is not infallible. 4. That he is inferior to
a Council.


At that time the breach seemed to be irreparable, and it was generally
believed that a Patriarch would e're long preside in France. It is true indeed,
that the persecution of the Protestants, whose entire Destruction was then
hastened, afforded but little hope of a Reformation to the moderate part of
Roman Catholics. However, many of them that were willing to flatter themselves
with vain Expectations, gave it out, that none ought to be discouraged by these
rigorous Persecutions; that the Court, not being ignorant of the commotions
that a too much precipitated Reformation has produced in other places,
intended to proceed therein by degrees; And that even on this account they had
very good grounds to abolish, the Exercise of the Reformed Religion; either to
avoid a Schism like unto that which vexes yet England at this present; or
insensibly to gain the consent of the old Catholics by the Conversation of the
new.

Upon the whole matter, this is sufficient to induce us to believe, that the
Court of France is not unwilling that their Divines should take the Advantage
of this Conjuncture obliquely to assault the Superstitions of the Church of
Rome. However, Father Simon, to vindicate himself, in regard that our Author
had refuted (...) 4. Disse^^. Prol. P. 30.38.^9.
his too presumptuous Conjectures on the Pentateuch, has written against him
with much animosity, accusing him as one that had employed his Pen to revive
Calvinism that was so lately extirpated: Nevertheless, all these loud Clamours
produced no effect, serving only to promote the Sale of the Book; neither have
they obliged Mr. Du Pin to blot out these passages that were offensive to his
Adversary; but only to add certain Notes in this Second Edition to prove that
Moses really composed the Pentateuch. And the Author is so far from having been
reprehended for bringing allegations in favor of the Protestants; that the
Censors of Books have loaded him with extraordinary Commendations in the
beginning of the second Volume, which they conclude in these words; That not
being able to determine whether the vast extent of his Learning, the Sagacity
of his Judgment, or the continual solidity of his Reflections, ought most to be
admin'd; they find themselves obliged to declare, that that which would serve
for the Commendation of many, is not sufficient to discharge all the
Obligations that they judge to be due to his singular merit.

A large Preface is prefixed to the first Volume, wherein the Author explains
and justifies the Title that he has given to his Book, gives an account of his
Design and Method, and propounds certain Critical Rules to determine whether a
Work be forged, or whether it really appertains to the Person to whom it is
Attributed. This Preface is followed with a Preliminary Dissertation concerning
the Books of the Bible; in which he treats, 1. Of the Authors of the Books of
the Old Testament in general. 2. Of the Canonical and Apocryphal Writings.
And indeed the judgment of Mr. Du Pin on this Article is very Remarkable,
seeing he is a Roman Catholic, for according to his opinion the Six last
Chapters of the Book of Esther are not extant in the Hebrew Text, but were
taken from diverse places, and contain several pieces apparently Collected by
the Hellenist Jews. St. Jerome, expressly rejects the Book of Buruch, as not
being included in the Canon of Sacred Writings, in his Preface to the Prophecy
of Jeremiah. The History of Tobit is likewise excluded, in all the Ancient
Catalogues, from the number of Canonical Writings, as well as that of Judith;
In a word, Christian Antiquity has followed the Canon of the Jews as to the
Books of the Old Testament; there are no others Cited in the New, and a great
part of these are often alleged therein; Moreover the Primitive Catalogues of
Canonical Books, composed by the Greek and Latin Ecclesiastical Authors, do not
contain any others. In the Chronicon of Eusebius, the Books of the Maccabees
are separated from those of the Holy Scriptures, and placed in the Rank of
Josephus and Africanus. The Books of Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus are inserted in
the Ancient Catalogues among those Writings that are esteemed to be very
useful, but such as are not Canonical. Nothing can be inferred to prove their
being Divinely inspired, from those passages that are produced by the Fathers,
in regard that Origin, St. Jerome and St. Hilary, by whom they are cited, reckon
them among the Apocryphal Writings. Moreover, these Books were not admitted
into the Canon of holy Scripture even in the time of Gregory the Great:
Forasmuch as this Pope speaks to this effect: Greg. Lib. 12. Moral.
We do nothing that is unreasonable in exhibiting the Testimony of Books that
are not Canonical, since they were Published for the Edification of the Church.
Many Ecclesiastical Writers, both Greek and Latin, reckon only 22 Canonical
Books, annexing the History of Ruth to that of Judges, and the Lamentations of
Jeremiah to his Prophecies, although they lived after the third Council of
Carthage, and after Innocent I. who is reported to have inserted the Maccabees
and other Apocryphal Books into the sacred Canon; which shows (adds our Author)
that these definitions were not followed by all Authors and by all the
Churches, until this was at last entirely determined by the Decision of the
Council of Trent. Insomuch that these Ecclesiastical Assemblies partake of this
general property with the others, that the Decrees of the later should abolish
all those of the preceding; or otherwise, it is but just that the Church of
Rome, which has a power to make new Articles of Faith, should likewise be
invested with that of causing the Books from whence they are taken to be
esteemed as Canonical.

In the third Article of this dissertation, the Author gives us the History of
the Hebrew Original, of the Translation of the Septuagint, and of other Greek
Versions of the Old Testament. 4. He discourses anfterwards concerning certain
Authors, whose works have some Relation to the Sacred Writings of the Hebrews,
as Philo, Josephus, Aristaeus, etc. 5. He treats of the Authors of the Books of
the New Testament. And 6. of the Canon of these Books.

Let us now proceed to the Body of the Work. Mr. Du Pin has thought sit to
reject the Liturgies p. 8.
that are attributed to the Apostles, in regard (says he) that we need only to
reflect a little on what we Read in the first Epistle of St. Paul to the
Corinthians, concerning the Celebration of the Eucharist, and on that which
has been alleged on this Subject by St. Justin, and the Primitive Fathers of
the Church, to be convinced that the Apostles and their Successors celebrated
the Sacrifice of the Mass with great Simplicity. A very small number of
Litanies were, recited therein, but by little and little, some other Collects
were added, together with certain exterior Ceremonies to render the Service
more venerable to the People, lastly the Churches proceeded to regulate and to
commit these particular Methods to Writing; and this is that which we call
Liturgies.

Our Author is not only content to disallow the Works of the Counterfeit St
Denis, p. 24.
( b) but he likewise proves in one of his Notes, p. 38.
that the true Dionysius the Ar^opagite never was in France; that Photinus
first propagated the Christian Religion in that Kingdom; and that in the time
of St. Irenaeus his Successor, Christianity was establishd only in that part of
the Country called Gallia Viennensis and Lugdurensis, since there were no
Martyrs any where but within the Limits of these two Provinces; concerning whom
he produces p. 50.
an Epistle of the Church of Smyrna to those of Pontus, which deserves to be
remembered in more than one place. The Pagans having hindered the Christians from
carrying off the Body of Polycarp that remained entire in the midst of the
Flames, lest (as was pretended by these deluded Heathens) they should adore it
instead of Jesus Christ; the Church of Smyrna made this reflection thereupon,
certainly these People were possessed with an extravagant frenzy, as being
ignorant that the Christians adore Jesus Christ, only because he is the Son of
God, and that they honor the Martyrs, who are his Disciples and followers,
only on the account of the Love that they testify for their King and Master.
Afterward, The Centurion having caused the Body of this Martyr to be burnt, the
Christians took away his Bones, being more valuable than the most precious
Stones, and more pure than Gold, which they BURIED in a place where they
Assembled together, to Celebrate with joy and Cheerfulness, the Day of his
Martyrdom; thus HONORING the MEMORY of those that had fought Gloriously for
their Religion, to the end that they might confirm and instruct others by such
Examples. These are the Sentiments (adds our Author) of the Ancient Church,
concerning the Respect due to Martyrs and their Relics, explained after a very
clear and distinct manner, equidistant from the contempt that is cast on them
by our Modern Heretics, and from the Superstition of some Catholics. But Mr.
Du P^n would have extremely obliged the World in showing who those Heretics
are, who despise the Holy Martyrs, and their true Relics, and refuse to afford
them this sort of honor that was done to their memory, by the Church of Smyrna.

In this Edition is an extract of Origen's Book concerning Prayer, p. 142.145.
which the Author had not seen when he published the first; and on the occasion
of the dispute that rose between St. Cyprian and the Bishop, of Rome concerning
the Repeating of Baptism, he produces a remarkable passage 164 2.
taken from the Acts of the last Council of Carthage, holden in the Year 256.
Wherein this Father exhorting the 87 Bishops that were there present, freely to
disclose their mind, without any design of excommunicating those that were of a
different opinion, gives them this reason. For none ought to Style himself
Bishop of Bishops, to endeavor to constrain his Colleagues by a Tyrannical
Authority, by reason that every Bishop has liberty, and power to make use
thereof, as he shall think fit, and that he can no more be judged by another,
than he can judge him: But we ought all to attend to the judgment of CHRIST,
who alone has power to set us over his Church, and to judge of our Actions. In
this Controversy both parties pretended to have Tradition on their side, and
St. Cyprian opposed to that which was alleged against him by Pope Stephen, the
truth of the Gospel and the Primitive Tradition of the Apostles. The Edition of
the Works of this Father, which is declared by Mr. Du Pin to be generally most
esteemed, is that which has been Published some years ago by two English
Bishops, and Printed at Oxford, but the Annotations of Pamelius are not much
reguarded, by reason that he applies himself rather to confirm the Doctrine and
discipline that is received and maintained by those of his own Society, than to
explain the difficulties that occur in the Text of the Author.

Mr. Du Pin doubts ^ 199.1.
whether the passage recited by Joannes Damascenus, in his third Homily
concerning Images, appertains to Methodius: it is declared therein that the
Christians made certain Figures of Gold representing the Angels, for the Glory
of God; if it were written by this Bishop, it must be taken (said he) in
another Sense, different from that which is attributed to it by Damascenus; and
by these words, Angels, Principalities and Powers, the Kings of the Earth are
to be understood, as may be inferred from the preceding expressions. Moreover
he rejects all the Decretals that are imputed to the Primitive Popes, and
believe that they were forged by Riculphus and his Successor Benedict in the
ninth Century. Lastly, he concludes this Volume, with an Epitome of the
Doctrine, Discipline, and Moral Instructions of the Church in the three first
Ages thereof. There are no notes subjoined to this Abridgment, because it is
taken for granted, that sufficient prooss of all that is asserted therein, have
been already exhibited in the body of the Work: Nevertheless, it cannot be
discerned by what Arguments alleged in the preceding Treatise, Mr. Du Pin
supports the following Propositions that are afterward maintained by him in the
said Epitome; viz. (1) That although all the Fathers are not agreed, that Infants
are born in Sin, and liable to Damnation, yet the contrary opinion was more
agreeable to the Church. (2) That the Sacrifice of the Mass was Celebrated in
Memory of the Dead. (3) That the ancient Christians invocated the Saints and
Martyrs deceased; and that they were persuaded that they prayed to God for the
living.
However, there are other Principles that are grounded on better Authority, and
such as are of great importance with respect to the present differences among
Christians. (1) That the ancient Writers always mentioned the Virgin Mary with
a great deal of respect, though they have not exceeded their due bounds, as it
has been afterward practiced; that it was not generally believed that she
remained a Virgin after her delivery; that no mention has been made of her
assumption, and that there is a passage in the works of S. Irenaeus, which is
not favorable to the immaculate conception. (2) That the Holy Scripture
contains the principal Articles of our Faith, and that it was lawful for all
Christians to read it. (3) That the Elements of the Eucharist were ordinary
Bread, and Wine, mingled with water; That the consecrated Bread was divided
into little pieces; that the Deacons distributed it to those that were present
who received it in their hands, and that they likewise gave them some of the
consecrated wine; That in some Churches this distribution was reserved to the
Priests, but that in others every one approached to the Table and took his
Portion of the Eucharist. (4) That during the three first Centuries, there is
no account concerning the unction or anointing of the sick mentioned by St.
James. (5) That the Clergy were forbidden to be engaged in Civil and Temporal
Affairs. (6) That Priests were permitted to keep their Wives whom they had
espoused, before they were Ordained, and not to marry any after their
Ordination: but that both was allowed to Deacons. (7) That there have scarcely
been any disputes, or different sentiments in the Church concerning Moral
Duties.


We find diverse Tables at the end of this Work, some of which are
Chronological, and show the time of the Nativity, Death, and Principal
Transactions of the Sacred Writers, and Ecclesiastical Authors; others serve to
distinguish the genuine Works from those that are forged. There are also
Alphabetical Indexes of the Authors and Principal matters.

Mr. Du Pin has observed in the Second Volume the same Method as in the
preceding, all the difference is, that the Works of the Fathers of the fourth
Century, being generally more known and in greater number than those of the
three first; there are likewise inserted more frequent reflections on the
Protestants, perhaps to satisfy the importunate clamours of some Zealots, who
otherwise would have suppressed the Book. However the same sincerity and
liberty of speech which was so acceptable to all judicious Readers in the first
Volume, is every where conspicuous throughout the second.

It is apparent from the Life of St. Athanasius, which is exhibited at large by
our Author, that the People began even in his time to adhere too much to the
exterior part of Religion, since two of the greatest Crimes with which the
Arrians charged this Father were, that he had broken a Chalice, and had
administered the Holy Sacraments in a Church that was not Consecrated. It may
be also observed, after Mr. Du Pin, that Laymen were then admitted to the
Communion in both kinds; that there were Women that kept their Virginity, and
were not shut up in Monasteries; that there were married Priests and Bishops;
that the Monks might alter their condition, and take Wives; that it was not
lawful to make new Articles of Faith; and that Councils, even the Ecumenical,
were only the Witnesses of the Creed of their Ages, whereas they had Sovereign
Authority to determine all matters that related to Discipline. Thus it is
expressly declared by the Nicene Bishops, in appointing the day for the
Celebration of the Feast of Easter. It seems good to us, we think fit that it
should be so. But their Expressions are altogether different with respect to
the Consubstantiality of the Word, since after having declared their Opinion as
to this matter, they are content only to subjoyn; such is the Faith of the
Catholic Church.

After the Extracts of the Writings of the Fathers, we find those of the
Councils that were convened in the fourth Century. The Canons of that which is
called the Council of Elvira, are an Ancient Code or Collection of the Councils
of Spain, and it cannot be doubted but that they are very Authentic and of
great Antiquity. The 34 and 36 Canons have caused much perplexity among the
Roman Catholic Divines. One of them prohibits the lighting of Tapers in the
Churchyards, by reason that the Spirits of the Saints ought not to be
disturbed: and the other to set up Pictures in the Churches, lest the Object of
our Adoration should be Painted on the Walls. Many have endeavored to render
diverse Explications of these Passages, but it seems to me, says Mr. Du Pin, to
be more expedient to understand them simply, and to acknowledge that the
Fathers of this Council did not approve the use of Images, no more than that of
Wax-Candles lighted at Noonday: but, continues he, these things are matters of
Discipline, and may be observed or neglected without any prejudice to the Faith
of the Church. The 35 Canon forbids Women to remain all night in the
Churchyards, in regard that often under pretense of Prayer, they secretly
committed abominable crimes. The 60 deprives them of the quality of a Martyr,
that are put to death for publicly demolishing of Idols, because it is not
enjoined in the Gospel, neither do we read that this was practiced by the
Christians in the time of the Apostles.

The same perverse spirit that has caused the Canons of the Council of Elvira
to be wrested to a contrary sense, has in like manner given occasion to some
to doubt as to the truth of the History of Paphnutius related by Socrates, Lib.
I. Chap. XI. This Egyptian Bishop opposed the new Law, that was intended to be
enacted in the Council of Nice, to oblige the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons to
live single, and to abstain from their Wives, whom they had married before
their Ordination. For although he himself was never married, nevertheless he
maintained that this Yoke ought not to be laid on the Clergy, and that it was
to expose the Chastity of Women to apparent danger. I believe, (said Mr. Du
Pin, in speaking to the Roman Catholic Doctors) that this doubt proceeds
rather from a fear with which some are possessed, that this matter of Fact
should in any wise impugn the present Discipline, than from any solid Proof.
But these Persons ought to consider, that this Ordinance is purely concerning
Discipline, that the Discipline of the Church may be altered as opportunity
serves, and that it is not necessary for the vindication thereof, to prove that
it has been always uniform in all Places.

Moreover our Author shows that Hosins Bishop of Corduba presided in the Nicene
Council, and not the Popes Legates. He acknowledges as the authentic Records
of this Synod, only the Form of Faith, the Epistle to the Egyptians, the Decree
concerning the Feast of Easter, and the first 20 Canons: And consequently he
rejects as suppositions Pieces, the Latin Letter of this Council to S.
Sylvester, together with the Answer of this Bishop, and the Canons of a
pretended Synod holden at Rome for the Confirmation of that of Nice.

In the 59. as also the 60 and last Canon of the Council of Laodicea, which Mr.
Du Pin believes to have been convened between the years 360 and 370. It is
prohibited to read in the Church any other Books than the Canonical, and those
only are acknowledged as such, which are allowed by the Protestants, excepting
the Revelation.

The 8. Canon of the Council of Saragossa forbids the vailing of Nuns before
the age of 40 years.

The Bishops of Macedonia being about to confirm a Censure that they had made
against a certain Bishop named Bonosius, and desiring the advice of Pope
Siricius, he replied, That the Council of CAPUA, having referred this cause to
them, it did not appertain to him to give any Judgment therein, and that they
had power to determine it.

The most ancient Record (according to the opinion of Mr. Du Pin) in which the
name of Mass is applied to signify the public Prayers, recited by the Church
of Rome in celebrating the Eucharist, is the third Canon of the II. Council of
Carthage, holden Anno Domini 390.

In the end of this Volume, the Author exhibits an Epitome of the Doctrine of
the fourth Century, as he has done in the preceding, with respect to the
first three, and he avoucheth that, although nothing was taught in the fourth Age
of the Church, but what was likewise believed in the three former; nevertheless
the principal Mysteries of the Christian Religion have been much illustrated
and explained therein.

III. Commentaries on Latin Authors. Q. HORATII FLACCI Poemata Interpretatione
and notis illustravit Petrus Rodellius e Soc. Jesu, jussu Christianissimi Regis
ad usum Sereniss. Delphini, huic Editioni accesserunt Odae aliquot and Satyrae:
una cum interpretatione continua, quae in priori desiderabantur, nec non Index
rerum, Phrasium and Verborum memorabilium. 8. Land. Impensis Abel Swalle. 1690.
page 366.
THis Edition which is no less correct than that of Paris, has moreover this
advantage, that it contains the entire Works of Horace. Father Rodellius
thought fit indeed not only to avoid the interpretation of diverse Odes and
Satyrs, that seemed to him to be somewhat too luxuriant and offensive to chaste
minds, but even wholly to retrench them, nevertheless this defect is now
supplied, by reprinting these Pieces that were omitted, and by Paraphrasing all
the rest, excepting about half of the second Satyr.

I. THE Author having perused Mr. Dacier's Translation and Critical Remarks,
undertakes to censure some of those that are not. agreeable to his opinion. The
latter in his French Interpretation declares, that whereas Horace makes mention
of Maecenas thus; Atavis edite Regibus. These words are not to be understood,
as if Maecenas were really descended from the Kings of Etreria, since there is
not so much as one Historian, that takes any notice of the Royal Stock of this
Favorite of Augustus, but they all affirm that he derived his extraction, from
an illustrious Family of Knights. The ancient Commentators produce three Names
of these pretended Kings, but he avoucheth it to be a counterfeit List, and
that they were deceived in taking Atavus for a Great Grandfather. As for his
part, by the word Reges he understands, Noblemen, or Persons of considerable
Quality, insomuch that according to his Judgment, the meaning of Horace was
only this, that Maecenas was descended of an ancient Family of Etreria. It must
be granted that the words Rex and Regina are often used in that sense which is
alleged by Mr. Dacier; but on the other hand, Rodellius insists, that in this
place the word Rex ought to be taken in its proper and genuine signification,
as well as in the following Verse of Propertius.

Maecenas eques Etrusco de Sanguine Regum. The Historians might easily omit
this circumstance relating to the Noble Extraction of Maecenas, by reason that
none of them undertook to give a particular account of his life, and it is
mentioned by the Poets, in regard that they had received the greatest share of
his favors. Neither indeed could Maecenas derive his Pedigree from the Kings
of Etreria, but at a very great distance; so that according to the judgment of
Rodellius, as well as that of Mr. Dacier, the name of Cecina that is attributed
to the Great Grandfather of this Illustrious Person, and who is reputed to
have been King of Etreria, is merely feigned. Besides the Kings of Etreria were
not very considerable, if we may give credit to the Testimony of Dionysius
Hallicarnassaeus, Lucius Florus, and other Ancient Writers. There were twelve
in number at the same time, and although they had an Equipage like unto that of
the Roman Consuls, together with a Scepter and a Crown; nevertheless they
reigned only within the narrow bounds of one City, as Porsenna at Clusium.
Therefore although it ought not to be accounted as a matter of no moment to be
descended from those Kings. Yet it is not of so great consequence, as that it
should be admired that the Historians have not made mention thereof, with
respect to Maecenas. These are the reasons alleged by Rodellius, which being
confirmed by the Authority of Propertius, will without doubt cause many to
incline to his Opinion.

It is not sufficient, that because a word, as that of Rex, is used in a
certain sense in some places, therefore it ought to be explained after the same
manner wheresoever it is possible that this signification may be admitted; it
must also be attended with certain circumstances which favor this sense, and
determine that equivocal word thereto. It is requisite then to enquire whether
it be probable that in the expressions of Horace and Propertius the word Rex
should be taken for a Rich or Noble Man; but we shall leave this to the
decision of those that are expert Critics in the Latin Tongue.

II. Father Rodellius has annexed a Chronological Epitome of the Roman History
from the 21. year of Horace to the 57. which account indeed is useful for the
more clear understanding of the Works of this Poet; but the Chronology of
Horace's Odes inserted in Tanaquil Faber's Letters would not have been less
advantageous; and Rodellius would not have acted more unjustly in borrowing
from him all this little Work, and in doing him that justice which is due to
his merits, than in taking only part of his design: for although Faber died among
those of the Reformed Religion, nevertheless there is no Jesuit that can deny
him the reputation of a good Grammarian, which quality has been always
esteemed to be consistent with that of an ill Roman Catholic.

III. Moreover Rodellius contradicts M. Dacier with respect to an explication
published by the later on the 6 Verse of the 1 Ode. Terrarum Dominos evehit ad
Deos; which M. Dacier understands, not with reference to those that are
properly called Gods, but concerning those that had obtained the prize in the
Olympic Games, whom Horace elsewhere styles Coelestes. The Latin
Interpretation is consonant to the ordinary acceptance of the words, that is
to say, that they which overcame believed that they had acquired a great deal
of Honor, which might be Hyperbolically termed a Glory equal to that of the
Gods. Horace makes use of the same Figure twice in this Ode. Me doctarum
hederae praemia frontium,
Dis miscent superis.
And Sublimi feriam sidera vertice.

It is likewise known that this expression Deus esse, is commonly taken to
signify to be esteemed happy; moreover the Epithet of Terrarum Domini entirely
determines the sense, and it may justly be admired that M. Dacier has not
observed it, since he has so clearly explained diverse passages that are far
more difficult. It is true indeed that he is not the first Interpreter, who
through a commendable emulation and earnest endeavor to offer somewhat that is
new, and to excel others, has been induced to deviate from his Authors
meaning, and to seek for too many Mysteries therein. We are sometimes apt to
lose our Subject by too intense an application of the mind, and by how much the
greater our efforts are, so much the farther we depart from the true sense, to
which it is afterward very difficult to return. On the other side, if we do
not apply our selves with a great deal of attention to the reading of an
Author, either we understand not what he says, or we let slip very considerable
difficulties, without illustrating them. To be successful, we must take care to
keep the middle path between these two extremities, but this precept is more
easily given to others than followed by themselves. However it may be observed
much better than it is generally done, if we could be persuaded to remain in
suspense for a while, as touching the meaning of those passages, wherein we
suspect that others have been deceived, and in the mean time if it be possible
often to read over that Paragraph concerning which we are doubtful. But as soon
as a new explication comes into our mind, if it have never so little show of
probability, we are immediately restless and impatient, till we have committed
it to Writing; and when it is once written, we find it to be extremely
difficult to deface or revoke it.

IV. TANAQUIL Faber had endeavored to show in his Epistles, that the 14. Ode
of the 1st. Book ought to be understood literally; where it was generally
believed that Horace designed to represent the State of the Roman Commonwealth
that was ready to be engaged in a new Civil War after the defeat of Brutus and
Cassius, under the Idea of a disabled Vessel that was again to be exposed to
the tempestuous waves. He affirmed that there was nothing Allegorical in this
Ode, but that the Poet addressed himself to the Ship that had conveyed him from
Philippi into Italy, and that was about to return by the same way, with those
that had accompanied him in this Voyage. Father Rodellius who seems to fear
lest there should be something of danger in opposing the Torrent of
Interpreters, as his Divines aver, that it is not lawful to depart from the
general consent of the Doctors, maintains the contrary opinion, viz. That there
is an Allegory in this place. They that are desirous to be further informed in
this matter, may at their leisure compare his assertions with the reasons that
are alleged by Tan. Faber.

V. THERE is a passage in the 2d. Ode of the 2d. Book, which has very much
perplexed Interpreters, and it is this, Quisquis ingentes occulo irretortor.
Spectat acervos.


M. Dacier explains this Phrase Occulo irretorto, with a straight or direct
Eye; that is to say, without envy; for the property of envy is to look askew;
and Rodellius insists that this is the Character of a man of whom it may be
said, That the brightness of Gold does not at all dazzle his Eyes, and he is
never blinded thereby. This indeed comprehends the sense in general, and
several Commentators have observed it before them, as may be seen in an Ancient
Edition of Horace's Works, together with the Annotations of 40 Grammarians,
Printed at Basil in the year 1580 in Fol. But without injuring the reputation
of those Gentlemen, it may be justly affirmed, or that they have not
sufficiently expressed the sense of the word irretorto. Torquere oculos
signifies to turn our eyes to a certain place.

-- Oculosque ad maenia torsit. Retorquere oculos, is to turn the head
backwards to look on something that we have left behind us; thus Cicero, in his
second Oration against Catilina, which he made after he had compelled that
Traitor to abandon the City of Rome, from whence he departed with great
indignation. Retorquet oculos profecto saepe ad hanc Vrbem, quam ex suis
faucibus ereptam esse luget. He often turns his head to view this City, and
grows desperate, by reason that his attempts against it have failed. It may be
said of a man that leaves his Native Country without expressing any sorrow:
Spectavit maenia patriae exiens oculo irretorto, or, egressus maenibus non
retorsit oculos. Horace represents a man that despises Riches after the same
manner, as it were, passing through vast Mountains of Gold, but beholding them
only whilst they are before him, without vouchsafing to look back on them when
he is past, which shows that he does not regard them; for we are accustomed to
turn our heads, that we may retain those things longer in our sight; which we
are constrained to leave with much regret.

VI. IN regard that it has been observed by those that have seen this Edition
of Rodellius, that he therein often opposes the judgment of M. Dacier, it
might be expected that he should have made some Critical Remarks on a passage
in his Notes on the 21 Ode of the 3d. Book but he has taken no notice thereof.
Horace addressing himself to a certain Bottle or Pitcher, has this expression,
Descend Corvino jubente
Promere languidiora Vina.


Go down, since Corvinus has commanded me to entertain him with the most
delicate Wine. M. Dacier observes on the word descend, that the Romans kept
their Wines in Warehouses built on the top of their Houses, that they might be
ripened with the Smoke. He would have done well, if he had quoted his Authors;
for none can imagine that Wine above twenty years old at least, such as that
which is here mentioned being as old as Horace, should be kept in a Garret to
ripen it with the Smoke. This perhaps might have been a good method to make
Vinegar thereof, but by no means to render it more delicate. He might then have
affirmed, on much better grounds, that the Romans usually hung their Bottels on
the walls of their Cellars, as may be inferred from the 23. and 24. Chapters of
Cato's Treatise de re Rustica. This is one of those things which it were to be
wished that M. Dacier had always observed, at least to produce his Authors,
when he exhibits any remarkable circumstance or assertion; for we live in an
Age that is extremely distrustful, by reason that diverse Critics have been
known to avouch those things whereof they could allege no proof, with no less
assurance than those concerning which there is the greatest Evidence.

IV. LES COMEDIES DE TERENCE traduites en Francois par Madame D'ACIER, etc. The
Comedies of TERENTIUS, Translated into French by Madam D'Acier, with some
remarks upon them. The last Edition Corrected and enriched with Figures at the
head of each Comedy. 12. Divided into three Parts. The I. has 576 page The II.
490. The III. 432. Printed in Amsterdam 1691 for the Brothers Huguetan, and are
to be Sold in London by Abel Swalle and Tim. Child.
This Edition is Printed after the same manner, and even Page for Page
according to that of Paris.

I. WE find in a large Preface prefixed at the beginning of the 1. Tome a
Comparison between Plantus and Terence, the substance whereof is this, that
Plautus had more vigor than Terence, that he exceeded him in the vivacity of
Action, and in the contriving of intrigues, that he showed more skill in acting
than in speaking; but that his Sentences were often too much affected, his
Drolleries gross, and his Style sometimes low: Whereas Terence is not so
accurate in his designs, and excels rather in speaking than acting; but his
Style is far more correct, his Morals better disposed, and his Drolleries much
more refined; And it is for this reason that the ingenious take more delight in
perusing Terence's Comedies, than in reading those of Plautus, and on the
contrary the common People prefer the later before the former; and it is on
this account likewise, that although other Poets are more esteemed than Terence,
nevertheless, he is reckoned among those of the first Rank, with respect to the
description of manners. Upon the whole matter, as when we happen to light upon
a thought or conception that we judge to be apposite, and which we are desirous
to preserve, we are so much accustomed to act a certain part, that when we
would represent another, we cannot forbear intermixing with it somewhat of this
Air, wherein we have been confirmed by a continual habit: thus that ingenious
disposition of mind which Terence might participate with Scipio and Lelius, is
more or less conspicuous in all the Personages that he brings on the Stage; we
cannot discover any thing that is outrageous or irregular therein, neither do
we find those mean and sordid expressions that are used by the vulgar. To prove
this, we need only to compare the discourses of Thraso and Gnatho, with those
of the Miles gloriosus and the Parasites that are introduced by Plautus; the
later indeed was skilful in causing the multitude to shout, but Terence
afforded satisfaction to the judicious Auditory, who do not make their
divertisement to consist in the obstreporous noise of Laughter, to which the
Rabble is addicted, but in hearing somewhat recited that savours of real wit
and ingenuity.

II. MOREOVER Madam D'Acier vindicates her design in translating the entire
Works of Terence, foreseeing that some Critics might be so scrupulous as to
dislike what she has done, by reason that a certain pious and worthy Person
seems to have believed that they ought not to be translated without making
great alterations, and very considerable additions. The same Gentleman
published three Comedies in French, many years ago, which were received with
great applause. They that are desirous to know whether he has as faithfully
rendered the Author's sense, as he has taken care to represent it in an elegant
style, may compare his Version with that of Madam D'Acier, and I doubt not but
that after a careful review of both, they will acknowledge that the latter has
better expressed the genuine sense and energy of the Original, which she has
followed with much more exactness:

III. AFTERWARD Madam D'Acier proceeds to entertain us with an account of the
several Translators and Interpreters of Terence's Works, and more especially of
certain Figures that are inserted at the beginning of every Act, in two
Manuscripts of the French Kings Library, and which may contribute much to the
more clear understanding of diverse passages of this Author; but it were to be
wished that she had caused them all to be well engraved. Moreover she has found
in these Manuscripts the confirmation of certain conjectures concerning the
order of some of the Scenes, that are generally attributed to those Acts to
which they do not appertain. Instead of annexing separate examinations
according to the Rules of Dramatick Poetry, as she has formerly done with
respect to Plaurus, she has intermixed with her Remarks several particular
observations relating to the management of the Theater, wherein she gives an
account of the alteration that she has made in Terence, as to the division of
the Scenes and Acts. She admires that those Comedies that have been in the
possession of learned Men for so many Ages, should nevertheless remain even at
this day in so great confusion, that there are some Acts that commence where
they ought not; that is to say, before the Theater is cleared: and she declares
that she has remedied this disorder. The cause of this inadvertency is, that
the greatest part of Grammarians adhere much more to the words than to the
matter, and imagine that they have sufficiently explained the meaning of an
Author, by showing what every word has been used to signify separately.

IV. AFTER the Preface we find a Translation of Terence's Life, Written by
Suetonius, together with Observations, wherein all the obscure passages thereof
are illustrated, and diverse Sentiments of the Ancients confirmed. She likewise
gives us this judgment concerning the six pieces of Terence that are now
extant: The Andria and Adelphi seem to excel in the beauty of the Characters,
and the description of manners; The Eunuchus and Phormio in the vivacity of the
intrigues; And the Heautontimorumenos and Hecyra seem to have the pre-eminence,
with respect to the excellency of the conceptions, and variety of passions, as
also the purity and simplicity of the style.

V. Lastly, to exhibit a general Idea of this work, we shall here produce two
passages in the Prologue of the Andria, one whereof is interpreted by Madam
D'Acier after a new manner, and the other seems to require a little correction.
Terence's Enemies objected to him that he did ill in not simply translating the
Comedies of the Grecians into Latin, but in presuming to compose a single one
in Latin, from many Greek; they expressed their resentment in these words:
Contaminare non decere fabulas; which Madam D'Acier translates, that it is not
lawful to intermingle Comedies: She derives the word contaminare from contango,
affirming that it only signifies here to intermix, and that it is taken in a
good sense, insomuch that when Terence's Adversaries maintained that
contaminare non decet fabulas, this Poet avouch'd that decet contaminare. This
Etymology seems indeed to be true, and it is on this Account that contamino
signifies to sullie or pollute any thing with touching it, according to
Donatus's remark; but we have no example, from which it may be evinced that
this word was ever taken in a good sense. Terence, after he has produced the
accusation of his Enemies, in the same odious terms as they had exhibited it,
does not reply decet contaminare fabulas, but simply proves that it was lawful
to do that which they called contaminare. They pretended that Terence defiled
(if we may use the expression) Menander's Plays, by adding to them somewhat of
his own, or by annexing certain passages taken from other pieces of the same
Poet, which being transposed, lost a great part of their Primitive Beauty and
Elegancy. Therefore although Madam D'Acier, as to the main point, is of the same
opinion as the other Interpreters; nevertheless every one will not admit that
signification, which she ascribes unto the word contaminare.

The other passage of the Prologue to the Andria, which seems to stand in need
of a small alteration, is this, Favete, adeste aequo animo and rem cognoscite,
Vt pernoscatis ecquid spei sit reliquum,
Post haec quas faciet de integro Comedias,
Spectandae, an exigendae sint vobis prius.


Give attention favorably, and examine this Piece, that you may be able to
judge what may be expected from our Poet, and whether the Comedies which he
shall hereafter make, may deserve to be acted before you, or whether they ought
to be rejected without hearing.

Now let judicious Critics determine whether this correction, which consists
in reading pernoscat is in two words, be not more consonant to the words and
design of the Poet. Give attention favorably, etc. To the end that he may know
whether there be any grounds for him to hope for the future, and whether you
will vouchsafe to grant that the new Comedies which he may hereafter compose,
shall be acted, or whether you will explode them without seeing. At least this
sense is more agreeable to these words, Ecquid spei sit reliquum, etc. Which
after whatsoever manner they are understood, may be much better attributed to
Terence than to the People of Rome. Perhaps this Comedy was acted after the
Hecyra, or some other Play of this Poet was rejected, which caused him to fear
lest the like accident should again happen. As for the People of Rome, they had
no reason to despair of the sufficiency of Terence's Pieces, which they had
already often approved; but the Poet having once received a repulse, might
suspect lest this should have done some injury to his credit, and should
occasion the loss of the public approbation. The word reliquum joined with
spes seems altogether to favor this sense, and is contrary to that of Madam
D'Acier, who by spes understands expectatio. Moreover it is a frequent custom
of Terence to make use of the Pronoun is instead of ille, hic, ipse, as appears
from the examples produced by Robert Stephen in his Thesaurus linguae Latinae.

V. CORNELIUS NEPOS de vita Excellentium Imperatorum; Interpretatione and notis
illustravit NICOLAUS COURTIN, Humanitatis Professor in Vniversitate Parisiensi.
Jussu Christianissimi Regis, in usum Serenissimi Delphini, juxta Editionem
Parisiensem. 8o. Londini apud Abel Swalle. 1691. p. 264.
Though Cornelius Nepos appears to be a very plain Author, and easy to be
understood; he is so succinct, and gives us the knowledge of so many Events and
Antiquities, that the public is without question obliged to those who took
care of the Education of the Dauphin of France, and appointed a person of so
much learning and judgment as Monsieur Courtin, to unfold the knotty
difficulties of this Author. He has not given himself the trouble to make an
unprofitable Paraphrase upon this Historian. He has only explained his most
extraordinary Idioms of Speech by the more common Phrases; and though his Notes
appear not very long, however they leave no difficulty in this Author
unexplained.

Now in regard the Ancients are no very exact Chronologers, Mr. Courtin has
placed before his Commentary a Chronology of 44 Olympiads, or 176 years. Which
space of time includes all the lives which Cornelius Nepos has written; and his
Interpreter has taken care to mark out to what year the several Historical
Actions therein recounted, particularly refer. This Chronology begins from the
72. Olympiad, that is to say, according to his account, from the year of the
World 3480. and the 261 year after the building of the City of Rome.

To the lives of Cornelius Nepos Mr. Courtin has added all the Fragments of
that Author, which are extant, upon which he has also made Notes. At the end
there is an Index of all the words of that Historian, conformable to the method
of other Commentaries, for the use of the Dauphin.

VI. D. JUNII JUVENALIS, and A PERSIS FLACCI Satyrae, Interpretatione and notis
illustravit LUDOVICUS PRATEUS, Rhetoricae Preceptor emeritus. Jussu
Christianissimi Regis, in usum Serenissimi Delphini, 8o. Land. apud Abel
Swalle, 1691. p. 606.
MOnsieur PRATEUS has translated these two Poets into other Latin, with so nice
an exactness, as if he had studied for a Version of the Bible. For as he is
obliged to add words to the Text, to make the construction and contexture of
the discourse, he has taken care to mark them in other Letters. You will say
perhaps that if he had made a freer Paraphrase, he might have better explained
his Authors; but he might as well have run himself into a mistake of sense. So
that there is no question but there are many people who will commend him for
having been a little precise, especially when they shall see that he has
supplied with ample Notes, what might be wanting to complete the perspicuity of
the Paraphrase. And indeed how was it possible to translate clearly and in few
words those verses of the 4 Satyr of Persius.

-- Esto;
Dum ndetcrius sapiat Pannucia Baucis,
Cum been discincto cantaverit Ocima vernae.
Ocimum is an Aromatic Herb, which they never sowed but with Curses and
Maledictions, believing it would grow the better. Baucis was the name of a poor
old Woman, and proverbially taken for any old Herb-woman. Socrates, who in this
Satyr represents the person of Persius, tells Alcibiades representing the
person of Nero, that though he might have reason to boast of the Nobility of his
Extraction, and the Comeliness of his Person; yet for all that, he might have no
less cause to fear his being reproached, for having no more wit than a
Herring-wife that abuses a Footman. This is the Interpretation and meaning
which, next to Casaubon, Mr. Prateus gives of this passage in Persius. You
shall find in his Notes all that the most subtle Critics have said to render
Persius intelligible.

VII. A DEFENSE OF DIOCESAN EPISCOPACY, in answer to a Book of Mr. David
Clarkson lately Published, Entitled Primitive Episcopacy; by HEN. MAURICE D.D.
8o. London 1691. p. 470.
IF all Books were written like this, I do not believe, there is any Mortal
would be so adventurous as to undertake to be a Journalist; for there is
neither Table of the Chapters nor of the Matters; nor any Titles upon the
Chapters; nor is the design of the Author to be apprehended, either in the
Preface or Introduction. So that a man must have read the Book which the Author
refutes, and know what it treats of, if he intends to make any advantage by the
reading of this.

That want of order might offend the Reader, and hinder the selling of the
Book, and yet neither Dr. Maurice nor his Bookseller have any reason to
complain. But this Book is otherwise so well written, and contains so many
learned Observations, that it is great pity it should not be as well known as it
deserves. And therefore we shall in a few words give you an account of what it
treats. Mr. Clarkson was a Nonconformist, of the number of those who are
called Independants, or Congregational Men, because they believe that every
Congregation is a Church apart, or a Society of Men by themselves, over which
no other has any thing to do; so that the Minister they have made choice of, is
very near as Sovereign as the Pope of Rome; or to make use of a Phrase which
less offends those Gentlemen, as a Bishop in his Diocese.

To prove that this opinion is not so new as it seems at first, Mr. Clarkson
wrote a Book, entitled Primitive Episcopacy, which was not Published till
after his decease. The principal thing which he drives at, is to prove, that
during the three first Ages, no Bishop had above one Flock under his charge,
that is to say, so many Christians as the Place could contain wherein they
assembled.

To make this out, he endeavors to show, 1. That in the first Age there were
none but Jews and Proselytes that embraced the Christian Religion, and those
but few in number. 2. That the Pagans that were converted in the second and
third Age were inconsiderable in respect of the Jews and other Pagans. 3. That
there was a Bishop almost in every Village. 4. That the greatest part of the
Cities were no bigger than the Villages and Borough Towns of England. 5. That
such as were bigger were but thinly peopled; at least that it is certain there
were but very few Christians in 'em. 6. That it ought to be considered that the
Christians were divided into several Sects, which had every one their
particular Bishops or Pastors.
Dr. Maurice refutes these objections with a great deal more pains and Learning
than they deserve, in the six Chapters of which the whole Treatise consists.
But these answers would engage us in a too long discussion; besides that we are
convinced that the greatest part of those that will read this Journal, are
almost able to discover the weakness of Mr. Clarkson's Arguments.

VIII. An Accurate Description of the United Netherlands, and of the most
considerable Parts of Germany, Swedeland, and Denmark, containing a succinct
account of what is most remarkable in these Countries; and necessary
Instructions for Travelers; together with an exact relation of the
Entertainment of his most Sacred Majesty, K. WILLIAM at the Hague. Written by
an English Gentleman. 8o. London for Tim. Child. 1691. p. 192.
TRavels are always full of divertisement, provided they be well written, but
they are not always equally beneficial; for that they who do no more than slip
into a Country, or make but a short stay therein, can never thoroughly inform
themselves of the manners and customs of the people, or of the form of their
Government, which is the principal thing to be inquired into. Therefore the
Remarks of Sir William Temple are admired for so much as they give an account
of such things. The Author of this description seems to have judgment enough to
have been able to do the same, especially having lived sixteen years in the
Countries of which he speaks. But it seems that he has avoided tracing the
Footsteps of that learned Politician; and that he has only applied himself to
make remarks more profitable for Travelers only, and more proper for the
common sort of People. Therefore it is, that you shall here find the
descriptions of the most famous Cities of Holland, Germany, Sweeden, and
Denmark, of their situation, their Building, the Charges of traveling
thither, and living there; besides several Remarks upon their Trade, their
Riches, the Inclinations of the Inhabitants, and which way to converse with
'em, and win their Friendship. In the Observations which he makes upon these
things he seems still to have had in view the good of his Nation, and to
incline those that sit at the Helm to reform certain abuses, which if removed,
the Nation would be in a more flourishing condition. You shall there find one
example in the extract of a Letter of a Merchant who preferred living at
Amsterdam before living in London, for reasons very requisite to be read p.
11^.113.
in the Author himself.

To render his admonitions grateful to his fellow Countrymen, he ends with a
discourse very curious, and much to their advantage. He gives you a Catalogue
of the 18 Cities of Holland that have voices in the States of that Province; of
53 the most famous Cities of Germany and the Low Countries; of 22 of France; of
14 in Italy; besides some others in the Territories of the Duke of Savoy, and
the Cantons of Switzerland. He sets down the number of their Houses, which he
says he had out of the public Registers, and comparing them afterward with
the Houses in London, which he demonstrates to be above 100000, he makes it out
by that Calculation, that all the Cities of the Province of Holland joined
together do not contain so many Houses as London and the Suburds, not having
above 88909. That the 53 Cities of Germany do not exceed the Capital City of
England above a little more than two thirds; and that the 22 Cities of France
have not once as many.

The Relation of the King of England's first Voyage into Holland is worth
reading, especially for persons of Wit, who will there meet with very ingenious
Devises and Inscriptions.

IX. The new Method of Fortification as practiced by Monsieur Vauban Engineer
General of France. 8o. London for Abel Swalle. 1691. p. 183.
Though this Book has been published by the Chevalier de Cambray, one of Mr.
Vauban's Pupils, it is certainly the work of that great Engineer, who composed
it for the benefit of certain young Noblemen and Cadets residing in diverse
Cities within the Dominions of the French King. To the end that they might be
able to avoid the pains and trouble of reading over so many Voluminous Books
that are written in the German and other Languages on this Subject; the Author
of this Tract has taken care to epitomize all that he judged to be necessary
for the attaining to perfection in this Art. And indeed, besides a large
Treatise of practical Geometry prefixed at the beginning; the several Methods
of almost all the Eminent Engineers that have hither to appeared in the World,
are therein plainly exhibited; insomuch that with a little observation we may
be informed of the manner of Fortifying of Places used by the Hollanders,
Germans, Italians, and French, as well as most other Nations. Therefore in
regard that this Book has been generally well approved, the Publisher of this
English Version could no longer refrain from imparting so valuable a treasure
to his own Countrymen, that they might likewise reap the same advantage
thereby, and it is on this account that he has taken care that it should even
exceed the Original, by the means of several considerable alterations and
amendments that are made in the translation. Moreover, if curious and
well-grav'd figures add any value to a Mathematical Book, it may be justly
expected that the great number of Cuts and accurate Schemes inserted therein
should render it yet more acceptable.

There are two parts in this Volume, one is a Treatise of practical Geometry,
and the other a discourse of Fortification; the Treatise of Geometry is
likewise divided into two Books, in the first whereof are contained four
Chapters, and in the second six; in the former are exhibited the p. 6.
explication of the Terms of Geometry, and the 6.
operation of diverse Problemes that may be drawn on Paper by way of recreation,
with the help of a pair of Compasses and a Ruler; together with the 22.
construction of five regular bodies, and of many others that come near them,
as also the 29.
manner of forming Piramids which shall have regular Polygons for their Bases,
from the Triangle to the Dodecagon. The second Book comprehends the mensuration
of 3^.
Heights, (the Authors Instrument for this purpose is the Astrolabe) 43.
Lengths, 62.
Plains, 6^.
Solids, 6^.
and Concaves, that is to say, according to his definition, the Art of
measuring hollow bodies, to know how much they contain. Lastly the method 74.
of making a body of a certain Figure equal to another of another Figure is
therein taught which Art is called the transmutation of bodies, in opposition
to that of surfaces represented in the second Chapter of the first Book. This
Treatise is concluded with a persuasion that what has been therein delivered
is sufficient for those that are desirous to make a considerable Progress in
the Art of Military Architecture.

The Treatise of Fortification is divided into five Books, every one of which
contains many Chapters: In the p. 1.
first whereof is explained the definition of Fortification, together with its
Original and several parts, as also the terms that are made use of in the
attacking and defending of places. As for its Original, the Author affirms 3.
that at first the Assaults of Robbers and wild Beasts being only feared, the
People were content to satisfy themselves with Hedges alone, which custom
continued even among some Nation 328 Years before our Saviors Nativity. But in
process of time, the ambition of some increasing, who endeavored to rule and
tyrannize over their Neighbors, those that desired to enjoy their liberty,
were obliged to dig Trenches and build Walls, which they afterward flanked
with Towers, to the end that they might more easily repel the Enemy, when he
should happen to be lodged at the foot of the Wall to batter or undermine it.
At last a Monk of the Order of St. Francis named Berthold Schwartz of the City
of Fribourg in the Country of Brisgan, having invented Gunpowder in the Year
of our Lord 1380. under the Reign of Wenceslaus. the Son of Charles IV, the
Cannon and other pieces of Artillery were then applied to beat down these weak
defenses, which was done without much difficulty, whereupon the besieged were
constrained to reinforce their Walls, to enlarge their Towers, and to give them
another Figure, which gave occasion to the invention of Bastions and other
Works that are now in use.

In the second Book is laid down the 21.
Maxims and Rules of Fortification, reserving the illustration of some of them
for the fourth Book. Afterward he enquires into the advantages and
disadvantages of the Situation of Places, built on a Rock, etc. as also that of
Citadels and other small Fortresses which serve to command the plain Country:
But as for great places he determines that they cannot be better situated than
in a Plain, or rather on the Banks of a large River: Then he proceeds to
discourse of the nature and 30.
quality of the earth, and prefers that sort which is fat and pliable as the
best for these Works. Lastly, he concludes this Book, with giving some account
of necessary 32.
Provisions and Ammunition; and it is not without good reason that he makes
mention of Money in the beginning of his Catalogue.

Moreover in the third Book the Author shows, after 33.
what manner a regular Polygon may be inscribed within a given Circle, and how
to make a Scale; he proceeds to represent the 35.
draught of a Square, as being the first figure propounded to be Fortified;
then having explained the 40.
construction of the exterior parts, he returns, to that of the 50.
Polygons: Lastly, he exhibits the manner of making, 53.
Profils or Draughts, of drawing out 55.
a Fortress in the Field, and of describing 57.
the Streets in a Draught.

To prove in some measure what he has alleged, and give a greater light into
the knowledge of this Art, he produces in the fourth Book 59.88.
the different sentiments of a great number of Engineers, concerning the most
principal parts of Fortification, and afterward declares his own opinion. We
shall now give a particular account of the most considerable remarks that have
been made on the Method of this famous Engineer. Let us then begin with the
Flanks which are the principal parts of Fortification, therefore nothing ought
to be neglected for the most advantageous structure of them. And forasmuch as
the largest are undoubtedly the best, Monsieur de Vauban endeavors to allow
them as much height as is possible. It is for this reason that he will not
admit a second Flank, and that he makes the Overture of the Angle of the
Curtain to consist of from 98 to 106 degrees. Thus the Flanks in his
middle-siz'd Fortification, which we shall only mention here, contain from 18
to 37 Fathoms. I cannot imagine that it will be objected, that he does not
regulate the overture of the Angle of the Curtain with a due proportion to the
said Curtain; since its height ought only to be determined with respect to the
Line of Defense. This seems to be that which this great Man chiefly regarded.
Monsieur de Vauban having allowed to the Flanks all the length imaginable,
endeavors to cover part of them as much as is possible; to this purpose he
erects an Orillon, which he forms out of a Semicircle. Perhaps it will be
thought to be somewhat unusual that he constantly makes it to consist of the
third part of the Flank, because it does not seem to be necessary to erect a
larger Orillon in a greater Fortification than in a lesser. I am apt to believe
that it is sufficient to allow it so much strength as to be able to resist the
force of the Cannon. Afterward he causes the two other parts of the Flank to
return within the body of the Bastion, assigning them the Figure of the sixth
part of a Circle, and this is what has been lately termed the hollow Tower, or
Flank retired. Lastly, for the better covering of the Flanks, he places the
wings of the Works which he builds before the Curtain within the Faces, at the
distance of some Fathoms from the Orillon. It has been believed for a long
time, that double Flanks were of very great use in the defense of a place, but
they are wholly omitted by Monsieur de Vauban, though his reasons are not as yet
well known: neither does he regard False-Brayes, which is not to be admired;
and to defend the Trench, he makes use of a small and low Tenail to very good
purpose, which he places before the Curtain, and is separated from it by a
little ditch. The Faces of this Work are in the same delineation with those of
the Bastions. The Flanks are distant from the others from 10 to 12 Fathoms, and
Monsieur de Cambray declares that this proves what he had before asserted
concerning the Line of Defense, for he had avouched in one of his Maxims, that
it ought not to exceed 125 Fathoms, nevertheless it appears from his Tables
that it contains from 126 to 138 Fathoms* There needs not much pains to be
taken with respect to the Angle of the Bastion, only assigning to it from 60 to
100 degrees, that it may be able to sustain it self, and that the Bastion may
be of a sufficient largeness. But as for the Faces they seem to require more
care to make them of an equal strength, since they do not exceed at most above
50 fathoms. Lastly, touching the Trench, the Author follows the opinion of
Monsieur de Clermont, who allots from 18 to twenty fathoms for its breadth, and
from 18 to 20 feet for its depth. The Glacis's are made as large as they can be
conveniently, not allowing less to them than 36 fathoms; but as for the
Rampart, its breadth is limited to 10 fathoms, and Monsieur de Vauban derides
their project that would have it proportioned to the largeness of the Polygons,
as if little places were not attacked with the same Arms as those that are
greater.

In the fifth and last Book, the Author shows 89.
the structure of diverse Fortresses erected in the Field, and afterward lays
down 95.
Rules for the fortifying of an irregular place. But as to the method used by
him, it may be affirmed, that he departs a little from his own Maxims, and more
especially from the first; in regard that the Trench, the Base of the Rampart,
etc. are diminished proportionably as the side of the Polygon exceeds 180
fathoms, unless one would say, that in Triangles, which are unequal, there is
the same proportion between their sides. This Book is concluded with mentioning
somewhat concerning Artillery, whilst a larger discourse thereof is reserved to
a Treatise wherein the Author promises expressly to inform us of the manner of
attacking a place according to the judgment of Monsieur de Vauban, the
publication of which is impatiently expected.

X. OSTEOLOGIA NOVA: Or, A New Treatise of the Bones, and the Parts belonging
to them; with the Manner of their Growth and Nutrition: Communicated to the
Royal Society in several Discourses; By Clopton Havers M. D. Fellow of the
Royal Society. London, for S. Smith, 1691. Page 310.
IT would require a Discourse as large as any of the Five Dissertations of Dr.
Haver's Book, should we go about to set down every Thing that is new and
curious therein: And therefore the extraordinary Abundance of Matter will
enforce us to pass over many remarkable Things upon which we should have
insisted much longer; but that they are, as we may say, so heaped up in Piles
one upon another.

I. The First Discourse treats of the Nature of Bones, and describes the
Membrane which covers them, their interior Frame and Figure.

The Author begins with a kind of Prologue, very significant to the purpose; by
giving an Idea of the manner of Generation, according to the Principles of de
Graef, and Monsieur Drelincourt. He supposes, p. 7.
That all the Parts of the Creature are delineated in the Female's Egg, while
it is yet in the Womb, and before the Seed of the Male has given it Life: That
the most volatile Parts of the Seed insinuating themselves into the Umbilical
Vein of the Egg, through the Pores of the Membrane of the Ovary, that Vein
carries those Particles to the two Ventricles of the Heart, where they raise a
Fermentation in the Humors which there they meet withal, that rarifies and
dilates them, and putting the Fibers of the Heart upon a Contraction, produces
that Beating, which is the Sign and Beginning of Life. Part of these rarified
Humors falling from the right and left Ventricles, into the Aorta, imparts its
Motion to the Matter contained in it, and in all the Vessels which depend upon
it. The Arteries being thus extended, and the Liquor within them being
agitated, opens its self a Passage through the Veins; and this compleats the
Circulation. These Humors thus circulating, meet with Glandules in their way,
upon the sides, and at the Extremities of the Arteries, through which there is
a necessity for them to pass. These Glandules being a sort of Strainers, the
most subtle Parts and those which first get through the Glandules of the Brain,
are those which are called the Vital and Animal Spirits; of which, when there
are sufficient to give motion to the Original of the Nerves, then apparently it
is, that the Soul is infused into the Fo^tus.

The Membrane p. 14.
which covers the Bone, is very thin, and exquisitely sensible, and made up of
most minute and curious Threads, which deduce their Original from the Dura
Matter, and from several Muscles and Tendons. Those that descend from the Dura
Matter, lie the nearest to the Bones, and are all parallel; but those which
proceed from the Muscles, take a different course, according to the situation
of the Muscle from whence they proceed. This Membrane is fastened to the Bone by
the nature of their Substance, which is viscous and slimy, and by certain
little Fibers of that Membrane, which enter into the Pores of the Bone. It is
appointed for Five several Offices: 1. It serves to cover the Bones. 2. It
conveys Spirits into their Substance, which preserve their Heat, render them
sensible, and assist them in their growth and nourishment. 3. It contributes to
limit the growth of the Bones. 4. It serves to keep them joined and knit
together, and with the Tendons of the Muscles 5. This Membrane being extremely
sensible, causes us to feel the least Disorder that happens in the structure of
the Bones, and directs us in the Application of outward Remedies to the Place
affected.


The Bones, p. 30.
at their first beginning, are no more than a clammy Gelly; which drying by
little and little, becomes a Gristle Cartilage.
, and afterward a perfect Bone, by the evaporation of the liquid Matter, and
the additions of the nutritive Juice. The Particles that compose them, are long
in shape, and of a terrestrial and salt Nature; but the terrestrial Particles
make above two Thirds of the Mass. Their Fibers are long; contig^ous, and
parallel one to the other, in such a manner that they form little Lamels; which
meeting at the Extremity of the Bones, lie one over another, and close up the
Concavity p. 43.
. There are two sorts of Pores in the Bones, besides those which serve for a
passage to the Sanguinary Vessels: of which some are oblique, and pierce
through the Lamels of the Bones, extending themselves from the superficies of
the Bone to the Hollowness; the other are straight and narrow, and appear all
along the Lamels from one end of the Bone to the other. p 49.
The Superficies of the Bone is very uneven, unless it be at the Joints, where
there is a necessity it should be smoother; to facilitate the motion of the
Parts. This unevenness proceeds from the superficial Cavities and Pores, which
there meet together. These superficial Cavities are of two sorts: Some are
long, and like a sort of Furrows; others are shorter, and of a different shape.
The Use of both is to dilate the Surface of the Bone, and to keep the Membrane
more firmly fastened to it.

p ^6.
As for the Pores, their Use is to serve as passages for Blood. Vessels; some
belonging to those Vessels which convey that Blood which supplies the
nutritious Juice; others, to them which serve to the Marrow. Those of the
nutritious Veins are very numerous, but so small, that it is a difficult thing
to discern them. Those of the Medullary Arteries are more remarkable, and enter
the Bone obliquely; so that the way which they make, is often Ten or Twelve
times longer than the Thickness of the Bone.

p. 61.
There are two sorts of Hollownesses in the Bone; and of those which are large,
there is but one in every Bone; the rest are very numerous, and resemble little
Cells, which render that part of the Bone spungy where they are to be found.
The Author gives the Reasons of all this Structure of Nature.

You will also find there very curious Observations upon the Teeth. p. 78.
Dr. Havers observes, That they are made up of two very different Parts: The
one is of the Nature of Stones, having the solidity and glittering of the
hardest Flints; but with this difference, that they will be dissolved by Aqua
Fortis, which Flints will not. This Stony Matter is a sort of Rind, which
covers all the Part without the Gums. That Part which is within the Gums is
covered with a particular Membrane, which nevertheless proceeds not from that
of the Jawbone, though this Membrane extends it self to the Fastening or
Enclosure of the Teeth in the Gums, and be contiguous to their Membrane.

II. The Second Discourse p 89.
treats at first of Growth and Nourishment in general; which the Author
afterward particularly applies to the Bones. He reduces all that Matter to
Three Questions. The First, How the Nutritive Juice is formed, and fixed to the
Parts of young Creatures, after such a sort as to enlarge their Dimensions?
Certain it is, that that same Juice proceeds from our Nourishment changed into
Chyle; which passing through the Milky Veins, to mix it self with the Blood,
meets with some Particles of the Nutritive Juice of the Kerness, conveyed by
the Lymphatick Channels, that serve for a Ferment to those of the Chyle. This
Milky Liquor entering the Heart, and being mixed with the Blood, is there
subtiliz'd, and passes afterward into the Arteries; on the sides of which it
meets with Kernels, the Pores of which are so framed, as only to admit the
Nutritive Juice.

Now while the rest of the Blood pursues its Course in the Artery, the
Nutritive Particles are pressed out of the Kernels, and advance forward through
every up-lifting of the Artery, and by the pressure of other little Bodies of
the same nature, which supply their Places, till they are pushed forward into
the Intervals of the Fibers, where they meet with the Spirits in Motion.

These Spirits have a double Motion; for they turn about their Center like a
Bowl thrown out of hand, while according to their local Motion, they describe a
Line as straight as is possible. Now in regard the Nutritive Parts are liquid
and viscous, and that the Spirits cannot impart their direct Motion to them,
they force them to the sides of the Vessels, where they stick; more especially,
if they meet with any hollowness, or any void space. Add to this, that while
the Creature is yet very young, the Parts are very tender, and the Fibers more
supple, and less extended: So that it is no wonder if little viscous Bodies
being forced in between the Extremities of the Particles of those Fibers, these
soft Parts give way, and so separate one from the other, for the infixation of
new Matter.

The Second Question, p. 126.
proposes, What is the Cause that stops the growth of any Creature? To which,
the Answer is, That it is the hardness of the Filaments and Lamels, and the
firm unition of the Particles of the Fleshy and Nervous Fibers, which, when a
Creature is come to such an Age, resist the Efforts of the Spirits and
Nutritive Particles; so that not being able to lodge themselves in the Pores or
Intervals of the Fibers, which are already full, they are carried off by the
direct motion of the Spirits, to other Kernels, which rarifie them to a greater
degree, and employ them to other Uses.

The Third Question p. 133.
is about Nourishment, the Nature of it, and how it is performed? Dr. Havers
believes it to be no more than a continual Supply of the fluid and nutritious
Particles that keep the Fibers, the Pores, the Hollownesses, and in a word, all
the Pipes and Vessels of the Body full, and in a good condition. Sometimes it
happens that there may be a loss of some part of the Fibers, and that the void
space is filled up by the Nutritive Juice, which the circular Motion of the
Spirits forces forward, toward the sides of the Arteries: But this, the Author
says, is not the manner of Nature's repairing the ordinary Decays and Wastes of
our Bodies.

For Proof of which, he supposes, as another Learned Anatomist D. Tyson.
does, that the whole Body of Man is porous, and full of Vessels, which several
sorts of Humors keep dilated and well sill'd; so that Leanness, and the Marasm
it self, do not proceed from that, the fixed Parts of our Body, as the Flesh
and Bones are deprived of their Substance; which can never happen but by the
violence of Corrosives, which would cause an incredible pain: nevertheless they
feel no pain who are troubled with those languishing Diseases: And therefore
such an Atrophy must proceed from hence, that the Humors which fill the
Vessels, and preserve them plump, evaporating the Vessels shrunk, and by that
means impair the Dimension of the Parts.

The Author afterward, p 143.
makes the Application of his Principles, to explain the manner, and the limits
of the growth of the Bones, and how they are nourished; which it is no
difficult thing to do, if the Reader forget not what has been already observed;
That both in the Foetus and a new born Child, the Bones are made up of a Matter
which is very tender, and easi^y gives way; but as it grows, changes into
G^istles that the Particles which compose the Gristles, do not form continued
Threads, but leave between them Cavities, or void Spaces, which in time are
filled up with Nutritive Juice! That it slides along a good while before all
the Spaces of those Particles are filled up, and that the Gristles are
converted into perfect Bones; and then it is that Growth ceases, the Nutritious
Particles no longer knowing where to lodge themselves. According to this
Hypothesis, Dr. Havers explains the Reason why the Bones grow crooked in the
Rickets, and why both that Distemper and the Neapolitan Disease many times
produce Knots or Excrescencies upon the Bone.

III. The Third Discourse treats of the Marrow. p. 161
All the World knows that the Marrow is an Oily Substance, which fills the
Cavity of the Bones; but you shall hardly any where else meet with so exact a
Description of it, as the Author gives here: This Marrow is enclosed in small
round Vesicles; of which two, or three, or more, are contained in Bags of
different shape, and these Bags in a transparent and very slender Membrane,
consisting of Fibers prolonged from the Blood Vessels, which afford it
Nourishment through the Pores of the Bones. These Vesicles and little Bags are
also furnished with Pores, through which the Marrow's Oil passes from one to
the other, and communicates it self to the Joints: So that these Vesicles are
also a kind of Kernels, and separate the Marrow from the other Parts of the
Blood.

p. 171.
When these Vesicles are full, they contract themselves, as all puffed up
Bladders do, and then discharging their Oil the one into the other, it passes
from Vesicle to Vesicle, and from Bag to Bag, till it enters into the thwarting
Pores of the Bones; whence it sheds it self into the straight Pores, and at the
Articulations, and is employed into the Cavities between their Joints, which it
keeps moist and slippery. In the great Cavities of the Bones, the Marrow
appears whitish, speckled with Red; but absolutely Red in the lesser Cells,
which only proceeds from the different quantity of Veins and Arteries that
nourish it: Some parts of this Marrow are apt to congeal, because they are
mixed with Nitre.

Though the Marrow p. 178.
contributes nothing to the Nourishment of the Bones, that are furnished with
Blood Vessels appointed for that purpose; it is otherwise many ways useful:
For, 1. It moistens the Substance of the Bones, and by its oily Nature it
preserves them in good condition, and hinders them from shivering. 2. With the
Mucilage it makes the Joints of the Bones slippery, and consequently sit for
Motion. 3. Mixed with the clammy Mucilage, it cools them, and prevents their
contracting a more than ordinary Heat by their Motion. 4. It prevents them from
wearing out, wasting and bruising by rubbing one against another. 5. It is
after the same manner serviceable to the Ligaments which tie the Bones
together, preserving them from being dry and stiff, and keeping them supple and
slippery.


IV. The Fourth Discourse treats of the Mucilage, and the mucilaginous Kernels
p. 187.
These Kernels are one of the principal Discoveries of the Author; who tells
us, they were never discerned by any person before himself. They are of two
sorts; the one sort, which is very small and numerous, take up the whole
Membrane of the Joint, unless in that part where you meet with the second sort
of these Kernels, which are conglomerate, bigger, and consequently more
remarkable than the first. They are made up of several Kernels, or small
Membranes, extended one upon another, long and large at the bottom, and ending
usually in a point, though there are some that are flat, and of other different
Figures. They are soft and supple, and not brittle; so that they yield to, and
suffer the impression of the Bones without receiving any harm. The
Blood Vessels with which they communicate, are not straight, but oblique; so
that the Blood circulating round about them, the mucilaginous Particles have
time to separate, when they enter the Kernels.

The Mucilage p 201.
which distills out of these Kernels, is a clear and clammy Liquor, almost like
the White of an Egg. It is composed of Watery, Salt and Terrestrial Parts; but
the Salt, and the Earthy Parts make no more than about the 32d part of the
Mixture. It partakes of the nature of the Serum, only that it is not to be all
turned into a Coagulum by the heat of the Fire, as the Serum is. It serves for
the same Use as the Marrow, and they assist one another to perform their
Functions. The Mucilage renders the Marrow's Oil more slippery, and that Oil
hinders the Mucilage from growing too thick. It is formed, as the Author says,
in the Spleen, which is of a Viscous and Kernelly Substance, and which has two
forts of Pores; the one proper for the distilling of Acids through them, and
the other is a Stiptick Juice, which serves as a Ferment for the Blood to
produce the Mucilage there. Dr. Havers sets down several Experiments p. 217.
which he has made upon this Liquor; of which, the most considerable, in
relation to Physic, are, That violent Acids, as Salt, and Oil of Vitriol, Aqua
fortis, and Spirit of Nitre, and Vinegar, coagulate the Mucilage, chiefly when
it is hot; so that it will become thin and fluid, and that you may separate
from it a kind of Whey, or Serum. The Author tried, whether by the help of
Powder of Coral, Antimony Diaphorerick, or Crab's-eyes, he could make it resume
its first Nature; but he could not bring it to pass: Yet with Spirit of Sal
Armon. and Salt of Tartar, all the Coagulation would be dissolved.

The Parts where these Kernels are seated, are subject to Catarrh^, because
these Kernels not only separate the Mucilage from the Blood, but many times
also other Morbisick Humors, which Nature desires to be rid of. When those
Humors affect the Muscies, they cause the Rheumatism, and when they fall upon
the Joints, they breed the Gout.

Dr. Havers bestows a whole Article p. 223, 249.
upon both these Distempers, and observes, that the Humors which infect the
Mucilage upon these occasions, are of three sorts; the one sharp and thin, the
other salt, und the last, which are the most usual, acid and corroding. You
will read with delight the Author's manner of explaining the three Sources of
these Distempers; which gives a great Light to understand their Cure.

V. The Fifth Discourse is concerning the Gristles, p. 288.
It has been already observed, that they are only imperfect Bones; which being
subtle and flexible, are apt to comply with the several motions of the Muscles.
The Author describes at large their Nature, and their outward and inward
Structure, as also their different Uses; and particularly of those in the
Breast, p. 284.

II. FREDERICI RVISCHII, Anatomes, Chyrurgiae and Botanices Professoris,
Observationum Anatomico-Chirurgicarum Centuria. Accedit Catalogus Rariorum quae
in Musaeo Ruyschiano asservantur, adjectis ubique I conibus aeneis naturalem
magnitudinem representantibus. Amstelod. apud H. Boom 1691. page 274. Prostant
apud Abel Swall, and Timo. Child.
THere are few Books that look more curious to the sight than this. The Paper,
the Print, the Figures, draw the Eyes of the Reader; and there is no body but
will give a favorable Judgment of the Work, when he reads in the Preface, that
the Author has been Twenty Years Professor of Anatomy at Amsterdam: That he has
had all the Conveniences in the World to make Experiments in the Hospitals of
that great City; and that he has spent all his Life in making Collections of
whatever he has observed most remarkable. Upon these Foundations it is, that he
has raised the Hundred Observations which compose the first Part of this Work.
The Second, is a Description of the Author's Study; where are to be seen
several Rarities of Anatomy.

Mr. Ruyschius is not of the number of those that build in the Air a Systeme of
Physic, which has no other Foundation than Chimerical Conjectures. He
maintains, that Experience only is the Mistress of that Art; and he advises,
that Men, instead of guessing at the Causes of Diseases, should chiefly busy
themselves in collecting together the most surprising Phanomena's that offer
themselves in Practice. But withal, it would be necessary, that all who
undertake this Employment, should have seen every thing with their own Eyes,
and that they should be endued with a Conception and Judgment so sufficiently
clear, as not to look upon as extraordinary Accidents, Things that happen every
day.

The cutting of an Artery Ob. 11. p. 5.
, especially in the larger Vessels, is an Accident difficult to cure; and the
Author would have obliged the Public, had he explained a little more at large
how he stopped that Aneurisma in the Arm, to the Cure of which he says he was an
Assistant. When he prepared to make the Incision, to discover the wounded
Artery that he might close it up again, he says, he made use of an Iron-Ring,
lined with a thick and soft Skin, which he intended to apply to the upper part
of the Arm, above the Aneurisma, to stop the motion of the Blood that way; That
that same Instrument not answering their expectation, they had recourse to
another, which took effect; but the Author is so far from describing it, that
he does not so much as name it. In a Journal of Eight Days, relating to that
Malady, which Mr. Ruyschius gives us, we find the Wound grew continually worse
and worse, till it broke out into two new Aneurisma's; the one of which being
as large as a great Pea, opened it self, but bled not much; because the
Surgeon stopped it presently; and a few days after, it was thoroughly healed,
by opening the Vein, a slender Diet, and a due compression. As for the other,
they had much ado to squeeze it down; it continued several days, but at length
it vanished, and the Patient recovered. Paucis diebus secta Vena, tenuiori
diaeta praescripta, and debita compressione facta, sanatum fuit. Alterum vero
Aneurisma quantumvis comprimeretur perplures dies, curationi remoram fecit;
tandem vero quoque disparuit, convaluitque aeger.

It would be a strange Thing Obs. 22. p. 27.
that a Woman should conceive, and yet that the Membrane called the Hymen,
should not be broken. But the Relation which Mr. Ruyschius gives us, is not
sufficient to make us believe it. He adds another Circumstance more incredible;
asserting, That the Vagina or Sheath of the Womb was covered and stopped up
with an extraordinary Membrane at the Time of the Woman's Lying in. He says,
That these two Membranes were cut, and that the Infant came forth sound and
vigorous, and that the Mother received no harm. However, in my Opinion, there
is nothing in this Relation of his, but what might have been unfolded, without
supposing any thing but what is very common. The Bed wherein the Foetus is
contained, and which is made up of several double Membranes, sinks down by
little and little, through the weight of the Waters that fill it. Then the
Infant separates from the Body of the Mother, and falls with his Head downward
toward the Orifice of the Womb. Many times it happens that the Foetus falls on
the Side, and incumbers it self, Head and Neck together, in the Membranes of
its Bed. Those, it seems, were the Membranes which Ruyschius caused to be cut,
and which hindered the Birth of the Infant: At least there is nothing in all his
Observation, which forces us to have recourse to two such wonderful Events.

XI. Leonardi Plukenetri PHYTOGRAPHIA, s^^^ Stirpium Illustriorum, and minus
cognitarum I CONES, Tabulis aeneis, 120 Fig. fere, 800. summa diligentra
elaboratoe. Fol. Londini 1691.
WHerein the Author has given impregnant Instance at his own expense, of his
earnest desire^ of improving Bot^^y. The Subject of this Book h^s been the
st^^died Collection of several Vears, and unites in it self the scattered and
most distant Parts of Vegetable Nature; which if we consider as to their Number
or Novelty, it will appear such an Ac^omulation of Network Science, as few
Books of this Nature can boast of: Not can we sufficiently admire the vast
Variety of curiously engra^^ do (...) ^i^^^ent or unheard of Plants
communicated to the World in so ^ior^ and compendious a Volu^e. The Method he
takes in explaining these E^^ticks, is both conspicuous and fuccirct; his Names
adapted from their essential Notes, and proper Characteristicks, such, as
without help of I^^n, might convey to the Mind a true Idea of the Things they
denominate, as being entire Descriptions of them.

The Work divides it self into Two Parts; and by a fresh addition of Parts, may
be ^^ngt^linect out ad infi^^^^n^. For our Author pursues the Alphabetical
Order in his Design; yet not so as to break in upon Affinities or Cognations,
but had rather commute a Name, than not preserve a Clan or Tribe, as may be
observed throughout the whole Work: As, for instance, what others call a
Pe^^^^es Africana Ca^^^^^ Pal^stris fo^^^^, with be^^e^ reason he terms a
B^i^o, and ranks i^ among its Cognominals in the Letter B. By this way of
exploding improper Appellations, and assigning new ones to some late discovered
Plants, he comes to assert the straggling Vegetable into its proper Family; and
such Alliances that lay before promiscuous, or disjoined, and stood at distance
with each other, into a closer kind of Consortium: Thus, the A^^^e Orienta^^^
^^pp^c^^ fruo^^^ of others, (which indeed is no Alcea,) is made by him, a
Lapp^^^ tetrasperm^s, and subjoyned to the ^^atina Trag^, Hist. L^gd, which is
a Tetraspermo^ too; (by many, most untruly styled a Cynogloss^,) as of more
congruity with it, and near akin thereto; and in this way of Distribution, he
still preserves both Alphab^^ and Aff^^^^.

How clear his Art^ol ^igurations has made that cloudy Stella Leguminosa of the
Great John Bauhine, when here, as through a Beam of Light, it manifests it self
a true Astragalus, and discrepant from all others of the Kind. The Jacca's,
however perplexed in other Authors, are set to rights in this; and Thapsla's,
no less confused, are here distinct in the Iconisms of our Author.

There are some of those many curious Figures, the needful Emendations of
vitiate or mistaken Icons in elder Authors, which are by him made genuine from
the Truth of Things, on purpose to clear the Doubts, and decide the
Controversies of our most celebrious Moderus: This he esteems a Service done
the Public, as well deserves his Pains, and equal to that of introducing
Plants de novo. A rare Example of this kind, is the Jacea fruticans Pini folio
of the renowned Caspar Bauhine, which from the miserable Cut in Pona, in his
Description of Mount Baldus, under the Title of Staebe capitata Rosmarini
folio; from whence all later Writers derive their Pictures of it, has been so
puzling to the most sagacious Botanists of this present Age, that it has been
wellnigh lost in their suspicion of its being the same with the Stachas
purpurea of Peliterius, in the Illustrations of Lobel. That Figure of it in
Prosper Alpinus his Exoticks, page 77. under the Name of Chamaepeuce, is indeed
more tolerable; but much inferior to this Noble and Illustrious Knapweed,
which owes its Restoration to the more ac^urate and lively graven Image of our
Author.

Whose studious care in stating References to obscurer, and less intelligible
Writers, as Marcgrave, Laet, and Hernandez, he takes to be a proper means to
ease Nature of the Tympany some others would affect her with, by multiplying
Species without sense or reason; in their proposing Plants for new, which under
other Names are to be found in the dark Obscurities of former Writers.

But let us now descend to some Particulars of the many hundred rare Exotic
Plants this Author represents to view in curious Sculpture; for to recount them
all, were to transcribe the Book it self.

He there presents you with a stranger Maple from Bengal, that has the Leaves
of Bay; with an Herbaceous Plant from China, from which they raze their Moxa,
so celebrated all over India for curing of the Gout. He gives you Three sorts
of Serpentaria, the Roots whereof are Remedy against the Bitings of the
Rattle-Snake; two from Virginia, and one from Maryland, all boasted Antidotes
of America: There is another from those Parts, they call a Serpintary, figured
in his first Appendix with a fattisll Birthwort or Briony sort of Leaf, and a
long Scries of stamineous Flowers disposed into a Spike; with a jointed
creeping Root, much differing from the former, a Plant of its own kind, and
truly Heteroclital. Moreover, he gives a true and genuine Figure of the
Ninzeng, or Ginzeng, together with its Root, of great value in its Native
Country, it being esteemed a Panacea throughout the Oriental Indies.

He obliges the World with several rare Adianthums from China and elsewhere,
with various Amaranths, and Amaranthioides from both the Indies; an odd sort of
Antirrhinum with very slender Leaves turned up like Mustachoes; and that
Peruvian, Shrub so ostentatiously shown by some, for the Tree, from whence the
Jesuit's Bark is taken, so famed a Remedy for all sorts of Fevers: He proposes
to the World a numerous Train of Indian Grasses unknown before to Europe; among
the rest, a most illustrious sort, one of the Glories of Carolina: Several new
and elegant Evonymi from America, and one from Maderospatan, with Leaves not
much unlike that sort of Cassia lignea, that is covered with the Bark of
Winterane. The Indian Tea, with its Fruit and Flower, by him styled Evonymo
adsinis nucifera Orientalis; as also that other Evonymo adfinis Occidentalis
alatis Rusci foliis nucifera, which at its first arrival, came under the Name
of Jasminum Americanum, and is the Guaiacum folio Lentisci of the Fagel Garden,
in the second Prodromus of Jacobus Breynius. He also pronoses to your view in
this most excellent Work, two sorts of the true Guaiacum, or Indian Pockwood,
with their Flower and Fruit. Several kinds of Hemionitis from Antego, Wales,
and the East Indies; and one especially of the Composite Order, akin to this
Moon-Fern Family, with petalous and perfect Flowers growing to the Crenatures,
upon the Rim, and on the back-part of the Leaves, a goodly Native of the
flourishing Island of Jamaica.

The Liquid Amber, or Storax Tree of the West Indies, together with its Fruit;
which shows it to be neither Platanus nor Acer, are here exhibited in Icon. The
Cock spurs, together with the Plum-leav'd Medlar of Virginia, without Thorns,
are here distinctly placed. That kind of Bastard-Myrile from Bermudos, so like
the Elaeagnus Cordi, which our Author, with good reason, takes to be the same
with Laurus serrata odora of the Cape, in the Learned Commentaries of Bodaeus a
Stapel; another most elegant bacciserous kind from Carolina, that bears its
Berries on its Branches in clusters, like so many rugged Coriander-Comfits; and
a Third Sort, both Juliferous, and Fruit-bearing, with an echinated Fruit, like
the prickly Involucrum of a small Chestnut, and Leaves of the Tree like our
Asplenium. An Onobrychis, with the Face of a Mimosa, from the Kingdom of
Bisnagar. Another with a single Leaf, from one of the Mouths of the River
Ganges; and a Third, bifoliate, from Maderaspatan, are the surprising Wonders
of Botanick Nature.

A mimerous Tribe of strange Phaseoli come to pay homage to the cerious
Phytognostick: a small one from Bisnagar, witha short and knobbed solitary Pod,
like that of Orobus; but covered with a brownish silken Down, whose Leaves are
of a soft and silver hue; another from Maderaspatan, I whose Leaves are
somewhat like the former; but its Podds are smooth, and blackish, bloated like
a Bladder, with several Flowers spike fashion. There is another larger sort,
with many cornered Leaves, and toberous Root, that is good to eat; which those
of Nevis call the Turnep Tree. Another of this Batata kind of Phaseole, from
the Southern Cape; a pretty kind of Phaseole with Laburnum-Leaves, and solitary
Flowers, a crooked pod in Figure of a Turkish Cymiter; another, with such like
Leaves, but a small Melilot, and a spiked Flower. A Tree-kind hereof, with Pods
no bigger than the smallest Lentil, and almost hid within its Calyx. All these
from the English Factory of Fort St. Georgs. Here is a Phaseole, whose Twiggy
Stalks are armed with Thorns. Indigenous of Japhnapatan; Two unifoliate Kinds,
one from the East, the other from the Western Indies, and very different each
from other. Several curious sorts of Lycia and Rhamni do here salute the
Reader; one Myrtle-leav'd from Ganges; and another with a Leaf like Privet,
from the Oriental Indies, that has this Peculiar, of having its Leaf at bottom
united to the upper part of the Pedicle, by an Articulation, that makes a
pretty Figure of a Navel. The Saamouna of Piso is only here, and no where else
in Flower.

A whole Set of Indian Ricini, the Sumach of Virginia, which our Author takes
for an Arbor Copallifera, among the Mexicans; whose near, resemblance to our
Lentiscus, gave birth to the Mistake of those Writers, who will needs have our
European Mastich-Tree a Native of Virginia. Four sorts of Scabious are all
displayed in artificial Sculpture. One from Bisnagar; one from Maderaspatan;
another from Jamaica; and a Conyzoide sort from Curassau. A Scorzonera bulbosa
from Virginia. The Stella Orientalis fulgens, a Securidaca kind, from
Maderaspatan; and a Scorpioides with a single Leaf, from Bisnagar, are here
laid open to your view.

You have the Absus of Alpinus de Pl. Egypt. here more Authentic; and the
Mundubi of the Brasilians in Piso, so near akin unto it, going hand in hand,
with all its Parts, most accurately expressed. The Sinapistrum-Family is here
enlarged, by the addition of two Bisoliate kinds, from the Coast of Cormandel.
The Basella Malabarensium in our Phytographia, in little, is more at large,
than in the most pompous Picture of it, in the Hortus Malabaricus, Part 7.
Where neither Berry, nor its Kernel, with its running in a Spiral Line, are in
the least taken notice of.

A Tribalus terrestris, with a large Poppy-Plower, from the American Strand,
next offers to divert you; and that other Ebenus, the same with Cytisus
Croticus (...), of Honerius Belli, in Leaf so like the Pentaphylloides
fruticosum of our famous Mr. Ray, is no small Ornament; seeing its diversity
from the Trifoliate Kind, is here made obvious. You have here the lively Images
of no less than two of the Tulipifera's; one from Carolina, the other from
Virginia, with Flower and Fruit, both differing from the common Kind. A sort of
Angelica from the Charibbees, with Seed that tastes and smells of Cummin, and
may perhaps be a sort of Podagraria. Very many fine Apocynums from the
West Indies. A trifoliate Arum from Virginia, Afters in abundance from all the
Quarters of the World; and an Ophioglossum that smells of Musk, with a
Limonium-Leaf, but not so stiff, and sinuate a-top, from the same most happy
Continent of Virginia. A Leonuros with a white Flower from America; and another
small purple one, with a single Whortle, or Bout of Flowers crowning its Tops,
from Maderaspatan.

The Goat-Balsome-Tree, from Antego; and that other Babsamiferous One with a
Mulberry-Leaf, called the Bastard-Cedar, by our Planters in Jamaica, do court
your Eye to Recreation; a pair of the new found Boxekind; one African, and the
other American; a genuine Branch of the Canella alba Clus, or Cassia Lignea,
from whence the celebrated Cortex Winteranus, together with its Fruit, from the
Island of Jamaica, are well expressed, and happ^^ present themselves in Icom.
The Ceratia diphyllos, or Locust-Tree, from Antego and Barbado^s, weeping forth
its Soul into a pellucid Resinous Gum, in Odor of Olibunum, or our finest
Frankincense, known by the Name of Anime; the same with Piso's Jetaiba, with
its Branch, its Lobe, and Fruit, is most exactly figured from the Life; the
Vngula Gati, of the Portugals, never before in Icon; and Avaremo Temo of the
Brasilians, and sometimes Native of Bengal, from whence our Author had it; both
in Affinity with the former, and this, so vilely cut in Piso and Marcgravius,
are here expressed in lively Sculpture. The Chrysanthemums are exceeding new
and numerous from several distant Parts of our Terrestrial Globe. The C^pressus
Virgintuna Aca^^ae foliis, with its Nots and Fruit; The Majoran leaved
Clinopodium; which our English Planters in America, from its most excellent
Virtues, distinguish by the Name of Di^tany; and several sorts of Anils or
Indigoes from both the Indies, generically differing among themselves, are here
to be found in lively adumbration. Ten of the Eupat^r^^n Band, Eight Conyzoide,
and Two of the Va^^ri^^^^^ Order, are here curiously exhibited.

The true E^^^^ of Jamaica, a Soliquiferous and Thorny Shrub, the various Kinds
of new discovered Fi^ic^s, as well Native of England, as Exotic; Two
E^^i^ories the one of Africa, the other a Virginiant* The (...), from the same
Place: The great Variety of Mos^i, Purs^anes of several Sorts from the
Charibbee Islands; and the most elegant Phyllyri^, from Virginia, a true Herba
de Raiz; which by the bended Top-parts of its Leaves, roots in the Ground, and
so propagates its Sp^^ies, are all surprising Objects among the Phytographick
Tables of our Laborious Author.

The Ph^ni^o-Scorpiuros, or Heliotropium Palmites from the Oriental Indies. The
Rhoi similis Tragodes, smelling so like Androsaemon foetidum, by those of
Jamaica called Fing^ego, and by the Barbados-Planters, from its stinking smell,
(as it is supposed,) the Savin Tree, is a most elegant Shrub, and really
deserves the great Exactness that was bestowed upon its ^o^n* The
Sw^ilax^aspern divides into many real and specific Differences, which with the
Bastard China, and True-Born Sarsaparilla, are here exhibited with exact
Resemblance to the Life: A Ro^ Sol^^, from the Kingdom of Portugal, with Leaves
about a Foot long; a Virga Aurea with Leaves, Smell, and Taste of Tarracon; and
an Epidendron, or Viscum arboreum from the West Indies, with a large white
Flower, of admirable Form and Structure, are the Vegetable Wonders that close
up this part of the Phytoptical Account: The Total whereof, must needs bespeak
the Author a Person of prodigious Pains, and demonstrate to the World what vast
Improvements of this Kind might yet further be expected from an Industry so
indefatigable as his.

XII. Praxeos Mayernianae in Morbis internis, praecipue gravioribus, and
Chronicis Syntagma, and ex Adversariis, Conciliis, ac Epistolis ejus summa Cura
ac Diligentia concinnatum. 80. Land. For Sam. Smith. 1690. page 472.
THE Reputation of the Deceased Sir Theodore Mayern, is so great, and his Cures
have proved so fortunate, That Dr. De V^^ix, his God Son, could not make a
greater Present to the Public, than by imparting to it the Remedies which
h^^^maderuse of with sc^n^^ti^n ness. It were to be wished, that the Deceased
Sir Theodore had himself pursued his own Work, and put in Order; it would have
doubtless been much more useful for our Instruction: But in short, since all
the Remains of Great and Learned Men, are esteemed as precious Relics, there
was Reason sufficient for not suffering these Observations, which were found
among the Collections of that Famous Physician, to be lost.

You must not expect to meet with many Chemical Remedies, because the Use of
such Medicines was but newly begun to be introduced in his Time. But there are
other Receipts which will appear to be Novelties to the Physicians beyond
Seal^, as, several Preparations of Tobacco, and other Herbs to be smoked in
Pipes, which he prescribed in sundry Distempers: There are some Persons who
will hardly believe, that the Smoke of Tobacco will reach the Brain; and the
Reason which they bring for so saying, is this; because Tobacco is an Herb so
sharp and vehement, that if the Smoke of it attended and reached the Substanne
of the Brain, it would beget Convulsions in those that took it. But this is no
convincing Argument; For besides the Trouble which they who first begin to
smoke Tobacco, have to accustom themselves to take it, and the Noysomness of
it to those that love it not, the great Effects which Smoke produces, will
doubtless prevail with all Persons not prejudiced against it, to believe that
Dr. Mayern's Practice was not without very good Grounds.

XIII. Edmundi Richeri Doctoris Parisiensis, De Potestate Ecclesioe in Rebus
Temporalibus, Libri IV. Nunquam antehac editi. 4o Coloniae; and Londini, for
Abel Swall, 1691. page 526.
THere are few People but have heard of Richer, Doctor of Sorbonne, who has
made himself so famous, for maintaining in Times of Danger and Trouble, the
Sovereign Authority of Kings against the Usurpations of the Popes of Rome.
These Pontiffs always upon the Watch to take the Advantage of all
Opportunities, to enlarge their Power, laid hold of the Occasion which the
Minority of Lewis XIII. put into their hands, and the Intrigues of Cardinal
Perron, who was all in all at that Time in France, to spread abroad that
monstrous Opinion of their having Power to excommunicate and depose Kings* The
Clergy was devoted to the Interest of the Roman See; The Nobility was drawn to
their Party by Promises and Threats; so that the Third Estate only stood firm;
because it was composed of Learned Civilians, and Doctors well skilled in the
Canon Law. But the Pope's Nu^cio so well knew how to scare the Queen Regent,
the Chancellor being besides, a Pensioner to the Clergy, that he silenced the
Third Estate, and prevented the Publishing of the Declaration which was made,
and included these Eight Articles. 1. p. 3.
That it should be declared by the Three Estates, that the King held his
Authority only from God; and that he has no Dependence upon any Authority
whatever, either Spiritual or Temporal upon Earth. 2ly, That all the Subjects
in the Kingdom of France shall be obliged without Distinction or Equivocation,
to declare, That this Doctrine is confirmed by Scripture. 3ly That the
Commissioners of the Three Estates shall swear to it, and subscribe it; as
likewise, all that hold any Office or Benefice. 4ly. That all the Instructers
of Youth, Doctors and Preachers shall promise upon Oath to teach this Doctrine,
and refute any Opinion to the contrary, as detestable. 5ly. That all Books
which maintain, that it is lawful to excommunicate and depose Kings, shall be
suppressed as seditious. 6ly. That all Foreigners that shall Publish the like
Opinions, shall be looked upon as Enemies to the Crown. 7. That all the King's
Subjects who declare themselves to be of their Opinions, shall be proceeded
against as guilty of High Treason. 8. That if any Religious Foreigner shall
maintain any Proposition contrary to the Law of the States of the Kingdom,
those of the same Order in France, shall be obliged to condemn it solemnly, and
without Equivocation; as also to refute the Author, if it be thought necessary.


C.l. You will find more at large the History of all these Disputes in the
First Chapter of the First Book of this Work. In the Second Chapter the Author
shows, That the Practice of the Catholic Church is conformable to the
Declaration of the Third Estate. In the Third, he proves, That it is no less
conformable to the Practice and Doctrine of the Gallican Church, which has all
along defended the Authority of Kings against the Usurpations of the Popes,
with an extraordinary Zeal; for which the Author brings many Examples, p. ^0.
1. Hinkmar the Archbishop of Rhemes's Letter to Pope Adrian the Second. 2. The
Refusal of the French Clergy to obey Gregory VII. who would forbid the
celebrating of Divine Offices in France. 3. The Answer which the Ministers of
Philip Aug. gave to the Legate of Innocent III. who would have excommunicated
Lewis VIII. Philip's Eldest Son, because he had taken Arms to maintain the
Right, which the Election of the Barons of England, (revolted from K. John, for
submitting himself a Vassal to the Pope,) gave him to the Crown of that
Kingdom. 4. The Constancy of St. Lewis, who would never yield to his Clergy,
That their Excommunications were of any force, till they were examined and
confirmed by the Secular Magistrate. 5. The Acts of the Three Estates against
Boniface VIII. which constrained his Successor Clement. V. to revoke his
extravagant Vnam Sanctam. To this, the Author adds the Decrees of Parliament
against the Books of John Tanquarelli, Bernardin Castori, Cardinal Bellarmin,
of the Jesuits, Decanus, Suarez and others who advanced the Power of the Popes
above that of Kings.


II. In the Second Book, the Author marks out the Method which he intends to
observe; and sets down Three General Heads, p. 66.
by which we are to examine whether a Doctrine be Orthodox or no. 1. He would
have it so clearly contained in Scripture, that it may be clearly drawn from
thence without any tedious Ratiocinations. 2. If the Sense of the Passage be
contested, to have recourse to the Tradition of the Church, that is to say, to
the unanimous Opinion of the Ancient Fathers. 3. To assure your selves that
this Tradition is true, and that it proves something, it is requisite that it
should be universal; that is to say, received and believed in all Times, and in
all Places.


Afterward the Author examines a little Scholastically, nevertheless with good
Judgment, the Essential and Formal Causes of Politic Power. There he makes an
Analysis p 73.
of that famous Passage of Romans 13.1, 2. and shows that the most Learned of the
Fathers, Tertull^an, Origin, St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, etc. and the most
Famous Modern Doctors, Tho. Aquinas, Tolletus, Estius, Cornelius a Lapide, etc.
believed that that same Passage proved the Independency of Princes from all
other humane Authority. He proves the same Thing, p. 109.
by the Commentaries of the Ancients upon the Words of David, Psalm-50. Against
Thee only have I sinned. He examines the Difference between the Mosaic
Priesthood and the Gospel, and shows, that though Princes were to submit to the
Priests in Spiritual Things, it did not follow, that they had any Superior in
Temporals.

After he has confirmed his Opinion by the Canons of several Councils, and
given Examples of the Fidelity of the French to their Princes, p. 123.
before they were corrupted by the Jesuits, he examines the Question, Whether
it be lawful for the People to depose Princes? and refutes those that hold the
Affirmative. The Reasons which he alleges, p. 133.
amount to this, That the Public Good, Peace, and Repose of Society, are of
Divine Right; whence it follows, 1. That it is unlawful to prejudice or disturb
them. 2. That Religion cannot be a just Pretense to take Arms, since War can
only pretend to regulate the Temporalty. 3. That in Moral Things, that which
cannot be obtained but with extreme difficulty, and a very great and inevitable
danger, is looked upon as an Impossibility; and therefore it is better to bear
with a Tyrant, than to expose Society to be turned Topsie Turvy, by
endeavoring to take him out of the World. 4. That the Maxim, That no Faith is
to be observed with him that has violated his own, takes no place in Public
Contracts, where the Interest of the whole Society is concerned. 5. That it
only appertains to Sovereigns to make War; because they have no other way to
preserve their Rights, and prevent the Subversion of their Dominions.


After this, the Author answers the Objection drawn from the Example of the
Maccabees, and examines the Hypothesis of M. Antonius de Dominis, who
maintains, That Kings are immediately established by God; whereas our Author
pretends, that it is the Society that has Divine Authority, and communicates it
to those into whose Hands the Society commits the Sovereign Power.

III. In the Two following Books, the Author treats of the Nature of
Ecclesiastical Power; and shows, p. 162.
That it has no other Aim, but to remove the Clergy from the World, and oblige
them only to mind the Salvation of Souls. 2. That the Ecclesiastics did not
succeed Jesus Christ in the quality of Governor of the Universe; but only as
Ministers, and Preachers of the Gospel. 3. That Excommunication is a cutting
off from the Communion of the Church; and that it does not deprive those that
are smitten with it, of their Natural and Civil Rights; and that it is of no
force, unless it be pronounced with the Consent of the whole Church. 4. That
when the Public Tranquillity is concerned, the Magistrate has a Right to take
Cognizance of Ecclesiastical Censures.


In the Fifth Chapter, the Author examines the Errors of Marsilius of Padua,
and John Duns, which Pope John XXII. condemned in the Year 1320, ( p. 323.) The
Bull reduces these pretended Errors to Five Heads. 1. That when Jesus Christ
paid Tribute to Caesar, he did not pay him out of a bare Submission; but
through the Necessity of the Obligation he was in, as he was a Man, to obey
Superior Powers. 2. That St. Peter had no more Authority, nor was any more the
Head of the Church than the rest of the Apostles. That Jesus Christ did not
establish any visible Head, or leave any such Vicar as the Pope. 3. That the
Emperor has a Right to establish, correct and punish, nay, to depose the Pope.
4. That all Ministers of the Gospel are equal by the Institution of Jesus
Christ; and that the Difference which is between them, is only founded upon the
Concessions of Princes, and may be revoked. 5. That neither the Pope, nor the
whole Body of the Church have any Right to punish Criminals, farther than
Sovereigns give them Authority.


In the Eighth Chapter, Monsieur Richer treats of the Immunities of the Clergy,
and refutes the Arguments of Suarez and Bellarmin, who affirm, That the Pope
has a Right to exempt Ecclesiastical Persons from the Civil Jurisdiction
without the Consent of the Emperor, or any other Sovereign Princes.

IV. In the First Chapter of the Fourth Book, the Author sets down a History of
Investitures, or the Collation of Benefices. He shows how the Election of
Pastors passed from the People to Kings, and the great struglings of the
Bishops of Rome to make themselves Masters of it.

In the Second Chapter, he answers the Arguments of Bellarmine and Baronius,
against Secular Investitures.

The Third and last Chapter contains the History of Gregory VII. the first who
usurped to himself the Power of deposing Kings, and first presumed to put this
pretended. Power in execution. The Author gives himself the trouble to answer
the Arguments which that unworthy Pontiff alleges, for advancing himself above
God's Vicegerents on Earth; according to the Prediction of St. Paul, 2 These. 2.
We shall mention only one; because it shows the Genius of that Pope, and the
Esteem which Popes, like him, have of Crowned Heads. To prove that the Church
is above Kings, observe how he argues. Royal Dignity was invented by Seculars
who knew not God, but by the instigation of their Prince the Devil, Principe
Diabolo agitante, p. 482.
whereas the Ecclesiastic Power was instituted by the Providence of God, and
and aims at his Glory. Therefore as much as God is above the Devil, etc.

XIV. Analysis Aequationum Universalis, etc. An Universal Analysis of
Equations; Or, A Short and General Method of resolving Algebraical Equations;
deduced and demonstrated out of the New Doctrine of Infinite Series: By JOSEPH
RAPHSON, Fellow of the Royal Society, 4o. London, Printed for Abel Swall, 1690.
page 50.
WE are in a manner indebted to Chance for the composing of this little
Treatise, since Mr. Raphson, the ingenious Author thereof, accidentally
invented this Method, on the Occasion of a Problem that had been propounded to
him by one of his Friends. For he declares, that he never saw any thing of the
like Nature: And indeed, the Novelty of the Subject might be alone sufficient
to recommend it to the World; and to induce the Author to appropriate to
himself the sole Reputation of so considerable an Invention, were he not
prevented by his innate Modesty, and the little regard that he has for popular
Applause. However, we shall leave it to those that are skilful in those
Matters, to determine, whether any thing has been hitherto Published, tending
to the same effect; and in case there has, nevertheless it cannot be imagined
but that they will readily allow the just Commendation that is due to this
worthy Member of the Royal Society; for it is not to be admired, that Learned
Men have often like Notions and Sentiments with respect to the same Subject.

Moreover, Mr. Raphson explains his 1.
Method after the very same manner as he invented it, and to show the large
Extent and Certainty thereof, he propounds a general 3.
Theorem, which he afterward resolves more particularly in Two Propositions:
Then he proceeds to illustrate his Method by Examples, 5.
in 32 Problems; wherein is exhibited the Resolution of Equations, of all
manner of Dimensions, taken from the Resolution of a Simple Equation: Whereunto
he adds Examples of Quadratick Equations, All his Operations are described at
large; and to render the Practice more plain and obvious, the Author has taken
the Pains to compose certain Tables, which are inserted at the End; insomuch
that if he continue to prosecute these Studies, as he has begun, it is not to
be doubted but that he will become one of the most skilful Mathematicians that
are now living; since at the Age of 22 Years, he has already attained to so
great a Knowledge in those abstruse and difficult Sciences: Wherefore what
improvement may we not expect from the extraordinary Judgment of his riper
Years?

XV. Cursus Mathematicus: Mathematical Sciences; in Nine Books: Comprehending
Arithmetic Vulgar, Decimal, Instrumental, Algebraical; Geometry, Plain and
Solid; Cosmography, Celestial and Terrestrial; Astronomy, Theorical and
Practical; Navigation, Plain and Spherical; Trigonometry, Rectilinear and
Circular: With the Description, Construction and Use of Geometrical and
Nautical Instruments, and the Doctrine of Triangles, applied to Practice in
Mensurations of all kinds; as in Longimetry, or taking of Heights, Distances,
etc. Planometry, or Surveying of Lands, Woods, Roads, etc. Military
Architecture, or Fortification; and in Navigation, Dyalling, etc. All which are
disposed in such a Method as they ought to be read and practiced by such as
would attain to a competent Perfictency in them by their own Industry. By
William Leybourn, Philomathes, in Fol. London, for Benjamin Took, etc. 1690. p.
984.
IT is not at all to be wondered, that the Body of this Work does not perfectly
answer to the Title: For that the Mathematics are of so vast an Extent, that
it is impossible to include them all in one single Volume; therefore how
careful soever Mr. Leybourn has been to be concise, he could not treat in this
Volume of Mechanics, Civil Architecture, Conick Sections, Music, Optics,
Diopticks, and the Parts that belong to them, and which he seems to reserve for
a Second Part.

Now in regard the Title of this Book sufficiently shows what it contains, and
that we cannot discourse of all the Matters therein contained, we shall only
give you here the Extract of one single Treatise, to show the Author's Method.
And we have made choice of that of Navigation, because we thought it would be
most delightful to a Nation so much concerned to be perfect in the Knowledge of
it.

It Is in the Seventh Book, that Mr. Leybourn undertakes to unfold the Art of
Navigation. In the Preface, p 605.
he ascribes the Invention of it to God only, and not to the Egyptians or
Phoenicians, as some Authors do; for that it was God who first discoverd to
Noah the Knowledge of Ships and Navigation, in the Time of the Deluge; and for
that it was according to the Model of the Ark, which rested upon the Mountains
of Ararat, that the Neighboring Nations built their Ships.

The Body of the Work is divided into Four Parts. The First contains five
Chapters, which are subdivided into Sections, when the Matter requires it.

In the First Chapter, p. 106.
the Author speaks of Navigation in general; the Rules of which are only to
furnish a Pilot with the safest ways to steer a Vessel whither he designs it.
To which purpose, he must have a regard to four Things; the Longitude, the
Latitude, the Course, and the Distance. They who are but never so little versed
in the Sphere, know what the Longitude is: But the most Judicious are still
ignorant of the Secret, how to find it exactly upon the Sea. There is not the
same Ignorance about the Latitude; for there are several Ways to know it;
either by the Meridional Heights of the Sun, or by some known Star, by the
rising and setting Amplitudes, or by the Pole Star. If Mariners could find the
Longitude as well, they would have all that they seek for: But in regard we
have but an imperfect Knowledge of the Longitude, we are obliged to have
recourse to the Ship's Way, and the Distance of the Vessel; but more especially
to the Latitudes, to determine the most exactly that may be, the Place where it
is. The Ship's Course is the Way which it steers upon the Sea; which is easily
known by the Compass or Needle, great Care being taken to observe its
Variation. As for the Distance, which is the Length of the Way which the Vessel
makes, it is not so easy to conclude it: But this is the way to take it; They
let down into the Sea a Plummet of Lead fixed to a Line, and at the same time
they turn an Hourglass; then they observe what quantity of Line the Log-Line
draws out of the Vessel, thereby to know how much way the Vessel makes in such
a prefixed time, with the same Wind, and the same Number of Sails. But there
are several Inconveniences in this way of Practice; so that there is no
building upon it: For it is not certain that the Log-Line stays in the same
place where it was thrown: 1. By reason of the Tossing of the Waves, especially
in a rough Sea. 2. The Wind does not always blow alike, and it is a hard thing
to measure the Briskness of a Gale. 3. The Tossing and Shogging of the Ship
will not let the Hour-Glasses which they make use of to measure the Time, run
exactly true. 4. The strong Currents which are met with in certain places, may
occasion Mistake in the knowledge of Distances; so that you must endeavor to
discover them by their Strength, their Rapidness, and their Course.
But you may in some measure attain your Ends, if instead of the Log-line, you
make use of a piece of Wood, or a small Bucket, with a piece of Lead fixed to
it, to make it sink into the Sea about 60 or 80 Fathom: For then by observing
the quantity of Line, the Sand, and the Compass, you may in a great measure
avoid the Mistakes which the Currents may occasion in the Distances. Now
suppose that you know the Distances in Feet, or in Miles, and the Rumb, or
Course of the Vessel, it is easy to observe the Point, and under what Degree
you are, provided you know the Latitude of the Place from whence you set Sail,
and where you are, and how many Miles and Feet there are in a Degree. The
Author tells you, according to Mr. Richard Norwood, that there are in a Degree
367200 Feet: But for the easiness of Calculation, and because it is better to
suppose that there are less than more, he allows but 360000 Feet to a Degree.

C. 2. After this, p. 600, 617.
he discourses of the Instruments made use of in Navigation, as well for making
Observations, as for the Easiness of Operations. He gives you the Description,
and sets down the Use of them. The Instruments are, The Plain Compass, the
Azimuth Compass, the Universal Ring-Dial, the Cross Staff, or Fore-Staff, the
Quadrant, or Back-Staff, and the Nocturnal.

C. 3. He shows p. 618.
the manner of finding out the Latitudes; and in the following Chapter, p. 621.
he treats of the vulgar Notes of the Julian Year, of the Motion of the Sun and
Moon, and gives some short Rules to find them at any time; explaining
afterward their great Use in Navigation.

C. 5. In regard the knowledge of the Tides is very useful to a Pilot, p. 633
the Author, in the last Chapter, gives you Tables, and sets down Rules how to
know them.

Part 2. In the Second Part p. 634.
he discourses of Plain Sailing, and puts in practice the Doctrine of
Rectilineal Triangles, for the Solution of sundry Nautical Problems and
Questions in Plain Sailing; all which are performed with Scale and Compasses,
by Trigonometrical Calculation, p. 646
either by Tables, or Proportional Scales, or wrought upon the Chart it self.

Part 3. After this, p. 656.
Mr. Leybourn proceeds to the Third Part; where he explains Mr. Wright's
Method, vulgarly called Mercator's Sailing; and he applies to practice the
Doctrine of Rectilineal Triangles, with the Supply of Meridional Parts, in the
Solution of Nautical Problems in Sailing by the true Sea-Chart; and all this is
performed by Protraction, by Calculation, and upon the Chart it self. There is
also a Parallel between the Plain and the true Sea Chart.

P. 4. p. 667, 672.
As the Method called Mercator's Sailing surpasses the Plain Sailing; so that
which is set forth in this Fourth Part, and is called Circular Sailing,
surpasses the other two Methods. He therefore resolves by Trigonometry, and the
Projections of the Sphere, the Problems of Sailing by the Arch of a Great
Circle. After which, you shall meet with some Tables, the Use of which is very
frequent in Navigation. The Tables bear the Title of Calendarium Nauticum, and
Astrale Calendarium. There are also some other Tables in this Treatise, and
quite through the whole Body of the Work, where they are necessary to be
inserted. Neither has he forgot to add the famous Tables of Logarithms, of
Sinus and Tangents, etc. He has also taken care to cause such Figures as the
Discourse requires, to be neatly engraven upon Copper Plates, and placed at the
End of the Book for the Convenience of the Readers.

A Letter of the Honorable Mr. Boil to the Author of this History of Learning.
Sir,
I Here send you an Experiment which made a great Noise In the Court of King
Charles the Second, and which will resolve all the Difficulties in the
Questions which you proposed to me, concerning the Coldness of Water. It was
made by a Captain of a Ship, a Man of very good Sense, and in the Presence of a
great many Persons; insomuch that there can be no manner of Doubt concerning it.


XVII. An Account of some Observations made in the great Congregation of
Waters, by lowering Bottles down into the Sea six hundred Foot deep from the
Surface, January 2d. 1677/^;.
THis Day, in the Lat. of 36 d. and 40 m. about 30 Leagues distant from Cape
St. Vincent, it bearing from us E. N. E. having received some Command from the
right Honorable the Earl of Danby, and Mr. Boil, concerning making
Experiments in this Nature, we lay by with our Frigot, the St. David, whilst
Sir Richard Munden, with some other Gentlemen, was pleased to go along with me
in the Pinnace, upon the Trial of these Experiments.

And having made fast to a deep side Lead and Line, one Vial-Glass filled with
the Oil of Aniseeds, according to Mr. Boyle's Direction, to experiment the
Coldness of the Deeps below; as also two ordinary Bottles only filled with Air,
the one being firmly closed with a substantial Cork, and the other with Wood,
being all securely made fast, We lowered them down into Eight Fathom, and there
remained fifteen Minutes; then haled them aloft to the Surface of the Waters.
The Oil of Aniseed was congealed and curdled; which demonstrates the Coldness
of those Regions below; the Cork-Stopple was sucked into the Bottle; but that
closed with Wood, remained as at the first; only through its Pores was
forceably drawn in, about half the Stowage of the Bottle, with Salt Water;
which boiling out from the little Crannies of the Wood, after haling the
Stopple out, the Salt Water ^moak'd, as though it had been some strong Liquor,
or Spirit.

Upon the Second Experiment, I seized fast, three Bottles to the deep-side Line
a little above the Lead; two of them were firmly closed with Stopples made of a
light sort of Lignum Vitae, which my Lord Treasurer proposed; the other, with a
firm Cork; then lowered them into one hundred Fathom depth: And having remained
there about five Minutes, I perceived upon the Surface of the Water the two
Lignum Vitae Stopples; wondering at the Cause, I immediately haled up the Lead,
and the Bottles were staved in many pieces, either by the weight of the Water,
or condensing of the Air, that remained within them. The other Bottle, only
closed with a Cork-Stopple, was sucked in, and so filled full of Water,
(probably near the depth of one hundred Fathom;) and being curious to taste
thereof, it was not only my Opinion, but all the rest of the Gentlemen in the
Pinnace with me, That this Water was much fresher than that we tasted upon the
Surface. I shall proceed the first convenient opportunity, as near as possible
I can, by Experience and Demonstration, to resolve the great Enquiries
concerning the Current of the Streights Mouth of Gibraltar.

XVIII. Inscriptionum Antiquarum Sylloge, in duas Parts distributa; in Vsum
Jnventut is Rerum Antiquarum studiosae edita; and Notis illustrata; a Guliel.
Fleetwood, Col. Regal. apud Cantab. Socio. Octav. Londini, apud Tim Child,
1691. p. 572. A Collection of Ancient Inscriptions; Divided into Two Parts.
Inscriptions being a great help to History, and Mr. Fleetwood having often
observed, that the reason why the Study of them was not so frequent, was,
because it required the turning over of a great number of Volumes, where they
were dispersed up and down; which it would cost a great deal of Time and Money
to do; he thought fit to do the Public an acceptable piece of Service, by
collecting the most remarkable, and such as are most useful to clear the
Obscurity of ancient History.

In the First Part, the Author has very nearly observed Gruterus his Method:
And so it is divided into Five Parts. Of which, the First, p. 1.
includes the Inscriptions relating to Pagan Divinities. The Second, p. 53.
Those which concern public Monuments. The Third, p. 92.
Those which were made for the Emperors. The Fourth, p. 130.
Those which are to be read upon the Tombs or Statues of them that officiated
at the Altars of the Magistrates, and other Public Persons. The Fifth, p. 171.
contains the Epitaphs which Fathers, Mothers, and Children, Husbands and
Wives, Servants and Masters, Kindred and Friends made upon one another.

The Second includes all the Christian Epitaphs, Inscriptions, and other
Monuments that are extant, or at least, that are printed till the Ninth or
Tenth Age. The Author has profitably made use of the Words of Arcudius,
Aringhus, Reinesius, Spon, the Travels of Wheeler, and the Fathers Mabillon and
Germain; though sometimes he forbears not to refute them in his Notes. There
are some which are no less profitable than learned; as that, p. 40.2.
where he shows, that St. Jerome was mistaken in taking a supposed Inscription,
for that which St. Paul alleges to the Athenians, Acts 18.23. Such are also
the Remarks which are made upon the Inscriptions, p. 115.
where they give to Dioclesian the honor of having abolished the Christian
Name, with as much truth as the Flatterers of Lewis X V. endeavor to persuade
him that he has triumphed over all Europe, and abolished the Protestant
Religion.

There is one Inscription in Verse, p. 379.2.
upon the Roof of the Church of St. Agnes, in the Suburbs of Rome. Baronius
pretends that that Inscription was put there by Constantina, the Daughter of
the first Christian Emperor, for having recovered her Health through the
Intercession of that Saint, over whose Sepulcher she cause that Church to be
built; and after that vowed perpetual Virginity. This Story being very
improbable, had need of credible Vouchers: In the mean time, it is only founded
upon the Testimony of Modern Authors, and those Roman Catholics. On the other
side, it is certain, that Constantina was twice Married: Whence Mr. Fleetwood
concludes, That the Constantina mentioned in the Inscription, was some other
than the Emperor's Daughter, and that she could not be living till toward the
End of the Fifth Age; since Prudentius, an Author of the Fifth Century, and who
speaks of the Sepulcher of St. Agnes, makes no mention of this Church.

Now in regard there are no Passions more eloquent than Love and Grief; there
are some of these Epitaphs which are Masterpieces in their kind: Such is that,
p. 193.
which Atimetus, the Emperor Titus's enfranchiz'd Bond man caused to be
engraven upon his Wives Urn. And that other, p. 535.
which is between his Collection of Christian Monuments, whose Authors are
unknown; where a Mother that had lost her Children, is made to speak.

We should here finish this Extract, were we not to observe in the Author's
Epistle Dedicatory, p. 3.
one Scruple which a Christian Philosopher cannot let pass without an Answer.
If it be true, says he, that Reason convinces us of the Unity of a God; how is
it possible that the Pagans, who were Rational Men, adored several? It follows
of necessity, that either they adored one and the same God under several Names,
and consequently, that they were not guilty of Idolatry; or else that Reason is
not now adays the same as it was formerly, and so there is no certainty; or at
least that Men did not make a right use of their Reason for so many Ages.

Mr. Fleetwood asserts that it is the same Si a^^a erat illorum ratio a nostra,
vel (quod idem est) si aliter ratione sua usi sunt homines, ubinam quaes^, ista
adeo jactain Ration^s certitudo, qu^ du^e, per tot secula, omnes fere via recta
aberraverint?
thing to have a Reason different from ours, and to make use of it in another
manner. But I am not of his Opinion: For it is demonstrable, that Colors, Heat
and Cold, are not in the Objects that produce those different Senses of Feeling
in us. Nevertheless, it is but within these few Years, that a small number of
Philosophers have retrieved themselves from this Mistake: All the rest of
Mankind is still in that Error; and it may be there are above Three Fourths of
the World that will never be undeceived. Tell a Country man, that Fire is not
hot, Ice not cold, and Snow not white, he will deride your Simplicity; and if
he thought it concerned his Temporal or Eternal Interest, to defend the
contrary, you might expect for want of Proofs, to be treated by him as the
Pagans treated the Christians, or as the Papists treat the Protestants* To
prove that there is but one perfect Infinite Being, and that none ought to pay
any Religious Worship to Creatures, let them be never so excellent, you must
allege Reasons much more abstracted, than those that demonstrate, That Colors
are not in the Bodies which affect our Senses. The Christian Religion is the
most perfect and sublime of all Philosophies; whence it comes to pass, that so
few People understand it thoroughly, and that to supply the defect of Attention
and Meditation among the greatest part of Men; the Scripture so often commands
us to believe. If we made a right use of Reason, Faith would not be so
necessary, but only for Matters of Fact, which are contained in the Sacred
Letters, and which have all the Certainty that Histories can be capable of. But
leaving here a Reflection which would carry us a great way farther, we shall
conclude with this Observation, That this Objection, which seems at first so
formidable, is grounded only upon the equivocal signification of a Word. For in
common Speech, Reason signifies both the Light of Nature, and the manner of
thinking. In the first Sense, Reason is an infallible Guide which never leaves
those that follow it, into Error. But in the second Sense, it may be said,
that Reason misguides and deceives us, because it happens too frequently, that
Men determine themselves, without consulting the inward Light, and the eternal
Reason.

XIX. The Falsehood of Humane Virtue, done out of French, 8o. London, For Tim.
Child, p. 308.
MOnsieur Esprit, of the French Academy, proposes to himself, to prove in this
Work, That all the Virtues of Men, considered in the corrupted State of Nature,
have no other Foundation but Self-Love; not excepting the most glorious and
beautiful; as, Prudence, Sincerity, Friendship, Clemency, Compassion,
Generosity; nor even those that seem to approach the nearest to Christian
Virtues; as, Humility, Liberality, Justice and Integrity. This is that which he
does in 21 Chapters; which are so many Rhetorical Discourses upon every one of
the Humane Virtues. There he sometimes handles Questions very material; as in
the 19th. Chapter, where speaking of the Fidelity of Subjects toward their
Sovereigns, he enquires, What is the Duty of Subjects, when Kings violate the
Fundamental Law of the Kingdom? And after he has produced the Answers of sundry
Politicians, and shown, that their Reasoning engages them in Difficulties, from
whence they cannot disintangle themselves, he concludes, That the best course a
Man can take, not only for the Peace of his Conscience, but also in order to a
quiet Life, is not to meddle at all with Affairs of State, when he has no Call
to the Government. For Liberty, and the Ease of the People, are loud Words
which the Factious make use of, but that signify nothing in their Mouths; they
always found it mischievous who believed 'em; and the Disorder must be very
great indeed, if a Civil War be not a Remedy worse than the Disease. As for
Religion, the Author maintains. That how specious soever the Pretense may be,
it is no better than that of Taxes and Imposts: That the Seditious, who make the
most of this Argument, are they who have the least value for it; that it is
well known that the Heads of the League against the Kings of France, Hen. 3.
and Hen. 4. made use of Religion, as a Cloak to cover their ambitious Designs;
and that it is better to follow the Example of the Primitive Christians, who
during the first Four Ages, obeyed the Pagan Emperors, without murmuring and
resistance.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed in Foreign Parts; to be Sold by Abel
Swall^ and Timothy Child at the Unicorn in St Paul's Church Yard.
Some whereof were designed to have been inserted in this Journal; but we
wanting room, have deferred it till the next, when they shall be more sully
described.

SAncti Caecil. Cypriani Opera omnia, Recognita and Illustrata per Joan.
Oxoniens. Episc. Accedunt Annals Cypriani^^; five XIII. Annorum quibus S.
Cyprianus inter Christianos versatus est, Brevis Chronologice delineate, per
Joan. Cestriensem. Huic Editioni annexae sunt Dissertationes Cyprianicae, ab
Henrico Dodwello. Juxta Exemplar Oxonii a Theatro. Amst. 1691. Folio.

Though this Book is very much known to the Learned, yet we have resolved to
give a large Account of it in the next Journal: The Writings of that Father
being one of the most Venerable Monuments of Antiquity, and his two
Commentators, Dr. Pearson, ^i^hop of Chester, and Dr. Fell, Bishop of Oxford,
two of the most Learned Men of this Age; to say nothing of Mr. Dodwell; since
he being yet alive, it would look too much like Flattery. We shall only now
add, that this Edition is very well Printed in a fair Character and Paper, and
with the Addition of Mr. Dodwell's Dissertations.

Phil. a Limborch de Veritate Religionis Christianae, Amica Collatio cum
Erudito Judaeo. Amst. 1691. in Quarto.

This Book contains some Conferences between a Jew, Doctor of Physic at
Amsterdam, who died there some Years ago; and the Ingenious Philip van
Limborch, Professor or Divi^ity amongst the Ar^inians at the same City; and is
an excellent Defense of the Christian Faith, answering all the most specious
Arguments of the Jews against it. But there being several things relating to
both the Authors, and the Boak wherewith the World is not acquainted, it is
thought fit to defer till our next, to give an Account thereof,

Ejusdem Phil. a Limborch Theologia Christiana ad Praxin Pietatis ac
Promotionem Pacis Christianae unice; directa: Amst. in Quarto.

Lud. Ellies du Pin de Antiqua Ecclesiae Disciplina Dissertationes Historicae,
excerptae ex Conciliis Oecumenicis, and Sanctorum Patrum ac Actorum
Ecclesiasticorum Scriptis. Quarto. Amst. 1691.

Whatever has relation to the Primitive Ages of Christianity, is so much
looked upon by the English Divines, and Dr. du Pin, though a Roman Catholic,
is so impartial a Person, that we believe they will be well pleased to find an
Abstract of it in our next.

Joan. Spencer, de Legibus Hebraeorum Ritualibus, and carum Rationibus; Editio
secunda, priori Indice Locorum S. Script locupletiore, necnon Indice Rerum and
Verborum memorabilium novo aucta. in Quarto.

Lud. Thomasini Vetus and Nova Ecclesiae Disciplina, circa Beneficia and
Beneficiarios. In tres Tomos seu Parts distributa. Opus ex Sanctis Patribus
and Conciliis, ex quorumque Temporum Historicis decerptum. 3 Vol. Folio, Paris.

This Book being one of the best Pieces of this Age and written by one of the
most eminent in Learning, we shall give an account of it in our next.

Anglia Sacra; five Collectio Historiarum, partim antiquitus, partim recenter
scriptarum, de Archi-Episcopis and Episcopis Angliae, a pr^ma Fidei Christian^
susceptione, ad Annum 1640. nune primum ex MSS Cod. in lucem editarum^ ^^s
Prim^, de Atchi^p* and Episcop Ecolesiarum quas Monachi possiderunt. Edi^^re.
Henrico Wharton, ^olio Land. Of this we shall give a particular account in our
next.

Edmund. Richerii Historia Conciliorum Generalium, in IV Libros distributa; and
ejusdem Vindiciae Doctrinae Majorum Scholae Parisiens de Authoritate and
Infallibilitate Ecclesiae in Rebus Fidei and Morum, contra Defensores
Monarchiae Universalis and absoluta Curiae Romanae, Lib. IV. etiamque Libellus
ejus de Ecclesiastica and Politica Potestate. 7 Tom in Quarto. Which with his
late Treatise, de Potestate Ecclesiae in Rebus Temporalibus, complete the Works
of this Learned Author.

Lud. E^^ies du Pin Bibliotheque des Autheurs Ecclesiastiques, Quarto. Vol. 4^^
and 5um. s^paratim.

Joan. Leusden^ Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, in quo omnes Universi Novi
Testam. Voces una cum Versione Latina inveniuntur. Editio ultima ab Authore
Recognita and Aucta. Lugd. Bat. in Octavo.

Testamentum Novum Latin, Sebastiano Castalione Interpret, cui in Margin
addita sunt Loca parallela S. Script quae Steph. Curcellaeus Graecae suae
Edition. adiunxit necnon Variant. Lection. Amst. Octavo. Well Printed in a fair
Character and good Paper; and is by much the fairest Edition of this esteemed
Book.

Petri Gassendi Metaphysica Disquisitio Anti-Cartesiana, seu Dissertationes and
Instantia adversus Renati des Carts Medit. Vltraj. 1691 in Octavo.

D Aug. Quirin. Rivini Introductio ad Rem Herbariam CLXXIX. Figur aeneis
Plantarum Rariorum illustrata Fol. Charta mag. Lips. 1691. In which not only
the excellent Figures of several very rare Plants, but the Author's Method,
expressed in his general Introduction before the Book, deserves the esteem of
all the Lovers of Natural Philosophy.

Opuscula Philosophica; quibus continentur Principia Philosophiae antiquissimae
and recentissimae, ac Philosophiae Vulgaris Refutata in duodecimo. Amst. 1691.

This Book contains Two different Tracts: The First is made up of some
E^agments found, as it is pretended, in the Closet of an English Countess, who by
the reading of the ancient Philosophers, forsook the Opinions of Des Carts.
The other has several Dialogues between a French and a Spanish Philosopher; in
which the Frenchman has the better of it, and vindicates the new Hypotheses,

Authors Classici varii cum Interpretatione and Notis Doctissimorum Virorum,
Jussu Christianisimi Regis editi, ad Usum Serenissimi Delphini, in Quarto.
Paris. Most of which are here to be had.

Authors ad Usum Delphini, quos juxta Editionem Parisinam, Londini editi sunt,
in Octavo. viz. Virgilius, Terentius, Horatius, Cornel. Nepos, and Juvenal.

A Prospect of Ch^lsey. College, curiously drawn, and engraved in a large
Copper-Plate, with a Prospect also of the Country contiguous; By J. Kip, who
designs to Publish the Draughts of all the King's Houses.

Books now in the Press, which will be Published in a few Weeks.
Les Oeuvres d' Horact, Lat. and Franc. avec des Remarques par M. D'Acier. 10
Vol. in 12. Les Comedies de Plant, Lat. and Franc avec les Remarques du la
Meme. (...) 3 Vol. 12.

