THEOSEBIA OR THE Churches Advocate:

Endeavoring the PROMOTION of LOYALTY TO OUR KING, And FIDELITY to the
Episcopal Church.

By Describing the Rebellious Principles of the Enemies thereof, both in their
Words and Actions to our late Sovereign King Charles the First, with the most
Barbarous Conspiracies and Horrid Machinations against King Charles the Second,
and his Royal Brother James Duke of York, whom God Preserve.

Cognosce teipsum,
Faelicitas vestra, erit Consideratio.
St. James iv. Ver. 1. From whence comes Wars and Fightings among you? Come
they not from hence, even of your Lusts that War within your Members? LONDON,
Printed for Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. 1683.

To the Matchless DON CAROLO GOVERNOR OF THEOSEBIA.
Sir,
THe late Conspiracy was to put you out of all hopes, my Ambition is to take
away despair by reminding you of your self, that in the midst of these menaces,
you may recreate in your natural courage and Innocence. For, (did we not know
so much all ready) your Life, (which has been a scene of Miracles) may teach
the World that Heaven has a peculiar regard for Princes, and among these, a yet
more especial Love for such as your self, whose constitution imitates the
divine Mercy. Fear not then Sir but dwell in Smiles, under those Angels, those
prayers, which daily are your Le guard de Corpse. And thus in the arms of
security, wealth, friends and health; may you still Rule Our Theosebia.

TO THE PRINCE JACOBIANUS
NAtural Compassion teaches us to rejoice at any Neighbors escaping a Storm;
certainly then, when those we owe so much unto, (as to the Royal Sovereign, and
Royal James, we do) shall be delivered from the fury of such tempests they have
lately been in, we ought to triumph. What Imprudence therefore, what Impudence
soever the world may judge it, to take notice of your Name, I am resolved to
take notice of your safety. And that you may no more be exposed as the
Sacrifice of unjust peoples Malice, that your disquiets like their Machinations
against your Brother (his most sacred Majesty) against your self, or the
Government, may vanish; that your grandeur and joys may increase; and your
Highness from time to time enjoy what is your Right, is the prayer of

Philo-Regius.

Page 1. line 18. r. the peace. p. 2. l. ult dele else. p. 3. l. 34. for Chance
r. Change, p. 5. l. 36. for require r. repine. p. 14. l. 2. for me r. him. and
l. ult. for is r. it. p. 15. dele to Their Behavior. p. 16. l. 14. r. as an.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF THEOSEBIA.
HAVING lately met with Several affectionate as well as Elegant Invitations to
unity; having observed the incline of the Theosebians to look more that way now
then ever; and being sensible that nothing but the want of this can hinder it
from being the invincible as well as happy Island: Therefore it is, that I not
only conclude this to be the proper time, to reduce our Jerusalem into that
pleasing state of being as a City at unity within it self; but, led with a
desire to propagate the public welfare as earnestly, as every honest Man would
be assistant toward the Extinction of a dangerous Fire, do now throw in my
Simbolum; which though not so Considerable, yet being well meant, may be
acceptable I hope to those who mean well.

That little then which I have to propose I humbly desire may be directed.

1. To the Pastors themselves.

But here I must take some pains to reconcile my Readers patience. How (you will
say) can it consist with Peace of the Church, to make reflections upon the
Churchmen. To which I can with safety answer, that what I am about to speak
proceeds neither from Envy nor Derision, and therefore will no ways I presume
darken their Luster I should be glad to enhance, because the end of my
animadversions is, to remove that which may make their Lights more Clear, Nor
shall I commit any thing to paper, but that which any Friend of theirs I doubt
not will allow of.

I. Observation.
To allow them then all the respect that is due unto their sacred function, to
suppose them Illustrious in parts as well as Office, you will allow with me I
hope that they are but Men, and as Men, their very constitution exposes them to
frailties, nay real errors, since Nemo sine crimine vivit, is St. John's
Doctrine as well as Cato's, and an offense may come by Jonas as soon as any of
the Passengers.

2. And as offenses may undoubtedly come among these, so there is great
difference among these offenses. Those which I am to take notice of, do not
arise so much from the defects of the Head as the Heart; but in their nature,
are perhaps much worse then the faults of the other place, because whosoever
has industriously sought Knowledge, and is found amiss in his principles, goes
with great Labor up-Hill, and with shame Tumbles down again.

3. Nor need we any other Satisfaction of the Mischiefs that attend Learning
without Constancy, then the Divisions of Theosebia and her Church. For
notwithstanding the Government thereof is Episcopacy, and obedience to this is
sworn unto, by all that have Preferment or Employment in that Church; yet even
this Church is as a House divided against it self. The reason of which I cannot
otherways Comprehend, then by casting my Eyes upon those who being Educated in
the Principles of Mr. Calvin or a Buchanan, have littel more in them it is to
be feared of the Church of Theosebias Essentials, then their Livings, Gowns and
Cassocks.

How comes it to pass else, that those who have taken these orders, those oaths
decry the same Episcopacy; as if they were thrust in on purpose to ruinate the
Government, from whence comes else the first part of the Naked Truth* from
whence the Black-nonconformist, from whence Julian the Apostate, and Protestant
Reconcilers, but from men in Orders, and of such Principles. And what was the
design of them, but to be as standing Batteries against the Church.

The first of these endeavors to Ridicule, the next to Annihilate her
Constitution. The Last* indeed describes her one while as the Mother of
Cruelty, and presently as an Angel, or Daughter of Peace.

4. Here then it is that I again presume you will with me conclude, that it is
Expedient, that these Men should be what they pretend to be, renouncers of
their former Opinions, and lovers of that Church they are now Members of,
because their Levity* becomes the occasion of great Scandal.

For I pray consider. When the weaker brethren look upon the great ones with an
humble, modest, prudent intent to make them their Examples, when they
experience here great Learning but no fidelity to God or the Church, when they
shall mock both, to advance their interest, what must these think or do. How
must they think, that such like Mecaenas, love the Patrimony and not the
Church, as he did the Emperor, and not Augustus. How must this be the inlet to
worser Consequences, even those of Skepticism, Atheism, and Rebellion. For when
those whose understandings are so great, and ought with modesty to be submitted
unto, shall in their Practice thus Equivocate, this makes one to boubt all is
but a juggle when they deny a God as it were, by slighting their oaths in his
presence, this emboldens another to think there is none at all.

When the guides of the Church are not firm in their Religion, others are more
easily Loose. Nay I pray consider once more, when they themselves have no fixed
Love for their Government, how apt do they stand to be invited to part with it,
and more then that, having no true Principle of Morality as well as Religion;
how fit they are to become themselves instrumental toward that Chance. And
should you consult the confusions of the Church at any time, from Arrius, to
Hugh Peter's, from him to Ferguson, there have been such as those who assisted
the alteration. Thus then it is but reasonable I hope to continue our wishes,
that there may be no more Examples like that of the Protestant Reconciler, who
inso short a time, can make the same thing to be as a trifle, and of the
greatest moment. Who so solemnly calls God to be a Witness; that what he has
discoursed in the following Papers, was his fixed judgment; which he has taken
up upon Irresistible Convictions, that through which he thinks he might do good
service to his God, to the Religion of his Savior, and to the Church as well
as native Country, if he could but prevail with others to embrace the same
Opinion, and yet in Page the 5. of the second part blast all this with the same
breath, and leaves the Reader to Conjecture very Probably from this
inconstancy, that neither his God, nor his Religion are really such things in
his Eye, as he would have others think them to be; since the same Ceremonies,
the same scrupled Liturgy, he before declares ought not to be imposed by
Superiors, are now such he confesses as ought to be submitted unto by Laymen,
and that they are liable to the Censures of the Church who refuse this.

And this ought to be done the rather, because the conditions of the Church,
are such, and nothing else, but what have been required by the Church of Christ
in all Ages. Nor may it be Impertinent to wish again, that there may be in the
Church of Theosebia, no more besides these instances, whose former Education,
whose downright Antipathy to the Church, whose present dissatisfaction in the
Government, they doubt of, not to say deny Episcopacy to be jure divino; whose
tang in the Nose and Throat, whose Predestinarian Doctrine, whose curtailing
the Common Prayer, and other things, may truly hint, that they have much of the
Old Man in them, and little of the New. May Omens act by contraryes. The
unlucky birds be tokens of good luck. And all these things I have mentioned
have no significations in them but of their reality. And notwithstanding these,
may they all think the same thing, cry up the same Doctrine, in the Pulpit and
out of it, and methinks, when they are thus all of one mind, it must be a
likely way that there should be no divisions among us. Now then, were they thus
agreeing in their minds, we might conclude they would the sooner agree in their
hearts.

And this also I presume you will allow (my Reader) is a thing necessary among
them. For certainly if it be pleasant to see any brethren, it is to see these
live together at unity. Those therefore who are become our Brethren, may they
as Children of the same Parent Love their Mother the Church, and part with that
little interest of theirs which may advance hers. But by no means ought they to
encourage her Enemies for their own advantage, lest interest alone be thought
their Deity.

However, should they be unwilling to part with their Diana to do the Church
service, methinks they might let go that cheaper part, and Love those of the
same Order, the same Faith they now publicly profess in a better, at least,
equal degree, then the avowed adversaries to all this. It may perhaps pretend
something ill, when the Strictness of our opinion shall not only be resented
ill by them, but the discourse, the designs of the fanatique party prefered to
ours, and by Subteraneous ways, managed against us, and us against our selves.
When nothing we can do, can heartily oblige them to us, what can this be, but
the effect of the old cause, Invisum mihi Genus est. Whatsoever Policy may
teach them to speak superficially, they are but inwardly those Wolves whose
natural repast it is to prey upon the Lambs.

This mixture of Love and hatred, (might we be worthy to advise) ought rather
to be turned into that entire Liquor of Life, cordial affection. For such
inward grudges, are but the source of those waters of strife, which run into
the veins of other men from their example, and threaten, what once they swelled
into, a pernicious deluge.

And indeed, unless they do resolve that their actions may speak their love for
the Church as well as their tongues, unless they forbear to be one thing in the
Face and another in the Heart, prudence will suspend our Charity, and we shall
not be afraid to say, that tho they are come into the Church and call her
Mother; they are but those Vipers who creep there to eat her Bowels out.

Not that we refuse any converts, nor require at their preferments, long may
they enjoy them, but that they would really be, what they pretend to be,
further the interest of the Church they are Members of; pursue those Principles
they have sworn to approve of, and not like him in Justin, come over to us with
a design to deliver us into the hand of the Enemy.

And until those waters are healed, and there be this unity in your own Family,
neither the present advocates for Union, nor any other, can hope to have
influence upon those I next desire to speak unto, viz. The Laity to reclaim
them if possible from that inveteracy they so closely harbor against those of
the Episcopal opinion.

To the Dissenting Party.
HAving thus ended our Memorandum to those who want no knowledge may we accost
them, who want that as well as consideration. The rancour of their disposition
toward us, we shall according to promise make apparent, if we may have leave to
recount how partial they are in their Judgments between our actions and their
own; what delight and pains they take to deprive us, not only of our
Reputations but our Hapiness. For although they are men of the like passions, and
perhaps more faults then any body. Yet when they take a veiw of their own
memories: so strangely do they dote upon themselves or voluntarily Shut their
eyes in the Inquisition, that no blemish can be found, they are at Spotless as
the Snow, and the devout man is placed in Solomon's Porch, of greatly wondering
at his own excellency. But turn the prospect upon us, and then he startles,
beholds nothing but Leopards, and in his horror cries out to Satan and the
wicked to depart from him, nay rather then their sight shall be called in
question, though nothing but what might be pardonable among better Christians
then himself can be laid to our charge, He or they, will invent something that
shall, and then with a Multiplying faculty they have, they will make it of one,
seem to be innumerable crimes. For us to drink the Kings or Duke of Yorks
Health, is debauchery, and the man who speaks of them with affection, must be
thought to have four Devils in him; but for them to pray and Tiple, to Cuckold
a Friend or Brother, to make a whore of a Sister, to get an Estate by the
Gentle theft of composition, to contrive to take away the Estates or life's of
the Church-Enemies as they call us, tho the King or Duke of York be amongst us,
is but Sanctily with them and the liberty of the Godly: And so dangerous is
their ordinary conversation, that, as the Italians chose to Murder a man
rather then Slander him, these chose to Slander him on purpose that he may be
Murdered, as I will prove unto you from the Examples of no less Persons then
King Charles the first, King Charles the Second, and James Duke of York.

Of the Fanatique's Behavior toward King Charles the First, both as to their
Words and Actions.
WHoever has conversed with the Chronicle of Theosebia, cannot be Ignorant that
King Charles the first (of blessed Memory) had, with his Crown, many troubles
entailed unto him, not only upon the account of the Palatinate, but by reason
of that War he engaged himself in for the Preservation of the French
Prostestants. How zealously he desired to be the defender of the Faith, even
among our Neighbors abroad, as well as those at home, if any are unacquainted
with it, let them repair to his affectionate, pithy, and eloquent speech to his
two houses upon this subject, and that will satisfy them. And besides that, his
employing the subsidies, (he at any time prevailed for) to their proper use,
(the service of that business) gives evidence thereof in his actions. But not
withstanding his intentions were fixed upon so commendable an object; yet how
hardly did he meet with supplies to his desires; since the Eloquence, nay the
prayers almost and entreaties, as well as sincerity and vehemence of that pious
Prince, left them too often immovable. And at length, so it was, that the
Emegency of this, and some other affairs, threw that good King into new
exigencies. And here was the time, they first began to play their Pranks with
Him; preparing of him for his following scene of disasters by this one
observation they gave him occasion to make, that his Enemies were they of his
House. Nothing was more wanting to the King then Money, nothing less obtained
by him, nor more pleasing, (to the factious party in the House of Commons) then
that want. For, (as if they had been the only Trustees of the Nation, as if
they had Money ordered them by the people to turn Merchant Adventurers with,
and improve it to the best advantage for them,) no Money could be had from
them, without interest given unto them from the King, and such interest as made
it look like a design in them, to ask that, which in time they presumed, would
eat out the Principle of the Mortgage, and bring the Crown into the Bankers
Hands. So strict were his Majesty's necessities, they cunningly observed that
Money must be had; and so exacting were they, that like Bread in time of a
Famine, he must pay dear enough for it.

First they requested Privileges, afterward they incroached upon his
Prerogatives; next, they could not be satisfied unless they had something of
his Possessions; and by degrees, from whetting their Appetites, they arrived to
insatiable humors, which not only with the Horseleech, did cry, Give, give,
but with Cerberus the Doorkeeper of the House of Devils, would devour those
that fed them not. Now then, in plain English, nothing less then three Kingdoms
would serve their turn. And should we take our Estimate of such People from the
result of this Story, we must conclude them to be made up of deceit and
cruelty, and that we are to avoid them with the same care we would refuse to go
betwixt two Millstones actually grinding, because, if they once lay hold of
you, they will crush you to Death.

For thus, to accomplish their ambition, they betake themselves to that course,
they are famous in; not go foolishly to work, and openly attempt that which
carries Scandal along with it, but pretend that which may be plausible with the
Multitude, and under this disguise, carry on barbarity, and any Villainy. They
therefore strongly give it out, that the King was a Papist, a betrayer of their
Liberties and Privileges, and would deprive them of their Religion. And this
they do (with Sighs and Tears, Pity, and Compassion, as they were men of tender
Consciences) declaring themselves, as obedient subjects to his Majesty as the
world could afford, or their duty, could require them to be. But in regard,
that their All, their Religion that is and their God, next to these, their
Rights of Liberties, and Privileges, were more dear to them than their Prince;
therefore it was, that with swords in their hands, they thought it requisite,
and their bounden duty, to defend those, though they unwillingly fought against
him, for the defense of them. So that this was no violent Opposition, no
Rebellion against their Sovereign; but a Pious care of the Reformed Religion,
and worship of God, a faithful pursuance of those Oaths they took to preserve
the Rights of the people; and a Moderate way they had to bring the King to his
right mind again; that he might serve God, and Govern his people as he ought to
do, at least as they would have him; And in all this, as it was once said of
Job (in a truer sense) they vainly contended to have been thought such as did
smite. And how did the Plot take. O, Admirably well? And even so as it was to
be expected. For as Hay heated, and dried by the Sun, soon takes fire, so the
People who were naturally inclined to repinings, as well as discontents, and
from these, to Insurrections, were easily moved to this, when they were
summoned unto it, upon the pretense of their Religion and Liberties being in
danger. For, though Religion, (truly so, is the Least in their thoughts) and as
little in their understandings, yet such a confused affection they have toward
the name of it, that nothing shall sooner Command their assistance then to save
the life of this, and though their greatest liberty they make use of, is to
destroy the Liberty of their Prince, and despise Dominions, yet when it is
styled their Property, this also presently provokes them to come into its aid.
The declaring the King then to be so much an Enemy to his People, was the
likely way to make his People Enemies to him, and upon the first Alarm, they
were immediately in Arms against him, and greedily hasten to the Camp of the
Lord of Host to fight his Battle. And here they fight against their Sovereign,
as much by Slander as force, since the first, encouraged men to join in the
Last. To satisfy the Reader in this, pray once more break open his Cabinet, and
let it be seen, what they publicly and falsely asperse him with, until from a
wound in his Name, they bring him to his Sepulcher. Thus, as Mr. Symonds
testifies in his vindication of King Charles the first, Page 35. They one while
with strange Malice report him as one that did sit in the Seat of the Scornful,
to remain (that is according to their own interpretation) for ever in the
highest Throne and degree of wickedness, that man or Devil could reach unto:
And as specimens of his wickedness, they in Page 177. are manifested to charge
him, as one, who hated his Protestant Friends, purely for being Protestants,
(though they loved him, nay in Page 179. They undauntedly say, that Idolatry
was set up by his Authority, in contempt of God and true Religion. And in Page
193. (that they may make him complete in all that is Ill) they say that the
Rebellion in Ireland was managed by the Kings Influence. And nothing is more
certain than at the last, they laid, (that unnatural War, which themselves
occasioned amongst us) to his charge, who most shunned it. Here then observe the
Exquisite malice of their false accusations.

For notwithstanding, He was a known Pater Patriae, and Defensor sidei, a true
nursing Father to the Church, and Indulgent Parent to his People: Though he
parted with every thing he had, unto his life it self, to preserve the true
Religion, to please his Friends and appease his Enemies, yet even him they
would render as a Caligula or Monster of Men, who, rather (in respect of his
Virtues and Candor, ought with Vespasian to have been styled and honored as
another Deliciae hominum, or delight of Mankind. And what use they made of
these aspersions I need not tell you, since from these, there arose such an
aversion to his Royal person, as could not be taken away, but with his Life?
But betwixt this and the Grave, their demeanor toward him was with the most
remarkable inhumanity. And as a prelude to this, take notice if you please of
the Agony his Majesty underwent through a sense of the effects of the killing
Slander. If I had not my own Innocence and God's Protection, it were hard for
me to stand out against those Stratagems and conflicts of Malice, which by
falisies seek to oppress the Truth, and by jealousies to supply the defect of
real causes, which might seem to justify so unjust Engagements against me. And
indeed, the worst effects of open hostility come short of these designs: For I
can more willingly lose my Crown then my Credit; nor are my Kingdoms so dear to
me, as my Reputation and my Honor. Those must have a Period with my Life, but
these may survive to a glorious kind of Immortality, when I am Dead and Gone: a
good name being the Embalming of Princes; and a sweet consecrating of them to
an Eternity of love and gratitude among posterity. But this was not all? Those
foul and false aspersions were secret Engines at first employed against my
Peoples love of me: that undermining their Opinion and value of me, my Enemies
and theirs too, might at once blow up their Affections, and Batter down their
Loyalty. However, he thanks God, that the detriment of his Honor was not so
afflictive to him, as the Sin and Danger of his Peoples Souls: whose Eyes once
blinded with such Mists of Suspicions, they are soon misled into the most
desparate Precipices and Actions: wherein they do not only consider their Sin
and Danger, but glory in Zealous adventures; while I am rendered to them so fit
to be destroyed, that many are Ambitious to merit the name of my destroyers;
Imagining they then fear God most, when they least Honor their King.

And in this the King was his own Prophet, for what he foresee and feared did
come upon him. For a Civil War did quickly break out upon these jealousies, so
those were not so soon Laid. Though by Treaties he endeavored so far as Honor
or Conscience would give him leave, to put an end to these strifes, yet nothing
could prevail, until the Sword deciding the business, he was driven of two
Evils as he thought to chose the least, and fly from the Rebels in England, to
the subjects of Scotland, by whom he was sold as a slave, and by these made
one. First, a Prisoner in Holmby, and then in the Isle of Wight, where the loss
of his Chaplains, or rather denial of them, was more Irksome to him then the
loss of his Liberty or Kingdoms. This was the highest piece of Barbarity, not
used toward the meanest Malefactors, as the Law aims not at once to destroy
their Bodies and their Souls.

After this, what was the sense of their vote of Non-addresses, but that none
should come from his Majesty to the Parliament, with overtures of Peace, nor
have any opportunity to ask it of them. The sense of their own guilt and his
Right as a King, resolved upon this course, as he was now doomed to be led like
a Lamb to the Slaughter, whereas, were he once dispatched, his Letters nor his
person would be any Eyesore to their Consciences or Impediment to their
designs, but the way must be open to their Ambition, when they had once
satsifyed their cruelty. And this construction of their thoughts in that
action, His Majesty gives as well as I, laying of it down as a Maxim that there
are but few steps between the Prisons and Graves of Princes. And since they
prohibited any Messengers to come unto them, from his Majesty, His Majesty had
a prospect of some dreadful Messenger who would be sent to him from them,
insomuch that Now, says he, I have cause more then enough, to meditate upon
and prepare for Death. It was Gods indulgence he confessed which gave him the
space, but man's cruelty that gave him the sad Occasion of those thoughts. For
alas, it was not the Common burden of mortality that was grievous unto him,
but he had laid on him the heavy load of Men's Ambitions* Fears, Jealousies, and
cruel Passions, whose envy or enmity against me, makes their own lives seem
deadly to them, while he enjoyed any part of his.

But what need we doubt of that which is too certain. Behold him led from
Carisbrook to Westminster Hall. And as they would not let him speak unto them
by others, so now he must not speak for himself. A Traitor they tell him he is,
though against whom they cannot tell.

A Murderer, and Public Enemy, and therefore was Sentenced to be put to
Death, by Severing his Head from his Body.

Guilty he is therefore in this, and many other things because he must be so.
Dye he must, and did. Led once more into his Palace-Yard, to suffer the
Tortures of their derision and cruelty, and dye the Death of a glorious
invincible Christian. And now he left them to carry on that Babel they builded
with the bones, and cemented with the blood of their King. Which (with thanks
to God) had its confusion. And He, whose Right is was now sits upon the Throne.

Of their words and usage to King Charles the Second.
HAving thus Misused the Father, may they prove more kind unto the Son. But
being Heir to his Crown, He must Expect their Cruelties I doubt also as part of
his Inheritance. And so it was.

Their Behavior toward King Charles the Second.
HAving thus Misused the Father, let us see how they will use the Son: But,
being heir to the Crown, He must I doubt be heir also to their Cruelty. And so
it fell out: For no sooner was he laid in the ground, but they took what care
they could to keep King Charles the second off of it. That which was his Right,
they endeavored by all the stratagems of Fraud and Malice, might never be his
real possession.

And to this end was that Act from a Mock-Parliament set forth in March 17.
1648. That whereas Charles Stuart was justly condemned for many Treasons,
Murders, etc. Therefore his Issue and Posterity, and all others pretending
title under him, are become incapable of the said Crown. And not only did they
discharge all people to pay any fealty or Allegiance to Charles the second, but
(to add Cruelty to their Cruelties of Regicide, and usurpation) they likewise
Enact, that if any persons should by any means, so much as comfort, or assist
the King, as well as attempt to revive his Right, they should be deemed guilty
of High Treason, and be prosecuted against accordingly. In which words they do
not I confess throw petty slanders upon him. Style him in names which reflect
upon his wisdom, his honesty, etc. for such low games they scorn to play at.
But (if they please to be sensible of it) they call him something worse then
Racha, whilst their words are like sharp Arrows carrying death along with them.
They declare him Traitor, See History of Indepen. p. 108.
They cheapen 2 part p. 24.
his Life, Commissionate Villains to lay violent hands upon the Lords
anointed, who would religiously, as it were, kill him, because commanded to do
so by them, in whom they trusted as an Oracle from Heaven. And further, they
not only banished him as and seized upon from his country, but became robbers
an Alcibiades, his Inheritance. For in March 23. 1648. It was then ordered by
the Commons, that Commissioners should be appointed to make Sale of the Kings,
Queens, and Princes Personal Estate, upon inventory and apprisal, and it was
done accordingly. Thirty Thousand pound was to be taken out of it for the use
of that Summers fleet. Then it was to be referred to 40 Hogon Mogons, or
Council of State, what they thought fit to be sold, and the rest to be reserved
for the use of them and their attendants. The Kings House, Parks, and Honor of
Eltham, were given to Sergeant Bradshaw; Greenwich to Bostrode Whitlock;
White Hall afterward was seized on for Monsieur Cromwell's apartment, and other
things, in other manner bestowed as they pleased.

And having thus laid hold of the Inheritance, they wanted nothing but to kill
the Heir. Which the sense of these words likewise intended, and the reason why
they did not kill him, was, because they had no opportunity for it. And as if
it was not sufficient to exercise their cruelty against him, they torment him
in the Punishment of his Friends, Maliciously contriving against Thousands of
Innocent people for his sake. Insomuch that they imposed an Engagement as
Effectual as a Massacre (as the History of Independency informs us) namely to
be true to the Commonwealth as Established without a King and House of Peers,
under the penalty of being totally deprived of the benefit of the Law. The
effect of which was, to have their Lives, Liberties, and Estates Exposed, to
put the Outlawry into the Soldiers Hands, and bid them plunder and destroy the
Non-engagers.

Whilst thus much then is contained in their words, what could have been said
more than this, (to the prejudice of his Majesty) which would have taken away
his Life and Fortune, Liberty and Reputation (if they could have done it)
amongst his People, altogether. These were the undoubted Marks of their
inveteracy against King Charles the Second, presently after his Fathers Murder
and both their faults were; The First was, This ought then to have Reigned King
of Theosebia. And in this high pitch of cruelty did they continue their rage
against him.

For when the Scots had yielded Allegiance to him, these denied it, and opposed
him, to the destruction of many Thousand Lives, whatever befell the Souls of
their own, who died as Rebels. They forced him to the Perplexities of Dangers
and calamities. Exposed his Head to sale, and drove him to a Second Banishment,
which he through difficulties attained.

Many were the disturbances he fed upon in the time of his Banishment, being
hurried from one Court to another, in the midst of contempts, fears, and
conspiracies against him. And thus his Life was as it were a living Martyrdom.
And when through the indulgent providence of God, He was at last remembered,
they yet could not forget their nature, but soon entered into projects, which
time has discovered to be the fruits of their disaffection. How disorderly, how
unneighbourly they have been all along, we all are. sensible, and what we
could, not otherwise so well understand, this Kng himself has told us in his
Declaration. From which you may be assured, that notwithstanding he labored
for Peace, they still were studious of Battle. The things which should have
composed the differences of the Nation, which should have united it in a Solid
tranquillity, and rendered his Majesty formidable to his Enemies as well as
glorious in the eyes of his Friends, they most rejected. And so seriously did
they design the greatest injuries to his Majesty, that, (lest he should be able
to do himself or his People any good,) lest he should act like himself and get
renown, or maintain his grandeur among his Subjects, they therefore vote it
unfit for him to have any Money given him; nay that is not enough, it was fault
said I, yes Treason against the Commonwealth to lend him any, tho he gave his
Royal security for it. And to further their worser intentions, which since with
thanks to the knower of secrets (have been discovered) what aspersions were
scattered up and down, to insinuate into the people a belief, that his Majesty
was too much a Friend to the French, too much a Friend to some other Religion,
that the Peers were their Enemies also, and none but those true Trouts, their
Friends, in the House of Commons preserved their Rights.

All which was but to endear them unto the People, and set the People against
the King. For at length, where did these things center but in a design (which
Heaven has detected) to kill the King.

Their Carriage toward the Duke of York.
HAving seen their infamous Barbarity toward the Father and the Son, may they
by this time be ashamed, or at least have abated of their rigor, and demean
themselves toward the second Son, or Brother of our present King with more
Moderation. But as it would be to expect the reconcilement of contraries, or
the performance of Impossibilities, so it cannot be hoped for. Nor indeed do we
find the Ethiopians altered, notwithstanding so many washings in blood.

The Bill of Exclusion, I suppose, is still fresh in many of our Memories. And
the missing of their votes sticks as fast we see in theirs. But then, the
design of that Bill, I presume, we all likewise understand, which was to lay a
Block in the way, that the Duke of York might not come to the wearing the Crown
of Theosebia. And tho it is true (should there be occasion for it) that as
Eusebius reports concerning the great Constantine (...). He by a natural right
from his Ancestors, would ascend the Throne of Majesty and Dominion, yet even
him they would have kept violently from it. And because his Majesty would not
consent unto that Bill, you too plainly see, that they consented since unto a
worse. And from distaste, fell into conspiracy; which, (they hoped) would have
ripened in the Slaughter of both.

But what I pray was the occasion for these impious proceedings against the
Duke? Why, nothing but the cruelty of their own Ambition and dreadful
inventions. For, (to irritate the Popular against him) they dressed him up in
Hideous Characters. Declared him to be a Papist, and implacable in his
disposition; And therefore that he would infallibly be their (...) or
Man-killer, since he will thirst after blood, not like Cyrus in an Heroic, but
Religious appetite, which would make our destruction, like the burning of Rome
to Nero, seem Musical unto him. Now to prevent all this Mischief, it is thought
very good Religion, to cut off the Successors Entail, and rather then fail, his
Head. And this they were mightily encouraged unto, by one of their Chaplains
who was Author of that Famous piece of Roguery, Julian the Apostate. In which
book it is uncertain, whither he shows himself more Fool or Knave. For in the
description of Julian, he was, (this Author says) Impious, Cruel, and an
Apostate. And because he was so, he concludes that the Duke of York is, and
necessarily will be the same in all circumstances. But what a pretty way of
arguing this is, by which we may fit the worst Character to the best man, and
take away any man's Life or Estate by it, should they proceed against them
according to his advice.

And to retort it upon himself, pray let us see how he would like it. For thus
after his example we may likewise say.

Judas was a Clergyman, an Apostate, and a Traitor to his Master the King of
the Jews.

The Author of this book was a Clergyman, and is therefore an Apostate, a
Traitor to the King of Theosebia, ergo, he ought to be condemned, and executed
according to his own Law, and then he need not take the pains to Hang himself,
another will do it for him, and at that rate, like Phalaris, he may quickly die
by his own Inventions.

Nay further, should the Laws be prosecuted (as he directs) upon Supposition
only, then the Lives and Estates of all Dissenters must be forfeted and taken
away, as these are likely persons to destroy that Government, which their
Principles do so Fundamentally and Earnestly oppose.

But this he informs them may lawfully be done against the Duke.

Or, (should they not prevail by fair means to court the King and his
Honorable Peers out of their senses) this may then be their remedy, That they
should watch the breath of our Sovereign, and as soon as that takes leave of
his Royal Corpse, then with a prepared Army, step betwixt the Throne and the
Tomb, and bid the Successor go seek his fortune in another Country. But, should
they unhappily fail in this device also. Should he climb the Throne and demand
Allegiance; yet if he commands unjust things, it is very just he says to kill
his Messengers, and save their Money, much more their lives; and should they
not do this, they would be but their own Murderers, in not preserving
themselves so much as they could.

And thus he has found out a way, to make Rebellion so far from the sin of
Witchcraft that it would be but the manly, Christian fortitude of Killing, Se
defendendo.

And since (through the Providence of God bringing their designs to light,
since the honest endeavors of some learned hands have likewise, not only
refuted his Doctrine of Devils, but enlightened the minds of a great many, and
reduced them to the more clement Doctrine and disposition of Saints, they are I
hope frustrated in this last Intention; how did their disappointments turn into
fury; which in a sudden Eruption they presumed might have hastened the Enjoyment
of their desires, in the utter dissolution of the King, the Duke, and Thousands
more.

But here by the way, since the injuries to this Prince are so unjustly
accumilated upon him, since thy were intended to disturb our Peace, and it may
be a good step to it, to understand rightly what may be said for the Duke, and
the satisfying of those they would stir up to rancour and Rebellion; give me
leave to insist on this, which I take in hand on no other Score than to relieve
the abused reputation of so great a man.

What his Opinion is, God knows, we are not to enquire after it, but this I
know, that my own is altogether different from that which some may think
inclines me to become his Advocate. Who he is, we all know, namely our Kings
Brother. And therefore as a Neighbor, as a Prince, as the Brother of our
Sovereign, he certainly merits our charitable observation.

1. First then, consider his descent. Because, A Fortibus fortes, A Piis pii
generantur, they say. And if the Maxim may be allowed the same favor here as
at other times, there may be a probability, that (from a confluence of merciful
blood descending to him from Grandfather and Father,) there may be some in his
veins which may influence him to the same candor: Especially when in the
collateral issue his most sacred Majesty, there does to a Prodigy such a spring
of Clemency inhabit. And indeed, his Patience in his late exile from Council
and Nation, his calmness under the highest affronts to a Prince of his Blood,
Spirit and Fortune, his weighty Service in Scotland, his inseparable love to
his Royal Brother, and his Friends, do methinks plainly bespeak him, not to be
made up of Serpents blood, or a compound of Monsters bearing Antipathy against
Mankind, as they labor to have him thought to be.

2. Nor Secondly, can we suppose it possible, that a Prince of his Known
ingenuity, should so lose his Genius, his Education, his Understanding, as to
delight in the destruction of those who are at once a Princes glory and support.

3. Besides which, Imagining him but to have as much natural affection for
himself as other men have, we cannot but conclude, that he will like a Crown
upon his own Head, as well as upon a stangers, and that a Prince of his parts,
experience, and improvements, will not for a Frolic, dissolve three Kingdoms
as a present to a Foreigner.

In the mean time, why should we look upon such a Prince, as that Animal who
was cut out for the Society of Beasts or Devils, merely because they describe
him so, who for no cause hate him. Can this conciliate his heart, to treat him
with the malice of a Jew.

Nay, where is their Love to our present King; since they thus consider him as
if he stood in specie in Westminster-Abby, and not at White Hall with the
Scepter in his Hand. What Christianity is this, what love to us, to persuade
one to turn Dioclesian, and the other to dye, whether they will or no.

Having thus presented you with a view of their behavior, toward King Charles
the First, King Charles the second, and the Duke of York, having seen how
exorbitant they were toward these, you may now possibly be induced to think it
probable that they may be such as we at first described them to be, namely too
inveterate toward their inferiors or equals.

But that you may not depend upon my observation only, give me leave to
instance this also by one example of their deportment heretofore, and from what
they actually have been, you may perhaps with certainty enough guess what they
are or would be; and those are you will find, Tyrants in seed, though not in
growth.

For thus, from the History of Independency in his Mystery of the two Iuncto's,
Page 6. you may be assured, that they ordinarily turned well affected men out
of their Free holds and Goods, imprisoned and beat their prisoners, nay
murdered them, without any charge, accuser or witness. Although they cry out
of our cruelty in suppressing their seditious Meetings, they could find in
their hearts one Sunday, Sept. 9. 1649. at the Church of St. Peter's Wharf, what
to send armed men into the Church, and whilst Mr. Williams was praying for the
King, some were Shot, and mortally wounded, a great many, very much wounded,
and others pillaged. And these are but particular examples of that Pile, which
is impertinent for so short an animadversion. But as it is thus evidenced that
there does so much inveteracy Lodge in the breasts of those who think
themselves the best of Christians, whom (laying aside their mistake) we court
into one body, so this antipathy must be removed before they can firmly join
with us. For there must be a Simpathy in the ingredients which are intended for
this Compound.

As we are willing to forget the deformity of their opinions, and injuries, so
let them be as ready to forget their Animosities. Modestly think they have
faults as well as we in their morals, and something much worse. And as to the
final judgment of actions, let them leave that to the God of Heaven whose
prerogative alone it is. In the mean time, our Charity becomes us better then
censure. Let them conclude their Superiors in Church and State, ought to be
obeyed, let them conclude our Divine service has no danger in it, and therefore
cordially perform it. Let them be as kind to us as they would have us be to
them; and then, both our Union and our Nation may be impregnable. But if they
lay aside this affection (which is the essential part of Brethren) this will be
but Cain to Abel, Brother in show, and a Murderer in the Heart.

To those of our own Church, who seemingly are our Friends, but too easily
hearken to the Insinuations of the adverse party, and become our Enemies.
HAving thus shown you what they have done, be pleased to compare further, what
it is they teach, and the consideration of what the Church of Theosebia
teaches, and the Doctrine of any Dissenter compared together, you will find it
a very equal thing I doubt not, that you should afford the same candor to us
you do to them.

The sense of our Doctrine then is according to that great command, to love our
Neighbors as our selves, to do as we would be done by, and thus by mutual
offices of good Neighborhood to promote the content of Living. Instead of
which, the opinion of our adversaries has been and is, that none have Authority
over us, but the Holy; none have right to the goods of this life but they; and
as the Jndependents taught that they could be forgiven in the very act of
sinning, so the rest teach that God allows them a particular liberty in
sinning; as he cannot be thoroughly angry with those whom he has decreed to
save. From which Principles, how must they be inclined to think highly of
themselves, and to do injuries to those they esteem ungodly, and therefore have
no right to anything but concontempts, poverty, or the gallows. Once more I say
consider this, and you may be satisfied that our Principles are much more fit
for society, and that we as much or more deserve your affection, when you come
to judge betwixt us and them. And this you will the sooner be won to do if you
consider once more, that it is not impossible, but that some of these late
disturbers of our Israel in the Pulpits themselves may have been, what
heretofore some have been, hired on purpose to raise factions and divisions.
Hist. Indepen. page 156.

THE CONCLUSION.
SInce then you have little to say to us, and nothing against the Church, make
use of your judgments, and observe that the jealousies which they have raised
in your minds, are but Chymera's, no more then Children's fancying strange
sights, in the Air, and telling them to others. And we are not so much betwixt
Scylla and Charybdis as they contrive to make us conceit.

Let then those Melancholy Mists, (which darken the mind, and force men to
apprehend falsely, which foment uncharitable distrusts, despairs, and Torments;
turning our Paradise into a Hell) be cleared up by the more comfortable Light
of Love and Peace as the issues of a diviner Spirit, from whence we may be
armed at once with Fortitude and wisdom. That we may in the sweetness of
Satisfaction, enjoy our Lives and estates small or great; and from the
unconstancy of these Tabernacles, pass into the Eternity of the Celestial
mansions.

FINIS.

