THE Unequal Match: OR, THE LIFE OF MARY OF ANJOU QUEEN of MAJORCA. An
Historical Novel.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Blount near the Bear Tavern by the New Exchange in
the Strand, and Richard Butt at the Bear and Orange-Tree in Princess Street
near the Horshoo-Tavern in Drury Lane: 1681.

TO THE Right Honorable THE Countess Dowager of Tenet, etc.
Madam,
WHen greatness is maintained and attended with all those Gifts and Talents
which procure it ecteem and respect, when Persons of the highest Rank and
Quality are more illustrious by their Merit than their Fortune, it is no wonder
if the World flocks to them with Offerings, and that their excellencies procure
them sometimes trouble and importunities instead of ease and satisfaction. All
those who have the Honor to know you, Madam, speak even with that veneration
of your Ladyship, that I could not curb the Ambition I have of adding one voice
to the general shout, and from crowding up to your Feet, with this present. It
is a Presumption, Madam, I should have despaired of ever having been able to
have attoned for, had not this story of the Queen of Majorca met with that
approbation in the World, that it has been found capable of entertaining with
delight the greatest Judges, amongst whom your Ladyship being with justice
acknowledged to have the first Place, this Queen fancyed she could be no where
so safe as under so glorious a Protection, and therefore was restless and
impatient, till I had Vshered and Introduced her into your Ladyships presence.
I shall have fully satisfied my vanity, if you find her Company, Madam, as
agreeable as others have done, and if you can think fit to Pardon the dress she
appears in, which I Am afraid will be found to have too much of the French in
it, and I in this a too Superstitious observer of their Mode. But should I
excuse my self with her being huddled up in haste, I should but prove the more
importunate; Nor shall I tell the World that Honor, Wit, and Virtue, have
never had a better Example than your Ladyship, it would be I fancy like a Man
in the Month of May or April, who in a clear, bright, Sun-shining Day, having a
fair Prospect of all the Beauties Nature was ever capable of bestowing, and
which were adorned by all manner of improvements, would declare to the World
that it was Spring; and Figure to himself he had discovered a great secret, in
publishing what was already the general delight, Admiration and Wonder: he
could not fail of being similed at for his folly, which to avoid, it is sit
that I be silent in a Subject that is above description, that I make my Leg,
and retire with all Submission and Respect.

Madam, Your Ladyships most Obedient and most humble Servant. F. S.

MARY OF ANJOU, QUEEN OF MAJORCA.
THe Caprichiousness of the Stars is much to be admired in the Destiny of
Princesses, who seem to have been only born in an illustrious Rank, for to be
the more unhappy; Policy usually requiring, that they be delivered to Husbands
without consulting their Inclinations; and that they be purely Victimes of
State. Mary of Anjou, Daughter of Charles the Second, King of Naples and
Sicily, was a Famous Example of the fantassticalness not to say of the
injustice of the Stars. The King her Father gave her, or rather Sacrificed her
to the King of Majorca. He had for her that tender affection, that the most
accomplished Princess upon the Earth merited; several Princes aspired to so
Illustrious a Possession, and she might have been happy. The King of Majorca
was an Old Man, of a whimsicall and fierce humor: had already had two Wives,
nay and had the Reputation of knowing how to dispatch them when he pleased. An
Union so ill suited, could not but produce a very ill agreement. Yet all these
reasons though very powerful, could not prevail in the mind of King Charles,
over the reasons of State; His Affairs demanded this Sacrifice from him, the
King of Majorca offered him great succors by Sea, of which he had extreme need
for the resisting the powerful Fleet, that was preparing against him by Don
James d' Arragon, out of whose Prison he was newly released; Insomuch that he
accepted that alliance preferrable to so many others, if not more illustrious,
at least more suitable to the Age and Humor of the Princess his Daughter, but
which could not be then so useful to him, as that of the King of Majorca.

I shall take the Subject a little farther than would be necessary for a
History of Gallantry, but as it is one of the finest Circumstances of the
History of Italy, and that I shall say nothing which does not belong to a
faithful Historian, I assure my self, that a Reader the least curious, will
not take ill my having added to the amourous Narration, a recital of the
passages of most importance in that time, and which will be no less diverting
than what there was of Gallantry.

Charles the Second of that name, King of Naples and Sicily, one of the
greatest Princes then under the Heavens, had been more than Ten Years free
Possessour of those two powerful Kingdoms, when his ambition which could not
contain it self in the Narrow Bounds of some States, which made but a little
part of the World, stirring up his Warlike Humor, inspired him with more
glorious Conquests. Constantinople that Famous City, appeared to him a Subject
worthy enough to make him take Arms, and some Lands he had in Morea, being
capable of serving him for a reason, or at least for a pretext to pretend to
the Empire of the East: He prepared himself to drive away the Emperor Michael
Paleologue, but fortune raised him on a sudden greater Affairs than he could
put an end to, and gave him in his own Country, wherewith to Exercise his
Marshall-Genius.

The French according to their usual Custom lived in Sicily, with that Liberty
amongst the Women they take in all places. Their Gallantry little agreeable to
the Humor of the Country, giving occasion of complaints to several Husbands,
there was one certain John de Procula, Physician of the deceased King Manfroy,
whose Crown Charles the Second then possessed, who entertaining some secret
Intelligences with the Principal Lords of the Kingdom, resolved to deliver his
Country from so Incommode a Nation; He went for that end to Constantinople, had
made known to the Emperor Michael the design that King Charles had, hoping to
engage him by a Motive of revenge as well as of glory to favor the
discontented party; but his practices not succeeding in that Court, which
demanded nothing but Peace; and was not at the least in a State of giving great
succors to the Sicilians, he passed into Catalonia, where he offered the
Sovereignty of the Isle of Sicily, to Peter King of Arragon, who had Married
Constance, Daughter of Manfroy, King of Naples and Sicily; Peter being an
Ambitious Prince, and one of the most valiant of his time, pusht on by jealousy
of the Glory of Charles, as well as by Ambition, for so fair a Conquest:
listened to the Proposition of Procula, without seeming, however, to close with
it, till he first knew what the Pope's Sentiments were therein, to whom this
Physician made two Journeys: And in fine after several Paces and
Solicitations, the Resolution being taken by Pietro d' Arragon, Nicholaus the
Third, who then held the Pontificial See at Rome, gave him the investiture of
that Kingdom.

What was most strange in the success of an Affair of so great an Importance,
and at which Posterity will have ever reason to be astonished, is, that it was
carried on with that Order and Secrecy for the space of Eighteen Months, it was
in Treaty, that it could never come to the knowledge of any French Man.
Insomuch that in one and the same day, at the first ringing of the Bell for
Vespers, generally all the Cities of that Kingdom took Arms, and made a
horrible Massacre of all the French without any exception; And they were
possessed to that Point, with hatred or rather with fury against that Nation;
that they put to the Sword, all the Women they found, that they believed to be
with Child by any French Man. This horrible Tragoedy happened in the Year,
1281. about Eleven Years after the Entire Establishment of Charles the First,
in the two Kingdoms.

The Sicilians having thus cruelly freed themselves from the French, and Pietro
d' Arragon, having taken possession of the Island, Charles was forced to quit
the vast designs he had on the East, to think of having satisfaction for so
cruel a Revolt; He prepared a powerful Army against Sicily, and being come to
beseige Messina, he found the enterprise more difficult than he had believed
it. Insomuch, that he was obliged to raise the Siege, and was repulsed as far
as Calabria, from whence he went to Rome, to complain to the Pope of the
Investiture he had given to Pietro of Arragon, who in that time was Crowned at
Palermo.

This Affair was agitated in full Assembly, and the two Kings not agreeing, it
was resolved that it should be decided by the way of Arms, between these two
Princes; and this Duel, a thing very strange, was even by the allowance of the
Holy See. Bourdeaux, the Capital City of Gascony, was chosen for the place of
the Randevouz, and the King of England for Judge. Wherefore Charles came to the
Place on the day assigned, and waited the greatest part of the day for Peter of
Arragon, who kept himself so well concealed, that no Body knew where he was,
only it had been heard said the day before, that he was still so far from
Bourdeaux, that it was almost impossible, he could arrive there on the Day of
assignation: Insomuch, that Charles upon the going down of the Sun retired, and
departed at the same time from Bourdeaux. Peter of Arragon, who had run
incessantly upon good Horses, that he had caused to be placed upon the ways,
being arrived in cognito in the City, kept himself concealed till Charles was
gone, and then he appeared in the Field of Battle, in the presence of him who
presided there, being a Lord the King of England had sent in his place, and
complained of King Charles, whose Impatient Haughtiness had not permitted him
to attend his Arrival. He walked in that manner upon the place, till that he
saw the Stars appear, than he remounted his Horse, and returned with the same
swiftness that he came, going, as is reported, Thirty Leagues that Night. He
retired into a place of safety, thus deceiving King Charles; but Martin the
Fourth, who was then Pope, excommunicated him, and conferred the Kingdom of
Catalonia, on Charles of Valois, Second Son of Philip, King of France.

In the time that King Charles went to Bourdeaux for this Duel, Roger de Loria
a Calabrian by Birth, Admiral of King Peter of Arragon, one of the most
experienced as well as the bravest Captains, that had e're been upon the Sea,
plied all the Coast of Naples, with Forty Five Galleys, ruining all the
Country, as far as the City of Naples, where he likewise came and shot an
infinite number of Arrows, reproaching the Neopolitans with Cowardice, defying
them to come fight him. Which so strongly animated a Number of brave men, there
was in that City, and especially the Young Nobility, that could not endure so
cruel an affront, that Charles Prince of Salerno, the only Son of Charles the
Second, took the Resolution of fighting him, notwithstanding, all the
Opposition of the Legate, and the Express Orders of the King his Father, who
had recommended to him, to think only of well defending the City, and not to
come to blows with the Enemies; This Prince, I say, pushed on with a desire of
Glory, as well as Indignation at so injurious a reproach, went out with Thirty
Galleys, and some other Vessels of less Consequence: and attacqued with more
Valor than force Loria's Fleet, who after a very sharp fight, was at the
length Conqueror, took Nine Galleys, and a great number of Young Lords,
amongst which was Charles Prince of Salerno, who was kept with Nine of those he
would choose, and the rest were sent to Prison in Sicily, of whom, more than
two Hundred were beheaded at Messina, in revenge of the Death of Corradin,
Young Prince of Suevia, whom King Charles whose Prisoner of War he was, afthe
cruel Sentence of Pope Clement the Fourteenth, a Provential by Birth, who wrote
to him, Vita Corradini mors Caroli, mors Carradini vita Caroli; this King, I
say, put him into the Hands of Justice, who condemned him to Death; A Sentence
however, which not only every French Lord and Gentleman refused to Sign, but
whose Execution was fiercely opposed by the Count of Flanders, Son-in-Law to
King Charles, saying that a Prince of that Blood was not to be put to Death
after that manner: But to give him his Liborty, and to make him rather a
Friend, and an Ally, by the means of a Marriage.

The Day after the defeat of the Prince of Salerno, the King his Father
returning from Gascony, arrived at Gayeta, with Sixty Galleys, and Three great
Ships with Soldiers and Horses; and learnt the sad News of his Sons misfortune,
and that there was already a Revolt in the City of Naples, all the People
crying, may Roger de Loria live and Charles dye. At which this Prince fell into
so great a Passion, that being come near that City; he would not Land at the
Port, but above the Church of the Carmelites, where he descended with design to
set on fire that ungrateful and rebellious City. And was a long time in that
cruel Resolution, but at length conquered by the Tears of some good People, and
by the Prayers of the Legate, he pardoned them, after having caused a Hundred
and Fifty of the most culpable to be hanged. This punishment having both calmed
and terrified the City, all his cares were to raise a powerful Army, for to
pass into Sicily, which was ready about Autumn; and he came to Cotrona with a
Hundred and Ten Galleys, and some other Sails; but seeing the Winter come on,
and wanting Victuals and Money for so great a Fleet, he went to disarme at
Brindiso, with design to put to Sea again in the Spring, and in the mean time
to make Provision of all that should be necessary for the bringing to pass his
Projects; If Death had not made them vanish in a moment. He dyed at Foggia, a
City in la Pouille, oppressed with sadness and Malancholly, after having lived
Fifty Six Years, and reigned Nineteen. This Prince was tall, of a ruddy
Complexion, had a great Nose, and a fierce and Martial Air, he was sharp and
severe in punishment, much more admirable for War than for Peace; As to the
rest, very serious, and of almost a Religious Life in what concerned Love. He
slept little, spoak seldom, doing more than he said; He was liberal to brave
men, and firm in his Promises, an Enemy of Trisles and useless Courtiers, but a
generous Protector of Soldiers, and Ambitious more than any Prince whatever,
resolute to have Money at any rate soever, when he was to bring to pass any
enterprise. One of the things that have been most found fault with, in this
Prince, and which has lest some stain in his Glory, is the great License, he
gave to Soldiers in time of Peace, to the great disadvantage of his Subjects;
but otherwise, one of the most accomplished Princes of the Earth.

In that time, Pope Martin had sent two Cardinals to Sicily, for the
endeavoring to make Peace with King Peter of Arragon, and not being able to
reduce him to accept the Conditions that they proposed, they renewed the
Excommunication, there was against him; and likewise Excommunicated all Sicily,
from whence they departed in that manner: The Sicilians more Animated than
ever, to see themselves so ill Treated by the Pope, in Consideration of the
French, having learnt the Death of King Charles run to the Prisons where the
rest of those were who had been taken with the Prince of Salerno, for to
Massacre them: But they found there so vigorous a Resistance, that for the
sparing of the Blood of theirs, they were Obliged to set the Prison on Fire,
and caused the Death by this unmercifull Cruelty of the finest Youth that had
been seen of a long time in Italy, in sequel of which they caused the Judges of
the Principal Cities of the Kingdom to Assemble, for to make the Process of the
Prince of Salerno, who was in Prison with Nine of his Friends, after the
Example of King Charles the First who had caused Corradin to be thus judged,
and they all unanimously condemned him to be Beheaded, as had happened to the
unfortunate Prince of Suevia; But Queen Constance, a Princess, whom Historians
cannot enough commend, being then in Sicily, designed to save him, and for to
satisfy the People, who demanded his Death, she let them understand, that in an
Affair of so great Importance, nothing could be Executed without the allowance
of the King her Husband; and thereupon she ordered, that that Prince should be
sent into Catalonia, where King Peter of Arragon was, to the end he might do as
he should think convenient. This was at length approved by the People, and much
Commanded in the World after the Action of Charles the First.

The Pope having learnt the Death of this King, sent to Naples, in Quality of
Legate, Gerard Cardinal of Parma, and King Philip the Count de Artois his Son,
for to take care of the State with Mary Princess of Salerno, in the Name of
Charles then in Prison; during that, this King on the other side with the Count
de Valois, to whom the Pope had given the Investiture of Catalonia, entered that
Kingdom with two powerful Armies, of which that by Sea was of a Hundred and
Twenty Galleys. They won Girona by assault, where the King of Arragon, who was
there in Person to defend it, received a Wound, of which he dyed. He left Anfus
his Eldest Son King of Arragon, and Don James the Second, King of Sicily.

During that time, Roger de Loria, being departed from Sicily, to come to the
Succors of the King his Master, learnt that a part of the Fleet of France was
in the Port of Roses, and that the other was gone to seek Victuals at Narbonne.
Whereupon he went and attacqued first that of Roses, of which he burnt a part,
having taken or sunk the rest, and made Prisoner Enguiran Admiral of France.
From thence turning toward that of Narbonne, he surprised and defeated it with
much less difficulty than the former, which being understood by King Philip,
who was Sick at Perpignan, it so grieved him, that it caused his Death; and
almost at the same time that of Pope Martin the Fourth, Insomuch that there
dyed in the space of a Year three Kings and a Pope.

Things seemed to be some thing appeased in the midst of so many Deaths of that
Consideration, and the King of England, who was come into Gascony, endeavoring
to make Peace between the two Young Kings, James and Charles the Second, then
in Prison in Catalonia; had almost concluded when it was interrupted by the
Occasion I am going to relate.

The Cardinal Legate, and the Count d' Artois, Governors of the Kingdom of
Naples, judging the Conjuncture fair for the recovering of Sicily, resolved
with Fifty Galleys that they had obtained part from the Venetians, and part
elsewhere, and some Militia, that they had caused to come from Toscany with the
French, and the Country People, to attempt this enterprise under the Command of
Raynand, Count of Aveline. This Fleet put to Sea, they Landed in that Kingdom,
they beseiged Catania, they took it, and the Count fortifying himself there,
sent his Fleet to Naples, for to take in the Soldiers which had been left on
Shore there. At the same time the Count of Montsort Vicar of Toscany,
accompanied with the Count de Boulogne, and Philip Son of the Count of
Flanders, who were at Sienna, departing from Maremma, with a Fleet of Sixty
Galleys, of which Arrigin of Genoa was Admiral, came toward Sicily, to join
with the Count de Aveline. But de Loria, who had newly won two Famous
Victories, having learnt at his coming from that of Narboune, the descent that
the Nepolitans had made into Sicily, turned that way, and came to the Succors
of the Sicilians. The First that he met with, were those of the Count de
Aveline, who were going to Naples, whom he chaced, and finding them almost
unprovided of Soldiers, he immediately routed them: and from thence going to
meet that of the Count of Montfort, which was coming from Toscany, there was a
furious fight, in which being at length Conqueror, he took the Count of
Montfort Prisoner, the Count of Boulogne, and Prince Philip. These two last
ransomed themselves with a Sum of Money; But the Count of Montfort, having been
detained Prisoner, dyed some time aster in Prison. Aafter these two Victories,
Catania being beseiged by all the Army of Arragon, without any hope of
Succors, was obliged to render upon Composition, in the Articles of which it
was permitted to the Count de Aveline, to retire to Naples, he and all those
who had accompanied him.

The Treaty of Peace between these two Kings, that Edward of England had begun,
having been interrupted upon this Subject, he brought it again upon the Board,
and infine concluded it upon Conditions much less favorable for Charles than
the former, because things had extremely Changed Face, after the Victories that
de Loria had won. King Charles promised and obliged himself to procure that the
Count of Valois should renounce all the pretentions that he might have upon
Catalonia, by virtue of the Investiture that Pope Martin the Fourth had given
him of it; and that he would Labor at his own Charges, to make James King of
Sicily be Crowned, who gave him three Years to acquit himself of these two
Articles, for want of which Charles swore he would come again and put himself
in Prison at the End of that Term, in the same place where he was, and for
surety of his word he gave to King james Three of his Sons in Hostage, who were
Lewis since Bishop of Tholose, Robert who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom
of Naples, and John Prince de la Morea, who dyed very Young, with whom King
Charles their Father left. Fifty of the Bravest Gentlemen, he had then with
him. And Infine having moreover paid three Thousand Marks of Silver in
Carolins, he was delivered out of Prison in the Year 1288, where he had been
detained Four Years. He went immediately into France, to acquit himself of his
word, and to procure of the Count de Valois, that he should Renounce the
Pretentions, he had upon Catalonia; But he could never obtain it, and departing
from that Court, with a Number of Young Lords, and some Squadrons, which were
under the Command of Emerick de Narbonne, he came into Italy, passed through
Perugia, where he saw Pope Nicholas the Fourth, who had succeeded Martin the
Fourth, with whom having Treated of the renewing and Confirmation of his
States; This Pope whether out of Imprudence, or Malice, for the Opinions are
Diverse therein, Entitled him King of both Sicilies, in the Year 1289, After
which he went to Naples, where he was expected with the greatest Impatience by
all his Subjects, who had not ceased to make Vows for his Liberty. But what
was Extraordinary, and filled with joy and tenderness, the Hearts of those who
were there present, was to see the King with a Train of Young Lords, the most
splendid and magnificent that had ever been beheld, and on the other side the
Queen his Consort who went Three Leagues out of the City to meet him,
accompanied with Charles Martel his Eldest Son, Philip Prince of Taranto his
Fourth Son, and with Four Princesses his Daughters; Blanehe, Eleonora, Mary,
and Beatrix, Clemence being married to the Count de Valois, all of them perfect
Beauties, and who had after them a Train of Young Princes, whom Glory and Love,
Arms and Gallantry, diversely engaged in that Court. It would be very dissicult
to express the Joy that the King had at the sight of the Queen and his
Children; not being able to leave off Caressing them, especially the Princess
Mary, for whom he had ever had a Particular tenderness, and who was so
increased in. Beauty since his absence that he could not enough admire her. The
People of Naples received him with a joy and Acclamations that touched to very
Tears: and the rejoycings upon his happy return, were such as if fortune had
ever been on their side. Those Young Princes were seen to strive to out do one
another by their Addresses and Magnificence in the Tournaments; and all the
other Feasts which were daily made: especially those who besides Honor were
Spirited with an Interest of Heart. Love Animating them to suprass all the
others. All these Princesses were infinitely pretty; Yet as Palats are very
different therein as in all other things, Mary according to the most Common
Opinion, carried it from all the others, and as soon as she approached her
Sisters, she seemed to Efface them. The Elogies that the History of Italy give
her, surpass all that can be believed. She had not only fine Eyes, a Nose, and
a Mouth, perfectly accomplished, Teeth extremely white, a Shape, a Gate, an
Air, a Port, a Majesty worthy of the most lovely Princess upon the Earth; Her
wit was likewise admirable in all kinds, a Grace in all she did, as well as in
all she said, that Charmed all People, and an understanding so fruitful in all
sort of matters, that she not only astonished but consounded the most
intelligent. So powerful Charms hardly begun to appear, than that they had
Adorers, and by the measure they increased, the number of her Gallants
augmented also. Insomuch that of all her Sisters, she was the best provided by
Love, as well as she had been by Nature: There was reckoned amongst her
votaries the Count of Boulogne, and Prince Philip, as those who made the
greatest noise; after whom followed Azzo, Marquess d' Este, Prince of Ferrara,
and Henry of Narbonne, Son of Emmeric, who endeavored to attain to the
magnisicence, as well as Gallantry of the former; but a fifth who sighed in
secret for the Beauty of that Charming Princess, and who was the Lord of the
Court, the most generally esteemed, and the most welcome to the Ladies, was the
Young Hamibal Count d' Aveline, Son of Raynand, one of the Gallantest men, and
the best made of all Italy. The Glory and Rank of his Rivals had not hindered
him to declare; his Heart was Young and ambitious, and would not have yielded
to the Chiefest Princes of the Earth, but not seeing them more happy after
their Declaration; and fearing a like Destiny with so haughty a Princess, he
would manage her esteem which he possessed, better the way he took, than any of
his Rivals: His cares, his assiduities, and his Complacency which he had for
her from the Morning to the Evening; were what spoke, and would have made her
divine something of what passed in his mind, if that Divine Princess, from
whose Penetration nothing escaped, had not out of the goodness she had for him,
endeavored to persuade her self the contrary, that she might not have reason
to Treat him like the others, taking too much pleasure in all the little
Devoires he rendered her, not to be troubled to give them another interpretation
than that of the usual Gallantry. However his Rivals who were very powerful
with the King, whether by their Quality, or by the Services they had rendered
him, and which they were still ready to render him, pressed him very hard to
declare himself in favor of some One, and the report was, his Inclination was
most for Philip the Son of the Count of Handers, which very much allarmed all
the others, and especially Hannibal, in whose Face was not only seen sadness,
but Death Painted, from the time he heard talk of this Marriage. But the News
which arrived, that King James of Arragon prepared to renew the War more hot
than ever, giving other thoughts and cares to King Charles, than those of
making Nuptials, were a great ease to the despair of these unhappy Rivals.

This Prince, having learnt that King Charles, contrary to the Faith of the
last Treaty, had caused the Pope to give him the Investiture of the two
Sicities, animated with hatred and resentment, resolved to be revenged, and
made incessantly Warlike Preparations to go and attack him in his own Country;
Charles the Second, as vigilant as a generous Prince, had not wanted foresight,
judging that his Enemy would not leave him long in Peace; He had Soldiers
enough, but the losses that the Kingdom had had upon the Sea, while that he was
in Prison, in the two last Rencounters there had been, wherein Count Raynaud on
the one side, and the Count of Montfort on the other, had been defeated, had so
weakened him in that part, that all that the King had been able to do, since
the little time he was returned to Naples, was to prepare a Fleet of Thirty
Galleys, with which he could not pretend to show himself against the Forces of
the King of Arragon, who had more than Fourscore Sail, under the Conduct of the
Famous Roger de Loria. However the time pressed, the News came that King James
was arrived in Sicily, that by his Cabals he had caused part of Calabria to
revolt, and that Catenzano had yielded up to him, in so pressing a necessity,
his allies finding themselves incommoded, or at least discontented at the
losses they had had in the two last Engagements, not to be able to assist him
so soon, he knew not what Council to take, nor to whom to have recourse, for
the helping him to extinguish the Fire, which was just lighted in his own
Kingdom, being more necessary for him to have forces by Sea to hinder the
Succors of Sicily, than an Army by Land, in which he was strong enough, when
there appeared in the Port of Naples, Six Galleys which brought an Ambassador
that the King of Majorca sent to King Charles, to demand of him the Princess
Mary in Marriage, in considedration of which he offered him Forty-Galleys, and
Six Hundred Men at Arms, who were ready to set Sail at the first Order they
should have. This Ambassador was received with that Joy and Honor as so
obliging offers merited, and which came so conveniently as those did. It is
true, that there was little Proportion between the Youth and the Qualities of
that fair Princess, and the Age and Humor of this King; but the necessity of
the time, and the advantage of an Alliance with a Prince so powerful at Sea,
and who becoming an Enemy by the refusal that should have been made him, would
not have sailed to have took the part of the Arragonians, were reasons which
prevailed over all the others, and over the particular tenderness the King had
for that Princess; he proposed Blanch or Eleonora, but the demand was express
for Mary, to the Exclusion of all the others. Insomuch that in fine he was
forced to resolve of this Sacrifice, and the Affairs of the Kingdom, obliging
the King to press the Conclusion of this Marriage, for the sooner having the
Succors, he expected it was almost as soon done as proposed. The astonishment
of all our Lovers, was as great as cruel: they had no sooner learnt the Subject
of that Embassy, than that they saw that Negotiation brought to an end. The
King endeavored to satisfy the most Considerable, as the Count of Boulogne,
Prince Philip, the Marquess d' Este, and Henry of Narbonne, there being other
fair Princesses enough in his. Family, for to repair that loss, if that the
Honor of his Alliance bound them to his Person; For Hannibal's part, he had
nothing but grief: from whose Succors he hoped to put quickly an end to his
pains, at the same time with his life. But that which made him quite desperate,
was that the Princess who had more Confidence in him than in any other Lord of
the Court, imparted to him part of her troubles, and the little satisfoction
she expected in this Marriage; complaining to him of the Cruelty of her
Destiny, with Terms so touching the Soul of the sad and passionate Hannibal,
that notwithstanding all the constraint he made upon himself, he could not
hinder sighing, without daring to look upon her, for fear his Eyes which he
could not so well govern, as his mouth, should have acquainted her with a
secret, it was less time than ever she should know. The Fatal Day arrived at
length, that she was to depart, all the Court was to take leave of her, except
the Count Hannibal, whom she caused to be sought for every where without being
found. He even knew not, what was become of himself, so much the grief of so
Cruel a Separation: had put him besides himself, he too well knew the weakness
of his Heart, for to expose himself in the middle of all the Court, to bear so
cruel a moment as that of the departure of that Charming Princess, that the
most indifferent could not see without Tears: He went out of the City, attended
only by his Gentleman of the Horse; and from the Sea Shore, where he stayed, he
saw the Galleys of Majorc^ depart with an immovable Air, and almost without
Sentiment, they carrying from him all that he had most dear in the World,
without being able to retire from that Contemplation, so long as his sight
could accompany them.

The City of Majorca, which bears the Name of the Isleland, is one of the
prettyest Scituations in the Mediteranean Sea and the Castle of Belver Palace,
where the Kings resided, and which is a Work o^ the Ancient Moors, half a
League from the City, is one of the most lovely Place in the World. But to what
use is the agreableness of Places to a Young Princess if it be not joined to
that of Persons She was hardly arrived there, than tha^ the King her Husband
would send back the few People that accompanied her, and this order was
Executed, notwithstanding all the Opposition she brought to it. So strange a
beginning could not fail of having sad Consequences. She quickly found a great
difference between that gloomy and desert Court, and that of the King her
Father where all smiled, but seeing daily some Change in the things that
concerned her, and that her Liberty diminished by the same degrees that her
pains augmented, she had many more Complaints to make. This Conduct appeared to
her by so much the more rude, in that having been brought up in an Air of
Grandeur and Liberty, Honored, Served, and if it may be said, adored by all
the Princes and Lords at the Court of King Charles her Father, she saw none
about her but Old Women, who served her ill enough, and shut up in Five or Six
Chambers of her apartment, out of which she could not go, without the
Permission of the King her Husband, and that even very rarely. What a Destiny
for a Young and Fair Princess, whom the chiefest Kings of the Earth would have
been proud of serving, to see her self a slave in a place, where she ought to
have Commanded: and without having tasted any of the Sweets that others find in
Marriage, to be exposed to all the pains of without and within, that could
attend so in compatible a Union. She did nothing but shed Tears every day, but
those Tears instead of softning the Heart of that Cruel Monarch, did but the
more Irritate him; imagining that they were so many snares that the Gossiping
Humor of his Wife laid for his Honor.

The Countess of Palomer, a Young Widow, who was with the Queen in Quality of
her Lady of Honor, extremely touched to see so Charming a Princess treated
after that manner, took so great a kindness for her, that there was no mannner
of care, or Complaisance which she did not employ for the giving some diversion
to her displeasures, she was a very lovely person of a good Wit, and of so
engaging and sweet a Humor, that it was a great Comfort to the sad Queen, the
having her with her, she had loved her from the first day she had seen her, and
put in her an entire Confidence, imparting to her all her troubles, to which
the Countess applied, the softest remedies she could imagine. But in fine the
troublesome Humor of the Old King; came to that point of Caprichiousness and
Impassion, that there was no longer bearing it, insomuch that the Queen by the
Council of her dear Countess, took the Resolution of writing concerning it, to
the King her Father, hoping that, as he had ever tenderly loved her, he would
take pity of the Condition, to which she was reduced: and would take order at
least, that she might be something better treated. But the dissiculty was to
find a faithful and able Messenger, who would charge himself with the Letter,
and carry it to Naples. The Queen had not one Servant with her, in whom she
could trust, they were so many spies that the King kept to take notice of all
her actions: The Countess was observed as strictly as she, and the Kings chief
Minister was one, Don Geronimo, from whose penetration and vigilance it was
difficult to keep any thing of that Consequence. However at the length, seeing
themselves extremely perplexed, not knowing upon whom they should cast their
Eyes for to serve them in this occasion, without their design being in danger
of coming to the King's knowledge, the Countess bethought her self to propose
to the Queen that same Don Geronimo the Kings chief Minister. At which that
Princess much surprised, asked her if she rallyed, to employ the man of all the
Kingdom, they ought most to fear, who was all the King's Council, and to whose
persuasions she fancied she owed the greatest part of the troubles she
suffered. It is true, Madam, answered the Countess, that Don Geronimo has a
great power over the King's Spirit; that he is a Creature wholly devoted to
him: and that perhaps to make his Court, he approves the Conduct, that is held
with you. But it is likewise true, that this Minister owes more to the Count de
Palomer, whose charge he at present possesses, than to the King; that it was my
deceased Husband, who made him what he is, and that he arrived not to that high
degree of Fortune, not being of a Birth for that, but by his means. Don
Geronimo, Madam, continued the Countess, whom the Queen listened to with
Delight, is a Catalonian by Birth, and having the Reputation of a man of great
learning, it obliged the Count to send for him to Majorca, for to take care of
the two Sons he had had by his first Wife. He was so satisfied with his
Conduct, that after having employed him in some Affairs which he performed
extremely well, and like a man of sense, he made him known to the King;
advanced him from charge to charge, till that dying, he told the King, that
there was not a man in his Kingdom who was more capable of that he possessed
and which was going to be vacant by his Death, than Don Geronimo, in which the
King who besides the esteem he had, ever had of the Count's Penetration, had a
very great Opinion of Don Geronimo's Capacity, followed my Husbands Council,
and as soon as he was dead, notwithstanding all the Cabals at Court, for so
Considerable a Charge, he advanced to it Don Geronimo. So much grace and so
great an Obligation that he owed to the memory of his former Master, could not
render a Man ungrateful, and I must needs say in his praise, that the
acknowledgment he has of it, is such as I could desire it; That he lives not
with me as a chief Minister of State, but as if he were still the Count's
Domestic, with respects and cares that have never ceased, since my Husband's
Death, interessing himself in all my Affairs as if they were his own, and I can
likewise say that the Employ I have about you, Madam, is less an effect of the
acknowledgment that the King owes to the good Services that the Count de
Palomer has done him, than to the Solicitations of Don Geronimo. In fine,
Madam, he has neglected nothing, not only of all that could be for my
advantage, but of all that could please me, and what I have told you of the
King, it is from him that I knew it; and all the Counsels that I have given
you, came from him; thus, Madam, added the Countess, it is not to be feared but
that if we employ him, he will serve us faithfully and usefully. The Queen very
much Charmed to hear all these things, told her with an extreme joy, that they
needed not to go seek any farther, since they had for them the man of the
Kingdom, who could the most easily and without danger bring to pass their
design. Whereupon they concluded, that the Countess should first speak to him,
to see if he were disposed to serve the Queen in an Affair of that Consequence,
without telling him however what it was, and that the Queen should afterward
finish the rest. The Countess took her time one Morning that the King was gone
a Hunting, for the having the more Liberty, not only to discourse him her self,
but to cause him to speak to the Queen, and having sent for him, he came
immediately to her Chamber, where after a small obliging reveiw of all the
cares he had for her, and having declared to him the delight she took, to see
how acknowledging he was, for what the Count de Palomer had done for him, she
fell to discourse of the sad Condition whereto the Poor Queen was reduced,
which was the Subject, for which she had sent for him, not doubting but that he
was sensible of it, esteeming him as she did, that he could do nothing to
comfort her, and that nothing in the World could better declare him to be her
Friend, than in endeavoring to find some means, that, that lovely Princess
might be treated with less Cruelty, assuring him that she was so sensibly
touched at her unhappy Destiny: that she suffered more than the half of her
pains. Don Geronimo, the most Ardent of all men in what concerned the obliging
the Countess, after having assured her, that he had neither Goods, Fortune, nor
Life, which she might not dispose of, and which he would not employ for her,
and for all that she loved, declared to her, that he was already impatient to
know what the Queen desired of him; Whereupon the Countess made him pass into
that Princess's Cabinet, where she expected him, for the having a more secret
Conference with him; As she had prepared her self for what she was to tell him,
and that she knew that the Conntess had made the advances that were necessary,
she no sooner saw him in her Cabinet, out of which the Countess attended, for
fear some Body should hear them, than that falling to the business immediately,
she told him, that being at length wearied with the Visions and continual
Caprichio's of the King, not to say follies and rage: That she was resolved to
write of it to the King her Father, and that she prayed him if he had any
Consideration, or at least any pity of an unfortunate Princess, he would
furnish her with the means for the doing this; and aid her with his Council and
Credit, to procure some Temperament to the sad State of her Life, and that the
King her Husband might Treat her with a little more softness. Don Geronimo, who
had hearkened to all this discourse, with the posture of a Man who was
profoundly applied, to the Proposition that was made him; was sometime without
answering the Queen, for the making appear of what importance that was she
desired of him. After which he represented to her, the difficulties there was
in this design, into what incidents he might Precipitate himself, if he so far
proceeded to serve her, wherein not only his Fortune was concerned, which he
would not consider, in the Honor and Joy he should have of contributing any
thing to the easing her pains; but his Life, if the King got the least
knowledge of it, and that this demanded some time to think of it. Insomuch that
he prayed her to give him at least the rest of the day for that end, the Queen
granted it him, but she presently fancied, that it was a Pretexte, that she had
consided in a man, who only demanded time to consider of it, that he might
excuse himself the more Civilly. Don Geronims being retired, the Countess
entered the Cabinet, where she saw the Queen with a sad air, which presaged to
her nothing of happy for their Enterprise. Has Don Geronimo, Madam, deceived my
hopes? Not quite, answered she, but the pain he is in, among so many dangers he
sees, to employ himself for us, makes me fear he will not charge himself with
this Affair: After which relating to her the rest of the Conference they had
had together, she made her see how little they were to rely on his Succors:
However the Countess, who would not believe that she had vainly slattered her
self of the Credit she fancied she had with this Minister, begged the Queen not
to despair, till that she had spoke to him once more; and that very Evening she
sent for him, thinking her self too much concerned, after the advances she had
made, not to make use of all she thought most effective to engage him not to
refuse. Don Geronimo came, who knowing wherefore he was called, Composed his
Face according to his design, and appeared at first with the Air of a Man so
Melancholy and so perplexed, that the Countess almost lost her hopes of
reducing him to what she desired. Hereupon she renewed her pressing ways and
full of Charms, to endeavor to put him in a better Humor: The Cunning Don
Geronimo seemed still difficult, he told her into how many dangers such an
Affair was capable of drawing a Man, and showed her yet greater dissiculties
than to the Queen; But the Countess not willing to stop in so fair a way, and
perceiving notwithstanding all that this Minister told her, that she might yet
gain him; asked him what was become of those Protestations so often reiterated,
that he had neither Fortune nor Life that she might not dispose of, and pushing
that point still farther in telling him that the shame of this refusal would
fall all upon her, because it was she who had engaged the Queen to declare her
self to him, from whom she had promised her self more zeal to oblige her, than
he made appear* there is no manner of softness, looks, sentiments, assurances
of friendship, and all that a pretty Woman has of most engageing to bring a Man
to her will, but what she employed, and seeing that this Minister begun to
yield, she was in a greater joy than she could make appear. The sensible Don
Geronimo, who was touched to the very bottom of his Heart, by all the Countess
said, suffering himself to be carried away with the motions that Transported
him, took one of her fair hands, which he dared to kiss. That action made the
Lady something blush, having ever seen Don Geronimo with the greatest respect
for her: but the conjuncture of time and the need they had of him, would have
procured his Pardon for much greater Liberty. She could have desired he would
have gone to the Queens apartment, to impart to her himself the good intentions
he had for her service; but he excused himself upon some pressing Affair, which
demanded his attendance upon the King; and prayed her at the same time that she
would her self carry the news, that he was ready to risque all for her sake, as
he would not fail to go and confirm to her the next day at her rising.

As soon as the Countess saw him gone, she run immediately to the Queen to
acquaint her with Don Geronimo's Resolution; which was really to her the most
agreeable news she could have brought; but which required the assurances of the
Minister himself to be in perfect joy, of which he did not fail at the Hour he
promised, and he charged himself not only with the Letter she would write to
the King her Father; but to make it have the success she desired, to accompany
it with one of his own, which should be no less effectual: the Queen willing to
acknowledge his zeal, told him that he would all his Life find, not only a Prop
in her, whose power was not great in Majorca, but a Protector in the Person of
the King of Naples, who could better acknowledge than she the Service he rendered
her. Don Geronimo listening to what the Queen told him, with an air indifferent
enough, the King your Father, Madam, answered he is a great Monaoch, and can
content the Ambition of a Man much more Elevated by Fortune than I am, but it
is not what I seek, Madam, and you can do more here for me than I can desire,
for the being the most happy of all men, I know not, continued he siighing, if
the respect I owe to your Majesty, should permit me to pursue this discourse,
but I fancied, that in abandoning my Life for you, you would if you could,
render it happy. He stopped here some moments without saying any thing, during
which the Queen was in great pain, fearing that in the disorder she saw him, he
would make use of the necessity there was of him, for the exacting something
from her that might be contrary to her Glory: Insomuch that she was two or
three times upon the point of sending him back, without hearing him any more.
When Don Geronimo taking Courage, I know, Madam, pursued he, that it is not for
such a man as I, to dare to make his Queen his confident, and such a Queen as
your Majesty; but I can only address my self to you, and the Passion I have for
the Countess of Palomer, being such that I can no longer conceal it, I have
hopes that it depending on you to render any one of the Court happy, you will
consider the interests of a man who is willing to sacrifice himself for the
endeavoring to render you less unfortunate. This Princess who did really
tremble, and changed Color twice or thrice, was ravished with joy, that this
sigh was not addressed to her, so that she easily pardoned him the Liberty of
his Confidence; and not being able to hold from laughing at the fear she had,
she asked him, if the Countess knew the sentiments, he had for her: upon which
this Lover answering, that respect had ever hindered him from declaring them to
her, although he had been more than Six Years passionately in Love, she took
upon her to acquaint her with them, and to serve him as much as she could. This
so overjoyed the Amourous Don Geronimo, that casting himself at her Feet, he
could not be thankful enough for so much goodness. The Queen made him rise,
and told him, that he might repose in her the interests of his Heart, and that
he should think of her Letter Affair which this Lover promised her, and went to
labor that moment for the dispatching away secretly for Naples, a Brigantine
of Twelve Oars of a side.

Don Geronimo being retired, and the Countess coming to the Queen, was much
surprised to find her laughing all alone, she made known to her the joy she had
to see her in so good a Humor, and begged she would impart to her with the
soonest the Subject of it, that she might also laugh; this Princess told her,
that she charged her self with a Commission to her, which she knew not if she
should come of with Honor: but that it was so extraordinary, that though it
was upon a very serious matter, she could not promise she should acquit her
self of it in that Tone, and that in a word, if there happened any change in
her misfortunes, she should be obliged for it to her Charms, for the Love of
which the passionate Don Geronimo was obliged to serve her. The Countess
blushed at the Queens Raillery, remembering the boldness he had for to kiss her
Hand, which had then made her suspect something; but she fell a laughing with
the Princess and told her, that she had well foreseen that she should pay all
the charges of that Embassy; that however, she should never have believed, that
the Folly of a man of that Birth, who had been her Domestic: could have
mounted to have considered her upon that Foot, and that now she saw that
Fortune made People Blind. The Queen took the Lovers part, and the thing having
been again turned into Raillery, she told her the fear she had been in her
self: and begged of her at the same time she would manage the Spirit of this
man, till that her business was done, which the Countess the more casily
promised her, for that she prepared to divert her self with the passion of this
Minister, as well as make use of it for the obtaining what they desired of him.

King Charles had at that time, an Army before Catenzano, under the Command of
the Count d' Artois, who beseiged it by Sea and Land. Which King James of
Arragon having learnt he departed from Sicily with a powerful Fleet, for the
releiveing that City with Five Hundred men at Arms, and de Loria his Admiral;
but he found those of Charles, with the Majorquins in so good order before the
Port of Catenzano, that he never durst attack them, nor attempt the Succors on
that side. He fancied it would be more easy for him by Land: Wherefore having
disembarqued his Catalonians, with de Loria, they advanced toward the Army of
the Count d' Artois, who repulsed them as far as the Sea, constraining them to
get with all haste into their Galleys. Which was the only time that that great
Captain Roger de Loria was ever Conquered, Charles the Second received the
Letter of the Queen of Majorca, his Daughter at the same time he did the news
of this Victory; and the one raising in him as much pity as the other gave him
joy, he resolved to send expressly an Ambassador to the King of Majorca, to make
him his complaints. He made choice for that Embassy of Count Hannibal d'
Aveline, as one who had not only the most Wit and Merit of any Lord of the
Court, but was most capable of performing his Commission; and speaking with the
requisite Tone to the King of Majorca. Wherefore he bid him prepare himself
with the soonest for this Voyage, and gave order at the same time, for the
making ready Three Galleys, for the carrying him with all his Train, to the
Isle of Majorca. He wrote Three Letters, one for this King, the other for the
Queen, and the Third for Don Geronimo, which Count Hannibal had orders to
deliver him in particular, and to testify to him how sensible the King was of
the good Offices, he rendered to the Queen his Daughter.

Hannibal was not so much Charmed with the Honor of this employ; because that
the King thereby distinguished him from so many other Lords in that Court, as,
because it gave him the opportunity of rendering an important service to a
Princess, he had so passionately loved, and these hopes renewing a flame in his
Heart, that neither absence nor any other reason had been yet able to
extinguish, he used all manner of cares, diligence, measures, and precaution
that his Deputation might succeed to the advantage and contentment of the
Queen. Her Beauty returned into his mind with more force than ever, and more in
Love than he had ever been with her Charms; all that he said and did, since
the King had given him this Commission, was only for his fair Princess, till
his arrival at Majorca, which was at six of the Clock in the Morning, with
Three of the finest Galleys of Naples, having brought with him a Hundred Young
Gentlemen, whom his merit as well as his magnificence and Liberality bound to
his Person: He landed with this fine Train, which immediately drew all the
People to see them disembarke, and they were so astonished at the richness of
the habits as well as the good mien of the chief and of those of his Company,
that the report run immediately through the City, that it was King Charles
himself who came to see his Daughter. This news being presently carried to
Belver, came to the Ears of the King of Majorca, who, not knowing what to think
of it, sent incessantly Don Geronimo, to inform himself of the truth. The
Queen, who had heard the report, as soon as the King, had an unspeakable joy:
and having sent for the Countess of Palomer, they went together into her
Cabinet, from whence they saw those Three Galleys. For Belver is upon a rising
ground, which commands over all the City. They were in such delight, that their
joy was heard by all the apartment. They were however in great pain as well as
the King, to know who was come, not doubting but that it was some one that the
King of Naples had sent in Consequence of their Letter, and they expected with
great impatience, as well as the King, the return of Don Geronimo, to give them
certain News: In the mean time they did not fail to Figure to themselves a
Thousand things thereupon.

This Minister being arrived at the City, in the time, that Count Hannibal was
just landed, and having conducted him to the Town Hall, through such a crowd of
People, that they could hardly pass through the Streets, he had, after some
Ceremonies of Civility, a particular discourse with him. The Count gave him the
Letter that the King wrote to him, which he opened, and read the particular
Testimonies that that Monarch gave him of his esteem and favor. From thence
passing to the Affair in hand, Don Geronimo gave to the Count the necessary
instructions upon the measures he was to take, and the manner he was to conduct
himself, after which they both mounted into one of the Kings Litters, to go to
Belver, whether Don Geronimo had already sent a Gentleman to give notice to the
King of the arrival of this Ambassador* This Prince received him with the most
Curtezy and Honor, that his Humor, little proper for these public
Ceremonies, could permit him. The Interview was very rare that was made in this
Reception; where the King on one part dressed like a dull heavy Merchant,
accompanied with Ten or Twelve Lords of his Court, who had no better meens, nor
were better apparelled than himself, and on the other Count Hannibal, who was
the handsomest Youth of all Italy, all sparkling with Gold and the Jewels he
had about him, with that great number of Gentlemen, all extremely well dressed,
with a Courtly Air, which Charmed, and at the same time astonished all those
Majorquins. They made a noise in entering the Place, and especially the French,
who made the greatest number, that one would have said they went to beseige
this poor King; Count Hannibal after having made his Conge in the Chamber of
Audience, where he expected him; spoak to him with a Grace and an Eloquence,
that the Morose Soul of this Monarch was Charmed with the praises that he gave
him, and became good natured in favor of him, and more mild; he embraced him
Two or Three times with marks of kindness he had never shown to any one, so
much power over the most obdurate Hearts, has a Person whom Nature has took
delight in accomplishing.

The first audience, which was about Ten of the Clock in the Morning, being
passed in Compliments and Ceremonies; there was a particular one about Eight a
Clock in the Evening, in which the Count declared to the King the Subject of
his Embassy, in delivering him the Letter that the King his Master wrote to
him; and by which he prayed him to consider that the Princess he had married,
was the Daughter of a Monarch, not fit to be treated after the manner he did,
that those were not the conditions of their alliance. That he very well know,
that he had promised him to have that regard for her that was due to Daughters
of her Rank: That she should live at Majorca, as she had lived at Naples, and
that however the difference was so great, that having deprived her, upon her
arriving at his Court, of all the Domestics he had himself given her, he had
learnt from good hands, that she had hardly People capable of serving her, and
that she was kept shut up in her apartment, as a Criminal of State, or as if
she were accused of some infamous crime; that this belonged more to a slave
than a Queen, that he prayed him, not as a King; but as his Ally, Friend and
Father-in-Law, that he would change his conduct, and treat his Daughter after a
manner that all the Earth might not reproach him, with having so ill married a
Princess, who merited, and who could have had a more happy Destiny, than that
of being his Wife.

The King of Majorca well saw, that King Charles his Father-in-Law wrote to
him, as a Prince, who had newly got a Famous Victory: and who begun to have no
more need of him. He was of a more peaceable than Warlike Humor: and not being
willing to draw upon himself the enmity of so powerful a Monarch, he
endeavored to excuse upon the custom of the Country, the conduct he had
thitherto held with the Queen; but that, since it did not please the King his
Father-in Law, he would to disabuse him of the false Relations that might have
been made him, regulate himself as he should judge most convenient. And it was
concluded, that very moment, with Count Hannibal, that the Queen should enjoy a
modest Liberty, for to walk when she pleased within and without the Palace of
Belver, when she thought fit: that of the Persons who should serve her, she
might choose Six, over whom she should have an entire power: and that in fine
the People who would see her, or who had Affairs with her, might approach her
without any difficulty. All those Articles of Peace being thus concluded, the
King would out of an excess of Civility; that the Count himself should carry
the news of it to the Queen, whom he had not yet seen, and prayed him at the
same time he would make his Peace with her. Hannibal promised him what he
desired: and going to her apartment, where she expected him with the Countess
of Palomer, he saluted her, but with a joy, and such motions of Love, fear and
respect, that are difficult to be described: and I believe that it is all that
a very passionate man can do to imagine them. The discontent of that Princess,
had not at all lessened her Beauty; on the contrary they had added a certain
languishing, which in the midst of so many Charms, had the most engaging
effect imaginable. The amorous Ambassador lost at that sight all his senses to
his very Speech; and had occasion for all the force of his Courage to uphold
himself, his Countenance changed Color Two or Three times, and not daring
hardly to look again upon the Queen, since the first time he had seen her, he
remained as immovable, and without saying any thing, in so great a space of
time, that that Princess knowing that no man had more wit than he, was much
surprised at it. She had no Body near her but the Countess, and Hannibal was
likewise alone, all the People of their Trains being retired on both sides out
of respect. Insomuch that the Queen not seeing what could hinder the Count from
making known to her what he had to say, in so fine a Subject for the showing
his wit, was as much concerned as he, at the perplexities in which she saw him;
and beginning to speak that he might recover himself, she told him, that she
was extremely obliged to the King her Father, not only for the affection he
showed her in such an occasion, but for that he had given this Commission to
the man of all his Kingdom, she should have desired to have had it, if it had
depended on her choice. This Princess good and generous as she was, believed,
that she ought at least to acknowledge with words as obliging as those were,
the Service that the Count had just done her: besides that, what she told him
was perfectly according to her sentiments: but this Lover, who was Charmed
enough with the pleasure of seeing her, without her needing to add out of so
extraordinary a goodness favors which quite confounded him with Love, was upon
the point of falling upon his knees, if she had not hindered him. It is a little
too much, My Lord, said she to him smiling; and that Excess of Submission would
not become a man of the Character you have here. I can never render you enough,
Madam, replied the Count, who began to come to himself, all your due, for there
is nothing submissive enough which belongs not to you. It is true, continued
he, that I am sent hither as an Ambassador from the King of Naples, but it is
when I am before the King of Majorca, and before you, Madam, I am but your
Subject, a Title much more glorious for me, than all those that the greatest
Kings of the Earth can give me, and which does not dispense me from any respect
near you. But after what manner soever you should consider me, Madam, added he,
whether as the Ambassador of the King your Father, or as your Subject, you may
order me all that you please; for I am sent only to this Court to obey you, and
to have what rendered to you, that is your due. The King of Majorca is going to
change his conduct in what concerns you, or at least he has promised me to do
it: That if he fails in it, and that with all the Honor and respect they owe
you, he gives you not the Liberty you desire, I have order to tell him, that
you belong to a Monarch extremely jealous of his Glory: and whose resentment
for the injury shall be done you, will proceed much farther, than if it were
done to his own person. He still enlarged more at length upon the particular
orders he had received from the King; and which concerned the Queen, but with
terms so strong and passionate, that she was extremely touched with
acknowledgement, and could not hinder her self from showing it him by a
Thousand goodnesses, of which the most important for the amorous Hannibal, was
that of her picture, which she gave him. Never Lover loaded with Honor and
Grace, felt so much joy as the Count did at that present. The least favor from
the Hand of that Charming Princess, would have been more considerable to him
than all the Riches of the World: and it is credible, that that of a Picture,
for which he would have given a Thousand Lives, was something very Charming to
him.

The Queen passing to the News that she would know of the Court of Naples, and
the Count having satisfied her in all that she desired, she believed, it was
not yet convenient to lay hold of the new Articles of Peace, between her and
the King; and made it a small Subject of raillery with the Count; after which
this Lover taking leave of the Queen retired to his apartment, where he passed
the most pleasant Hours that a happy Lover had ever had.

The Queen, since her being in that Court, having seen none but such People as
raised her pity, and having had an esteem of a long time for the Count, could
not hinder her self in seeing him from showing the joy she had of his arrival,
and even to seel something more strong, that those motions finding him better
made, as seemed to her, than she had ever seen him; and afterward passing over
in her mind part of the things, he had told her, she found in his air and
manner of expression, something so Witty and so Gallant that she sighed, in
making reflection on all she had quitted. The truth is, the Count had a great
part in that sigh, but the Hour was not yet come, that this mystery which did
but appear in her should be discovered: Her Heart which she had since that
Evening silled with a Thousand different things, caused her desires to floate
diversely, sometimes upon one Subject, sometimes upon another: but that which
most possessed her, was the silence and the disorder into which the Count
immediately fell in seeing her, and this Seconded by certain looks and a
passionate action, that she had observed in him; and which exceeded the ardour
of an ordinary Subject, seemed to learn her a secret, of which she had had
formerly a great deal of Suspicion. In the favorable disposition she then was,
this thought musts needs give her at first a great deal of pleasure, but
certain returns on the side of Glory; coming to destroy in one moment all these
Amorous Fancies, she reproached her self with the very weakness of thinking of
them. In the mean time notwithstanding, all these glorious Reflections, the
mind taking the party of the Heart, as it usually happens, she fell into it
incessantly, and passed one part of the Night in disquiets. Not that she
distrusted her self, and that she did not believe she had Empire enough over
her Heart, to hinder, from entering therein any thing that might be called
passion; but it was, that she feared, that the esteem, perhaps a little too
great, that she had for a Gentleman so well made and so dangerous, might not
insensibly engage her to treat him more favorably than she ought, if it was
true, what she imagined, that he had Sentiments so little respectuous for her,
and that this might not give him at the same time an occasion of flattering
himself. And in this thought she did, all that she could, to irritate her self
against him; but she found so little reason to do it, that that even betrayed
her, and engaged her whether she would or no to justify him.

The Count passed the Night much more agreeably. He had a long time made it his
happiness to love that Charming Princess without telling it her, and without
hopeing any thing; and then Swimming in a sort of languishing full of joy, he
represented to himself with what Grace she had received, with what kindness and
goodness she had spoke to him; but above all that Divine Picture she had given
him in so obliging a manner, and which he incessantly kissed, as being the
Crown of his happiness, the Night lasted but little in that manner, although he
passed it without sleeping; and Don Geronimo, who had not yet made him a visit,
coming to see him in the Morning, was received by him with that kindness that
was recommended to him by King Charles his Master, and which the services
merited he had rendered to the Queen his Daughter, and the truth is, the
Ambassadors Soul was then so satisfied, that he would have been pleasing to his
very Ennemies; They then contracted a very great Friendship, and as those of
Court are usually founded upon some interest, that of Love was principally what
engaged them: the Count because that he saw, that the Friendship of a Man as
Don Geronimo, who governed the Old King's mind, could not but be useful to him;
and the other, because that he judged, that it would be to make his Court to
the Queen, the being united in Friendship with the Ambassador, and to have at
the same time a pretexte of the oftener seeing the Countess. There was presently
the best understanding between them possible, they were almost ever seen
together, especially when they were to go to the Queen; which the Count
affected for the giving the less Ombrage to the King, with whom Don Geronimo
made it likewise a merit, that he ever accompanied the Ambassador in these
occasions, rendering afterward an account of what passed in those visits, such
as he judged convenient, for the entertaining him in the confidence he had of
him. But at the length this Minister of State, who was a clear sighted man,
remarquing a great Change in the Countess's mind, as well as in her manner of
treating him; and that the Society he had made with that Ambassador, had been
more disadvantageous than useful to him, especially since some days, that the
Queen, more retired, showed her self less than usually, the Countess then
passing whole Afternoons in entertaining her self with the Count, without
daigning once to cast her Eyes upon him. Don Geronimo, I say, vexed to the very
bottom of his Soul, to be thus treated, and weary with acting the part he did,
resolved to Troop a part and render his visits in particular, for to see if it
was out of modesty before that Ambassador, or because there was no more
occasion for him, that he was looked upon with that indifference. He feared
that they had really changed their Sentiments for him, and that he had been the
Instrument of his own misfortune: but the thing required some light, before he
came to Complaints; and his design was not difficult to be Executed. He took
the pretexte of an Affair of importance, as it happened to him often enough to
pray the Count to excuse him, if he d^ not accompany him that day to the
Queens; His excuse was very kindly received, for that Ambassador who had also
his reasons to quit his Company, was i^ pain to find the means to be civilly
rid ^ him. The Countess of Palomer, whom h^ considered as the Queens Heart and
Council, and of whom he had demanded the reason why that Princess was become
s^ solitary, since some days that she could no^ be seen, had told him, that Don
Geronimo was the cause; but the truth was, that it was she that was weary of
him, and who would have been glad to have entertained the Count without such a
Witness, who observed her least actions. In the mean time the Ambassador was
extremely concerned he had no sooner known what the Countess told him; gave her
many thanks for her advice, and promised her to make use of it. But what the
Queen feared, was not the sight of Don Geronimo, the Countess had spoke for
her: and that Princess on the contrary very much approved therein the Count's
Conduct. What she shunned and rendered her solitary, was the sight of that Lover:
But retreat and solitude are ill remedies against Love. The violence she used
upon her self that she might not go and see him when she knew he was in her
Antichamber with the Countess, more augmented her ardour than a discourse of
several Hours. In sine she knew not what to do, nor what to say, and she saw
that her Heart became daily more weak against so Charming a Passion: if any
thing was capable of fortifying it, it was what the Countess told her, at the
return from the discourses she had had with the Count; for the Queen ever very
passionate and very curious to know what he had said to her, did not fail to
send for her as soon as that Lover had quitted her, and to demand upon what he
had entertained her. The Countess, who considered this Ambassador as a Conquest
already made, needed not to be much pressed, to brag of it to the Queen, and
with the air of a Woman something vain, and who would make her self believed
she told that Princess, that his discourse was always of Gallantry, attended
with sighs and passionate looks, which escaped from the Count, who was ever
commending her Beauty. The Queen told her, to undeceive her, that all this was
very usua^ at the Court of Naples, where all the Young Lords thought it the
Devoir of a Gallant man, when they were with any Lady to say to her kind
things, and tha^ it was very dangerous to trust in them The truth is, that the
Count, judging tha^ the Countess's Friendship, who had all manner of Power with
the Queen, was absoluetly necessary to him, had neglected no thing that might
get him into her favor and that, as he was extremely amorous, Courtship and
kindness cost him nothing, and he had been more persuasive to that Lady than he
desired: because that she would really be persuaded that he loved her. In the
mean time the Queen, whom she had Twice or Thrice acquainted with the same
thing, not knowing what to believe of it, and incessantly attacqued with a
Thousand different thoughts, resolved to have an Eclaircissment, there being
nothing more capable of curing her of that passion, than the truth, of what the
Countess told her. She was thus disposed, when her Lady of Honor came to tell
her, that Count Hannibal asked to speak with her. It was what she desired,
however notwithstanding, the Resolution that she had taken, she balanced, and
would not have yet been strong enough to have Executed her design, if the
desire she had to see him, had not made way for her to resolve of it. Whereof
she bid the Countess bring him in. I come, Madam, said the Count as he entered,
to ask you a Thousand Pardons for my imprudence, in not having judged, that it
was too great a Grace you did in granting me the Honor of seeing you
sometimes, without charging my self with the Company of a man as Don Geronimo,
who might be to you in the end troublesome and incommode. I know not, answered
the Queen very much astonished at this discourse, who has so ill informed you
of my Sentiments; but far from having disapproved your Conduct therein, I found
it very reasonable. Don Geronimo, added she, is a man to whom I have
Obligations, I cannot enough acknowledge, I am acquainted with his merit and
probity. And he shall not only be kindly received when he comes in your
Company; but I declare to you, that I shall never more willingly see you, than
when he is with you. Don Geronimo, Madam, replied the Count, is much more happy
than I imagined, and I shall for the future better know how to judge of the
Sentiments you have for People, than to attribute to them the cause of the
unhappiness, which deprives me of the Honor of seeing you, without which I
should have nothing more to do here. Let us let Don Geronimo alone, replied the
Queen, not being willing to enter into this discourse; and tell me from whence
it proceeds, that having related to me the particular Affairs of the Court of
Naples, and the adventures of several Lords, you have told me nothing of your
own. Do you keep them for the Last? Or do you believe that there is too much
vanity to acquaint with them your self, without that I desire it. I believe
Madam, answered the Count, I have forgot nothing of all the Gallantry that
passed in that Court, since your leaving it, for as to what concerns me, I can
assure, that there has been nothing in all that time which merits your
Curiosity; and that in all my Life, I never passed my time with so much trouble
and ill Humor. How is it possible, replied the Queen, that that amourous Star
which rules over that Court should have no Influence upon you. This is so true,
Madam, replied the Caunt, that what inclination soever I have formerly had for
pleasures, I was never seen at them but when an indispensible devoir called me
to them, or when the Service of the King my Master was concerned, or that I was
to give him an account of the orders he had been pleased to give me; except in
those Cases I was ever at my Country House, it being most suitable to the
Humor I then was in, and where I had resolved to pass the rest of Life. The
Change is great, said the Quen to him; who easily comprehended that that
solitary Life regarded her, and we should not be much in pain to be persuaded,
that it is the effect of some unhappy Destiny; But however, if People are to be
believed who observe you, you have not the air of an indifferent man, and
whether it is that you have found more Charms in this Court, than in that of
Naples, you are not seen to seek Solitude so much. The Count, blushing at these
words, could not hinder sighing, which being presently observed by the Queen,
you sigh, my Lord, said she, Ah! you are in Love, and you shall acquaint me
with the Cause of that sigh, or I shall be no longer your Friend. If I have any
favor to demand of you, Madam, answered the Count with a trembling and
passionate voice, it is, not to oblige me to tell you a thing, that I should
rather dye than declare to whomsoever it was. This Charming Princess being in a
greater fear than he, that he should explain himself too clearly, was not
willing to press him any more: However as she was in pain to quit so soon, a
matter, which so much pleased her, she could not stop there, and reviewing him
with an air to force the secret from a Heart: but in fine, said she to him, you
will at least confess to me, that this sad and pensive Humor has not always
lasted in you, and that whether at Naples, or in this Country, you are in Love.
It is true, I Love, Divine Princess, answered that Lover all Transported, and
with the most extraordinary passion that ever one has loved. I have been in
Love pursued he sighing, these Five Years, that is to say, from the moment I
could know what Love was, and I have from that time felt all that can be
imagined of most tender and ardent in a Heart: and at the same time all that
there is of most submissive and fullest of respect in devoir. All this, Madam,
without daring to tell it, and without hopes. The Queen, fearing that she could
not answer this discourse without its costing her some weakness, considering
the looks and passionate action with which that Lover accompanied it, would rid
her self of it; and rising from whence she was, I pity you, said she, and went
at the same time into a Balcony there was to her Chamber, for to hide the
disorder, into which a Thousand different motions cast her which rose in her
Soul. The Count followed to the Balcony Door, where stopping, he saw she said
nothing more, and that she did not so much as look upon him. Wherefore after
having beeen some time in that Posture and silence, he thought it was his duty
to retire. But the Queen turning then toward him; What do you go away, said
she to him, without having satisfied me upon what I desire: and shall I not
know who that Beauty is for whom you have so long sighed. I have told you,
Madam, answered that Lover, with a very submissive voice, that it would be less
trouble to me to take away my Life, than this secret. And the only Grace I
demand of you is to let it dye with me. You put but little confidence in
People, replied the Queen, and to let you see, I have more consideration for
you, I not only consent you tell me nothing of it, but I even forbid it you:
and passing at the same time from the Balcony into her Cabinet, she left the
Count in a terrible fright.

Don Geronimo was then with the Countess. This Minister being desirous to know
his Destiny with that Lady, came alone to the Queens Antichamber, where he
found her Pensive, but so profoundly that she hardly saw him enter. He
approached her: and notwithstanding all he could say, he saw, she could hardly
open her Mouth to make him an answer. Insomuch, that taking from thence an
occasion of explaining himself, he told her, that he knew not if he had been
unhappy enough to displease her in any thing; but that he had observed that of
late, she had much diminished the esteem she had formerly had for him; and that
she would oblige him extremely, and likewise draw him out of a very great pain,
if she would be so kind as to acquaint him with the reason of it. The Countess,
who immediately comprehended whither these Complaints tended, and not being
willing to give this Minister a reason for them, knowing his dangerous Spirit,
she answered him very obligingly, that as thitherto she had had all manner of
reason to commend him, she had likewise for him the same consideration she had
ever had, but that since some time, she had taken, but she could not tell at
what, a certain sad and Melancholy Humor, which made several People complain
of her as well as he, and that they who knew her ought rather to pity than
blame her. Don Geronimo was not satisfied with this excuse: He knew, from
whence her disease proceeded, or at least he very much suspected it; However
without seeming to know any thing; he told her that Divertisement was the only
remedy for such sort of ills; and proposed to her at the same time to go see
the Water Works that were made in the Garden, and which were to be tried for
the first time. The Countess, who had many other designs in her Head, told him,
that she had something to do with the Queen, but that if he would in the mean
time go alone, and hinder them from playing, they would presently follow him.
Don Geronimo seeing, that the Lady would get rid of him, answered her that he
would have the Honor of attending them: and that he well knew that there would
be nothing done in the Garden till he came. But I must, replied the Countess,
(in whose Eyes it was easy to see the Impatience she was in to send him away)
see the Queen, and speak to her in particular. You may do it, Madam, replied
this Lover, holding still sirme, while that I attend you. But cannot you,
replied she, go wait for me in the Garden. Not without you tell me, ( Don
Geronimo answered coldly, beginning to lose his Patience) that I am troublesome
here, for I should have more pleasure in accompanying you: thereupon the
Countess, seeing the Count going from the Queens, and that he passed by without
stopping, ran after him. This Minister, whose Heart was stabbed with that
action, no longer doubting of the truth of his misfortune, approached her, and
with Eyes that were inflamed by his jealousy, I see, Madam, said he softly to
her, what you waited for, an other time I shall be more Complaisant. The Count
surprised with seeing Don Geronimo go away in a rage, not knowing, if it was
with him that he was angry, asked the Countess what that Minister had said to
her, and from whence it came he retired in such a pet. The Lady, who would not
have been willing that the Count should have known that Don Geronimo was in
Love with her, was at first something perplexed; But her Wit which never failed
her upon any occasion, furnishing her with an answer to her advantage, Do not
you see, said she to him with a forced smile, that he is a faithful Minister,
and that he takes part in all that concerns his Master? He saw you come alone
from the Queens, with whom, you had passed an Hour in particular discourse, and
you would not, that he should have Ombrage of it. You are too well made, and he
would injure your merit, if he treated you with more softness. How, Madam,
cried Hannibal, troubled at this News! Should I be so unhappy, that this man
should have so criminal suspicions of me. Ah! Madam, added he upon the point of
running after him, I must undeceive him as soon as possibly. Make not so much
haste, answered she stopping him, for I have something to tell you of more
importance than that. Permit me first, replied the Count, to speak with this
Minister, and I will afterward return to you. It will be a useless trouble,
replied she, and instead of undeceiving him, you will by this eagerness but*
the more confirm him in his Suspicions. I do not believe that, replied he, but
in fine let what will happen I must needs speak to him; and I beg, Madam, you
will let me go. After that the Countess could not detain him any longer, but it
was not without a very sensible displeasure. That Nicety she saw in him in what
concerned the Queen, and that earnestness to run after Don Geronimo, seemed, in
giving her an extreme disquiet, to open her Eyes for the discovering to her all
that she could imagine most cruel to her. What should it be possible! Said she
in thinking of all this, that I should have been so long without perceiving
this mystery: and that Chance should have thus discovered it. Am I mistaken! Or
is it true that the Count is in Love with the Queen. Ah, Heavens! Added she in
lifting up her Eyes, can you have prepared me so terrible a Blow. Her mind was
almost overcome with these cruel thoughts, when the Queen came out of her
Chamber, who told her, that she had a desire to go walk in the Garden, the
Countess immediately endeavored to recover her self, for fear that Princess
should observe in her Face the disorder of her Heart; but the Queen her self
was so possessed with her own thoughts, that she hardly looked upon the
Countess. Wherefore they went toward the Garden, where the Queen being
desirous to entertain her self all alone, left the Countess behind her with the
rest of her Train. Don Geronimo who walked at the same time his thoughts or
rather his furies in that same Garden, seeing the Queen, went directly to her,
for to complain of the Countesses cruelty, he borded her with a melancholy
air; and told her his misfortune with so sad a Tone, that it would have made
the Queen laugh, if she had took less part than she did in the Subject of his
Complaints. She endeavored however to undeceive him; Ah.! Madam, answered he,
I am but too well persuaded, that in employing my self for your repose, I have
only labored to ruin my own: and that the arrival of this Ambassador undoes
me, and that in delivering you from all your pains, he loads me with the most
cruel torments that a Heart can suffer. I lived at least in some hopes, added
he sighing, and if I was not beloved, I had no Rival. There are few People in
this Kingdom who would have disputed with me that happiness; and am not I very
unfortunate in having been my self the Instrument of my despair! The Queen, who
did really take pity of this poor Lover, to whom she had very great
Obligations, was not in much pain to assure him; that she was concerned at his
misfortune, and that she would use all her power with the Count as well as with
the Lady to hinder, that he might not be troubled in his designs. But a certain
interest of Heart engaged her much more in it, she was very glad that this
interest was authorized by so reasonable a pretexte, as was that of favoring
the pretentions of Don Geronimo, as she had promised him. She then told him for
to comfort him, that he needed only to retire, and that she would go that very
moment and speak to the Countess, who was come with her into the Garden. This
Minister having thereupon quitted the Queen, she enquired of her Maids what was
become of the Countess, whom she saw not: Who answered her, that they believed
she was in the middle Arbor with the Ambassador of Naples, this Princess, who
had already been much concerned with what Don Geronimo had told her, was so
troubled to learn at the same time, that the Count was in particular Conference
with her, that not being Mistress of her self, she would go see what they did
in so retired a place as that.

As we are extreme prone to flatter our selves in things which please us, we
likewise believe, as late as we can, those which are disadvantageous to us; and
especially Women, in whom Vanity is a weakness they lay by the Last of all
others: the mistaken Countess might have observed by all the actions of Count
Hannibal, that his Heart inclined toward the Queen, but taking pleasure in
blinding her self, and not being willing that other Qualities than her own
should have made impression upon that Lovers Heart, she had persuaded her self
that the devoir of an Ambassador bound him to that Princess, and that of a
Lover to her, till the Affair of Don Geronimo, in which besides the earnestness
he had been in to run after him; she had immediately observed a certain trouble
in his Face, which had more of the Character of a passionate Lover than of an
Ambassador zealous for the Queens Interests. These thoughts which had
accompanied her to the Garden, having conducted her into the Green-Arbour,
after she had seen Don Geronimo board the Queen, entertained her in a profound
pensiveness, when the Count, who still sought that Minister, passing by the
Arbor, fancyed that in seeing the Countess the Queen was there, and went in to
Salute her, however finding only the Countess, who sitting upon a Grass seat,
seemed by her languishing posture to have sought retreat, asked her Pardon for
having interrupted her in her Solitude, and was going to retire. But she rose,
and eying him with a Face mingled with vexation and Love, I very well see, My
Lord, said she to him that it is not me you come to seek here. It is true.
Madam, answered the Count, that I still seek for Don Geronimo: and perhaps the
Queen, interrupted she, but whether the Queen or Don Geronimo, added she
blushing, it would be neither obliging nor civil to find me alone, and to quit
me again to run after a man. I must tell you, pursued she, that he is in
conference with that Princess, and that you will lose nothing by being a moment
with me. Hannibal yielding at the reproaches of the Countess, whom he had no
mind to displease, prepared himself to entertain her; and the Countess, who had
already made so many advances, continuing her design, Don Geronimo is not the
only person that is jealous of your going alone to the Queens, and that you
entertain her without witnesses: there are People who have observed your
actions yet more nearly; and who, taking more interest than he in your sighs,
have pushed their Penetration so far, that they fancy they have found out their
course; and you will be more troubled to undeceive them than this Minister. The
Count extremely surprised with the discourse of that Lady, who spoke to him
very seriously, assured her, that he could hardly believe what she told him;
because he did not think he had ever given the least ground for the like
suspicions. I will not tell you, replied the Countess upon what they have
particularly conjectured, that your Heart went toward the Queen: but there is
perceived in you an air extremely amorous; sighs escape from you from time to
time before People: you fall into languishings and into absences of mind, and
to the least of your actions all is so passionate in you, that one would really
say you were in Love with all the World. In the mean time, as there is not in
this Court many persons fair enough for a man so well made as you, they easily
cast their conjectures upon those you see most often, who are the Queen and my
self. The most common Opinion is, and with reason, that it is the Queen, but
that Princess will have it me. She endeavors at least to persuade Don Geronimo
so, who seems to take more interest in it than ought to be permitted to such a
man as he. I explain my self no more, my Lord (pursued she) it is for you to
draw such Consequences as you please; but it is to debase one's self very much,
for a Queen to manage such a man to my cost. I will not, added she, pretend to
an Honor that is not my due; wherefore I beg of you that in undeceiving Don
Geronimo of the suspicions he has of you upon the account of that Princess, you
would not let him know that it is to me you address your passion: for I am not
at all of the Humor to take pleasure in being made use of for a Pretexte. The
Count, much perplexed at this discourse, fell into the snare that the Countess
laid for him; and as if he was awaked from a long sleep. Can it be possible,
faid he sighing, that this Minister durst lift his Eyes upon the Queen, and
that this Princess -- no, continued he, after a moment of reflection, this
cannot be: I know, pursued he with some transport, the Queens Heart, and though
the insolence of such a man as he should have mounted to that point he -- But,
my Lord, (interrupted the Countess, whom that discourse assassinated) Is it
against me that you ought to dispute this? and do I ask you If it is true, that
D^n Geronimo is in Love with the Queen or no? It is of you, pursued she, the
discourse was of, and I interess my self in it more than ordinary, I shall not
oppose all that can be said, if you love me as they say you do, the passion of
such a man as you, has ever wherewith to flatter the Vanity of a Woman, not to
be displeased at the report of it; but if it is the Queen you Love, as I do not
at all doubt, your Generosity is concerned not to suffer me to be played upon.

She was come to that, and the Count who fell from perplexity to perplexity,
knew not what to answer, when the Queen entering the Arbor so surprised the
Countess, that not knowing how to hide the disorder the Counts silence had cast
her in, as well as the presence of that Princess, she chose to retire. The
Queen something surprised to see her go away in that manner, would have called
her, but in the Agitation and trouble she came, she found her self so weak at
her entrance, that she had not the power to open her mouth. The Count, who saw
her so pale and changed, run immediately to her, and with a tenderness full of
allarum, he asked her, if she found her self ill, and if she desired, he would
call any of her Maids. No, answered she him, in sighing with a languishing air:
But from whence comes it that the Countess goes away? I know not, Madam,
answered the Count in a manner something perplexed. You know not, replied the
Princess; I believe however you can tell me the reason if you will, but I
begin, added she, to know the little relyance there is to be had upon you, by
the little Confidence you have in me, Alas! with what do you reproach me,
Madam, cried that Lover? and how little you Penetrate how far goes -- he
stopped there sighing, and on a sudden renewing the discourse with something
more heat, if my Life was concerned, Madam, added he, I should not hesitate one
moment the telling you all there is in my Heart. Why then, replied she, do you
refuse me the part I demand in your Confidence? You know, Madam, answered the
Count what you forbid me? Yes, but I no longer forbid it you, replied she, how
should I know what you would think? For if it is what they would make me
believe, it would seem that in leaving you in this silence one should authorize
your temerity: No, Count, pursued she, with a more pressing manner than ever,
you shall tell me, I Command it you, if your Heart does not accuse you of any
thing against me: if the sentiments you have for me are as full of respect, as
I could desire them of you. You are troubled, Count, continued she still,
seeing the disorder into which she put him; and your Face does but too much
declare that you are Guilty. Do not rely upon my goodness, I have a
consideration for you, because you have some merit; but I am to maintain my
Glory; a small thing would wound it, and you would less deserve favor than any
one soever, if you were fallen into such a misfortune. The amorous Hannibal,
with a Countenance sad and full of respect, though ever very passionate, I have
failed, Madam, I confess it, said he to her sighing, without being able to say
any thing more: at which that lovely Princess extremely touched, began to
represent to him with a great deal of softness, that she was neither of a Rank
nor in a State to suffer that any other than the King her Husband should have
such sentiments for her; and that if he was reasonable, he would do himself
justice in that point, and not suffer himself to be hurryed away by a blind
passion and without hopes. That he very well knew that it was to lose his
respect to her, and that since she had perceived it, what she owed to her self
would oblige her, not only to forbid him her presence, but also to cause him to
be recalled by the King her Father, if the hopes she had of reducing him to his
devoir, did not make her treat him with a little more goodness: that this
merited, that he should make some reflection upon it, and that he would
seriously labor to cure his mind of a blindness, which could not fail in the
end of being his ruin. I know, Madam, answered that Lover, who began to take
Courage, that I have merited Death, I shall not refuse it at any time you shall
be pleased to order it me, but for loving you nothing can hinder me as long as
I live. I might not tell it you, as I did not during the space of Five Years,
that I have loved you with a passion the most tender and fullest of respect
that ever one loved with, I might likewise not see you, that neither my Eyes
nor sighs should speak; but I should not however have failed of having always
for you the same ardour, and it does not depend on me to get rid of it. I have
told my self, all that can be said in that case. I have set before my Eyes
greater unhappinesses than all those you can ever threaten me with: and all
this, Madam, has but the more irritated my passion. All the reasons contrary to
this inclination, and even to your very hatred, which would be to me the most
redoubtable thing in the World, have never been able to persuade me, that you
were not the most lovely Princess under the Heavens, and that I ought to love
you to the very Grave. I saw it was without hopes, pursued he, seeing that the
Queen let him speak, I durst not even flatter my self, that you could ever know
any thing of it, and yet I could not hinder the abandoning my self to it, as if
I were to have been the most happy of all Lovers. The Queen who had thitherto
suffered her self to be lulled with the pleasure of hearing him, recovering
from so charming an Error, was something ashamed of her weakness and blushed.
Whereupon recalling all the efforts that modesty and devoir could make upon
her, and taking an air more severe than the softness of her Nature, and than
even the tenderness of her Heart could well permit her, You only seek then to
irritate me against you, and what advice soever I can give you, you will
despise it, and you fear not my anger. I fear all from you, Madam, answered he
with a transported voice, but what I ought most to sear in you is your fair
Eyes. And would to God, added he sighing, that I had ever seen you in anger and
full of disdain and contempt for me. This wish so little usual, and the action
with which that Lover pronounced these words appeared something so rare to the
Queen, that notwithstanding all her affected seriousness, she could hardly hold
from laughing, and not being willing to pursue a discourse, from which she saw
she should not come of on her side with that haughtiness that what the Count
told her merited, she rose, and without looking upon him, I have nothing else
to say to you, said she to him, without it be that you make use of the advice I
have given you, for you may very well judge, pursued she in going out of that
Arbor, that I can no longer see you with modesty and without doing an injury
to my Glory, if you still continue in the same Sentiments. Wherefore change
them, added she, if you would have me live with you as I have hitherto done.
You must then, Madam learn me how to hate you. For to hate me, No, replied the
Queen, but there is a Temperament between both that I could pardon in you. Ah!
Madam, replied this Lover, how difficult is that Temperament to keep with such
a Person as you. I believe, pursued he, that if it was possible not to Love you
with that Excess that I Love you, I should hate you more than ever any one was
hated: The Queen fell a smiling and viewing him, I must then be extremely hated
in the World. For I assure my self there are few People in the World that are
bold enough to Love me as you say. If all the Earth knew you as well as I do,
Madam, replied immediately the Count with a Tone full of Ardour, all the Earth
would adore you, or hate you, as the most dangerous Princess in the World, who
after having forced Hearts to dye for Love of you, takes delight in making them
dye of despair. The Queen looking upon him with a great deal of Complaisance,
cruelty said she is not my Vice, but I know what I owe my self, and who go
against that, added she a little more seriously, may assure themselves of not
being very happy. They were then come to her apartment, where the King being
entered, the Count retired little satisfied with these last words, but likewise
less unhappy than he could have hoped after such a declaration.

The Countess, who had passed all that time in her Chamber, in examining in her
mind, all the Count's words and actions, found to the least stroke in that
Lover, that she had been unluckily mistaken, and that the Queens Charms
possessed him absolutely. Cruel discoveries when they come so late; she had no
hopes but the Princesses kindness, who making perhaps some difficulty to Embark
her self in an engagement of Heart which would ruin her, would be in no pain to
make her that Sacrifice. Wherefore she resolved without waiting any longer, to
speak to her of it, to open to her entirely her Heart, that she might the more
easily move her by her pains. She came to her at the same time the Count left
her, and casting her self immediately upon her knees, with a Torrent of Tears,
that she shed, she was some time without being able to express a Word: At which
the Queen much astonished and concerned, asked her several times what it was so
much afflicted her. Alas! what it is, Madam, answered she with a profound sigh.
I am the most unhappy Creture under the Heavens: I see my Death caused by the
Person of the World I Love the most. Yes my Queen, pursued she, in recovering
her self a little, it is a secret I have hitherto concealed from you, but for
which I am very cruelly punished, not to have occasion to draw still upon me
your reproaches. I have suffered my self to be surprised by the Courtship of
the Count d' Aveline, I took for my self the sighs I saw him make, and I
fancied he spoak to me, when he only thought of you. Of me, interrupted the
Queen. Yes, Madam, pursued the Countess, it is you that take him from me, and
that which is most cruel to me is that it is you, whom I cannot hate, who are
the cause of all my ills. The Queen, having asked her upon what she founded
these suspicions, Alas! Would to God, answered she lamentably, that I could
doubt of it, but I am but too well convinced; my hopes, Madam, is now only in
you, and if you allow the sighs of that Lover, I have only Death to deliver me
from all my pains. In finishing these last Words her Tears trickled down in
greater abundance than ever: The Queen, who had the tenderest Soul of the
World, was so touched to see her in that state, that she wished, in that
moment, she had never seen the Count, and was some time without being able to
say any thing to her, being assailed by a Thousand different motions, which
were at length followed by some Tears, which she could not hinder her self from
shedding, whether it was from the Effort she made upon her self, for the
resisting the Sentiments of her Heart, or from the pity she had of those of
the Countess, I cannot, said she to her, hinder my being beloved, if I am
beloved against my will; but all that can be done in that I will do it, and you
shall be witness of it to Morrow. While that this Conversation passed in the
Queens Cabinet, there was one much more extraordinary in Count Hannibals
Chamber, Don Geronimo, who had learnt that that Ambassador had a long time
sought for him, would make use of that Pretexte to go know what he desired of
him, and to acquaint himself at the same time with his Sentiments upon the
inclination of his Heart, for having well examined him, he did not find,
whether it was dissimulation or a real indifference, that he perfectly
answered the eagerness of the Countess. And for the better acting his part he
resolved to feign he was in Love with the Queen, hoping that the Count would
open himself yet the more freely to him: Insomuch that being come to his
apartment, seeing that the Ambassador did not speak to him of any thing, and
that he was possessed with a Melancholy, that rendered to him Conversation
troublesome and incommode; I perceive, my Lord, said he to him, that I have ill
taken my time, for the rendering you a Visit; but being told that you sought for
me, I fancied I could not be dispensed from coming to ask you, what you desired
of a man who is entirely yours. The Count Civilly thanked him; and continuing
in his sad Humor, he answered him coldly, that it was nothing, and that he had
been only told, that he observed his steps, of which he was willing to have
known the reason; but that he no longer cared for it. He spoak to him with this
indifference for the better undeceiving him. As you are here, my Lord,
independent of whom soever, and that you are not to give an account of your
actions to any one, neither is there any one that would concern themselves with
examining them; but you cannot hinder that when one has Pretentions in a place,
they fear to have a Concurrent made like you. Not that, added he, that I have
hitherto had wherewith perfectly to Ground my judgments: You are seen to go in
several places; you have assiduities for several persons, and perhaps, if one
could know the party your Heart takes, one should be at ease and endeavor to
serve you in it. The Count who knew he had to do with a Cunning Politician, was
upon his Guard, but as he hazarded nothing in acting the Countesses Lover, and
that it would be on the contrary a means for the entering into his considence,
if it was true as they would make him believe, that he was in Love with the
Queen, he confessed to him in a confiding way, that being to pass some days in
the Court of Majorca, he had thought necessary for the divertisement of a man
of his Humor, to have an Amusement of Heart, and that he had cast his Eyes
upon the Countess, but that, if he had the ^ust design there, he was ready to
aband (...) her entirely to him; not pretending to ^ake an engagement of
Consequence in a ^lace, where he was to stay so little a ^ime. Don Geronimo
felt to the very bottom of his Heart the cruel grief of that declaration, and
composing his Face the best he could, he told him, with a joy he was not a
little troubled to feign, that he learnt with an extreme pleasure the Course of
his Heart; that he should have had the same defference in his regard, if he had
been so unfortunate as to have had the same Inclinations with him, but that,
since their vows had different Objects, they might without trouble each on his
side render their amourous devoirs; that he promised him not to disturb him in
his, and that he hoped the same favor from him: and thereupon quitted him,
searing, that in the violence he used upon himself, he could no longer maintain
that part. The Count had yielded to him wish too much Facility the interests he
had in the Countess, for to believe it was in earnest: it is not so easy to
lay by that passion, provided one is really engaged in it, and this generous
proceedure of his Rival appeared to him too full of Art, for to be persuaded
that it was sincere: Insomuch that he would return him the same Complement, and
went from him with all the rage of a Lover Transported with jealousies. The
Queen, who had promised the Countess to contribute as much as she could to her
repose, no sooner saw her self rid of her, than that her Heart complaining that
she had so little consulted it in the most important Affair of her Life, had
like by many sighs and regrets to have overturned all that pity had exacted in
the Countesses favor, for it is rarely we betray our selves, and less in Love
than in any other thing: But Glory maintaining the first Party, seconded with a
Thousand reasons of the Consequences and the future, again balanced the
Sentiments of her Soul, and so well confirmed her in her first design as the
most becoming her, that she did nothing all the rest of the Day and all the
Night than seek reasons for the fortifying her self against the weakness of her
Heart. She was almost in this disposition when the Countess, with whom she had
regulated the measures she would take, for the yielding to her entirely the
Count, came to give her notice that that Lover was just a coming. The Queen
made her lide her self in her Cabinet, and having given orders to a Page to
bring in the Ambassador of Naples when he should come, she prepared her self
for an engagement, in which the trembling which had took her, since her Lady of
Honor had spoke to her of the Count, made her fear she should not come of with
that case as she had promised her self. Hannibal appeared with a Face sad and
melancholy, and which still seemed sensible of the words, with which the
Princess had left him the day before. She could not see him without being
concerned; and as if she had forgot the cruel design she had against him, she
asked him in a Charming manner, from whence proceeded the sadness she saw upon
his Face. A Man, Madam, answered he, so unfortunate as I am, cannot bear a Gay
look. But unfortunate, replied the Queen, those are not to be pityed, who will
be so: It is true, Madam, answered that Lover, that I should not be pityed to
Love the most insensible Princess of the Earth, for it is a long time since I
prepared my self for it; But I am -- added he sighing, and stopped there.
Whereupon the Queen, who would not be more curious, than was necessary in that
occasion, without pressing him to make an end, must you not confess, said she
to him, that you have lost your reason in applying your self to an object,
where not only you have no hopes; but where you are even forbid to pretend to
any, and which is capable of ruining you with those, whom duty obliges you to
consider more than all things. Ah! Madam, cried the amourous Count softly,
those are not my greatest misfortunes: And would to God, added he, something
raising his voice, that at the expense of that reason, that you say, Madam, I
have lost, I had only your insensibility to fear or the ruin of my Fortune.
Believe me, Count, interrupted that Princess, whose Heart was touched with all
he said, follow an advice that I will give you as a true Friend, lay by a
passion as extravagant as useless, and turn your thoughts toward an Object,
who shall be of a Rank and in Right of acknowledging them. The Countess of
Palomer -- at that Name Hannibal, retired two steps, and would have interrupted
the Queen, but she making a sign to him to let her pursue, continued in this
manner, she is of one of the most illustrious Families of Europe, she is a Lady
who has Beauty and Wit to surpass all Women I have ever seen; and if I was a
Man, none could please me so much as she, see her, offer her that tenderness
and Heart, of which she can make a better use than I, and you will certainly be
happy. I, Madam, answered the Count, who had heard very impatiently that cruel
Proposition to the end, could I ever Love any one after you, when I should be
capable of ceasing to Love you. Ah! Madam, continued he sighing, know me
better, all the misfortunes of the Earth should sooner fall upon me than I
would once think of it: It is however the only means, replied the Queen, to
live well with me. I beg it of you, and if that be not enough I Command you,
as much as I can have power over you. I shall reckon for my self the cares and
the Paces you shall employ for her, and as much as your former sighs may have
given me pain, so much this little Sacrafice that you shall make to my Glory,
will give me joy. If I am not, Madam, replied sadly the desolate Count, to
merit your favor but by that: if I cannot, pursued he sighing, please you but
by quitting you for another, I am to be the most unhappy of all men, and am
going to draw upon my self your hatred for all the rest of my days. For it is
impossible for me to obey you therein; Or for me, Count, replied immediately
the Queen rising, to see you any more: think of it better, added she, for the
virtue of a Princess as I am, would suffer by it too much, after the Liberty
you have taken, Ah, Cruel Princess, cried then the unfortunate Hannibal in a
Transported manner, how can an Innocent Love as mine be contrary to your Glory,
it having neither desires nor hopes, why add you to the Cruelty of not
suffering that I Love you, the injustice of making me Love against my will,
what I can never Love. The Queen not being willing to push any farther a
Conversation which was as sensible for her, as it was Cruel for that Lover. It
is enough, said she to him; defferences that one has for what one Loves, are
the secret marks of a true Love, and I shall know yours by the Obedience you
shall show me in what I desire of you. Love does not destroy it self, Madam,
answered the Count, but I see what it is, and what you desire of me. It is my
Death: I shall not be put to much trouble to satisfy you therein. In finishing
these words he quitted the Queen with so disordered a look, that that Princess
really fearing some terible effect from his despair, sent a Page to recall him
and letting her self fall languishing upon her Bed, near which she was seated;
Ah, Heavens! Cried she to what Combats do you deliver me, when the Countess
coming out of the Cabinet where she had been hid, cast her self upon her Knees
with Eyes all filled with Tears: Too generous Princess, said she to her, how
can I acknowledge so much goodness? You maintain the designs of a Creature, who
merits rather your hatred than your favor: and for her sake you bring into
despair a man who adores you. She would have continued speaking, but the Page
the Queen had sent after the Count, reentring, told her, that the Ambassador of
Naples was coming back: Insomuch that the Countess, who would not have been
willing he should have seen her in the State she was, returned immediately into
the Cabinet, where being entered, the Count arrived, who saw it shut with much
Precipitation. His surprise was great: for he had not believed there had been
any one with the Queen; and his jealousy, which, after the last Conversation
he had had with Don Geronimo, was yet augmented by the Order or the Counsel,
that that Princess had just given him, of ceasing to Love her, for to give
himself to the Countess of Palomer, increased more than ever, with seeing that
Door shut, he believed it was some one who ought to be suspected to him, and to
whom the Queen had had a mind to Sacrifice him. That Princess who got up in
seeing him enter, observing, that he had his Eyes toward that Cabinet, and
that he considered it with the attention of a man, who ruminated something in
his mind, immediately fancied he had seen the Countess, and that he suspected
the Trick that had been played him. She would see, what he would say of it; But
as he was still in a profound pensivenss, you are surprised, said she to him
ready to Laugh, though she was but little difposed to it, at the Ambuscade that
has been laid you. It is true: Madam, answered that Lover, that I should never
have imagined, that you would have had such a Conversation as we have had for
the savouring another: I know not, at least, continued he, by what I have
merited this deceit. Do you call deceit, (replied the Queen still Laughing,
who really believed he meant the Countess,) an Innocent design one has of
serving the Person one Loves. But the Count who at first cast his suspicions
upon Don Geronimo, whom he fancied to be concealed in that Cabinet, was
overcome with grief at that Confession, after which he could no longer doubt of
his misfortune, and changing Color Two or Three times, before he could answer
her; No, Madam, said he to her, viewing her with Eyes fuller of vexation than
Love, I shall give what name you please to the most cruel injury that can be
done a man: but the Triumph was already great enough, without calling me back
for the pushing it farther; and take it not ill, Madam, if I no longer serve
for a Victimeto aman so little worthy of one of my kind. Thereupon making a Low
Bow to the Queen, he went out of the Chamber with a Heart as full of rage, as
it had before been seized with grief, leaving the Queen much in pain, to divine
what man he meant, and what obliged him to retire in that manner, without ever
being able to divine the true Subject. The Countess, who was come out of that
Cabinet, and who had not failed to penetrate into the Counts jealousy, having
been the first who inspired him with it, might have easily drawn the Queen from
the perplexity she was in, but she would not reveal to her a secret, from which
she hoped to draw some advantage. The greatest Friendship of Women is not proof
against Treachery when it is Love that inspires it. It has always more
appearance than reality. It is not to be relied upon, the least interest of
Heart stifles it, or makes it serve its designs. The Queen after having
entertained her self some time with the Countess, finding her Heart in need of
a little solitude, took the pretexte, to rid her self of her, that she was not
well, and that she desired to take some repose. These two fair Lovers had their
pains and their cares, it is true, that the Queen was beloved, and that this
point in Love is capable of solacing a great many ills, but Glory and Devoir
which she had incessantly before her Eyes for the Combating an Inclination
which forced her away, and besides all this the Cruelty of causing all the
unhappiness of a man, whose Felicity she would have procured; to feign not to
Love him; and not to be willing to be beloved, when that she really found that
all her tenderness was for him, and that she was Charmed with his, and in fine
to be condemned to persuade him by all manner of reasons to Love another, which
perhaps would have made her desperate: all this, I say, made appear that the
Destiny contrary to the repose of great Souls, had taken pleasure to produce
Caprichious and opposite motions in the Heart of that Lovely Princess. The
unfortunate Countess passed her time no more agreeably than she, if she felt
not all those stinging pains which Devoir and Glory occasion, in opposing the
passion of a Heart, she had likewise only her revenge to solace her in the rage
of seeing her self contemned. She waited with great impatience all the rest of
the Day, to see the Count again, for the quite confounding him upon the Subject
of Don Geronimo, but he appeared not at Court, and she easily comprehended what
was the occasion of his retreat. She was no sooner up the day after, than that
she sent to tell him, that she had something of great importance to acquaint
him with, and that if he would take the time that the King and Queen were at
Dinner, he would find her in her Chamber. Hannibal, who since the Queen had
proposed to him to Love the Countess, had took an Aversion for that Lady, whom
he considered, as one does a Mortal Enemy, would hardly have gone to the
assignation she made him, if in the despair he was, the Curiosity of knowing,
if it was not something from the Queen she had to tell him, had not overcome
that aversion. He went to her at the Hour appointed; but with a Face so sad and
changed, that it surprised the Countess. I take pity, my Lord, said she to
him, of the pains you suffer for my sake, and which only put me into Confusion.
I know not, pursued she, what the Queens design is, but she might have spared
her self and you to so great a perplexety. If you were to Love me, it is not to
her that I would have the Obligation of your Heart: it is an ill augure to
receive that of a Man from the hand of a Woman. It must give it self, my Lord,
added she, use not constraint upon your self for that: I made known to the
Queen Yesterday, that I was not obliged to her for all these cares, as it is
not to do me a kindness she takes so much trouble, but for the Love of a man,
who came to make a Triumph to me of the Sacrifice she had made him of your
passion; It is from Don Geronimo, at least that I know all that I here tell
you. He related to me to the very least particulars of the Conversation you had
with the Queen, which he heard in the Cabinet he was concealed. The Count found
his grief terribly renewed at this recital; but that which gave him most pain
was the Vanity of his Rival, who thus triumphed over his misfortune: Wherefore
he could not hold from complaining, likewise seeing, that it would be useless
any longer to conceal his passion to a Lady who knew too much of it, but it was
still without ever losing the respect he owed the Queen, complaining more of
his Destiny than of the unjust Preference of that Princess, who despised him
for such a man as Don Geronimo. The Countess, who would have been glad he had
pushed his resentment farther, forgot nothing that might heighten the injury
that was done him, sometimes excusing the Queen upon the acknowledgment she
owed that Minister, for the services she had received from him, and which might
have touched her Heart. This last stroke made that sad Lover quite desperate who
saw some reason in what was told him; but nothing however that could oblige him
to rail against that Princess. There never escaped from him one word, which was
not in all the submission of a Lover full of respect: On the contrary the more
reason he had to complain of her, the more he made appear his tenderness,
resolving, notwithstanding so much contempt and so many Cruelties, to Love her
till Death. The Countess, in whose Heart all these Sentiments were so many
stabs, suffering pains which only a Jealous and Passionate Woman can imagine,
seeing that she could not succeed on that side, I am, my Lord, said she to him,
as much interessed as you in the Queens Conduct; for she may have some reason
with you to treat you after the manner she does, but with me, she has none, I
know the means, pursued she, if you would believe me, to get into her favor,
if she has the least disposition not to hate you, and for me to have my return
on Don Geronimo, by whom I have been played upon. Do you make show of loving
me, and that you have followed the Councels that were given you. A Woman, added
she, may use contempt, but she seldom sees without vexation that an other does
profit by it. It is the only touch stone for the Queens Heart, and I warrant
you, that this fiction shall have lasted no longer than Eight days, than that
you will see her change her Opinion. To feign for Eight days, replied the
Count, who liked the Council well enough that the Countess gave him, it is a
great deal of time, Madam, for a Lover, who is full of Ardour for that Charming
Princess. He had hardly finished speaking, than that the Queen returning from
dinner, passed through the Countesses Chamber, and was much surprised to find
the Count with her at that Hour. That Lover, who would begin to act the part he
was advised to by the Countess, no sooner saw her arrive, than that rising, he
retired, thinking himself much more strong to seign, in flying an object that
he adored, notwithstanding all her cruel contempt, than in remaining in her
presence. The Queen still more astonished to see the Count go thus away, asked
her I ady of Honor the reason of it, who declared she knew nothing, but in
such a manner that it excited that Princesses Curiosity, who pressed her to
tell her the Subject of that prompt retreat, and upon what they discoursed. The
Countess after having still made some refusal for the augmenting the Queens
suspicions, feigning to yield to so many Prayers, avouched to her that at
length the despair she had brought the Count to, had had the effect she
desired, and that having sought for her all the Morning to speak to her in
particular, he had said to her such things that he must be the most perfidious
of all men, if they were not true. The Queen, who was not used be constrained,
could not hinder from showing the alteration in her Face, that, what the
Countess had told had caused in her Heart, and opening her Mouth with much
pain, she asked her what it was the Ambassador had said to her. But the
Countess pretending to discretion, begged she would not press her in that,
because she had promised secrecy. The Queen, who would not discover her
trouble, quitted her to retire to her Chamber, where all the most cruel motions
assailed her, and gave her no repose till she had spoken in particular with the
Count, but she did not so quickly find the occasion; for she was not willing to
speak to him before the Countess, who being at length fallen ill through the
agitations of her mind, and the violences she was obliged to use upon her self,
the Count passed almost whole days in her Chamber. The Queen came there
sometimes, but besides her Rival's Eyes, whom she begun to fear, there was
likewise those of Don Geronimo, who was from Morning to Evening in her Chamber,
and whom she feared as much as the Countess. Insomuch that it was the rarest
Scene imaginable which daily passed between those Four Persons, the Count
affecting to entertain the Countess, as in obedience to the Queens orders, and
the Queen to discourse with Don Geronimo, for the amusing him, and making the
others believe that she was not concerned at their goood Intelligence. But all
these parts, especially those of the Queen and the Count demanded too much
violence, to last long: Insomuch that the Queen one day sinding, that Don
Gerenimo was with the Countess, whom he endeavored to entertain, and that the
Count was at some distance, she came and sat near the place where he was, and
viewing him with a tender air. What change is this, said she to him with a Tone
of voice not to be understood by the Countess, there is in you since some
days, I can hardly imagine, it is the same Count d' Aveline, who spoke to me
in the Garden. It is true, Madam, answered that Lover, wholly Charmed with this
reproach, that the change is great, but it ought not to surprise you, since you
ordered me it, Yes, replied she, but confess you were not in much pain to obey
me. The amourous Hannibal sighed, and selt his Heart so seized with joy and
tenderness, to read in the Queens Eyes, as well as in her words that he was not
indifferent to her, that he could hardly open his mouth, to make her understand
that she was mistaken, and that far from having changed, he loved her more
passionately than he had ever loved her. That Lovely Princess well judging that
that was not a place for reconciliation, left of this discourse and turning
toward Don Geronimo, she entered into that that Minister had with the Countefs,
not to give them matter of Suspicion. However after having been some time in
that Chamber, the impatience she was in of entertaining the Count in
particular, mastering all manner of consideration, she told him softly, that
she had something to say to him, and that he should be within an Hour in the
Garden; but that it might be in such a manner that the Countess might know
nothing of it. After which she retired: That happy Lover wholly Charmed with
this order, or rather at this Randevouze, could hardly hinder himself from
showing his joy before a jealous Woman, who, in the uneasiness she was to know
what the Queen had told him, examined him in all kinds. But in fine the amorous
Hannibal weary of constraint, and impatient to go to the Garden, seeing the
Hour approach, took leave of her, and leaving her with Don Geronimo, seemed to
sly to the place of assignation, so fearful he was of coming too late. Thus
was he at Liberty of giving a loose to all his joy, he went from Alley to
Alley, he walked, he stopped, he ran, he went in a Thousand kind of Paces
transported with the happiness of hat day. If any thing was capable of
troubling him in his amorous disorder, it was the reflections he sometimes made
on Don Geronimo, whom he sancied if not savoured, at least very far advanced in
the kindness of that Princess, who did, he thought, things for that Minister,
that one does not for an indifferent Person, and for whom one has not a great
engagement, he hoped to know suddenly the certainty. He had already took
several turns in the Garden, in those occasions time lasts furiously to a
Lover, it was something late, he incessantly turned his Eyes toward the Palace
for to see if the Queen did not appear, and he began to doubt of his good
fortune with a vexation that made him repay with great usury the little joy he
had had. When in sine he saw that lovely Princess come, who followed only by
two of her Maids of Honor, showed the earnestness enough she had to join him
by the swift pace she walked, she immediately feigned to be surprirized with
seeing him; How so late, my Lord, said she to him, and walking all alone in the
Garden? You must needs be in Love to do this. The Count, who presently
comprehended the reason that made the Queen speak thus, and that it was by
reason of her Maids, made such an answer as the Conjuncture demanded, and
having given her his Hand to help her to walk, they began it together. The
Queen no sooner saw her self at a distance great enough, not to be understood
by her two Maids, who followed her, than with a smile perfectly Charming, I
have made you wait a little, said she to the Count, but I could not come
sooner, having been obliged to see the King depart, who is gone toly Three
Leagues from hence upon a Hunting match that is to be made to Morrow. I had
like to have broak my word with you, added she, for it is very late, and I must
retire in a moment. Have you only done me so great an Honor, Madam, answered
Hannibal, to deprive me of it so soon. What I suffer, pursued he sighing, since
Five or Six days, cannot be sollaced by so short a happiness. You ought not to
complain, replied the Queen, you have passed those days pleasantly enough, of
which you speak; and if any thing has given you pain, it was without doubt my
presence, which has sometimes troubled you in your softest moments. You, Madam,
replied the Count, can you disturb my days in that manner? Can you believe it,
No, I have seen it, said the Queen, and the continual cares you take to fly me
and shun my sight, have but too often confirmed me in what I say. You take
pleasure, Madam, replied the Count, to Laugh still at my troubles. For it is
not possible that you have not penetrated into all this fiction; and that
notwithstanding all my Artifice, my Eyes have not told you, that it was not
without an extreme violence that I forced my self from you, and that I deprived
my self of seeing you. But how can you accomodate, replied the Queen what you
say, with the Protestations that you daily made to the Countess? Is it still a
violence, or a habit of Cajolery, to act with all the passionate part? I,
Madam, interrupted the Count, with an air the most surprised imaginable, at the
Protestations of the Countess? Yes you: replied the Queen. There is not a Day
you do not spend your self in cares and tenderness, for the expressing to her
the greatness of your Love. Not that, pursued she, in an indifferent manner, I
find fault with it. You know, added she, that I was the first that counseled
it you, but why to be so difficult? What reason have you to desire to abuse the
Credulity of a Princess, who has ever had goodness and esteem enough for you,
for your being obliged, to put some more confidence in her: must you needs by
so base a Treachery make her divine, what you take so much pains to conceal
from her. Don Geronimo has told me enough of the Confession you made him; and
it is such a Rival as he you ought to distrust and not such a Friend as I. And
I do distrust, Madam, that cruel Rival, interrupted lamentably the sad
Hannibal, who has made me but too well comprehend the height of his happiness.
But is it him, pursued he, that you ought to believe, Madam, when he speaks
against me? and that he gives you to understand that I am in Love with the
Countess, ought not he to be content with the sacrifice that you made him of my
passion, without adding false reasons to render it just? Of the Sacrifice,
replied the Queen much astonished, that I make him of your passion? Yes, Madam,
pursued the jealous Count, his indiscretion having moved him to go and Triumph
to the Countess of the last conversation I had with you, that Lady has had the
Cruel pity. -- He stopped there, surprised to see on a sudden the Countess
appear before them, who came from behind a Hedge, which Composed the Alley they
walked in. The Queen, as may be believed, was in no less astonishment than he,
not expecting to have so near her, the Person of the World she ought most to
fear, in such a discourse as she had with the Count. The jealous Countess had
observed in her Chamber certain rays of joy, in the Eyes of Hannibal, from the
moment of the secret Conversation he had had with the Queen, which had made her
not only conjecture, but all most divine that her Prophecy was truer than she
was willing it should, and that the Queen went toward the Count when he made
show of flying her. Insomuch that seeing them both go out with the countenance
of People, whose mind was full of some design, and especially the Count, who,
what violence soever he used, had not been able to conceal the uneasiness he
was in that Chamber; she rid her self as soon as she could of Don Geronimo, and
having sent two Maids in whom she consided, to observe the Queens steps, she
had no sooner learnt that she was gone into the Garden, accompanied only with
two of her Maids of Honor, than that she suspected a Rendevouze, wherein all
that her jealousy had been able to invent for the disuniting of those Two
Lovers was going to be destroyed. She called for her Clothes, and
notwithstanding all the opposition of the Persons about her, who were
astonished at her design, and who represented to her that she was not in a
Condition to rise; and much less to go out of her Chamber, and to go take the
Air, she would go walk in the Garden, and took with her only one of her Chamber
Maids, who was of her Confidence. She had not had the patience to be quite
dressed, and all in disorder she descended into the Garden with more haste than
the weakness of her Body could well permit her, but it was the mind which
carried her, or if you will her Love or jealousy. She had no sooner discovered
where the Queen was, than that stealing from Alley to Alley, and still
concealing her self with the Hedges between which she walked, she came toward
that where they were, and just in the time that those two Lovers were going to
inform themselves upon her Chapter. Which obliged her to show her self,
notwithstanding all the Curiosity she had of listening to them. It is true,
that she came to them with so much trouble and Agitation of mind, that she
could hardly understand what they said. But in fine the Word of Sacrifice, and
that of Countess coming to her Ears, she could no longer be Mistress of her
self: and must needs go interupt them. She did at first all she could to
compose her self, but the alteration there was in her Face, did but too much
discover the occasion of her coming in a place, where there was so little
reason to expect her: and seeing the surprise with which they looked upon her,
you find it without doubt strange, Madam, said she to the Queen, to see me
here; and I am assured you did not expect me, but wearied with lying in Bed, I
fancied it would do me no hurt to go take the Air. But may be I am come
inconveniently and am troublesome to you: If it be so, Madam, I shall retire.
You spoke, answered the Queen, something blushing, a Language very new both to
your self and me. You know, pursued she, that I am very glad to see you
wherever I am, and that you cannot incommode me, but it is true, that I am
something astonished, that you have so little care of your health, and if there
is any thing I blame in you, it is that. Nothing pressed you to come out, but
let us retire, for I confess you raise my pity, and I fear you will really
fall sick. The Countess, after having thanked the Queen for the tender
Sentiments she seemed to have for her, set her self to follow her, but with so
much difficulty, that she could hardly bear her self up, insomuch that that
Charming Princess, who had a most compassionate and tender Soul, taking notice
of it, would not augment the ills of that Poor Sick Lady, and bid the Count
have pity of that Lover, and that he should give her his Hand, resolving that
for once at least the passion she had in her Heart should not be the strongest.
The Count obeyed, but the Conversation he had with that Lady was not great; for
she could hardly speak, overcome with emotion that her Soul as well as her Body
suffered. She only held her Eyes sixed upon him, and it was the Language with
which she expressed to him all the violent motions, which then passed in her,
and of which he was the only cause. They came in that manner to the Queens
apartment, who, having been willing to accompany the Countess to her Chamber,
left her, a moment after, at the Liberty to go to Bed, of which she had great
need. The Count, having given her his Hand to lead her back, was in an extreme
impatience of entering again into the Conversation they had begun in the
Garden, and which he perceived was tending to a kind Reconciliation; But the
Queen whether out of Malice or Prudence told him, that it was too late, and
that he should go give some Comfort to that desolate Lady, and that they would
at another time end their Quarrel. Hannibal undone with this answer, begged of
her to give him at least one Quarter of an Hours Audience more: but with an Air
so passionate, that the Queen could not hold from laughing. You have then a
mind, said she to him, to kill that Poor wretch, who at this Hour imagines a
Thousand things that sting her. Go, pursued She, still smiling, go put her Mind
at rest, for you owe this at least to her Love. The Count looked upon the
Queen, who he saw took delight in railling him upon his pain, and with an Air
very indifferent; there are, Madam, answered he Her, other people about her who
are more proper than I to render her those Cares: But if her Disease had
occasion for mine, her recovery would be very dangerous. You are too cruel,
replied the Queen, and that does not become such a man as you. But can it be
possible, pursued She, that these are your true Sentements, and do you not
still abuse me? For after the things you daily say to the Countess, who
certainly loves you very tenderly, your Soul must be full of Treachery that so
much Contempt and Indifference can be without disguise. The Count, whose Heart
was pierced with all these Words the Queen said to Him, though She spoke to Him
in a manner, to make him know, that She was not fully persuaded of what She
reproached Him, hardly knew with what Air to answer her; but sighing, What is
it I beseech you, Madam, I have ever said to that Lady, that is contrary to the
Sentiments I have always made appear for you? Upon what have I entertained
her, but of the tender passion, I have had more then Five Years for the most
cruel Princess upon the Earth, and of which I must dye, for her satisfaction.
If it is a Crime, pursued he to have made her this Confession, which never
ought to come out of my Mouth, accuse the vanity, not to say the insolence of
Don Geronimo, from whom she had already known all the Conversation I had had
with you in your Chamber. What do you mean by Don Geronimo, interrupted the
Queen? This is the Third time you have mentioned him, without my comprehending
any thing of what you tell me. Has he ever had part, pursued she, in our
discourses: and must you not be very extravagant, or the Countess very wicked,
to make you believe, that I could be capable of bringing him into such a
confidence, he who I should fear in such an occasion more than all the Persons
of the World? But, Madam, interrupted the Count, why then was he hid in your
Cabinet? Hid in my Cabinet, replied the Queen stung with this Reproach, O,
Heavens! and this is all the mystery of this Sacrifice, and of that victime
that I could not unriddle! and is it possible you could be persuaded of so much
baseness on my part, you who ought to know me better than any Body. Go, If I
did well, added she, I should leave you in your error; but I am too much
concerned. The anger the Queen was thereupon in against the Count, having
almost calmed all the distrust of that Lover, he fell upon his Knees to ask her
Pardon, when of a sudden there entered one of the Countesses Women, who came to
beg the Queen on her part, that She would oblige the Ambassador to pass one
moment in her Chamber before he went out of the Palace. The Queen being in
extreme vexation that that Woman had sound the Count in the posture she had
seen him, would repair it by making him go that moment to the sick, that She
might not become quite desperate: It was to send a man to Execution, by so much
the more severe to the Amorous Hannibal, for that he saw himself in a fair way
of reconciling His Affairs with the Queen. He must however obey, but after what
manner so sadly and with so much pain, that he raised pity in that charming
Princess, who gave him not so harsh an Order, without being the first that
found it severe. The Countess was in great joy to see that Lover return; but
that joy was dissipated by the measure She spoke to Him, for his Answers were
of a man so abstracted, that She perceived that His Mind as well as His Heart
was elsewhere while that his Body was with Her. Nothing causes so much vexation
as these kind of absences, especially in regard of Women. This Lady was high
spirited, and would not make the Count observe that She perceived His contempt;
but the Conversation became barren at length: She was weary with maintaining it
all alone. The Ambassador made no other Answer than Yes, and No, and would even
two or three times have took leave of Her, under pretext that He feared to
incommode Her. At which She growing impatient in the end, and suffering Her
vexation to evaporate in Reproaches, She mnde him several She had no reason to
make him, She attributed to Him Crimes the Count had never committed against
Her; and in sine, She threatened to ruin Him with the King, if He had not more
Complaisance for Her: Insomuch that the Count knowing Her Spirit, and fearing
this Point, by reason of the Queen, more than any thing that jealous Lady could
have invented, very prudently resolved to stay with her, and even to be more
sweet than He would have been, for the endeavoring to bring Her to Reason. The
Queen according to the Custom of Women who love well, was uneasy, knowing Her
Lover with her Rival, though She was well persuaded, that She had the better
part in his Heart, had reason to see Her Suspicions augmented, since that
Entertainment, which was to have lasted but a moment, was so long. She knew not
in what pain poor Hannibal was; and her Judgment was such as another Woman's
would have been in her place; that is to say, that He found Himself well with
the Countess, and that it was a Treachery She ought not to pardon Him, after he
had pretended so to slight that Lady.

Amongst all these Disquiets and Reflections, there was likewise Reasons of
Modesty, that the Count was so late and so long in Her Apartment, contrary to
the Custom of that Court, and the King's express Orders, who would not suffer
there any man but Himself, from Sunsetting to Sun rising; and however the
Night was very much advanced, which might make Her Maids and other people talk,
who served Her, and who might have believed that it was for Her sake, and not
the Countesses, that that Ambassador staid there at that unseasonable Hour: or
at least blame her for not putting her Lady of Honor in mind of her duty; But
the means to do it, without making her jealousy appear to her Rival, who
perhaps would have made a Triumph of it. She would rather have dyed than have
given her the occasion. In that perplexity of Heart and mind which was great
enough whether from without or within, she was told that the King was upon his
return. This news did not at all surprise her. She was used to those kinds of
Caprichio's, which often took that Prince. But that which cast her into a
terrible unesianess, was what would become of the Count: Who at the hour it
was, could not go out but in passing by the Kings Attendants, who could not
have failed to have known him which undoubtably exposed her to ruin by a
Prince so jealous and passionate as he was. It was not a time for her to
balance any longer, if she ought to go disturb an entertainment, which made Her
more in pain than all the rest, She had a better pretexte for it than she
could have desired. In what danger soever we are, the least ill we find on the
side of Love is ever what we are most sensible of: she therefore went without
noise to the Countesse's Chamber, beleiving to surprise them in a very
passionate entertainment, and which would convince the Count of persidiousness
of which he could no longer defend himself, but she was agreeably deceived in
Her opinion, when entering the Chamber, she found all in silence, with cold
meenes on both sides, from which one could not guess a very great tenderness.
One part of the jealous motions of that Princess were then appeased, though she
had no great subject of joy, she could not hinder her self from appearing in
good humor, and told them, almost laughing, what brought her thither. Hanibal
and the Ladies could hardly persuade themselves it, but as the Queen fell to
speak then a little more serioussy and told them that there was no time to
lose if they would save themselves from a misfortune which would ruin them all
three together, they thought of finding some expedient for the hiding the
Count, not seeing that it was possible to let him out of the appartment that
night, without his meeting with some of the Kings people and perhaps the King
himself. As they were each for their own interests, the Countess fancied there
was no place so sure as the shutting him in the Guard robe that was in her
Chamber, and the Queen perceiving that if he were any where else that jealous
one would be so uneasy as might bring them into trouble, or at least would
imagine a thousand things to her disadvantage, agreed to it, and went out a
moment after, for to send to see, where the King was, that if there was any
opportunity of making the Count evade, the occasion might not be lost. That
lover who was not content with the resolution they had taken, of making him
pass the night in the Countesses Chamber, for whom he could not any longer but
have an aversion, followed the Queen, and told her, that she should rather
condemn him to die by a thousand hallebards, or cast himself headlong out of
the window, than to oblige him to stay so long with a Woman, whose sight alone
was become more insupport able to him than Death it self. The Queen turning
toward him, and from whence comes it, Count said she to him, as if she had
been surprised at this discourse, you have so much aversion after so long a
conversation and which ought not to produce only contrary effects; If there has
been any division, pursued she smiling, you will have leisure to reconcile this
Night; for Quarrels between lovers last not long, and it is usually what most
unites them. I have no Quarrel with her, answered the Count couldly, no more
then I have ever had union: But what pleasure do you take, pursued he in
tormenting me with with that. You know whether my sighs go, aded he, in looking
upon her amorously, you know to whom my vows are addressed, why should you
kill me by so cruel a way, for I declare to you, Madam, that if any thing has
contributed to the aversion I have taken for that Lady, it is the unjust and
disobliging War you have daily made me upon her account. The Queen fell a
laughing, and the rest of the conversation would have been favorable enough
for the Count, for this Princess was satisfied with him that evening, but she
had notice brought her that the King was coming in: Insomuch that she had only
time to tell that Lover, that he must return to the Countess, and to run to
meet that Prince for the giving the Count leizure to retire. It was not
possible for Hanibal to obey this order; the less since that the Queen did not
cease to charge him upon the Countesses account, he believed to be in right of
seeking all means not to give her any longer reason to do it. He therefore
sought where he could hide himself in that chamber, and finding by chance that
the Queen had left the Key in her Cabinet, he fancied that the Conjuncture was
fair, that he ought to lay hold of it, and that he should apparently be in more
safety in that place than in any other part: Insomuch that without making any
noise, he slipped into it with the greatest joy imaginable; and hearing the King
already in the Chamber, he remained for some time planted in one and the same
place, for fear, not knowing what was in the Cabinet, he should have met with
something in the dark that might have made a noise and discovered him. The
Dialogues there was between the K. and the Queen, and of which he lost not one
word, was for some time his Divertisement, for the Courtship that Prince made
use of for to Cokes his Dear Spouse, was something very pleasant: but being at
length wearied with standing in one place, which demanded so much constraint,
and where he had been already a long time, and no longer hearing any one speak
in the Chamber, he conjectured, that the King was already in Bed and was a
sleep, wherefore he would venture a little farther with design to open a Window
that he might have a little light, if possible. Whereupon he approached it, and
as he sought for the Casement, he met with something colder and softer than the
Walls, or the Tapistry. His Curiosity went farther, and in fine by much
feeling, he found the figure of a Man. He neither lost time nor judgment, but
taking his Poniard in his Hand, he asked who it was, no answer was made him. He
set his Weapon upon the man's Breast, and threatened him with Death, if he did
not speak. The Complement was something harsh to a man who had no mind to dye
such a violent Deaths; Wherefore it had the effect that he desired. For his
Poniard being set upon that Humane Body, caused immediately a lamentable voice,
which said to him, Ah! my Lord, take pity of a wretch. In the emotion the
Count was, he could not well distinguish that voice. Insomuch that still
pressing him to tell who he was, and what he came to do there. It is Don
Geronimo, my Lord, answered he, Ah! Traitor, the jealous Hannibal interrupted
him with more fury than ever, is this a place for thee, he was in that moment
so transported with rage, that he was Two or Three times upon the point of
dispatching a man so fatal to his repose, but in sine a certain return of
tenderness, that he had still for that unjust Princess, stopping his arm, not
doubting but that an action of that Consequence would absolutely ruin her, he
spared for the Love of her the Blood of that wretch, and in such a weight of
grief not being able to stay any longer in that fatal Cabinet, least his fury
might perhaps at length overcome, the regards he owed, to what he so much
loved, he went out, and passing without any noise through the King's Chamber,
where there was no light, he went to the Countess, who was much surprised to
see him; because that the Queen who had but just left her, had protested she
knew not what was become of him; and that he must absolutely have been retired,
without knowing however after what manner, not having seen him since the King
was entered her Chamber. The Count who was as sunk into despair, hardly hearing
what* that Lady said to him, gave her no answer In the mean time, the Queen, in
the uneasiness she was for her Lover, having heard some noise in her Cabinet,
rose softly, while that her Husband reposed in a profound sleep, took her Night
Gown, and would go see what it was, almost doubting the truth, that the Count
had hid himself in that Cabinet. She advanced trembling toward the Door which
she found open, the Count not having given himself the trouble to shut it for
his Rival. But when she was to have gone in, her courage failed her: several
reslections she made all at once upon her self, upon the time and the Hour it
was, upon the Equipage she was in in the dark, in a Cabinet where she did not
doubt but that her Lover was, but a Lover beloved, and against whom she easily
perceived that all her Glory could not resist if he added violence; all these
Reflections, I say, made her resolve to return, rather than to expose that
cruel Glory to so evident a danger: but she was no sooner near her Old Husband,
who was in a deeper sleep than ever, than that inspired again with an amorous
Curiosity, she reproached her self with her fearfulness, and arming her self
with new courage that her Heart suggested to her for the better deceiving her,
she went into that Cabinet without hearkening any longer to any Reflection, she
searched on all sides, and suffering her self to be led by a passion that
blinded her, she came at length to the place where Don Geronimo was, who knew
not what to do, and had already cursed a Thousand times the moment, he began to
be in Love. The Queen, who in the different passions which she was agitated
with, could not fail of being much disturbed, having lost her Speech as soon as
she found what she sought, was some time silent, leaning upon that Minister, as
a Person ready to faint. After which recovering her former forces, Ah! my Lord,
said she to him, sighing, to what do you expose me, you who know the Countesses
Humor, and the King's jealous Spirit, what do you do here; have you a design
to ruin me? Don Geronimo, to whom these words might be addressed as well as to
the Count, not doubting but that the Queen had learnt from him, that he was in
her Cabinet, sell upon his Knees to that Princess, and embracing her, Pardon,
Madam, said he to her softly, a Lover in despair, whom jealousy has
precipitated into this misfortune. The Queen had no sooner discovered by the
voice that it was not the Count, that already half dead for fear, she fell into
a swoon upon that Minister, who was not a little perplexed at this new
misfortune. He knew not how to help that Princess, he saw that by the least
noise he should make, his Life was gone, and in this perplexity he was bereft
of all his Senses, and losing courage, was likewise upon the point of falling
into a swoon: When the Queen recovering her Spirits, whosoever you are, said
she to him, with a voice, that could hardly express one word, save the honor
of a Princess, who does not deserve to be exposed to so much shame. Don
Geronimo fancied, that the fear, she was in, disturbed her Mind, and to
encourage her he asked her if she knew not her ancient and faithful servant.
The Queen then discovered who it was and not knowing if it was by the Kings
order that he had hid himself in that Cabinet, she treated him more gently than
she would have done. This Minister not knowing the Queens thoughts, avowed to
her, that the jealousy, he had of the Count, had brought him into that
Cabinet, and in the despair the Countess had put him in that day, he had not
been Master of himself, for to consult the reason, or the respect he owed her.
But was it of my Cabinet, said the Queen you ought to make a place of retreat
for the clearing your suspicions! No, Madam, answered he, but if it is a crime,
I might plead for pardon, since I assure you, I have been enough punished by
the hazard my life has been in from the Count's hands, who held his Poniard a
long time upon my throat, and still more by the extreme grief I am in for
having caused so much trouble to the best Princess upon the earth. The Queen
thereupon interupting him, asked him how he came to be with the Count, and what
reason that Lord had had to fall out with him to that point, being so much his
friend. This Minister attributed the reason of it only to their Concurrence for
the Countess, and then making the Queen some reproaches upon the promises she
had made him of favou in his interests, which she abandoned for the vows of
another, related to her all that had passed in that Cabinet. The Queen was
enough satisfied that Don Geronimo had not penetrated farther into the Count's
Design: But she easily judged, that she should find it difficult to undeceive
that Lover, that Don Geronimo came not there upon her account, having been
already more than once suspicious of it. She bid this Minister be persuaded,
that it should not be her fault, that he was not successful in his desires,
and having recommended to him silence, in which he had as much or more interest
than she, she added, that he must wait till it was day to go out of her
Cabinet, and that she would come her self to fetch him away; After which she
went into the Countesses Chamber, where she hoped to learn news of her Lover.
That Lady no sooner saw her than that reaching her hand to her out of the Bed
by way of Caress, fansying that it had been she who had sent him back to her;
you come Madam, said she to her, the most conveniently possible to comfort the
most desolate of all men, and from whom I have not been able to get one word,
since he came here. The Queen, who had well foreseen the effect that the
rencounter of Don Geronimo in her Cabinet would produce in the Count's mind,
was so touched with the posture in which she found him, sitting in a Chair,
his Head leaning upon both his Hands, endeavoring to hide his grief by rising
when she entered, that, without considering who she was, she approached him,
and with eyes all most full of tears, I know, Count, said she to him softly,
not to be heard by the Countess, the subject of your discontent; but if you
will hear me one moment. I am sure to cure your mind of the unjust distrust
that has just surprised you. He! What can you tell me, Madam, interrupted that
sad Lover with a lamentable voice, but what will perfectly ruin me; It is too
much for you, replied she, something stung at the manner he received the
effects of her goodness, and if I had not forgot who I am, I should not debase
my self so far, as to justify my self with a man to whom I owe nothing, and
who will hardly hear my justifications. They would be useless Madam, replied
he, after what I have seen. I spoke to the man, pursued he, and it is not
without reason, Madam, that the King being toly this night out of the Palace
you would engage me to pass it in this Chamber. The Reproach, that the fury and
vexation of the jealous Hanibal had made her, so peirced the Queen's heart,
that on a sudain overcome with a torrent of tears, she had not the power to
make him an answer, and fearing above all things, that her Rival should
discover her weakness, she retired and went to Bed in a condition the most
cruel and afflicting that a Princess who has an extreme deal of Glory, and
Heart preingaged by a great passion, could be reduced to. The Countess, who
what care soever she had given her self for to hear, what those two Lovers
said, could never comprehend any thing of it, which might give her the least
knowledge of what passed, and of the subject of the new Division that she well
perceived there was between them, had more impatience and curiosity then ever,
to enter into the Count's confidence: But notwithstanding all she could do,
that lover was obstinate not to acquaint her with any thing of his affairs, and
only told her, that before sour and twenty hours where passed, she might divine
the better part in learning the news of his depart. Of your Depart, my Lord,
replied the Countess more surprised then ever; and why, what has been done that
obliges you to quit us so soon? is the Queen the cause of it! is it me? Speak,
for there is not any thing, but what I would do to hinder it if it depend on
me. No Madam, answered the Count; but I have already told you, that I shall not
explain my self further therein; you will know enough in time, and whatsoever
is the cause, it suffices that I tell you, that I have a very great reason for
what I do, and that from the moment I can get from hence, I will go give order
for my embarking. The Countess pierced to the very bottom of her Soul with
hearing this news, as well as she had joy at the misunderstanding there was
between the Queen and him, did all that she could to make him change his
resolution; and told him in respect of her self, the most moving things
imaginable, that she might take advantage of their disunion: but that is not
all ways the best time, for the gaininga Heart, which is sometim^s themore
strongly bound, when it is believed to be disengaged by some prevention. The
Count hardly hearkened to what she said, and his Soul more disposed to motions
of despair, than to sentiments of tenderness, did not show that fair Lover one
ray of tenderness, nor even a spark of complaisance, he was in an extreme
impatience till day came; And he no sooner saw the moment he could retire
without danger, than that he took his leave of the Lady, leaving her as little
satisfied with him as one could be, and enough for the putting an end to a
passion, if these contempts did not sometimes rather augment Love than diminish
it.

The Queen who had passed one of those terrible nights, that Love takes delight
in poisoning with all that is most cruel and bitter no sooner saw the King go
out, but she arose to go put Don Geronimo out of her Cabinet. This Minister,
who had been as uneasy in this place as she in her Bed, fell again upon his
knees as soon as he saw her, and with a pityfull look, and Heart truly
contrite, he asked her pardon for all the troubles he had given her. The Queen
having made him rise, told him, that all this was nothing in comparison of the
grief she had, that the Count had found him thus by night in her Cabinet; and
that if he would repair the fault he had committed, and render himself worthy of
her pardon, he must go find him out, and relate to him the true occasion of his
being in that place, and endeavor to undeceive him of certain impression, that
he might have taken thereupon, it being important for her glory that that
Ambassador had better Sentiments of her, than so unlucky an accident might give
him: Don Geronimo, who, in another occasion, would hardly have been persuaded
to take upon him such a message, humbly submitted himself to this Order, too
happy to be quit with this satisfaction, which he owed to the goodness alone of
a Princess, whose reputation he had so much hazarded, and whom he had brought
into a condition of having all the reason imaginable to complain of, and to
ruin him, as she might have done if she had a mind; at least according to his
opinion; but Affairs went quite otherwise than he believed, wherefore he
promised to the Queen to execute faithfully what she commanded him, and having
quitted her with great acknowledgment for her goodness, he went directly from
thence to the Ambassadors Palace, where he found that all diligence possible
was made for his depart; and that the Count having passed the night very ill,
would not see any body that day, at least till it was very late.

The Queen stayed in her Cabinet, loaded with thoughts upon which she formed a
thousand designs, that the resolutions she made, upon the state of her heart,
inspired her, when she saw one of the Count's Pages enter her Chamber, who
delivered her a Letter from his Master; she opened it trembling, and the
impatience the had at first to Read it, not permitting her to think of any
thing else, the King, who was ever listening and spying her actions, entered the
chamber at that time, and slipping softly into the Cabinet, came upon her,
before she hardly, with the earnessness she read that Letter, perceived him,
and snatched it out of her hands, without her being able to hinder it. The
grief as well as surprise of that Princess were such as may be easily imagined.
She ran after the King begging him in the most earnest and moving manner
possible to restore her Letter, employing even tears but the more pressing she
was, the suspicions of that jealous Prince the more augmented: insomuch that to
be freed from the Queens importunity, he retired to his own apartment, where he
might read that Letter with a little more liberty. I leave you to think in what
a terrible perplexity the poor Queen was, that a Letter of the greatest and
most dangerous concern in the world was fallen into his hands, whom she had
most reason to fear; of a King jealous and passionate, and that in fine there
was no means of having it again. She knew not what to do in so cruel a
conjuncture, and her mind floating between fear and danger, love and shame, she
meditated an infinite number of designs, without having the Courage to
undertake any: she went in sine to the Countess to ask her council, she had
formerly found it successful; but it was now no longer the time. She first
related to her, what had passed that night in her Cabinet between the Count and
Don Geronimo, and afterward the misfortune that had happened to her upon the
Letter, the Count had wrote to her upon that adventure. The dissembling
Countess overjoyed at so unlucky an accident, and that things were so
disordered, affected the showing the Queen an extreme regret for that
accident, but instead of comforting her, she only told her things to make her
the more despair, making her fear the terrible consequences of that Letter; and
that if she did not take refuge with the soonest in some Convent, she would
find the fatal consequences it would be of to her. The sad desolate Princess
suffering her self to be persuaded to follow that advice, as it really was the
safest, tho the Countess gave her that council to be rid of her, to have the
more liberty of taking, according to what should happen, such measures, as her
Love, or rather her despair should advise her: The Queen ^ say resolved to go
cast her self into a Convent, for avoiding the Kings fury, quitted the Countess
and prepared her self to execute with the soonest her design. During this, Don
Geronimo, who had not been able to procure to speak with the Ambassador of
Naples, returning to his House found people, who told him, that the King had
caused him to be sought for every where. Is it not, said he immediately to
himself, that he knows that I have passed the night in the Queens Cabinet?
Every man, whose conscience is ulcerated with any crime of which he cannot
justify himself, is ever in fear of being accused of it. He took courage
however and went to that Prince, who was alon^ in a by chamber, walking apare
and with a paper in his hand. Well, said he to him so so^n as he saw him, is it
thus. Traitor, that thou take care of my honor! are these pursued he with a
thundering voice in showing him that paper or Letter, the Orders that I gave
you, when I recomended her to thy care! by Heavens, thou shall smart for it.
This poor Minister, as soon as he heard the King speak with this fury, did not
doubt, but that the Queen had told him all, and casting himself immediately
upon his knees, and with a lamentable voice, Ah ^ir, said he to him, Heaven is
my Witness, that I never in my life had any desire that was contrary to your
glory, and that it would be very easy to make appear my innocence if moderating
your anger a little you would be graciously pleased to give me one moment of
audience. And what can thou say, interrupted the furious Monarch, to justify
what I have here? Is it not to be criminal, to savor the bold and infamous
designs that the Ambassador of Naples has upon the Queen? I, Sir, favor so
criminal designs, replied Don Geronimo, who begun to be a little bold. Yes!
thou, replied that Prince, how can I interpret otherwise the Stories thou daily
toldst me, that he lived very respectfully with the Queen, while they have
secreet practices together? Can any other serve that Ambassador in this? and is
it not visible thou art of intelligence with them to deceive me? All that you
tell me, Sir, replied the Minister, surprises me, and I know not, if I should
tell you that in regard of that Ambasador you may be mistaken. Ah perfidious
man! cried the King transported with rage, thou would continue to abuse me!
thou had best deny it: I have herewith to confound thee: See the insolent
testimony of that infamous man, which but too well declares my dishonor, and
afterward tell me if my suspicions are just, and if I have reason to accuse
thee; thou must, pursued he, explain to me all the mystery of that letter, or
thou dyest. Don Geronimo took it trembling not doubting by what he heard the
King say, that there was something in it which concerned him, and found these
words.

I ought to believe, Madam, that after the fatal encounter of last night, you
will not be surpized at my depart. How cruel so ever the thing was, I do not
complain of you. It is of my destiny and of Heaven that I will complain, for
having made me cast my eyes, to the unhappiness of my days, upon a Princess it
destinied for the love of another. A Preference so much the more cruel that the
subject is low, and unworthy of being preferred to the least of all men. This
thought alone asassinates me; and I should willingly at the price of a thousand
lives be still in the error I was, and never to have entered that Cabinet, where
I saw, what I never could have believed. O Heaven! Can I yet think it, after
having seen it? Farewell too unjust Princess. I quit you without regret, but it
is to go pass the rest of my Life, as a man fuller of despair than Love.

Le C. d' A.


D. Geronimo, who had thitherto believed, that that Ambasador was really in
Love with the Countess of Palomer, was very much surprised with reading that
letter; and haven taken courage, by his not being named in it, though he
perceived, that it was of him the Count was jealous, he protested to the King,
that he had never had the thought that the Ambassador of Naples had the least
design upon the Queen, and that on the contrary he had always believed him in
Love with the Countess of Palomer: in sequel of which there had been some
jealousy between them upon that account, and also for a Proof that their
Intelligence was not great, it was above Eight Days since he had spoke to him.
That if he durst take the Liberty to tell him, what he thought of that Letter,
he believed, notwithstanding the Title of Princess, it was addressed to the
Countess rather than to the Queen. The King little satisfied with all these
reasons, would however read over that Letter again, for to see if there was any
appearance of what his Minister told him, whom he had thitherto sound very
faithful. But the particularity of that Cabinet too much referred to the Queen
to attribute it to any other. That which most confounded the King, was this
favored Gallant, of whom the Count complained, not knowing upon whom to cast
his Eyes, there being no other than Don Geronimo of all those of his Court to
whom it was permitted to enter the Queens apartment: and there was so little
appearance of casting his conjectures upon such a man as he, that, how
susceptible soever he was of jealousy, it could not fall into his mind. He
would however be cleared of the truth, and force the Queen to confess all
things to him; and afterward take such measures, as the resentment of such an
injury should inspire him, and that the Guilty might repent their insolence. He
went with this design to that Princesses Chamber, causing Don Geronimo to
follow him, and would not suffer him to quit him, till he had unfolded all this
intrigue. He found her not there: and thereupon went to the Countesses, where
he knew the Queen was most commonly, but found no Body there. He asked in a
furious manner, what was become of the Queen. But could learn no news of her,
he feared some other Treason: and was in a greater despair than ever. He
threatened all those he met, he sent them to seek every where the Queen or the
Countess, and nothing was heard but rumor through all the Palace: He learnt in
fine, that the former was descended into the Garden, and that the other was
gone out of the Palace in man's Clothes. All this confounded him and increased
his fear and uneasiness. He ran toward what most concerned him; which was the
way the Queen had gone, and he was seen like a lost man, who comes, who turns
from one side to the other of the Garden, without being able to meet the Queen.
All his People were frighted, he was so himself more than any one: and putting
all the World in pain, he suffered the most cruel tortures that can be
imagined. Notice was brought him that the Ambassador of Naples prepared to
depart, and he fancied to discover in that moment what so sudden and so secret
a departure threatened him with. He gave orders to go stop that Ambassador, not
doubting but that his design was to carry away the Queen* He was told, that he
was no longer at his Palace, and that he was mounted on Horseback to go away
with all those of his Train. Thus, that Old Monarch falling into Exclamations
that he was betrayed on all sides, and commanding his Guard to take Horse (...)
his faithful Subjects sho^^^ (...) in a Conjuncture (...) concerned,
(...)ented not the outrage, that was designed him.

The Queen, after having taken Counsel of the Countess, resolved to retire into
a Convent: and without losing time, she wrote this Note to the Count to demand
his Comapny to Guard her, imagining she might have need of it, in the few
moments that were left her to get thither.

The Letter you wrote is something so cruel, that it would require more time
than I have to make it an answer. It is sufficient, that I tell you, that I
know, who I am, and of what Blood I come, not to be capable of any such crime
you accuse me of. I should not be in pain to justify my self; and I should
have much more to pardon you so cruel a suspicion: but this is not a time for
my justification, nor your punishment. Know only, that the King has taken your
Letter from me, and that I am necessitated to take Refuge in a Convent, if I
will avoid all that his fury is going to make him act upon me. Send me as soon
as possible some of your People to conduct me to Majorca. I shall come out at
the Garden back Door, where I shall be in a moment. Adieu! If possible, let me
see you once more.

As for the Countess, she was no sooner delivered from the Queen, than in the
Conjuncture of all this disorder, her Love inspiring her with Romantic
designs, she sent to seek for her Gentleman of the Horse, in whom she put great
confidence, and having related to him in few words what passed, she added, that
she would not be alone exposed to the King's fury, from which she did not at
all doubt, that she should suffer the most violent effects, if the Queen went
away, and she staid i^ the Palace. Insomuch that it was requisite
notwithstanding all her illness, that her Body should take forces from the
necessity of the time, and that she disposed to save her self as soon as
possible. This Gentleman of the Horse, very complaisant to the wills of his
Mistress, having answered her, that he was ready to obey her, i^ all she should
please to order him, she caused a Gentleman's habit to be brought, which she
had made use of in a Masquarade, and with which she disguised her self. After
which having caused two good Horses to be brought some paces from the Palace,
she took what Money, and Jewels she had, very necessary movables for the
design she meditated, and departed from Belver, accompanied only by that
Gentleman of the Horse, who was surprised, having seen her sick in Bed, that on
a sudden she found her self capable of sitting on Horseback, so much power
has Love upon Bodies, when it animates the Heart.

The Count, who, as we have already said, had prepared for his depart, are
sinece the Morning he came from the Palace: his orders being but to stay at
Majorca as long as he should judge necessary for the reconciling the King and
Queen, no sooner received that Princesses Letter, than that making all his
People take Horse, he made them file off by little and little, toward that
side of the Garden she had mentioned. Immediately his affliction was extreme,
notwithstanding all the reasons he believed he had to complain of her, for
having thus caused the unhappiness of a Princess, he still loved too
passionately, with all the injustice she had done him, not to interest himself,
in all that concerned her. He went then to the place where the Queen expected
him, being at the Head of all his People, and he no sooner saw her, than on a
sudden Galloping, toward that side, he alighted, and presenting her with his
own Horse, he served for her master of the Horse, and one of his Gentlemen
rendered the same Office to one of her Bed Chamber, who accompanied her. After
which he disposed his People in Three Troops, and placing himself with the
Queen at the Head of that of the middle, they marched incessantly toward the
City of Majorca. These two Lovers were some time in entertaning themselves upon
the Subject of the conjuncture. The Queen, who notwithstanding the unhappy
Estate of her Affairs, thought her self too happy to have got out of the
Palace, could not hold from showing an extreme joy to see her self in the midst
of so brave a Nobility, in whose looks she saw a boldness, capable of driving
away all manner of fear: especially of Count Hannibal, who appeared to her
handsommer that Day than he had ever been, and to have so warlike a mien, that
he animated all the others. Insomuch that she almost forgot, that this was a
beginning of a Thousand troubles that Fortune prepared her. They looked upon
one another some time without saying any thing, each of them beleiving that it
was for the other to begin the discourse, and to make some sort of reparation:
But the Queen, was too much concerned to undeceive the Count, of the false
impressions he had taken upon the Subject of Don Geronimo, seeing that there
was not a moment to lose, at length broak silence. Well! Count, said she to
him, will you not ask Pardon for the Letter you wrote me this Morning? It is
true, Madam, answered the Count, that I am the most unhappy of all men, to be
the cause of all this disorder: and that if I could repair it by my Death, I
would go immediately, offer my Head to the King of Majorca. That is not in what
you are most criminal, replied the Queen, and I should not be in much pain to
Pardon you this sault, though it cost me my Life. But, my Lord, added she
blushing, your unjust suspicions, are so unbecoming a Princess of my courage,
and whose Glory has been able to relist the Inclination she had for you, are
these crimes that can be Pardoned? The Count hearkened to the Queen with a joy
that transported him, and casting a languishing look upon her. I confess,
Madam, replied he, that there is no torment but what I should merit, if my
suspicions were ill grounded, but I have but too much wherewith to justify my
distrusts, and maintain the reasons I had to conceive them, by Testimonies that
you cannot your self disavow. And what Reasons and what Testimonies, replied
the Queen, something displeased at this answer, have you? What to have found
Don Geronimo in my Cabinet, where the jealousy, he had of you upon the
Countesses account, hade made him hide himself, am I Guilty of all the
extravagancies that it has pleased your fancy to Figure to it self thereupon?
Well, Count, added she sighing, if this Minister had pleased me enough for
that, if I had loved him, I would have took such order as you should never have
perceived it. I would not have slattered your Passion with any hopes as I have
done: I should not have sought to see you in particular, and in fine the
Passion that you might have had for the Countess, could not have been so
uneasy to me as it was. Once more, Count, pursued she, you are very much
mistaken, and you little deserve all the efforts my Heart has made for the Love
of you. These Reflections softning her Heart, her Eyes were filled with Tears,
and she was not able to pursue her discourse. The words of that fair Princess
having almost dissipated the fears of that Lover, he could not see this effect
of sensibility without a confused transport of joy and repentance, and viewing
her with Eyes, which signified all this, should it be possible, Madam, said he
to her, that with so much reason of loving you, I should have none to complain
of you. Ah, Heavens! pursued he, why should I be so happy in the moment I must
quit you. He had hardly finished those last words, than that the Gentlemen of
his Troop made him observe, that there came down a Body of Horse from Belver,
and that those of their arrier Guard had already made a halt, to expect them.
The Count having cast his Eyes toward the place that was showed him, did not
doubt but that it was the Cavalry that the King sent after them, for to stop
them: Insomuch that fearing, that those that were behind, were not strong
enough to resist them, he detached part of his Troop to go Second them, and
sent orders at the same time to those of the Vaunt-guard to Face about, and to
go join them also, while that he, with the few People he had, would accompany
the Queen, to the place of her retreat: Insomuch that going a little Gallop,
they pursued their way as far as Majorca, of which they had then made more than
the half. That Princess was so satisfied with seeing that she was at length
justified with the Count, and that she had dissipated all his false Ombrages,
that she was almost insensible to all the rest, and all that she feared was the
moment she must part from him, and which that Lover made the more sensible to
her, by his saying to her, during all the rest of the way, the most passionate
things imaginable, for the repairing the crime he had committed against her, in
suspecting her with so little reason of so much baseness. He would have
persuaded her to have gone aboard his Galleys, rather than to expect the danger
with which she was threatened, and he told her all manner of things that could
make her take this course. But the Queen seeing to what such a flight would
expose her Glory, and that she could not repair it but in following her first
design, begged of him not to triumph over her weakness, and rather help her to
bear so cruel a Separation, than to engage her in the taking a conduct so
contrary to her Reputation. The kind things that they said to one another
thereupon till that they arrived in the Convent, where the Queen designed to
shut her self up, which was a Royal-Abbey, Three Hundred Paces from the City,
were sensibilities that tender Lovers may easily imagine, but which can never
be well described. That fair Princess had prayed the Count, that as soon as
they were arrived in that Abbey, he would quit her, without saying to her any
thing, and that he would take care to embark with the soonest, not to expose
himself to the violences that the King might commit. But that Lover could
neither obey the one nor the other: and he no sooner saw the Queen upon entering
her retreat, than falling upon his Knees, his Eyes all bathed in Tears, he
embraced hers with so much transport, that that tender Princess, using upon her
self an extreme violence for the overcoming the sensible motions, of so cruel a
sarewell, fainted in the Arms of Two Religious, who carried her into the
Convent, leaving that poor Lover so lost in grief, that he was sometime as not
himself, without being able to part from that place. Nothing but sobs and
sighs, which moved all those who heard them, But in fine, the People he had
about him, seeing there was no time to loose for the securing those they had
left behind them, put him in mind, that they might have need of his presence.
Insomuch that a little recovering from so sad a state, he took Horse, and went
with a great deal of pain from his dear Princess, turning incessantly his Head
that way, not being able to go the rate his People went, without as it were
racking his Heart. He arrived at length at the place where he had left all that
Nobility, that had attended him in his engagement, and he found them almost
oppressed by the Number rather than the valor of the Enemies. The King was at
their Head, who caused Troops to come incessantly to second the former. The
Count's was but few in comparison of the others, but all warlike men, and who
breathed in numbere nothing but Glory; They were a nimated anew by the C.
sight, who falling upon the Majorquins with a boldness that it seemed as if he
had a powerful Army with him, he repulsed them notwithstanding their Number as
far back as under the Canon of Belver, and could have made the K. Prisoner, if
the taking him could have been of any use to his victory: but the Q. being in a
place of safety, and having nothing more to do, than to retire to his Galleys,
he would not push his valor farther: he rallied such of his people as were a
little strayed in that pursuit, and retired in so good order and so assured a
countenance, that the Majorquins never had the courage to pursue him: Insomuch
that having gained the Port de Portopi, which is half a League from Majorca, to
which place he had in the Morning ordered his Galleys to come he caused all his
People to go on board, and falling to Rowing, in a little time they got out of
sight o^ those Insularies.

FINIS.

