A LETTER FROM A CLERGYMAN OF THE Church of ENGLAND TO AN Eminent Divine
Pretending to be of the same Church; Desiring his Resolution and Direction
about a Compliance with the present Government, and especially about the
Alteration of the Public Prayers.
Reverend Sir,
THe Post you are in, and the Character you bear, besides some Personal
Respects, induce me to apply my self to you for your Assistance to remove some
Doubts that Oppress my Conscience; which I am bound (as indeed every one is) to
give Satisfaction to, by an Impartial search after Truth; and the Obligation is
the greater upon me, because I have Others to Instruct, and Answer for, as well
as my Self; and who (if I mislead them, either by my Doctrine, or Example) will
one day lay great part of the blame upon me; I cannot therefore but be
Solicitous how I behave my self in this Case toward God, who will require of
me some Account for other Men's Souls as well as of my own. I believe this
Consideration to be Apology enough for giving you this Trouble; and yet there
is more to be said: We are not now left at Liberty to suspend our Judgments,
But we are required to act in Compliance with the present Power: If we do not,
we hazard our Liberty and Property; and if we do, (for all that I can see yet)
we do more then hazard our Eternal Salvation. I know to a good Christian it can
be no question, which if these ought to be preferred, when ever they are set in
Competition, as in the present Case to me they are; but in Prudence I may, Nay!
In Justice to my Self, and Family, I ought to endeavor, as far, as Honestly I
can, to enjoy Peace in this World, as well as in the next. This makes me press
for a removal of such Doubts as arise in my way from the late and present
Proceedings. And I must again and again enforce it, because we Clergymen have
in some degree other Men's Consciences to quiet as well as our own.

Therefore to come to the Business. I take it for granted that JAMES the Second
was the True and Lawful Heir of these Kingdoms; after the Death of King CHARLES
the Second of Blessed Memory; upon whose Decease King JAMES succeeded to, and
was rightly Invested with the Government of these Kingdoms, and all the Just
Rights and Prerogatives belonging to the Imperial Crown of England. Now I
desire to be Informed by you Sir, or any Man else, by what Authority, or upon
what Score, he is not Owned, Obeyed, and Prayed for as King still; since God
(as far as we know) has not yet called Him into another World? His Deserting,
or Abdicating the Government, is a pretense so Fulsome and Naucious, that my
Conscience cannot get it down, whatever theirs can do, that have Revenge or
Interest in the^ Minds to help to digest it. And especially at this time of the
Day, when the World ^nows from His Majesty's Letters to the Convention; and
from His present Endeavors that He Desires, and Resolves to try (by the help
of God and good Men) to Recover His Throne, out of which he has been strangely
Jostled: I say strangely, because the Nation having been bubbled once before,
by Men that pretended to keep our Religion and Property (as indeed they did,
but it was from us, not for us, they proving just such Patriots, as the Storke
in the Fable, or the Ostriches were Stewards) that we should fall into a like
Mistake and Misfortune again, while our Teeth are yet on edge for the Sour
Grapes that our Fathers Eat, ^s very surprising. But in our Age of Paradoxes,
we will let the wonder alone, and come to our Duty.

Christ and his Apostles taught Submission and Obedience to Kings and
Emperors; yea, to the worst of them; and the Primitive Christians always
Believed, and Behaved themselves accordingly, suffering patiently the
extre^mest Injuries in Goods and Person that an impe^ous Cruelty could lay upon
them: And this not for want of Courage; for how could they fear Death, that
every day expected and suffered it; nor for want of Strength, for they were
Numerous in their Cities, in their Forts, in their Armies, as we are assured by
them that could tell. Now this very Doctrine of Passive Obedience or
Non-Resistance, is that which the Church of England was wont to value it self
upon, as that whereby it manifested its Apostolic Primitive Spirit, and
whereby we eminently distinguished it from the Papists and Dissenters, who we
know, were wont to agree in this damnable Doctrine of Rebelling against, or
Deposing Kings. And because Revenge, Love of the World, or fear of Persecution,
are apt to give a false Bias to Men's Judgments (as we see by woeful
Expeperience, by the Glosses and Expositions that were given to the Doctrine of
our Savior and his Apostles professed by this Church, by the Men of 41 now in
Vogue again) The Church of England has taken a particular Care to make this
Doctrine of Non-Resistance her own, and to bind it upon her Sons by the
strongest Ties that could be invented. For we of the Clergy must remember, that
we are admitted into no Degree in the Universities, without assuring our
Allegiance by Oath. Not that our Allegiance was not due before, but by our Oath
we refer to God as a Witness and Judge of our Integrity, when we so declare to
Men. When we enter into our Deacons Orders; we take the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy again, promising, To bear Faith and True Allegiance to the Kings
Highness, His Heirs, and Lawful Successors, (this is not all) and to our Power
shall Assist and Defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Pre-eminences, and
Authorities, Granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, His Heirs and
Successors, etc. And because a Sect of Men had undertaken to exclude and set
aside their Oaths: Upon the Restoration of the Church with King Charles the
2d. the Three Estates of this Realm Assembled in Parliament, made a Solemn
Recognition 12 Car. 2. cap. 30. That by the undoubted and Fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom, neither the Peers of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both
together in Parliament, nor the People Collectively, not Representatively, nor
any other Persons whatsoever, ever had, have, has, or ought to have any
Co-ercive Power over the Persons of the Kings of their Realm; and to Enforce
this with all possible weight, and to Exclude that absurd Notion of
Co-ordination, by making the King one of the Three Estates, and therefore less
and constructively inferior to the other Two, they made another Act 13 Car. 2.
Declaring the Sword to be solely in the King's Power, and that neither one nor
both Houses in Parliament can, or Lawfully may Raise or Levy any War Offensive
or Defensive against His Majesty, etc. Besides this, there is a particular
Declaration provided in the Act, for Uniformity over and above our Subscription
to the XXXIX. Articles, of which the XXXV. is not to be forgotten, viz. That it
is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms against the King,
etc. so very careful have both the Church and State been to Establish Loyalty.
They that desire to see this Argument discussed at large, let them among many
more, read these Excellent Pieces, Dr. Hickes's Jovian, Dr. Sherlock of
Non-Resistance, and Bishop Morley's Vindication of himself from Mr. Baxter.

But this till removed, is a sufficient Gag to my Conscience, to keep me from
acting and concurring with the present Power. And if this be the Doctrine of
our Church and the Law of the Land, as by the Book of Homilies, the XXXIX.
Articles, the Common Prayer Book, and Statute-Book undoubtedly it is: I would
fain know by what means my Conscience may be discharged from what I have
Declared, and Sworn to be my Duty, that is, not only to Obey, but also to
Defend and Maintain King James the Second, who is, and ought to be my Sovereign
while God grants Him Life. I say, upon these Grounds, He ought to be our
Sovereign still. For Abdicating without His Will and Intention, is what I
persuade my self, was never heard of before; and being without Precedent, I may
truly say is without Sense. I have been put in mind of Bishop Sanderson's Case
of Submission to Usurpers, and I have with great Pleasure and Approbation, read
that Judicious Treatise. But as I do not think the present Power, out of
respect to their Credit, would make that its Foundation, so if they would, I
cannot think that Case comes up at all to our Circumstances; for I cannot let
my self down into so mean an Opinion of my Countrey-Mens Courage, whatever I
think of their Honesty, as to imagine that Eleven or Twelve Thousand Dutchmen,
though each of them had Soul enough to inform his Bulk, or had Courage equal to
his Corpse, were able to Conquer one County of England, well resolved; and to
say we have Conquered our selves, is like Abdicating against our wills, very
Monstrous to any Man of Honor or Conscience, we ought at least to try the
Prowess of these Anakins, and not ingloriously without a Stroke become their
Vassals, and pay them for it too, as we are like to do at a round Rate.

Sure we can no longer be so stupid, as not to see how some Men by the Noise
and Pretense of an Impostor Prince, have Shamed a King upon us. I confess I
have the more resentment, because the Honor, as well as the Peace of a Man's
Country is to be regarded; for as such a Change, upon the Terms we must have
it, makes us the wonder of some, it will inevitably make us the scorn of all.
But I forget that where there is no Conscience, there can be no Sense of
Honor; and therefore a Declamation may indeed ease my Spleen, but cannot be
expected much to help their Judgments.

The Ties of Religion and the Honor of our Country, which at present suffers
extremity, being so Sacred, and so Inviolable, I am not able to give my self
any satisfaction, as to my Conscience, (therefore Sir, I desire it from you or
any good Body) how we can Innocently sit still and see our Sovereign
Exterminated His Kingdom, and Deprived of His Crown and Dignities.

For the Maxim is evidently true in respect of Government, and Civil Community,
That Malum qui non prohibet cum possit, jubet. In our Savior's Phrase, He that
is not with the Government, is against it. And accordingly by our Law, He that
Conceals Treason, is liable to suffer an Accessory to it. If David's Heart
recoyled for cutting off the Skirt of Readiness Garment, ours will fly in our
Faces, to have Stripped our King of all He has; And I cannot for my Life see how,
without the greatest Injustice, as well as the greatest Baseness, we can be
quiet, and not heartily (bona fide) as before God, whose Anointed He is,
endeavor His Restouration.

The Greatest, I had almost said, the Only Obstacle worth Note, that appears to
me, is the apprehension of the King's Popery, or exasperated Indignation: but
they must have a very mean Opinon indeed of the King's Judgment, that can think
He will scruple to Restore by Pardon, not only His mistaken, but most, if not
all His Malicious Subjects: or that having felt the effects of false Measures,
and ill Councels, He will again go about to advance His Religion so contrary to
the Law and Genious of the Nation.

But if we can be so meanly persuaded of the King's Intellect; let us not be so
of God's Providence too: The Hearts of Kings are in his Hand, and he turns them
as the Rivers of Water, whethersoever he pleases; We are assured of God's Power
and Providence, and why should we doubt his Care and Kindness; if we do not
forfeit it by going about to take his Work into our hands, to be our own
Carvers? Methinks it is very preposterous to make Shipwreck of our Faith, for
fear of a Storm of Persecution; or, least our Church should split upon the Rock
of Popery, to throw all our Religion overboard; Sure we may venture to trust
God with our Persons and Posterity, whom we must trust with our Souls. And yet
really I must say if the King were upon His Throne, in as full Power as ever;
we might if we were not wanting to our selves, give the King His Due, and yet
keep our Consciences and our Laws too. And, as many honest Gentlemen stood
their Ground: so (I hope) more hereafter, if ever there be occasion, will
follow their Example. But be that as it will, or as God pleases, why should not
we repose our whole Trust in him that has heretofore wrought so many Wonders
for us? This is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith, Joh. 5.4.

In short, by the Constitution of our Government as King Charles left it, and
as King James the Second found and possessed it, we are not only restrained
from resisting the King, but we are bound to defend His Person, and support His
Crown and Dignity. My Question is therefore, what has disolved that
Constitution and set my Conscience at liberty? Not the danger our Religon was
it; for that directs and oblidges us to commit our selves to God: not the
King's breaking in upon the Laws; for we are allowed upon no pretense
whatsoever, to take up Arms against Him, He being accountable to none but God:
not a Conquest, so that, to save our Consciences, we must throw our Lives and
Estates at the Conquerors Feet; for sure no Englishman besides his Duty, can
brook such a thought in point of Honor or Policy. Upon this short view of the
whole, I can much less see how we can put our Lawful King out, and put another
into our Public Prayers, in which we ought not to Dissemble or Parget with God
or Man.

Thus Sir, I have proposed to you my Doubt, with most of those Appendant
Circumstances which have increased and tied it upon my Conscience. If you can
clear it, I implore your Charity to do it, Si Pergama dextra defendi possint
certain hac. If not, I may say in Justice you are obliged to take my part, who
protest solemnly before God, I have no other end but to discharge my Conscience
to God, his Church, and my Country, whatever Opinion or Usage I may have among
Men; God of his Mercy grant that Truth and Justice may prevail; and that
unfeigned Religion and Piety may Flourish here, and make us the Praise, as we
are now the Reproach of Christianity. Amen.


