A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in the CITY, TO One in the COUNTRY; Concerning the
BILL For Disabling the Duke of York To Inherit the Imperial Crown Of this REALM.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

A Letter from a Gentleman in the City, to one in the Country.
Sir,
THE Nation being awakened out of that Lethargy, which for so many Years had
bound up its Senses, and deprived it of all feeling and Perception; begins at
last to discern it is danger and to provide against the ruin and mischiefs
which threaten it. Accordingly the House of Commons have not only declared,
nemine contradicente, That the Duke of York's being a Papist, has given the
greatest countenance to the present Designs and Conspiracies of the Papists,
against the King and Protestant Religion; but have brought in a Bill, Disabling
him to Inherit the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Now, Sir, this being the Affair I design to Write freely to you about, I
presume in the very entrance to tell you, that they could do no less, without
abandoning themselves, and the whole Kingdom, to Bondage and Popery. And all
true English Men as well as Protestants, are so fully satisfied of the
necessity and Justice of the course which they steer; that they not only
applaud and commend them in what they have undertaken, but are ready to stake
their Lives and Fortunes toward the seeing it effected and accomplished.

Sect. I. Nor, in the first place, can the Papists themselves Condemn us for
taking these due ways and Methods to secure our Religion, and preserve our
Lives and Properties; seeing they are not only agreeable to the Measures, (but
much more modest) which they have taken in Foreign Countries to preserve their
own. Shall it be lawful for the French, to endeavor to preclude Henry the 4th.
from enjoying the Crown of France, because he was a Protestant, and must it be
unjust for the English to debar James Duke of York from attaining the
Sovereignty over this Realm, that is a Papist? Shall the Pope and Church of
Rome cherish and justify a Bloody War, upon the alone foot of his being of a
different Religion from what was received in that Nation? And shall not we be
allowed to use such legal means, as are consistent with and warranted by our
Constitution, to hinder a Papist from ascending the Regal Throne of this
Kingdom? Shall it be lawful for those in the Communion of the Papal Church, to
advise Phillip the 2d. of Spain to Murder his Son Charles, for speaking only
favorably of his Fathers Subjects in the Netherlands, who were called
Lutherans? And shall not we have the liberty humbly to pray and desire our
King, to desert a Brother who has Plotted the Ruin of his Majesty's Subjects,
and for no other reason but because they are not Papists. And suppose it should
be said; that these methods were not only unjust, but Condemned by some of the
very Roman Communion; yet the desparity is so great between a Papists arriving
at the Government over a Protestant Kingdom, and a Protestants being advanced
to Reign over a Popish Country, that it will no ways follow from thence, that
what the Parliament have undertaken, is in the least reprehensible. For no
Protestant Prince will either enslave his Kingdom or Subjects to a Foreign
Jurisdiction, nor call his People into question for their Religion, provided
they be not influenced by the Principles of it, to disturb the Government, and
disquiet the Civil Peace. So that Papists instead of receiving prejudice by
having a Protestant Prince to rule over them, they become possessed of many
advantages as to safety, ease and immunities, which their being under a Popish
King excludes them from. And therefore it is, that we find the Papists do no
where so fully enjoy the Right and Liberties of mankind, as in some Protestant
Nations, where they have had the Wit and Sobriety, not to molest their fellow
Subjects, or Conspire against the Government under which they live. So far as
their Religion is found to have an Influence only upa future Life, and merely
to endanger their own happiness; they are pitied instead of being Capitally
Prosecuted, and the worst they are made to suffer, is now and then to be
rationally accosted by their Neighbors, and addressed unto by arguments, which
may conduce to rectify and instruct their Judgments. Whereas through the having
a Popish Prince Succeed over a Protestant People, they become immediately
subjected to the severest Punishments, and that upon the alone score of their
Christian Profession. It is not only lawful for such a Prince to destroy those
of his Subjects, who disagree from him in Faith and worship, but it is an
indispensable Duty upon him to do it. Nor is he only sure of a Pardon upon the
accomplishing so Blessed a work, but the merit of the Achievement entitles him
to unspeakable Happiness and a Glorious Crown.

Sect. 2. And this conducts me to the 2d. thing, namely that no Papist ever
since the Reformation succeeded to Supreme Authority over a Protestant Country,
but he both endeavored to overthrow the Religion which he found Established,
and pursued his Subjects with the most outrageous Cruelties. Nor has the
Loyalty of their People been able to appease or obstruct their indignation, but
they have been treated as the worst of Criminals, because they would not
renounce the Faith which they had embraced. This is so certain and beyond all
control as to matter of Fact, that there is not one instance upon the whole
file of History to the contrary. Wheresoever any of the Popish Belief, have
attained the Sovereignty over a Protestant Nation; whether they were Crowned
Heads or Princes of a more Inferior Rank, they have Universally applied
themselves to Subvert the Protestant Religion, which they found legally settled,
and to destroy those innocent and generous Souls which had the courage to own
it. And if Sweedland, Hungary, Bohemia, and several Principalities in Germany,
do not suffice to confirm the truth of this Assertion; England can produce
Queen Mary in the proof, and for the attestation of it. And as I challenge any
man to assign so much as one opposite Example, so it is not to be expressed
what Cruelties they have used toward the accomplishing their Design of rooting
out Protestancy, and re-establishing Popery. Not only Laws have been trampled
upon, but Cities and Kingdoms made swim with Blood, in order to the extirpating
the Faith of the Gospel and destroying those who professed it. And therefore let
me say, that the portion and Lot which has befallen other Nations, through
their folly in admitting persons of a Papal Stamp to Succeed over them, should
instruct England to prevent and obviate his ascent to the Throne, from whom we
may justly expect to undergo the same mischiefs.

Sect. 3. For thirdly, no Antecedent Promises made by Popish Princes on their
Assumption to Rule over Protestant Countries, have been any security to those
who relied on them, or any confinement to such as made them. The Examples of
the violation of all Faith are as numerous, as the Persons who have been
admitted to Sovereignty upon such Stipulations. Every own knows that it was
the Emperor's Transgressing against the promises which he had made to the
Bohemian's concerning the liberty of their Religion, which occasioned that long
bloody and fatal War. And as thereby all Europe came less or more to be
concerned and entangled; So by the ill conduct of some, and Treachery of
others, the Protestant Religion, after the shedding of an Ocean of Blood, is at
last extirpated that Kingdom. Yea the present differences in Hungary between
the Emperor and that People, are wholly to be resolved into a departure from
the Promises which Ferdinando made to them for their preservation in the
enjoyment of their Religion, when in Anno 1618. he was chosen to be their King.
And notwithstanding the Hungarians have been at all times ready to submit to
his Imperial Majesty, providing their Religion and Legal Rights might according
to the first Contracts and Stipulations be secured unto them; yet in the midst
of all his necessities he has chosen rather to venture the ruin both of the
Empire and his own Hereditary Countries by the French, than fulfill the Promise
of his Ancestors or comply with so just Requests. Which plainly shows us that
it must be a strange implacableness which Papists bear to our Religion, that
neither regard to Covenants nor interest of State can induce them to moderation
toward such as profess and maintain it: But what need we to consult Foreign
Examples, seeing our own Queen Mary affords us a remarkable instance as to
breach of Faith in this matter. Who as she was the only Papist who has weilded
the English Scepter since the Reformation, so she has left us abundant warning
how we admit others of that Impression and Stamp to ascend the Throne, be their
Promises before hand what they will. For neither the finding the Protestant
Religion legally established, nor the having pledged her own Faith for the
Preservation of it according to the Establishment, were of any significancy to
keep out Popery, or to secure Protestants from Fire and Faggot, when once she
was possessed of the Crown.

Sect 4. And therefore fourthly, Some Neighboring Nations Professing the
Protestant Religion, having found that by submitting to suffer a Papist to
Reign over them, they had betrayed themselves to lose all that was dear unto
them; took not only care to relieve themselves from the Violence and
Treacherous Attempts of their Regnant Papish King; but made Provision to debar
all of Roman Principles, from being capable for the future of pretending to the
Throne. The case in brief stood thus, Sigismond the Sweed who had been before
chosen King of Poland, was as next Heir to the Deceased King of Sweedland
admitted to the Throne of that Kingdom, but upon previous conditions that he
should not infringe their Liberty as to Religion, nor introduce Popery which
they had Banished out of their Dominion. Now this Prince having contrary to all
Stipulations endeavored both to overthrow their Religion, and to break in upon
their Civil Rights; The Sweeds like a generous People that would expose
themselves to all hazards rather than give up their legal Rights, and Sacrifice
their Consciences to the Will and Lust of their Prince, commenced a War against
him under the Conduct of his Uncle Charles, whom they chose to be their
Protector. In which War being at last Conquerours, they not only Deposed him,
but made a Law that no Papist should at any time after be trusted with the
Scepter. And how conduceable that Law has been to their Preservation, all the
World has observed upon Queen Christina's resigning the Kingdom, having
entertained a purpose of Renouncing her Religion. For as she knew that she
could not declare her self a Papist, and at the same time remain their Queen;
so they had too sadly experienced what it was to have Popery and Sovereignty
meet in one Person, to suffer her to continue their Sovereign if she once
abjured their Religion. Now I would gladly be informed, why the Parliament of
England may not as well exclude a Papist from all capacity of mounting the
Throne, to destroy this Nation and the Resormed Religion here, as the States
and People of Sweedland have done there. Surely it is much better to be
instructed by the Prudence of others after the foretast of manifold mischiefs
which they had undergone, than when we have made our selves through folly and
Credulity Subjects and Examples of misery, to think to provide for our own
safety and Interest, and these of our Posterity by the hopes of an aftergaim.

Sect. 5. Fifthly supposing it were possible at an other juncture* to preserve
our Religion under a Popi^h Prince, and that therefore it were not altogether
unreasonable to admit one; yet at this Season when the whole Papal Party in
Europe have Conspired to extirpate Protestancy in all the Schem's and Branches
of it, it were no less than madness to think we could secure our Religion, were
the Sovereign Authority over these Nations once lodged in a Papal hand. He must
be very ignorant in the present State of things, who does not know that there
is a Design laid and carried on for the enslaving all Europe again to the
Tripple Crown. And he must be also a very great stranger in the Affair's of the
World, that does not understand how far this Projection has already succeeded,
and that there is very little wanting to the full accomplishing of it. I am
sure separate but once England from a hearty espousal of the Protestant
Interest, and it must necessarily sink and, without a Miracle, be supplanted in
all other places. And as we cannot imagine that should we have a Popish Prince
in England, he would prevent the ruin of a Religion elsewhere which himself
has renounced; so we can as little think that he would support a Religion at
home, that is both opposite to his own, and which had lost it is footing every
where else. So that as matters stand, we should by admitting a Popish Prince to
Succeed his Majesty, not only lose the Protestant Religion from our selves and
our posterity, but through abandoning of that profession abroad, we should be a
means of making all the World Vassals again to the Romish Yoke. And hence it is
that the Eyes and Hopes of all protestants are upon the present parliament, and
from the Councels of this great Assembly, they are ready to date their
Happiness or Misery. How much they judge their whole interest and concernments
to be wrapped up in our Consultations and Resolves, is evident from this, that
since the meeting of this Assembly, they have in several Protestant Countries
and Provinces abroad, observed Selemn days of Fasting and Prayer, to beg a
blessing from the Lord upon it, and that there may be a happy correspondence
between the King and his Parliament.

Sect. 6. Sixthly, should it be allowed as a thing (at least) credible, that
there are some persons in the Papal Communion, who should they ascend the
English Throne, we might nevertheless deposite with them and consign into their
hands the preserving of our Laws and the Protestant Religion; yet we have
little Reafon to believe James Duke of York to be a person of that temper and
moderation, that we ought in a matter of this consequence and importance to
rely upon him. For though I could venture far upon the Moral Principles and
good Nature of such a one as Maximilian was; yet I would be loath to abandon my
life, fortune, and the liberty of my Worshipping God to such as Charles the
Ninth of France, or Philip the Second of Spain were. And if I mistake not, the
experience we have had of the Duke of York while only in a remote prospect of
the Crown, may perfectly instruct us what we are to expect from him were he
once possessed of it, and vested with the Purple Robe. He that while subject to
the Law has so industrioufly pursued the subversion of Protestancy, which is
established and fenced by it; what would he not do? were he once so stated, as
that according to a fundamental Maxim of our Law, he could do no wrong. If you
take a view of his private Friends, during his being in the rank of a Subject,
you may eafily guess what his public Ministers would be, were he once arrived
to the Quality of a King. There are few men of any Observation about the Town,
but they have taken notice that both his Court at St. James's, and his Train in
the Park used mostly to cousist of those who had formerly washen their hands in
the blood of Protestants, or who are the genuine Offspring of those that did.
And how far we have reason to suppose he would be from overthrowing our
Religion, and trampling upon our Laws, were his Temples once encircled with our
Imperial Crown, we may in some degree learn from the arbitrary Counsels which
he has been observed to give, and the Plots against our Religion which he has
influenced, and (to speak modestly) has given countenance unto.

Sect. 7. Seventhly, The Nation has already so much provoked him, that it will
not be hereafter safe to advance him to a condition, and trust him with a
power, whereby he may be enabled to revenge himself. The very endeavors of
this Parliament, and the last, to disable him from inheriting the Imperial
Crown, will be judged expiable by no less than the blood of those worthy
Patriots who acquitted themselves so well in those two Houses. And therefore as
they have engaged themselves beyond any possibility of a safe retreat, it were
a base thing in those whom they represent, and whose welfare in all this they
have been consulting, to abandon them to the revenge of an enraged and
implacable Prince. It had argued great simplicity to have trusted him with the
Government at any time since we had the first opportunity to know him, seeing a
secret aversation for the English People has betrayed it self in his whole
carriage ever since his Majesty's Return: but we should proclaim our selves
perfectly frantic, after we have expressed our Resentments for his ill
behavior toward our Laws and Religion, and thereby have more exasperated him,
if we should trust our lives, fortunes, and consciences under his power, and
leave them to his mercy and discretion If a gracious King, who could both
command him and and call him to an account, has hardly been able from time to
time to restrain his fury, what can be able to bridle him when he has all
under his power, and has no man to control him. Besides, how many English
Protestants must be offered up, to atone for the deaths of the late Tyburn
Martyrs? The blood of thousands will be accounted too little, to appease the
angry Ghosts of those who have suffered by reason of this meritorious Plot.

Sect. 8. Eighthly, It were ridiculous to entertain any thoughts of
discouraging the Papists from prosecuting their Conspiracies, while we leave
them any hopes or expectations of the Duke's succeeding to the Government. For
as so many of all qualities and conditions would never have embarkt in designs
so hazardous to themselves and their posterity, unless they had been encouraged
and supported by the hopes of the Duke's being the presumptive Heir; so they
will never desist from pursuing the Plot wherein they are engaged for the
enslaving of England, and the final subjugating the Norrhern Heresy, while
there is any probability left them of his coming to the Throne. So long as they
enjoy the least hope that it is possible for the Duke of York to succeed unto
his Majesty, instead of being disheartened from following their traiterous
undertakings, they will be animated to accelerate their Villainies, especially
that of destroying the King. You may find that through the interruption of this
affair, during the late interval between this and the last Parliament, how that
instead of being dismayed by the detection of their Crimes, they have been
enflamed to carry on their Plots with more Zeal and Vigor than ever. Moreover
as the disabling the Duke to Inherit the Imperial Crown of this Realm, is the
only rational medium to hinder the continuation and pursuit of the Plot, so it
will be the most effectual inducement to prevail with Persons to come in and
make a further detection of it. For can we reasonably conceive that they who
have cooperate in it, should venture by discovering to save us; when they must
needs know that their reward may in a short time, amount to their being hanged
themselves for their Service, It Is indeed a wonder, that in the prospect of
Death, and Torment which such persons must necessarily foresee themselves
adjudged unto, should a Papist once mount the Throne, how so many have already
exposed themselves to lay open this Conspiracy against our Religion and
Government. Whereas were the Duke made once incapable of arriving at the
Sovereignty over this Nation, there are many more who seeing themselves put
into a condition of safety for the future as well as for the present, would
undoubtedly without the prospect of any reward, offer themselves to be
Instruments of further detecting, and thereby disappointing this whole Hellish
Conspiracy.

Sect. 9. Ninthly, There is nothing in this Bill of Exclusion, but what is
consonant unto, and justified by that which is the Supreme and Ultimate end of
all Government, For no Government was either designed by God, or ever erected
by Men, but in order to self-preservation. All Humane Laws whether they relate
to the kinds of Government, or the ways in which persons shall Succeed unto it,
they suppose an Antecedent Right in Men of protecting their Lives and
Liberties, and preserving to themselves a freedom of judging how they ought to
serve and worship their Creator and Maker; and the design of all Humane Laws is
to secure those Antecedent and Natural Rights. No persons ever Congregated or
Coalesc'd into Societies, but with an intent to live more safely and better,
than if they should continue separated and alone. Nor did ever any condescend
on this or that mode and form of Government, but with a prospect and upon a
supposal, that the Privileges, Rights and Liberties of Men should be preserved
unto them. And therefore as all Government is founded in Trust and settled in
such a person or limited to such a Family, for the safety and advantage of the
people as well as of the Ruler; so there can be supposed no primitive
Agreements in reference to such and such links of Succession, where the ruin
of the people is unavoidable without a break in the Chain. If an Idiot may be
justly put by from Succeeding in the Royal line, because he is incapable of
understanding the interest of his people, or protecting them in their Rights;
much more may one who has designed and resolved to destroy them, and overthrow
every thing for which Kingship was both erected and submitted unto; be debarred
all Plea and Title to inherit. For to what purpose serve Laws betwixt King and
People, but to instruct us not only concerning the Fealty and Obedience which
we are to pay to our Prince, but what we may claim and expect from him that is
to be advanced to that Grandeur and Dignity, Yea were there any Laws for the
Establishment of a Mortal Enemy over us, on this alone supposal that he were of
next affinity to the foregoing and lawful Prince, such Laws were revocable and
ought to be repealed as inconsistent with the safety and happiness of Subjects.
For though our Ancestors might restrain and limit us in the usage of those
things which we derive from them; yet they could not restrain and limit us in
such things which we have a right unto by the Law of Nature. That is (and
blessed be God they never attempted it) they could not deprive us of, nor
abdicate from us, a right to protect and defend our selves from our declared
Adversary. So that if the people of England be but acknowledged to have a right
to preserve their Lives, maintain their Proprieties, or secure their Religion;
it is lawful for them to disable the Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial Crown
of this Realm, as having already not only rendered himself unsafe to the Nation
in all these, but Proclaimed by his Actions that he is an open Enemy to every
one of them.

Sect. 10. Tenthly; It is remarkable that there was never a conveyance of the
Crown of England to any person, but upon the tacit concurrance and with the
virtual or implicit consent of the people. And indeed though a people may be
made Slaves without their Consent, yet it is impossible that they should be
free Subjects but with it. And therefore anciently before any King of England
was actually Crowned, the people, being first acquainted with the day appointed
for that Solemnity, were three several times publicly asked, whether they
would have such a person to Rule over them. And till the consent of the people
was thus obtained and declared, they who held in Fee of the King together with
the Nobility, were not obliged, neither were they called to do Homage to him.
And though these kind of Tenures be since abolished by Act of Parliament, yet
it plainly shows that heretofore the Nation had a great interest in recognizing
the Right of their King. Now the people of England are no where so Universally
present, as when Represented in Parliament by those whom they have chosen and
delegated to act in their Places and Names, as well as for their interests. And
therefore what is the Language of the House of Commons, 1s the unanimous Voice
of all the People of England. Yea were the several Individuals of the Nation to
be demanded their Opinion, they would harmoniously resound the Vote of that
House, namely that they will not have James Duke of York to Reign over them,

Sect. 11. Eleventhly, The Parliament of England have from time to time so
disposed of the Crown of this R^alm, as both to settle and limite the
Succession in referrence to the English Throne. It was a Parliament that
Deposed Richard the 2d, and chose Henry the 4th. to Reign in his stead. It was
a Parliament which limited the Crown to Henry the 6th. only for his Life with
an exclusion of his Posterity from all Title to it, and settled the Succession
upon Richard Duke of York. And it is observable that they who afterward took
part with the said Henry the 6th. and fought by his Authority, as well as under
his Banner at the Battle of Wakefield, where Richard Duke of York was killed;
were in the 1st. of Edward the 4th. attainted of Treason because they fought
against and slew a person who was by Act of Parliament declared Heir after
Henry to the Crown. It was a Parliament who chose and advanced Richard the 3d;
though Edward the 4th had not only left behind him a Brothers Son whose Title
was Prior to Richards, but two Sons of his own. It was the Parliament that
entailed the Crown in Henry the 4ths time; and settled the Inheritance of the
Realms of England and France, etc. Upon his Sons by Name, and upon all of them
successively, in case He or They upon whom the settlement was first made,
should die without Heirs? Yea our Parliaments during the Reign of Henry the
8th. made a threesold Settlement and Entail of the Crown, and that with such
various Limitations and Provisions, as they thought the interest of the Kingdom
conducted them unto. These three Entails were made and enacted the 25th of
Henry the 8th the 28th of Henry the 8th. and the 35th of Henry the 8th. But to
omit more Instances, it was the Parliament that having by Statute Recognized
Queen Elizabeth's Title to the Crown in the first Year of her Reign, afterward
Entailed it upon her and the Heirs of her Body in case she should come to have
any, in the 13 of her Reign. Now it is very remarkable that in diverse of these
Entailes and Settlements, our Parliaments proceeded without any regard to
Legitimacy, their sole will and pleasure, under the Influence which the
interest of the Kingdom had upon them, being both the best motive into which we
can resolve diverse of those Settlements, and the only Standard according to
which we must account for the Limitations contained in some of those Entails.
And can we be so silly as to believe that the most Magnanimous and Victorious
Princes that ever Reigned over this Nation, would have suffered Parliaments to
interpose about the Succession and meddle in the disposal of it, if it had not
appertained unto them by the constitution of the Kingdom and the ancient Usages
thereof. Surely bequeathment of the Inheritance of the Crown by the Regnant
Prince, would have better become the Prerogative of our Kings, if they had not
believed that it belonged to the Parliament in conjunction and Cooperation with
their Kings to dispose and to settle that matter.

Sect. 12. Twelfthly, Nor has the supreme Court of Parliament in their
interposure about the disposal of the Crown of this Realm, confined themselves
to nearness and proximity of Blood, as if it had been to descend without
interruption, or be conveyed to the next in the Royal Line. And therefore
whosoever consults our Laws and Histories, they will find that our Parliaments
in their choice and designation of Princes to ascend the Throne, have often
diverted from the next of Kin, and regulated themselves in their Election and
Appointments by the alone Measures of Public Good, and the safety and
happiness of the Kingdom. And to begin with William the Conqueror, that Norman
Prince had no right but from the Peoples Election of him. For whereas he
pretended to derive a Title to the Crown of England, from the Will and
Testament of Edward the Confessor, that very Edward had no hereditary right
himself. However by the peoples advancing William the Norman to the Throne of
this Realm, Edgar Etheling the nearest Prince to the Crown, if respect had been
shown to Blood, was excluded and shut out. And no sooner was William the
Conqueror dead, but William Rufus was preferred before Robert, who being his
eldest Brother would otherwise have had the better right. Yea upon the decease
of Rufus, Robert was again put by (though upon an Agreement between them two he
had been promised the Crown in Reversion after him) and Henry the First was
advanced in his room. And if we proceed a little farther, we shall find that
King John was advanced before his eldest Brothers Son, who must needs have had
the best right, if nearness of Blood had obtained and taken place. And to pass
by other Examples, it is easy to determine whether any regard was had to the
next of Kin, when Richard the Third was preferred before the two Sons of Edward
the Fourth.

Sect. 13. Lastly, The Bill depending before the Parliament about disabling the
Duke of York to inherit the Imperial Crown of England, is not introductive of a
new Law, but corroborative and explanatory of those which we have already. And
indeed all the Laws which we are provided of against Popery, are not only weak
fenses to withstand the irruption of it; but in themselves null and void,
unless we admit that there is this intended in them, that no Popish Prince
shall ever be allowed to Reign in England. And this being of some consequence
to be known, I shall therefore insist somewhat the more largely upon it. Every
one knows that there is a vast difference between a persons right to an Estate,
and persons remote Title only to Govern. For an Estate is a man's Property,
whereas the advancing one to Rule over a Nation, is but the recognizing of a
Right originally inclusive of a Trust. And therefore if our Laws have made
Papists to forfeit their Estates, or any part of them, for mere Recusancy: We
may very rationally suppose that they intended that every Popish Recusant
should forfeit and be incapable of all Regal Authority, seeing that is but a
Trust limited to such a Family, in order to the preserving us in our due
Rights. Now that our Laws have made Papists liable to forfeit all their Goods
and two Thirds of their real Estates, notwithstanding all Title either by
Birthright or Purchase which they may have in them, is evident and beyond all
contradiction to whosoever reads the Statute of the 29. of Eliz. cap. 6. and
the Statute of the 3. of James, cap. 4. Besides our Laws provide that no
Recusant Convict shall be a public Officer, or shall exercise any public
Office or Charge in the Commonwealth, but that every Recusant shall be utterly
disabled to exercise the same by himself or by his Deputy. Sat. 3. of Jam. cap.
4. Yea that they shall be disabled in Law to receive, take, or have any Office,
Ministry, or Service in this Realm. Stat. 1. of Eliz. cap. 1. And can it after
all this be thought, that they who Enacted those Laws, intended that it should
be lawful for a Popish Prince to ascend the Throne, and be trusted with the
exercise of Sovereign Rule over us?

Moreover our Laws have ordained and declared, That every Papist who is
convicted, shall be disabled to be an Executor, Administrator, or to have the
Custody of any Child, as Guardian, and that if any Wards be granted to such,
they shall be utterly void, and of none effect. Stat. 3. of James cap. 4. And
can we then suppose, that they who enacted that Law, ever thought, or intended
that a Papist should be capable of having the Guardianship of the whole Nation.
Our Parliaments have provided both by a Statute of the 13. Eliz. cap. 2. and by
one of the 23. of Eliz, cap. 1. and by another of the 3. of James cap. 4. That
it shall be Treason to be reconciled to the Church of Rome. Now as those Laws
are wholly insignificant, as to ends for which they were made, if a Papist be
left still capable of inheriting the Crown; so I cannot therefore but think,
that they do in effect exclude all such who suffer themselves to be seduced to
Popery, and who thereupon are brought to acknowledge a foreign Jurisdiction,
from all Right, Claim and Title to the Throne of this Realm. I^ is also
provided by a Statute of the 5. of Eliz. cap. 1. That it shall be Treason, by
Deed, or Act, etc. to hold, or stand with, extol, maintain, or defend the
Authority, Jurisdiction, or Power of the Bishop of Rome, or his See. Now what
does this Law amount unto, or of what use is it to the preserving the
established Religion? If he that both does all this, and also glories in it, be
held still capable of mounting the Throne.

Again the Statute of the 3d of James which appoints and injoyneth the Oath
of Allegience, does in reality and in the drift and Scope of it, debar a Papist
from being admitted to Reign in England. For as the Design of that Oath was to
extirpate Popery, so that is impossible to be compassed, should we be liable to
admit a Popish Successor. Nor can there be any thing more silly and ridiculous
to be required of us, than that we should swear Allegiance to a Papist in
opposition to Popery. And not to pursue this point any further, the Statute of
the 1 of Eliz. Concerning the Oath of Supremacy, can no ways be adiusted to
Principles of Reason and Wisdom, if notwithstanding any thing contained in that
Law, a Popish Recusant remains in a condition to inherit the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, In a word that and all other Statutes made against Popery, serve
only to reduce us into a worse condition than ever we were, if this do not run
thorough and enliven them with sense as well as virtue, namely that no Papist
can have right, or is ever to be suffered to Reign over this Nation.

SIR, You see with what Freedom, I have represened my thoughts unto you in
relation to the Bill for Disabling James Duke of YORK, to Inherit the imperial
Crown of this Realm. And indeed it is a Bill of vast importance, not only to
our selves and posterity, but to all of other Nations who have forsaken the
Fellowship of the Papal Church. I could have not only enlarged upon the several
heads, but have reasoned from more Topics: But I think there is enough already
said for one Letter, and shall therefore reserve the rest, till I receive your
Advice whether it be necessary to say any more, or whether you dare trust the
farther manage of it in so weak and mean a Hand.

And shall only add that our Churchmen are like to be strangly entangled,
should the Bill once pass into an Act. For if they omit to Pray for the
Illustrious Prince James Duke of York, they will be thought to offend against
the Obligations they are under of reading the whole Liturgy; and should they
continue to pray for him in the wonted form, they may perhaps not only meet
with some affront from the angry and incenced Multitude, but be judged by wiser
Heads, to bespeak a public Calamity at the hands of God, and entreat him to
inflict the worst of Judgments upon the Nation. I am.

Sir, Your most affectionate and willing Servant.
Land. Nov. 8. 1678.
FINIS.

