A LETTER CONCERNING THE JESUITS.

2 Esdras chap. 2. verse. 18. And I showed them the hand of my God, that it was
with me; and I said, Let us rise, and let us build, and their hands were
encouraged in Good. But Sanaballat -- Tobias the servant, and Gosem -- heard of
it, and they scorned us and despised us, and said, What is this thing you do?
Why do you rebel against the King? And I answered to them, and said to them,
The God of heaven he helps us, and we are his servants: Let us rise and
build: but you have no part, nor justice nor memory in Jerusalem.

Printed in the Year 1661.

SIR,
IF my ability were equal to my will, or to the equity of their cause, this
Answer would prove satisfactory to your demands. For you ask, Whether the
scandalous Reports, and malicious Libels lately vented against the Society,
have as much real truth as they seem to carry Gall? And your Motives are why
you choose me to solve your Doubt, (1) because you know I received my education
for many years amongst them. (2) And being now actually a professed Religious of
an other Order, you conceive, that I shall impart my judgment with less
partiality.

In criminal matters, de non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est ratio;
And truly, Sir, to be daily conversant with Persons of all Ages, of all
Tempers, in several emergent occasions, (when naturally men's humors start
forth) and that these persons should be inwardly corrupted with horrid
opinions, and yet never break out into word or deed, would be an hypocrisy
almost miraculous, and render the Professors of Virtue and Vice
indistinguishable.

Must the fashion of such a Gown, or such a Cassock, with the name Jesuit, be
the only marks to notify such Impostors? Certainly Christ has set other
Sea-marks to avoid these Rocks of perdition, E fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos.

To promote Mental Prayer, the first mark of a Jesuit.
That great Instrument of Piety Mental Prayer, which before was as a hidden
treasure, cloystered up in Monasteries, is by their industry so universally
laid open, that millions of men, who could hardly have been drawn into the
outward porches of God's Temple, have by this Soul-refreshing-prayer ended
their days in the Holy of Holies.

Consider the Prophecy of Abbot Joachim, cited by the learned Stapleton in
testimony of the Society; Insurget una nova Religio sanctissima, quae erit
libera and In prompt. Morali in Dominicam infra Oct. Not. Dom. textu primo.
spiritualis, in qua Romani Pontifices, potiti pace Ecclesiae, se continebunt.
Quam Religionem and ordinem Deus super omnes alios diliget, quia perfectio
illius vincet omnes alias aliorum Ordinum. How directly this Prediction points
at the Society, I will not engage with Opposers; but methinks the judicious
eye of learned Stapleton would never in his application have aimed at the
Jesuits, unless the specifical marks intended by the Prophecy were in them
visibly apparent. Think but of the multitude of dissolute and carnal persons,
who at first either out of curiosity, importunity of friends, or remorse of
conscience, have entered their spiritual Exercise; and consider how they have
returned like Gold out of the Furnace, become joy to Angels, and high examples
of a heavenly reformation. Give glory to God, and let Envy say, Digitus Dei hic
est.

That tedious and insiped employment of Catechizing and Teaching Children,
which no wo^ldly honor, but much labor and patience attends, is the
institution of the Society, nay, the main Pillar that supports the Structure,
to the great advancement of Christianity, and confusion of Heresy. In this
charge I have known Jesuits, who (after they had laudably performed the
chiefest Offices in the Society) have spent with alacrity the remainder of
their days. If you turn them out of Schools, shut the doors after, for 'twill
then be sadly verified, Parvuli petierunt panem (vitae and disciplinae) and non
erat qui daret eis.

This is the Fruit which the Tree bears, and all passengers may behold it, if
they please but with a charitable hand to remove the leaves, and gather thereof.

I am confident since my remembrance, almost a thousand Youths of this Nation
have been successively in their Schools; produce of them one sufficient witness
that will attest, that he was ever taught opinions either to Neighbor or
Magistrate pernicious, or when they laid their souls open for remedy of sins,
which youth or folly might have led them unto, whether applied found those
abominable cases applied to their souls for cure, or not rather the wine and
Oil of the good Samaritan poured into their wounds.

A substantial part of the English Clergy owe those Talents of learning and
virtue, with which they are endued, to the Schools of the S^oiety: and the holy
Orders of St. Bennet and St. Francis acknowledge a high obligation for many
eminent Persons now incorporated amongst them. Can any body think, that the
Jesuits are the monsters that breed all sedition and damnable opinions, and
that none of those should rise in judgment against them? But on the contrary,
the best Bishops of all Nations require daily their assistance; the wisest and
holiest of Benedictine Abbots have been their Friends and Founders.

If the Interest of the Society were any thing else but God's honor and glory,
or were the Jesuits such selfseekers as some pretend, could it possibly be
hidden from such judicious and pierceing eyes? A chief Superior of the English
Benedictine Congregation, a man deeply learned, who wanted neither opportunity
nor judgment to discover fallacies, gave this recommendation of the Society to
his Subjects, Amicitiam colatis, P. Rudisindus Barl. in Epist. 3. ad Monachos
in Apostolica Missione laborantes:
maxim cum Reverendis Patribus Societatis Jesu, quorum and numerus est in
Missione perillustris, and gravitas, eruditio, sanctit as ac prudentia tanta,
ut merito ab omnibus piis inter praestantissimos Christi Operarios summa cum
veneratione censenntur.

Shall now a few persons, that never were in their Colleges (unless in the
quality of an invited guest, who, I hope, retain not the bitter leven of an old
corruption) be preferred before such a Clowd of domestic and honorable
Witnesses? That Monster of a The unreasonable Reasons.
Libel, that ravening Wolf, whose passion stripped him of the very voice of
truth, who had impudence enough to vent falsities of Mr. Simmons and others,
when the world was able to shame Crimine ab uno disce omnes. With how much
brass must that countenance be covered, who could accuse Mr. Simmons of
procuring at Rome the condemnation of certain Propositions, when there are many
in London that can avouch, he employed his whole interest to effect the
contrary? Never more let the Author set Pen to Paper, unless it be to sign his
Recantation: He that will commit such blind errors at noonday, may well
stumble in the dark when he rakes the ashes of the dead; who, under the name of
Catholic, does blast more fowlly the memory of those dead Persons, than the
surviving Records of their Examination.

The straw of F. Garnet weakly urged by the Libeller might with more humanity
have been concluded the sign of God's accepting his repentance, (if guilty)
then an argument of the Society's evil disposition, since all know, 'twas a
crime detested by him at his execution, by all living now abhorred, and by
modest Protestants charitably forgotten. Sum up Cook's Rhetorical Hyperboles,
and Indepent Consequences, and in a juridical Arithmetic, they amount only to
accuse F. Garnet of the knowledge received in Confession of the intended
mischief. But this Author with undigested choler, beyond the officiousness of
an Attorney General, charges the very heart with Treason, and impails the whole
Society in an hereditary guilt. But it is to be noted, that this strong and
undeniable conclusion must be gathered from straws. Surely in this Pamphlet,
the only Title by which he appears Catholic, is his general calumny.
Sanderson in the History of King James says, That 'twas a great affliction to
F. Garnet at his Trial, that he should not be enrolled a Martyr. Now grant this
supposition to be true, it follows evidently, that he conceived the Society (by
whom his Canonization should have been promoted) to abhor those traitorous
attempts.

With what spirit could he calumniate all foreign Missioners, (nay, a Xauerius
is not excluded his Catalogue) when the Barbarians upon the account of their
sanctly conversation, used them with a civility, that would have confounded the
malice of this Author. Certainly the very names of Japonian Martyrs would be so
many divine Exorcisms, to expel this spirit of detraction. To pass over many of
our English Fathers, that have forsaken the embraces of all worldly content, to
spend amongst Savages their days in preaching and want, I will only mention
venerable Father White, who would have had more Pagans to testify his
sanctity, then I think this Libeller can ween Believers of his forgeries and
scandals. To say, That none goes into that Mission but who are weary of their
Colleges, is a proof (for the suggesting which) Bale and Osyander would have
thankt him, when was their Task to maintain, that St. Austin the Monk converted
the English-Saxons from Bad to Worse, from Pagan Idolatry to Popish Superstion.

The best prayer and excuse that Charity can imagine, is, Pater, dimitte illis,
non enim sciunt quid faciunt.

But the acknowledging in Popes a power of deposing Kings, is the crime which
arms all loyal hearts against Jesuits; this, this is the Article of faith
proper to the Society! for the condemning which, Racks and Laws have been
invented: Here is the Jonas, who have caused all the storms of Persecution on
Catholics.

Before we let reason pass sentence upon the Jesuits, these following
considerations ought to be weighed.

A Congregation held 1606. and confirmed by their General Claudius Aquaviva,
commanded all Subjects of the Society, in virtue of holy obedience, to forbear
the teaching, that Popes can depose Princes. By this it is evident, that Jesuits
conceive this Deposing Power to be no part of their belief: For it is an
obligation indispensable to all Christians, not only to believe all Articles
of Faith, but also openly to profess them when occasion requires; and no
command of any Superior whatsoever can excuse him from being an Apostata, who
publicly, or by silence, tacitly denies or refuses to profess any Article,
though his inward persuasion be the contrary.

Upon examination we shall find, that this pretended Article of Faith shrinks
into a Problematical Doctrine, which (having its Full and Wane, according to
the Conjunction with States and Persons) must necessarily cause a Schism, if we
impute Heresy to the Maintainers either of the Affirmative or negative part;
for, as Unity in Faith is the foundation of Communion Ecclesiastic, so Heresy
is a crime of that high nature, as it denounces ipso facto Separation. Hence
the incommodious and circumstantial expression of disavowing the Deposing Power
as Heretical, in the Oath of Allegiance, bars not only Jesuits, but all
Catholics from taking it. When I detest from my heart all opinions offensive
to Government, that manner of expressing, which adds nothing of security to my
Prince, but evidently causes a rent amongst Christians, and cast dirt upon our
forefathers, ought to be carefully avoided. If I am required to lay down my
Arms, 'twould be malice to cast them in so unlucky a posture, as thereby to
wound my Neighbor.

Upon the Parricide of Henry the Fourth, the Parliament of Paris (seeing no
Arrest of Theirs could defend the Kings life, against a Villain that will
contemn his own) published a Decree of the Council of Constance, judging the
Churches Anathema to be more powerful in deterring Subjects from such wicked
attempts, since this retains its full force, when Racks and Wheels, with the
corporal death, surceases. Thus speaks the Synod, ss. 15. We have been lately
informed, that certain erroneous opinions are holden, contrary to peace, and
good estate of the Commonwealth, viz. That a Tyrant may be lawfully and
meritoriously taken away, and killed by any Subject or Vassal of his,
notwithstanding whatsoever Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance that he has made to
him. Such Doctrine is contrary both to Faith and Manners, and whosoever shall
hold it pertinaciously are Heretics, etc.

He is no Jesuit that will not (if occasion require) seal this Doctrine with
his blood; and certainly this Canon is a great defense to all Princes, against
Rebellions and secret Machinations: And when the Pope does depose Princes,
(that are foedary to the Sea of Rome) in the case of Infidelity or Heresy, he
utterly Card. Peron. The Oath of Allegiance.
disallows the assassination of them; the prayer of the Church being against
sudden and unprovided death, but leaves them to the Imperial Laws: As when
Bishops declare such to be Heretics, they intermeddle not with sanguinary
punishments, but deliver them to the Magistrate.

We see Land held by certain Tenures, does, upon breach of customs or
particular covenants, escheat to the Lord: and when the Principality of Parma
was given by the Pope, it is not to be doubted, but that such a Proviso was
inserted in the Deed; that in case of Infidelity or Heresy he lost all right
thereunto; and that the gift, as also in default of issue, should return to the
Donor.

Granado and Navar were made Foedary to the Pope under Julius the Second;
Naples sends a Palfrey, as a Heriot due to the Church of Rome: The Canaries,
Hesperides, and Gorgon Islands, were subjected to the Sea of Rome, under the
chief Rent of 400 Flo. by Lewis of Spain: and of both the Indies, Alexander did
reserve the Regalities. Since there are such Princes, who have submitted their
Thrones to the Chair of St. Peter; without doubt 'twould be a temerarious Oath
to forswear in general terms a Deposing Power in the Pope, but to detest it as
an Heresy, would be absolutely Schismatical; although to deny the effect of
such a Power in England might be done upon prudential grounds; and, I think,
there are diverse considerable reasons which may guard the Assertion against
Opposers.

Engubinus.
Constantine, in his Dotation of the Church, where many Kingdoms are made
Foedaty to the Papacy, England is not named, as if the Emperor would have
reserved the place of his nativity from all Temporal subjection whatsoever.

Never by any Act of Parliament was this Nation in Vassallage concerning
Temporals to the Pope; but on the contrary, many Laws have been enacted in
cutting off encroachments of the Papal Temporal Power: And although some
object, that King John did submit his Kingdoms to Innocentius the 3d. yet, the
Deed of Conveyance lies so dormant in the Vatican, that it could never be
awaked or produced upon any provocation. And Sir Thomas Moor, the just Assertor
p. 296.
of the Pope's spiritual jurisdiction, denies, that King John either did or
could make England subject to the Pope. Neither is it to be objected, that
Peterpence, or Rome-Scot were Duties, but Alms, for in our ancient Authors they
are termed, the one, Elemospia Regis, the other, Larga benignitas Regis, which
truly would be very improper expressions, to signify a Tribute or marks of
Subjection. Hence I gather, that we may conscientiously promise;
notwithstanding the Deposing Power the Pope may have over other Princes, yet we
will never put in execution the said Power as concerning England, to which all
Jesuits by Oath will engage themselves, though the particular Covenants and
Agreements of other Nations with the Sea of Rome, would cause a scruple, to
assert the same Proposition in unlimited terms.

As it is objected by their Adversaries, that they were banished for this
opinion out of France and Venice; so likewise it might be pleaded, that by the
same States they have been recalled: The Magistrate condemning only to the
fire Books of a few Authors, who held forth those dangerous Tenets, and did not
(as some do) cast with a poisonous breath the ashes of a burnt Doctrine into
the faces of the Innocent.

But to gratify their Adversaries, suppose them all guilty, and that they were
required to give satisfaction before their re-admittance; the same assurance of
Loyalty will be joyfully given (when demanded) to our present Powers: And I
hope, that security of Allegiance, which fully appeased the jealousies of
France and Venice, may prove sufficient for England.

There is no Nation in Christendom keeps a stricter Eye upon the Popes growing
Power than France, and yet the Jesuits are no where in greater esteem than
there. Henry the 4th. in whose Reign they were expelled the Kingdom, appeared
an earnest Advocate for their readmission, and in requital of the Jesuits
dutiful affections to him living, he bequeathed his Royal Heart to them in his
last Will and Testament: And his Successors have constantly committed their
Souls to the direction of certain Fathers of the Society; and what power and
credit they now have at Court, let the Jansenists (who are most sensible
thereof) declare.

It must then be concluded, that either the Kings and Ministers of State in
France are weak Politicians, to nourish these Serpents in their bosoms; or else
we must believe, that the Jesuits are good Citizens, and hold Principles
consistent with Loyalty.

The Government of the Society is Monarchical, the Supreme Power residing in
the General, all other Officers are constituted by his approbation, and, upon
misdemeanors, by him may be displaced; therefore even to be right Jesuits, they
must necessarily suck with their education Maxims very agreeable to Monarchy
and Regal Power. And may be this very consideration did not a little retard the
wary Venetians, from granting so speedy a re-establishment into their
Commonwealth, especially the Monarchs of France, Spain, and Germany being their
earnest Solicitors.

The Rebels in Bohemia did believe the Jesuits to be of such a Monarchical
temper, that they conceived themselves not sufficiently secured in their ways,
by throwing headlong the Imperial Commissioners out of a high Tower in Prague,
unless they had completed their work by expelling the Jesuits, which they
presently performed. Cardinal Richeleu, after the Siege of Rochel, erected
there a College of Jesuits, judging that more effectual to contain the
Revolters in their due obedience to his Christian Majesty, than any Citadel or
Canons the ultima ratio Regum.

Many are the instances of this nature, not to be comprehended within the
limits of a Letter: Therefore I will conclude with the constant practice of the
* Alexander.
Prince of Parma, who wheresoever he rooted out Rebels, he always planted
Jesuits.

The result of this Discouase demonstrates, that lawful Governors have always
found in the hearts of Jesuits a Sovereign Antidot against the poison of
Rebellion, and that Usurpers must send away the Ark, if they will have their
Dagon stand. But the Pamphleter shall have his choice, either to be busy in
piecing up broken Dagon, or with the Ark return to Israel.

The Actions committed in Queen Elizabeth's Reign I will not defend; and if I
should accuse the Jesuits to be the only causes of the Penal Statutes then
enacted, all Historians would confute me: Yet this I believe is a great truth,
that if the Title of the Queen of Scots (to favor which Cataolicks were
suspected, and thence sprung the Sanguinary Laws) were now to be argued, it
might be done with more thanks, and less contradiction.

For Queen Mary of England and Queen Elizabeth could not both pretend a Title
to the Crown, as right Heirs, unless the Parliament had supplied a Defect in
the one; and whether the power of any Parliament (unless it be a
Rump-Parliament) extends so far as to dispose of Crowns, let those whom it may
concern, judge.

If the Jesuits were faulty, 'twas but in antedating their Allegiance to the
Sacred Family of the Stuarts; and since Hales and voluminous Sir N. B. and many
other Protestants did not receive a just punishment for promoting the Title of
Suffolk, I see not why the Jesuits may not deserve a commendation, their
Transgression (if it must be so called) being in the happier extreme. But those
that kept the middle and surer way, in defending against Hales and the like
Caball, Queen Mary's right in succeeding after Queen Elizabeth, were Sir
Anthony Brown Chief Justice in the Common Pleas, and I. C. (who for his
eminent knowledge was commonly called the Father of the Law) both Catholics
and Friends to the Society. But it may be remembered to the immortal praise of
Father Parsons and Father Campian, who procured a mitigation of the Sentence
Declaratory of Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth, and Pope Gregory
following declared that The Subjects of England ought to perform all duties to
the Queen notwithstanding the Censures, and whatsoever their inward judgments
might be concerning her Title, yet after the Parliament had acknowledged her as
lawful Queen, all Civil obedience was most exactly paid. And this may be looked
upon with a gracious eye, that the present State of England owes more to Causin
the Jesuit for publishing to the world those deserved Encomiums of the Heroic
Queen of Scots, then it does to Buchanan (suborned by Murrey, and countenanced
by a domineering Faction then in England) for his defaming and false detections.

Religious persons can appear in no other Arms for the defense of Justice, then
in servent prayers and wholesome counsels; these weapons the Jesuits did not
want in our late Wars: Their lives they did expose to hazard in assisting His
Majesty's Catholic Subjects; and they were waiting to perform their Function
within the reach of the same shots that deprived His Majesty of two most loyal
Servants, Colonel Gage and Sir John Smith. Passages acted in private I will
not produce. I will only desire a reflection upon Mr. Wright (who assisted
Colonel Gage at his death) when being arraigned and condemned in the time of
the Rump-Parliament, for being a Jesuitical Priest; his intimate friendship
with Colonel Gage an enemy to the State, was at the Bar violently urged
against him.

The condition of our present King was so deplorable that it did require the
immediate hand of God to apply a remedy, all humane industry being at a stand;
but their prayers were always imploring Gods mercy on our pressing miseries.
And whenever His Sacred Majesty was pleased to honor their Colleges with
His Presence, all dutiful respect did wait on His Royal Person: and they did
extend the utmost of their abilities in relieving His needy and sick followers.
Surely had Treason and malicious thoughts lodged in their hearts, it might have
then appeared by some disdainful action, when no disadvantage could accrue
thereby; but on the contrary, it might have been countenanced both abroad and
at home.

I have given a glance on all the Times since Jesuits set footing in England,
but what proofs can sufficiently convince their Adversaries, since the Laws
have confined them to a disguise? Yet here are evident symptoms of a healthful
body. To frame a right judgment of a Corporation; (1) The persons that unite
ought to be looked into. (2) The course which they hold in their proceedings,
must be examined according to the standard of justice. (3) And lastly, there
must be an eye on what design their actions terminate. These three qualities
are highly eminent in the Society. (1) The holiness of its first Institutors
God did proclaim to the whole world by Miracles. (2) Their Laws and Rules bind
them up in a most strict obedience both to God and Man. (3) The aim of all
their labors is the salvation of their own and their Neighbors Soul.
Particulars ought no more to prejudice a whole Body, than a Judas may defame
the College of Apostles. Nor is there any understanding so void of natural
Logic as to conclude the innocent with the guilty; yet when we reduce this
principle to practice, our passions hurry us with such a violence, that in
rooting up the tares we frequently trample down the corn. Censurers ought to be
mindful of the Aphorism of St. Ambrose, Saepe in judicando majus est peccatum
judicii, quam peccati illius, de quo fuerat judicatum.

Sir, I am afraid in compliance with your commands, I have by this weak Defense
betrayed the justness of their Cause, which no body could have defended better
than themselves, if they had not been pleased rather Sicut Agnus coram
tondente, to endure the sharpness of reviling tongues with a Christian
patience: permitting those Libellers as so many murmuring waves to dash
themselves against the silent Rock, and vanish, according to our great exemplar
Christ, when the witnesses were not sufficient, nor the proofs convincing he
never opened his mouth to answer malice. Sir, In this Letter you have not only
my opinion of them, but also the respects to your self

Of a most affectionate Friend.


