A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in Flanders TO A LORD in the PARLIAMENT.
NO Motives less forceable than the love of my Country, and your Service, could
have prevailed upon me to have given you this Trouble. And first I shall
acquaint you what News we have in this part of the World. The King of France
has resolved to send with all Expedition Ten thousand Men into Ireland, and an
Agreement made with the Turkish Privateers to have Breast and the Ports of
Ireland for their Harbors; but what is most considerable, the new Pope has
declared himself in Favor of the King of England, and a general Peace: The
whole of this is probable, the first part certain.

Now all I beg from your Lordship is to lay aside all Passon, Dissatisfaction
and Revenge, and give but Time to your ready Wit to think, What England was in
No(...) What it is now: and What it is like to be.

In November last, we had a King who had an indubitable Right to the Crown, and
Malice cannot deny him these Qualities; He is a Prince Frugal, Brave, and
Merciful even to a Fault; A Kingdom wealthy, (for I heard it affirmed by
knowing Bankers, That there was more Money in London than in Amsterdam, Paris
and Constantinople) a Trade the greatest that ever our Kingdom had; a Revenue
great, and raised only upon our Superfluities; with an Universal Peace with the
whole World.

Now see what we are at present; we have an Usurper upon the Throne, engaged in
a War with France, Ireland, and Scotland; our Trade ruined; our Revenue changed
from Customs to Poll-Bills, and Land-Taxes; with the Addition of Free Quarter,
and that in Private Houses.

Now let us see what hopes we have of seeing England free from this Misery.

I remember a most excellent and true Maxim I learned from your Lordship, That
to alter the Succession of the Crown was to entail a War upon the Kingdom. And
the Truth of this we saw verified in the Wars betwixt York and Lancaster, and
in our late Usurpations; and until the indubitable Heir of the Crown was
restored, England still continued in a state of War, though the Usurper had
then France to his Friend.

Is this the present state of England? Let every Landed and Trading Man
consider then, that we are engaged in War; and War must be maintained, or
Soldiers will maintain themselves, which is worse. But the great Query (...),
How all these Wars must be maintained? The Resolution is easy; they must be
maintained by Land, or Trade: for Trade, that is already gone, and once lost is
hardly retrieved; and the Customs which afforded a Million of Money the last
Year, will the next hardly defray the Officers Salaries. For Land, it is
already charged with Seventy thousand Pound per Mensem, which by a tolerable
Calculate is a Twentieth part of the clear yearly Revenue of the Kingdom;
concurring to this I s per l upon all Land, there is another Twentieth part;
and the like upon personal Estates: So that he who has 600 l a Year must allow
a Hundred for mere Taxes. Were this all, it were supportable; but the
Countryman must pay his Rent out of Wool, Corn, and Cattle; Wool which gave
8 l a Stone, will not now give 4 Corn and Cattle fell at the same Rate
proportionably; then the Farmer can pay but half Rent: So here 600 l is reduced
to 250. And I believe many would be glad to have well paid them 250 l neat
Money, for 600 l a Year Land.

Another Consideration no less melancholy than this is, our Trade gone; this
needs no Proof, every Man does both see and feel it; and no Trade no Seamen,
no Seamen no Navy, no Navy no Wooden Walls; and then our (...) Conquered than
if it were upon the Continent. And sure it is worth a Thought to think, What
must become of all those Seamen, Dray-men, Porters, and Forty other sort of
Mechanic Trades, whose Livelihood and Subsistence depended upon Trade: They
must and will live, and Masianello like will take it without distinction from
those that have it.

Nor can any reasonable Man imagine, that a King turned out of Three Kingdoms
will leave any Stone unturned for his Restoration, but will rather come with
Force as a Conqueror than not at all. And the thing will not look difficult to
him that does but consider how the Discontents increase in England; and as
their Necessities grow, so will their Hatred to the Government, and accelerate
their despair of ever seeing either Peace, or Plenty, without seeing their
lawful King seated upon his Throne. Fresh and great Supplies are now pressed
for, and that speedily; which though granted, can never be raised; for no
Revenue can stand long when Money does not circulate: And it is now obvious to
Men of the meanest capacity, that the Kingdom of great Britain can never be
happy, until they see his Majesty in White Hall.

Now, my Lord, I beg for your own sake, the sake of your Country, and all that
can be called Good, Pious and Just, to Consider these weak Notions I have
offered to you, and improve them by that excellent Wit, eloquent Tongue, and
discerning Judgment, Gifts given you from Heaven; and if not employed to this
good End, expect a Judgment for misapplying such Faculties. But boldly
communicate your Thoughts both to Lords and Commons, that as they tender the
happiness of Themselves, or Posterity, they restore his Majesty, who will deny
nothing for their Good, and consistent with his own Security.

The Author, I think, you cannot guess at; but if you should, conceal him: For
it is one that desires to live to serve you, and question not his Power of doing
it.

FINIS.

