

Il Putanismo Di Roma, Or the History of the WHORES And Whoredom of the Popes,
Cardinals And Clergy of ROME. Discovered by a Conclave of Ladies convened for
the Election of a new Pope.

Written in Italian by the Author of Cardinalismo and Nepotismo.

And now made English by I. D. Esquire

London, Printed, 1670.

The Author to those that are curious.
WRiting in this age is nothing else but an itching of the hand, whilst they
write with so much liberty, that we must absolutely believe the Intellect has
no share in the manual operation. Besides it is believed, though that the hand
opposes the pen with so great silence and secrecy, that the judgment is also
excluded from reading; for many things would be omitted in writing, if the
judgment and not the hand did manage the affair. If writing were an incurable
French disease, the world in a short time would be deprived of Writers, if I
deceive not my self; but I fear I am deceived, for to be real, the Art of
Writing at present is a devilish distemper, and yet not feared; how then can a
venereal distemper be dreaded, if the Devil himself cannot terrify Writers?

As for my own particular, I never had an inclination to write for others,
judging it better to let others write for me, but seeing so great a Vorago of
Manuscripts scattered abroad in every corner of Rome, it did so rouse my fancy,
(...) that I could do no less, but enter the List (...) the rest; yet before I
took my pen in hand, ^ery seriously considered of the subjest; and thought with
my self, that in a time when the Chair was vacant, it behooved me to write with
liberty concerning the public scandal of those vices which at other times walk
mask't in Rome. I had a desire by all means to be in the Conclave, that in a
place of such clamor, I might find out a worthy subject to immortalize my name
at my first appearing in Print: And whilst I communicated this my thought to a
friend of mine, whom I did very much esteem; his She-confident, who was then
present, did advise, or to speak more properly command me (because that
Curtezans bear the sway at Rome) to undertake a description of the General
Conclave, which the Court-Ladies of pleasure had taken up a resolution to
create in order to the finding out of a subject concerning the Election of a
Pope that might be better suited to their interest. I did not disrelish the
sentiment of this good Lady, who though she said it only in raillery, did
nevertheless in good earnest leave a great impression upon my spirit; Insomuch
as that very evening I undertook the work, and in a short time finished it so,
as it is now presented to you. Read it then, not as mine, but the work of those
excellent, or if you please curious Wits, that deprived me of it, before I had
time to peruse it; telling me that I must publish it to enrich the more
abstruse studies of those spirits that are scrupulous. In truth my intention
was to print it, but in time, knowing very well, that in Rancounters of this
nature, it is convenient to proceed with deliberation; but my good Friends made
me this reply, that it was not now the custom to be slow in printing, since all
persons are as nimble at the Press, as those that slide upon the Ice. In fine,
all that I could obtain was one moment to write thee Reader, these two lines by
way of Apology, and to give thee to understand, that I study thy satisfaction.

A. D. A. S.

Il Puttanismo di Roma, OR The Whoredom of Rome.
THe distressed and miserable City of Rome did not only live under a grievous
and pitiful, but cruel and horrible servitude, as was prepared for her to
undergo for the future, and had so composed her mind to the patient enduring of
her disgraces, that she seemed to be clothed with constancy, and to emulate
those that are Hydropical: When as fortune, who had obstinately resolved to
persecute her, envying her undauntedness, as if it were the undoubted reproach
of the decay of her strength, and the other virtues, did, by other inventions
as ingenious as tyrannical, procure means to shake her out of that peaceable
condition, by the feigned apparition of a sudden blaze of probability, that
there was some hope of her deliverance from such perplexities and penal
torments, by bringing her to suspect (as is now notorious) the life of
Alexander the Seventh to be of no continuance, upon whose death the abstract of
her greatest felicity, and redress in and by all things, depends: But since
among the individual persons who chiefly constitute the said City, the Ladies
retain the most considerable place, and conspicuous number; whose seed is more
fertile then the grass that grows in the field; these persons seeing themselves
generally ill-treated and deluded by this so strange, unlawful and horrid
Popeship, from which they never can, could, or ever may expect from the future,
as long as ever it continues, any advantage or success imaginable, but rather
fear unexpected ruin and destruction: Because the Seneses have by a certain
quality of nature, or natural instinct so absolute and implacable an antipathy
against the female sex, that it seems almost impossible there should ever be
expected a reconciliation or agreement between them.

It is reported by some Historians, that this took beginning ever since some
Eastern Merchants, anno 200 of the creation of the world, did by the way of
Ligorne import and transport some contagious Commodities that came from those
Provinces; where the people have such an aversion for the female sex, that
rather then they will perform their duty to them, will assume so much boldness
as to affront even the Angelical Guests of Lot himself. Wherefore the modern
infirmity of this new Pontificature is not easily known at Rome, which the
Patriarchess of the Brothel house has with so solicitous and exact diligence
discovered to be exercised various ways, to be urged in diverse businesses, and
so propounded in several discourses, to see if by any means possible the
Succession of the new elected Pope may be made in some Creature of theirs, or
at least in some Subject which they know by the natural inclination of his
genius, or experience of his proceedings, to adhere and be devoted to their
party, and in whom they might safely confide, without fear of being betrayed.

This advice succeeded the 20th of August, anno 1666. at which time the season
of the year being then found sufficiently suited and proportioned to whoorish
actions, and chieflly by reason of the great leisure that is before that time
in the months of June and July, which precede it; in which they themselves
grant the Students in Physique a vacancy from labor, and only reserve
themselves to read them some small Lecture by way of diversion concerning the
contrarium Jesuiticum in libro Posteriorum. Wherefore the major part of these
Women, the better to allure the Scholars, and those that follow their natural
Doctrine, did retire themselves toward the near neighboring Towns, and the
most pleasant and suburbian places; for in things of this nature, being upheld
by the benefit of the winds, those nauseating matters which accompany their
conceits less agreeable, or troublesome to the genius of those that set them
on, would cease. Wherefore seeing that loss of time in such a juncture of
affairs, is an absolute prejudice to their interests, and that their not being
all unanimous in the agreement of their Votes, and abetting an inclusive or
exclusive sentence against the Medicean Florentine Faction, so great an enemy
to them, and that of Siena, of whom Chigi, was the head, their last
Exterminator, were to bring them a second time under their former
disparagements.

Whereupon at Madam Angela Salas, the most serene Senioress of the
Brothel-house, with her flying squadron Diana Velletrana, Anna Felice a san
Marco, and Bernardin^ alla Longara, they came to this resolution to advertise
the venerable Cicia dello Struzzo by an Express, who was departed with Nina by
the way of Frascati, that she should immediately come upon the place, and be
ready to negotiate, and agree to the inclusion of Cardinal Spada, called Santa
Susanna, who being formerly disgusted with all the other Lucheses his
Contrymen, and adherents to Barbarinos party, because he was his friend, and
had for love of them abandoned altogether the Toscan temper, with some hazard
of being in trouble, he had so certainly secured their fidelity, that there was
no doubt at all but he would return them a perfect contribution of love and
affection, and withal give an account to the House of Chigi of all the
insolences and grievances offered to their female sex, and to oblige him to
satisfy them for all the damages and interests suffered for the space of 12
years under the Papacy, by introducing the practice of Sodomie, by reason
whereof their Trade was utterly destroyed, to the great prejudice of humane
propagation.

In so much as Nina Barcarola, who understood very well how great advantages
might accrue to her by the raising of the Celsi; She having the will of Ravizza
at command, her obliged servant for these twenty years, and wherewith she was
also assured to incline the affection of the said Celsi to any promotion of
hers; she did earnestly endeavor by Language and Presents to gain him the
Votes of them all, and in in particular of Minima Pandolfina, Nina delle
Cannaie, and of Mary Vittoria delle Mass, assuring them that if they were not
wanting in their due fidelity to concur at her instance in the advancement of
this person, they should be prodigiously rewarded for their pains and affection.

On the other hand the party of Ladies, who being interessed in their own
advantage, take no farther care for the public good, but only for themselves;
every particular person among them did strongly endeavor to engage in
discourse about their Inamoratos, and did absolutely oppose the pretenses of
the Whores: whereupon alleging a thousand defects against Celsi and Spada,
they did pretend that these should be totally excluded as Counterfeits of
little credit, and no indifferency as much with the male as the female sex; or
to speak more properly, for their applying themselves to both, protesting that
certain notice was given, that withal they seemed willing to contradict their
own satisfaction, and apply themselves to the wicked practices of the Chigi,
yet one of them was her Creature, which was Celsi, and by consequence suspected
to join in his Election, and therefore it was done before the famous Erratica,
with the nomination of Azzolino or Maldacchino; she pretended to be approved by
all the rest for two reasons; First, because they being such persons, it was
expedient in point of policy, that the choice should light upon some youthful
person, to the end that the length of a good Popes Reign might give some
recompense for the sufferings of the disastrous and villainous Government of
the precedent Bishop of Rome.

The Duchess Mattei, who was not willing to lose her satisfaction and advantage
altogether, out of respect and civility, did oppose her self, saying, that as
to the exclusion of Celsi and of St. Susan, it was extraordinary well done; but
as to the inclusion of Azzolino or Maldacchino, she could neither afford her
approbation nor commendation thereunto, because these two persons being at
present cast down low enough in every place, you would put them in a condition,
in the space of few years to scandalize all the Ladies that ever were, and for
that reason it was not well nor advantagiously done in them to hazard it,
having nothing hereafter to rely upon between the hopes and new fears of being
deluded, and to meet with the greatest difficulties, from whom they expected
immediate assistance and happiness: and that it was most credibly related to
her, that Maldacchino had a good share of the French Pox by exchange; and if
that as yet the fruits was not maturated, however the Thirds were most
mischievous; and therefore there is a necessity that we should move slowly in
this business, that we may not be the occasion of so much detriment to the
universality of the female World, and grieve their consciences. Whence it
appears to me very expedient to beseech Erratica, that she would be pleased to
give her concurrenr vote for Bonelli; who, besides his being an aged Subject
and a Relation, he was known to be o^ good repute, so that he might upon some
rational grounds pretend to this suprem^ Dignity. Besides he has given man^
proofs of his person in Spain, where n^ misfortune happened to him, nor was eve^
observed to deviate from the affection conconceived by him of this Sex,
notwithstanding that he had a rough and hairy countenance, which was the true
reason that any person was compatible, who receiving no farther information,
would have sworn him to be a most cruel Pentapolitan.

Then Adrianella answered, your Excellency by this way of reasoning concludes
on my side, because these and many nobler qualifications do concur in Cardinal
Rospigliosi my friend, an expert man, well skilled in the trade, facetious in
conversation, of a quick wit, ingenious in his matter, and very free to
acknowledge the services and the affection of those that most respect him;
besides his having bin in Spain, and giving far greater testimonies than
Bonelli, worthy a serious reflection; therefore that I being moved with these
considerations do not condescend to their desires, I beg their pardon, because
I have a great deal of reason to serve this person more then any other
whatsoever.

Soft a little, my Lady Adrianella (replied the Princess of Rossano) and the
Lord Gardinal Odelscalchi, what injury has he done you? you know that we
always wished you well, and that my advantage has ever been for your good:
This Cardinal has deserved well of our House, and is a person that deserves
good will; and that which is of greatest importance, he will do nothing to
displease me, therefore he is worthy of esteem.

I beg your Excellencies pardon ( Adrianella returned) because this is
awry-neck't fellow, a mumbler of Pater nosters, that minds not the Ladies; and
if by chance he meets one in the Street, he crosses himself, as if he spied
the Devil; and farther, Lady let it suffice, that he is a counterfeit Saint.
Your Excellency is not ignorant of the Proverb, A Butchers dog and
Company-keepers, ever avoid, avoid.

O Figh, figh, I know he is a man of desert, and we can meet with no other,
said Rossana.

Adrianella replied again, if your Excellency should talk till to morrow
morning, I should never be able to understand that it were the part of a
judicious person to confide in this Pope, who is a Blessing-monger, and has
one fault, that he never looks one in the face; he is so obstinate, that all
the Tortures of Ripetta would not at all move him, although he himself be a
Milanese.

Well Sister, I see there is no discoursing with you, but you will be passionate
(replied the Princess.)

With these and the like confusions were things managed for the ensuing
Election; so that they seemed to be in such a hurry, that without a long
Session of the Conclave, they could not finish the business of the Election as
they had designed, if the death of Alexander should happen, which is much
desired.

Wherefore perceiving on the 22th day that their voices and hopes did increase,
by a certain new accident, which, according to report, happened to them, they
newly awaked out of that sleep in which they had lien these two days without
any proceedings; every one of them did hold out stoutly for the persons
insisted upon: and were by order from the Soveraignness of the Ladies, and
Angela only on the behalf of the Whores, made to understand, That they should
all meet at the Vaschette, the place appointed for the Conclave, that they
might there make an Assembly, and discourse about the ensuing Election, before
they did conclude, that they might with more ease and less disturbance among
them understand the difficulties, which it seems were now risen up among them,
and that it was known that they had with public damage and discommodity
commonly published the effecting of their desires by what they said, contrary
to the public good.

Wherefore this summons seeming very proper and convenient, there was not so
much as one person that did seem averse to so honorable an undertaking: so that
on the 22th. day in the place appointed of the Vaschette near the house of
Maria Teresa, one of the Whores of this Company, ad sonum Tubi, (a certain
person John Baptista Gronata Townclark and Spy to Don Mario in Borgo waited as
Bailiff.) The Whores made their solemn Entrance, viz. Angela Sala the
Senioress, Nina Barcarola, Cicela dello Struzzo, Brigida della Bufola, Anna the
happy, Maria Vittoria, Diana Velletrana, Ghita delle Portiere, Margherita of
Florence, Minima Pandolfina, Nina Cucchierina, Nina delle Caniere, Cecca of
Florence, Niuccia Belluccia del Pancascreccio, Nina Faccendona Momma
Velletrana, Laura of Ferrara, Laura Massa with the whole Sisterhood, Giovanni a
Santa Maria in via, and Angela Dezza of Garaffone, 24 persons in all, invested
with prudence and authority over the Bawdy-Houses.

There came many factious persons, who took part with these same Ladies, as
Assistants and Coadjutors in this so great a work; so that there arose a most
extravagant confusion and contest at the door: insomuch that coming to blows
for their places, they banged one another so handsomely, that in the conclusion
many of them were strangely and dangerously hurt. The Canon Regular Scotti, who
to serve Ravizza went to wait on Barcarola, was so wel-favour'dly beaten in
this skirmish, that he is still much pained in the arms and knees, so that he
cannot stir out in foul weather.

The Abbat Pizzisio quite lost his nose, so that he was forced to get him a
Taliacotian one.

The Lord Cardinal Aquaviva, who would court Minima Pandolfina for the interest
of Azzolino, did so wrench his back in the conflict, that he has such an
imperfection, as by degrees will turn to the Running of the reins.

My Lord Cesarini, and the Popes two Chancellors, who endeavored to make
friends to keep in their office, were shrewdly thrash'd 't one of them received
a back-blow upon his Privy-members, and the other such a blow in his groin,
which swelled so grievously, that it will be many months in cure.

But my Lord Altemps they say received the greatest prejudice of them all, who
fell backward on the floor so unhappily, that he brake his head in the fall,
and received the same hurt in the groin as the Chancellor had, by a blow in his
fore-parts: so that the accidents in themselves were very sad and unexpected.

The She-Conclavists were hereupon at peace, and whilst they were complementing
one another, the Ladies came to them; who, neither upon one consideration not
other, more than out of policy, daily practiced; laying aside all manner of
thoughts whatsoever, concerning the inequality and disrepute of these
Curtezans, approached the door in a most scornful and unaccustomed way: and
having made all the Curtezans silly Gallants stand aside, they passing them by,
went up of their own accord, and so mixed themselves with the Whores, the men
following them.

It seemed to some of the men, that this union of Ladies and Whores, was a very
unequal mixture; so that without thinking of it, some of them began to
discourse very freely of that business: and making some reflection upon
Erratica, and guessing pretty nearly what might be the cause of it, did very
much press to know the true reason that obliged Her to give this occasion of
admiration. Wherefore She giving them to understand, That this was occasioned
by reason of the infrequency of such Meetings: She ordered with a nod, that
those that were assembled should come to Her, and that they should leave off
their complements at present, and make use of them another time, delivering
Herself as follows:

THe deplorable condition into which the perfidiousness and obstinate aversion
of the Seneses to Ladies, who to this day still reign, has involved us; is a
thing so apparent and public: that it seems to no purpose, and dissonant to
reason, so much as to doubt that it is not very notorious to you: Since that we
have daily seen for these Twelve years and better hitherto, that the Popes
Antichambers are filled with the youths of the Family of the Chigi, who to our
disgrace triumph in that grandeur, which we heretofore should have nauseated,
and now being wanderers and banished thence, we earnestly seek after; which
might easily persuade you to believe, that we have had a great deal of violence
offered us, for which we must seek out redress, because herein not only our
disparagement, but our prejudice is equal: so that it seems your admiration
deserves no excuse, since that being informed of the urgency of the business,
and the necessity of the ease, that you should admire at it, is strange, being
this very day constrained, though to your detriment, to convene, and agree with
other persons, though inferior to you in condition, mean in quality, of a
strange fortune, and infamous by profession; so much the more, that the
countenancing some actions, though unusual, and otherwise not permitted a
Prince; is not altogether blameless, when private interest, which policy trusts
us to provide for before before our reputation, or any other thing whatsoever
move us to it; besides, since we have showed our selves so publicly, this
appearing so disjoynted, that is, by the Ladies standing upon pre-eminence, and
not condescending to treat with the Whores, is a conceit that will bring so
little advantage, or profit to us, that we are resolved for the future to bring
up this custom, that as well the Ladies as the Curtezans shall be equally
esteemed, and without any imaginable distinction, that Whore and Lady signifies
the same thing; to the end, that when a Lady will seek her own satisfaction, or
a Whore pretend to represent a Lady, it shall be freely permitted without
meeting with any signs of derision by the hand being pointed at, or
supercilious reproaches, as to this day is used in the City, and we our selves
did a little before our wonderful condescension.

Therefore, Gentlemen, rest satisfied with this Declaration, and leave us free
to our selves, by your departure, to negotiat in this business, for which we
did call together this Assembly, and so ended.

The Gentlemen that stood by were all satisfied with this Harangue, and in
token of their consent, did agree with the general applause of Erattica's
expressions, and departed satisfied to understand that hence forward they
should not need to be inquisitive whether a Woman was a Lady or a Whore; since
it was indifferently concluded among themselves, that who names the one
excludes not the other; and that mentioning the one, both the qualities were
expressed.

When the Gentlemen were departed, Erattica took up again her discourse de
novo, who continuing still in the same mind she was at first, did endeavor to
leave no stone unturned, which might afford her some hope of obtaining her
desires in favor of Azzolino and Maldocchino, with a design to captivate the
minds of all Opposers; that they might in the end find themselves obliged to
subscribe and condescend unto her will: She then prosecuting her discourse,
thus said;

I believed it my duty (Dear Sisters) in this so important juncture of affairs;
upon which your advancement or ruin indisputably depends, to advise you of,
and discover unto you, all that I apprehend may prove injurious, or else
advantageous to us in our designs, because I have been a party among you ever
since I first heard our Pope was at Confession. Besides that, Ladies you see
the opinions of every one are so tumultuous and disagreeing concerning these
matters, that I had resolved, as a thing almost desperate, to leave off all,
and to refer the success of this new Election to the conduct of chance and
fortune: But recollecting my thoughts upon this matter, and remembering the
cruel persecutions that our Occupation has been under for so many years, and
the great decay thereof in the time of these Seneses, these modern scandals of
the Brothel-house, and most cruel Dioclesians of our natural delights, I have
found my self so much moved with compassion and justice; that I could not at
least but endeavor to make you understand my thoughts and desires, which are
altogether directed to your profit and satisfaction; therefore if you think
that I mind not the dignity of our Sex, or at least that I lay it not to heart,
I swear you are deceived in this particular, since you could never discern that
I ever did you any injury. Therefore believe that it was either out of pure
necessity to content those few that remain, which are at this day reduced to a
very inconsiderable number; or because the fear I had of making our secret
delights public, and infamous in the eye of the world, tha^ has brought me
thus furnished with council, from that which I thought not only for my own, but
their reputation also.

Wherefore I think it convenient to acquaint you, that reflecting upon all that
I have glanced upon in this particular, you ought to follow me absolutely, in
the chosing (during this vacancy) for our Pope one of these most trusty
persons, either Azzolino, or Maldacchino, your most affectionate friend, as you
know certainly by experience.

And to the end that you may understand I should not have attempted to propose
these persons to you, out of a desire to assume an arbitrary power of Election,
and personate the Queen out of my own Dominions, without a full assurance of
your satisfaction in, and advantage by, them.

Therefore I do declare and protest, that if you will concur in the Election of
the two persons abovenamed, they, before we enter into the Conclave, or at
least before we come to a debate concerning them, shall promise and swear to
these following Capitulations.

I. The Lord Cardinal Azzolino shall swear that he will make a Bull, that from
the time of his sitting in the Chair, it may be lawful for the future for any
Priest, Friar, religious Person, either constituted or not constituted in
Ecclesiastical Dignities, freely to go a Whoring, without any fear of affronts
or disturbance, either by night or day, or in any season of the year
whatsoever. II. He shall set forth a legal Declaration, when he obtains the
Government of the State, that the Ladies that are single, or married, may
without any opposition, shame or disparagement, and without incurring any
penalty, either of their Prince, Husbands or Parents, indulge their own humor
as much as they please; nor may they, nor ought they be obstructed by any means
whatsoever, no more than in their going to Mass. III. That neither public nor
private Ladies may, or ought be compelled to change their appartment for the
lodging of their Friends, unless in the most excessive heat; that is, from the
25th of July to the very end of the 25th of August; upon pain of being guilty
of public violence, if they are not content, and voluntarily agree to it;
except the first, second, and third day, they lodge in Inns, that Counts and
Marquesses may happen to lodge in the ordinary Chambers of their House, upon
pain, to the transgressors hereof, of his displeasure. IV. That the Canon
Regular Del Corno, My Lord Pepe, my Lord Anguisciola, my Lord Cafarelli, my
Lord Bernino, and my Lord Cavallernio, and all the generation of the Seneses,
even to the last man of them, shall be removed far from the City and the bounds
thereof; to the end that they may not infuse into the minds of the people, by
their heretical doctrines concerning poor Ladies, that persuasion, that they
ought to be abhorred and avoided, as they have already begun, and we have seen
practiced to this very day. V. And finally he shall impose a great Tax upon
those that keep Pages; which, to tell you the truth Sisters, are our utter
ruin, for since the vicinity of that odor is in the nostrils of Men, the
Chamber-maids and Matrons are neglected, and are not thought persons fit for
any other service, but of this nature; and therefore I have discovered the
larger extent of the use of those Chamber-fellows, Valets de Chamber, youths in
the Shops, and Barbers boys; by whose means the whole world seems to be
altogether strangers to us, as we plainly see.
Therefore, Sisters, to tell you the truth, if you accept of this offer in good
part which this person makes you, a man of himself faithful and rational, you
will find that he cannot possibly be bettered, as for our use: and now to weigh
well the substance of these same Capitulations, you will apprehend there can be
no other way or means found more proper to bring the Brothel-house to its
ancient Custom, in spite of that cursed practice of the Seneses, then what is
therein set down; besides, the most pregnant circumstances that result from
this particular for the liberty of the Ladies, who, to this very day, are
forced to run through a thousand dangers, a thousand means, and infinite
troubles; then they may without any imputation or inconveniency, take a fuller
and freer satisfaction in all things; a thing, which to speak truth, would be
of sufficiency, without the help of any other; to stir up any Person whatsoever
among us to proceed with expedition to so honorable and deserved an Election.

If then your fancy should waver upon this consideration, that he is so
affectionatly and really mine, that you cannot agree to this Election, then I
return and advise you with all clearness and sincerity, for the great advantage
of all your Consistory, however do not suffer your selves to be deprived of
imagination and sense, but being guided by reason, resolve at least that
Maldacchino wall be the person, who I am confident will have success in all his
undertakings, to his profit, honor and satisfaction. O but you will say, what
will the world think, if we should resolve to make this person Pope? one that
is a beast so brutish, has a look so deformed, a countenance so rude, a shape
so il-proportion'd. Laugh in your sleeve at them, and make this answer to
convince any person that talks to you concerning him, saying, do but mind what
he has; and do not go about to seek better bread then is made of Wheat. If
they should chance to say that he is a witless mad-fellow, he commits nothing
but absurdities, he never entertains a thought but what is folly in the very
abstract, he never speaks but he manifests his simplicity; it is no matter for
that, let them go on, and if afterward you please to give them any reply, tell
them, that we have no need of Aristotle's nor Cicero's, but of lazy idle
persons, and Mamma-luques, to lead them by the nose as we please, and that will
be subservient to our humor night and day, and bestow what they have upon us
without many words and discourse; and that which is of greatest moment, that
they be not so nice, but that they can eat the bread of their own Table, and
satiate themselves therewith, without going about to seek other Junkets, as
those learned men use to do. And you know very well, that in the long
continuance of your profession, you ever met with those that are most curious,
and nice to be pleased, with here and there one, who pretend to walk on tiptoe,
and to speak mincingly. Whereas in this person you will meet with nothing but
affibility, kindness, a readiness to serve you, and please your humor: There
is no danger that he will be much inclined to suspicion, disrespect or respect;
with a good meaning will do what ever you shall desire him, and will entertain
no other thought but how to please and content you; and, nay further, that you
may in short know, and consider of what nature his proffers are, he shall also
capitulate with you, as follows.

I. He will make you share in his Trust, and you shall be Mistresses, and set
foot in any part of the Palace that seems best to you, or pleases you most, to
converse with him; shall call in the Proclamation against Coaches, shall free
you from the Imposts at Easter and Christmas; and (which is of greater
consequence) will give you also leave to keep a Carneval in Lent, and, if
occasion be, will lend his Rochet and Robes, and will go in woman's Apparel like
you, and will make as many Banquets as you shall think convenient, without
disturbance, as others do, always keeping himself in that natural and free
loving humor of his. II. He shall make a most severe Proclamation against the
Usurers, and build near to St. James's (the Hospital of those that are
incurable) an Appartment for poor bashful Females, where they shall be attended
with decency and order, after a noble manner, without being beholding to the
service of some contemptible Servant-maid or lewd Fellow, who is very
negligent, and when his assistance is most required, shows you a fair pair of
heels, and leaves you to your prejudice. III. He shall bring this Custom, which
the Civil Offices of the City yet constitute among us, and shall appoint you to
have Praesidentes of the Exchequer, Signet-Office and Treasury, as to our own
interests, who shall assist you so, that you may provide in all junctures of
affairs against the impertinencies of those Priests and Prelates, who, when they
come to take a heat, promise great matters, and when they are once gone, if
they have not some pretty little youth, who very gracefully and publicly goes
to visit them again, and to solicit them for their service, there is no profit
at all accrews thereby. IV. And finally, he promises to do all that in him
lies, to endeavor to bring them to allow this Custom in the Consistory, that
Popes shall Marry, or at least shall be served by the Ladies, to take off that
scandal, that the Papacy was ever composed of such persons as never fancied any
such thing, and that one day it will come to pass to our great honor, to have
young Popes, and to bring them up with Pap; that then when they grow up in
years, their inclination may wholly oblige them to us and our satisfaction. And
to sum up all, we shall have a Pope, whom if we would have him made on purpose,
we could not have him better; as for the rest, you may rather fear the Abbot
Luigi, then him; because he is a creature without gall, and a great Epicure;
and though he be deformed, yet he is like those Pears in Rome, that the worse
they are to sight, the better they are to eat; therefore I beg of you to take
these reasons into your serious consideration, and to agree with me in my
opinion for the Election of one of these two persons.
When Erratica had concluded her discourse, Adrianella arose first of all, and
with a moderate smiling countenance, making her obeisance comelily, graciously,
yet humbly to them all round, began to make a Speech.

May it please your Majesty to grant me the favor to be the first that shall
give you my reasons,; to the end this noble Consistory, which apprehend the
business quite contrary to the sense of your Majesty, might be able to judge as
shall seem meet to their solid, but womanish judgment.

It is true, nay most certainly true, that our sex has just reason to expect
all the advantages that till now could ever have been desired by us, and which
your Majesty has so Rhetorically described and amplified, by the promotion of
the two persons proposed: But, because in short, these particulars, that are
pretended to be agreed unto by these Lords in our service, are more directly
for the advantage of the Public, then we private Ladies, who pass for chaste
persons, under the title of Ladies, with all the exactness we can: Now, to
bring us to consent to the promotion of these persons for the Public, and
abandon our particular good, does not sure with my temper. I having great
regard to that Proverb, that permits not any person to leave his own real, for
a titular right: Besides, to tell you plainly, this confusion that will happen
in attempting to unite the Ladies and Whores together, without making any kind
of distinction or difference; it is true, is a thing that will be of advantage
to those other inconsiderable Ladies, but will not do me any service at all,
but rather an injury, because then I lose all my trouble and care that I have
taken all my lifetime to be esteemed as a Lady, if I shall not be so; and to
be believed honest, if I am not so reputed, therefore I cannot by any means
rest upon those your sentiments: And besides, to deprive my self of the
protection of Rospigliosi, my very great and affectionate friend, by whom I and
all the rest of the Ladies may be well treated, beyond all other persons: And
indeed, let this be true, what is it to me if the Florentine Faction, or that
of Siena, has so basely clouded the glory and esteem of our sex; if I,
nevertheless, have now at last given over my Trade, and I (for some other
reasons) a great while ago have voluntarily turned my back upon my friends,
that I might not nauseate them at the sight of my countenance, which is
altogether short of the voice for dilicacy.

What need I care if there be a public Law made concerning the legallity or
illegallity of Cardinals, Prelates, and all other Ecclesiastics, going without
control to the house of every Lady of theirs i^ I have had, and still have my
house full o^ them? Have not you your self, Madam, constantly seen Cardinal
Chigi though a Senese; Cardinal Albici, Cardinal Bonvisi, Don Mario, Don
Augostino, all those that belong to the Popes Treasury and Chamber: and in sum
our greatest Adversaries, night and day, and at all times? Yes certainly.

Then what benefit can I have by this new Order? O! But you will say, they came
not to you for your sake, nor for the Music, but for love of the Eunuchs, that
you have gathered together; and therefore it being not your Trade, it fares
with you, as it does with all Arts; and particularly that of Cookery, who
neither speak, discourse, nor come to the Cook for the satisfaction, but for
his viands. Very good, yet Sisters, every one helps himself with his own, and
labors for his own interest; because this world was not made for fools, to
speak as I ought.

So also as to other matters concerning Usurers, St. James's and Offices,
though I have paid the Baker, I have not pawned my Clothes for it: and to tell
you true I am in good health, and my reins are still sufficiently warm, so that
I should want nothing but a little Ambition and Government; and this I can
neither pretend to, nor hope for, unless it be by means of my Lord Cardinal
Rospigliosi. Therefore her Majesty may be pleased to pardon me, that I cannot
possibly condescend to hers, nor be removed from my own now settled opinion.

Nay, nay, Madam (replied la Barcarola to this discourse) I hope you will not
deal thus by us, then your thoughts are only for your own profit, and do not in
the least concern your self for the Company; be patient, and fly not out into
passion; for I deal truly with you, you are a brave Curtezan; and I must tell
you, that your dealings with those Lords have made you Mistress of your Art,
more than any thing else whatsoever: But understand how this came to pass.

I do protest, said Leonora presently, being red with anger, that what I said,
I spoke not as to you, nor your Company, because I now know you have agreed;
but I mentioned it for the other Ladies, to whom, in my opinion, the same
reasons belong, that are suitable to the case: as to what remains, now I have
declared my thoughts, I will not repent me of it.

Your Ladyships (replied the other) are at the height of your fortune, and take
your rest at pleasure, according to the Proverb; you think that I was, and am
yet in such a condition, that I stand in need of no person; and if I have not
cared to play the mar-Trade, as some others have done, and to make a medley of
Ladies and Whores, yet I have by all means had, nevertheless, Gentlemen and
Cardinals, that did continually court me; nor did I ever much concern my self
to be taken notice of particularly more then other persons, and to receive all
the courtesies which I could wish for. It is sufficient that we meet not here
to contend about that. The business is this, if I can promote my Lord Cardinal
Celsi, who I know wishes me well, and others as well as he, I understand there
is nothing done but what comes through the hands of Ravizza, who is entirely
mine, and that I made him what he is; and if he be not so with all persons, yet
he is altogether faithful to me; yet if her Majesty thinks it better for the
public good, that this man should be excluded: I will not be obstinate in a
thing that can no ways prove advantageous to me; but I am content to give my
vote and voice for one of those two proposed by her Majesty, with those
capitulations mentioned to you; because I judge it convenient for me so to do.

And I know very well (said Leonora smiling, and speaking between the teeth)
this is to make a virtue of necessity, and to make use of the opportunity to
throw off that burden, which I cannot do, that the Lady Nina, fore^ knows that
to believe either Celsi or Ravizzo, who are a couple of Traitors, whose credit
or word are not to be relied upon, who have a hand in every thing, is to throw
her self down a precipice, and to put out both her eyes; now she goes about to
seek moderate ways to free her from the engagement, and to disoblige her self
with the greatest reputation imaginable. Alas, Madam Nina, take notice, that we
know all this. And what do you know, Madam Leonora ( Nina answered) O, I know
(replied the other) that Celsi desired something, I know not what, of you, that
you at first denied him, and he went to obtain of the Lady Minima, and she
suddenly granted it him to ^ight you, without any great difficulty, and ^ou
were extremely galled, when you un^erstood it.

Minima replied, I hope you will excuse me, Madam Leonora, it was not
absolutely so; because that if it be true, that I satisfied his desire, yet it
is not altogether that I condescended to it to cross the Lady Nina, but because
Ravizza advised me to humor him, he being in a capacity to be extremely
serviceable to me; and the more, because he was in credit and hopes to be
advanced to the Papacy, therefore I was his servant.

So then, was Ravizza the man that gave you this counsel? Alas poor Lady Minima
(replied Nina.) Truly (answered Minima) those that are so, I tell you true, it
was just as the Lady Leonora said; you must understand I was ever of a free
temper, and clearly discover my thoughts; I must be plain with you; do you not
know why you had no notice? The reason was, because that it being publicly
known, that you play the man more then the woman* and besides you get together
all the young boys of the City, to trade with the Seneses, to the great damage
and prejudice of the rest of our Order; instead of being registered in the list
of those of the Vaschette, you are found in the roll of the Piazza Novana:
Therefore we need not wrangle, o^ make any more ado, but to tell you the truth,
and modestly pass it by, and not do as those people that have their horns in
their pocket, and yet will fasten them upon their head whether you will or no.

How (said Nina) does your Excellency say, that I keep a company of young boys
in my house, and that they are intol'd in the Piazza Novana?

I say (replied the Princess) that all persons know you take delight in nothing
but such unlawful actions: nay farther, that once speaking of me, you said,
whilst they were talking, that Don Camillo my Husband would never be kind to me
more, that he grieved to see the insupportable extravagancie of my family, and
therefore he did mis-use me, and forsook my bed thereupon; and this befell me,
because I could not be content with that moderation, which you used to preserve
your friends; which was to keep every inconsiderable complaint to ^ome to his
knowledge, and so to cover ^he natural faults, and constantly bear with ^he
usual changes that happen in the world.

Suppose that I had said so, though real^y I don't remember that I ever
troubled ^y self with other persons concerns; what ^eed the Eagle care for
flies? How comes it to pass (said Nina) that this Trade, as well as that of
trafficking in the Commodities of other persons, crept into my House. Alas,
Sister (replied the Princess, you must not engage people to sell all, because
that when they are forced to it, they say more then is convenient.

Nina made answer, say as much as you think convenient, what you please, I
would know, whatsoever it cost me, whether those things are true or false,
which are reported of me. Then you have a desire I should tell you, well, I
will, though it be but to spite you (replied the Princess). Do you not believe
that it is not known all over Rome, that you made a conspiracy against all the
rest of your poor Companions, to procure their ruin, without any hope of
recovery, if they did not dispose themselves very circumspectly to take all
things in their order? Do you thin^ Rome is ignorant of your agreement wit^
Fulvio Zacconato, now Heir, and the Lord del Medico Missorio (though some think
h^ is his Bastard) who is now called the Abbo^ Missorio, to make a Conventicle
of Seneses* both at home and abroad, and so root ou^ the Commandres of the
Brothel-house, wit^ the patent of Whore of the Palace; an^ then what wonder was
it, if all was fish that came to the Net: and the concourse of all the Nobility
which you had, was because who ever came had his Coach. And now, my Daughter,
things at Rome are soon known; and a blessing upon the Knight Ciarci, with the
good memory of the Earl of Gaddi Delci, who were the most infamous and beggarly
rascally Knights that ever were, and came to Rome that night, by all means,
when you had broken open the backdoor when they cured you of those ill
thoughts, and stopped the course of your wicked career, that you had undertaken;
and if this man be dear to you still (as is believed) although that Missorio
knows yet how to keep up the good opinion of Cardinal Nini, and his Eminency
Chigi, nevertheless the thing is but short lived; because I am now informed,
that the House of the Barbarini begins to persecute it, without any hopes of
hinderance whatsoever, which they go about with all diligence to do; and Madam
Rossa, the fair spoken, goes about instructing them: it is a madness to
discourse of it, Sister, because that the Lettice and Artichoks, when they are
grown seedy, are food for poor people, and not for the Nobility. Now, Sister,
what say you, and shall I say more to you? Do as I do, do; content your self to
go about your own business, that will be better for you: Know this, that the
Proverb says, that whosoever comes to a wedding without invitation, either is
a fool, or a madman.

The unfortunate Stagnarina was in such an amazement, that besides her being
naturally of a low stature, she became now so little that she could creep into
an augurhole, and so being quite jear'd out of her skin, and deluded, went away
without taking leave of the company.

Now the tumult being allayed by the departure of this fantastical baggage,
they returned to their first work, though it was late; and it did seem that the
Conclavists were tired out from evermore discoursing in that place, because
some of them did make a sign, as if they would make water, who said, that their
heads ached through the excessive heat; and others muttred, and said they were
thirsty, and the like; insomuch that it looked as if it ha^ been a Jewish
Synagogue. But la Rossan^ who grieved, and saw well this hurly-burly, was
displeased that she was disturb'^ by that draggle-tail'd Slut, being the
Consistory was so attentive to what she ha^ prepared to say concerning
Odescalco: Wherefore Erratica understanding it, began to say, for God's sake,
Ladies, let not our business be turned into discourse of toys and trifles; and
that they would take the weight of the affair into their consideration, for the
most pertinent reasons that did now concur; and if there was any occasion to
mention any thing else, they should speak it freely, that it should be carried
on without discomposing the Audience; and if agreeing in their opinion, they
were not as yet resolved to bring their votes to a head, they might, upon the
first notice given of the Chair being vacant, come thither, and include those
persons they most desired.

Now Rossana began to talk high, and with a look neither supercilious nor
pleasant, but between both; what will your Majesty then forget the Cardinal
Odescalco, your most affectionate Servant, and friend to my House? Is it
possible, that the merit of this person does not necessarily urge you to shake
off all other persons, to follow him single, and particularly his favors above
the rest.

So honest a man, a person of so clear a spirit, a mind so adorned with
virtues; O, Madam, Methinks you do him wrong, and and that your Majesty falls
short of your devoir, and your solid judgment. Your Majesty, I hope, will
pardon me for speaking so boldly in this Assembly. In fine then, Justice must
take place.

Wherefore I beseech your Majesty once again to take this business into due
consideration, that I may at least reap this satisfaction, as to be satisfied
with the refusal, that your Majesty and the rest of the Ladies can make.

Very well; yet not so well as may satisfy your Excellency neither (replied
Brigidaccia) I know that we shall have but cold entertainment from this
hypocritical Jesuit; I beseech you, Princess, tell me, whether will your
Excellency swear that this man will diligently mind the Ladies business, verbi
gratia, that he will be pleased to converse with them, and be kind unto them?

I can tell you a truth, (replied the Princess) that he has visited me often
at my habitation, and behaved himself with all the affibility imaginable, and I
could not perceive any natural aversion that he had for businesses of that
nature. Yes (said Brigidaccia) and pray how long since was it that these
amourous confidential visits passed between you? By my life, if you have no
other commodities but such as these to carry to Market, you must even set it
off with fair words, for there are no things to set a price on it.

We have been here all this day, and yet have done nothing to conclude: the
Lady Nuccia Bellaccia began to speak, the Lady Nuccia delle canuccie
accompanying with a it is very true, Lady: The first went on, and said, Their
Ladyships do not know what is come into my mind; that this Pope being to be
made by force, and not being able to avoid any other Election, it would be well
for the future to let these Cardinals continue a while, with a vengeance to
them; because they being Priests, we shall agree very badly with their humor,
and that we should make choice of some good Friar or Monck, as it was of old;
and those (as I have heard my Grandmother say) were happy days, that the
Ladies had more double Ducatoons then; and the Bawdy-houses were far better
furnished with moneys then ever as the Treasury of Venice.

O, my Daughters, said Angela Sala, it is a madness to think of it; for
besides, that this thing you talk of cannot be, it were requisite you should
understand one thing, that now the Friars have made a Custom; besides that,
which is known to be done to Novices, there once came a business to my hands
that did astonish me, and Maria Vittoria knows it very well too; how I was
treated by a certain Friar, who was going to Supper the Thursday before
Shrove-Sunday the last year.

I thank God I was never driven to that disgrace (replied Nuccia.)

Said the Seinoress, because you have had Timone, who was a Frenchman: But as
to the Lady Nina, to tell you the truth, I cannot understand it, by reason the
practices between her and Silvio de Vecchi, who is of Siena, proves the
contrary.

Indeed, indeed (the Lady began to reply all in a heat) if you by chance had at
any time talked with me of any such thing, and I would have shut the doors
against him with disdain.

I but (the old Lady rejoined) and what did Nicholas Lacche do there about a
year ago, as you love him, tell me?

It is three years ago, saving the truth (the other returned answer.)

Is it but three years (replied Brigidaccia) since his Son the Duke of
Carpinetto.

The Princess made answer, it was now twenty years ago.

Go to, Your Excellency never asks me any other questions. I know that I can at
present swear that she is deceived, because the visits were not hers, nor did
the Lord Cardinal give himself that trouble for her sake; I am sure of that.

And you, to speak true (replied the Duchess Mattei) seeing that he never
converseth with Christians, that he is so obstinate in his chymerical fancies,
that he pretends to be so good and lively a Saint, and then to do all things
after his own way, as if no other person in the world had brains besides
himself: To deal plainly with your Excellency, this is enough to make us so far
from desiring to chose him Pope, as that he should not be so much as a
Parochian in Rome. I beseech you remember, that if we should by chance resolve
upon this Election, the Papacy would be all French (though he be a Milanese,
and so consequently ought to be a Spaniard) and nothing of Italian among them;
besides, we know that this humor is not condescended unto, unless it be to
promote Scullery-boys and Ostlers, all France and Lorrain would leave their
habitations to come to Rome; one to be made a Canon Regular, another an Abbat,
one a Bishop, and the other a Cardinal. Does not your Excellency see that there
appear none but ordinary persons in the Antichamber, and Gentlemen of the
third degree? But pray let us forbear, and disgrace our selves no farther with
discoursing any more of him, because it is a thing beside the matter.

Besides the matter, I, most extraordinarily (all the followers of Nina
Barcarola began to say) and at the worst it would be better in case of
necessity, to conclude upon Spadino, or Celsi; is it not true, Madam Angela?

Yes, Madam (She answered) and I, as for my part, will be of the same opinion:
And therefore I am content to follow her Majesty to the uttermost, to include
one of those she has mentioned; as for the rest, I will not quit my own, since
others will not do so neither.

My Sisters, of all these three Hero's, the Crab, at best, would (said She)
that took the Wolf, they are Husbandmen without government, and court you
most; and, according to the notes of their Sol fa, they will keep time with 39,
and it may be more.

Will you, in fine, have me make it out clearly to you; they are neither good
for men nor women; and for foreign affairs, two of them are of the nature of a
Roman, and the last is a perfidious Teatine. What can be said more? it is a
Triumvirate, that will make Sugar-sops for the Devil when he is sick. I, for my
part, had rather Father Carovila should be Pope, if he could rise again from
the dead, then one of them.

Erratica began to express her self thus; no more of this discourse; this is no
place appointed for Devils; and since we see, that we cannot all this day
dispatch this business, it is sufficient that we have brought it to that pass,
that we understand the difficulty: As for what remains, the best course we can
take will be to make an end with that Directrix, Time and Opportunity. I am
satisfied that they understand the advantages, that those persons I mentioned,
proposed to them; and I take no farther care for the rest.

La Leonora, that was so long without speaking, seeing things more intricate
then ever, began to hope she should have time to negotiate, and like one, who
among the rest, was perhaps the most crafty, and best known in the humors of
the world, had it in her head, raised her self to say three or four Country
songs, to dismiss the Assembly, and move Erratica a little to anger, that was a
little too much satisfied that she had gained the major part of their Votes on
her side at the first: Wherefore turning to her; in truth, even as your Majesty
can with so much ease obtain the good will of all, for the promotion of those
persons you propose to St. Peter's Chair; so I believe you may obtain your
desire in making your self be chosen Pope, without any manner of difficulty,
because no person would deny you their vote.

Without doubt ( Brigidaccia answered nimbly, and if it were not to her
disgrace, that Pope Alexander had, who is of so strange a temper, the business
would be done; because, I believe, that he had a mind to make Erratica one
among the men, since it was not his design to place her among the Beasts. But
patience, Madam, for he is as much a Merchant that loses, as he that wins.

Now they all were up to return home to their Houses, the second meeting being
appointed to be the next week, when the Lord Stecchino, Prince of the
Brothel-house, was seen coming into the Conclave, who being very much troubled
and afflicted, laying his hand upon his head, and making his honor in fashion
of a half moon, with his Bandy-legs, began, with a thousand sighs, in the midst
of the Assembly, being almost drowned in a torrent of tears, to howl out in
this manner: O miserable wretches that we are! We are undone, we are ruined: O
the disgrace of Nature! O cursed influence of the Stars! The Pope recovers, the
Pope proves better and better.

You would have thought the soul was departing from these wretched people at
the hearing of this voice, and that their spirit was vanishing; insomuch, that
among so many, you could scarce find one that could do so much as draw out
these words, though with great trouble, though they knew not in the least how
the business went: O, how goes affairs, my Lord Stecchino? How did you come to
know this? Very ill (answered Stecchino.) You know the Pope was given over, if
the Relation be true, that there being a stone loosned in his bladder, it
hindered his Urine, insomuch, that he began now to exceed the time allotted by
the Physicians to his life, that suffers such accidents: Whereupon the world
being turned into a general rejoicing, there was not a voice, but what did
raise it self up to beg of heaven, to be careful of this so jovial and much
desired termination; and there was not a heart, that did not offer up its
desires to the benignity of destiny, that this infamous Sodomit might yield to
Fate. Therefore I, who among the rest, was most sollicitous and most curious
for our own common interest, did by many pretenses get into the Palace, and so
far within the Appartments, without giving, or taking exceptions from any
persons, I understood all the novelties whatsoever that passed, they being all
in such a peck of troubles: And in fine, I came to know this, and that so
certain, that I wanted time to come away, and acquaint you with the news; (it
being assured) of our common felicity, when unexpectedly, behold, I perceived a
sudden change, which speaking an extraordinary joy among those madmen, cast me
down into the Aybss of misery.

Having received this information, the Consistory brake up with a shower of
tears, and lamentations; some of them blaspheming the Destinies for their
perfidiousness, and others against the impiety of Heaven it self; they went
down the Stairs muttering, that it looked just as if Doomsday had been come;
and with much ado there was one; I know not what curious person, who cried
aloud at the threshold of the door; Make an end of your story Stecchini; tell
us how it was; and he answered,

I have told you how the business went already; He can Piss now, and we may go
-- if we will.

When the Assembly was departed from the place, and every one accompanied by
her Gallant to her lodgings, who waited for her at the door; an Officer of one
of the Justices of the Peace came in to take a view of the places where they
sat, that he might be able to give an account to him that had commanded him so
to do, of the order of precedence which was observed among them. But ^t was
impossible to stay there long, so ^trong was the ill scent that they had left
behind them; Besides some pieces of Purple were spied upon the floor, which
made the Officer go out, crying, Boys, Boys, What do we do with so many Whores?

A DIALOGUE Between Pasquin and Marforio, Upon the same Subject of WHOREDOM
Pasquin. DEar Friend, O how I am overjoyed to see thee in such good health;
and that which is of greater importance, altogether lively and well disposed;
but what novelty moved you, what motive did drive you into these parts? what
curiosity obliged you to my Quarters, now the season is so excessive ^ot, to
the great hazard of your person?


Marforio, Truly, if ever I had reason to pay you my devoir, I judge I ought to
do it now; for at this present, I do not only satisfy my own self, but give
the world to understand how I esteem your Friendship.


Pas. Soft and fair a little; let us in part wave these ceremonies, least we
make the Court laugh at us; for to deal cordially with you as a friend, they
will all flout at us, if we our selves use those ceremonies, which we
discommend in other persons. Speak freely, you have somewhat to say to me, is
not that true? Do not conceal your thoughts from me, let me understand them
exactly.


Marf. I confess my self overcome, and therefore I declare sincerely to you,
that a desire of being satisfied in mind, and not superficial complements,
forced me with such speed to visit you at your habitation.


Pasq. Assure your self, that as soon as I saw you set your foot within the
door, I did imagine you were discontented in mind* and I Will lay what you will,
that I know the cause of all this.


Mar. I Will lay no wager, it is beneath a Roman spirit; and you would win as
surely, as ti^ certain few of the Popes Subjects are saved* I come hither to be
informed by you of the state of the interests of our Curtezans, and of the
issue of their Conclave, held with such exquisite order, and great diligence,
endeavoring to get the knack of molding a Pope of their own fashion.


Pas. Very well, the mind then of the Roman is lost and not gained by me; for I
believed as an article of my Creed (but such a Creed as is chewed in Rome) that
it was a business of greater importance then what you relate.


Mar. Of greater importance? you drol with me: there is no other discourse at
Court but of this Curtezan Conclave.


Pas. I know it; but we ought to have an eye upon more substantial and profound
matters then these.


Mar. More substantial, I grant you, but more profound, I deny: Because when we
speak of the Whores of Rome, the discourse is of a most profound thing; they
being more unfathomable then the Sea; insomuch that the most subtle
Theologians, that from time to time fish for their Science in this Ocean,
cannot find out the bottom with the help of all their Theological matter: Well,
it is true that at present, the Whores of Rome are not considerable now a days,
but for their profundity, whilst one good pound of a villainous Bull-Galf is
judged more substantial for a Roman, and for the preservation of the health of
the Court of Rome, then twenty of the best young Heifers. But to say true, in
my opinion, to discourse of the Curtezans of Rome, is a subject substantial
enough; since they are full (though there be always a place empty, which the
more it is replenished the emptier it grows) of the Substance both of the one
and other; particularly of Ecclesiastical substance, which nourishes the most;
besides, they neither do despise the foreign substance of almost all the
Nations of the world; insomuch that now Strangers come to Rome from all parts
of the world, to go to Whores: Therefore you must not be offended with me, nor
upbraid me with this, that we must level at more substantial and profound
matters, since that the Curtezans of this our City are the most profound and
substantial things perhaps of the whole world.


Pas. Be it as you please, I grant you all you can desire, because it is in my
own house, where it would not argue good breeding to enter into disputes with
those that visit me. I shall only tell you, that this depth and substance that
is in the Curtezans, would be worthy our entertainment, if we could find out
nothing more substantial, nor profound; which by many degrees goes beyond all
other substance and depth that ever was known.


Mar. I am curious to know what thing you think there is in Rome, that has a
greater depth than Whoredom.


Pas. What thing? The Nephew-ship, that is a Gulf, an abyss, a Sea, a Hell; A
Hell that the more damned spirits it receives into its embraces, it burns with
the greater desire of having more: A Sea that swallows up of its self the
Merchandises procured by rapine from Seamen, by its proud swelling tempests.
An Abyss, that admits you not to see those that once throw themselves into it;
it is a Gulf that strikes terror in all that look upon it. Two lazy Franciscans
with chiopins are sufficiently able of themselves to fill the belly of the
greatest Whore in the world, and the better if they meet with those that have
the Keys of the Stores at command; these grow as fat as Swine with Acorns; but
to fill up this verago and deep Abyss of the Nephew-ship, neither Kingdoms,
Provinces, States, People, Seculars, Regulars, the Earth, Heaven, Church, nor
the whole world are sufficient. What comparison can be made between the depth
of a poor Curtezan, and the gulf of Nepotism? The depth of such a Lady swallows
up with sweetness, and the gulf of Nepotism with bitterness: The gulf of a
Curtezan seeks nothing but what is voluntary brought to her; and the vorago of
Nepotism obliges and constrains all persons to bring Grist to their Mill. In
fine, he that buries what he has in the Sea of a Whore; he has a kind of a
prerogative to return thither to fish again; but he that loses his substance
in the Abyss of the Nephewship, loses all hope of ever recovering it.


Mar. You will acquaint me with so much, that I shall grant what ever you say.
But how do you understand it of the substance of the Nephewship?


Pas. The substance of the Nephewship is infinite; so that speaking of this you
mention the most substantial thing in the whole Universs; and in effect, the
Nephewship is nothing but a Quintessence distilled in the Limbeck of the
Church, from a great deal of wealth violently taken both from the one and the
other. The substance of Curtezans is made up of one sole species, they drawing
that small wealth they have either out of the purse of some desolate Youth, or
some enamored old Dotard: But the wealth of the Popes Nephews is of such
several kinds, that it is impossible to know the form of it. For the Nephews
rob day and night, both Men and Women, Citizens and Strangers, Priests and
Friars, Married men and Virgins; those that are innocent, and those that are
guilty, small and great; and to conclude, do not spare a whit the Altars
themselves. Nay, I Will go farther, there is some of the Curtezans wealth that
helps to make up that of the Nephewship; but in that of the Curtezan, not one
farthing of the Nephewships substance. And the reason is, because the Popes
Nephews go to Whores without paying any money for the use of their Bodies,
whereas the Whores must pay the Nephews, that they may have liberty granted to
return the whole for a small matter. See, this is the kind of substance that
these goodly Nephews enjoy.


Mar. Then you believed that I came to discourse with you about the Nephewship,
did not you?


Pas. Without doubt; and do not you know that the City, Court, nay, the whole
Universs, believes it! There is not a Scullion in Rome, that did not imagine
when he saw us together that we did confer about the state and condition of the
Nephewship: And because the very name of the Nephews (thanks to their unworthy
actions) is now become odious to Heaven and Earth, the Gentry and Plebeians,
therefore is our discourse thought to be altogether employed in the censuring
those villainous actions of the most wicked Nephews; and the evil proceedings
of the Nephews of the most sanctified Popes.


Mar. We have discoursed so much of this subject, that I think there can be
nothing more added.


Pas. Dear Brother, you deceive your self; for if the Nephewship goes on ad
infinitum, as well in robbing as multiplying constantly the number of their
Relations, multiplicity of words will increase thereupon; and there cannot be
found so licentious a tongue as will be able to publish the tyrannies that
these Reigning Nephews exercise, not only against the miserable people of Rome,
but also against the whole flock of Christ; to whose prejudice they transform
themselves into ravening wolves: Nor can there be so tenacious a memory, as to
retain those many knavish tricks, extortions, contempts, torments and laziness,
that such a number of Nephews do fill Rome withal.


Mar. In my judgment we should all be silent, now that this evil is,
inevitable. Those miseries are complained of, that can be redressed; but in
this case where there is no remedy, prudence requires, we show either our
patience in suffering those evils, or scorn in despising them, or a counterfeit
humor in dissembling them. Whilst Rome is Rome; that is, as long as Rome is
under the Pope, you must expect to see none but Harpyes in the Church, and
Horseleeches in the State Ecclesiastic: Harpyes to devour and consume the
substance of the Subjects; and Horsleeches to suck the blood of all the
faithful, even the very inward bowels that lie most concealed.


Pas. But what would you have men leave off talking, when the Nephews will not
leave off doing of mischief? A fine business indeed, that the party offended
shall be sooner wearied with speaking, then the offender with evil doing? That
the people of Rome shall make an end of talking, and yet the Nephews not leave
off assassinating? That the Nephews have more liberty to rob in Rome, then
Rome, to speak in the world. The miserable state of the Church would grieve to
see this single tyranny; that is, to see her own mouth stopped, and the devouring
Bog of the Nephewship evermore open to their damage: Which you have very well
baptized, by comparing them to the Horsleech, and calling them Harpyes. But I
would have you know, that that so trivial and common Proverb, viz. like will to
like, is most of all verified in the Popes Nephews, they being by natural
instinct, which the Vatican communicates unto them (if it be the Vatican, which
I am not very certain of; since some that esteemed themselves Saints in their
own Apartments as soon as they went into the Vatican became Devils) Harpyes and
Horsleeches, who cannot converse with others then Blood-suckers and Harpyes,
with whom they agree most naturally.


Mar. As for my own part I was ever of this persuasion, that there were no
Harpyes or Blood-suckers, but the Popes Nephews.


Pas. Ah Sir, you know the contrary very well, but you will not relate it: Why,
are not the Genoeses, who come most of them to Rome laden with Jewish Usury.
Horpyes? And the Florentines and Seneses, that forsake Tuscany to bring their
Fabian Buttocks into the Court of Rome,; are not they Blood-suckers? And the
Luccheses, that abandon the liberty of their own Republic, to render
themselves Vassals to their Nephewships of Rome; are not they both Harpyes and
Blood-suckers? Now who do these Nephews trade with, but a few of such rascally
Fellows? On whom do they confer the principal places of Office and Government,
but Genoeses, Seneses and Luccheses?


Mar. Really Countryman, you are in the right, and I wish your words were so
prevalent as to penetrate the minds of the Nephews; but in my opinion it were
better to hold your peace, now that the Popes Nephews, who have rendered
themselves the Tyrants of Rome for these two Ages hitherto, have sworn to do
all things contrary to what the Romans pretend: And experience makes it
sufficiently manifest, because they hear daily clamours, that they should have
regard to the proper Subjects of the State, to whom, in reason, the most
eminent Offices and Dignities of the Church did belong. But the tyrannical
Nephews laughing at such lamentations, have not only made it their endeavor to
introduce thousands of Strangers into the most famous places of Judicature,
disposing of the most eminent Dignities to them; but have also taken away, and
violently deprived the Citizens of those Offices which they enjoyed for the
space of five Ages and better, enriching the Luccheses, Seneses and Genoeses
therewith, who, in effect, are not unlike Harpyes, as you say; they having by
their extortion and merchandises so impoverished this miserable State, by
exporting the most staple Commodities, with an assured hope that they shall
never return to them again, that it is become the most poor, unpeopled and
unhappy of all other States in the World: And will still grow worse and worse;
because these rascally Genoeses, Luccheses and Seneses, have made oath to leave
nothing but wooden Gibbets in Rome; to the end, that they may crucify the
Romans both in Body and Estate. If other Nations should rob this most
unfortunate State, there might one day be some reparation expected. But the
Luccheses, Seneses and Genoeses, when they steal from others, swear they will
think of any other thing but restitution; and indeed if Lucca would restore,
what her Citizens have taken from Rome, She must necessarily give the Romans
her whole Republic: The same thing must the Seneses do also, or at least pawn
the very shirts off of their backs, and being thus naked, enter into a Nunnery
to do penance.


Pas. Soft a little, how you mistake? You would say in a Convent of Capuchins,
not a Nunnery.


Mar. I do not err at all; I say they must do penance with Nuns; and I would
have you understand, that the Seneses, could not be more mortified with any
thing, then to see themselves deprived of practicing with their Ingles, and be
constrained to co-habit with a Sex so much an enemy to their filthy
inclinations: Besides, all the Beards in Sueden, much less those of the
Capuchins, would not be sufficient to satisfy the unbridled lust of the
Senesian Sodomites: But this ardent desire would of it self extinguish at the
sight of that which inflames it; and it is most certain, that I would sooner
trust one of Sienna with a naked Virgin, then a clothed Capuchin: and of this
opinion are all the Curtezans of Rome.


Pas. You are in the right, Sir. I had forgot it; for I know it as perfectly as
my A. B. C. Go on with your discourse.


Mar. The Genoeses, who believe that restitution is an abuse introduced among
Christians, will never go about to restore either in the whole, or in part,
what they have robbed Rome of; because they had rather be taken notice of as
rich Jews, then poor Christians; therefore it is in vain to hope that ever the
Genoese will so much as think of the restitution of so many Millions as they
have stolen from the State Ecclesiastic. This in truth is one of the greatest
troubles that has afflicted my mind; that is, to see such a brood of people
sack Rome with greater impiety, then the Soldiers of Charles the Fifth did in
the time of Clement the Seventh, and to carry away the spoils to enrich Siena,
Lucca and Genoa; the Geneoses, Luccheses and Seneses, having spent more study
and time in raking into the very bowels of the Church to carry away her most
precious substance, then ever the Venetians did to enrich Christendom with the
spoils of Infidels. Heretofore the Jews stood in awe of the Romans, expecting
every hour that they would posses themselves of Judea; and now, the poor Romans
fear three Nations, the Seneses, Luccheses and Genoeses, that are found at Rome
in such vast multitudes, with no other design but to unbowel her,; like Jews
under the New Testament, to flatter their own Country with the spoils taken
from the Church, not from Christians only. However, though the Popes Nephews,
that come from this place and that place, rob without any regard to Religion,
yet their Larcenies do often remain in the very bosom of Rome, whence the
Romans hope to draw some comfort.


Pas. Great comfort indeed, that poor beggarly hungry dogs, and those Strangers
too, that come to gather the Church spoils of so many Kingdoms, to reduce the
natural Citizens to beggary and misery, and the whole body of the Roman
Nobility, to the Vassalages of a few rascally Upstarts. O how much better had
it been for Constantine to have left Rome to the Empire, then to give the
Empire of Rome to the Popes; that must afterward deprive themselves of all to
bestow gifts upon their Nephews; and which is worse, such Nephews as are fitter
far to serve as Sextons to the Temple, then to command the Church as Princes!
If the Popes Nephews were capable of governing the Empire with honor, we might
bear with it; but the Devil himself would burst with rage to see the Parasites
themselves fall into the greatest absurdities imaginable: The Romans only
complain, and yet the Church has its share; but in those sordid actions, quite
void of reason and judgment, which they commit, by endeavoring to command
Princes, not the Romans only, and the Church extremely suffers thereby, but
farther, the Princes of the world being prejudiced thereby, are greatly obliged
in point of policy to interest themselves; I will not say with the Church or
Pope, but his Nephews, that sell and give, ad libitum, the Church, the Pope,
the People, Kingdoms, Offices and Dignities, having all sworn never to deviate
from the natural instinct of the Nephewship; which is to manage every thing in
despite of Church and Princes.


Mar. I tell you I am not come hither to treat of such vulgar and common
things; about which even in the very Cobblers stalls there are night and day
long discourses, that choke up the air it self, insomuch that they leave a
greater stench in those places, then the filth that is in the old Shoes they
mend.


Pas. You understand it, and I you, let us then discourse of things that more
particularly concern you.


Mar. And what things are those that concern you most, and are more particular
at present?


Pas. The death of the Pope, is not that a subject worthy to be celebrated by
us with joy and triumph, and for us to make large reflections upon? O God! and
what greater happiness could ever happen to our City, as also to the state
Ecclesiastic, nay, the whole world, then to see her self freed from those
chains, wherewith she has been shackled for the space of eleven years? All the
people did rejoice at the entrance of Alexander the Great into the City,
because he entered to give freedom to the Citizens, peace to the People, plenty
of food and honor to Families: But when they saw him afterward dead, they
gave themselves over to grief, and shed rivers of tears, being assured they
should lose that in his death, which they gained in his life. On the contrary,
we poor Romans, because that Alexander gave us, during his whole life,
sufficient cause of weeping, taking no other thought in the whole course of his
Pontificature, but to afflict the Citizens, lay heavy burdens on the People,
impoverish Families, and to bring scarcity in the State: For this reason we are
obliged to rejoice in his death, that gave us such cause of sorrow in his life.
Even now we may believe the people of Rome to be beloved of God, now that he
has delivered her from the slavery of this Pharaoh of the Christians: And if
the Jews had their Chains taken off in the month of May; the Chains also of the
Chigi ought to be broken off of the hands of Christians even at the same time,
it may be on the same day, that the world may see the Christians are no less
protected by Christ in the New, then the Jews by God in the Old Testament; with
this only difference, that they passed through the red Sea dry footed, before
they came into the Land of Promise; but the Christians, and above all the
Romans, are constrained to pass through an Ocean of tears, not dry footed,
because that the cause of weeping is not removed by the death of Alexander; he
having left us so many Gabels, that it is probable they may never be taken off,
and by consequence we shall be ever obliged to shed tears: So that the Jews may
be called a more happy people being come out of Egypt, then we out of the
prison of the Seneses; because we have not our entire freedom, whereas the Jews
enjoyed an absolute liberty; yet in truth we ought to rejoice much more to see
Alexander buried in the midst of our Ocean of miseries, then the Jews
heretofore to see Pharaoh overwhelmed in the Red Sea: For to be plain with you,
Alexander did handle the Christians far worse then Pharaoh did the Jews of old.
But what shall we say of Don Mario, that modern Silla of the Romans? His
cruelties are infinite; and though the Devil has given him leave to survive
his Brother, no matter for that, we must not therefore cease our rejoicing; it
being a kind of petty death to him, and life to us, that he is put out of the
Vatican, and his government of the Town. Nevertheless, it was but agreeable to
reason, that as Alexander left his Brother, and all the rascally Chigians for
more months in Sienna, whence he leapt into the Popedom, only richly to prepare
the Vatican for their nobler reception, that he should now again descend into
hell before any of the Chigi's, to prepare Palaces and Apartments, to the end
that he might receive those his Brothers and Nephews, according to their
merits; and all of them indeed deserve nothing else, but to go to the mansion
of Antichrist, since that they have been more impious then Antichrists in
Christendom. We must therefore hope, that we shall see this City free from that
plague, before many months are past, as we have also seen the Vatican rid of
those Tyrants. Truly we are obliged to Alexander for going to the other world,
but we had been far more engaged to him, had he taken his journey ten years
ago; because then all persons would have believed, as an article of their
Faith, that he had gone to Heaven; whereas now there are some Christians in
Rome, that make it a scruple of Conscience to believe, that he is not gone to
Hell. Furthermore, the obligation had been doubled, if he had pleased to
conduct with him, if not the whole House of the Chigi's, yet at least that most
excellent Brother of his, who is the Head of the Chigi's, Neck of the Bichi's,
Body of the Ciaii, Feet of Siena, and finally a member of the Devil.


Mar. Don't you be offended, Dear Brother, that Don Mario had not the
transfretation over the Stygian Lake at the same time with his most holy
Brother; because the Devil, who knew the crimes both of the one and the other,
would not hazard Charon's Bark through the tempestuous waves of the Stygian
water, fearing least he should sink himself by the way, by reason of the great
weight of the sins of these two Brethren, and so Hell should happen to lose two
such happy Victims. Therefore we must believe that Lucifers command was, that
Alexander should be first conducted thither, and then Don Mario should be
snatched away, because it will be requisite to build a new Boat on purpose to
waft over so large a body, laden with so many rapines.


Pas. You think not amiss; but for my own particular, I do now imagine with my
self, that this is one of the intrigues of Alexanders policy, desiring to make
himself known to be a great Politician at the end of his Papacy, as he did seem
to be at the beginning; when he understood so well how to deceive the World and
the Church, Christendom and Rome, feigning himself averss to the promotion of
his Relations, so that every one believed him to be pious, and disinteressed
with his blood; and at his end he did pretend he would have this also to be
understood in the other world, to increase his glory, if he had gone to heaven,
according to his desire, or abate his torment, when ever the misfortune should
befall him to go to hell, which he did not believe.


Mar. On the contrary, if he had been an able Politician, he had taken Don
Mario along with him, because the Devils would have yielded in all things, and
all manner of ways to the train of his Infernal Excellency, and so had let the
poor Pope go shift for himself in Purgatory.


Pas. The Devils would not have been so foolish to lose such a prey, which they
have for so long a time been in chase of. I would have you understand, that the
damnation of Alexander (if so be that he is damned, as we ought religiously to
believe) had no other rise, but the force of diabolick temptations; for whilst
he lived without delivering up himself into the hands of those that use to
tempt the Popes, he wrought none but wonders, miracles, and holy works; but the
Devil no sooner began to possess himself of his heart, but he became a Judas to
the Church, an Iscariot to the People, a Jew to the Romans, and a Pilat to all
Christendom.


Mar. But how can the Devils enter into the heart of the Pope, if it be the
residence of the holy Ghost?


Pas. Are you also one of the Disciples to those false Divines, that bestow the
holy Ghost upon the Pope by weight and measure. Those Tales that the Pope is
guided by the holy Ghost, are Theological inventions to blind the eyes of the
faithful, to the end that they should not be offended with the actions of such
Popes that are Wolves and not Shepherds, that fleece the Flock of Christ, but
do not govern it; that hold the knife in their hand like Butchers, and not the
pastoral rod like Pastors; and in truth there are none but a few beggarly
Whores; some mendicant Fellow-friars; and peradventure some kind of novice of
the Capuchins order, that believe the Popes directed by the holy Ghost: As for
the rest, men of solid judgment smile at all the Theologians write, and give
them the liberty to say what they please, whilst they believe what they see;
that is, so long as they find in the Pope's a holy way of operation they
believe them holy; but when afterward they discover deeds of darkness in them,
they judge them Devils. One of the greatest impieties in Christendom is the
Inquisition, which punishes most tyrannically those poor faithful ones, that
moved with a scruple of conscience, maintain publicly, either by the hand or
tongue, that these Popes are subject to err, whom they in truth see full of
error. God himself by the mouth of his Prophet instructs us, that, Cum sancto
sanctus eris, cum perverso perverteris, "With the holy thou shall be holy, and
with the wicked thou shall be wicked." Yet by all means the most reverend
devils of the Inquisition, will have an absolute power, that the faithful shall
be holy with the wicked, though in despite of them they do nothing; therefore
we will not say they do worse, because this stopping of the mouth in public
places by menaces, does so swell the hearts of the most sensible Christians
that they endure with great violence the more zealous pens of those
Nicodemusses that for fear are forced to abscond themselves in their most
private Studies, making their Writings fly to the utmost parts of the Earth,
where the men are not so credulous as to believe white to be black, and black
white. In my opinion it should satisfy the Inquisitors, that the faithful
believe the Pope's infallible whilst they do not errr, and are guided by the
holy Ghost; whilst they work according to the gifts of the holy Spirit, and
conformably to the laws wherewith that blessed Spirit has furnished the Church.


Mar. I would fain know, at what time, you believe that the Devil took
possession of the heart of Pope Alexander?


Pas. I will tell you forthwith; but first I would give you to understand, that
the Pope's cannot pretend to be the true Vicars of Christ, because they are
elected by certain Cardinals, that are all of the devil; from whom, as being an
enemy to the Church, they cannot expect any thing but wicked inspiration; and
withal, if the Election be granted to be good, the Pope that is inaugurated,
ought to be acknowledged as a most holy and infallible person by the faithful,
until that he delivers himself up to these devils, who oblige him to sin.


Mar. And this farther I desire to be satisfied in, having spoken to you
concerning Alexander in particular, to understand somewhat of the other Pope's
in general, now that the calamities of Rome are subdued, to see that which is
universal made particular.


Pas. The Devils that tempt the Popes to sin, are their Nephews, Dear Brother,
these make him deviate from the right path, and lead him through mountains and
steep places: These blind his eyes, and make him walk in the dark. These are
they that tie up his hands, so that he can do nothing for others, because he
does all things for them. These stop his ears, that he cannot hear the cries of
the people. These drive all good thoughts out of his mind, to fill it with
those that are bad and wicked. In sum, the Nephews are those that engage the
Popes in sin; whence it is, that after they are laden with sins, they go to
give an account at the divine Tribunal, for that liberty that they give to the
Nephews.


Mar. To this purpose I remember, that a certain Prelat related a certain dream
of his to one of his Confidents in my presence; and I think it is now about
three days ago. The dream was, that he seemed to see a Pope kneeling at the
Footstool of the Almighty God, who being examined by him why he had governed
the Church so ill, afflicted the People, and spoiled his Altars. The good Pope
all bedewed with tears, answered with Adam. Those Nephews (not that woman which
served as an excuse to Adam) which thou have given me, O Lord, have forced me
to sin. At which words the Prelat said, that the Almighty made this reply. Thou
lie, for it was not I that gave thee these Nephews, but thou thy self have
introduced them into the Vatican of thy own accord.


Pas. I also heard another dream told a Priest, yet relating particularly to
the Popes; that thought he saw a Pope in Hell disputing with his Nephews; they
belshing out against one another the grossest curses and lies in the world; the
poor Pope reproaching the Nephews for their wickedness, and the Nephews the
Uncle for his facility. The miserable Uncle said. Ah you, cruel and wicked
persons! Ah you Thieves and Devils! You are the persons that were the occasion
of my being here: I have gained darkness and obscurity, to leave you the
splendor of gold and silver; I have caused my self to be imprisoned in hell,
for that liberty which I allowed you in the Vatican. I have chosen for my self
the pains of this Abyss, for bestowing too much honor on you in Rome.
Therefore, O ye Nephews! he accursed, and let those heaps of gold, silver and
riches, that I permitted you to disappropriate from the Church, and steal from
the People, be turned into everlasting flames, and serpents that may ever war
against you. On the other hand the Nephews replied. Be you accursed we will not
say, Uncle, but Enemy; you that have thrown your self into our arms, to cast us
into the embraces of the Devil; you that have bestowed so much gold upon us,
that it is of no use, but to purchase Hel-flames withal; you that have made us
great in the world, to be annihilated in Hell: Be you therefore accursed, that
was the cause of our damnation, and not we of yours, as you affirm; for we did
not call you from the Vatican, where you were, to come and dwell with us; but
you invited us from our own habitation, where we did reside, to give us
possession of the Vatican. These are but dreams, yet experience has shown us
many things of the like nature that are true; and really we have seen too many
holy Popes before they suffered the Nephews to sway, who after their admission,
became absolute Devils. Good God! that the Nephews should corrupt the Uncle,
and the Uncle the Nephews, it being a real truth, that the one serves to tempt
the other. But now to return to Alexander, I will tell thee, that the Devil
that entered into his heart was Don Mario; he having tempted him to commit all
the devilish tricks that he was guilty of.


Mar. If you should enter too deeply into the Hell of the Nephewships and
Popes, we should never get out again; I am not come hither to see the Devils
Lodgings, but your own self, and therefore I entreat you to alter your
discourse, we having sufficiently expatiated on that subject which battens you;
all the world knows, that as Swine grow fat with eating Acorns, and wallowing
in the most filthy mire, so you nourish your self by turning and winding your
discourse concerning the Nephews, and I really believe that their dirty actions
have a more stinking savor, then the very filth that fattens Swine; Sir
Reverence to the Company, and his Excellency Don Mario.


Pas. You deceive your Neighbor and Enemy by this kind of talk, and I plainly
see that you will be overcome on all sides: Now then let us speak of that which
is suitable to your humor, suite that you will not condescend to speak of that
which agrees with mine. Let us end these arguments concerning the Seneses with
this filthy talk, who value a Civet-box much more then they do a bottle of
sweet washing Water. Let us proceed to the Ladies urine, because that will
please your humor; wherefore it behooves you to know that our discourse at the
beginning concerning the Nephews was not amiss, since that all proceedings
arise from them, they holding as it were the keys of the Whoredom of Rome.


Mar. Nay, rather of Sodomie, you would say, if I mistake not; for they will
not enter any but certain straight gates, which are more suitable to the Palace
of the Vatican; and that is the reason so many Ganimeds are found at Court, and
so few Nephews in the Bawdy House; The Lordly Nephews fancying those viands
that are exchanged for Ecclesiastical Benefices, not such drinks as are
purchased with the expense of ready money. The Popes Nephews are not such
Mammalucks, to spend their money in going to a Whore, with the danger of losing
that neutrality which they ought to maintain with Princes Crowns, showing
themselves too much interessed with the French party; it being now adays a
common thing in Rome, that he that exercises himself with the Roman Curtezans,
though he be a Spaniard by birth, and an Italian by practice; notwithstanding
all this, he becomes a French man both in blood and constitution, in a small
time.


Pas. That policy of neutrality the Nephews sufficiently observe; because they
impose Taxes upon the Whores, forcing them to pay even for the very confession
of their own sins; and with the filthy gain they draw from thence, they make
Seminaries of Ingles; and that which is more to be admired is, that they give
the people to understand this is done out of a mere act of charity; as if it
were a pious thing to leave the high way of Christianity, and follow the
Spherrical way of the Turk. some persons believe, that is, such as are more
curious in the observation of the experience of things, that this custom was
brought into Rome, together with the Nephewship,; yet however, it is reported,
that it never had such a vogue before, as it had when the Seneses had the
command of the Vatican; which is the reason that now the poor Whores are weary
of their very lives, to see the bread taken out of their mouths, and have a
custom introduced, to eat no other bread but what is made of corn grinded in a
Windmill, slighting the flower that is made in a Water-mill as an
inconsiderable thing; they are resolved with themselves to make use of the
opportunity, whilst the Chair is vacant, to promote their own advantage, and
endeavor to introduce a custom of choosing a Pope after their own mode, and to
their own fancy.


Mar. I have now understood many particulars in this business; which tend to no
other end but to stir up a desire in me of knowing every the smallest
punctilio; so that you by acquainting me with what you know, and I you with
what I apprehend, we shall mutually satisfy one another; by our arguing, for
the future upon those matters which deserve most to be published, as we think
convenient.


Pasq. The subject in truth is very proper to raise an argument; it being a
novelty, and never heretofore heard of, that the Whores do pretend to have a
share in the Election of the Pope; and that which increases the wonder is,
that their pretenses are not so vain and airy, as they seem to be, for they
appear to me as grounded upon the solid basis of reason.


Mar. O, I can by no means entertain this in my thoughts; I ever took all that
to be a kind of Curtezan-like liberty, and a thing rather ridiculous then
substantial: And indeed to speak rationally what (a Devil) have the Curtezans
to do with the Election of the Pope?


Pas. And to answer you in reason, what (a Devil) has the Pope to do to draw
so much money from the Whores, for the maintenance of his Nephews pride? To
oblige the Whores to give great store of contribution-money, to force them to
pay so many Gabels and Taxes; this is nothing else but a permission for them to
sin after their own mode; to sell their own flesh at cheaper rates, then that
which is vended at the Shambles, and to leave no stone unturned, to make even
those great ravenous birds of prey; the Friars to be taken by the lime-twigs,
and when they are once caught, they leave all their feathers behind them, and
some of them break their necks by struggling to get their liberty. Now this
Theologian will say, that is no less sin to grant the Whores the power of
choosing the Pope, then the Pope liberty to oblige the Whores to play the
Whores, to pay off those Taxes which the Nephews impose upon their way of
Livelihood? The reason which moved the Whores to such pretenses are many.
First, the Curtezans say, why shall not we choose that Pope, that must be
maintained by us? Why should not we pay money to one that is elected to please
another humor? Why should others set up a Pope, and we empty our own purses
to fill his coffers? We do not refuse the payment of those contributions that
are laid upon us, but very well may we deny him to be our Pope, who is not ours.


Mar. If they are furnished with no better reasons then these, they will never
bring their pretended desi^ of having power to elect a Pope, to a period.


Pas. These are in a manner inconsiderable, they have a far greater number; but
the business is this, in Rome it is not reason, but the interests of those that
are the most powerful, that prevail in the Popes Election. Wherefore if it were
granted, that the Whores should be admitted into the Conclave, and have a free
vote as well as the Cardinals, in the creation of the Pope, they would do no
good, because the Ingles, who are more esteemed, would procure all the votes in
favor of them, and so would set up a Pope according to their own fancy, in
despite of all the Whores, not in Rome only, but the whole world.


Mar. Don't you know that the sin of Sodomie makes not such an noise in the
world as that of Wenching? which is the reason that the most conselentious
Prelates, and those Cardinals, that are the nearest pretenders to the Papacy,
turn away their face when they spy a pretty little poor Whore go to Mass, or a
most excellent Curtezan to ride for her recreation in some Ambassadors Coach,
as if they saw the devil with his horns, crossing themselves often times with
the left hand, and yet afterward take a pride in spending whole days, and the
greater part of the night in their Chamber, with some little Sodomitical Boy or
filthy Ingle: And what is the reason? Because that as soon as the Whores of
Rome do but once touch the Pontificial Glove of any Prelat, they grow so proud,
that the Roman Lords can scarce have the honor to touch their Toe; and so much
the worse if it be a Cardinal; then they go about to every Bawdy House proudly
mounted on their Chioapins; boasting that they served as a Mare to his most
illustrious Lordship, and as an Hackney to his Eminency: For in truth it is
the nature of a Whore to discover all she does; and the Boy's to keep secret
whatever is done to him; therefore, the Prelates and Cardinals to preserve the
reputation of the Purple and Episcopal Robe, think it well done to slight the
Ladies, that they may avoid all occasion of scandal to Christians, and spend
their time with Sodomitical Boy's, with whose friendship being a long time
acquainted, serves for a use of edification to the Court; now the major part of
the Courtiers lick their fingers ends, and take no notice of it.


Pas. If they would be content, the one with the Bull-calf, the other with the
Cow, the thing would be more tolerable; but in Rome they steer another course;
whilst they that diet themselves with the ordinary food of the Bull-calf, do
not altogether refrain from taking some small morsels of the Cow, which serves
as sauce the better to sharpen the appetite to have their belly full of
bulling; and they who feed ordinarily on the Cows flesh, will for all that,
like women, with child, sometimes satisfy their longing, that the Infant in
the womb may have no mark of the Bull-calf. It Is true, that these devout
Arseworms, do like him, that said the Liver was not flesh; wherefore he did eat
flesh on the Thursday, liver on the Friday, without any scruple of conscience.
The Heretics spend the leisure time of the day in murmuring at the Courts
proceedings in this business; and there are thousands who have been just upon
the point of forsaking heresy, and becoming good Catholics, that afterward
were diverted from those holy thoughts, by seeing Bull-beef sold, as it were in
a market among the Roman Prelates; and in truth that kind of victuals is had in
so high esteem at Rome, that even the greatest Courtiers call it, the Cardinals
bit; which is no other then a hellish kind of food that deserves to be burned
in the fire, and reduced to ashes, that so by this means it may be absolutely
forgotten. Nature has distributed things according to natural order, so that
the destroying that order is no other then to bid a Turd in Natures teeth, and
consequently to transform ones self into an animate beast. In sum, the sin of
Sodomie is a contagious vice that has infected the Roman Court; insomuch that
all Christendom resents it, because the examples of Superiors are imitated by
Inferiors; and it is a common maxim, the head being once corrupted, all the
members are likewise. To redress these disorders, it is necessary we should
introduce the Custom of permitting Curtezans to make choice of the Pope;
because if they should once get a Pope of their own side, they would
methodically lay down those necessary rules that are for the good government of
humane frailty, and all those Pages, and little Pages, Abbats, and little
Abbats, Lords, and little Lords, whose will is their law; Prelates, and little
Prelates, Cardinals, and little Cardinals, Popes, and little Popes, would be
banished the Court: It being a thing confirmed by long experience, that they
which bear the Bass in the Chamber, can also carry the Treble in Councils,
Congregations and Consistories. The golden age would be again returned in Rome,
if the gold could be procured out of the hands of those Youths that profane it,
and left to the disposal of those good Curtezans, who supply the necessities of
the Apostolic Chamber, and who voluntarily contribute to the management of the
Christian war against the Turk. Who will not say, that it is more convenient to
give the Papacy to these Ladies that give to the Pope, rather than to those
Ingles that spoil both Pope and Popedom. Two things make me desire to see the
Custom of choosing a Pope by the Curtezans in their Conclave introduced. First,
to take away that filthy stench out of the nostrils of those strangers that go
to Rome, and cannot endure to see so many Ingles in the habit of Clergymen,
with their Cod-piece points untied in every corner of the City, and such a
number of Clergymen that smell so rankly of Sodomie. The second is, that we
may not see so much ordure made into Comfits, with most precious sweat of the
most eminent offices of the Church: Since that the now most sacred Dignities
instituted to serve for ornament, to the Ecclesiastical Order, serve for Sugar
to make Confections withal: Now that I have said it once, there needs no
further repetition. All these things will be redressed, if the Curtezans can
but at any time get the possession of the Vatican: These, these are they that
must redress this evil; that is, become natural to the Court, scandalous to
Heretics, dreadful to Catholics, and terrible to the whole world. These,
these must necessarily regain the Prelates their reputation, the Cardinals their
liberty, the Vatican its honor, and the City her ornament: These, these are
the persons that will remove that scandal that is all up and down the world; by
chasing away all those Commanders from the Court that are too haughty in their
government, the reward of their obedience to the Nephewship with too low a
genuflection: These, these are they that will root out of the earth that common
belief that is generally held of Rome, and will make it appear that the Pope
keeps his Chair in a Christian Rome, and not a Turkish Sodom.


Mar. I am also sometimes yet of that persuasion, having made no mean
reflections on a matter of so great importance; but since that, persons of
mature judgment have put me out of these thoughts; for to acquaint you with
things as they are, or at least as they ought to be, if at any time our little
Whores and Wenches should gain the command of the Vatican, they would play the
Devil, nay, do worse, with their fond impertient discourses, their Loves and
Lovers, and would study a hundred subtilties and stratagems to entertain the
Court sometimes in one House, sometimes in another, at Fasts, Recreations, and
with Music, and keeping an open House, would treat them with all sorts of
viands, whether boiled or roasted; besides, being persons naturally minding
their own Interests, they would even deprive the Pope of his Robes, and the
Cardinals of their Purple, to furnish their own Chambers with Tapestry; to the
end, that that reddish color might incite him the more to suffer the martyrdom
of turning his back, who loves not to see the face.


Pas. Would to God that it would once come to pass that the Pope should have
his Robes token off his shoulders, and the Cardinals the Purple off their
backs; because then the people would in some measure find a way to be
comforted, seeing those Governors that describe them, disrobed by others; for
the Curtezans will never be able by their caressing the Pope, to deprive him of
the thousandth part of what he by violence robs the people. To believe that the
Concubines, can, by their joint interests, bring more damage to the public
Treasury, then those thousands of Boys do, that suck the blood of the Vatican,
is but an erroneous faith; because there is no comparison to be made between
the damage that is done to the Court by the Ladies, who for the most part have
their eyes looking up toward Heaven, and those silly Boys, who, like the seed
of the Devil, incline themselves always to kiss the Earth; the confideration
of the number of them is sufficient to prove this; the number of the
Sodomitical Boys in the Court exceeding infinitely that of the Whores, whence we
may easily gather that larger expenses are requisite to the maintaining a
greater, then a smaller number. But if we pry into the business more narrowly,
the reason will be found on the Curtezans side. First, a few yards of slight
silk, cloth of Gold or Silver, will serve to accoutre these Ladies; but to
cover the nakedness of the bare Buttocks of so many Ingles, there must be
somewhat else besides a few yards of Cloth of Gold or Silk; there is a
necessity to take away Abacies from the Dacary, Offices from the Court, and
Curatships from the City, to cloth such a crew of rascally follows; and yet
these cursed Citizens of the Sodomitical Brothel House are not satisfied with
ready money and clothes, but will have annual Revenues, and Benefices to them
and their Heirs for ever; they judging their profession to be as to the
estimate invaluable; and by this means those Prelates that have planted a
thousand good works in Heaven come to be deprived of their offices and
Dignites, to invest these bare-breech't dogs with them, who never did any thing
in their lives, but plant Coleworts in Earth that was never dig'd up. O how
much better would it be to leave the Papacy to the discretion of these Ladies
that are content with little, than to the licentiousness of those Younglings
that grasp at all. Come what will of it, we should never be sensible of so many
cries of the People, tears of the Prelates, and such universal scandals. The
Heretics, who punish with burning that nefandous wickedness that is so sweet
in Rome, and the lustful and carnal copulation with women, with the whip,
imprisonment, and sometimes with the loss of life: If they were to make choice
of a Pope, I am confident they would sooner elect a Stranger than a Sodomite;
and I believe there is none but the Devil, that would rather have a Sodomit
than a Whoremonger. However I will believe the Popes to be chaste, their reins
tied up, and free from all carnal pollution; but what does all this signify,
if they suffer Brothel-Houses to be in the Court, that for the most part go
mask't under the names of Seminaries? How can the Heretics, nay, the very
Catholics themselves, imagine that Pope chaste, that receives great sums from
Bawdy House Contributions? How can they think him to be innocent, if he has
such daily commerce with sin? How is it possible he should be worshipped as a
Saint, if he permits all manner of vices to be uncheck't and unpunished
throughout the City, worse then the Devil himself would do? How can he be able
to free himself from those accusations that he is taxed with by the faithful,
viz. that he keeps off the deserving, and calls those that are most ignorant to
the Court, that he exhausteth the puplick Treasury of the Church, and disposes
of Ecclesiastical Dignities to private persons; when the proofs are daily
apparent? There are no other persons found going up and down the stairs of the
Vatican, but old Sodomitical Boys, some of them go to receive the reward of
their Sodomitical Sacrifice offered to the Devil for many years; and others
coming thither laden with gratuities received for their great services done to
those that take a pride to have their standing-chamber in the Arsehole of Rome.
What infamous custom reigns there now in Rome; which has the paternal
benediction of his Holiness? This little Lord, because he has carried an Abbot
on his back, pretends that an Abbacie of right belongs to him, and he obtains
it: The other reverend Chamber-fellow no sooner desires a Bishopric, but it is
granted, because he was Mule to a Prelat; and many of them think they deserve a
Cardinals Cap, which they obtain before they demand it; because the acts of
humility in those young men in the presence of the Cardinals, is in Rome
rewarded with the Purple: as if the Cardinals Hat were made to cover their
heads that bow down to the very ground; to the end that the bowing down of the
head having raised the back parts, the head ought also to be raised for the
bowing of the back-parts. The Pope is the cause of all this, because he does
not, or seems not to take notice of it.


Mar. You run impertinently from one thing to another, Dear Brother: What need
we talk of the Pope if he be dead! We are met here to discourse of the Election
of the new Pope; therefore there is no necessity for us to give our judgment
of the faults of the dead, nor of those that shall live, which we know not out
of what place they will come, I had almost said are born.


Mar. Methinks you seem to betray your simplicity. The Pope never dies, he
lives always in spite of the Devil, though he should destroy one every day.
The men only dye that carry a resemblance of the Pope, and that have the
Popedom at their disposal during life; leaving every thing to his succession
when he dies.


Mar. If it be so, then we must unsay all that was spoken a little before, that
many Popes are damned by their Nephews. How can this be, that they can live
always, and yet go to Hell?


Pas. If you could not understand me, I cannot help that, if you did not
apprehend my meaning, that was no fault of mine. I do not mean that the Popes
are damned; on the contrary, I believe this as an undoubted article of my
Faith, that whilst they are Popes, they can by no means go to Hell; because the
Popedom makes the Popes Popes, and that is a thing that is always left as an
Inheritance to the Church, a torment to Rome, an affliction to the People, and
for the mortification of the Heretics. Yet those persons who have had the
Papacy, which has been always supposed by certain persons, may be damned, and
do damn themselves. For example; A Porter carrying a Bale of Silk, falls down
dead under his burden; yet this does not make the propriety of him to whom it
belongs to dye also with him; but there is soon found some other person who
takes it up and carries it to the Owner; and although the Porter should go to
the Devil, the Bale of Silk would not be also condemned to go thither. Now
those that have been Popes, and governed amiss, are damned; but the Papacy is
not, verbi gratia: I believe Alexander the Seventh, who was a Pope (I bring
this in only as an example) is gone to Hell, not the Papacy that was governed
by him: And therefore the Romans that understand the nature and the usages of
those persons that are called to the Papacy better then others, can
distinguish, as to their humane actions, those Popes that are saved, and those
that are damned; for the Tree is known by his fruit.


Mar. This is a doctrine in the Gospel, Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos, You
shall know them by their fruit: But the Popes are exempted from all this,
because they are not subject to the Rules contained in the Gospel; they having
a faculty which Theologians have given them, to create Gospels according to
their own humor, and to frame Rules to their own fancy, jesting at the supreme
authority that is found written; it being enough for them to cause that to be
written which agrees better with their own temper.


Pas. That which you say is certainly true; but yet they know very well, they
have not so great authority as is allowed them; and you have a testimony of it
in Leo the Tenth, who discoursing one day with one of his intimate and very
familiar Theologians, concerning the doctrine of Luther, contrary to the power
of the Pope, and the Divine informing him, that Luther among those opinions
that he dispersed abroad, one was, that he did every where deny, and instruct
every one, that it was not true, that the Pope had the Keys both of Heaven and
Hell in his possession. Good Leo, making a jest of it, answered the Divine: No
matter for that, let him prate what he will, he shall not deprive us of the
Keys of the Datary, we will try who shall be best able, either he to take away
the Keys of Heaven that are invisible, or we to preserve those of our Treasure,
which are palpable. From hence may be gathered, that the Popes do not aim so
much at heavenly as earthly things; wherefore they know very well, that they
are in as much danger of going to Hell as other men; and as a testimony that
they fear it, observe this, that they confess almost every day the sins that
they commit. Now if they themselves are dubious of it, why may not the Romans
also doubt of the salvation of the Popes? To conclude this point, the Popedom
still continues in the world, and they fall into the precipice that have been
bad Ministers; and here to avoid all scruples, where we say that such a Pope is
gone to Hell, we mean the Person, not the Dignity, the Minister, not the
Ministry; and if I my self should hear any one say, that the Papacy is gone to
Hell, I would give him the lie, if the Devil himself were present; for he that
will intermeddle and deliver such opinions, must understand how to make
distinctions in due form, and separate the Popedom from the Pope, leaving the
Papacy in Rome, and sending the Pope from thence to Hell.


Mar. This distinction of yours pleases me; and it would do very well to
acquaint these Pious-stinkards therewith, who believe they lose both soul and
body, if they do but lend an eat to any simple discourse against the Popes
person.


Pas. These persons that seem so conscientious, are all Priests Sons and Friars
Bastards; it being their nature to be scrupulous, and such you must imagine
them to be; but men of staid judgment, both in public and private, make
themselves very merry with these Mock-Saints, and indeed who will be so foolish
as to believe that that Pope can be saved, who tolerates, or shuts his eyes
against, as we may say, or to speak more truly, commands Simony, Sodomy,
Larceny, and so many cheats as his Nephews put in practice, and with the
Nephews the whole Court.


Mar. But prithee let us return to our Gloria Patri, and leave these Nephews,
in the Devils name, if you will.


Pas. The Pope and his Nephews are things linked together, that it is
impossible to treat of the one without the other.


Mar. For my part I believe, that to redress all these disorders it were
necessary to deprive the Cardinals of the power of electing the Pope, and make
the Popedom Hereditary, as many other Dominions are, which are far better
governed; because if it be left in the power, and at the disposal of these
Cardinals, the Nephews will always tyrannize over Rome and the Papacy; It
being impossible to find a Pope among the Cardinals without Nephews, and
Nephews without Boys: If now the Whores have the liberty of Election, Whoredom
would become insolent as Sodomy, because they would make the whole Vatican
whorishly inclined; besides that, the Ladies of greatest quality would pretend
to have a share with the Whores, to have the honor of coming to the Vatican
when they please; and it is most certain, that they will never condescend to
this, that they must kiss the Popes Toe, and the Whores receive the Osculum
Pacis, from the Popes own Lips. All these distractions would be appeased, if we
could once find out the way to make the Popedom Hereditary; which might be done
by the Popes taking a Wife; and so neither the Ingles, nor Whores would have
any pretense to the Vatican; because the Wife would lay Rats-bane in every
corner, to poison (as they use to do Mice) the Whores and Sodomitical Boys,
that eat up all the fat of the Church, and all the lard of the Court: But it
were necessary to find a Woman that would wear the Breeches, and not scruple
the giving her Husband both boiled and roast meat; otherwise, both the pot and
the pipkin would fly in pieces. If this custom be but once brought in among us,
Oh, what brave doings would there be! O the famous Nuptials that would be
celebrated in such a Marriage! Then after that would be the greater rejoicing,
when the most holy Popes's should be delivered, and of a Popeling full of
pontifical blessings, which should drop into the very arms of the Pope. What
joy would there be at Court? What rejoicing in the City? What feasting all the
world over? But all these joys would be nothing in comparison of the solemn
pomp that the most holy Father would make, to see young Popes of his blessed
seed make the Popedom for ever Hereditary to his Family. I am persuaded, if the
City of Rome could once see a Pope with a Popeling in his arms, and caress him
with so great affection, it would comfort her, and sweeten her afflictions.
There would be neither little nor great, male nor female, but would run to the
Vatican to see the little Pope kiss the reverend beard of his Holiness his
Father. The Pope, as I conceit with my self, would be almost distracted with
joy, and hug the young Pope in his bosom, and I am of opinion he would be
always saying, be thou happy, O my blessed sweet heart, my gracious little
Pope, my dear Popeling; kiss thy Father that made thee a Son, hug that Pope
that begot thee a young Pope; O my little Popeling, caress him that gives thee
a Popedom.


Pas. Peradventure the Pope cannot do so much as you talk of, and in my
judgment the Cardinals would do well to make you Pope by the name of Marforio
the First, and give you liberty to make choice of a Marforia at your own
discretion, because you understand so well how, to make much of Children. It is
most certain, that it would wash away a great deal of that scandal that is in
the world, and the Roman people would receive no small advantage by allowing
the Pope a Wife; because all the Priests and Friars would follow his example,
and marry likewise; and by this means many of those that wear the Bulls feather
now, would be without, seeing it is the natural quality of those that want, to
seek to be accommoadated by other men's goods. But yet however, this very act
would have its share of impediments, and the people would be always, more
subject to grievances, if the Pope should now have a Wife; for, if at present
the Popes prove so covetous, and the Clergy such base Rogues, now they have no
Children, how would they behave themselves if they had, when nature her self
would oblige them to enrich the issue that springs from their own loins?


Mar. Do you believe that the Popes and Clergymen are without Children? Figh,
figh; those that are Nephews by name, are Children by nature, so that they
could not act more wickedly than they have done already; but there might rather
be some hope of a good end thereof; because that when mischief is arrived to
its height, it must necessarily have a fall; it being very natural for those
things that are unstable to descend when they can soar no higher.


Pas. The example of Alexander the Sixth ought to be always fresh in your
memory; he was one of those Popes you mentioned; being a married Priest,
Bishop, Cardinal and Pope; it being the common discourse now that he married
Vanoccia Romana, which had been his Concubine a long time, in a private
Chamber, and in the presence of a Parochian Priest, his great friend and
Confessor. That thereupon suddenly gaining the papal Chair, he brought her
into the Vatican; keeping her not as a Concubine, but as a Wife; and the
Children that he had were not at all treated by him as Bastards, but as
Legitimate; he having also attempted to make the Popedom Hereditary to his
Family. There was no kind of sacrilege which he did not commit, no tyranny
which he did not exercise, no barbarism which he did not act, no Simony, which
he did not allow of, no Larceny which he was not guilty of. He disturbed the
public peace of Christendom, robbed the Church of her wealth, took away the
sacred vessels from the Altar, sold the Ecclesiastical Dignities, let loose the
reins to all manner of vice, and reduced Rome to the greatest miseries that
were ever heard of, in so many sackings and destructions, which she was brought
unto by the cruelty of her barbarous enemies: And what is the reason of all
these infamous actions and cruelties? Ask Alexander himself, and he will tell
you that his Issues that stood before his eye did spur him on thereunto; the
sight of his Children did deprive him of his judgment, and transformed him
into a Devil. Nor am I any ways offended at this, because in the last place
Alexander was not wiser than Solomon, and yet he to please his sense, and
satisfy his Ladies, offered incense to Idols l nor yet was he more innocent
than Adam in the state of innocence, who did every way transgress the divine
commands, to obey his Wife. Now if a Pope, that had no other than a Demy-wife,
because he espoused her in private, did commit so much wickedness, and
occasioned Chistendom to shed so many tears, which are not a little resented at
this very day; what devilish thing would not the others do if they had entire
Wives? Let us be content with this, that we have seen the lawful Children, or
(if you please) the Bastards of Alexander the sixth, without wishing for worse
fortune. If we had not seen the difference there is between the Papacy, when in
the hands of the Nephews, and in the fingers of the Children, we might
earnestly desire to have a married Pope; but undoubtedly the Church could not
stand long, because the Popes would double their avarice, in the same measure
as the Parents affection to Children is doubled in comparison of that to the
Nephews. The business concerning the Romans being thus judged at first sight,
who are every day subject to fall out of the Drying Pan into the Fire; it seems
that it were far better, and more to be desired, to die once well, than a
hundred times ill.


Mar. By what I perceive, you would gain the better of it, and have the
victory; but you cannot resolve with your self to ask the She-Secretary a copy
of the sentence. You would have the Pope married, and yet it is not possible
that you should let him marry; and you would wish him without a Wife, that you
might give him a Wife according to your fancy. I for my part agree with the
common opinion; let the Christians choose them a Pope that is a Bachelor, the
Heretics a married one, the Romans a Whore-monger, and the Courtiers a
Sodomite; and there let every one stand to his own, without envying his
compannions; and this seems to me the best remedy of all; because if the Pope
be a Bachelor, he will be too violent against those that are married; if
married, he will treat the Sodomitical Boys very coursly, and if he be a
Sodomite, he will despise both those that are single and married; but when
every person has a Pope according to his own desire, he cannot complain of any
of them: The single Pope conforming himself to those that are single persons;
he that is married with those that are married, and so from hand to hand, every
one following the Pope that is of his own temper.


Pas. By what you say, it were requisite, to impapate the whole world, and fill
the earth with Popes and Popelings.


Mar. Let us return to our subject; for I see that the Devil himself cannot
make us leave off our discourse of the Pope, when we once enter upon it. Let us
see a little what the Whores have done in their Conclave.


Pas. Even little or nothing, because there are far more differences among
them, than among the Cardinals, who are so well skilled in dissimulation and
crafty dealings in their Conclaves; yet however it is true, that the Pope shall
be chosen without the assistance of the Ladies.


Mar. How without the Ladies? what (a Devil) have the Ladies to do with the
Whores? I am astonished to hear thy discourse; and I even this very morning was
informed of I know not what in words, that happened in the Whores conclave,
between the Princess of Rossana and Brigidaccia a Super-annuated Whore, upon
the account of Odescalchi.


Pas. You must understand that our Roman Dames do extremely envy the Whores
condition, because they are obliged to beg the advantage of admission from the
common Whores. Dear Marforio, if you had been near this place, you had crossed
your self a hundred times; for in truth there was such a horrid bawling, that
the fire of Mongibel could not out noise. The Ladies did pretend that they had
more reason to be at the Election of the Pope among the Cardinals, than the
Whores ever had; and on the contrary the Whores did cry out, that the Election
of the Pope did belong to them, and not to the Ladies.


Mar. But what were the Ladies pretenses?


Pas. They were infinite, the Whores did affirm the Election of the Pope did
belong to them, because they had no small party in the College of Cardinals;
which the Ladies did oppose, saying, that they were altogether Mistresses of
the affections of the Cardinals, who have left off their purple Robes, rather
than they would give one single distaste to a single Lady. To corroborate this
assertion, the example of Cardinal Camillo Panfilio was insisted upon, who did
not value the displeasure of the Pope his Uncle, and Donna Olimpia his Mother,
to gratify the Princess of Rossano, upon whom he had cast his eye; despising
the Cap, Lordship, Church and Vatican, to marry this Lady whom he fancied. To
this Signora Nina Stagnarina, in the behalf of all the Whores in the Assembly,
as a person of good judgment, and able to advise how to preserve the reputation
of the mystery of Whoredom, answered, and said, that even as one Swallow did
not make a Summer, so the example of Don Camillo being but single, was not
sufficient to strengthen the Ladies pretenses; wherefore, if they would carry
away the palm, it was necessary that they produced more solid and pertinent
reasons.


Mar. But tell me a little, before you proceed any further, how do the Ladies
and the Whores agree among themselves as to precedence? How did they do to
dispose of places in the Assembly?


Pas, In truth I know not all the particulars upon that subject; but I am very
certain that these three points were insisted upon: First, Whether this noble
concourse should be called the Assembly of Whores, or of Ladies? Secondly,
Whether the Whores should have the same title as the Ladies? And thirdly,
whether the Presidents should be chosen by the Ladies or the Whores? As to the
first, there was no great debate about that, because it was agreed they should
count both the one and the other, and should conclude in favor of the greater
number, that thereupon the Whores being found to be far more in number than the
Ladies, it was concluded that it should be called the Assembly of Whores,
though the chiefest Ladies of the City were included among them. They could not
agree so easily about the second, the Ladies being altogether unwilling to give
the Whores the title of Excellency; and on the other hand the Whores were
resolved to make no kind of difference in that place which was common both to
the one and the other; but after long opposition, the Whores yielded the title
of Excellency to the Ladies; concluding that the Ladies should be called Most
Excellent Whores, and the others only by the name of Lady Whores. This second
point being agreed upon, they came to discourse the third; which was that of
electing the Presidents, but the disputes were so great, and the differences so
irreconcilable, that it was judged convenient to draw lots for it, which fell
to the Whores, to the great regret of the Ladies, who could not without
difficulty resolve to be subject to a Whore for their Presidentess.


Mar. It makes me in a ecstasy, and ready ^o leap out of my skin. Then it is the
same thing as the world goes now, to say Whore, or Lady?


Pas. Don't wonder at that, Brother, because, Mundus semper fuit Mundus,
quanquam nunquam mundus: The world has ever been a world, though it was never
free from pollution, and causes have kept the same path in nature, though we
have steered another course, so that we could not meet with that before, which
we encounter now. The Ladies and Whores have almost ever been one and the same
thing; and there never was any person known, unless it were some poor Peasant,
that did not understand that the title of Whore was included in that of My
Lady; and if you never knew it before, understand it now, that you may free
your self from the imputation of an Ignaro; there being no other difference
between them, but this, that the Lady is a private Whore, and the Whore a
public one. The best bits are for the Ladies, who no sooner spy out a piece of
well shaped flesh, but they run upon it with more violence than a Mule upon his
Provender: What thing else can you imagine makes so many Provincials and
Generals, so many Priors and Guardians, so many Confessors and Converts, which
frequent the Houses of so many Ladies in Rome, which cannot but bring scandal
at least both to Maid and Menservants? I would have you to know, that the
Friars do not visit the Ladies to teach them to raise paste, but to instruct
them how to clap a cap on their Husbands heads, not red, like the Cardinals,
but of the Rook's color, which is much more common than the Cardinals Cap is;
because every one is allowed as well Priest as Friar; Cardinal as Bishop,
Citizen as Stranger, to bestow the Cap of the Rooks color: But the Cardinals
Cap, no person gives but the Pope himself; which is the reason it is not so
common as the other. This, if I mistake not, made the Ladies pretend to the
Election of the Pope; and they might rationally claim a right to the Popedom,
who are already all Popesses. Let right take place; why should the Pope enjoy
the Popedom, who makes few Cardinals, and not the Ladies who create many? I do
not understand how they can pretend to a jurisdiction above the Ladies, if they
may not have the power of creating Cardinals granted them, as well as the
others; who in effect may be called Popesses without a Pope.


Mar. I believe these Lady Popesses and no Popesses did reproach one another
with many things in the Assembly.


Pas. They did cast so many reproaches one upon the other, that if Marino were
alive, he would think it no hard task to furnish himself with invention to make
a Poem of Whoredom like that of his Adonis. Among other things, whilst they did
argue about the making a Presidentess of the Assembly; Laura Feraresses being
moved with, I know not what words spoken by a Lady, in disparagement of
Whoredom in general, standing up, took up the Ladies words, with great
arrogancy, saying, I expect, Ladies, that one of these days you should
resolve to banish us the City, to the end that you solely might enjoy the
Company of Citizens and Strangers; what strange kind of malice is that gnaws
your mind? We have no prejudice for you, why have you so much for us? We leave
you almost all the Cardinals, whom you enjoy at your pleasure: You have your
share of Bishops too, as well as we, and possibly in a larger measure; for to
us none resort now but mean people, who have no golden Chains, nor Crucifixes
of Diamonds to bestow upon you. The Roman Princes are yours, and the Princes
Ambassadors also; what then do you complain of? to what purpose is all this
rashness and murmuring? This Assembly was brought together by us; and therefore
the Presidentess ought to be of our choosing: Most excellent Ladies pray tell
us, did we over come into your Assemblies, which are almost without number, to
make our pretenses to any thing?


Mar. Soft a little, what Assembly did that most Illustrious little Whore mean?
The Ladies manage their business privately, and would sooner die with longing
to eat raw flesh, than trust one another: And if they do confide in any one,
they do it with specious pretenses, and make choice of such persons they have a
power over. As for the rest they desire to be reputed chaste: What Assembly then
are these?


Pas. For my part I do not understand Laura Ferraresse's meaning; for to
acquaint you with the business as it is, she is a person of such depth that the
Devil himself cannot fathom her: However, she knowing this her natural
perfection, always endeavors to practice with persons that are most fit to
dive into: Yet I conceit with my self, that she would hit them in the teeth
with the Feasts, Balls and Plays, and such like Recreations, that use to be
made at Rome, where the whole company of Ladies and Gentlemen meet together.


Mar. I do not believe that there can be any injury done in those places, the
customs of the Country being sufficiently moderate; this might be alleged
indeed, if our Ladies were French, and not Italian; or they were in France,
where all liberty imaginable is allowed, and not in Rome which is the Mother of
virtue.


Pasq. In sum, I never met with such another Marforio in the world as you are;
you change your discourse when you please; make whom you will virtuous, marry
in the morning and bury at night; and that which is of greater moment, you can
feign your self ignorant, or wise, in time and place when you please. It seems
you think I have committed a heinous crime, in calling the Balls, Feasts, and
other recreative meetings, which are made in Rome for the diversion of Ladies,
Whorish meetings; but I perhaps do not absolutely believe all that you your
self say to be true. Remove from you, I beseech you, so false a persuasion, and
if you please change, your mind, by disabusing your self with those prejudices
that persuade you, that the French are greater Libertines, than the Roman
Ladies, Know, that the liberty which you say is used in France, is civility in
Italy, and the civility of Italy is a licentiousness in France, where there are
not found so many Popesses to creat Cardinals as in Rome, that is, of such as
wear Acteons Livery. The French Ladies are not so foolish as the Italian, for
they divert themselves with Prominades and constant visiting one another at
their own Houses; sometimes they take occasion to go to a newly wedded Bride,
sometimes a Lady with Child, and sometimes a sick person, or other Gentlewoman;
and thus they leave the Friars in their Cloisters, the Bishops in their
Bishoprics, o^d the Priests in their Cures: Whereas the Roman Dames whilst the
French are walking for recreation, they are shut up in the Chamber of some
House with a crafty preaching Friar, who teaches her the transubstantiation of
persons, or transfiguration of occult causes. Those beasts that are most
closely kept up in the Don are the most savage and cruel, and they never go
forth but to seek after a prey. The French Ladies are reclaimed Beasts, and the
Italians Savage, and therefore you had more need stand in fear of the Savage
Italian, than the Tamed French Lady: when the Roman Lady goes out of the hole
of her Chamber, you may be sure that she looks after some prey, that she may
gnaw upon in her den; and on the Contrary, the French that lives plentifully,
has no need to provide for other food: If you had ever been in France, and
observed with what accustomed sincerity, and civility of manners, the Ladies
converse with Gentlemen, who make use of their liberty civilly, you would be of
opinion that our Ladies are Arch-whores to them. But in Rome, you may easily
perceive, that the Ladies go to Balls with no other design, but to make some
honest man out of his wits: Not to Plays, but to steal away the heart of some
poor Gentleman. What glances of the eyes? What gestures? What gentle brushes in
passing by? What sighs? What biting of the fingers? What treading on the Toe?
What counterfeit smiles are there seen at Plays, Feasts, Balls, and Comedies,
between Ladies and Gentlemen? And to what other end is this, but to manifest
that all the public meetings of Ladies are but an Assembly of Whores? But this
is nothing, if they would be satisfied with such kind of meetings: but the
incivility of our Ladies rests not here; they are not content to Court wantonly
at such a Bride's Ball, or such a Cardinals Comedy, but they give themselves up
to profane the very Churches themselves, to the great scandal of faithful,
pious and devout Christians, and wicked and perverse Heretics, where they make
it lawful to fix their eyes wantonly upon their Lovers, and oftentimes to
contrive with their Hectors the way how they shall procure a nights lodging.
And this I believe that la Ferarose did mean, and not without reason; because
it is certain that there is far more mischief done in one Assembly of Ladies,
than a hundred meetings of Whores, these being Whores in the House, and Ladies
in the Church; whereas the Ladies (with reverence be it spoken to those private
Actoresses) are Whores every where. Truly the Ladies do deserve the title of
most Excellent Whores, because they have the right of primogeniture, to that
occupation, of the Whores themselves. The Lady Nina della Canuccie, that now
and then plays the tame beast, and sometimes the savage, defended this point
with the highest applause for the credit of the Whores, that could be, in
presence of four Ladies and more of the chiefest of them; and that which is the
greatest wonder, when flying out into passion, she seems as if she would only
tickle their ears, but she touched them to the quick. Yes, most Excellent Ladies
(said she) you do in all things deserve the precedence of us poor Whores who
are born to gather up the crumbs that fall from your Ladyships table? And reason
good too, for we are but small Whores, whereas your Excellencies are the
greatest Whores in the World!


Mar. But what did that great foul beast Nina intend by her gathering up the
drums that fell from the Ladies Table?


Pas. I am not fully informed of that; the other night, having an opportunity,
which necessity forced me and of visiting the Lady Nina to speak with a certain
Gentleman, who co-habits with her always, and serves to satisfy her corporal
wants; though some thinks he is a man that minds his souls health; I came in
just as they had entered upon the discourse of the Ladies; wherefore I entreated
them not to wave it, and so they proceeded in their good arguments; this most
illustrious Gentleman commending her extremely for that ingenious conceit,
which she found out in the Assembly to overcome the Ladies; meaning that
concerning the Table, which you had a desire to know; and she seeing her dear
Gallant ready with an open mouth to receive hr words, it did the more inflame
her to speak, giving him a thousand reasons for that matter, and if by chance
she was defficient in any thing, the Gentleman, who had resided in the Houses
of more then four Ladies besides, did come in to her assistance, by rendering
his own reasons. The whole substance of the discourse consisted in this, that
no men followed the Whores, but such as by chance had very ill fortune with the
Ladies; or else such who could not satisfy their hunger by tasting all sorts
of food, by reason of the jealousy of their Husbands.


Mar. O, Now I understand your meaning, and if it be so, the Ladies deserve the
Seniority in Whoredom. But do you believe it to be so?


Pas. Yes, I do believe it, and he that does not never saw woman. It is the
nature of man to do that which is forbidden; whence it proceeds, that the
greater the privation is, the more is the will inflamed to obtain the desire.
And indeed we see how that daily Husbands murder their Wives, and Wives run
away from their Husbands. And what is the reason of this? Because all Laws and
Honor are slighted, Ladies are daily stimulated on to seek after those men
that are defended copulating with them; and the men those Ladies, that they
should let alone. In sum, it is certainly true, that the Devil instigates us
always to commit the most dangerous and great evils; so that men being
overcome by such temptations, do besiege the Fortress of the Ladies Chastity,
assault the Virginity of young Damsels, and play the madman more than the devil
himself; nay worse, to violate the chastity of married Women and Widows, nay,
of the very Nuns themselves, who are (to avoid those incivilities) purposely
shut up under lock and key, and live under the severe laws of a Cloister: To go
a whoring is natural, and therefore the Devil permits nature to steer her own
course, and he moves on to the acting of things prohibited: And therefore we
are bound to believe, that men now adays go to Whores, when they find they
cannot attain to that, to which they are most prompted; hence we may argue with
reason, that the Whores have but little advantage of the Ladies.


Mar. I am apt to believe all you say, and am obliged to you for your
acquainting me with those things that were before unknown to me. But if you
will pray fully satisfy me in some particulars as to those Cardinals that were
in this so famous Assembly, in nomination for the Popedom.


Pas. The actions of most were surveyed one after another: The Ladies sometimes
proposing one, and the Whores another. Their propositions the Ladies did
beforehand strive to deny with pregnant reasons; to the end they might bring it
to pass, that they should propose one according to their own fancy; but they
had no sooner proposed it, but the Whores opposed them.


Mar. I should have propounded something that might have been acceptable, that
I might have heard their discourse thereupon; but know you not whether there
was any thing mentioned the of Barbarini.


Pas. Above all; and to what purpose had this Assembly met, without mentioning
those Cardinals who are in greatest estimation at Court? They made long
reflections upon their persons; and produced so many reasons, that it is
impossible to repeat them.


Mar. But were the propositions made by the Ladies or Whores, or else in
general by the one and the other?


Pas. Francis was proposed by all unanimously, and as unanimously and
absolutely excluded by them, they judging it inconvenient to admit him to the
Papacy, who virifies the Sex, and goes for a Virgin. He being excluded, the
Ladies proposed the Cardinal Antonio; in favor of whom all the Whores also of
the Assembly did concur; so that he was looked upon by them all as a Pope: But
this vogue did not last long; for the Ladies being jealous because the Whores
did condescend to it with so much affection, began to be suspicious, that he
did take the Whores part more than theirs, that therefore he would sum up
together the greatest things he ever did in his life, and they should discourse
of that subject apart; and observe near hand the Curtezans proceedings, who
still cried out, that this Lord should be made Pope, who for so many years had
carried himself so affectionatly to the Sex. The Ladies thought fit to
enumerate, as near as was possible, all the Ladies, with whom the Cardinal
Antonio had been privately concerned; and if the number of the Ladies should
exceed, that then he should be admitted to the Papacy, otherwise, he should be
excluded. But a just account being made, it was found, that he had -- twice as
many Whores as Ladies; so without any more ado, they declared themselves
against it. The Curtezans on the other hand, understanding that he was
excluded, were very forward with them in the defensive part; saying, that they
did deceive themselves; for the account that they had given in had no ground,
because the number of Ladies, as well married persons, and Virgins as Widows,
with whom the Cardinal Antonio had kept company was innumeralbe, having had a
design to the business, but not secrecy; so that he was never very careful of
that in his exercise with Whores, esteeming all this to be to his honor, and
an effect of Nobility. Now the Ladies were almost resolved to condescend to his
Election, when the Duchess of -- rose up and said; let us for all this think
of some other Lady Associats, because this were to cut our own throats. Let us
have a care of making one Pope, who has been more zealous to defend a filthy
deformed Slut, than to protect those Ladies that were the greatest Favorites.
Let us remember what he did heretofore to my Lord Palotta, for causing that
infamous Strumpet Cecca Buffona to be whipped, who acted the domineering
Cardinals, because she lay with the Cardinal Antonio, who then reigned. If we
should make him Pope, all the Whores would be She-Cardinalst, and we must go
and beg protection from our enemies. This discourse did stir up the mind of the
Curtezans the more to maintain the argument; and there had happened a mutiny,
if the Presidentes had not moderated the violence of the Whores; saying, it may
be we shall all be mistaken, therefore I judge it more fit to think of another
subject. This Cardinal is now old, and old age in men brings them to repent of
the sins of their youth; that therefore I am apt no believe, that we can expect
no other, than the affront of be-being banished his presence; it being the
quality of old men to despise that which they have had the fruition of, and can
no longer enjoy. And if withal he should retain any remains of good will
toward us, he would have no food, but such as is fit to create him an
appetite; so that one way or other, we should lose our time; and so much the
more in regard that he had made many Ladies and Whores Cardinalesses, he would
be gravel'd to create a Popess among, and may be he would make one that would
be jealous of all. The Ladies of pleasure being satisfied with this argument,
they, together with the Ladies, excluded Cardinal Antonio, and declared him
incapable of pretending to the Popedom.


Mar. And did they not mention Cardinal Charles Barbarino their Nephew, who is
young, and in hopes of being Heir to his Uncles?


Pas. There was some what said of him, but the Ladies would not endure to hear
it, by reason of the disparagement he had done the female Sex, despising the
Primogeniture, by not marrying, the Ladies arguing from hence, that if he had
denied a Princess, who was offered him in marriage, he would not be sollicitous
to seek one. The Whores said neither good nor bad of him, because they never
had the honor of his conversation, but thereupon they agreed with the Ladies
that had excluded him. The example of Cecca Buffana, who was caused to be whipped
by Palotta, mentioned to the company of Ladies, made some impression upon their
spirits, and did penetrate the thoughts of all their Excellencies, who
endeavored, the Barbarina being excluded, to promote Cardinal Palotta, as one
that abhorred the name of a Whore, having always showed a himself persecutor
of Whoredom, and never failed to protect the Ladies in and by all means
whatsoever. Some of them said they must have time to consider of it well; for
these were things that could not be done a second time: And among the rest one
Lady of the House of Conti argued thus: If we were assured that Cardinal
Palotta would deal with all the Curtezans of Rome, as he did with la Cecca, we
had good reason to endeavor his promotion; but who can assure us that he is
really the same person, as he seems to be? Who knows, whether the whipping of
la Cecca was done out of an earnest affection, or vainglory: I am apt to think
out of vainglory, to let the City understand that he loved justice, without
respect of persons; and by this way of proceeding to gain the love of the
people; besides that, many are of opinion, that la Cecca had never been whip't,
if she had not been Cardinal Antonio's She-friend; in despite of whom, it is
thought Palotta proved so rigorous. It is the property of such kind of men, to
declare themselves enemies to what they love: For my part I will not swear for
his honesty, and I understand what I say; he is a man as well as other men are;
and loves to keep company with rascally people, therefore he entertains himself
in the morning with them, and at night with Friars, who in Rome are Hectors to
certain of the vilest Whores; so that there is little hope there should be any
great matters done for us. For all this the Ladies did still favor Palotta;
the whipping of la Cecca being imprinted in their minds; though this was thrown
in his dish by the Curtezans, that this Palotta having caused the Prelates
Whores to be whipped, he should not have omitted the whipping the Popes Ladies
also. It suffices to say, that the Whores did manage their business so well,
that they excluded him, forcing him to take a more dangerous leap than that he
took in Portugal to save his life by jumping out of a window.


Mar. So it seems this Cardinal is neither of God, nor the Devil, and can
neither satisfy the Whores, nor the Ladies.


Pas. Perhaps, if he were made Pope, he would be of another mind, and would
outwardly manifest what is found inwardly. His exclusion was the cause that
they fell upon Tapetto Ginetti; but they no sooner began to mention him, but he
was excluded with a general consent; the Ladies, by reason of his mean and base
extract; and the Curtezans, because of his Covetousness. Laura Massa however
did not fail to give her assistance, not because she was inclined to favor
those that were covetous; for she loved prodigality in the excess far more,
then moderated covetousness, but to satisfy the Sister-hood, that had some
particular interest in some of Ginetti's Nephews; the rest did altogether jear,
at Laura Massa for her recommending him, hissing at her behind her back with
very much scorn. Ginetti being quite out of hope of gaining the Chair, they
began to muster up their forces for the Cardinals Grimaldi and Ursini, the
Ladies extremely desiring their promotion; the others did not dislike them; but
said, it would be no good policy to bestow the Popedom upon frenchified
Italians, who might frenchifie all Italy; so that they changed their minds;
though very much against their inclination, to advance the benefit of their
public interest; for indeed there was not one Lady in the Assembly, but
desired either the one or the other of these two persons for many respects; and
particularly, for the hope they had to see the French liberty introduced in
Rome; being that these Cardinals enjoy it, and make a very fine use of it. They
came then to visit the Spanish Subjects, naming them one by one; the Whores now
reckoning up the virtues of the one, and the Ladies of the other. The Ladies
were content the Whores should make choice of one to please themselves,
provided he were a Spaniard; and the Whores made the Ladies the same proffer,
the Arragonians only excepted, as a people that did never much affect Rome; yet
neither the one nor the other could by any means find out a good Subject among
so many Spaniolizers, to suit with the humor of the Assembly; but excluded
them all for their damnable pride, by which they made themselves odious to all
the female Sex, who love to see men humble, as well riding as on foot; so they
endeavored to bring the other Italians upon the Stage.


Mar. Among these She Conclavists, were there not diverse factions, as there
used to be in the Conclave of Cardinals?


Pas. Not among the Ladies, but among the Whores there were, yet there was no
great notice taken of it; because the Italian Faction was thrice as well
furnished as all the rest in number; however the Spanish Faction was grown
somewhat numerous by the arrival of many sordid baggages newly come from Spain,
with the Catholic Ambassador: But as for the French Faction, it was very weak
they having but a few little Whores, who lived upon some leavings that did
advance the old Italian Curtezans. The Princess Colomia did pretend at first,
that she was capable of bringing in a party of Ladies, either French Ladies,
Italianiz'd, or Italians frenchified; but the French Ladies Italianiz'd, would
not agree with the Italian Ladies frenchified; and therefore the Princess, who
did not know in her conscience whether she was Italian or French, being
doubtful whether she was born in France, or Italy; did not much care to show
her self obstinate in making a Faction, but followed the rest, and assisted
them them in their Councils with her natural gentile humor.


Mar. This Princess has a good wit, and a sweet flowing tongue, and deserves to
be half French and half Italian.


Pas. But to come to our business; the female Conclavists being thus in a
confusion and in suspense, not being able to find out a Pope to their
satisfaction, having now sifted the point concerning the Cardinals more
exactly, did think to effect their business by promoting the Cardinal
Brancaccio; for whom the two Velletrane spoke, informing the Assembly with the
quality of the person; saying, that this Lord being addicted to pleasure, and
to the satisfying of his own appetite; ever allowed of, and granted licenses
for Balls and Comedies, and continual Masks; which are the most convenient
things to bring store of men to his Apartment; he would not fail to make a
continual Carneval, and make Lent shorter, which makes us for the most part eat
up what we gained during the small time that the Carneval lasts. But these are
not all his good qualifications; there being other considerations, that should
plead for his Election. If we should make this man Pope, it will prove for the
good of us all, because he having an infinite number of Relations, the House of
Brancaccio (which you know very well) having such numerous branches, he will
bring little less than half the Kingdom to Rome; so that you gain advantage by
them all. The Ladies smiled at this proposition, and answered in short, that
that vulgar Italian Proverb, which the Romans know by common experience to be
true, was sufficient to exclude Brancaccio, viz. The Neopolitans are large
mouthed, but close fisted. It Is very true indeed (the Whores said) we had need
of another kind of men then the Neapolitans are; it were more necessary for us
to seek out a Polish or German Pope, that would bring hither along with him a
great number of those Mamalucks, that are open-handed and narrow mouthed.
Adrianella; who had no other design then the promotion of Rospigliosi her
Confident, perceiving that the proposing of a Pope who had many Relations was
not il-resented by the Assembly, began thus to express her self: Most noble
femal Companions, if the reasons for a Pope with a numerous Family may take
place in this Conclave; certainly we ought not to quit Cardinal Rospigliosi,
who has three parts of four of the Citizens of the City of Pistoia, the place
of his Nativity to his Relations, who will all of them forsake their dwellings
to come and live in Rome, and thus there will be no jealousy among us; because
every Lady, and every Whore will have one of this Popes Nephews for her friend.
Besides, he being a great lover of the Muses, he will grant us liberty to to
make public meetings according to our pleasure, and suffer those Geldings and
Superiors that are of our opinion to come among us. Weigh this well in your
minds, my most dear She-Companions, because these propositions are not to be
buried in oblivion. Adriana's proposal was well relish't by the conclave, the
major part of the She-Conclavists being in a manner satisfied, so that they
were about to make an immediate conclusion in favor of Rospigliosi, but were
forced to leave off by reason of a great noise that began to be raised without
doors, by those Abbats, Prelates, and other of their Gallants, every one whereof
staid in expectation of his Mistress to wait upon her home. The occasion of the
noise was, that having had a relation of the words of Adrianella; and
understanding that now the Female-Conclavist, would create Rospigliosi Pope,
who had so many Nephews and Grandchildren, the Gallants grew jealous upon
this, fearing they should lose what they had; since it is the property of the
Popes Nephews to dispossess those that are in possession, to put themselves in
possession; for this reason they cried out that Rospigliosi might not be made
Pope, he being burdened with so many friends. This rumor was so loud, that
there was a necessity to adjourn the Assembly, and refer all things to another
day. This is all I can acquaint you with at present.


Mar. I return you thanks, and will find out some other time to understnad the
rest.


FINIS.

