TYRANNY AND POPERY Lording it Over THE CONSCIENCES, Lives, Liberties, AND
ESTATES BOTH OF KING AND PEOPLE.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

TYRANNY AND POPERY Lording it over the Consciences, Liberties, and Estates
both of King and People.
To all those that Love either their Religion, their Prince, their Country, or
Themselves.
THis, and no less than All This, is the Import of the Matter in Question. The
Government is charged by a Faction to be Tyrannically, and Popishly Affected;
and This Pamphlet is to Prove, that the very Faction which charges This upon
the Government, is in all Matters Ecclesiastical, and Civil, Public and
Particular, the great Imposer, and Usurper it self.

But before I enter upon the Subject, I do here previously Swear by the Hopes
of a Christian, that I am not moved to this Discourse by any Biass, either of
Partiality, or Faction; That I have no Aversion to the Party, any further than
as I find them the Mortal Enemies of our Government, Laws and Freedoms, and
that in the Prosecution of this Argument, I will not Press one Syllable,
(according to the best of my Skill, and Knowledge) beyond the strict Limits of
Truth, and Reason; My Purpose being only to Uncover the Pit, that the Unwary
may not a second time run Headlong into the same Precipice. I shall begin with
the Platform of the Scottish Presbytery, and show you the Sovereign, and
Unaccomptable Power which that Judicatory claims to it self. My next work will
be, to observe the Harmony betwixt Simeon and Levi; Their Consistorians, and
Ours, in the Frame, and Scope of their Discipline. In the next place, we'll
Compare their Positions, and then conclude, with a View of their Usurpations,
Arbitrary Practices, and Proceedings: and all This, extracted from the
Undeniable Memorials, and Records of the Times, and Actions, whereof we are
about to Treat; and in as few words as may be, to speak Home to it, and Clear.

The Platform of the Scottish Presbytery.
THe Presbyterial Government has Four Judicatories. A Parochial Session; A
Presbyterial Consistory; A Provincial Synod; And A General Assembly.

The Parochial Session is constituted of One Minister, or More, with a
Competent Number of Lay Elders (their Presbyteri non Docentes) and Deacons. It
meets once a Week, or oftener, if there be Occasion, and takes Cognizance of all
Parochial Cases concerning External Order, and Censure. If there be but One
Minister in the Parish, he is Constant Moderatour: If More, they take their
Turns as they can agree upon it; and they are all of them Equal in Honor, and
Jurisdiction. There passes no Act without the Joint Consent of the Minister,
Lay Elders, and Deacons; or Plurality of Votes; and Note, that the Minister has
no Casting Voice. The Power of Binding, or Loosing; of Censures Ecclesiastical;
and of External Order, and Worship, is Radically, and Equally in All: So that
the Lay Elders, and Deacons have as much the Power of the Keys, as the
Ministers.

To support this Jurisdiction, they have their Four Sacred Orders, which they
challenge to be of Divine Right. First. Their Preaching Elders (whom they call
Ministers.) Secondly. Doctors (or University Professors.) Thirdly. Lay, or
Ruling-Elders, who have as much Authority in the Debate, and Decision of
Matters of Faith, Worship, Polity, Ecclesiastical Censures; as the
Preaching-Elders. Fourthly. Deacons. Take notice that their Lay Elders, and
Deacons are Annual, and Consequently one Year Sacred, and Another Profane.

This Session meddles only with things Parochial, as the Ordering of the
Parish Church, and Peculiar Service; the Censure of Lesser Scandals; as
Fornication, Drunkenness, Scolding, Sabboth-breaking, etc. And in Difficult
Cases, they apply themselves to the Presbytery.

In their Censures, they impose Civil Punishments, and Fines; they Emprison
Offenders at pleasure; Cart them through the Town; set them in Pillories; Shave
one Half of their Heads; Cut off their Beards: Nay, they take upon them by
their own Authority to Banish whom they please out of the Bounds of the Parish;
which is a Direct Usurpation of Sovereign Power: In Case of a Pecuniary Mulct
inflicted, or of a Child born in Fornication, they will not allow the Infant to
be Baptized, if either of the Parents have not paid the Fine, or secured it, or
satisfied the Church.

The Presbytery is next; and it is made up in some places, of More, in others,
of Fewer Parishes, and the King himself is not Exempt from the Power, and
Jurisdiction of this Consistory; nor in Effect from the Authority of the very
Parochial Session, living within the Precinct, either of the One, or of the
Other. This Judicatory is Composed of all the Parochial Ministers within its
Compass, and a Lay-Elder for Each Parish: so that the Lay Elders are Equal to
the Preaching Elders both in Number, and Power; and a Botchers Vote goes as far
under that Capacity, in Divine Matters, as the Voice of the most Reverend and
Learned of the Clergy; only a Lay-Elder cannot properly be a Moderatour; though
in several Cases they have dispensed with that Scruple.

This Court takes Cognizance First, Of what is Referred, or Presented to them
from every Individual Parish. 2. Of all Capital Crimes, and Scandals of the
Highest Degree. 3. Of such Offenses as fall under the Censure of
Excommunication. 4. Of all Appeals from Sessions. 5. Of all Differences that
cannot be Composed, or Determined in the Parochial Conclave. 6. Of the
Visitation, and Censure of what is amiss in Every Parish, either in Preacher, or
Other. 7. Of the appointing of Readers, and Schoolmasters.

They meet commonly once a Week, or a Fortnight; at which Meetings, all the
Ministers, in their Turns, Exercise (as they call it) in the expounding, and
applying of Texts of Scripture: In these Exercises they have a sort of People
which they call Expectants of such or such a Presbytery, who are Licensed to
Preach in any Parish Church within its Bounds. These Expectants have usually
some smattering in Divinity; as Country-SchoolMasters, or the like: and they
are Authorized to do all Ministerial Acts, except Baptizing, or Administering
the Lord's Supper; without Holy Orders, Imposition of Hands, or any
Qualification for the Sacred Function. There are more or fewer Presbyteries in
a Country, according to the Number of Parishes; but all of them Independent One
from Another: If the King himself be Cited, he must Appear, or be Excommunicate
for Contempt; and submit his Earthly Scepter to their Scepter of Christ, as
they term it, and from thence, receive Christ's Laws, and Ordinances. As no
Person is Exempt, so neither is any Crime whatsoever that is either Committed,
or suspected to be Committed within the Limits of their Jurisdiction; but they
hook it in, as scandalous to a Christian Profession.

A Provincial Synod is an Associate Body of the Commissioners chosen out of
all the Individual Presbyteries, within the Precinct of the Province: they meet
twice or thrice a year, and Exercise an Overruling Power over all the
Presbyteries within that Province, in such manner as the Presbytery
superintends the Parochial Session. In this Judicatory the Leading men of the
Faction lay their Heads together; form their Projects; and when the
Commissioners return from hence to their several Presbyteries, they intimate to
the Particular Ministers what Points they are to Preach upon, for the
Advancement of those Designs.

The General Assembly is Sovereign, and Independent: Hither lies the Last
Appeal, and the Jurisdiction of it is Universal in what concerns Ecclesiastical
Matters, and Persons, or Temporals in Order to Spirituals. They look upon
themselves as immediately Entrusted by Christ, and to Him only do they hold
themselves Accomptable. Whosoever does not obey this Sovereignty, (though the
King himself) he is to be Excommunicate, and the Nobility, Gentry, Collective
Body; nay, every Individual Person is to assist to the Compelling, Censuring,
and Punishing of him to the Utmost of his Power. So that the King himself is at
their Command, and to order the Execution of their Censures, in Estate, Body,
Life, and Death.

To This Judicatory Two Preaching Elders, and a Lay-Elder are sent as
Commissioners from every Presbytery in the Kingdom; so that the Clergy have
thus far, Two to One: but then reckoning that every Borough, and Corporation
sends One Commissioner, and the Universities, and Colleges their Commissioners
too, which are most of them Laymen, this Assembly of the Kirk is turned into a
Council of State.

The King himself is also a Member of this Assembly, either Personally by
Himself; or Virtually by his Commissioner; but without a Negative Voice, or any
Power there, beyond that of a Lay-Elder: The Major Part carries it, and
whatsoever They Vote, (though against the Kings Opinion, and Conscience) he is
bound to see it put in Execution, upon pain of being Excommunicate, and Deposed
from his Government. And if any thing be proposed in this Assembly, as
Spiritual, (though never so hazzardous to the Crown) if they tell you that it is
for Christ's Glory, there is no opposing of it in favor of the Public Peace,
or State. The Proper President is a Preaching Elder, and this Judicatory they
accempt as Christ's highest Tribunal upon Earth, from whence there lies no
Appeal. They are obliged to meet once a year, and they Indict, and Adjourn
themselves by their own Power, without allowing the King to appoint either the
Time, or the Place, only if there be any Occasion of meeting before the time
set, their Commissioners give an Account of it to the King.

The steps by which they mounted to this Arbitrary Jurisdiction were, A
Dislike, First, Of the Church Government. Secondly, Of the Church Governors.
Thirdly, They proposed a Reformation after the Geneva-Copy; which not being
admitted, Fourthly, They framed a Model of their Own. And lastly; by Fraud,
Violence, and Rebellion they Imposed it upon the Nation.

The English Presbytery.
THis was the Method also, and the Design of the English Disciplinarians, under
Queen Elizabeth, as appears by the Records of those times, though many
particulars of the Conspiracy were never brought to Light. The Examples of
Geneva, and Scotland, were at every turn pressed upon the English; and a
Confederacy was carried on in Both Nations, for the Erecting of the same
Platform of Presbyterial Discipline; which one Davison, a Scotch-man, affirms
to have no less Warrant to be continued perpetually within the Church, under
this Precept, Feed my Sheep, than has the Preaching of the Word, or the
Administration of the Sacraments. From 1560, to 1572, they vented their Spleen
only in Libels, and Conventicles. In November. 72. they Erected a Presbytery at
Wandesworth in Surry; and from that time, to 1583, their Design was agitated in
secret Meetings, which they called Conferences, wherein, (at a London-Meeting)
they came to This Conclusion, That the Present Government of the Church by
Archbishops, and Bishops is Antichristian, and that the only Discipline, and
Government of Christ, that is, by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, shall
be Established in Place of the Other. In 1583, Their Book of Discipline is
Drawn up; (which they called the Synodicall Discipline, and an Assembly being
held upon it, among other Decrees, it was ordered, That the Comitial Assemblies
are to be monished, to make Collections for Relief of the Poor, and of
Scholars: but especially for Relief of such Ministers here; as are put out for
not Subscribing to the Articles tendered by the Bishops: also for Relief of
Scottish Ministers, etc. These Scottish Ministers were they that Justified the
Rebellious Act of making King James a Prisoner in 1583. and took Sanctuary in
England, upon the Parliaments Declaring it Treason: And who so proper
Instruments as They, for the Promoting of another Rebellion in England? Their
Book of Discipline was reviewed, and put in Practice, in 1587. In 1589 it was
Perfected, and in the Year following, the Conspiracy was detected; when, upon
Examinations of Littleton, Edmunds, Johnson, Barbon, Holms, Brown, etc. it
appeared, that the Discipline was Framed, Subscribed, and Carried on, in all
Respects after the Scottish Project, and Model.

By Public Justice upon some of the Principal Incendiaries, and King James
his Vigilance, and Care afterward, the Consistorians were for a long time kept
within some tolerable Compass. Their Mouths were stopped, upon the Conference at
Hampton Court, Anno 1603, with a strict Proclamation for the Observing of an
Uniformity in the Church: Episcopacy was restored in Scotland in 1610, and an
Act passed in a General Assembly at Aberdeen in 1616, Authorizing the
Compiling, and Framing a Public Form of Liturgy, or Book of Common Prayer to
be first presented to the King, and after his Approbation, to be Universally
received throughout the Kingdom: Which Book, pursuant to the Act, was by the
Archbishop of St. Andrews sent up to his Majesty, and by himself, and his
Order, Examined, Corrected, and Returned: But his Majesty died before it could
be put in Practice. And this was the Book, which with very little Alteration,
and That too, in favor of their pretended Scruples, was by the late King's
Proclamation in 1637, commanded to be publicly Used in all Counties of that
Kingdom. There were also diverse of the English Rites and Ceremonies settled
in 1618, by Five Articles that passed the Assembly at Perth; Which Articles
cost King James an Expensive Journey into Scotland the Year before; where he
was forced to tell them plainly, in a Speech at St. Andrews, That it was a
Power belonging to all Christian Princes to order Matters in the Church; and
that he would never regard what they Approved, or Disapproved, except they
brought him a Reason which he could not Answer. To which, upon Consideration
they made his Majesty this Return, That if he would grant them a Free Assembly,
they would therein satisfy his Majesty in all the Points he had propounded.
The King depending upon it, returned into England, and the day of the Assembly
being come, and nothing done according to their Promise; his Majesty went a
short way to Work with them, and took away their Augmentations, that he had
formerly allowed them out of the Exchequer, which brought down their Stomachs,
and made Way for the passing of the aforesaid Articles.

It is not my Intent to write any thing more of the History of the Times, than
what I find pertinent to my present purpose: so that passing over the
Grumblings, and Mutinous Dispositions that appeared in the Remainder of King
James; and the First Seven or Eight Years of King Charles his Reign; I shall
only tell you, by way of Introduction to what follows, that the late King
(having beforehand ordered a Convention of the Estates) upon the 13th of May,
1633. began his Journey toward Scotland, in order to his Personal Coronation,
where he was received with a Pomp, and Acclamation, befitting the Dignity, and
the Solemnity of the Occasion. His first Work was to ratify the Laws, and
Statutes of his Predecessor, in Relation to Church - Government; which passed
not without some Opposition: but the Commission of Surrenders went yet nearer
them, though both the Owners of Lands, and the Ministers were so abundantly
satisfied, that the Former (as the King himself says in his large Declaration,
page 9.) acknowledged it as a Deliverance from an Intolerable Bondage, under
which They and their Ancestors, ever since the Reformation of Religion, had
grievously Groaned; and the Other, with Infinite Gratitude Celebrated his
Majesty as the Father, and Founder of their Churches. The Case was this, (as
Heylin renders it in his Cyprianus Anglicus, page 224.) In the Minority of King
James, the Lands of all Cathedral Churches, and Religious Houses, which had
been settled on the Crown by Act of Parliament, were shared among the Lords,
and Great Men of that Kingdom, (by the Connivance of the Earl of Murray and
some other of the Regents,) to make them sure unto that side: and They, being
thus possessed of the Lands, with the Regalities* and Tithes belonging to these
Ecclesiastical Corporations, held the Clergy to small Stipends, and the
peasan^^y in Vassallage. His Majesty was advised by Council, to take them into
his own hand, the present Oecupants having no other Title to them, than the
Unjust Usurpation of their Predecessors. And this was, carried in such a Manner
too, that the very Nobility, and Lay-Patrons could not open their Mouths
against it; for they were satisfied for their Tithes, to the Uttermost
Farthing, only they lost the Dependency of the Clergy and Laity upon them, by
Virtue of these Tithes; and Consequently the Power of making a Party to Embroil
the Government. They contented themselves within the Bounds of Libels, and
Clamours, till that Rebellious Outrage in the great Church of Edinburgh, on the
23 of July, 1637. Which was no more than the Emprovement of an Occasion to put
the Principles of the Consistory in Execution. I Will make some amends for the
length of this Digression, by Contracting my self upon the Discipline which was
afterward Erected in England, after the Scotch Pattern.

It will be a hard matter to pass from 1637, to 1648 without taking some Notice
of the Horrid Distempers in that Interval: I shall only tell you that after
three or four Years spent in Dissolving the Legal Government, and Debating what
we should have in the Place of it; Out comes the Directory, Jan. 3. 1644. with
an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, for the Authorizing of it. And
afterward, Aug. 23. 1645. another Ordinance, for the more effectual Execution
of it; which was followed, Jun. 5. with an Ordinance for the present Settling
of it without further Delay, and Aug. 19. 1646. with Directions for the Choosing
of Ruling-Elders in all the Congregations, and in the Classical Assemblies for
the Cities of London, and Westminster, and the several Counties of that
Kingdom, in order to the Speedy settling of the Presbyterial Government. There
passed also an Ordinance for the manner of Ordination of Misters, with Rules
for Examination, and Suspension from the Holy Supper, etc. And Another of
January 29.1647. for the speedy dividing, and settling the several Counties of
this Kingdom into Distinct Classical Presbyteries, and Congregational
Elderships: and they came at last, Aug. 29. 1648. to The Form of Church
Government, to be used in the Church of England, and Ireland, agreed upon by
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, after Advice had with the
Assembly of Divines. And all This, toward the Promoting of an Union with the
Kirk of Scotland. I should have told you of the Ordinance of Jun. 12. 1643. for
the calling an Assembly of Learned, and Godly Divines, to be consulted with by
the Parliament, for the settling of the Government of the Church: The Knights
of every Shire to make Choice of Two, that should serve as Members for That
County: and These, in Conjunction with so many of the Members of Both Houses;
as might serve to inspect their Actions; took upon them the Powers, and
Authothority of a Convocation.

The Form of their Government was the same with That of Scotland: They had
their Congregational, Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies; with the
same degrees of Subordination, and Vested, in Proportion, with the same Powers.
They had their Expectants too, and the Constitution of their several
Judicatories was the very same; only the Lords, and Commons (under the Notion
of a Committee for judging of Scandal) were so wise as to reserve the Last
Appeal to Themselves, which was formerly lodged in the General Assembly; by
which Device, the Schism was made subservient to the Rebellion; whereas in
Scotland it was the clear contrary. And they had also another Hank upon them,
in appointing that the National Assembly should meet upon a Summons by
Parliament, and then sit, and continue, as the Parliament should order, and not
Otherwise: for they were not able to consent (they said) in a Declaration of
the House of Commons, Apr. 17. 1646.) to their Granting of an Arbitrary, and
Unlimited Power, and Jurisdiction, to near ten thousand Judicatories, to be
Erected in the Kingdom, which could not be consistent with the Fundamental
Laws, and Government of it; and which, by necessary Consequence, did Exclude
the Parliament from having any thing to do in That Jurisdiction. But the Nation
is never the better yet for This Caution, so long as the Tyranny, and the
Slavery is still the same.

From this View of their Brotherly Agreement in Government we shall now proceed
to their Harmony in Positions; and our Brethren of Scotland shall lead the Way.

The Positions of the Kirk, under the Queen Regent, and James VI.
THe Punishment of such Crimes (says, Knox) as touch the Majesty of God, does
not appertain to Kings, and Chief Rulers only, but to the whole Body of the
People, and to every Member of it, as Occasion, Calling, and Ability shall
serve: Nay, they are bound by Oath to God, to Revenge the Injury done to his
Majesty. If Princes be Tyrants against God, and his Truth, their Subjects are
discharged from their Oaths of Obedience. The Nobility, and Commonalty ought
indeed to Reform Religion; and in that Case, may remove from Honor, and Punish
such as God has Condemned; of what Estate, Condition, or Degree soever. It is
not Birthright only, nor Nearness of Blood, that makes a King Lawfully to
Reign over a People professing Christ Jesus; but Princes, for Just Causes, may
be Deposed. Kings, Princes, and Governors, have their Authority of the People;
and, upon Occasion, the People may take it away again. Thus far Knox; Now for
Buchanan.

The People (says he) have the same Power over the King, which He has over any
One Man; They are Better than the King, and of Greater Authority, and may
bestow the Crown at Pleasure. The making of Laws belongs to Them: They may
Arraign their Prince; The Ministers may Excommunicate. him; and He that by
Excommunication is cast into Hell, is not worthy to Enjoy any Life upon Earth.
It were Good (says he) that Rewards were appointed by the People, for such as
should Kill Tyrants; as there are for those that Kill Wolves, or Bears, or take
their Whelps.

The Seizing, and Emprisoning of King James, in Aug. 1582. being Adjudg'd
Treason by the Three Estates, in December. 18. 1583. and some of the Criminals
Executed; an Assembly of Ministers, and Elders at Edinburgh, in 1585. did not
only Authorize, and Avow the Action, but also ordained all people to be
Excommunicated, that would not Subscribe to their Judgment. And Andrew Melvil,
being Cited to Answer for Treason delivered in a Sermon, declined the King's
Authority, Affirming, that what was spoken in the Pulpit ought first to be
tried by the Presbytery; and that neither King, nor Council, might in the first
Instance meddle therewith, although the Speech were Treasonable.

Upon King James his Coming to the Crown of England, he ordered the Proroguing
of the Assembly at Aberdeen, which was to have met in 1604. to a longer day:
But thirteen or fourteen of them, for all this, met formally at the day
appointed: The Lords of Council discharged their Meeting; Whereupon they
Protested, That in Conscience, and in Duty to Almighty God they were bound to
preserve the Churches Right, and neither Could, nor Would give way to that
Power the King had Sacrilegiously Usurped over it. Hereupon, they were
Convented, and Appealed from the King's Council, to the next General Assembly.
I had almost forgotten the Determination of Wilcock, and Knox; who Positively
gave their Judgments, That it was Lawful to Depose the Queen Regent. Whereupon,
she was solemnly Process'd, Sentenced, and Deprived.

The Positions of the Presbyterians, under Queen Elizabeth.
THe Church (says Cartwright) wherein any Magistrate, King, or Emperor is a
Member, is Divided into some that are to Govern, as Pastors, Doctors, and
Elders, and into such as are to Obey, as Magistrates of all sorts, and the
People. The Admonitour holds it sit, That he, and his Companions may be
delivered by Act of Parliament, from the Authority of the Civil Magistrates; As
Justices, and Others, from their Indictings, and Finings. Every Fault (says
Cartwright) that tends either to the Hurt of a Man's Neighbor, or to the
Hindrance of the Glory of God, is to be Examined, and Dealt in by the Order of
the Holy Church. Nay, the very Suspicion of Avarice, Pride, Superfluities in
Meat, or Clothing, falls under their Lash.

All men (says Goodman) are bound to see the Laws of God kept, and to Suppress,
and Resist Idolatry by Force. Nor is it sufficient for Subjects not to Obey the
Wicked Commands of Princes, but they must Resist them; and Deliver the Children
of God out of the hands of their Enemies, as we would deliver a Sheep that is
in danger to be devoured by a Wolf. If the Magistrate shall refuse to put
Mass-Mongers, and false Preachers to Death, the People (in seeing it performed)
show that Zeal of God which was commended in Phineas. Subjects do promise
Obedidience, that the Magistrate might Help them; which if he does not, they
are discharged of their Obedience. If Magistrates without Fear transgress God's
Laws themselves, and Command others to do the like, they are no more to be
taken for Migistrates, but to be Examined, Accused, Condemned, and Punished, as
Private Transgressors. Evil Princes ought by the Law of God to be Deposed, and
Inferior Magistrates ought chiefly to do it. And now hear Gilby to the same
Tune.

Kings, Princes, and Governors have their Authority of the People, and upon
Occasion, the People may take it away again, as men may revoke their Proxyes,
and Letters of Attorney. It is Lawful (says he) to kill wicked Kings, and
Tyrants; the Subjects did kill the Queen's Highness Athalia: Jehu killed the
Queens Majesty Jesabel: Elias, being no Magistrate, killed the Queen's
Majesty's Chaplains, Baal's Priests: These Examples are left for our
Instruction, where Justice is not Executed, the State is most Corrupt. If
neither the Inferior Magistrates, (says he) nor the greatest part of the
People will do their Offices; (in Punishing, Deposing, or Killing of Princes)
then the Ministers must Excommunicate such a King. It would be Endless to
follow these Instances as far as they would carry me; so that I Will back now
again into Scotland; and you will find them much of the same Opinion under
Charles I. as they had been under his Royal Father.

The Positions of the Kirk under the Late King.
IN their Protestation of September 22. 1638. against the King's Declaration,
they say, First, That what Subjects do of their own heads, is much better than
what they do in Obedience to Authority, the One Savouring of Constraint, but
the Other being Voluntary, and Cheerful Obedience.

Secondly; That the Parliaments Power does no more reach to the Placing of
Officers Originally in the Church, than the Church has Power to make Statesmen
in the Commonwealth.

Thirdly; The Parliament can make no Law at all concerning the Church, but only
Ratify what the Church Decrees: And after it has Ratified it, yet if the
Assembly of the Church shall Prohibit it, and Repeal that Decree of the Church,
all the Subjects are discharged from yielding Obedience to the Act of
Parliament.

Fourthly; The Assembly has Power to discharge all Subscriptions to the
Confession of Faith commanded to be Subscribed by his Majesty; and as it is
Interpreted by Him, or his Commissioner.

Fifthly; The Assembly, without the King, is the Church, and the only Judge
Competent, fit to Interpret, and Explain all Doubts arising upon the Confession
of Faith Commanded by his Majesty.

Sixthly; Though the Law be Interpreted, yet if the Interpretation be disliked by
Most of the Kingdom; the Body of the Kingdom (for whose Good the Law was made)
may crave the lawful Redress of Grievances sustained by that Law. Take Notice
here, that they had already Actually trangress'd the Law (without staying for
Leave) and Justified the Doing of it.

Seaventhly; The Assembly is Independent either from King, or Parliament, in
Matters Ecclesiastical.

Eighthly; That the King is to Receive all the Determinations of an Assembly,
as a Son of the Church, though they be not matters of Faith, but only of
Government; and concluded by Acts of Parliament.

Ninthly; It is Lawful for Subjects to make a Covenant, and Combination Without
the King; and to enter into a Bond of Mutual Defense Against the King; and all
Persons whatsoever (though against several Acts of Parliament.)

Tenthly; It is Lawful for themselves, (sitting in an Assembly) to Indict a New
Assembly, without the King's Consent.

Eleventhly; If Subjects be convented before the King, and Council for any
Misdemeanour; they may Appeal from the King, and Council to the next General
Assembly, and Parliament, if they think either the Glory of God, or the Good of
the Church concerned in the Matter in Question.

Twelfthly; They do not desire the King to Indict a General Assembly, as
needing his Authority, but rather for his Honor, and for the Countenance of
their Proceedings: Alleging, that if the Prince shall omit to do his Duty, the
People, from whom he had his Power Originally, may Resume it.

Thirteenthly; If the King's Voice shall be denied to any thing, though never so
Unjust, and Illegal, that shall be carried by the Major part of the Assembly,
his Majesty is bound Jure Divino to enforce Obedience to to those Acts, and the
Counselors, or Judges refusing to Execute, shall be Excommunicate, and
deprived of their Places, and Estates.

Fourteenthly; An Assembly may Abrogate Acts of Parliament, and discharge the
Subject from Obeying them, if they any way reflect upon the Business of the
Church.

Fifteenthly; The Protestation of the Subjects against Laws Established, either
before the Judges of the People, or the People themselves who are born to be
Judged, does void all Obedience to those Laws, without ever bringing of them to
be discussed before a Competent Judge.

Sixteenthly; The Major part of the People may do any thing (they say) which
they Themselves conceive Conducing to the Glory of God, and the Good of the
Church, any Laws to the Contrary notwithstanding.

These Positions you will find in his Majesty's Large Declaration concerning
the Tumults in Scotland, page 407. et Deinceps. We shall now see how the
Counterpart of this Confederacy behaved it self in England: And show you the
Doctrine, and Principles of the Faction, in the very Infancy of the Rebellion:
as appears out of their own Acts. See Husband's Exact Collections, Printed in
London, 1643.

The Positions of the English-Covenanters: and First, In Case of the King's
Authority.
AFter that the Faction had Extorted from his Late Majesty such Concessions as
never any Prince granted before Himself; And when they had Defamed his
Government, and his Person; and Poisoned his People, with Contemptuous, and
Scandalous Libels; Upon March 2. 1641. They began to Unmask, and to discover to
the World, that their Design was not to Reform, but to Govern; and upon
Pretense of Fearing an Invasion from Abroad, took the Power of the Militia into
their Own Hands at Home; Resolving upon the Question, p. 96. That the Kingdom
be forthwith put into a Posture of Defense, by the Authority of Both Houses.
This Vote was seconded by Another, of March 15. page 112. That in Case of
Extreme Danger, and of his Majesty's Refusal (to give them the Power of the
Militia) the Ordinance agreed on by Both Houses for the Militia, does Oblige
the People, and ought to be Obeyed by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. His
Majesty insisting upon the Illegality of This Proceeding, Both Houses passed
this following Vote, March 16. That when the Lords, and Commons in Parliament,
(which is the Supreme Court of Judicature in the Kingdom) shall Declare what
the Law of the Land is; to have This, not only Questioned, and Controverted,
but Contradicted; and a Command that it should not be Obeyed, is a High Breach
of the Privilege of Parliament, page 114. Finding themselves Pinched upon this
Point, they fly to a Distinction betwixt the Letter, and the Equity, of all
Laws, page 150. There is (say they) in Laws, an Equitable, and a Literal Sense:
His Majesty is Entrusted by Law, with the Militia, but it is for the Good, and
Preservation of the Republique against Foreign Invasions, or Domestique
Rebellions; not that the Parliament would by Law Entrust the King with the
Malitia, against Themselves, or the Commonwealth; that Entrust Them to provide
for their Weal, not for their Woe. So that upon Certain Appearance, ^or
Grounded Suspicion, that the Letter of the Law shall be improved against the
Equity of it, the Commander going against its Equity, discharges the Commanded
from Obedience to the Letter.

The Pretense of Defending the Government is now Advanced to the Reforming of
it. Apr. 9. 1642. The Lords and Commons do Declare, That they intend a Due, and
Necessary Reformation of the Government, and Liturgy of the Church, page 135.

Having already by Violence Encroach'd upon the Militia, as against a Foreign
Power, the First Considerable Use that they make of it, is to Employ it against
his Majesty's Authority, and Person Before Hull; and Passed Two Votes, Apr. 28.
in Justification of the Action. Resolved, etc. That his Majesty's declaring of
Sir John Hotham Traitor, being a Member of the House of Commons, is a High
Breach of the Privilege of Parliament. And That, without Process of Law, it is
against the Liberty of the Subject, and against the Law of the Land. Nay they
Vote it. May 17. To be against the Law of the Land, and the Liberty of the
Subject, his Majesty's Commanding of Skippon to attend him at York; and The
very Removing of the Term to York from Westminster (sitting the Parliament)
they Vote to be Illegal, and Order the Lord Keeper (notwithstanding his
Majesty's Command) not to Issue out any Writs, or Seal any Proclamation for
that Adjournment. May 20. They Order also the Putting of all the Magazines in
England, and Wales, into the Hands of Persons well Affected to the Parliament.
page 194.

They find themselves now in Condition to Threaten the King, and the Kingdom
with Open War: And pass upon the Question, these Three following Votes. First;
That it appears, That the King (Seduced by Wicked Counsel) intends to make War
against the Parliament, who, (in all their Consultations, and Actions) have
proposed no other End unto themselves, but the Care of his Kingdoms, and the
Performance of all Duty, and Loyalty to his Person. Secondly; That whenever
the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a Breach of the Trust reposed in
Him by his People, Contrary to his Oath, and tending to the Dissolution of his
Government. Thirdly; That whosoever shall Serve, or Assist him in such Wars,
are Traitors, by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, etc. And Persuant to
these Votes, July 12. they Resolve, That an Army shall be forthwith Raised for
the Safety of the King's Person; Defense of Both Houses of Parliament, and of
Those who have Obeyed their Orders, and Commands; and preserving of the True
Religion, the Laws, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdom. page 457. All these
Votes, and Declarations, they cause, with all Solemnity to be Printed, and
Published: but at the same time, his Majesty's Proclamations, and Declarations
are said to be Contrary to Law. page 449. And all Officers are forbidden any
way to Publish, or to Proclaim the same. The King's Commissions of Array are
Declared, July 20. to be against Law, the Liberty, and Property of the Subject.
And the Actors in it to be Esteemed Disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdom.
page 478. And again, page 576. All such Persons as shall, upon any Pretense
whatsoever, Assist his Majesty in this War, with Horse, Arms, Plate, or Moneys,
are declared Traitors to his Majesty, the Parlialiament, and the Kingdom; and
to be brought to condign Punishment.

The Poison of their Artificial Delusions you will find Maliciously enough
Defus'd in their Remonstrance of May the 26. 1642. page 263. And the Doctrine
of That Declaration summed up with great Exactness, in his Majesty's Answer to
it, contracting the Venom of it into These Six Positions.

First; That they have an Absolute Power of Declaring the Law; And that
whatsoever they declare to be so, ought not to be questioned, either by King,
or People: so that all the Right, and Safety of the Prince, and Subject,
depends upon their Pleasure.

Secondly; That no Presidents can be Limits to Bound their Proceedings; which,
If so, The Government of the Turk Himself is not so Arbitrary.

Thirdly; That a Parliament may dispose of any thing, wherein the King, or
Subject has a right, for the Public Good; (speaking all this While of the
Remnant of the Two Houses) That they, without the King, are This Parliament,
and Judge of This Public Good; and that the King's Consent is not Necessary.
So that the Life, and Liberty of the Subject, and all the Good Laws made for
their Security, may be disposed of, and Repealed by the Major Part of Both
Houses, at any time present, and by any Ways, and Means Procured so to be, and
his Majesty has no Power to Protect them.

Fourthly; That a Member of either House ought not to be troubled, or meddled
with, for Treason, Felony, or any Other Crime, without the Cause first brought
before Them, that they may judge of the Fact, and their Leave obtained to
Proceed.

Fifthly; That the Sovereign Power resides in Both Houses of Parliament. The
King has no Negative Voice; and becomes Subject to their Commands.

Lastly; That the Levying of Forces against the Personal Commands of the King,
(though accompanied with his Presence) is not Levying War against the King: But
to Levy War against his Laws, and Authority, (which they have Power to Declare,
and Signify) is Levying War against the King; And that Treason cannot be
Committed against his Person, otherwise than as he is Entrusted with the
Kingdom, and Discharging that Trust; and that they have a Power to judge,
whether he discharges it or no. And to justify their Usurpations, they do
maintain, page 270. That the Kings of This Realm are Obliged to pass all such
Bills as are Offered unto them by Both Houses of Parliament.

It would be superfluous to tell you of their Proclaiming Fasts, and Assuming
to themselves other Rights of Sovereignty, under the specious Pretense of a
Parliament. But to show you that it was All an Imposture: If the King will not
Agree, the Two Houses (they say) may Act without him: If the Two Houses Differ,
the Sovereignty rests in the House of Commons. As in the Case of a Bill they
sent up to the Lords for Directing a Protestation which they had Framed, to be
generally taken throughout England. This Bill the Lords Rejected; Whereupon,
the Commons passed this Vote, That That House did conceive that the
Protestation made by them is fit to be taken by every Person that is well
Affected in Religion, and to the Good of the Commonwealth; and therefore does
declare, That what Person soever shall not take the Protestation, is Unfit to
bear Office in the Church, or Commonwealth. And so they ordered the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses to send down to the several Places for which they
served* Copies of that Vote of the House concerning the Protestation, and that
the Vote should be Printed. They began with a Contempt of the Lords; they Laid
them quite Aside at last; and in the Conclusion, they Themselves were, upon
their Own Arguments, Confounded by the Rabble. You see the Dominion these
People Challenge over their Master; and it cannot be expected that they should
give any better Quarter to their Fellow Subjects; But it is Their Way of making
Kings Glorious, and Patronizing the Liberty of the People.

The Positions of the English-Covenanters, as to the Liberty, and Propriety of
the Subject.
IN May, 1641. they entered upon their Design with the Protestation
abovementioned, in these Words: I A. B. do in the Presence of Almighty God,
Promise, Vow, and Protest to Maintain, and Defend, as far as Lawfully I may,
with my Life, Power, and Estate the true Reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery, and
Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine, and
according to the Duty of my Allegiance to his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor,
and Estate; as also the Power and Privileges of Parliament, the Lawful Rights,
and Liberties of the Subjects, etc. Here was First, an Usurpation in the
Imposing of it; and Secondly, an Abominable Fraud in the Construction of it.
The Matter of it was so Plausible, that it went down without much Enquiring
into the Authority of it; but upon the Commons declaring, that the Doctrine of
the Church of England had no Regard to the Maintaining of the Descipline and
Government of it: And Afterward, that the Sovereignty was Virtually in the Two
Houses, and that by This Protestation, they were Obliged to serve That
Interest, Men's Eyes came then to be Opened, and they saw their Error: For they
were called upon according to their Solemn Vow, and Protestation, to Subscribe
for Money, and Plate, page 340. and to Maintain Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, for
the Defense of the King, and Both Houses of Parliament. In Yorkshire there was
a Neutrality Propounded by some Persons of Eminent Condition in the County; but
the Lords, and Commons Declared against it, page 629. as a Contradiction to the
Tie of their General Protestation. And it went so high, that they past a Vote,
Oct. 15. 42. That such Persons as shall not Contribute to the Charge of the
Commonwealth in This Time of Imminent Necessity, shall be held fit to be
Disarmed. And the same day, they Voted the Sequestring of Church Lands,
Delinquents Estates, and Revenues of the Crown. They Ordered Victuals, and
other Necessaries for the Army to be taken up upon Public Faith, Nov. 29. 42.
page 763. and where any thing was Refused, to Force it: And likewise they
appointed a Committee of Six Citizens of London, or any Four of them for the
Assessing all such (to the twenti^th Part of their Estates) as had not
contributed upon the Propositions of raising Money, Plate, Horse, etc. in
Proportion to their Abilities. The said Assessment to be Levied by Distress,
and Sale; and in Case of Refusal, the Parties to be Emprison'd. page 767. With
further Authority, Feb. 3. 42. p. 777. to Break open any Chests, Trunks, Boxes,
Doors, with Power to Seize such Chests, with Money, or Goods, for the
Satisfaction of the Sums Assess'd. And the same Power, Amplifi'd, they granted
to Commissioners for Levying of Money by a Weekly Assessment, upon London, and
Westminster; and every County, and City in England and Wales; the City of
London being Rated the Weekly Sum of 10000 l. and Others in Proportion.

You have here from their own Public Acts, (for I cite none of their
Pamphlets) a Breviate of the Powers they assumed to themselves over King, and
People: And this so Early in the War too, that the Faction was not as yet sure
in the Saddle. (For This was all before 1643.) You shall now see the Execution
of these Arbitrary Principles by the Covenanters of Both Kingdoms in their
Turns, and you shall Confess that though the Rigours of the Kirk may serve as a
Foil to any Other Tyranny, the English have yet had the Honor to outstrip
their Masters.

According to the Common Method of Innovatours, their First Work was, by Press
and Pulpit, to Defame the Government; their Next, was, by Popular Artifice, to
stir up the Multitude by Tumults to Reform it; and Lastly; (if they found their
Party strong enough to Depend upon) to Enter into a Confederacy, and Set up for
themselves. This was the Course that Knox, Willock and their Followers took in
Scotland under the Queen Regent in 1555. and afterward, under King James VI.
And Cartwright with his Accomplices went the same way to Work also under Queen
Elizabeth; only the Conspiracy of Arthington, Hacket, Coppinger, Wigginton,
etc. was Discovered, and the Plot Disappointed. But the Libels, and Tumults in
Scotland, 1637. which led to that Impious Bond, and Covenant in 1638. had
better success. (See his Late Majesty's Large Declaration upon That Subject.)
And after their Pattern, so had the Practices in England in 1641. when the
Parliament was so Over-awed by Tumults that the Vote of the Two Houses was no
other in Effect than the Sense of the Rabble in the Lobby. It was but their
Bawling for Justice upon the Noble Earl of Strafford; their Crying down of
Bishops, and Popish Lords, and the thing is Done. The Riots were so Great, that
the Lords pressed the Commons at a Conference, to Join with them in a
Declaration for the Suppressing of them. But it was Answered, saying, We must
not Discourage our Friends, This being a time we must make use of All our
Friends. God forbid (says Mr. Pim) that the House of Commons should proceed in
any way to Dishearten People to obtain their just Desires in such a way; Exact
Collections, page 532. The Kirk would have said, that they did not know with
what Spirit they were Overruled, as they told King James in the Case of
Gibson, and Black, for delivering Treason in the Pulpit. The next thing that
followed in Course, was a Combination; and That shall be the first Point we will
handle in the Common Practices of the Party; which in One Word amounts to no
less than the Dissolution of a Legal, and the Setting up of a Tyrannical
Government.

The Practices, and Usurpations of the Presbyterians upon the Civil Government.
TO be as Clear now in their Practices, as I have been in their Positions, you
shall have as good Evidence for their Proceedings, as you have had already for
their Principles. And I Will begin with the Foundation of their Empire* their
Audacious, and Mysterious Covenant: Not with the Matter, or the Design of it,
but only to show you that Covenanting is the Method of the Party.

Covenanting is the Method of the Party.
The First Covenant of Scotland bears Date December. 3. 1557. at Edinburgh: The
Second at Perth, May 31. 1559. The Third at Sterling, Aug. 1. And a Fourth, at
Leith, Apr. 27. 1560. They Entered also into Another Covenant at Air, Sept. 4.
1562. which Knox calls a New Covenant.

In England 1583. they Subscribed their Discipline, and Entered into a League
both by Promise, and Writing, to do their Parts toward the Establishing of it.

In Scotland 1638. so soon as ever they had settled their Tables of Advice, the
First Act of those Tables was their Solemn Covenant.

And so likewise in England, the Commons Imposed a Protestation, and then went
on to Covenants, and Oaths without End.

Here Is an Usurpation upon Sovereignty, Al Leagues without Authority are
Seditious.
the very first step they set; in the Exacting of an Oath without due Authority;
beside, that all Leagues of Subjects among themselves are (in the Eye of the
Law) no better than Seditious Conspiracies. We Will come now to the Pretense of
these Covenants, which is only an Artifice of Inveigling the Silly People into
a Confederacy against the Government, under the Notion of Promoting the Common
Good.

The End of the First Scottish Covenant abovementioned (at Edinburgh) is said
to be the Defense of Christ's Gospel, The Pretended Ends of the Covenant.
and his Congregation, and of every Member of it against all Opposers, to the
Death. The Second at Perth goes further, and Extends to all Persons that shall
trouble them upon what Pretense soever. In the Third, at Sterling they bind
themselves from any Correspondence with the Queen, either by Word, or Writing.
In their Fourth at Leith they Covenant a Direct Revolt, and the reducing of all
men by Force, that are not of their Opinion. In their Last Bond, at Air, they
declare against all men as Enemies that shall not submit to their Government.
And upon the Whole Matter, they Found all their subsequent Proceedings upon the
Obligation of the First Covenant for the Defense of Christ's Gospel.

The Pretext of the Scottish Covenant in 1638. was the Defense of the King's
Majesty, his Person, and Authority in the Defense, and Preservation of the
True-Religion, Liberties, and Laws of the Kingdom: As also the Mutual Defense,
one of another, against all sorts of Persons whatsoever.

And the English Protestation of 1641. looks the very same way, viz. for the
Maintenance of the Doctrine of the Church of England; the Power, and Privileges
of the Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject. And what is the very Title of
their Solemn League, and Covenant, in 1643. but Reformation, and Defense of
Religion; the Honor, and Happiness of the King; the Peace, and Safety of the
Three Kingdoms?

So soon as ever they had by these specious Appearances decoyed an
Inconsiderate Part of the Nation into the Net, they Improved the Fraud by
Expounding upon all their Bonds and Covenants, quite Contrary to the Common
Intent, and Acceptance of the same. And made way thereby to the Destruction of
all those Interests which the People thought they had Sworn to Preserve. But
the Subject was so hampered betwixt the Dread of the Oath, among those that did
not understand the Nullity of the Obligation; and the Forfeiture of Life,
Fortune, and Estate, if they should not pursue it according to the Oraculous
sense of them that Imposed it, that betwixt their Consciences, their Safeties,
and Estates, they were in a great straight. He that Considers the Solemn, and
the Awful Circumstances that accompanied the taking of these Engagements; the
lifting up of the Eyes, and Hands; the Attesting of Almighty God; the
Invocations of the Great Name of the Lord, and their Appeals to the Searcher of
all Hearts; and Compares their Actings with their Protestations, will find them
perhaps the most Impious, and Extravagant Contradiction in Nature. And That Is
the thing next to be Observed in a View of the Fabrique they Raised upon this
Goodly Foundation.

After this Hypocrisy in the very Frame of their Project, there was but little
of Good Faith to be expected in the Menage of it: And all their Covenants,
under Color of Reforming the Government, were both in Construction, and in
Effect, but so many Oaths for the Abjuring of it; and the setting up of a more
Blasphemous Oracle in the Name of Christ Jesus, than ever was silenced at his
taking Flesh upon him by his Holy Power. I call their Covenants, Oracles; as
well in respect of the Inspiration, as of the Imposture. But we shall better
understand them, by Tracing their Motions from One Usurpation to Another.

By Letters from Sterling of March 10. 1556. Knox was invited from Geneva, The
steps by which the Holy Discipline Advanced into a Direct Rebellion.
with This Assurance, That the Faithful in Scotland were ready to jeopard their
Lives, and Goods for the setting forward of the Glory of God, as he would
permit. These Letters came to his Hand in May. And in September following (with
the Privity, and Encouragement of Calvin) he left Geneva, and October. 24.
arrived at Diepe, (with Intent to Embarque for Scotland) where he met with
other Letters, dissuading his Return. (See his History of Scotland, Fol. 107.)
The Faction was now ready to give up the Cause; and had undoubtedly so done,
but for Knox his Letter to some of the Nobility upon That Occasion; which
re-Confirm'd them in their Resolutions. Your Brethren (says he) are Oppressed
(Fol. 109.) and you ought to Hazard your own Lives, (be it against Kings, or
Emperors) for their Deliverance. (So that here was Violence Intended; you see,
in the very first Proposition.) By the Instigation of this Letter, they entered
into their first Covenant at Edinburgh in December. 1557. ( Fol. 110.) and
Immediately after the Subscribing of it, they Ordered the Common Prayer (of
England) to be read weekly on Sunday, and other Festival Days, in all the
Parish-Churches of That Kingdom, with the Lessons of the Old and New Testament,
Conformed to the Book of Common Prayers. (Fol. 111.) Soon after This, they
Petitioned the Queen and Council for the Use of the Common Prayer in the Vulgar
Tongue, which was granted them, with an Exception only to Edinbourgh, and
Leith, for fear of Tumults: And upon the Neck of this Petition, follows a
Protestation, delivered in Parliament, 1558. against all Acts of Parliament for
the Punishing of Heretics; the Removal of all Prelates, and their Officers
from any Place of Judgment: (Fol. 133.) Foretelling, by way of Menace, that if
Abuses should chance to be Violently Reformed, the Government may thank it
self. From Protesting they Gathered themselves Together, at St. Johnston, the
Town Declaring for them. Hereupon, the Preachers were Summoned to appear at
Sterling, May 10. 1559. And on the Other side, The Brethren Concluded that the
Gentlemen of Every Country should Accompany their Preachers, to the Day, and
Place appointed: that is; to St. Johnson; where they had their First Assembly.
Upon this Contempt, the Ministers were Proclaimed Traitors, and the Multitude
fell to the Demolishing, and Rifling of Religious Houses; where they found
great Booty; and so they Proceeded to the fortifying of themselves, and calling
in of their Friends to their Assistance; Maintaining their Ground by Force,
notwithstanding A Proclamation for all of them to avoid the Town, under the
Pain of Treason: (Which Place soon after was Delivered up upon Composition)
From the Pretense of Defending themselves in St. Johnston, they Advanced,
shortly after, to the Assaulting of it; and so the Burning of Scone; the
Seizing of the Minting-Irons for the Coining of their Plate. And then from
Monasteries, and Abbeys, they went forward to the Defacing, and Pillaging of
Cathedrals; Parochial Churches; and there were few Chancels that escaped them.
In their Answer to the Queens Proclamation of Aug. 28. 1559. they Rise from
matter of Religion, to matter of State. (Knox Hist. of Scotland, Fol. 174. And
in Direct Terms, Fol. 179. They Affirm, that it appertains to the Nobility,
and also to the Barons, and People, to bridle the Rage, and Fury of misled
Princes; which was only a Prologue to the Formal, and Solemn Deposal of the
Queen Regent at Edinburgh, October. 24. 1559. that ensued. After This; they
emplor'd Aid from England, under Color of Maintaining their Ancient Liberties.
And the Treaty was signed at Berwick by the Commissioners of Both Nations, Feb.
27. 1559.

By these Persecutions they brought the Queen Regent to her Grave; They
persecuted the Queen Regent into her Grave.
And upon her Death, a Peace was Concluded; the Armies to Disband, and the
French, and English Succors to return Home. In December. 1560. Francis the
Second of France departed this Life; leaving the Queen of Scots an Unfortunate
Widow; Poor, and Helpless. They were now out of Fear of France, and there was
no Danger from England, in regard of the Queen of Scots Pretensions to That
Crown; so that they resolved now to play their Own Game; And their First Act
was the Abolishing of the Common Prayer (in a Convention at Edinburgh) which
they had formerly Embraced, and Confirmed by a Solemn Decree, and Subscription:
And the Presenting of a Church Government of Knox's own Contrivance, and not
much differing from the Geneva-Model, to a Convention of the Estates; under the
Title of The Confession of the Faith* and Doctrine, believed, and Professed by
the Protestants of Scotland. The States took Time to consider of the Form of
Polity; but passed an Act however for the Demolishing of Cloisters, and
Abby-Churches. Whereupon (says Spotswood in his Church History, Fol. 175.)
there ensued a Pitiful Vastation of Churches, and Church-Buildings. No
Difference was made, but all the Churches either Defaced, or Pulled to the
Ground. The Holy Vessels, and whatsoever else Men could make Gain of, as
Timber, Lead, and Bells) were put to Sale. The very Sepulchers of the Dead were
not spared. The Registers of the Church, and Libraries cast into the Fire: And
All This, colored with the Warrant of Public Authority. Take Notice here,
that after the Convention was Dissolved, their Book of Polity was Subscribed,
notwithstanding the Postponing of the Question. And we shall see now, that they
treated the Queen her Self no better than they had done the Queen Regent.

The Daughter had no better Quarter than the Mother.
Upon this Nice Juncture of Affairs, the Queen was Invited Home. And Aug. 20.
1561. She arrived at Leith; declaring upon her Entrance, That there should no
Alteration be made in the Present State of Religion, only for her Self, and
Family she would have a Mass in Private. But the Preachers decrying that
Toleration in their Pulpits, produced a Dangerous Tumult against the Freedom of
her own Chapel.

After several Riots, and Open Rebellions, which were still promoted, and
seconded by the Presbytery; In July 1564. the Queen was Married to the Lord
Dainly; And June 19. 1566. brought to bed of a Son (afterward James VI.) in the
Castle of Edinburgh. In 1567. they sent the Queen Prisoner to Lochlevin, and
passed an Act of Assembly for the Securing, and Disposing of the Person of the
Infant-Prince; with Direction to move the Queen to a Resignation of her
Government, and the Appointing of a Regent during his Minority; which by Force,
and Menaces, her Majesty was compelled to do; and her Renunciation, and
Commission Published at the Market-Cross at Edinburgh, the Prince being
Crowned, and Anointed King, in the Church of Striveling the Third day after the
Publication, being July 29. On the 20th of August, the Earl of Murray was
Elected Regent: King James being as yet but Thirteen Months old. At the
Beginning of the Spring, in 1568. the Queen made her Escape, and was conveyed
to Hamilton, where several Lords meeting in Council, her Resignation was
declared Void, (as Extorted by Fear) and Proclamation issued against the Rebels
that had Usurped her Authority. The Dispute, in short, was brought to a Battle,
May 13. the Queens Army Defeated, (and She her self fled into England for
Protection; where the Faction never left the Persute of her, till they brought
her to the Scaffold. But here you will say there was a Foreign Interest, and
Popery in the Case. If That were All, how came it that they handled the Young
King at as Course a rate every jot as they had treated his Mother? though their
Natural Prince, and afterward, the Celebrated Champion of the Protestant Cause.

They treated King James as ill as they had done his Mother.
The Government of Scotland had been Administered by Four Regents, when, upon
the Earl of Morton's desire to be Discharged of his Regency, the King (not
twelve years old as yet) accepted of it; and his Acceptance thereof was
Proclaimed at Edinburgh, March 12. 1577. where the Regent himself was
Assisting. As an Earnest of the Respect they bare to his Majesty's Authority,
Andrew Melvil presented a Form of Church Government to the Parliament at
Striveling, in 1578. which they referred to certain Commissioners, who agreed
to such General Heads as did not touch the Authority of the King, nor prejudg
the Liberty of the State. But this did not content Them; so that they resolved
to put their Conclusions in Practice the next Assembly, without staying for a
Ratification (Spotswood's Hist. Fol. 302.) In Glasgow, the next Spring, the
Ministers put the Magistrates of the City upon Demolishing the Cathedral, but
the Tradesmen Interposed, and Defended it. In 1582. Montgomery was Process'd
for Preaching at Glasgow: The King by his Warrant commanded the Assembly to
desist, which the Moderatour peremptorily refused, and thereupon, the Officer
pulled him from his Seat, and Clapped him up in the Tolbuyth; for which, they
Decreed him to be Excommunicate, though the King himself earnestly persuaded them
to the Contrary.

After this Contempt of the Kings Authority, they made a Violent Seizure of his
Person, and carried him Prisoner to the Castle of Ruthen, where they kept him
Close Nine Months; forcing him by a Writing under his hand, to command the Duke
of Lenox to Depart the Kingdom, and Imposing upon him what Servants they
pleased, under pretense of Zeal to Religion, and Care of his Person. They did
also Petition the next General Assembly at Edinburgh, to give their sense of
the Action: Who made themselves Judges; and did so highly approve of it, that
they appointed all Ministers to recommend the Actors of it, as good Christians,
and Patriots, pretending, that there was no other way to preserve their
Religion, and Freedoms. And yet this Duke died soon after, in France, of the
Reformed Communion. For the Countenance of this Proceeding, they force the King
(being but Seventeen years of Age) to emit a Proclamation, commanding all those
that had Levied any Forces upon Pretense of his Restraint, to Disband within
Six hours, upon Pain of Death; and Declaring that he was at Liberty, and had
only his Friends about him. In the Summer following, under Color of Viewing
the Castle of St. Andrews, It was contrived, that the Gates should be shut upon
his Followers, and so he delivered himself from his Guard. It would be but the
same thing over again, to Enumerate the Repeated Usurpations of their
Government, and the Contumacy of their Ministers: their Rebellious Practices at
Striveling, Glasgow, etc. and that Horrid Outrage against the Octavians in
Edinburgh, December. 17. 1596. When the King appoints a Feast, they Indict a
Fast; the Council Orders the Ministers of Edinburgh to give Thanks for his
Majesty's Deliverance from Gowry's Conspiracy: Their Answer was, That they were
not acquainted with the Business. And when it was urged, that they were only to
affect the People with the Sense of his Majesty's having escaped a great Danger,
they Replied, That nothing should be Vtter'd in the Pulpit, but That whereof
the Truth was known. Nay, they would not so much as pray for the Kings Mother,
when her Death was Resolved upon, though the very Form was prescribed in the most
Innocent Terms Imaginable. viz. That it might please God to Illuminate her with
the Light of his Truth, and save her from the apparent Danger wherein she was
cast.

The Conspiracy under Queen Elizabeth was nipp'd in the Bud.
And This would have been the Issue too of the English Project under Queen
Elizabeth; as appears by the Insolence of their Demands, and the Virulence of
their Writings, if the Conspiracy had not been nipp'd in the Bud.

The Scotch Rebellion of 1637.
The Scottish Insurrection in 1637. was only their Old Method Revived. Of which,
in a few Words, Out of the Kings Declaration upon That Subject.

The Rise, Method, and Progress of it.
Upon occasion of a Seditious Uproar at Edinburgh, October. 18. 1637. his Late
Majesty ordered the Discharge of all such Meetings, upon Pain of Death. And his
Proclamation, being Published at Sterling, Lithgow, and Edinburgh, was
encountered with a Protestation against it, at the same Times, and Places; and
with the same Solemnity, as if they had been Both by the same Authority.
Immediately upon this Affront, the Protestors erect Public Tables of Council
for Ordering the Affairs of the Kingdom without the Consent of the King, and in
Contempt of his Majesty and Council. At These Tables, having First agreed upon
their Covenant, they conclude upon Certain Propositions of Instruction to the
Party. No Answer must be made to State-Questions without Advice. All
Proclamations to be Protested against; and to take nothing for Satisfaction,
Less than their Whole Demand. This way of Anti-Protesting they made use of from
first to last. Upon his Majesty's Proclamation for Dissolving the Assembly at
Glasgow 1638. they did not only Protest, and Refuse to Depart, but Cited the
Kings Council that Signed the Proclamation, to appear before the King, and
Parliament. In This their Protestation, his Majesty observes Eleaven Nullities;
and that In One Hour they made Void Six General Assemblies; though Two of them
Wholly, and the Other Four, in Part, were Ratified by Acts of Parliament. In
Another Hour, they Damned all the Arminian Tenets, without Defining what they
were. In Another Hour they Deprived One Archbishop, and Two Bishops. And in
One hour more, they Abolished Episcopacy; Deposing Four Bishops, barely upon a
Libel read in the Pulpit, without Examining any One Witness against them; and
only for the Crime of Obeying Parliaments, and General Assemblies.

They Levy Arms against the King for the Glory of God.
All This they do, as having the Cognition of Ecclesiastical Matters. They Arm
the Subject; Block up, and Force the Kings Forts, and Castles; Intercept
Victuals, and Ammunition for their Relief; Tax the People; Levy Soldiers
against the King; Issue out Warrants to Sheriffs for Commissioners of
Parliament; and when they are Asked why they do these things; It Is for the Good
of the Church, (they say) the Glory of God; and the Preservation of Religion.
(Kings Declaration, page 415.) These are the men that bind their Kings in
Chains, and their Nobles in Links of Iron, according to the very Letter. And
you shall now see that the English Covenanters are as good Text-Proof as their
Brethren. Take Notice here, That my Observations are restrained simply to the
Actings of the Presbyterians, without Imputing any thing to Them that was done
by the Influence of the Independents.

The Practices of the Scotch, and English compared.
It appears from what is already said, that The Name of God was the Prologue to
Both Rebellions: The Form, and Doctrine of the English League, the very
Translation of the Scottish: It rests now to show, that the English Practices
are so likewise; and how far they have put their Seditious Positions in
Execution. What was the English way of Remonstrating, and Declaring, but the
Scottish Mode of Protesting? The General Assembly declines the Kings Authority
in the Case of Treason; and so did the House of Commons, in the Case of their
Members. The Kirk refused to pray for the Queen; and our Mock-Parliament made
it Penal to Pray for the King; And they both of them took upon themselves to
Convene Assemblies; Impose Oaths, and Subscriptions by their own Power: To
Banish the Kings Servants, and Scandalize his Ministers: And with a Scottish
Grace the English Faction tells the King, in Answer to one of his Declaration,
That his Suggestion is as False as the Father of Lies can Invent. As they
agreed in the Intent of the Reformation, So did they also in the Manner of it.
They Alarmed the City of London at Midnight that the King was coming with his
Papists to fire the Town, and burn the Citizens in their Beds; (the Common
Pretenses of Scotland) And after the Scottish Method too, they Rifled
Winchester-Church in 1642. Burnt the Communion Table in an Alehouse; brake
open several Leaden Chests, wherein the Bodies of some of the Saxon Kings were
Deposited; Casting the Dust into the Air; and throwing the Bones of them at the
Windows: Hacking with their Swords the Crown that was there upon the very
Statue of the King. With the same Barbarity they proceeded at Chichester, where
they Picked out the Eyes of Edw. VI. his Picture; saying, that all this was long
of his Book of Common Prayer. At Canterbury, and Rochester they did the Like,
and turned the Church of St. Paul, both into a Stable, and an Alehouse. It
might serve, in one word for all, to say, That they have put all their
Positions before spoken of in Practice.

The Usurpations of the Two Houses.
The Two Houses, by their own Authority, set up Ordinances for Laws; settled the
Militia; styled themselves the Supreme Judicature of the Kingdom; Changed the
Whole Frame of the Government; Punished those as Traitors that served the
King; Seized the Kings Forts, Towns, Magazines, and Revenues; Raised an Army
against him; Imposed Taxes, Excise, Customs; took away Episcopacy, and the
Common Prayer, and settled the Directory; Proclaimed Fasts; spoiled the King of
his Authority; made him a Prisoner, under Color of taking him into Protection;
and then for a Sum of Money, with Judas, betrayed their Master to be Crucified.

All this and More was not only the Effect of the Covenant, The Rigours of the
Covenant.
but the very Drift, and Meaning of it; as appears by the Artificial
Emprovement of it to all their Purposes: (being the very Test of the Faction.)
No man was allowed to Practice the Law; No man Admitted into the Ministry, that
had not taken it; and it was Imposed, under a Penalty upon the Whole Nation.
And Then After the Taking of it, it was made Death for any man to return to his
Allegiance; and all the Deserters of the Conspiracy, that were murdered under
a Form of Justice, were put to Death for Breach of Covenant.

The Kirk Betrayed, and Sold the King in his Distress.
When the late King, May 1646. in his Distress, applied himself to the Scotch;
and they received him, as into Protection; his Friends were kept from him at
Newcastle, by as strict an Order, as afterward at Holdenby. But they
Formaliz'd the Matter however, how Base a thing it would be for Scotland to
Deliver up their King; Lowdon's Second Speech at a Conference, Oct. 6. 1646.
and how Inconsistent with the Duty of their Covenant, and how Dishonorable to
the Army; to whom in his Extreme Danger he had Recourse for Safety. The Scotch
Commissioners also Aggravating the Matter. Answer to the Vote of Sept. 24. 1646.
If it be Contrary (say they) to the Law, and Common Practice of Nations, to
deliver up the meanest Subject, fled to them, though it be for the greatest
Crimes; How much more would the World abroad Condemn our Army for a Base,
Dishonorable Act, if they should deliver up their Head, and Sovereign (having
cast himself into their Hands) to be Disposed of at the Arbitrament of another
Nation? Nay, (says the Chancellor) I shall desire that the Word of Disposing
of the Kings Person, may be rightly understood for to Dispose of the Kings
Person, as Both Houses, or Both Kingdoms shall think fit, may in some sense, be
to Depose, or worse. But alas! these Difficulties only stuck till the Price was
agreed upon. How Stiff they were, till the Bargain was Struck, and after That,
how Flat, and Supple! For Then he tells his Majesty plainly, If he refuses the
Propositions, Both Kingdoms will be Constrained (for their Mutual Safety) to
agree, and settle Religion, and Peace without him. And he is told afterward by
the Pretended Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland, of Jan. 16. 1646. that
by reason of his Refusal, there would be a Joint Course taken by Both Kingdoms
concerning the Disposal of his Person. And Then a little After, [ with respect
had to the Safety, and Preservation of his Royal Person. Lowdon's Speech to his
Majesty*. 1646.
In the Preservation, and Defense of the True Religion, and Liberties of the
Kingdoms. According to the COVENANT, etc.] On Feb. 12. They Exhort their
Covenanted Brethren (the Assembly at Westminster) to hold fast their Solemn
League, and Covenant; to Entertain a Brotherhood, and Unity between the
Nations; but not a Syllable of the King. And again Jan. 18. the General
Assembly of the Kirk presses the Two Houses to a Speedy Establishment of the
Presbytery. (And here again no Mention of his Majesty.)

The Covenanters Barbarous Propositions to his Late Majesty.
But what is the Sum now of these Propositions that stand in Competition with the
Kings Freedom, Life, and Dignity? First; Only the Justifying, and Confirming
of all they had done. Secondly; The giving away of the Militia of England, and
Ireland, for Twenty Years, with Power to Raise Men and Money. Thirdly; His
Majesty must Swear, and Sign the Covenant; Impose it upon the Three Kingdoms;
Abolish Episcopacy, and settle Religion, as Both Houses shall Agree. Fourthly;
All Honors (since 1642.) must be made Null and Void; No Peers admitted in
Parliament, for the Future, but by Consent of the Two Houses. Fifthly; All
Great Places, and Offices of Honor in England, and Ireland, to be Disposed of
by Consent of Parliament; and in Fine; his Majesty must deliver to Death,
Beggary, and Scorn all that ever Served him.

Thus was this Glorious Prince Betrayed, and Sold, according to the COVENANT.
Here Is the True English of it, and the Divinity of that Moloch, to which this
Nation has offered up so many Noble Sacrifices. Are not our Fundamental Laws,
Persons, Consciences, and Estates, Secure, and Happy, under the Care, and Wing
of such Blessed Guardians? How meanly have we Prostituted the Reverence of the
Land, and of the Government, to the Lusts of these Imperious, Shameless
Ravishers! Take Notice here of some of the Kirks following Resolves upon the
Main Point in Question. First, That the Kings Taking of the Scotch Covenant,
and Passing Some of the Propositions, does not Warrant Scotland to Assist him
against England. Secondly; That upon bare Taking the National Covenant, they
may not Receive him. Thirdly; That the Clause in the Covenant for Defense of
the Kings Person, is to be understood In Defense, and Safety of the Kingdom.
Fourthly; That his Majesty shall Execute no Power in Scotland, without
satisfying every Point. Fifthly; That Refusing the Propositions, he shall be
disposed of according to the Covenant, and the Treaties.

The Two Houses as bad as the Scotch.
Nor would the Two Houses Probably have Used him any better if he had gone to
Them. For, upon his First withdrawing himself, they Voted it Treason, and Death
without Mercy, for any Man to Harbor, and Conceal the Kings Person, (upon a
Supposition that his Majesty was then in London.) This was the 4th of May; and
on the 6th, the Commons Voted him to Warwick Castle, which was Unvoted again,
upon the 9th; and in June, they Voted the Kings going to the Scots, a Design to
prolong the War.

Let me not appear to Confound the Faction of Scotland with the Nation; It was
the Faction of Scotland, not the Nation, that Ruined the King.
for no Country affords greater Instances of Integrity, and Honor. Nay, I have
heard it from good Authority; that the Kings going into Scotland, (which he
most earnestly desired) was carried in the Negative, only by Two Voices.

Their dealing with the King at Holdenby.
His Majesty is now under the Care of his New Governors, and a Prisoner to the
Covenanters at Holdenby; where he desired only Two of his Chaplains that had
not taken the Covenant; and Then, a Common Prayer Book for his own Private Use,
but Neither could be Granted him.

At the Isle of Wight, Their Rigor at the Isle of Wight; and the Horrid
Murder of Montross.
the same Faction had the handling of him again; where they still Treated his
Majesty much at the same Rate. And they Used his Royal Successor not much
better in 1650. When, to Auspicate the Project for the Recovery of his Crown,
in the very Dependence of a Treaty at Breda with him; upon the Instigation of
the Kirk; they Murdered the Brave, and Generous Montross, with the most horrid
Circumstances of Malice Imaginable: And how they Used the King himself
afterward at his Coming among them, I am not willing to mention.

Nay, The Covenanters Justify the Murder of the Late King, upon the
Restoration of This.
when the Time appointed by Gods Providence was come for the Restoring of the
King, the Presbyterian Ministers in London Published a kind of Squinting
Gratulation upon That Occasion; as if Popery were coming in with his Majesty
for Company. And the same Party, upon the Readmission of the Secluded Members,
pressed upon the House of Commons these Two following Votes, for the
Justification of the Rebellion in 1641. and in order to the Exclusion of the
Royal Party from the next Choice.

1. I do Acknowledge, and Declare, that the War undertaken by Both Houses of
Parliament in their Defense against the Forces raised in the Name of the Late
King, was Just, and Lawful; and that Magistracy, and Ministry are the
Ordinances of God.

2. Resolved that All, and Every Person, who have Advised, or Voluntarily
Aided, Abetted, Assisted, in any War against the Parliament, (since the First
day of Jan. 1641.) His, or Their Sons, (unless He, or They, have since
manifested their Good Affections to This Parliament) shall be Incapable to be
Elected, to serve as Members of the next Parliament. So that as their Feud
against Kings, is Implacable, their Aversion likewise to all those that Love
their Prince, descends from Generation to Generation.

How Inconsistent Presbytery is with Monarchy, Presbytery is Inconsistent with
any other Government.
is sufficiently manifest. But they will say for themselves, that Kings may be
Misled; and that it is not the Form of Government that is Grievous to Them, but
the Maladministration of it. To which, it may be Replied, That All
Governors, under what Form soever, are to Them, Alike, where they themselves
are not Uppermost: And that the Reformation of Personal Failings will not do
their Business without the Total Subversion of all those wholesome, and
Profitable Laws that stand in the Way of their Discipline: It being their
Custom to Reproach Princes, and their Ministers, for straining the
Prerogative, while they Themselves at the same time, Usurp over Kings,
Parliaments, and People: And Trample under their Feet, All that is Sacred in
Society, and Government.

Princes, it is true, The Presbyterians Will is their Law.
may have their Errors, and their Passions; but what have the Innocent Laws
done? Are They Popishly Affected too? But where ever Presbytery reigns, there
can be no Law, but their own Will. Did they not (in Scotland) Damn Bishops, as
Antichristian, and Deprive Ecclesiastiques of their Voices in Parliament,
Convention, and Council? notwithstanding Three Acts of Parliament; that is to
say, of 1584. 1597. and 1606. expressly to the Contrary. And did they not
pronounce the Acts of the Assemblies of Glasgow, and Perth to be Void, and
Illegal, though Enacted as Municipal Laws? Ask them now (says his Late Majesty;
Large Declaration, Page 416.) by what Authority they do these things, expressly
against Acts of Parliament, Acts of Council, and Acts of General Assemblies.
They Answer, that Those Acts of Assembly were unduely Obtained; and that now
they have Rescinded them. For Acts of Parliament, and Acts of Council, they
Express great Wonder that any man should Question their Authority over-Them:
For if Christ be above the King, Christ's Council must likewise be Supreme;
Parliaments being only the Council of the Kingdom. And for the Kings Privy
Council, and Judges, they must submit to the Councillors, and Judges under
Christ, who is the King of Kings. Nor is it all that they assume to themselves
an Arbitrary Rule; but whoever refuses Subscription, and Obedience to their
Acts, and Decrees, stands Excommunicate without Mercy. And Then (if he persist)
follows Out-Lawry; Forfeiture of his Goods; his Revenue for Life; Letters of
Caption for the Seizing of his Person; and Close Commitment as a Traitor. If
he does not yet Appear, they take out Letters of Intercommuning; making it
Treason to Receive, or hold any Correspondence with him. This is Executed by a
Warrant to the Civil Judge from a Commissioner of the Presbytery; and upon his
Refusal, to see the Sentence put in Execution, he himself incurrs the same
Danger.

And the same Tyranny was Exercised by the Two Houses upon the English
Government; The Tyranny of the Pretended Parliament in 1641.
Whose Orders were Imposed upon the Nation, for Laws, and Obedience required to
them, under Pain of Life, Liberty, or Estate, at Pleasure.

What a Mockery is it now to talk of Religion, Kings, Parliaments, or Laws,
where the Dictates of Mechaniques shall Overruled the Articles of the
Apostolic Faith; and the Vote of a Seditious Conventicle, Dissolve the Order,
and Authority of a Legal, and Established Government?

The Tyranny of the Presbytery over the Consciences, Lives, Liberties and
Estates of the People.
Although These Usurpations upon the King, and the Government it self, do
Naturally Presuppose, and Imply an Oppression upon the Subject; It will not be
amiss yet, more particularly to Expose the Inevitable, and the Scandalous
Slavery of living under That Dominion; as well in regard of their Unlimited
Power, as of their Inherent Cruelty, and Rigor.

In the Matter of Conscience, Life, Liberty, and Estate, Enough is said already
in the very Case of their Covenants; wherein, without any respect to the
Lawfulness of the Thing, or the Conscience of the Person, it was Sequestration,
and Emprisonment, to Refuse them, even where it was the Hazard of Damnation to
Take them: and being once Engaged, 'twas Death to Repent. The History of
Scotland abounds with Instances upon This Subject; but I shall rather bring my
Observations Home, to the Covenanters of our Own Age, and Nation.

The Early Plunders of Sir John Lucas, The Tyranny Cruelty, and Profaneness of
the English Covenanters.
Sir William Boteler, The Lady Rivers; with other Persons of Eminent Condition,
both Laymen, and Divines, are to be read at large, with the Inhumane
Insolences that were Acted upon their Persons, and Relations, in Mercurius
Rusticus: but the Outrages that followed, were so Great, and so Many, that
These are hardly worth the Mentioning, and the Other would be too Tedious to
Recite; for the Whole Story of the Rebellion was carried on with Rapine, and
Blood. How many Noble-mens Houses were turned to Prisons, without the Masters
knowing either his Accuser, or his Offense? Several Gentlemen of Quality put on
Shipboard, and half smothered in the Heat of the Year; where they contracted
Diseases, and by an Arbitrary Power were to have been Transported nobody knew
whither. Others were Sold for Slaves into Plantations: Near 100 Ministers were
brought out of the West, and Clapped up in Lambeth-house, where almost all of
them were Destroyed by a Pestilential Fever. Nay; so Profane was their
Barbarity, that upon Sunday the 5th of March 1642. Dr. Featly Preaching that
day, at Lambeth-house, order was given to dissolve the Congregation, and the
Reformers took with them some great Guns to do the Work: At which time some
Mischief was done, and there had been more, but for a Gentleman, who is at
present an Eminent Person in the City, who snacht away the Linstock just as
they were going to give fire upon the Congregation, into the Quire of the
Chapel. This I have upon the Credit of a Man of Worth, and Value. I could tell
you of a Minister in Covent Garden that refused Christian Burial to the Body of
a Gentleman that was Quartered for his Loyalty; One that made it a Moot-Point,
upon an Anniversary Fast, whether or no the Kings Death were a Murder.

They Disposed of our Estates, and Persons, at Pleasure.
And These People were as well the Masters of our Estates as of our Persons:
(See Scobell's Collection of Acts, and Ordinances) by their own Power, taking
upon them to Sequester Delinquents; Borrow Money upon the Public Faith;
gathering of Other Peoples Rents, and Debts; Levying of Money; Raising of
Horse; Assessing at Pleasure; Sequestring Church and CrownLands; Gulling the
People with Irish Adventures; Laying new Imposts; Authorizing the Breaking Open
of Locks; and Examining upon Oath, for Discovery of Delinquents Money, and
Goods; Raising, Continuing, and Enlarging several Excises; Borrowing Money for
the Scots; Taxing the Whole Nation; Appropriating the Profits of Tonnage, and
Poundage to themselves; Compounding for Wardships: Beside their Impositions of
a Weekly Meal; their Monthly Assessments; and other Impositions upon the People
to an Incredible Value, and without any Color of Law.

As there is no Freedom either of Conscience, Person, or Estate, Their
Scandalous and Uncharitable Censures.
under their Boundless Dominion; so there is no living under them, with either
Peace, or Reputation. If a Man and a Woman Live in such a manner of
Conversation, that it is Possible for them to be Lewd together in Private, the
Presbytery shall take it for granted that they are so; and without any
Evidence, require them publicly the next Lords day, perhaps, before the
Congregation to discharge themselves upon Oath that they are Innocent. Which if
they do, and that they purge themselves of the suspected Crime, they shall yet
be forced to do open Penance for their Misbehaviour. But if two Persons shall
be Presented, under a Suspicion of Incontinence, and that being Convened, and
Examined, there shall appear any strong Presumptions that they are so; though
there be no Proof in the Case, they shall yet be made Close Prisoners, to feed
on Bread and Water, and no body to come at them; to try, if either by Proof, or
Confession, any thing can be made out against them by the next Court-day: If
not, they are Dismissed, but upon Condition, that if ever they be seen together
again, unless in the Church, or in the Market, it shall be taken pro Confesso
that they are Guilty. There was a Husband that confessed to his Wife some
Faults that he had committed, and She out of Zeal told a Presbyterian Minister
the Story; for which the Minister very fairly Convented him, and made him do
Public Penance. This Practice has Parted many Men and their Wives; and
stirred up Feuds never to be Reconciled. Nay a man shall not Sue for a Debt
upon a Bond, or a Landlord, for his Rent, but the Presbytery shall take the
Judgment of it to Themselves, as a Course Scandalous to the Profession, where
any of their own Gang is Concerned. They must have an Oar in every Boat. In
Scotland they interposed in the Business of Salt-Pans, Salmon-Fishing, Fairs,
and Markets; and fell heavily upon some Scottish Merchants in Edinburgh, for
carrying Wheat to Spain in a time of Dearth. But the Trade of Wax thither, was
Unpardonable, as not only feeding Gods Enemies, but maintaining their Idolatry.
To say nothing of the Absurdity, in their Constitution, of making Tradesmen
Judges in Matters of Faith; and the Unmannerly Temper of it, where a Tailor, or
a Shoemaker shall Sit, and Vote Cheek by Jowle with his Sovereign.

Having made a Faithful Report of the Pretended Powers, the Avowed Principles,
and the Open Practices of these Troublers of our Israel, so far as the
Discovery may honestly conduce to our Present Purpose; we shall now lay open
the Mystery of Iniquity, in the Secret Contrivances of their Cabal; and upon no
less Authority, than the Faith, and Honor of King Charles the Martyr, in his
Remarques upon the Proceedings of the Scottish Covenanters.

The Scottish General Table was the Pattern of the English Close Committee.
The Device of our standing Committees in 1641. with Subordination to the Close
Committee, was only an Imitation of the Preparatory Tables of Advice in
Scotland, with Subordination to their General Table. And There, Effectually,
was lodged the last Result of Counsel. It was Composed of Men of Brains,
Popularity, Boldness, and such as were most Obstinately Engaged to the Faction;
whether Preaching, or Ruling-Elders. The Acts of Assembly were but the Dictates
of the General Table; as in England the Two Houses still agreed to the sense of
the Close Committee. There it was, that the Abuses of Government were
Inspected; Reformations Modeled; Court-Offices disposed of; all Conspiracies
Formed, and Digested; And the Preachers Expressly directed what Points to Press,
and which Nail to drive. There can be no better Account given of their
underhand dealing, than they give of Themselves, in their two Private Papers
of Instructions (Printed in the Late Kings- Large Declaration, Fol. 282. etc.
with his Majesty's Notes upon them) toward the Securing of a General Assembly
(which was to meet at Glasgow, Nov. 21. 1638.) The One of them being directed
to one LayElder; and the Other, to some One Minister in every Presbytery, for
the Packing of their Party. In the Former of them you have in terms these
following Particulars in Charge.

That some one Minister, Their Private Instructions.
and Gentleman in every Presbytery meet of together, to resolve upon the
Particular Commissioners to be Chosen, and use all diligence with the rest of
the Ministers and Gentlemen, that such may be Chosen.

And Because nothing will avail so much for our Purpose, where the most part of
the Misters are disaffected, as that the Gentlemen be present to Vote in
Presbyteries, it would be presently tried whether this be put in Execution; and
if the Minister be slow in urging it, the Gentlemen themselves to urge it, and
put themselves in Possession.

That they linger not, they would be urged again to send their Commissioners to
Edinburgh before the First of October: by this we shall know our own strength
the better at our Meeting.

And the Gentlemen (at least the greatest part of them) would be warned to be
at Edinburgh, September. 20. And that only the Gentlemen* who are named
Commissioners to the Presbytery for choosing their Commissioners for the
Assembly, with some to assist them, that day stay at home, and those to come
away immediately after the Election.

That in every Presbytery there be a Particular Care taken of the Informations
against the Prelates, for Instructing our Complaints.

The Other Paper of Private Instructions of Aug. 27. 1638. runs as follows:
THese Private Instructions shall be discovered to none but to Brethren well
affected to the Cause.

Order must be taken that none be Chosen Ruling-Elders, but Covenanters, and
Those well affected to the Business.

That where the Minister is not well Affected, the Ruling-Elders be Chosen by
the Commissioners of the Shire, and spoken to particularly for that Effect.

That they be careful no Chapter-men, Chappel-men, or a Minister, Justice of
the Peace, be chosen, although Covenanters, except they have publicly
renounced, or declared the Unlawfulness of their Places.

That the Ruling-Elders come from every Church in equal Number with the
Ministers, and if the Minister Oppose, to put themselves in Possession,
notwithstanding any Opposition.

That the Commissioner of the Shire cause Convene before him the Ruling-Elder
of every Church, Chosen before the day of the Election, and enjoin them upon
their Oath, that they give Vote to none, but to those who are Named already at
the Meeting at Edinburgh.

That where there is a Nobleman within the Bounds of the Presbytery, He be
Chosen: And where there is none, there be Chosen a Baron, or one of the Best
Quality, and be only a Covenanter.

The Medly of their Assembly.
The King observes (Fol. 315.) that This Assembly of Glasgow had not so much as
the Face of an Ecclesiastical Meeting; not a Gown worn by any Member of it,
unless it was by one or two Ministers that lived in the Town: The Appearance of
it was in a manner, wholly Laical. Among the Members of it, were Seven Earls,
Ten Lords, Forty Gentlemen, One and Fifty Burgesses, many of them in Colored
Cloths, and Swords by their Sides; all which did give Voices, not only in very
high Points of Controversy, but also in the Sentences of Excommunication
pronounced against the Bishops, and Others. Nay, and all things in the Assembly
carried by the Sway of these Lay Elders; Insomuch that it was a very rare thing
to hear a Minister* Speak there.

Now let any man Judge whether this be a Church-Assembly, or the Embryo of a
Commonwealth: The General Assembly is but the Embryo of a Commonwealth.
A Conscientious Consultation for the Reforming of Religion, or a Seditious
Practice for the Embroiling of the State. How applicable is that Invective
against Popery (in the Libel concerning the Growth of it) to the Case of
Presbytery? The Power of it is Absolute (says the Author of it) and the Decree
is Infallible. It can change the very Nature of things; making what is Just, to
be Unjust, and what is Vice, to be Virtue. All Laws are in the Cabinet of its
Breast, and it can dispose of Kingdoms, and Empires as it pleases. It makes it
a Mortal Sin even to doubt of any part of its Religion; and demands, under pain
of Damnation, the Subjection of all Christians to its Authority. That Word of
Reformation misappli'd, has served it to justify all the Executions,
Assassinations, Wars, Massacres, and Devastations, whereby the Discipline has
been Propagated. It is almost Inconceivable how Princes can yet suffer a Power
so Pernicious, and Doctrine so Destructive to all Government. Their strict
Oaths, and Vows of Obedience to the Presbytery Evacuate the Fealty due to the
Sovereign.

What difference now (more than in the Name) betwixt the Papal Tyranny,
Presbyterial Tyranny.
as he has set it forth, and the Presbyterial, as it appears from their own
Words, and Deeds? What Power can be more Absolute, Or what Decrees more
Infallible, than That of the Presbytery; Which challenges Obedience to all its
Dictates, both from Prince, and People, under pain of Life, Liberty, Dominion,
and Estate? It Overrules Laws; sets up Oaths of Treason against Oaths of
Allegiance; and covers the Crime of Rebellion with the Title of Virtue. It
takes upon it self the Office of Christ's Vicar; Deposes Kings; and under the
Masque of Religion, dissolves the Order, and Authority of all Governments. The
King in his Declaration Beforementioned, (Fol. 404.) among other of their
Unchristian Extravagances, takes Notice of their Refusal to Pray for Sir
William Nesbett upon his Deathbed, because he had not Subscribed the Covenant;
and that they did Formally bar non-Covenanters from the Communion, in Express
terms with Blasphemers, and Adulterers; refusing Baptism in the Churches of
Ministers that had not taken the Covenant, even to Children that were born in
the same Parish.

The Unchristian Rigor of this Discipline, is such (says the Author of
Toleration Discussed Page 334.) that It Crucifies weak Consciences with
Needless, Infinite, and Incurable Scruples, that Haunt, Dog, and Torment us in
the most Necessary, and Ordinary Actions of Humane Life: At the Church, at the
Table, at the Market, at Home, and Abroad: At all Times, in all Places, and
upon all Occasions; in our Thoughts, Words, and Deeds.

Excess in Eating Censurable
As to Excess in Eating; It is Censurable either in the Quantity, or in the
Quality. So that in the first place the Eldership is to provide one Common Gage
for the Stomachs of the Whole Parish, for fear of a Mouthful too much. And in
the Second Place, It is made a matter of Salvation, or Damnation, whether a man
Eats Beef, or Venison.

And so for Excess in APPAREL, In Apparel.
one Inch more than to cover your Shame is a Superfluity; and One Penny more in
the Pound than the Allowance of the Presbytery, is made as much a man's Soul is
Worth.

It is the same thing for VAIN WORDS. Vain Words.
A Nurse shall not dare to still her Child but with a Psalm; and you must not
presume so much as to ask What a Clock it is, without a Text to prove that the
Question tends to Edification.

Chiding.
Nay they have drawn CHIDING within the Compass of Ecclesiastical Censure. So
that Masters shall not reprove their Servants, nor Parents their Children,
without Leave of the Eldership. And they have taken in BRAWLING too; and made
every Billingsgate Quarrel a Subject of Consistorial Cognizance.

Under LEWD CUSTOMS are Censured all sorts of Public Sports, Exercises, Lewd
Customs.
and Recreations that have been long in Use, as having their Original from the
Times of Paganism, or Popery; As Comedies, Interludes, Wrastlings,
Foot-Ball-Play, May-Games, Whitson-Ales, Morrice-Dances, Bear-Batings, etc. All
GAMES that bring Loss, are also Prohibited; as Tennis, Bowls, Billyards, etc.
And so are UNCOMELY GESTURES; So that a man may be given to the Devil for
Lolling upon his Elbow, or Sitting upon his Backside before the Deacon of the
Parish. Nay, our very THOUGHTS are Censurable, and it is enough to be suspected.
He that sues to recover a Debt shall be suspected of Avarice; and he that
refuses to Crouch like the Ass under the Burden, shall be suspected of Pride.

To pass now from their Rigours, to their Scruples; Rediculous Scruples.
There goes a Story of some of them that made it a Matter of Religion, to Piss
a Bed, and Ride Hobby-Horses, because it is said, Except you become as little
Children, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. But Bancroft (in his
Holy Discipline, Page 368.) tells you of those that made Hawking, and Hunting,
and Women's laying out of Hair, to be Cases of Conscience; and Walker consults
Field particularly, whether it be in any respect Tolerable for Women that
profess Religion, and the Reformation, to wear Doublets, Little Hats with
Feathers; Great Gowns after the French, and Outlandish Fashion; Great Ruffs,
and Hair, either Curled or Frizl'd, or set out upon Wyres, etc. And Cholmlye
desires to be resolved whether the strict Prohibition of not Kindling of fire
on the Sabbath be of the substance of the Moral Precept.

Among all these Scruples I find no Difficulty made in the Cases of Dethroning
Kings; Demolishing Churches; Killing, and taking Possession, etc. But to
conclude, with the Treatise aforesaid;

From the Triple-Crown'd Consistory; that Lords it over Souls, Bodies, and
Estates; over Kings, Nobles, and Commons; over Laws, Magistrates, and all
Sorts, and Ranks of Men, and Interests; That Turns Gospel into Law; Communities
into Deserts; Men into Beasts;

Good LORD DELIVER US.
THE END.

