A LETTER from a Gentleman in the Country, TO A Person of Honor in LONDON IN
VINDICATION OF THE Church of England. From certain Scandalous Aspersions cast
upon them.
Honored Sir,
I Received Yours, wherein you hint certain Fears and Jealousies, as if ^ome
that pretend themselves* Members of the Church of England, (Tainted with the
Popish Leaven, or Infatuated with the Temptations of Imaginary Profit and
Honor, in this Critical Juncture, which requires the greatest Zeal and
Courage) should be Bewitched into such a (...) or rather Inclinable to (...)
^udgment for our Sin, should (...) (which God ^^e^t) in their (...)ions.

And though I hope, nay promise my self, such Suggestions are utterly (...) and
(...) yet to satisfy you, that if any such t(...) they have taken wrong
Measures as well in Policy as (...) I offer you these few hasty Reason^ that no
(...) of England * Men can in such a Change, expect any Termporal Advantages to
themselves.

First Consider the vast Number of English, Scottish, and Irish (...) Prests
F^^ars (...) for the Spoil and you will find, that the In-come of Ten Thousand
(...) Twenty Six Bishoprics* and all their Appurtenances six times more
Valuable, than (...) Author of, Omnia Comesta ^ B^lo) will never satisfy the
Rapacious Jaws of such a Numberless Troop of Vultures and Cormorants.

Seco^^^y, ^^^ough ou^ (...) Gentlemen may have some Pretense to struggle for
their Church Lands; as being Estated in them not only by Act of Parliament, but
also the Popes Rem^^^ in Queen Mar^ Time, (which yet by the way, is nothing
worth in that Case; the Act being, they will tell you, (...) and no Pope ^ested
with Power to impoverish the Church)* Yet the P^^testant Clergy can claim no
such Grace from hi^ H^^^ness* But must certainly turn out. Cedite Majoribus:
Begone you Intruders; make room for the Ancient Proprietors.

Thirdly, Suppose they Comply betimes; this will be no Security for (...) or
getting New Preferments. For a New Conve^t in any General Turn, (to which he
must be supposed to be swayed more by Interest than Conscience) is always
looked upon with an Evil Eye, by the Old preventing Party* who will never
endure these New Truckers to Reap the Sweets, which they so long have been
sweating to obtain. These came in (...) Shall they be Equals with us, (...)
have (...) of the Day?

Fourthly, (...) English Clergy are Married* conseq^^^^^^ of any Ecclesiastical
Office, if Popery prevail*

Fifthly, (...) Jesuits have already pretended to the (...) ^^^ected Harvest:
And Quarrels for (...) ^^ween Them and the rest of the Orde^ (...) (...)se
Gibblets; before She be plucked. What (...) (...)full Hugenot Regenado's, ever
hope for*

Sixthly* As (...) Bargain, if any Prince hereafter should be (...) Barter away
the Protestant Religion (which, (...) Sovereignty) for a Fancied Arbitrary
Power (...) to the Paramount Pleasure of the (...) bearded in his own
Dominions, by every (...) So 'twill be no less Prejudicial (...) ^lergy
themselves, when instead of being (...) gratis,, by the King, for their Merit,
they pay a vast Fine for a Pall and Confirma(...) to the ^^and Seignior at
Rome: As Walter Gray (...) to deposite Ten Thousand Pounds sterling (...)
^^^^^^prick of York; and William de Raley, Eight Hundred M(...), for that of
Winchester, etc. See Matthew Paris, in (...) and alibi.

Seventhly, When(...) can any of our English Clergy, though never so much (...)
(...) of enjoying Preferments, when (besides (...) ^easons before recited) we
find, that heretofore under the ^way of Popery, Foreigners were usually placed
in the best (...)* As in the Year 1253. on an inquisition (...) that the
Revenues of the Italians an England (whereof many were Boys, most Dunces, all
Aliens) (...) Threescore and Ten Thousand Marks* Per Annum* (...) a greater
Revenue, than that of the Kin^^ And ^^other (...)e, Matthew Paris tells us,
Tha^ the Pope made a Bargain with the People of Rome, that if they would
effectuall^ (...)d him against the Em^^rour Frederi^k, their Children should be
put into all the Vacant Benefices in England* whereupon Order was sent to
Edward Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Lincoln, and Salisbury; That
Provision should be made for Three Hundred Roman Children to be served of the
next Benefices that should fall.

I need not mention the slavery they they must be under of Trudging to Rome on
every impertinent Appeal; Their being liable to be Sp(...)g^ll, as often as the
Popish Court pleases; the Hatred they will Incurr from Protestants, and
deserv^^^ Scorn from Old Papists, with an hundred other Inconveniences: But
shall only add, that as they must needs be Rebels to God. and their own
Consciences, so at the same time they must be Traitors to their King, and
Betrayers of the Liberties of their Country; whoever shall attempt or submit
(...)o any Reconciliation with Rome; which I assure my self no English Man
(...) unbyased Liberal Education, much less any that have e^^r imbibed the true
Loyal Gene^ous Principles of the Church of England, will be Guilty of:
Therefore advise you to silence unjust Suggestions of that nature, as that will
Conserve the good Opinion, of*

Your Friend and Servant, etc*

FINIS.
London, Printed for ^. D. 1680.


