A LETTER AND DECLARATION Of the Gentry of the County of NORFOLK, and the
County of the City of NORWICH, To his Excellency the Lord GENERAL MONK.
Right-Honourable,
We the Gentry of the County of Norfolk and of the County and City of Norwich,
do cordially rejoice, with many others of these Counties, and of the Nation,
for your Excellencies return into your Native Country with honor and safety:
And that the late Differences in the Armies are now so happily composed without
bloodshed; We are desirous to bless our good God for these mercies, and to
acquaint your Lordship, That we have signified the Resentment of our grievances
to the Speaker of the Parliament; A true Copy whereof we have here enclosed,
sent to your Excellency, least any persons should in our absence mis-represent
us or our intentions to your Lordship: We rest.

The Declaration.
WE the Gentry of the County of Norfolk and County and City of Norwich, Being
deeply affected with the sense of our sad Distractions and Divisions, both in
Church and State; And wearied with the Miseries of an unnatural Civil War, The
too frequent Interruptions of Government, the Impositions of several heavy
Taxes, And the loud outcries of multitudes of undone and almost famished
people, occasioned by a general decay of Trade, which has spread it self
throughout the whole Nation, and these Counties in particular; And having met
together and consulted what may best remedy and remove Our and the Nations
present greivances and Distractions; Do humbly conceive, That the chief
Expedient, will be, the Recalling of those Members that were secluded in 1648.
and sat before the Force put upon the Parliament (We of this County of
Norfolk, being by such Seclusion deprived of any person to represent us in
Parliament) and also by filling up the vacant places thereof; And all to be
admitted without any Oath or Engagement, previous to their Entrance; Which
being done, We shall be ready to acquiesce and submit in all things to the
Judgment and Authority of Parliament; Without which Authority, the People of
England cannot be obliged to pay any Taxes.

The Letter to General MONK and this Declaration was signed by Thomas Lord
Richardson. John Hobart. Horatio Townesend. John Asteley. Will. Hewitt. John
Palgrave. Thomas Berney. Will. Rant. Adrian Parmenter. Edmund Burman. John
Rawley. Henry Watts. John Maum. John Andrews. John Salter. Edmond Bacon. N. Le
Strange. Thomas Pettus. Will. Doyley. Thomas Guybon. John Windham. James De
Gray. Butts Bacon. Thomas Rant. Chr. Jay. Joseph Pain. Rob. Bendish. Richard
Wenman. John Laurence. Thomas Wisse. Philip Woodhouse. Ralph Heure. John Tracy.
Arthur Jenny. Augustine Sotherton. John Buxton. Francis Norris. Thomas Johnson.
Thomas Le Gros. John Hovile. Richard Catelyne. Suck. Jay. Rob. Suckling. Samuel
Smith. Rob. Holmes.
With many hundreds more of the Knights, Gentry, Citizens, and Freee-holders.

LONDON Printed for John Place, at Furnivals Inn Gate in Holborne, 1660.


