A LETTER formerly sent to Dr. Tillotson, and for want of an Answer made
public and now Reprinted; with the said Doctor's Letter to the Lord Russel a
little before his Execution.
To the Reader.
THE Author of the following Letter sent the Original to Mrs. Tillotson for her
Husband, and a Copy of it to my Lady Derby, for the Princess of Orange, several
Months ago; and when he writ it, he hoped the Members of Parliament would have
been, against the Sessions, awakened by their Disappointments and Taxes, to
consider aright, what is the present State of this miserable Nation, and how
much worse is our future prospect; and had he found them in that Temper, and
acting steddily for their Country, he had thoughts to have presented with his
own hands, his Reasons, why he thinks they have wronged King James, over-rated
their Disease, and mistaken their Cure; and he would also have given in
Proposals, how the King may be restored, without hazard, either to our Religion
or Property; and this the Author would have done, because he thinks, that if
either Reason or Religion would prevail, such an Offer must have had some
weight; but whilst the Whigs as much Sacrifice their Understandings to support
this Change, as the Tories did their Consciences to make it, a Man would be
reckoned mad that attempted in such a manner to reclaim such a Set of Men, as
have no more public Spirit, than what lies in wrangling for their particular
Parties; or common sense, than what is p^oper to get into Pensions, and Places,
that, at the witty Sir Charles Sidley once said in the House, They may charge
in Armor. How wild a Project too, would it be to offer Reason to Men that so
little know their own Minds, that are so inconstant, as that what they pass
unanimously one Sessions, they throw out the next, as they have done the Judges
Bill? The Author would venture himself against great odds, if it was but an
even Wager, that England might reap Good by so bold an Undertaking; for he sees
Slavery coming on so fast, that he thinks Life will be a burden to an honest
and free Spirit; yet nothing that Cato (were he here) could do, or suffer,
would repair our broken Constitution, unless God teaches our Senators more
Wisdom, or is pleased to teach the People that a House of Commons may as
scandalously abuse the Trust they repose in them, as some of his Ministers did
King James; which that he may, is the hearty Prayer of the Author, both for the
sake of the English Liberties, and Protestant Religion; for the sake of the
very Being of the one, and the Honor of the other.

The LETTER.
SIR,
I Shall Preface what I am about to say, with an assurance, That I have
formerly had the greatest Veneration for You, as well for your Piety as good
Sense and Learning; That my Notions of Government are so large, that the first
thing that I ever doubtfully examined, that had Your Name affixed to it, was
the Letter to my Lord Russel: but your Actions since do less quadrate with that
Opinion I had of your Sincerity, and seriously make me address my self to You,
to know how you reconcile your present Actings to the Principles either of
natural or revealed Religion; especially, how you reconcile them to the
Positions and Intentions of that Letter; and consequently, whether you have a
Belief of God, and a World to come.

Sir, I think it a very extravagant Maxim in Government, to affirm all
Insurrections which are only levelled at Reformation, and designed to correct
Mal-administration, and the Authors of them, and thereby (when the Common
Methods are at a loss) to let the King know, what are the Measures of his
Government, the Voice and Interest of his People, that so Justice and Mercy may
prevail against illegal Courses and his flattering Minions, and that the Rights
of his Crown and the Privileges of his People may be adiusted and preserved. I
say, I think it an extravagant Position, to affirm* That what may be so
conducive to public Peace, and the maintenance of a Constitution, and the
general Ends of all Government, is Illegal: Yet I have often thought, that the
Oath that expects a Man should swear it unlawful, upon any pretense whatsoever,
to rise in Arms against the King, or any Commissioned by him, intended to
establish this wild Civil Article; and I thought your Lordship writ upon so
solemn an occasion, designing to justify the Purport and Doctrine of that Oath;
which was carrying Loyalty to a higher pitch than I ever thought necessary to
make a good Man, or a good Christian.

But, Sir, to lay your Letter aside at present, give me leave to examine this
Revolution with the most impartial desire of being informed; for I solemnly
invoke God Almighty to attest, That my Noncompliance with K. William and Q.
Mary's Title and Administration, is founded upon Scruples of Conscience, to
which I yet want satisfactory Answers. I am a Protestant of that size, that I
hope God would enable me to undergo all the Persecution that the Malice of Men
and Devils can invent, rather than one moment prostitute my Conscience so far
as to give any reasonable Umbrage for Protestants to suspect, or Papists to
hope, I could be made a Convert to the Church of Rome. I love my Country better
than my Wife and Children; and certainly therefore so much, that I would for no
Interest in the World disquiet the present Settlement, if I thought it was fit
for an honest Man to comply with it.

I have no Personal Obligations to King James; and I thank God I have an
obstinate Honesty, that will scarce allow me to be acceptable to any King.
Whatever I have done, or shall do, for the Exiled Prince, is upon mere Motives
of Conscience. I have no reason to believe my self incapable of being forgiven,
or perhaps employed, under the present Government; my R^lations and Friends are
many of them violent, and almost all at least for it. But let us begin with the
Revolution: I acknowledge King James's Ministers gave great Provocations; I
could have joined with any but a Foreigner to have rescued our Liberties; and
yet I must as freely declare, I saw nothing done that would have been too hard
for a Parliamentary redress, or at least for the intrinsic Power of this
Island, the natural Weight of those who are sensible of their Religion and
Property: but I cannot tell how any Provocations tha^ were given the People of
England, can justify the Invasion of a Nephew and a Son-in-law. I cannot tell
by what distinctions in Morality the Dutch could salve their denial, by their
Ambassador, that those Forces were designed for England; I cannot imagine what
dispensation gave them and the Subjects of England liberty to tell so many
things that were notoriously untrue, that they knew then to be untrue, and that
have been much more apparently proved so by the sequel of things.

Sure the Morality of the Decalogue is not abolished: Let us see how many of
the Commandments are broken; Has not Mammon been made a God, and a Crown an
Idol, to which the P. of Orange and his Adherents have sacrificed the Lives of
many thousands of Men, as well as the Reputation of our Religion, besides a
vast Treasure* though it is not fit to be named after the other two Immolations?
Have they not taken God's Name in, when they consecrated to the Preservation of
Religion the Injuries and Violations of it, of which they have been guilty? I
do not know whether you are a strict Sabbatarian; I believe not, and will
acknowledge I am none: but I think the Nation grossly perverts the ends of
Humiliations and Fastings, and appointed Days for God's Worship, whilst they
pray to God to prosper any immoral Enterprise. For God's sake, and the sake of
your Soul, and the sake of your Queen's Soul, study the fifth Commandment, though
the performance of it has the promise of length of d^ys in this Life, the
breach of it (if any Religion be true) will plunge her into Miseries of a
longer duration; She has partaken with Thieves and Liars against her own
Father; She is a Receiver of what has been by them from him wrongfully taken
away, unless it can be proved that the Crown of England is Elective, the Kings
of it punishable and deposable. If this is right, you know, Sir, all our
Law Books are in the wrong, for they say, The King can do none; That he is not
accountable to the People, collectively or representatively; and that the
Monarchy of England is Hereditary. This is all in the Original Contract of our
Statute-Books and Law Cases.

Sir, You know these things, you cannot plead ignorance, nor can you believe
Abdication: You know the treatment the King had from the P. of Orange and his
own Subjects, and cannot believe he voluntarily resigned. Are not then our
Judges, our Juries, our Fleets, and our Armies, guilty of Murder, in opposing
King James 's Return? Don't your Queen list so many Assassins, whilst she
Commissions them for that pu^p^se? Is it not as unlawful to steal a Crown as a
Trifle? And till they have recanted all the false Accusations which were
countenanced by the Prince of Orange and his Princess, and were instrumental
toward the getting of these Crowns, do they not violate the Ninth Commandment,
as well as covet their Neighbors (their Fathers) Goods? The Civil and Natural
Obligations the Prince and Princess of Orange have to King James aggravate
their Crime; and, if it were not almost levity to say so here, I would add as
another aggravation, their having coveted too many of King James's Servants.

The King of England does every thing by his Officers; they are impeachable,
they are punishable: The King (who we always said was not so) is dethroned,
whilst those are employed in this Government, who were the Disgraces and
Instruments of the last. But I don't intend a Libel, and therefore will not
enter into an Account of such Matters; I will neither give the present
Ministers their Characters, nor show how little, as mere Men and Subjects, we
are the better for the Change. But I fear, whoever reflects without heat or
bias upon what I have said, will find we have lost at least Nine of the Ten
Commandments, which is exceeding Popery in our Index Expurgatorius with a
witness.

But, to come to your more particular Case, I beseech you to publish some
Discourse (if you can clear things) to demonstrate either your Repentance of
what you writ to my Lord Russel, or the Reasons that make that, and what you
now do, consistent; and that you, with the usual solidity with which you treat
upon other Subjects, justify the Proce^dings, and explain the Title of K.
William. I know no body has a stronger and clearer Head, and if you have Truth
on your side, you can write unanswerable. God's Glory, the Reputation of the
Protestant Religion is at stake; your own good Name calls for it; and more
especially because you have accepted a most Reverend and Devout Man's
Archbishopric; a Man that has given Testimony how unalterably he is a
Protestant! a Sufferer formerly for the Laws and Church of England; a Sufferer
for those very Principles upon which that Letter to my Lord Russel was writ;
for those very Principles which you disputed for (when he was about to
Communicate) when he had so short a time to live, nay, you remembered him of
even upon the Scaffold, with the dreadful Commination of Eternal Woe.

Really, Sir, if there be any Truth, if there be any Virtue, if there be any
Religion, What shall we say to these Things? What will you say to them? You
must be at the pains to clear this Matter, that we may not believe the
Boundaries of Right and Wrong, the Measures of Violence and Justice quite taken
away, that we may not be tempted to Speculative, and from thence to Practical
Atheism. This Change has made many sober Men Skeptical, and gone farth^r toward
eradicating all the Notions of a Deity, than all the Labors of Hobbs and
Epicurus; and your part in it has, I must confess, more staggered me than any
one Thing else: I have been ready to suspect that Religion it self was a Cheat,
and that it was a defect in my Understanding, that I could not see through it;
for, I think, if I can know my right Hand from my left, our present Government
stands upon Foundations that contradict all those Discourses which you, as well
as others, have lent to Passive Obedience.

The excessive Value I have for you, for your Knowledge, your Judgment, your
largeness of Spirit, your Moderation, and many other great Qualities that ^ave
signaliz^d your Name, once made you one of the greatest Ornaments of the
Christian Church, one of the greatest Exemplars of sound Morality, and all that
Philosophers call Virtue, make what seems to me an Apostasy from what you
Preached and Writ, pretended to believe, and would have others to belive, shake
me so violently in the first Credenda of Religion, that I beseech you, if you
think it necessary upon no other account, that you will publish such a
Discourse, at least, for the Satisfaction of mine, and the Consciences of many
others, who I can assure you of my own knowledge, lie under the same Scruples
with my self, have the same Scruples in relation to the Government, and the
same Temptations to question Religion it self upon your account: It is the
interest of the Government to satisfy such Men; and if you think that we ought
particularly and privately to apply our selves to you, our Number is so great
that it would be too constant a trouble for any one Man to undergo; nor can we
safely debate a point of this Nature; nor can you expect Men should trust
themselves under the Protection of your Honor, whilst they think you have in
the Face of the World, so grossly Prevaricated both from that and what ought to
be a Principle of a higher Nature, the dictates of your own Conscience.

We would as soon deliver our Reasons at the Door of a House of Commons, and I
am not sure that the same Spirit of Integrity, which has hindered me from
succumbing under what we think an Usurpation, will not the next time there is
an Assembly there carry me that length, (if I don't in the mean time publicly
hear from you.) I beg of God Almighty (in whose Being I bless his Name I yet
believe) to lay a happy constraint upon me, to do what may be most for his
Glory, and the Good of these Nations; and I earnestly supplicate him, that he
will enable me to suffer whatever may be necessary for those great Ends, and
that he will incline you either to publish your Reasons or Repentance. To his
blessed Guidance and Protection I heartily recommend you.

ADVERTISEMENT.
* Since Dr. Burnet's Pastoral Letter is burned by the Common Hangman,
according to the Order of the House of Commons; it is therefore now far more
necessary that you or he should explain King William's Title, and what you have
now to say against the following Letter to my Lord Russel.

Dr. Tillotson's Letter to the Lord Russel.
My Lord,
I Was heartily glad to see your Lordship this Morning in that calm and devout
Temper at Receiving the blessed Sacrament; but Peace of Mind, unless it be well
grounded, will avail little: And because transient Discourse many times has
little effect for want of time to weigh and consider it; therefore in tender
Compassion of your Lordship's Case, and from all the good Will that one Man can
bear to another, I do humbly offer to your Lordships deliberate Thoughts these
following Considerations concerning the Points of Resistance, if our Religion
and Rights should be invaded, as your Lordship puts the Case; concerning which
I understood by Dr. Burnet, that your Lordship had once received Satisfaction,
and am sorry to find a Change.

First, That the Christian Religion does plainly forbid the Resistance of
Authority.

Secondly, That though our Religion be established by Law, (which your Lordship
urges as a difference between our Case, and that of the Primitive Christians,)
yet in the same Law, which establishes our Religion, it is declared, That it is
not lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever to take up Arms, etc. Besides that,
there is a particular Law declaring the Power of the Militia to be solely in
the King. And that ties the Hands of the Subjects, though the Law of Nature and
the General Rules of Scripture had left us at liberty; which, I believe, they
do not, because the Government and Peace of humane Society could not well
subsist upon these Terms.

Thirdly, Your Lordships Opinion is contrary to the declared Doctrine of all
Protestant Churches; and though some particular Persons have taught otherwise,
yet they have been contradicted herein, and condemned for it by the generality
of Protestants: And I beg your Lordship to consider how it will agree with an
avowed asserting of the Protestant Religion, to go contrary to the general
Doctrine of Protestants. My end in this is to convince your Lordship, that you
are in a very great and dangerous Mistake; and being so convinced, that which
before was a Sin of Ignorance, will appear of a much more heinous Nature, as in
Truth it is, and call for a very particular and deep Repentance; which if your
Lordship sincerely exercise upon the sight of your Error, by a penitent
Acknowledgment of it to God and Men, you will not only obtain Forgiveness of
God, but prevent a mighty Scandal to the Reformed Religion. I am very loath to
give your Lordship any disquiet in the Distress you are in, which I commiserate
from my Heart; but am much more concerned, that you do not leave the World in a
delusion and false Peace, to the hindrance of your eternal Happiness. I
heartily pray for you, and beseech your Lordship to believe that I am with the
greatest Sincerity and Compassion in the World,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and Afflicted Servant, JOHN TILLOTSON,

Dr. Tillotson's Last Prayer at the Execution of the Unfortunate Lord RUSSEL.
O Almighty and Merciful God, with whom alone live the Spirits of Just Men made
perfect, after they are delivered from these Earthly Prisons; we humbly commend
the Soul of this our dear Brother into thy hands, as into the hands of a
Faithful Creator, and most Merciful Savior; humbly beseeching thee, that it
may be precious in thy sight: Wash it, O Lord, from all its Guilt in the Blood
of the immaculate Lamb that was slain to take away the Sins of the World; that
whatsoever Defilements it may have contracted in the midst of this wicked
World, by the Lusts of the Flesh, or the Wiles of Satan, being purged and done
away by a sincere and unfeigned Repentance, through thy infinite Mercy and
Goodness in our Lord Jesus Christ, it may be presented pure and holy, and
without spot, before thee. O Lord, we humbly beseech thee to support thy
Servant, and stand by him in this last and great Contest; Deliver him from the
Pains of Eternal Death, and save him, O Lord, for thy Mercies sake; and grant
that all we who survive, by this and other Instances of thy Providence, may
learn our Duty to God and the King; and that by this, and other like Spectacles
of our Mortality, we may see how frail and uncertain our Condition is in this
World, that it is all but Vanity; and teach us so to number our days, that we
may seriously apply our hearts to that holy and heavenly Wisdom while we live,
which may bring us to Life Everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord: In whose
holy Name and Words we conclude our Prayers.

Our Father, etc. It being credibly and confidently reported, That you, Sir,
immediately after the Execution, went to visit that Excellent Lady my Lady
Russel, and assured her, amongst other expressions to comfort her, That you
wished your Soul might go to the same place whither my Lord's was gone: I
beseech you to make Mankind understand that expression, or vindicate your self
from the Imputation wherewith this Story charges you.

FINIS.

