A LETTER From a Friend in LONDON, To Another at SALAMANCA.
SIR,
YOu may Remember the last year, and I think in the time of the Dog days I gave
you an Account as per Advice, how our Affairs stood here in England, and that
the whole Rise and Texture of them were from a certain Person, who said he was
a Doctor in Divinity, and took his Degree at Salamanca, which obliged me to
Write to you to know if that Assertion were Truth or not, because in other
matters he has been suspected. I then gave you the Description of him Inside
and Out, I told you he was Sanguinous, Bold, and Passionate, qualifications
Dissonant to his Coat and Character; and you in Return told me that you had
made full Inquiry, if ever such a Person had at any time heretofore Resided
amongst you, or taken any Degree or Order, but could find none that ever knew
or heard of him; to which I Concurred, and so I do still for many Reasons more
than what you gave me. Now God be praised we have another Face to what the last
year wore, the Angry Wasps are now caught in their own Honey, you told me that
the English were all Ears and no Eyes, but now they are all Eyes and no Ears;
had you but seen how near Destruction that Doctor I mention had brought us to,
you could not have been less Mad than he himself was, when he heard that his
Patron the Sheriff would not keep House; for it is Reported that a Nine-penny
Ordinary here is better than the best University Commons in Sallamanca, yet
thus much I must needs say in praise of that never to be forgotten Prelate,
though your University scorns to own him, that if he Retrieved us from the Jaws
of the Fox of Rome he did not better our Safety by it, but left us to be
Dovour'd by the Woolf of Fanaticism. We have a Multitude of other Doctors
sprung up since the State was Sick, not Prelates, but Physicians of the State,
mere Quacks there is Dr. Grig a Pismire, Dr. Lambs-wool one of Aesop's Race; in
short we are so Diseased, every Country has almost a Doctor, here is Dr. Kent,
Dr. Essex, Dr. Huntington, Dr. Gray: Dr. Arm-strong he is for Monmouth-shire,
and such a multitude more, it would put a man out of Breath to name them. All
these are Physicians for any Mallady in Religion, Mind, or State, they have but
one Remedy for all Diseases, Phlebotomy; they found the Cure infallible in 48,
and would fain practice it de novo, not for Reputation but for Gain sake. Then
to vend their Drugs the better they have their Zanies, one Hittringale,
Janeway, Joyner, Curtis, Care, cum multis aliis, whose names as soon as Mr.
Kech can inform of, shall be Transmitted to you, in the mean time I beg the
favor of you to acquaint me by the first opportunity, if any of these
Empiricks I have named were ever known to you at Salamanca, because there is a
great deal lies upon that point. At Geneva I have heard some of them have been,
and am very apt to believe it, for they have the very Cut, Mean, Habit and
Cant, that Marshal the Geneva Bull Nigh, and others had in the year 1641. A man
would have thought there had been none of the Race left in the year 1660, but
the are a mere Hydra the more you destroy, the more they improve, a mere Love'
stain-Faction opposite to all Government, but where themselves are Pentioners,
and yet would abuse all others for being such. O! there is no such
Spawning-place in the World as under a sanctified Shed, which some Nickname a
Meetinghouse, or Conventicle.

Now Sir, it is strange to me that our Doctor of Salamanca should feed and herd
with these of Geneva, for he, they say, is a brave Huffing Blustering Doctor,
sitter to Fight the Lords Battle, than to say he has had his Coversation in the
World, in simplicity and Godly sincerity. You would not know him from a Tory
when he meets with a Plentiful Table and good Company, as that he has often
done behind the Exchange as well as at Mile End, where he was Caressed with
Dukes and Earls, but at the Expense of the poor Wappingers. And these Geneva
Whigs are quite of another Kidney, they are Demure, Conscientious, Prickear'd
Vermin, full of Hypocritical Sanctity in figure and appearance, but the Devil
is as much a Protestant within; they will not Swear you an Oath for all the
World, but swallow Thousands to serve a private Turn; They will not drink a
Health for any Gain, yet scruple not to intoxicate themselves with Vinegar and
Gall against the Government; though Justice and Equity is no where else so
equally distributed: sure these are the true Genuine Issue of those men our
Blessed Savior mentions, that take Care to pay the Tyth of Mint and Cummin,
but neglect the weightier Matters of the Law, Obedience to Powers, Rendering to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, living in Charity with all men, and c. The
Good King we live under suffers 'em to Keck at these things, knowing that by
Nature they have squeamish Consciences, and can as ill digest Gospel Ordinances
as human Laws. They are a sort of people that no part of the Universe produces
but this, they stumble at Straws in Government, but leap over Blocks of their
own laying, they baul against Grievances of their own Raising, they have so
infinite a Veneration for God, that they daily perpetrate things directly
opposite to his Laws, for instead of being the Instruments of Peace and Concord,
they are the Ingeniers of Desolation and Ruin. Having now told you Sir, what
they are, It Remains Requisite to tell you what they would be at; They would
Reform the World if they could; for Reformation is their work, tho God Himself
has Declared the Oeconomie, and Order of it good: And first they would begin
with England, and what are their Instruments think you, but such a Miscellany
of Heedless, Increditable Vermin, as the Eye of Man never beheld but that night
the Pageant Called the Pope was burnt, the sight of which all wise Men, and
good detested, as knowing such Popular sorts of Buffoolry would certainly
Stigmatize the Nation with an everlasting Odium; for whatsoever bears the
figure of that which is, or seems sacred ought not to be made Ridiculous.

I forget not tho they have Our houses of prayer was by the same incorporated
Body of Protestant Reformers, turned into Stables and a Den for Thieves; poor
Women Excited from the Pulpit to Rob their Husbands to support the Godly
against the (so called) wicked, and a thousand Villainies besides. And
notwithstanding all their Attempts have hitherto been blasted with those of
Rome; such an Abhorrance has God Almighty to the Machinations of Evil, yet they
are at work still with the Prince of Darkness their Coadjutor, but it is an
Egyptian work, It is making Brick without Straw, when the Taskmasters grow
faint well may the Laborers do so, and we shall all see it meet with a
Babylonish Conclusion. Such little Artifices, such Paltry Intreagues they use;
to keep the Malcontent in heart; that such a thing as Oats hangs its head
and withers. I could not choose but smile to see it intimated the other day in
our Impartial Intelligence, that because it was falsely Reported the Address to
his Majesty was made by all the Apprentices of London, there would be a
Petition suddenly Signed by the far greater number for the calling of a
Parliament in opposition to the other Loyal Youths. Now what does this purport,
or why should it be suggested, but to give the Country to understand that the
Apprentices of London are divided upon the point of Loyalty, and to render us
Ridiculous abroad as well as to one another, to think his Majesty should adhear
to the Advice of a Company of poor Novices, who have been bred by their
Shismatick Masters without the Pale of the Church, and know no more than their
Manual Occupations (if that) and to carry on a Meeting day, a two handed Bible
under their Arm, sooner than to the Petition of the Lord Mayor, and Common Hall
to the ame purpose: I confess I was struck with pity to see a little stapling
the other day come Crying into a Tavern in Cheapside for his Petition, which he
had a little before brought thither for the Vinegar Drawer to sign (the other
drawers Refusing it) and I know not how it came to be misplaced and lost; the
Boy Roa'd out and said he was undone, his Master would beat him and turn him
away for losing his Petition, but there was no Remedy for him, for as I
understand the Cook stole it for the bottom of a Tart: However I told the Boy
where he might have more (to wit) at the George in Iron Monger-Lane, where
thirteen to the dozen of these hopeful Youths meet every night to carry on the
great work of Petitioning, and have their Daily Exhibition of half a Crown a
piece. Nay I know all, and it will out: Their Actions are as Conspicuous as
their Hypocrisy, saying one thing and meaning another; but I blame not them
more then I do their Pastors, that cheat the poor Credulous Sheep of their due
sustenance, give them Husks and Chaff instead of Gospel Truth. Read but these
books of theirs and see what they contain. A Cat may look upon a King, A Pea to
stop the Issue of sin, The Seamans Compass Spiritualized, The Marrowbone of
Grace and thousands more, than tell me who are the greatest Prevaricators, your
Jesuits, or Ours.

I intend to dine with these Petitioners, for I hear their Masters are to treat
them with Stags at Weavers-Hall, and the Horns are to be nailed up in Memorial
of the Entertainment, to out do the Loyal Apprentices who had but Fallow-Dear.
Would it not make any man laugh to see these Gnats buz about the light of
sense, sindge their Wings, and lose all motion after it? Who can pity those
that piss against the Wind and thereby put their Eyes out? Tho our
Intelligencers make it their business to deceive the Foolish and the Ignorant
with a belief that this Petition will be Signed by the Major part of the
Apprentices of London, I do averr and assure you, and all your part of the
World, that the Address which was presented by the Loyal Youths were by them
ascertained to his Majesty to be subscribed by above 20000, of the best sort
and condition that this great City in their quality affords, who do all
Unanimously Renounce any consent of Heart or Hand they have to any such
Petition, and look upon it as a thing rather Deserving their Scorn that
Aprobation. And all the harm I wish Mr. Curtis for his false information is
that he may never see them Mustered.

Sir, I have been troublesome to you beyond Measure; but as I ought, I beg your
Pardon; this had come to you by our penny Post, for they say here it is
Enlarging it self all over the World, but that there are such notorius
Rogueries conveyed under that Covert by Lovers of their Country, that I rather
thought fit to Print mine before hand, and then it is no matter what Post
brought it you.

I Remain SIR, Yours and c.
From Hedg-Lane near his Grate the D. of M. Millimo Trillimo Quillimo.
London, Printed for J. C. 1681.


