A LETTER Directed to the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Earl of Perth, GOVERNOR TO THE
PRINCE.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1700.

Die Lunae, 17 Februarii, 1700.
UPon Reading this day a Letter communicated to the House by His Majesty's
Command, Dated 18th February, 1701, and Directed, To the Right Honorable the
Earl of Perth, Governor to the Prince, These, It is Ordered by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England, do give Order, that the said Letter be forthwith Printed
and Published.

Matthew Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

A LETTER Directed to the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Earl of Perth, GOVERNOR to the
PRINCE.
Friday 18th of February, 1701. My Dst. Br.
SInce I promised to put in Writing what we had not time to talk fully of, I am
set down to it in the Morning, that my Letter may be ready for the Messenger if
any call.

I told you all that I had heard at Versailles, and the favorable Audience I
had of Madame de Mentenon, for which I beg it of you to return my most humble
Thanks to the Queen, and beg of her to be so good as to Thank Madame de
Mentenon, and know from her what can be done in that matter. It will be a great
Charity in the Queen.

I told you amongst other things the great Fleet the King intends to put out
this Summer, the Orders being given, and the Money ready, the Stores full, and
every one concerned Active in their Stations; There is no doubt but this Fleet
will be Master of the Sea for some time, if not for all the Summer, because the
Dutch dare not stir till the English be ready, and they have long Debates yet
before they can be in a Condition to Act, if they have the Will; and it is a
Question if they will have it at all.

The King never had so favorable a Conjuncture, if he can persuade this King
that his Affairs are really in the Circumstances they are in, but there is the
Difficulty.

The King and Queen have more Authority with the King, and with Madame de
Mentenon, than any other in the World can have, but that is not all, there
should be some one Acceptable to the Ministers, who should lay before them
these Proofs, their Majesty's cannot enter into the Detail of, and explain the
Reasons, make Plans and Memoires by their Majesty's Approbation, to Convince
them of the necessity, and to show the easiness of Restoring the King, the
Glory it brings to their King, and the Advantage to Religion.

How this will be done their Majesty's are wise enough to Consider, and I think
it is not a Subject fit for me to enter upon, but their Friends in general, who
know not the half of what I know in this matter, think that it will not be well
done by a Protestant Minister, Lazy in his Temper, Enemy to France by his
Inclination, Tainted with Commonwealth Principles, and against the Kings
Returning by any other Power than that of the People of England, upon
Capitulation and Terms, who is suspected of giving aim to the Compounders, if
not worse.

That Mr. Carrell is qualified no man doubts, but in Society with the other,
these who must be Instrumental will not trust him as he ought, so that so long
as the other is within distance of penetrating the Affairs, they will never
think themselves secure.

And yet the King has no such Game to play as by these very Persons, who are
thus defident, namely the true Church of England Party, the Catholics, and the
Earl of Arran, and I shall say something as to every one of them. The King
cannot but be sensible that the true Church of England Party, and their
Principal Head now the Bishop of Norwich, has been silent of a long time, and
their Majesty's may remember what weight the Court of France laid upon their
joining the King (I mean the Non-swearing Clergy) in case of a Landing.

Therefore all arts should be tried without delay to get them to enter into
Correspondence again, and every Impediment ought to be removed, I say without
exception, and though sometimes it is of hard digestion for Sovereigns who
ought to be obeyed without reserve, to yield to the humors of Subjects, yet
Prudence should teach them, when they cannot without hurting their Affairs do
what they would, to do what they can, and remember the Fable of the Dog, who
lost the Substance for the Shadow.

Assurances from the Non-swearers, the Soundest and Venerablist part of the
English Church, would be of great use at this time, to persuade France to
undertake this great Affair, for besides their own Example at a Landing, and
their Preaching and Writing to the People, that their Religion was in no
danger, it is most certain they know better than any others can, what the
Church of England in general would do for the Kings Service, and they being to
run all the hazard, would be better believed at the Court of France than any
other, as I found by experience.

As to the Catholics and others Associate with them unfortunately for the King
they were thought to have too much Inclination for me, and so have been
reckoned as useless to the King, but I must beg leave to say, that Undertaking
was the best Feather in his Wing, and was most justly thought so by him, and by
the Court of France too, even to that degree, they pretended if this and the
other Article concerning the Clergy, could be made Appear, they would Concur
with the King to Invade England. They Consisted of Seven Regiments of Horse and
Dragoons, their Arms, Trumpets, Kettle Drums, Standards, etc. were all ready,
and are yet in surety, their Men were all Listed, and their Officers Chosen,
and they had twenty Horses to a Troop, which Troops lying at a distance in a
Horse Country, twenty Horses would soon have Mounted the rest.

Those who could not divine the Greatness and the Use of the Undertaking,
blamed the Rashness of it, and even some Churchmen have not been disapproven
for endeavoring undutifully (because contrary to the Kings Written Orders) to
break the Design; but I desire you now for all this to believe, that you have
not such another Argument to use to the Court of France as this, and if you
could make it appear, as it might have been done some Years ago, I should have
very good Hopes of this Summers Work. Nay let the King have what other Hopes,
or even Promises you please from the Court of France, this is to be Encouraged,
and if possible, to be put in the Circumstances it was in, for if ever there be
a Landing in England to purpose, it must be before they can be armed, and they
cannot be armed before the Parliament come to a Resolution concerning the War,
and considering the few Troops in England, suppose these men to be no better
than Militia, what a Diversion would it be.

It is not necessary for me to say any more of this Article, till I know
whether their Majesty's have as good an Opinion of this Undertaking as I have.
If so I shall show what I think to be done in it, if otherwise I shall save the
Pains.

As to the Earl of Arran, it would be of great use to have an Understanding
with him. He will have none where -- can prye; his all is at stake, and he
ought to be wary with whom he ventures to deal.

I think it better for the Kings Service, that the Court Party prevailed in the
manner they have done in the Parliament of Scotland, than that the Country
Party should have got their Will. Opposition swells the Waters to a Flood, and
so long as the Country Party is not discouraged, they gain more Ground in the
Kingdom than they lose in Government. So that the Disaffection to the
Government will increase, and one may judge of the Nation in general, which is
of an other Temper than this pretended Parliament, or rather Presbiterian
Rabble, ill representing the Nation. For since even in it, there is such a
Struggle against the Government, what would there be in a Free Parliament,
which the P. of O. durst never hazard to call.

The Nation then, at least a great part of it, being disaffected to this
Government, it is of the last Consequence that E. Arran may know what to do in
case of an Invasion of England, or in case he and his Friends be obliged for
Self preservation to rise in their own Defense.

The Army who are and ever were well-affected, are to be gained by Money, and a
little goes a great way with them.

The Disbanded Troops would be engaged, and the Officers are well inclined.

The Places of Strength would be secured, and such as can be put in Defense
(without Expenses) fortified.

To do all this, at least such a part of them as can be begun with, a small Sum
will serve, and He ought to have Hopes of it, and of the Command.

These being only Heads to be discoursed of, and much to be said of every part,
it is not to be thought that this Letter can carry a final Conclusion; for it
may be upon Discourse, I might change my Mind, or be more confirmed in, and see
further.

This makes me insist again to you, upon two things as appearing to me
absolutely necessary to put things upon a right foot.

The First is the removing of all Impediments out of the way, and sending all
Suspected Persons to Champagne or Burgundy, according to their Goust.

And the Second is of the last Use, both to their Majesty's and the Prince,
which is the Establishing of such a Number, under no Qualification, to talk of
their Affairs in their Majesty's Presence, with whom we can freely converse and
propose what may be for their Majesty's Service.

As for the First, It will be for the Kings Reputation both at the Court of
Rome, France, and with all his true Friends in England for many Reasons --

As for the Second, It is according to Scripture, In the multitude of
Counselors there is safety.

Nothing is so dangerous as first to Determine what one will do, and then hear
Reasons against it, and immitate the deaf Adder who hearkens not to the Voice
of the Charmer, let him Charm never so sweatly. Reasons against a Resolution
taken, offend, and the more Force they have, they offend the more, whilst
before the Resolution be taken, Reason has its Effect, and the Determinations
are not the Effects of Humor and Faction, but of Prudence and Justice.

If in any thing I fail, I Will Swear its want of Understanding, and not of Will.
And I beg, that their Majesty's may be persuaded, that it is not Humor nor
Vanity, but their Service I have in my view, who am,

My Dst. Br. Most humbly Yours.
There are no Letters from England, I expect and am promised --

I forgot to tell you, that the Conjuncture ought to be improven so long as the
Court of France have the Ill Opinion of the Pr. of Orange's Treachery
discovered lately in their hands.



Superscription, For the Right Honorable the Earl of Perth, Governor to the
Prince, These.

