CLEMENS IX. PONTIFEX MAXIMUS, CREATVS DIE XX IVNII. ANNO M. D. C. LX. VII.


Il Cardinalismo di Santa Chiesa; OR THE HISTORY OF THE CARDINALS OF THE Roman
Church, From the time of their first Creation, to the Election of the Present
POPE Clement the Ninth, With a full Account of his CONCLAVE.

In Three Parts.

Written in Italian by the Author of the Nipotismo di Roma, and faithfully
Englished by G. H.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Myter betwixt the Middle-Temple-Gate,
and Temple Bar in Fleet Street. 1670.

A SUMMARY Of the Matters contained in the Three Parts of this Book.
THE First treats of the Essence of the Church; of the Controversies which
arise betwixt the Religious Orders, the Princes, and the (...)ergy: Of the
Pontifical Authority, how it is understood in Rome; and how it ought to be, by
the Sovereign Princes: Of the Original, Augmentation, and Essence of the
Cardinalitial Dignity; and of the manner of living of all the Cardinals in
general.

The Second shows how careless, and perfunctory the Cardinals are in defending
the Church from the rapacity of the Nipotismo, with the reasons and obligations
they have thereunto: As likewise the Promotions, Titles, Alliances, Qualities,
Vices, and Virtues, of all the Cardinals now living.

The Third discourses of all the Treaties, Negotiations, Differences, Disputes,
and Dissentions, happened amongst the Cardinals in the Conclaves; and betwixt
the Cardinals, the People, and the Emperors, in the Elections of all the Popes,
and Anti-Popes, from the Incarnation of our Savior, to the Conclave in the
Year 1667. in which Clement the 9th. was elected Pope: To which are added
certain Politic Aphorisms, written by Cardinal Azolini, upon the Cardinals of
the said Conclave.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Kind Reader,
I Present you here with the Cardinalismo I promised you in my Nipotismo; Read
it as your own, not as mine; for he who promises a thing, obliges himself de
jure to him that expects its performance. Certain Critics who vouchsafe to
throw away some moments of their time in the perusal of the Nipotismo, wondered
exceedingly that I should publish that book first, having declared the
Cardinalismo to be my first born. The first pangs and qualms which I endured,
were (I must confess) in the Conception of my Cardinalismo; but I laid that
aside, and fell upon my Nipotismo. You will ask me upon what grounds, or
inducements? What necessity was there for that? I will tell you sincerely, my
design was to publish them together; but upon second thoughts, I made an Esau
of Jacob, and a Jacob of Esau, that is, I put forth my Nipotismo by way of
Essay, resolving, if that had not had the approbation I expected, to have
stifled the other, or confined it to my own Cabinet. But things succeeded
according to the predictions of my Friends, and the Nipotismo relishing even
amongst those Argus's, and Critics, who read books only to correct them, and
upbraid the Authors: I concluded forthwith to present this Cardinalismo
likewise, for the benefit of the Public, presuming its reception would be no
worse than the other, if the Readers judgment, and the Authors do agree: which
nevertheless I cannot but apprehend, when I consider how frequently they differ.

This I know, that if any book ever gave occasion of Censure, this will, and
that not only to the Catholics, but to the Protestants also, (for even amongst
them there are such as will find fault, where they do not sometimes
understand.) Methinks I hear a Protestant at one of my ears, crying out
already, You might have left out this, you should have omitted that, it would
have been better thus, and thus, and thus: and in the other, a scandalized
Catholic complaining, that I write several things superfluous to the very
nature of History, and pass by others which would be proper and adequate.

But he who should write a book, and undertake to give universal satisfaction,
would but lose his time, and have his labor for his pains. Nor is it to be
expected the general will submit to a particular. The Apostles were holy men,
guided by the holy Spirit, and according to that direction, they writ the book
of the holy Gospel: yet how many Heretics are there found, who fear not to
condemn, what they ought in Conscience to adore? How many profane persons
which despise the Apostolical instructions? How many Divines, that with a
thousand niceties, and distinctions, do controvert and dispute against the
writings of the Apostles? Now if the nature of man be so dogged and perverse,
that it cannot accommodate with so sacred a book, so necessary to our
Salvation, and so infallible in its Composition; how is it possible they should
receive one kindly, that perhaps is contrary to their own sense and
inclinations? I am satisfied it is impossible this Cardinalismo should please
both Catholic and Protestant, because the one contemns what the other
approves, and the other embraces what the first has rejected. Many things are
inserted which are familiar amongst the Catholics, and for that reason those
are contemptible to them. Many others there are which are common amongst the
Protestants, and accordingly as inconsiderable to them: but all things are to
be regulated with order, and the good intention of the Author is to be excused,
because his design is to give general satisfaction as near as he can. Should he
have writ only what had been palatable to the Catholics, the Protestants would
have disgusted it; and on the other side, to have addressed himself only to the
satisfaction of the Protestants, would have been as ungrateful to the
Catholics.

Seeing therefore what is acceptable to the one, is unacceptable to the other;
the Catholic may read what makes for his interest, and the Protestant, what
the Catholic rejects: (and I am certain he will reject what is most worthy to
be read.) For my part, I advise the Protestant to read nothing but what the
Catholic condemns; and the Catholic, only what the Protestant despises: that
both of them may suck what honey they can, and throw away the sting which
pricks them within.

Thus far kind Reader, I have spoken in general, I shall now apply my self
particularly to thee: and first I desire thee to take notice, I am not the only
person concerned in the composition of this book. For these two last years I
have endeavored (notwithstanding some trouble and expense) to procure such
Memoires as were necessary for my design, from the hands of other persons: so
that if the book happens to be disliked, let not the whole blame be laid at my
door, but let them have their share who cooperated in the work, which I cannot
call mine, because my Memoires came from the hands of other people; people I
may say, for I depended not upon the Relations of any one man.

Yet there is one thing I may properly call my own, and that is the Style, and
Contexture of the book, in which also you may have occasion (and perhaps in
every leaf) to condemn me, as not observing the rules of the current Style. I
confess I thought the trouble unnecessary to apply my self to those niceties,
and punctilioes, to which the writers in this age are so much addicted, and it
preceeded from an inclination I had to the common (not a particular) benefit to
the Public, and not to any private Party. Those who writ with so much glory
in this age, do it to gain applause amongst the learned, because they are
learned themselves. For my part I am conscious of great insufficiency, and that
I have nothing to recommend me, but an immense, and insatiable desire, to make
my self intelligible to the most illiterate people in the world: for this
reason (being unable to arrive at that pitch of satisfaction (which is natural
to all writers) to see my self favored by the learned, and received by them,
though as the meanest of them all). I endeavor to gain the acceptance of the
commoner sort, by framing my self to the capacity of every body; and the
rather, because those strangers who are most curious of learning our tongue,
venture not but upon such books as are easy and familiar. Thou wilst not deny,
but the learned do understand what is easy, and that the common people abhor
what is difficult. He therefore who writes smoothly end plain, writes to every
ones understanding; whereas he that is abstruce, designs only to please a few.
Such books as these, ought to be read by many, rather than by particular
persons, though but few of the Commonalty are acquainted with such things, the
rigor and severity being so great in Rome, no books are permitted, but
Encomiums and Panegyricks.

Many will blame me for writing with that freedom, of persons of so great
quality, and now living, and not unworthily: yet I am not the only man, if I
were, I should not (I hope) deserve to be condemned, writing nothing but the
truth, for it would be cruelty against nature it self, and the right of reason,
and History, if verity should be persecuted. If the good Catholics will look
impartially upon what I have written of the Church of Rome, they will find my
aim is no other, than to admonish them of the errors into which the world
imagines they are fallen, and ought therefore to encourage and commend the
piety of my design, there being no greater expression of kindness, than for one
to advertise his friend of a Precipice which he sees not himself. Neither have
the Cardinals more reason to complain, the whole drift of this Cardinalismo
being nothing, but the elevation of their authority, too much depressed by the
Popes: and although they perhaps will despise such advertisements as Satirical,
yet have their Eminences no reason to be offended, if they be made acquainted
with what the world says of them. And if from the variety of Pens, which
co-operated in this work, they meet with any thing netling and pungent, they
are in all humility desired to gather the Rose with such artifice, as not to
prick themselves with the Briars. The Princes, on the other side, are most
humbly beseech'd, (and their Ministers of State with them) that they would
peruse this book intentively, and not make any judgment upon the information
of any prejudiced Ecclesiastic: and I am of opinion (if they vouchsafe to read
it themselves) they will rather applaud than explode it.

You are desired likewise (kind Reader) to excuse the Errors of the Press: they
are too numerous indeed, yet in respect of your judgment, they are the fewer,
for I am confident there is nothing, but what your learning will correct as you
read, and by that means cover those defects, as well as the Errors of the
Author, who promises for the future to write nothing but in generals, without
any particular reflections, either upon Rome, or any other place. The Books
which I intend to publish, are, L'Europa Morta; and Il Christianismo
Universato: Farewell.

A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for John Starkey Bookseller, at the
Miter in Fleet-stteet near Temple Bar.
THE Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Muscovy'
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
Complete History of those Countries; whereto are added, the Travels of
Mandelslo^ from Persia, into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and finished in
1640. the whole illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures. Written
Originally, by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy; Englished by J. Davies
of Kidwelly. The second Edition in Folio. Price bound 18 shillings. The Present
State of the Ottoman Empire in three books; containing the Maxims of the
Turkish Polity, their Religion, and Military Discipline: Illustrated with
diverse Figures. Written by Paul Rycaut, Esquire; late Secretary to the English
Ambassador there, now Consul of Smyrna. The third Edition in Folio. Price bound
10 s. The History of Barbado's, St. Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight;
in two books, containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands;
Illustrated with diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable
rarities therein described. Written by an Ingenious hand. In Folio. Price bound
10 s. A Relation of Three Embassies, from his Majesty Charles the Second, to
the Great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark,
performed by the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the years 1663, and
1664. Written by an Attendant on the Embassies. In Octavo. Price bound 4 s. Il
Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews, from the time of Sixtus
the 4th. 1471. to the death of the last Pope Alexander the 7th. 1667. Written
in Italian, and Englished by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society. In Octavo.
Price bound 3 s. The Present State of the United Provinces of the Low
Countries, as to the Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs,
Revenue, and Territory of the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors by W. A.
Fellow of the Royal Society. In Twelves. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. The Art of
Chemistry as it is now practiced. Written in French by P. Thybault Chemist to
the French King; and Englished by W. A. Dr. in Physic, and Fellow of the Royal
Society. In Octavo. Price bound 3 s. Basilia Chymica and Praxis Chymiatricae,
or Royal and Practical Chemistry, in three Treatises; being a Translation or
Oswald Crollius his Royal Chemistry; augmented and enlarged by John Hartman. To
which is added his Treaties of Signatures of Internal things, or a true and
lively Anatomy of the greater and lesser World. As also the Practice of
Chemistry of John Hartman, M. D. augmented and enlarged by his Son, with
considerable Additions; all faithfully Englished by a Lover of Chemistry. in
Folio. Price bound 10 s. Accidence Commenced Grammar, and supplied with
sufficient Rules; or a new and easy Method for the learning the Latin Tongue.
The Author John Milton. In Twelves. Price bound 8 d.
In the Press this 5th. of November, 1669.
The Jesuits Morals, faithfully extracted from their own books which are
Printed by the Permission and Approbation of the Superiors of their Society.
Written in French by a Serbon Doctor, and faithfully Englished in Folio.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART I.
BOOK I.
The Contents.
In which is discoursed, concerning the weakness of Humane Understanding. The
manner of God's speaking to Men in old time, and at present. The Excellencies
of the H. Scripture. How R. Catholics, live in Protestant Countries, and
Protestants in those of R. Catholics. Of turning from one Religion to another.
Of those, who relinquish the Church wherein they were born, and know not for
what reason. The promiscuous admission of Doctors in the University of
Valenza, applied by a Protestant Preacher in discourse with a R. Catholic. Of
some Missionary Priests who receive licentious persons for Converts. What
answers the Priests and Friars of Italy make to their Superiors, when these go
about to punish their Miscarriages. An Example of a certain Florentine who went
to Geneva to change his Religion. Another of a Neapolitane, to the same
purpose. Of those Missionary Priests who buy their Faculty of Mission from some
Courtier at Rome. What remedy is requisite in these matters. Of the Protestant
Ministers who are contented to live in their Pastoral charge, without thrusting
themselves into matters of State. Of Liberty of Conscience, so much talked of
amongst Christians. What Authority the Emperors and Magistrates, had over
Churchmen in the Primitive times. In what particulars the several parties of
Christian Professors lament their miseries in these days. Of the zeal of
Princes toward their Subjects. What Effect the Magistrate's diligence in
visiting the people's Actions produces. Of the neglect of Princes in observing
the ways and proceedings of Churchmen. How the respect given anciently by the
people to Princes and Magistrates, differs from what is given to them at this
day. Of Churchmen who assume authority to pry into the actions of Sovereign
Princes. A Parallel between the Princes and people in reference to the Exercise
of Religion. Of the Policy of Churchmen, how exquisite to preserve their
Grandeur. Some Examples of Preachers as to the matter of Ecclesiastical
Grandeur. Of the disaffection of Ecclesiastics to the Sovereignty of Princes.
Of some Differences wont to arise between R. Catholics, and Protestants, in
the Elections of Preachers. The Example of Moses, appointed a Preacher to
Pharaoh. Of the Vigilance of France in maintaining the Gallicane Rites. Of a
Book printed at Rome in diminution of the Sovereignty of Princes. The Jesuits
questioned by the Parliament of Paris, concerning the Impression of the said
Book. Their Answer to the Parliament. The great Devotion of the Venetians to
the service of God, and the preservation of their Liberties and Privileges. Of
some pretendedly scrupulous, wh^ blame the Venetians for being too jealous of
their Sovereignty. Of the danger wherein all Princes would be, were it not for
the resistance which France and Venice make to the ambition of Churchmen. Of
some discourses concerning the Authority of the Pope. Of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical and Temporal compared together. What effects the Excommunication
of the Venetians by Paul V. produced to the Church. Of the blame those Popes
incurr, who by their Excommunications, forbid Subjects to obey their Natural
Princes. What Obedience both people and Magistrates owe to the Pope. The
Opinion of a Dominican Divine. The heady Opinions of the Roman Divines
concerning the Popes Authority. The subjection of such Princes as are
constrained by the Pope to obey the caprichio of those Divines who write
accommodately to the Pope's humor. How easily the Popes may Excommunicate
Sovereign Princes, and what mischief that easiness produces. How the Popes
deal with Princes who have deserved well of the Church. The chief causes which
moved Paul V. and Urban VIII. to thunder out Excommunications against the
Venetians, the Commonwealth of Lucca, and the Duke of Parma. In what manner the
Pope ought to be honored by Princes and their people. Of the difference
betwixt being of the Church in the days of the Apostles, and now. Of the
effects wrought in the persons of Popes by the H. Ghost. Of the Offenses
arising daily between Popes and Princes, by reason of the misdemeanors of
Churchmen. What great fear Popes of the Primitive Church had of falling into
any Error prejudicial to the public good of Christendom. How little now
adays they regard the Universal Good. Of the great zeal wherewith of old they
exercised their Pastoral charge. What Esteem all people had of Popes in
consideration of their holy Lives. What kind of persons ascend the Papal
Throne in these times. What persecutions they suffer, who either by tongue or
pen, reprove the faults of Popes and Churchmen. Of the praises attributed to
the Popes by some writers. Of the Flatteries which sound well in the Popes
ears. Of those who are looked upon well or ill by the Pope. Of those who write
of the Pope's Impeccability. Some Reasons and Instances proving the Pope
fallible like other men. Some Conclusions and Disputes maintained at Paris by
the Jesuits in defense of the Popes power and Infallibility. The cause why
Popes are deficient in Miracles. The corruption of the Age. Some deserving
persons kept far from the Court. Of the scandals committed by Churchmen in
Rome. Of a Bull of Boniface VIII. Of an Opinion written by John XXII. What was
the judgment of Paul II. concerning the Infallibility of the Pope. Of a Book
written by Pope Adrian VI. The Error Princes commit in suffering public
disputes touching the Popes Infallibility to be held in their Dominions. Of
some disgusts given by Alexander VII. to the most Christian King. A Bull put
forth by the said Alexander against some Decrees of the Parliament of Paris
which rejected the Popes Infallibility. The censure of the Faculty of Sorbonne
of writings which defended the Papal Infallibity. Of Odoardo Farness Duke of
Parma, who of a friend became an Enemy to Urban. What the Author thinks the
Pope conceives of him. The Popes desire that no Pens were in the world, but
those which write in their favor. Of the Rodomontadoes which the Roman
Theologues write in magnification of the Pope. The Opinion of a certain
Theologue, That a Pope cannot be damned though never so wicked. The
Impeccability of the Pope which the Jesuits begin to teach. Of the Opinion of
those who hold the Pope not subject to General Councils. Of the Title of
Eternity which some Flatterers would apply to the person of the Pope. The
Obligation of people to reverence and honor the Popes whilst they are good,
and to blame and avoid them, when they are wicked. Diverse other particulars
touching the Popes Grandeur.

THE dullness of Humane Understanding renders us incapable of comprehending the
mysterious conduct of Divine Providence, whose Counsels and Designs are as to
us involved in a most profound night of impenetrable Obscurity. The Apostle St.
Paul, after a Transport even into the third Heaven, gives this plain Advice to
Inquisitive Spirits, Non plus sapere quam oportet sapere, sed sapere ad
sobrietatem. Which Doctrine, if received by the more speculative sort of
Christians, with the same lowliness of mind wherewith the Apostle writ it,
would undoubtedly free the minds of men bewildred in those perplexities wherein
even the most learned have been inextricably entangled by too nice and curious
Contemplation.

But so deeply rooted in our Nature is the Insatiate Desire of Knowledge, that
we are continually climbing above our own Level, though, besides the trouble of
the Endeadeavour, we run a hazard of falling from the Precipice, and of loosing
the eyes of our minds, by tyring them in a prospect of things Invisible.

Nature has allotted to Birds a light body fit for flying; to Oxen a heavy one
accommodate to the slower motion of progression; the former being designed to
adorn the Region of the Air, and the latter for Labor and Service on the Earth.

Mankind, not content to enjoy the Measure of Understanding given them by
Divine Providence, seek to raise their heavy clods beyond their assigned Sphere
by speculations of things incomprehensible, as if it were free for them to
outdo Nature, and make a new Creation of Spirits.

Many admire, and amidst the confusions of their admiration, ask why God speaks
no more to men since the Incarnation of our Savior, as he did in old time to
the Israelites? But for my part I wonder more, that Men in these times cannot
understand the Language of God as the Israelites did in times past; and this
wonder makes me sometimes pour out very pathetical complaints.

To the Israelites God spoke seldom; few were the words; and many times 'twas
on the tops of very high Mountains, from amidst thick Clouds, and darkness;
sometimes in profound sleeps, clothed with Robes of invisible Air, and
sometimes with a Voice only delivered by some Celestal Messenger. Now this
Seldomness enhanc'd the wonder and Surprise in the Israelites themselves,
whilst they observed how they were favored at times and places by measure and
proportion; and they were not a little proud of these favors.

Those who doubt at present whether it be true that God speaks no more to Men,
have all the reason of the world to change that doubting thought, if they will
but seriously consider that God speaks now, not from Mountains but from
Pulpits, not by Night but by Day, not in Sleep but to men Awake, not in the Air
but in the Church, not seldom but often, not at some definite times but
continually: So that if they hear him not, they are either deaf to the Voice of
God, or else nautiateth the great plenty of Celestial favors.

The Israelites boasted that God writ the Divine Law in Tables of Stone, in
order to the better preservation of the same; and why should not Christians
glory of the H. Charter written by the Apostles and Evangelists, by the
assistance of the H. Ghost, for the propagation of Christianity?

God Almighty writes every day in Characters so legible, that those who cannot
read them, may deservedly be called blind. But, which is worst, those that are
thus blind, are the very same that take up a belief, that in these days God
neither speaks nor writes, as he did in former Ages.

Whosoever would understand the Divine Speakings, and Desires to read the
Characters of Heaven, let him not be at distance with the H. Scripture,
inasmuch as this is the Key of Paradise, and the H. Ghost has left the same to
us, to declare to men what the Language of Heaven is in the New Testament.

The H. Scripture is the Book wherein God spoke to the Israelites, and speaks
still to Christians. And it is so replete with sweet expressions, and wholesome
discourses, that it is not possible to go away hungry from so plentiful a Table,
nor sick from so efficacicious a Medicine.

That wretched Impostor Mahomet, who to blind others made himself blind, forbad
the Translation of the H. Scripture into the Turkish Language under severe
penalties, as doubting lest the Doctrine thereof being so pure and holy as it
is, should purify and sanctify the minds of such as should read it: And the
Roman Church permit it not in any other Language but the Latin, as if the
Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, had written for a few, and not for all
men, for some peculiar persons, and not for the Universal Church.

Where can Christians of all sorts and conditions better spend the most
precious Laws of the day, where refresh themselves in afflictions, where enrich
themselves in poverty, than in reading of the Volume of Divine Laws.

The Political Books of the Heathens, which contain nothing but Secular
Maxims, cannot furnish us with other than Worldly Knowledge; But the H. Volume
which descended from Heaven brings Celestial Instruction with it, whence those
that read the same with great ardor, find consolation in it amidst their
greatest calamities end miseries.

The holy, pure, clean, and simple Doctrines of Christian Religion give solace,
and comfort not only the most ignorant who live by direction, but even the most
learned, who give directions to others; or to express my self better, they
refresh and relieve not only the most learned who teach, but even the most
ignorant who are taught.

The Catholics think to be saved by going to Ma^s, and the Heretics by
hearing Sermons. Some of these to appear good Christians, read the H.
Scripture, sing Psalms, and say Grace at Table; and diverse Catholics make
Confessions to a Priest, go in Pilgrimage, and receive Indulgences; and all
this to avoid being pointed at by others, by which manner of living they
intimate the difference of Religion consists in nothing but in an outward and
(as I may say) constrained appearance.

The Protestants deny not but that there are many in their Communion, who lead
Atheistical Lives, making every thing lawful to themselves, and stretching
liberty of Conscience, to a liberty of Sinning: So likewise the Catholics
confess that many of themselves too, live as if there were neither God nor
Christ, nor Law, nor Faith in the World.

In this matter of Religion I find one Evil of which the Catholics are more to
be blamed than the Protestants themselves, and it is this: When Catholics go
into the Country of Protestants, they not only accommodate themselves to live
with the liberty of the place, but assume a greater liberty of Conscience, and
abstain as well from some Exercises of Religion which are not forbidden, as
from such as are.

In like manner the Protestants in Catholic Countries, not only abstain from
reading the H. Scripture, singing of Psalms, and frequenting Sermons, but
besides making a medley of Omissions, they forbear to pay their Devotions to
Almighty God, both when they go to sleep in the Evening, or rise from bed in
the Morning. It Is true, the Protestants well knowing the extreme rigor of the
Inquisition, find themselves necessitated to dissemble their Religion for
avoiding the anger of men, whereas the Catholics having greater liberty in
Protestant Countries wherein they find no such rigor against themselves, grow
careless of their Religious Observances, insomuch that many times they will ask
for good Capons on Friday or Saturday, although they may have plenty of good
Fish.

If you ask a Catholic why he commits such faults as these, he presently
answers you, Dum fueris Romae, etc. Whilst one is at Rome, one must live as
they do there, out of Rome, as in other places. Nor are the Protestants
unprovided of the same answer when they reside in Catholic Countries, And this
is the miserable case of Religion.

Yet I will not pronounce this Depravation general, because I have known many
Catholics live with great modesty, and exemplary piety, in the Countries of
Protestants, as do also many of these in the Countries of Catholics, insomuch
that many Catholics do very much approve of, and are edifi'd with the manner
of living of the Protestants, and these likewise with theirs; but they are such
Catholics and Protestants as have not studied the abovementioned Axiom of Rome.

This last Easter I saw a certain Catholic, a friend of mine, in a Protestant
Country, and asking him why he went not to Mass which was celebrated not above
a mile off, he answered me, That when he Traveled, he carried no Religion at
all along with him. Which a Protestant, who was present, over-hearing, replied,
You are a gallant man, I take the same course.

But in my judgment, the thing most to be considered concerning this point of
Religion, is the daily transition and change of Christians from the Catholic
to the Protestant Church, and from the Protestant to the Catholic; and this by
persons who oftentimes know not the cause either why they leave the one or
embrace the other; but run like Goats up a precipice, whilst they behold others
fall down from it at the same time: Yea some Christians have left the Religion
wherein they were born, to take up another, in which they know not whether it
will be fit for them to dye or no; inasmuch as they go upon no other account,
but the seeing others go before them. Nor is it an extravagante to compare such
Christians to Brutes, since there is no greater Brute than that man who lives
without the Instructions of Religion, without knowing the Obligations of
Christianity; or the duty of his own Conscience.

The Protestants are so easy to admit those that leave the Catholic Church to
embrace theirs, they receive them so blindly sometimes in some places, that
they do not so much as examine them concerning the Principal Grounds, and the
Essential parts of the Christian Faith. I know not whether they do thus, as
judging it better than to leave the Sheep to wander in the Desert, or else to
populate their Church the more: but it is certain that for the most part they
find themselves deceived, by receiving ravenous Wolves instead of gentle Lambs.
Being at first not a little scandalis'd at such stories, I had the curiosity to
enquire the reason of this slight proceeding, in a matter of so great
importance, from a Protestant Minister, who answered me in the following words,
Sir, We do like them in the College of Valenza in France, who give the Doctoral
Cap even to Asses, sub spe futuri Studii. But it is true being now adays well
aware of this Error, lest they should be mistaken in Wolves, they let go the
Lambs also; or at least they turn and wind them so about with multiplicity of
questions, that they cool their desire of changeing their Fold.

On the other side, the Catholics not only readily receive both Wolves and
Lambs, but moreover they endeavor to draw from the Protestant Flock the most
infected Animals of all, by promising them gifts and presents with a large
hand, in order to compass the more easily the end of their purpose: and because
Wolves commonly run with a more greedy appetite to the prey than Lambs, by this
means they get Wolves and not Sheep, who after they have devoured the prey,
return back to their first Herd more savage than before.

There are some Missionary Priests (for I except those who are full of true
zeal) who admit to the Catholic Religion, any wild-headed, indocible, and
debauched persons, who think of nothing less than of leading a Christian life;
and so likewise some Protestant Ministers (I speak with reverence to the good)
who receive to their Communion such people, as have nothing of Man besides the
shape, being otherwise, as to what concerns the Conscience and Soul, Devils
incarnate.

I could here insert a Story as long as curious on this occasion, and
demonstate by good proofs and examples, the Errors which the Catholics commit
in forcing Protestants to change their Religion; and likewise the failings of
Protestants in receiving amongst them fugitive Catholics. But I have neither
will nor time to rub the soars of the one or the other; only, it would be great
Prudence and Charity in both parties to use greater circumspection, and to have
their eyes a little more open, that Christianity might not be subverted by
Hypocrisy, and the Lambs exposed to the discretion of the Wolves.

In Italy, accounted the soundest part of Christendom, yea in Rome it self, and
the Papal Dominions, Bishops and Superiors of Monastic Orders, have indeed the
title of Masters, but scarce any power to correct any of their refractory
Subjects; for no sooner are reproofs used toward them, but the Scandalous
Priests and Friars, have a common custom to retort insolently these express
threatenings to their Superiors, Per Dio, per Dio, che me ne andero a fare
Heretico; I will turn Heretic. But these Varlets oftentimes find themselves
deceived, for the Heretics sift them so much, and examine them so with
multitude of questions, that they make the Fugitives themselves confess the
cause of their flight; after which confession, they find themselves obliged not
without great shame, to return back with more have than they departed, I say
not from their Religion (because such wretches know not what Religion is) but
from their Country; for proof of which, it will not be amiss to subjoyn here a
short, but very true and fresh instance.

A certain Italian who affirmed himself born of one of the most Eminent
Families of Tuscany, (although his garb spoke him rathera Hedge-bird, having
nothing but the Impudence of a Friar, and the pronuntiation of a Florentine) I
know not out of what Caprichio, took a resolution to relinquish the Catholic
Religion, to no other end, but to go to Geneva, and live there (as he said)
like a very good Heretic.

Being arrived at Geneva, he imparted his purpose to a certain man there, who
might indeed have claimed alliance with him, for he was not inferior to the
most subtle Snap of Siena. After some discourse and questions concerning his
resolution, the Inhabitant of Geneva asked this new-commer, What Art he was
skilled in whereby to get a Subsistence after his Conversion? The honest
Italian answered him boldly, That his intention was to live like an honest man.

The Protestant smiled, as well understanding his meaning; nevertheless he made
as if he understood him not, (as indeed he did not in that manner wherein he
explained himself to him afterward) and therefore he entreated him to declare
himself more openly and in plain words, what he meant by living like an honest
man.

The other with a face more impudent than before, thinking to acquit himself
well, and to oblige, not only the Protestant with whom he talked, but the whole
City, (and perhaps too hoping to receive some present beforehand) answered him
in the following words.

Sir, I resided eighteen years at Venice, in which City I lived always like an
honest man. My peculiar and most frequent employment was to serve my friends,
by killing sometimes one at the request of another, and sometimes cudgelling
such or such a man at the instance of this or the other. My pay was not great;
for commonly I took but ten Crowns for killing a man, and five for giving one
the Bastinado. But this practice of mine being by my envious Enemies signified
to the Council of Ten, order was issued forth for my Imprisonment. Whereupon I
found great difficulty to escape the hands of the Officers, who together with
several of my ill-willers, searched for me in all the places where I used to
practice. But to secure my person from a Persecution so dangerous to my life, I
determined to leave not only Venice and Italy, but likewise the Catholic
Religion, and to embrace Heresy, it being to me a thing indifferent to live a
Catholic or Heretic. Now therefore if you will do me the honor to receive me
into this City, I promise to keep my self always in the estate of a gallant
man, with the same employment: and I shall say further, and engage my word for
it, that I will practice here at far cheaper rates; for whereas at Venice I
used to kill a man for ten Crowns, I will kill a man in this City for five, and
give the Bastinado to any Body for a single Crown. And thus having an
employment of my own, it will be no hard matter for me to maintain my self, and
live like an honest man.

The Protestant amazed hereat, remained a while in a manner out of himself, and
took himself to be rather in a dream than awake: till after some space for
recollection, he fell to consider the Orator with a more heedfull eye, and
observing that his whole outside gave confirmation that he was really such a
Varlet as his discourse had portrayed him, he gently took up the fold of his
Coat, and smelling to it between jest and indignation, he said to him, my good
friend, you smell strong of the Gallows, and I shall tell you further, that if
the Senate receive any intimation of your quality, they will soon create you a
Knight of the Hempen Cord, and not fail to give you a passport to the Gallows,
whether such gallant fellows are wont to be sent by the Justice of this place.

At the hearing of these words of the Protestant, the blood became frozen in
the veins of the Florentine, who liked not such Honors for the Commonwealth of
Geneva: and if at first he thought to make his fortune by discovering his
Profession, he now fell down trembling at the feet of the Protestant, praying
him with tears not to discover him, and telling him that he was resolved to
depart the Town; whereupon the Protestant yielding to his request, he made such
have out of Geneva, that he went not back to the Inn to fetch his Portmantle,
which it is likely the Host keeps to this day, though I believe but little worth.

Another not unlike Example, I will likewise set down with brevity, because
more fresh than the other. It came into the head of a certain Neapolitan to
change his Religion, although he had never lived in Italy with the appearance
of any at all. To which purpose he went to Geneva, where at his arrival,
inquiring for somebody that understood Italian well, his Host conducted him to
the same Protestant mentioned in the abovementioned Story of the Florentine.

After some common Ceremonies, the Protestant asked him concerning his quality,
and what cause had brought him thither. To the first question, the Neapolitan
answered that he was the Son of the Duke della Noce: and indeed his hands
looked as if they had been employed in pilling Wallnuts. And to the second, he
answered that he had left Italy out of an humor, having a fancy to try his
fortune in another Climate, and to live in a traveling way without being
obliged to go to Mass; and in brief he declared that he had good inspirations
to become a Heretic, and was firmly resolved upon it; and therefore desired
counsel and assistance in the matter.

Whilst these two persons were talking together, the Bell chim'd to Church,
whereupon the Protestant took leave in order to go to the Sermon; at which the
Neapolitan amazed, said to him, to the Sermon? Why, do they believe a God in
this City? The Genevese laughed at the ignorance of the man, or rather the
impiety of the Beast, and replied, Did you leave your Country, Sir, to go and
live in some place where God is not acknowledged? If so, for my part I advise
you to recommend your self to the Devil; for there is no other place but Hell
wherein there is not a God and some Religion professed. But in earnest I shall
give you the counsel of a Friend, which is, to lose no time but get out of the
Town as soon as possibly you can: Otherwise, you will be made to understand at
the Gallows what punishment they deserve who speak in the manner as you do. The
poor Neapolitan terrified at this language, was not slow to take his leave, but
presently ran away on foot, lest it might be too much loss of precious time to
fetch his horse; so great was his fear of being discovered and brought under a
trial of dangerous questions.

From hence one may easily gather what reason there is to deplore the
calamitous state of both Religions, or rather the wretchedness of both sorts of
Professors, who live without knowing the true obligations and duties of
Christian Life.

It Is true, the Examples of this nature are more numerous in the Catholic
Church, in regard of the greater multitude of Protestant Fugitives. And I know
a certain Protestant who keeps above half a dozen Letters of a certain
Missionary Father, which contain the agreement made between them, the sum which
the Missionary offered, and that which the Protestant demanded, to leave his
own, Religion, and embrace the Roman Church.

This indeed is the practice of certain ignorant Missionaries, who buy Missions
of some Servant of the Cardinal who is Head of the Congregation de Propaganda
fide, and think by showing a long list of Heretics converted by their means to
obtain of the Roman Court, not only Bishoprics and Masterships, but even
Cardinalships too. But those Missionaries who have wit in their heads, and zeal
in their hearts, go in another road, and do things with more maturity of
judgment.

For remedy of such disorders as these, 'twere fit some persons of authority
had inspection into the promoting of Religion; otherwise, the ordinary
Clergymen, either through ignorance, passion, or humor, spoil all, break a
sunder what ought to be joined together, and join what ought to be separated,
and bring things into confusion and ruin.

The Roman Church having resolved to assume to its self both a Spiritual and a
Temporal Dominion, and to make Cardinals precede Princes, and Priests
Magistrates, has thought fit for the more easy preservation of its Grandeur,
that not only the Cardinals, but the Priests too, should keep up a certain
Majesty and eminent decorum, which intention been so diligently pursued, that
they run even into excess; without which excess,, I believe things would not
proceed so agreeably to their humor.

On the other side the Protestants, that is to say, the Ministers and
Ecclesiastical Pastors, for the better preserving their Religion in its due
decorum, are contented to live with modesty suitable to their Pastoral Charge,
that is, to administer the Sacraments, to Preach, to visit the Sick, to
instruct the people in the power of the H. Scripture, referring Command,
Authority, Temporal Dominion, and even the Protection of Religion to the
secular arm of Magistrates and Princes; and teaching all to know, by proofs
both Holy and Political* the Pre-eminence of the Majesty of Sovereigns above
the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, and the obligation incumbent upon
Ecclesiastics to obey the Temporal Power.

And indeed the Protestant Religion flourishes more, and shines with more
decency in those places where the Magistrates and Secular Governors have their
eyes most open over the people, taking cognizance of their actions, not only so
far as concerns the duty of a Subject toward his Prince; but also in reference
to Spiritual matters; and this not only by the assistance of the Pastors, but
also by their own proper office, which suffers not any to exercise their
Spiritual Function, but by derivative power from the Magistrate; as he that is
chosen by God to preside in the midst of his people, to the end they may not
run headlong without such a stay and guide, into irremediable and dangerous
errors.

The Magistrates and Princes study and endeavor, as much as possibly, to
advance their Sovereignty more and more above the Jurisdiction of Churchmen,
but these, aware of the design which might prejudice their independency, are
not asleep in the mean time, but strive not only to preserve, but likewise to
promote their jurisdiction beyond what they have already, if it be possible:
and they would effect it, did not Princes and Magistrates make use of Policy,
whereby without prejudicing the Church's Interests, they restrain the ambition,
which in these days seems natural to all the Churchmen of the world; to say no
more.

The Ecclesiastics, who take it in disdain when they see Magistrates
intermeddle with their Assemblies, the Elections to Spiritual Charges, and the
Orders of Spiritual Functions, have no reason at all to complain of a thing so
reasonable; because, to speak truth, Churchmen are in these days so far
respected by the people, as the Magistrates cause them to be respected by their
secular power; and the people are so far inflamed with zeal for their own
Religion, as they see the Magistrate zealous for it, and the preservation of
the Common Liberty.

For my part, I firmly believe, there can be no better course to destroy the
Protestant Religion, than to sow discord between the Clergy and the Magistrate,
and to bring it to pass that the Ecclesiastics not contented with the degree
and limits of their proper charge, may rise against the Princes and Governors;
an instance whereof is to be seen in a certain Kingdom, which perhaps bewails
the effects of that Policy even to this day. But the thing were impossible in
these times, inasmuch as the Magistrates well aware of the project, have
provided remedies against it in such sort, that the Churchmen glory in their
Loyalty and Obedience toward them, if for no other reason; yet at least to
avoid the involving of Religion in some Schism, or other, and the bringing of
themselves into a Labyrinth, hard to get out of, without first undergoing the
consequences wont to arrive upon civil broils.

In short, the Roman Religion continues such as it is, (that is, good for the
Churchmen, and bad for the Laity) on this account, that the Ecclesiastics make
use of an absolute and independent authority in Spirituals, and very much
likewise in Temporals: and on the contrary, the Protestant Religion is so far
Protestant, as the Magistrates have the supremacy both in Spirituals and
Temporals.

If Liberty of Conscience, (which is so much talked of amongst the Protestants,
and the principal point of the Reformation) should any wise come to be molested
by the Supreme Authority, upon the Ecclesiastics ambition and invasion of the
same, there would no longer be a Liberty, but a Slavery: for People seeing
themselves commanded by the Ecclesiastics, would think their Consciences
enslaved, and not free; it being proper to Churchmen to proceed with too much
Zeal, or too much Ambition, and to be displeased when they see that they are
not obeyed like Angels, although in their commanding, they remember not that
themselves are but men.

And indeed the Protestants desire to serve God, not according to the Orders
and Precepts of men, but according to the Divine Laws registered in the H.
Scripture, which they daily read in their Assemblies public and private; and
therefore they reverence their Ministers, as men who are contented to preach,
without commanding.

The Protestants doubt, I conceive, lest the Ecclesiastics being addicted to
study and speculation, in case the Supreme Authority should be united in them,
they would reverse the old Model which is Christ's, and impose a new one upon
them of their own, and of a plain Ecclesiastical Ordinance, make a new Divine
Precept: and therefore they* are very well pleased to see the Magistrate use
such great care and diligence for the preservation of that Religion which they
pretend to be of Divine Institution without any additions of humane invention,
although the Catholics accuse them of pinning their Faith upon Luther and
Calvin; which is false; for neither Luther not Calvin instituted any new
Religion.

The Catholic Religion (or rather the Roman, as we call it) in the Primitive
times, when the piety of Pastors was as conspicuous to their Flock, as the Sun,
went almost in the same order, whilst the Emperors managed Ecclesiastical
Elections, and the Magistrates not only preceeded the Churchmen, but besides in
case of deficience, obliged them to their duty, and constrained them to be
diligent in feeding the flock of Christ with Charity; yea they permitted them
not to exercise any public Function, but in the presence of their Deputies,
and oftentimes ordained that businesses of the Church should not be handled in
any other Assemblies but their own Councils, whereunto such Bishops were
called, as were esteemed necessary and fit for regulating sacred matters.

The terror which Tyrannical Emperors spread abroad in the world, so awed the
Ecclesiastics, that lest they should see Christianity extinguished, they
humbled themselves to very Tyrants, judging it better to overcome by humility;
than to break by pride. They humbled themselves to good Emperors likewise,
because they saw them zealous in defense of the Faith, and the propagation of
the name of Christ; and therefore they scrupled not to engage them in the care
and Spiritual Government of the Church, to the end the interest of Christian
Religion might have the more strength and Majesty.

This Correspondence and Union of Secular and Spiritual Power, of Magistrate
and Priest, Prince and Bishop, not only kept the Laity in awe, but obliged them
to a prompt Obedience; the Subject being not a little edifi'd by seeing his
Sovereign interessed in the Government of the Christian Religion.

And indeed how could it be otherwise, but that the Prince's zeal should
produce great ardour and affection in the Breasts of the people? For generally
the Subject bears a certain occult hatred (yet not so occult, but that it is
discernable) against the Majesty whereunto he is subordinate; which hatred is
suppressed either by force of the Sword, or by reciprocal Affection and Love,
which is the less durable when it is not deeply rooted; and therefore it is
expedient for a Prince to know with what kind of love his people is to be
obliged, in order to the extinguishing of that hatred which seems naturally
seated in their breasts.

Now what greater instance of love and benignity can a Prince show to his
Subjects, or a Magistrate to his Citizens, than to declare himself zealous, not
only in preserving of their privileges, abstaining from lading them with
impositions and taxes, dispensing favors liberally, executing justice
impartially, honoring the well-deserving, and punishing the guilty, but also
in watching, that together with external privileges, they may enjoy those of
the Soul inviolate, which are always the dearest to the Commonalty, and
consequently aptest to cause in them good or ill sentiments toward those who
carefully protect them, or supinely betray them.

There is no people in the world so barbarous, but they rejoice more to see
their Religion, which concerns the good of their Souls, zealously and
vigorously maintained, than the privileges of the State which referr only to
the commodity of the Body; and it is certain that a people is more sensible of
injuries done to their Consciences, than of the spoiling of their goods, which
are nothing but corruptible things, whose value depends much upon humane fancy
and avarice.

Those popular Revolutions are easy to be quieted which arise from the
grievances and Taxes laid by Princes upon their Subjects; for when these
impositions are taken away, the arms fall out of the hands of the incensed
multitude. Whereof we have seen sundry Examples in our times, particularly in
the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, and the Duchy of Milan. But when the
Subject draws his Sword against his Prince, or the Citizen against the
Magistrate, upon account of Religion, it is a hard matter, if not impossible, to
appease the tumult; because in this case, his Soul is engaged, and sets his
hands on work: and suppose the Prince should promise to yield to the demands of
the people, they will scarce take his word. And indeed it is a common saying,
That the wounds given to the Conscience in matter of Religion, are hardly to be
cured by the same hand that inflicted them.

I find that two effects are produced by the diligence of a Prince or
Magistrate, in taking good heed to the deportment of Churchmen, and to the
preservation of the Laws and Ordinances of Religion. First it increases the
people's devotion toward the service of God, and kindles more ardour in their
breasts to frequent the Sacraments; and this by virtue of their Superiors
example: so that when Subjects behold their Princes full of zeal, and vigilant
for the good of their souls, they become so inamor'd on them, that in requital,
they would even spend their blood for the service of their Princes: which is
for the advantage of the Prince, as well of the people. And it is certain, that
it is more easy for a Soveragin, who takes care for preserving the Laws and
Religion, to obtain supplies of money from his people, than for another Prince,
who thinks of nothing less, than of Religion.

The second effect is, That the spiritual service of the Church is carried on
with better order, and the number of pious Souls is always more multiplied,
when Churchmen find that Princes keep an eye upon them; and for the fear of
being corrected in case of deviating from their duty, makes them bestirr
themselves to perform their charge with all imaginable zeal and diligence, and
if they be not really religious, yet they become wary of being accounted
scandalous or negligent. Not but that they are of a nature weak and apt to fall
into great miscarriages; but they know that they are under the Magistrates eye,
and feel his goad at their sides, which keeps them both from tripping and
jading.

And to speak truth, if we compare the present obedience and respect that is
paid by Subjects, to their Princes and Magistrates, with the alacrity of former
times, we shall find the present to come much short, and in probability too
unlikely to continue; so as (there being great Armies in some places, and
strong Cittadels and Fortification in others to keep them in subjection) I am
of opinion that that reverence the Princes receive, is not radicated in the
heart of the Subject, but proceeding as it were ab extra, may more properly be
reckoned the policy of the Prince, than the affection or good nature of the
Subject.

For my part, I believe (and have many others of the same faith with me) that
the respect, obedience, honor, and affection, the people of this Age do bear to
their Magistrates, is either forced or miraculous. Forced, because the Princes
understanding their own Power and Supremacy, or (to speak more properly)
knowing the humor of the people very little inclining to obedience, they do
either actually force them by the power of their Arms, or fright and terrify
them into an unwilling allegiance. Miraculous, because Religion having
naturally the strongest influence upon the People, there is nothing moves and
actuates them like that, either into tumult or obedience. So as the Magistrate
interrupting, and even opposing that zeal and fervor of Religion the Layity
ought to enjoy as freely as the Ecclesiastics, no wonder if their obedience be
a Miracle.

A great reason is, that the Ecclesiastics are permitted to pry and peep into
the actions of Princes and Magistrates: To have a finger and intelligence in
the most secret Secular Council, which in reason they ought not to come near;
that the Secular Magistrate may (for the greater benefit of the people) have an
eye over the actions of the Ecclesiastics, and an inspection into all things
transacted in their Consistories and Congregations, which they hold now so
privately, the Civil Magistrate can scarce know whether it be matter of
Religion that is before them, or whether they be contriving, if not the
destruction, at least the subduction of the Temporal Power to the Spiritual.

In some places these Princes do not only neglect the concerns of their own
Consciences, but are much more incurious of regarding, visiting, or giving out
seasonable orders, that the Sacred and Religious offices might be administered
with decency and decorum, and that the Religion professed by the people might
not suffer by the Critticismes or Speculations of any Malancholly Divine. But
the people observing their neglect or aversion to all this, cannot be brought
easily to believe that their Princes are of the Religion they profess
themselves, it being impossible (in their judgments) that they who received
their Authority immediately from Heaven, should be so forgetful in their
returns, and so careless in matters of Devotion.

But that which is most scandalous and blameworthy now is, that the people do
not well understand whether they be to comport themselves with more Veneration
toward their Bishop, or toward their Prince, toward their Ecclesiastical
Governors, or toward their Civil, for the people observing their Princes
driving only at their own Interest, the ostentation of their Court, the
augmentation of their Revenue, and the advancement of their power, and (in
things relating to the benefit and conservation of the Church) too careless and
remiss. And beholding the Bishop on the other side, with his Clergy, reforming
this Statute and that, commanding Processions, renewing of Orders, introducing
of Ceremonies as he pleases, assembling, excommunicating, and in short,
manifesting himself not only a Minister, but a Patron and Defender of Religion,
they are persuaded, that as the Soul is to be considered before the body, so
their Bishop, whose Office it is to respect the profit and salvation of that,
ought in reason to have more Reverence than the Prince that regards only what
belongs to the body.

To speak impartially and without passion: what is it these Princes do in their
Dominions as to matters of Religion? They go to Mass on Sundays, and their
Subjects do as much; They hear Sermons in Lent, and their Subjects do the same;
They receive Indulgencies; They Worship the Altar, They profess themselves sons
of the Church, their Subjects do no otherwise; They are afraid of being
Excommunicated as their Subjects are; They regard not what is done in the
Ecclesiastical Synods or Assemblies, and their Subject; are as indifferent as
they. How therefore can the people respect their Princes, whilst their Princes
behave themselves no otherwise, or how can they have any care of their Princes,
whilst their Princes are so careless of themselves.

If a Prince should seem zealous to his Subjects, and watchful over the safety
of his people, and with his whole power to intend the Government of the Church,
the propagation of Religion, showing his care and solicitude as well in
Ecclesiastical Councels, as in Civil, or at least advising and consulting with
the Bishop in the administration of such things as are necessary for the
Regiment and well Ordering of the Church. It is most certain, that as such a
Bishop as should incite him, and put him forward in so good a design, would
with just reason receive great reverence from the people, so such a Prince
would receive likewise no less honor from them, and be esteemed their Lord in
their Temporals and Spirituals.

The Policy of the Churchmen has in all ages been very considerable, but for
these two or three hundred years last past, it has been very much augmented, to
the prejudice and diminution of the Civil Authority, against which the
Ecclesiastics do principally direct their designs. And there is one thing that
still perplexes the hearts and spirits of the wisest Statesmen, which is, that
four little, ragged, inconsiderable Priests, should by their cunning and
industry advance themselves to that height, to set their naked feet upon the
Crowned heads of Monarchs, whilst the whole force of their Dominions was too
weak to defend their Supremacy, or to preserve them from the arrogance of the
Clergy.

And indeed so industrious have they been in the maintenance of their Grandeur
and Majesty, and making themselves considerable in the World, that they have
introduced several great Dignities into the Church, as Abbats, Bishops,
Archbishops, Patriarchs, and at last Cardinals, which is a degree so high,
that the greatest Princes in Christendom do not only glory in their
correspondence, but express a kind of reverence and awe they have for them
whilst they give them preceedence, and receive them into their Dominions as if
they were Crowned Kings, and not Persons Ministerial and Subservient in the
Church.

Nor indeed is the respect they give them improper or inexcusable, the
Cardinals being not only great and magnificent, and acknowledged of principal
dignity in the Church of Rome, but (which is above all) Electors of the Pope,
who is one of the greatest Monarchs in Christendom.

Yet that which astonishes me most is, that both the Historians and Priests of
the Roman Church are not ashamed, with their pens, as well as tongues, to
inculcate into the people a business so repugnant to the reputation and right
of Supremacy in Princes; a thing I cannot think of without some trouble and
regret, though indeed matters of that nature are fitter to be laughed at than
otherwise.

Baronius, Peter de Prisse the Sorbonist, Gabriel Biel, Azolinus, Caluus,
Cadana, and others, maintain that the Hierarchy and Divinity are of the same
nature. That the Priests are more great than the Angels or Virgin Mary, and
that Kings are obliged to give them preceedence, as the first born of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

In the great Church at Florence, where the Great Duke himself was present, it
is not many years since, I heard a certain wooden footed Friar Preach, Orator
good enough, and of the Order of St. Francis. His Text was, Super Cathedram
Mosis sederunt Scribae and Pharisaei. The Scribes and the Pharisees sat in
Moses Chair. which he applied only to the Sacerdotal Office, and had the day
before invited his Highness thither, to oblige him (perhaps) to believe those
impertinent time-spenders, the Priests, and the Friars, and such other raffle,
to be such as he should persuade him in his Pulpit. The sum of all was, this
excellent Orator insisted much upon the dignity of the Priesthood, amongst the
rest I remember these Expressions only; Tour Princes are not to be named the
same day with your Priests, I cannot but smile at their comparison, one single
Priest is of more value than all the Princes in Europe, though their
Principalities be reckoned into the bargain.

Another Dominican of Placenza Preaching upon the same Text before the same
Duke, reiterated three or four times, That those Princes that had the honor to
wear Crowns upon their heads, ought not to come in competition with the
Priests. They wearing their Miters to show, that as the high Priest (which is
God himself) entitled himself King of Heaven, so the Priests (who are but
inferior Deities) ought to be received by all the world as Kings and Supreme
Lords of the Earth.

In Cenoa, in the presence of the Duke (and by consequence of the whole Senate)
there was a Carmelite with great gravity, and as if he had been actuated by
some Spirit, delivered this Doctrine, That Kings, Princes, and Senators, were
as good as nothing; That the Priest was all in all; That if their Dignity was
much greater than it was, it was to be thrown down at the feet of the Priests,
forasmuch as their Office was but Humane, and the Priests Divine, they were men
and not Gods, but the Priests both Gods and Men.

Not much unlike this was the discourse held by a Franciscan in a Church in
Milan, in the presence of the Marquess Caracena; having made a parallel before
betwixt God and a Priest, he pronounced this very boldly, That God as he was
God, had preceedence of a Priest, but that a Priest as God and Priest too, was
to have preceedence of our Savior, so as those two were to be united before a
Priest could be equaled, But that which in my judgment savored most of
Buffonry and Blasphemy in the whole Sermon, was another Comparison he had
betwixt a King and a Priest in these very terms, That Kings were made up of
Humane flesh, but Priests of the Spirit of God. That Kings were indeed above
other men, but that Priests were Superior to Kings. That Kings did converse
with their Courtiers, but Priests with Angels the Courtiers of Heaven. That
Kings had a Temporal Jurisdiction, but that the Authority of the Priesthood was
Spiritual. And lastly, That Kings could command the Creature 'twas true, but
'twas the Priest that commanded the Creator. That Kings had much trouble and
difficulty to make the people obey them, but that the Priests by virtue of the
words of Consecration, constrained God Almighty himself to descend into their
hands upon the very first signal.

Never in my whole life was my mind under greater disturbance, than at that
time to hear that Beast of a Priest deseminate such Doctrine, and that which
aggravated my indignation was, that I could not resolve with my self whose
indiscretion was greatest, the Franciscan in preaching after that rate, or
Carazens in hearing him. Before this time, I made it my business to magnify
the Valor and Prudence of that person; after this, I could never have that
reverence for him, to see him prostitute his attention to such wicked
discourse, and with patience endure such insufferable insolence, the whole
Sermon being but a drol and derision of Kings and their Ministers, as if he had
designed to mock and jeer the veneration they had for their lawful Prince out
of the breasts of the people.

But this was Venial in respect of what was maintained by another Father, who
deserved the next day to have ascended again, but to the Gallows; and not the
Pulpit; and I am confident my Reader will be of the same mind: God Almighty be
my witness if I add or diminish any thing in my Relation. Being in the City of
Naples, in Lent 1647. it was my fortune to hear a Franciscan Preach in the
Church dedicated to Saint Mary, but with more Volubility than Virtue. True it
is, I was not present at the beginning, I came time enough to understand that
the principal drift of his discourse was to evince the people, that the
Religious (which he restrained to their Preachers and Priests) were obliged to
reprehend the Errors and Enormities of all people, but especially of Kings; and
advancing in this manner with great Oratory, he pronounced the Priests to be as
Gods to all Princes, and to prove it, produced that place of Scripture where
God Almighty commanded Moses to go unto Pharaoh, said this to him, I have made
thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet, etc. From
which words he drew several consequences, and amongst the rest this, That the
Princes of this Age were the Pharaohs of Christendom, and the Priests the Gods
of those Pharaohs, and in the height of his Rapture he cried out two or three
times, Ah Pharaohs, Pharaohs, why will you be disobedient to the Priests that
are your Gods. From such kind of discourses as this, it is that all the Tumults
and Revolutions of the people do proceed, as was too lately manifest in the
Kingdom of Naples. Nay would to God that furious Rebellion had not been hatched
in the Studies of the Priest, where it is to be feared, the ruin of Secular
Monarchy is principally contrived. For my part I could swear without much
scruple, that the Ecclesiastics are the greatest Rebels, because in their
Commotions they pervert the zeal of the people toward God, joining it with
their passion and indignation toward man.

In the presence of Madam Royal in Turin, a certain Priest that is still
living, and therefore I will not name him, in a Sermon he was preaching upon
the Excellence of the Sacerdotal dignity, could not hold from crying out twice
or thrice, Princes, Princes, so many Priests so many Princes. But that which
pleased me most of all was, the conclusion of his Sermon, in which, casting up
his eyes very gratefully to Heaven, he used this Expression, O Lord, I give
thee thanks thou have decreed me to be a Priest and not a Prince, I believe my
Priesthood of more value than all the Principalities in the world, as I am a
Priest, I am a Prince, whereas had I been a Prince, I should have been nothing.

And these are the excellent Harangues the Italian Preachers do frequently make
in the presence of their Sovereigns. From hence it is the Grandeur and
Lordlyness of the Cardinals does spring. From such discourses as these it is,
that the Sacerdotal Monarchy is sprung, which gnaws and devours insensibly the
very bowels of Secular Principalities, whilst the Ecclesiastics advance
themselves daily by preaching up themselves Monarchs, and Gods upon Earth,
whereby they secure what they have got, are adding hourly new dignities to
their Priesthood, and that to such a height, that at this time it may be said
as properly at Rome, as the good Father said at Turin, Princes, Princes, as
many Princes as Cardinals.

God Almighty has been pleased I should be a poor man, not a Prince, so as my
condition is to obey, not to command. Yet had the Divine Providence seen it fit
to have altered my Station, and brought me forth a Prince into the world, I
should not certainly have suffered such liberty of public discourse within my
Dominions; or that Christians by such Gibberish should be brought into a
contempt of their Sovereigns, and enslaved by a blind obedience of the Church.
For my part, I think those kind of delinquencies no less than Treason, and that
though such expressions appear at first sight but trifles, and rhetorical
ornaments, yet it is not to be imagined what influence they have upon the
people, how much they inflame and enamour them with the service of the Church,
and how much they lessen their devotion to their Prince, whilst they persuade
them that their Princes are inferior to themselves. That Race of Incendiaries
is fit for nothing but the fire, or to be banished out of every Kingdom as
unworthy to dispense the Oracles of God; that their Pulpits may be supplied by
sober and learned men, and such as will preach the Word of God, and not the
Policies of Man, the Doctrine Christ has left us in the Gospel, and not such
Insinuations and Inveglements as they make use of in their Pulpits, that
thereby the affection of the people may not be perverted from their Prince, but
that they may be inflamed and excited to a more cheerful Obedience.

Had the Priesthood no designs against the Authority of Princes, their
proceedings would be with more sincerity than they are, and they would give
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. I have known contention in more than
three or four Cities in Italy, betwixt the chief Magistrate and the Bishop, and
the occasion was, that the Bishop pretended to the presentation of the
Preacher, and the Prince would allow none of them to preach without his
License. So as by reason of these controversies, Lent has several times past
without any News from the Preacher. I call it News, because their preaching is
now adays little else but Novelties, or (which is worse) Trifles, or
Sacrilegious Speculations, unworthy to be published in any Christian Church.

Amongst the Protestants also, there are the same differences. The Clergy
pretend to the Election of their Ministers, and that they can do it at their
pleasure, which notwithstanding is not conceded by the Civil Magistrate, who
will not suffer any to preach in his presence, but such as he chooses himself;
so as in a certain City I could name, there have some Cures been void above two
years together, because they could not agree in the Election of their Preacher.
But from whence, I would fain know, does their pretension proceed? If the
Clergy be Subjects, upon what grounds is it they would behave themselves like
Princes? The privilege of Licensing or Electing of Ministers, is in my
judgment absolutely politic, and therefore pertaining to the Civil
Magistrate, and not to the Church, to whom the power of Ordination belongs
indeed, but not the power to Present; and in this case, it is of very great
importance that all Princes and Magistrates be vigilant. For the end of the
Clergy in preferring their Preachers in the Cities, is nothing else, but that
seeing themselves excluded from all secular jurisdiction, they would this way
take their Liberty, and publish what Doctrines they please. It is convenient
therefore that all Sovereigns should consider that the people are at their
dispose, and that such Ministers are to be put over them as are suitable with
the Genius of the people.

Moses could not readily resolve to go and speak unto Pharaoh, till it pleased
God to constrain him by the force of his power, Now therefore go, and I will be
with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say. However in these times, the
Prelates presume to put what Preachers they please upon their Princes, and such
sometimes as are ignorant in the Fundamentals of Christianity, and that fall
upon discourse nautious and unpleasant to the Palats of their Princes.

But of all Nations, France is the happiest, for preserving entirely the
privileges of that Church, it will by no means admit of that Ecclesiastical
Grandeur and Authority, which the Clergy have usurped in other Countries, and
which with great arrogance they do still exercise, as if they were Princes, and
not subordinate at all.

And for conservation of the privileges of the Gallican Church, the King of
France loses no opportunity; in the year 1626. as soon as news arrived at Paris
that there was a Scandalous Book printed at Rome the year before, entitled,
Antonii Sancterelli Jesuitae de Heresi, Schismati, Apostasi^, etc. in which, he
spoke to the disparagement of the Power of Princes, but magnity'd and exalted
the Authority of the Pope. The Parliament was immediately called by his
Majesty's Order, and every period of the book strictly examined, and having
deliberated as was fit in a business of that importance, at last by an Arrest
of the whole Parliament, it was Decreed that these following Articles should be
Sealed, Subscribed, confirmed, and Sworn to by the Jesuits, in the presence of
the whole Court of Parliament, to the no small disgust, and dissatisfaction of
that Order. The Articles were these,

That the King of France holds not his Kingdom from any thing, but from the
bounty of God Almighty, and the power of his Sword.

That the King in his own Dominions had no Superior, but God.

That the Pope cannot upon any occasion whatsoever Interdict or Excommunicate
either the King or his Kingdom, nor in any case dispense with the Allegiance
and Fidelity his Subjects were obliged unto him.

These Articles were received with no small compunction by the Jesuits, whose
design being always to aggrandise the Pontifical Authority, by the diminution
of the Regal, they could not advance the one, but by depression of the other.
The President of the Parliament having demanded of the said Fathers, if they
did approve of that book of Santerelli's, they answered, no they did not, being
asked again, why then their General at Rome had approved it, they made answer,
That those who were at Rome, could do no less than comply with the Court of
Rome. The President, to entrap them perchance, as indeed it fell out, demanded
immediately, If you had been at Rome, what would you have done, to which they
replied, We would have done as they have done that are there; which being heard
by a Grave Person of the long Robe, he spoke out these words aloud, I believe
our Father Jesuits have two Consciences at their Command, one of them for Rome,
and the other for Paris.

Venice is a place as eminent for Devotion in Religion, for Piety and Zeal in
the Service of God and the Church, not only as any Republique in Christendom,
but as Rome or the Pope himself. Yet when any thing is in agitation about the
Popes Authority, or the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, they will by no means
permit the Clergy of their Dominions, to Entrench or Usurp upon their
Supremacy, which they acknowledged only from Heaven, and the Conduct and Valor
of their Ancestors.

In Venice, the Churchmen are Subjects, not Princes, it is the Senate that
Governs all with an effectual and Independent Authority, as well in Spiritual
things as Temporal, insomuch, that the Introduction of any Novelty, is with
great penalty forbidden, as well to the Bishops as Friars, they are not
permitted to exercise any public Function, or to publish any Order
whatsoever, though from Rome its self, without notice given to the Senate, and
their License obtained: and from hence it is, that the Service of God, and the
Majesty of the Church, is carried on with that Order, that they have made
themselves Emulated at Rome, as well as in other States; and all by the
Authority the Senate keeps over the Clergy, looking on them as Subjects, not
Equals, as other Princes do.

And without question, had it not pleased God by opposing the powers of those
two Countries France and Spain against their ambition, and by their means to
put a stop to that torrent that was overflowing all Christendom, the present
Princes of Italy had been either chased out of their Dominions, or forced to
have owed their Liberties to the Liberality of the Popes.

If the Princes of Italy would but yet take their natural Liberties into
consideration, and follow the Examples of France and Venice, it would not be
too late; and doubtless of all Nations, they are most worthy to be imitated,
though the Ecclesiastics are not ashamed to asperse the former with Heresy,
and the other with Atheism. But indeed the Priests and Pontificians, esteem
none other Christians, but such as believe them to be as they would be believed
themselves.

Some there are, who making judgment of things from their outward appearances,
do imagine the Spaniard much more Zealous for the Catholic Religion, than the
French: but they are certainly mistaken, for that zeal the Spaniard pretends to
the Apostolic Chair, and the Service of the Church, is but a Copy of his
Countenance, and rather the formal result of his Policy and Interest, than an
ingenuous effect of his piety and Devotion. The Spaniards have indeed a great
Reverence for the Pope, but none at all for the Church; The French have much
for the Church, but little for the Pope; for which reason, the Popes look upon
the Spaniards as Saints for being on their side, and on the French as Devils
for being on Gods.

And this Influence and Authority of the Popes over the Consciences of the
Spaniard, (besides a natural animosity that is betwixt them) is a great
impediment to their Union in Religion: the Spaniards (as it were in a Bridle)
are managed by the Pope; but the French keep close to their Gallican Church.

Others there are, that think the Conscience of the Venetian of the largest
size, but for what reason? Because in their Dominions, they will not suffer the
Priesthood to Usurp that unlimited and irregular power they exercise with so
much detriment to the Sovereignty of Princes in other States; and indeed what
mieseries, what calamities, do we see daily spring up in Christendom by their
^^ars? what anxieties and perturbation in peoples minds? and yet because the
Venetian distinguishes betwixt Gods Service and the Popes, betwixt the power of
Princes, and the power of the Church, betwixt Spiritual things and Temporal,
they are aspersed with largeness of Conscience. But would to God that Zeal and
Sincerity for Religion that raigns in the hearts of that Senate, reigned also
in the Courts of all other Princes in Christendom, and doubtless their affairs
would have better success.

Some few years since, it was my fortune to Travel upon the Road with two Roman
Abbots, one of them, after several other discourses, happened to fall upon the
Authority of the Pope, and to declare what great power God Almighty had given
him over all people in the world. I (who Traveled on purpose to make
observation of the proceedings of the Ecclesiastics, and of the Jurisdiction
every where, but especially in some principalities of Italy, to the prejudice
of Princes) was very glad of the occasion, as hoping thereby to receive some
matter for my pen. It is the custom of the Italians, to constrain and reserve
themselves as much as possibly, and keep their opinions close from the rest of
the world: but it is my humor on the other side, to speak freely what I think,
and to write all I know, whether it be good or bad; which, though they look
upon as imprudence, I cannot dislike. However, with these Abbots, I thought it
best to conceal my own, and attend an opportunity of discovering their
Judgments. At last, one of the Abbots took occasion very seriously to bewayl
the extravagant liberty, which the French and the Venetian assumed, concluding,
that were it not for the repugnancie of these two States, the Pope would be
absolute Monarch of the whole World; or at least the greatest Prince would fear
the censure of the smallest Priest; whereas by observing how little the French
and the Venetian regard the Authority of the Church, all others, in like
manner, despise the solemnest Excommunication, though from the Pope himself.

Being always delighted to hear other men speak, I made him no answer at all,
thereby in a manner enticing him to proceed in his discourse; but, when he came
to complain heavily of the French and Venetian for suffering Stationers to
Print and Vend books frequently in their Dominions, so much to the prejudice of
the Pontifical Authority, I could not forbear giving him this answer; Dear Sir,
shall it be lawful for the Pope to cause to be printed so many thousand books
at Rome in favor of his own Authority, and in prejudice of the Supremacy and
Majesty of Princes, and shall it be unlawful for Princes to permit the reading
of such books as are written in the defense of their falling Authority, and in
diminution of the Papal? The Abbot replied, with the passion and insolence of a
Priest, That Princes could not in Conscience challenge their Authority, but
from the Pope's blessing and benignity, who, as Christ's Vicar upon Earth, has
power to dispose of all things in this world which are bestowed by Heaven;
whence Princes are styled Sons, and the Pope Father, because as a Father, he
gives them their patrimony. But this, by your leave, is a mistake replied I.
True it is, Princes are Sons of the Church indeed, but not of the Pope: and
they are obliged to defend that Church which is their Mother, but not that Pope
who is their Enemy. The Goods of this world do indeed belong unto the Lord, but
not at all to the Pope, who by pretending to a Universal Dominion, is so far
from being Christ's Vicar, that he goes contrary to the Doctrine of our Savior,
who (besides the command he has left us to render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's) has declared that his Kingdom is not of this world, and how then
could the Pope, who is but his Vicar, confer, or take away, any Kingdoms here.

That which netled the Abbot most, was, my calling the Pope an Enemy to
Princes, to which he answered, And why an Enemy, I pray you? I replied, may not
he too properly be called my Enemy that seeks to rob me of my birthright. When
Christ came down from Heaven for the Redemption of mankind, he acknowledged
with his own most holy Lips, that he came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it. Now that Kings and Princes have been been always acknowledged as
Gods Ministers by the people, there are a thousand places of Scripture that
prove, whereas the Popes can hardly produce one Text to confirm that Authority
they challenge over Princes. And to speak impartially, and without interest,
what reason have the Romanists to withdraw themselves as they do from their
obedience to their Sovereigns? are they more holy than the Apostles, are they
more zealous than St. Peter, or more politic than St. Paul? Yet these who
were the founders of Christianity, (as I may say) and the propagators of our
Faith, paid tribute to Kings, obeyed their Magistrates, never enterpris'd any
thing without leave of the Governors of places whether they went; and in
short, have not only left us their Examples to walk by, but this express
praecept and command, That we give Obedience to all powers, for there is no
power but from God.

The Abbot was touched to the quick, he fixed his eyes upon me, repeated my
words one after another, and gave me so many tokens of his indignation, that I
was very well satisfied he could have wished me in the Inquisition; however I
took no notice, and he thought fit to change the discourse, and I in compliance
with him, took occasion to commend the Country through which we traveled.

By this relation, it is manifest what is the principal thing that the
Churchmen drives at; namely, the ruin of the Authority of Princes, and the
exaltation of the Pope who is their Prince and Supreme.

Nor indeed, can I see with what policy (I had almost said Conscience) Princes
suffer books to be printed and sold in their Territories, which speak with that
liberty, or rather insolence, in behalf of the Majesty and Jurisdiction, not
only of the Pope, but of all Ecclesiastics, against their own Sovereignty, and
such books as these are the great Volume of Sorbou, Bellarmine, Toletus, Diana,
Candidus, Palavicino, and the aforesaid Santerelli, with hundreds of other
Ecclesiastical Writers, whose preferrment depending upon the Church, they are
by their own interest prompted to such expressions, whilst on the other side,
they prohibit books which directly offend not the Church they profess, but only
the Authority of the Pope, and that too in nothing but what respects their
encroachments upon the Civil power.

And in this manner, the Jurisdiction of the Pope and the Ecclesiastics, and
the Majesty and Sovereignty of Princes, stand as it were in a balance, the
Subjects of each party contending with might and main to gain upon the other,
and to make their own side preponderant: the former endeavor daily to lighten
the latter, and 'twere good that the Ministers of Princes would use the like
diligence to diminish the Papal power, lest in time it swallow up both Princes
and Principalities too.

That the Pope should be Reverenced as first Minister in the Church; That he
should be acknowledged Superior to the rest of the Bishops; That he should be
esteemed as Christ's Vicar in Spirituals, and respected as Successor to the
Apostles, I do hold very reasonable; but that he should impugn the Sovereignty
of Princes, justify Rebellion, exempt four pitiful Ecclesiastics from
Obedience to their Sovereigns, and excite others to the same height of
disobedience, is in my judgment intolerable.

St. Peter received the Keys of Ecclesiastical power from the hands of our
Savior, and his office was acknowledged independent in Spiritual affairs: Yet
whilst he had the Government of the Church both at Rome and at Antioch, he was
imprisoned, and several times persecuted by Temporal Princes, and yet he never
threatened any Temporal Minister with his Censures and Excommunications, all
which notwithstanding, the Popes at present do not only make no scruple of
menacing with their Bulls and Arms the lesser Princes that are near them, but
with their Armies and Excommunications, they have the confidence to infest the
greatest Monarchs in Europe, and such as have deserved very well of the Church.

But the most Reverend Casuists of the Church of Rome, will tell me, the Pope
may lawfully, and with a good Conscience, dispense with the Obedience a Subject
owes to his Prince. What, has he Authority to invert the order of Nature? I am
certain, he that fears God, will not say so. When Pope Urban, at the instance
of his Nephews, Excommunicated Odoardo Farnise Duke of Parma, a Prince that had
deserved very well of the Church, he was not content to interdict him the
Sacrament, but he Excommunicated all such as paid him the ordinary obedience
and respect that was due to him as a Duke; decreeing expressly, that he should
be looked upon as an Enemy and not as a Prince; by this means subverting his
Authority, and to the universal scandal of Christendom, making a Prince a
Subject, and his Subjects Princes.

Paul the fifth did no less to the Senate of Venice, by the fulminations of his
Interdict, pronouncing all people Excommunicate that should any ways obey them.

All the Historians, and all the Orators in the world, shall never persuade me
that there can be any thing more barbarous and Tyrannical, than to forbid a
Subjects Obedience to his Prince, to restrain the people from communicating
their interests to their Prince, to prohibit to a Magistrate the protection of
his Subjects, to chase the Judges from the Throne of Justice, to shut up the
doors of Churches, and give Liberty to Vice, to imprison Princes, and put their
Subjects in confusion? Oh God, what greater barbarity and injustice can be
thought of amongst men, than to bring a State to be without Justice, a people
without a Prince, and a Prince without a people.

Nero, Heliogabalus, Tarquin, Caligula, and Dionisius, who were in a manner the
Founders and Contrivers of Tyranny, never arrived at that perfection of
wickedness, as to divide betwixt the Subject and his Prince; and yet this
Cruelty, which was too great to be practiced amidst Barbarism, is familiar now
where Holiness reigns. And perhaps the Divine providence has ordered that
Christians should suffer more now in the time of Christianity, than formerly
under all the Tyranny and Iniquity of Heathenish Ages.

Whence it is, that so many Kingdoms have been lost from the Christian Faith,
so many Nations have revolted from the Papal Obedience, and so many Provinces
have deserted the Roman Church, but from these practices and actions of the
Court of Rome.

The Protestants make no scruple to deny both the Spiritual Authority of the
Pope, and his Temporal too; and for what reason, but because they observe with
what audacity and arrogance, under pretense of his Spiritual power, he Usurps
upon the Temporal, as if Christ had given him Spiritual Dominion for nothing
else but the subversion of the Civil. Though, for my part, I am far enough from
thinking as they do.

It is one thing to obey the Pope as he would be obeyed, that is, as head of
the Church, and it is another thing to obey him as a Minister of Christ's Flock,
as sober people account him. I can allow him to be Christ's Minister, but not
head of the Church; as a Pastor like other Pastors, I can own him, as Superior
to others, I cannot; as one of those that are chosen to guide and direct the
Flock of Christ, I allow him, but as pretending to the principal Government of
all, I reject him.

And in this point it concerns all Christian Princes to be exceeding watchful,
to prevent ill consequences that may follow; for should the Christian Princes
acknowledge him head of the Church, he would infer most logically that his
Excommunications are Lawful; arguing, that if the Princes be Members of the
Church only, and the Pope the Head, the Members are naturally to receive their
Nourishment, Life, Motion, and Orders from the Pope, as Head.

I desire to be informed by the Grave Assertors of that Doctrine, if the Pope
be Head, what place Christ has in the Church? If the Church consists only of
Members and Head, if the Faithful be the one, and the Pope the other, there is
no room at all left for our Savior. In my judgment, it would be more modest
in the Pope to give place, or at least not to usurp, and ravish as it were,
Christ's prerogative out of his hands, but to content himself to be one of the
principal Members of the Church; and certainly, his so doing, would be a great
means to multiply the number of his Flock, many having left him, for no other
reason, than lest they should be forced to give to him that is but Man, the
Adoration that is due only to God.

The greater part of the Roman Divines, especially those that pretend to any
preferment or Prelacy, use but drolling and impertinence in their Arguments in
this matter, and maintain what is contrary to their own judgments, for proof
whereof, I shall by the way insert one Example.

A few months since, it was my fortune to meet a Dominican Friar, of a very
grave Aspect like a Divine, as indeed he was; we fell at first into discourse
of general matters, after which I had an opportunity, as I desired, to question
with him a little about the Essence and Prerogative of the Pope.

The Friar failed not to defend the Papacy with the usual Arguments of Rome,
which are already common throughout the world; denying my propositions, and
railing with all the liberty that might be against the Authority of Princes.
But above all, he insisted that the Pope was unquestionably the lawful and
confessed Vicar of Christ, and Head of the Church: urging often, that without
this belief, there could be no Salvation in the Christian Church. I (who by
Natural Instinct am inclined to take part with the Interest of Princes, as
supported by the most rational Arguments) desired with all reasonable respect
(however he was transported) that he would please to inform me what part Kings
represented in the Church, seeing the Pope was the Head? The Friar was
ingenuous, and told me, that Secular Princes might lawfully pretend to be chief
Members of the Church, provided they submitted themselves to the Pope as Head,
from whence they were to receive their necessary Nourishment, otherwise they
were to be looked upon as Members, ampulated and divided from the Body, and as
such, they might easily be excommunicated, and rejected by the Head.

This the good Father most civilly did assert, to which, I as civilly replied,
that I desired to know, If the Pope were Head, and the Princes Members,
according to his opinion, what place Christ was to have? For if the Pope and
Princes take up all, there will remain nothing for our Savior.

The truth is, his whole discourse appearing but rayllery, I made him this
question in jest. He replied with the greatest Sobriety he was able, that
Christ represented the whole Body of the Church, whilst the Head and the
Members stand in such Union with this Body, that it was impossible to offend
any of the parts, without offending the whole body. When he had thus given me
his judgment, I was obliged necessarily to reply to him thus, Reverend Father,
I grant what you say; but if Christ be the Body of the Church, the Pope the
Head, and Princes the Members, then Princes may with good reason be called
Members of Christ, but not Members of the Pope; because if the Pope be Head, he
is then but a single Member of the Body: and for that reason Princes are not
Members of the Head, which is a part of the Body, but Members of that Body
which nourishes without difference both the Head and the Members. Now if the
Pope who is Head, receive his Being from the Body, which is Christ; so the
Princes who are Members, depend directly upon Christ who is the Body, and not
upon the Pope who is the Head, Christ being the Body, and not the Pope, who
pretends to be Head. And if so, what has the Pope to do to command, or to
dilacerate the Members of this Body, to cut them off with his Excommunications;
or to dis-member them with their Interdicts?

The good Father sticking close to the Pope still, made me a long discourse for
an Answer, alleging reasonless reasons the Story of Nebuchadnezzars Statue,
whose Head was of Gold, the Body of Silver, and the Feet of Clay. He applied
this Vision to the Antitype of the Christian Church, or rather of the Church of
Rome, by declaring that the Trunck or Body of the Statue, represented our
Savior, the Head the Pope, and the Princes the Feet, without allowing any part
to the people.

I was amazed at the Fathers Answer, I began to suspect him a much greater fool
than I thought him at first, for urging so ridiculous a comparison, so that
smiling, rather than in good earnest, I subjoined, I do not wonder so much,
most Reverend Father, that Princes should be the Feet of Clay to that Body of
Silver, but it astonishes me to think that Christ should be that Body of
Silver, and the Pope the Head of Gold, lest because from hence may Arguments
prejudicial to the Deity be drawn, and I fear your Fatherhood may believe, that
as Gold is of greater value than Silver, so the Pope typifi'd by Gold, is more
estimable than our Savior, whom you denote by Silver.

The good Father was somewhat surpised, and continued a while in a pause, as
deliberating whether to deny or grant this inference, during which silence, it
came into my head to ask him, how he would dispose of the people? for seeing
that in the Statue which figured the Church he would have the Pope the Head,
and the Princes the Members, there was nothing left for them at all? He replied
hastily, that the people were Members of the Church also, as well as the
Princes. How, replied I, (though I know that we are all Members of Christ, with
whom there is no respect of persons) is the most vile and abject man in the
world of as great esteem in the Church as the greatest Monarch? The good
Father, as if he had recollected himself, and found out a most profound way of
satisfying the Quaere, returned this answer, That the people were not the
Members of the Church's body figured by Nebuchadnezzars Statue, as he had said
before, but the Guts rather, as he had found upon second thoughts.

This Answer, set three or four Protestants that were in my Company, and had
heard our discourse, into a great laughter, which indeed it deserved, and I my
self having had my share, ^ook my leave, as perceiving him fuller of smoke than
of meat, and indeed I entered into that Dialogue only to pass away the time, and
take off the tediousness of the way.

But I have been too long in this digression; to return therefore where I left,
I must needs assert, that almost all the discourses of all the Roman Divines,
are altogether of the same strein, and delivered almost in the very same words
upon all occasions; for in hopes of a Cardinals Cap, or some other preferment
from the Pope, they all conspire to advance his Prerogative, contrary to the
interest of Temporal Princes, whose cause is so clear, that the whole world
wonders it could ever be brought in question.

To what misery are poor Princes brought, who not only lie at the mercy of the
Pope, chief Sheepherd of Christ's Flock, and his Vicar General upon Earth, but
are enslaved and prostituted to the caprichio and fantastical humor of every
pedantick Theologer, who undertakes to assassinate their rights of Sovereignty.
Nor are the Popes indeed so much to be blamed by Princes as the Theologers, and
themselves; the Theologers, in that they dare infuse such principles of
ambition into the Hearts of Popes, which otherwise, perhaps they had never been
inclined to. And themselves, for admitting without any consideration, such
Books, and such Divines, into their Dominions, as diffuse Doctrines into the
people, utterly destructive to their Sovereignty.

Nor can I imagine how Princes are able to endure so many Bulls, Decrees,
Writs, and Ordinances to be pasted up daily at every corner of their Streets,
and so many books to be printed and published expressly against their Supremacy;
neither can I on the other side conceive, why the Pope should suffer himself to
be flattered by his Divines, to the perpetual disturbance of all the Princes of
Christendom, by the intrenchment their discourses and writings make upon their
Sovereignty.

How deplorable a thing is it, and almost above the patience of a Saint; to see
a Prince, though never so good, never so holy, and never so innocent,
Excommunicated by a Pope perhaps a thousand times more wicked and perverse, who
nevertheless cannot be Excommunicated by any other. That is should be lawful
for the Pope to inhibit the Subjects conversation with his Prince, though never
so worthy, and no body should have power to prohibit Subjects conversing with
the Pope, though never so bad. I remember, being in discourse with a great
Churchman of Spolito about ten years since, he told me, That the Pope had not
only an Arbitrary Power of Excommunicating what Princes he pleased without any
occasion, but that his Authority was so great, that he could fetch a Saint out
of Paradise, if he thought good, and cast him headlong into Hell. I gave him no
answer, but smiled to my self, and wished him in Paradise, and some Pope his
Enemy, who might remove his Quarters for him, and give him the gentle toss to
the Devil.

For these two last Ages especially, there have been Barbarous, Tyrannical,
Cruel, Scandalous, and Lascivious Popes in the Church of God, that flayed and
devoured this Flock, instead of nourishing and preserving them. Yet the people
were constrained, not only to obey and converse with them, but upon their very
knees to adore them. Yet during this time, even such Popes have taken the
liberty to Excommunicate Princes motu proprio, to interdict the people, to
suspend the proceeding of Courts, to forbid Commerce, and in short, to form a
new Scheme of Government, rendering the people without a Prince, and the Prince
without a people; than which, if a greater Calamity can befall any Nation, let
the world judge. In respect therefore of these manner of peoceedings with
Christian Princes, it is obvious that the Subjects in the Dominions of the
Church, have better times of it, and enjoy more privileges, than Temporal
Princes themselves do; for these, though born to command, rather than to obey,
may fall under the displeasure of some capricious Pope, be Excommunicated, and
deprived of the Obedience of their Subjects, as Odoardo Duke of Parma, was for
not condescending to the humor of the Barbarini; whereas the Popes Subjects
know no such matter. Because, though the Pope may dispense with the Obedience
of other Princes Subjects, yet it is not to be imagined he is so foolish as to
Excommunicate himself, and discharge his own Subjects from their Allegiance.

Pope Alexander the sixth, whose memory is scandalous to the Church to this
day, Tyrannis'd over the people at his pleasure, took delight to threaten his
Neighbor Princes, and clapped several great Prelates in prison, and all to
satisfy the impetuosity of his Revenge, and took away the Jewels and Plate
from the Altars to enrich his Bastards, so that those miserable poor Romans
that lived in the time of Nero, and seemed born for nothing, but to see their
own Bowels pulled out by their Governors, were not under half that affliction
that the Church was under in the time of this Pope.

The Cries of the people for the innumerable Extortions and Oppressions that
were committed upon them, and the Tears and Compassionate Groans that were
heard for the Expulsion of Justice and Equity, were enough to have melted and
wrought pity in the very Marble it self. But alas! are there such great
Iniquities committed, and shall no punishment follow? Shall the Pope satisfy
the Exorbitance of his nature in the destruction of the people, and no remedy?
it is too true. Is there no Temporal Prince that will appear, for the Glory of
God, for the Honor of the Church, and for the Interest of the Saints? Fie, say
his Theologers, what against the Head of the Church, Christ's Vicar, and Gods
Vicegerent upon Earth? God forbid; he cannot sin, by virtue of his being Pope
(so they believe) and those actions that to humane appearance seem wicked, are
indeed effects of Sanctity in the person of Alexander the sixth, and such like
Popes.

A Churchman of Note Traveling in Cardinal Chigi's Train into France, had
occasion one day to discourse with certain Protestants of that Kingdom, with
whom himself introduced a dispute about the power and impeccability of the
Pope. The Protestants declined it as much as they could, knowing very well it
could not be done without exasperating the Churchman, but at last being pressed
on all sides, they were obliged to say something against the Churchman's
positions, which were, that the Pope could not be deceived, nor err in any
matter whatsoever, to the public prejudice of Christianity; but being unable
to oppose the numerous examples brought by the Protestants, of Popes that had
erred, he concluded at last, that though the Pope should commit a considerable
error, or be a Tyrant, yet being Superior to all other people of the world,
there was no body had Authority enough to correct him; and therefore, that in
such cases, both Princes and people were to commit that matter to God Almighty,
who had the sole power to chastise him.

An excellent remedy indeed, and of great Comfort to the Afflicted! If things
were to go after this manner, Judges would have no more to do but to pardon the
Malefactors, and allege for their excuse to the people, that God will revenge
all in the other world. Christ himself knew very well the State of the Case,
and yet he advises St. Peter to repent and bewail his offenses, not in the next
world, but in this, not in the presence of Angels, but of Men, in the sight of
the Church Militant, and not in the sight of the Church Triumphant.

What greater injustice can the heart of man imagine, than to see a wicked Pope
Governing the Church ill, the People worse, but the Princes and Magistrates
worst of all, and yet be secure and incapable of Correction, not enduring the
least injury himself, and yet committing all insufferable outrages upon others,
crying up his own wicked actions as Sanctified and good, and decrying other
peoples good actions as unholy?

Whoever will but reflect upon the Excommunication published against the State
of Venice, and the Duke of Parma, and the Commonwealth of Lucca, will without
doubt find them full of nothing but carnal passion.

The Venetians were Excommunicated by Paul the fifth, for zealously preserving
their ancient privileges pertaining to them both by Humane and Divine right,
and ratified by so many Emperors and Popes; but that which is the principal
remark is, that Paul the fifth, who went about to destroy the said privileges,
was a great hater of this Commonwealth, although it had deserved so well of the
Church, so that his actions toward them were not like those of a Father, but
of a particular and professed Enemy.

The Commonwealth of Lucca's case was no better; I may say indeed, it was
worse: for where the Popes find weaker resistance, they laid about them so
impetuously that they resemble Furies; as the poor Luccesses experienced, who
were forced to defend themselves against the Rage which Urban the 8. had
conceived against them, for no other reason, but for taking the courage to
chastise the insolences of some Priests, who under pretense of being exempt
from the Jurisdiction of that Commonwealth, had committed more Villainies than
they had said Masses in their lives.

But all this is nothing in respect of Barbarini's usage of Odoardo Farnise
Duke of Parma, whom he Excommunicated, Interdicted, Declared an Apostate from
the Church, and Deprived of his Duchy, and for what reason? Marry, because the
Duke did not as he past from Capraruola to Rome to see the Pope, give a visit
to Donna Anna Barbarina, Wife of Don Tadco his Nephew (who had a great ambition
to see him at her house) which his Highness for some reasons did not judge
convenient at that time. And this was the true occasion which the Barbarini
took to persecute the Duke, and still to this day they swear they will be
revenged of him. This was the original of the Ecclesiastical Excommunications,
and this is the manner of the Popes proceedings with Princes; let the world
judge whether they can deal worse with their Slaves.

It were indeed to be wished, that Princes would always seek occasions to
testify to the world the great respect they bear to the visible Head of the
Catholics Church; were it not that experiences teaches them, that the Popes
exaltation to St. Peter's Chair, or rather the transfiguration of a Man into a
Pope, does not extinguish all humane passions, nor quench that fire of ambition
and revenge, which is wont to consume even Holiness it self, much more in those
persons that borrow only the title of Holiness, most of whose actions are very
contrary to that quality.

Upon very good grounds therefore, and for good reasons of State, are the
Princes obliged to distinguish betwixt the effects of the Popes power, and
those of his passion, and not confound and mingle as the Popes would fain have
them, Divine things with Humane, Spiritual with Temporal, the Church with the
World, the Gown with the Sword, and Priests with Princes.

I could wish that the Princes would receive these Orders, Bulls, and Decrees
of the Pope, which respect the Edification of the Church, and the Salvation of
the people, with all Reverence and Submission, but not that they prostitute and
debase themselves to the pleasure and humors of the Pope in matters conducting
to their honor, and to the conservation of their Temporal Majesty, which the
Popes with all diligence endeavor to destroy.

As the Popes are St. Peter's Successors (though like nothing less than St.
Peter) and as they are Shepherds of the Flock of Christ, (though they have
nothing of Shepherds but the Sheers to clip) and as they are endued with a
great Dignity and Character, it is fit they should be honored by Princes. But
I would not have them forget that the Election of a Pope is made by the
Cardinals, who are but men, and swayed too by a thousand worldly interests and
designs; there being scarce a person, not only in Italy, but in the whole
world, that is ignorant of the intrigues and canvasings in the Conclave; so
that that Sentence of the Apostle St. Paul is fit to be remembered, as in a
manner expressly intended for instruction of Princes, Omnis Pontifex ex
hominibus assumptus, circumdatus est infirmitate.

I think it fit that Princes should own and acknowledge the good actions of the
Popes before the people, but it is fit too that they take notice of their wicked
actions, which the people perhaps imagine to be good; according to St. Leo's
judgment, That it is not enough to oblige the Faithful to respect the Pope as
lawful Successor of St. Peter, but the Successor of St. Peter should endeavor
to imitate the good works of St. Peter, as his works of justice and piety, to
the end they may be really styled his true and lawful Successors: Manet Petri
privilegium quoties ex ejus aequitate fertur judicium.

I would know whether any Court of Justice in Christendom, or elsewhere, would
declare a man Heir, without obliging him to perform the duties, and discharge
the debts of the Inheritance. Certainly I think not; because Justice requires
always that the Heir be charged with the debts upon the Estate, otherwise he
is to be excluded, and the Inheritance divided amongst the Creditors.

But this Law seems to be repealed at Rome; the Pope can be contented with St.
Peter's Inheritance, but he is unwilling to be declared Heir to those duties and
obligations which the said St. Peter has left upon him to the Church: he can be
content to be owned his Successor, but it is in what only relates to the
Authority, Majesty, and Jurisdiction of the Church, and to the power of opening
and shutting the Gates of Paradise which St. Peter had; but with this
difference, that the Apostle refused to admit those that offered money for the
power of working Miracles, whereas the Pope does nothing without ready money.

In short, the Popes boast themselves Heirs of what is profitable and
beneficial, but as to debts, obligations, and incumbent charges, they speak not
a word, these things are not comprehended in the Inheritance: Do the Popes pay
Tribute to Temporal Princes as St. Peter did? Not a penny; they received not
the Inheritance forsooth, upon such terms. Do they pay that respect to Princes
which St. Peter did? No, they are not his Heirs in this point. Do they comport
themselves with St. Peter's zeal and humility? No. Do they leave the Government
of the people in Temporals to their Princes as St. Peter did? No, by no means;
these are too great burdens and encumbrances for Popes, who would rather
renounce the whole Sacred inheritance, than charge themselves with any such
obligations. It Is sufficient for them, that they are called Christ's Vicars, and
that they hold the Keys fast in their hand, which they say our Savior gave to
St. Peter, with power to dispose of them at his death as he pleased.

Many times have I been ruminating of the great difference betwixt the
primitive and the present Church. Nowadayes there is nothing but Threats,
Sword, War, Extortion, Theft, Luxury, Blasphemy, Scandal, Malice, and Enmities.
On the contrary, in the primitive times, nothing was seen but Martyrs and
Saints, whose blood, shed in defense of their Faith, made Rivulets in the
Streets; no discourse was heard then, but of Miracles, of the Cross, and of
Edification; nothing was regarded, but good examples, nothing thought of, but
fasting and praying, and holiness of life.

In those days, great reverence was given to the Sacerdotal Function, because
their Priests were pious, and of very good lives. In these days, it is
undervalued and despised, because the Priests are Devils (I speak with
exception of the good.) In those days, when they saw the Cross of Christ waved
gently over their heads by the hand of the Pope, they prostrated themselves
reverently in his presence; but now they are forced to kneel, because they see
a menacing Sword in the Popes hands. It was then the care of Christ's Vicars, to
win the Secular Princes, and work themselves into their affections by their
good Deeds; now their design is nothing, but to be feared by Princes for their
threats. Then they affected and endeavored peace and friendship amongst
Christian Princes; but now they are grown Martial, and think of nothing but
War. Then they were so devoted to the Service of the Altar, that they took no
care of their kindred, whom they kept at distance from the Vatican; but now are
so wholly addicted to the advancement of their families, that they never think
of the Altar. Then they were meek and humble; now proud and imperious. It was
their glory then to administer the Sacrament with their own hands; now they
will scarce vouchsafe to have it taken in their presence. Then they had golden
Consciences and wooden Walls; but now they have wooden Consciences and golden
Walls. Lastly, Then their Arithmetic was employed in reckoning up the Miracles
and good Actions of the Saints; and now it is of no other use, but to count out
their Money to their Kindred.

A difference so great and deplorable, it is enough to force tears from the eyes
of all the faithful that consider it.

But why do not the Popes at this day work Miracles? Why do not they practice
that holy and severe way of living which they did formerly? or why have they
laid aside those rules that conduce so much to the edification of the Church?
It will be answered perhaps, that in those days, Miracles were necessary for
the establishment of the Church, but that being now established, there needs
nothing but Faith for its conservation; but this is mere equivocation, and a
gilding of Pills to disguise their bitterness. If in the Infancy of the Church
there was need of Holy men to establish it, there is as great need now of
Miracles to reform it; and this opinion of mine, is founded upon the opinion of
certain of the H. Fathers, who assert the Conversion of one Sinner, to be a
greater Miracle than the Creation of the whole World, because there is more
difficulty in the Conversion of an old Sinner, than in the Creation of a new
Man.

And from whence is it that this vast difference proceeds? I know not, unless
that the Popes minds are so taken up in the enjoyment of their unmeasurable
wealth, they have no leisure to look over the sufferings of their Predecessors,
or to consider the benefit those holy men brought to Christianity by their
Mortifications, and the injury themselves bring to it, by their Luxury and
excess.

Can it possibly be believed, that the Holy Spirit should not have that
influence in the creation and guiding of the Modern Popes, as it had formerly
upon the Ancient? But Experience tells us, that the nature of Popes being now
changed, they are contented to dye Martyrs of their own passions, rather than
to live triumphantly with Christ; so frequently are interests of this world
preferred by them, before those of Heaven and the Church.

Some there are, who believe that Miracles are not ceased, but the Modern Popes
thinking that which was the glory of their Predecessors, their shame, will not
trouble themselves to perform them. Others are of opinion, that our Savior has
taken away that power from them, lest they should fall into the temptation of
Lucifer and Adam, and the addition of Sanctity of life to the title of Gods
Vicegerent, should induce the people to pay them the adoration of a Deity. And
others believe, that the Popes cannot do Miracles, because their Nephews hinder
them.

I am of opinion contrary to all these, that the same Spirit that governed and
directed Popes heretofore, still guides, and will guide them to the end of the
world. I am persuaded they are no sooner in the Vatican, but they are pricked
forward, and instimulated to good deeds by the Divine Spirit, their hearts
cleansed from bad thoughts, and impregnated with an affection to the Church of
Christ.

In short, I hold it as an Article of my Faith, that the Popes are not the
primary Authors of those Scandals and Controversies that fall out daily betwixt
the Temporal Princes, and the Popes who are holy men, nor yet of any of the
Calamities of the Church; but rather those Churchmen who are Devils; it being
most true, that the Popes sin so far as the good Ecclesiastics make them sin,
by putting thoughts into their heads which otherwise had never come there.

But who are those audacious Ecclesiastics that dare to put ill thoughts into
the heart of his Holiness? What Devil possesses them with such wicked designs?
What Malignant Star is it that guides them? what Land that bears, what Heaven
that nourishes them; Let them be known, let them be discovered, that the eyes
of the Faithful be blinded no longer.

And yet indeed in some respects they are to be excused; it is contrary to their
intention if they do any hurt; they sin by striving to do too well; it is their
great zeal to the Church and the Pope, that makes them ill servants to both:
They are like the Ape that hugs and embraces what it loves, so hard, that it
many times kills with its kindness; and I am afraid one day they will bring an
old house over their heads. But you will ask who these are? The Divines. What
Divines? Those Divines, who being Partisans of the Court of Rome, employ a
thousand Artifices for the depression of Secular Authority, and elevation of
the Papal. Whence in hopes of a Cardinals Cap, will with great impudence
maintain that the Pope is not only infallible, but also impeccable. This is the
Source of all the mischief and Heresy in the Church; hence proceeds the sorrow
of Christians, the failing of Miracles, and the Scandal of the Sea of Rome.

In the Primitive days, when there were no such Doctors, but such whose
business was to correct, not to flatter the Governors of the Church in their
iniquities, holiness flourished, miracles were frequent, zeal and sincerity was
always in the Hearts, mortification in the Countenances, and edification in
the Mouths of the Saints. Piety was showered as it were from Heaven, and
perfumed the Altars in the Churches, whilst the Priests by their good lives,
won over the people to Devotion.

Those Popes that were inwardly holy, forbore not to confess themselves Sinners
publicly, and because those Divines that writ then as with pens from Heaven,
did not ascribe to them that outward appellation holiness, they endeavored to
attain inward holiness by Mortifications and Sackcloth, and all imaginable
subduing themselves, lest (as the Apostle admonishes his followers) preaching
to others, they themselves should become cast away.

Those Primitive Popes were in such fear of erring, that they undertook not any
business of importance, but after long fasting, and severe penance; they
willingly followed the advice of the most pious Prelates, and submitted with
humility to the judgments of such as had more zeal in their hearts, than honey
in their tongues. They gave ear always with so great attention of mind, that
bystanders conceived them rapp'd into an exstasie, but not to such as
flattered them with panegiricks, or tickled them with stories of the peoples
applause; not to such as cried up the grandeur of their charge, the holiness of
their lives, and happiness of the people, in being under such holy Pastors; not
to such as strein'd their wits for far-fetched adulations to tickle their ears,
loosing themselves some times in magnifications of their virtues, as false as
tedious.

Such as these, were not suffered in Rome, were not received into the Vatican,
were not admitted into the presence of the Pope, but were chased from the
Court, banished from the Church, suspended from the Ministry, and deprived of
their Priesthood; and why? Because the Popes in those days being holy as
David, would not hearken to any of their Doctors, but such as were like the
Prophet, who dared to rebuke iniquity even in David himself.

They would sit whole days together in the Chair of St. Peter hearing such
Divines, Ambassadors, and Ministers, as with tears in their eyes recounted the
miseries of the people, the afflictions of the Faithful, the necessities of
the Church, the ill administration of Officers, the irreverence of Priests, the
scandals of Prelates, and the little care which Churchmen took of the Service of
God.

Oh! What effect did these complaints work in the hearts of the Popes in those
times? With what have would they apply themselves to the finding a remedy? How
they would embrace those that gave them such informations, and with what ardour
and zeal would they implore the Divine assistance?

How blessed a sight was it to see Criminals reverently fall upon their knees
in the presence of those Popes that reprehended them? And what heart could be
so stony as not to melt at their pious and humble admonitions? They did not
threaten, but embrace Offenders; and if they threatened, their threats awakened
repentance, as being affectionate and void of worldly design. When those Popes
admonished Sinners, they did it not to revile them with reproachful and
injurious language; but acknowledging that themselves also had their frailties,
and were subject to errors as other men, said, We are all Sinners, not, you are
all Sinners. Our flesh is liable to Sin, we are not Angels but Men: with which
meek and humble expressions, they wrought themselves first into the hearts of
Sinners, and afterward applied all fitting remedies to their condition.

Such was the holy Church in the Primitive times, such were the Popes; whose
piety was a great cause of miracles being so frequent, and of the universal
holiness of that age. But now let us see the difference of times, and the
reasons why no Popes do miracles now adays, nor holy men shine any longer in
the Church.

God forgive those Divines that have been the chief occasion of that loss to
the Church. Before the Divines turned Parasites, the Popes were holy, but they
became Devils after the Court of Rome was once filled with those Virmin, who
are become the very Plague of all Christendom.

Let us ask those Courtiers, that from Sun rising, to Sun setting, walk up and
down in the public Chambers of the Pontifical Palace, expecting, when by the
favor of the Nephews, a Cardinals Cap should fall upon some of their always
uncovered heads. They can tell us, if they please, and give us a list of what
persons are admitted now adays into Ecclesiastical charges, and who have the
most familiar and frequent access to the Pope's presence: which if they would
do, I am confident the Faithful would be no longer at a loss in seeking the
cause of the cessation of miracles, provided those persons would be exact in
relating the truth.

Miracles! From whence should they come, if Sanctity be banished from Rome, and
the Popes follow not those excellent examples that were left them by their
Predecessors? In the Vatican, there is now nobody to be seen, but people
crowding in with their offerings, and full of hopes of obtaining those
dignities by their money, which they could never have expected from their
merits, whilst out of the City Gates are to be seen melancholy and afflicted
troops of the best deserving persons unprovided for, the places which they had
merited, being given to the unworthy Simoniacks.

Miracles! And how should that be, if they who rebuke the iniquities of the
scandalous are persecuted to the death, if it be not permitted to any body to
put his hand to the Plough, and discover the calamities of the people: if the
most able Preacher be not allowed to reprehend Sin either in the Pope or his
Nephews, if iniquity that runs like a Torrent through the Streets of Rome, and
the Chambers of the Vatican, must be winked at, and past by, if the wicked must
be adored, and the holy man despised, if those must be clapped in Prison, that
were worthier to be Judges, if the ignorant be advanced, and the learned be
banished, if the Thefts of the Priests be more numerous than their Masses, and
if there be no distinction betwixt good and evil.

Miracles! How, whilst they who come to complain of the hourly oppressions of
the Popes Ministers, cannot be admitted into the Gate of the Vatican; if the
Cardinals Horses be fed with more care than the poor of Jesus Christ; if the
walls of Churches be left naked to adorn the Palaces of the Nephews; if the
Inheritances left by Religious persons for pious uses, be employed to buy
Principalities to satisfy the pomp and pride of the Popes kindred; If the
Clergy spend more time at Plays and Brothel-houses, than they do at Church, or
at Prayers.

But how would he that should dare to give these informations to the Pope, be
welcomed in Rome, with Kindness and Love? It Is madness to imagine it. Chains,
Manicles, Prisons, and Fagots, would be the recompense of his Zeal, and his
entertainment sooner with the Hangman, than with the Pope.

In Rome, in the Vatican, those Divines are well looked upon that write great
Volumes in defense of the infallibility and impeccability of the Pope; that
Canonize the actions of his Nephews; that cry up the Glory of his Family to the
Skies, pronouncing him one of the greatest Monarchs in the World; that
insinuate into his ear the satisfaction of the people with his Government, and
what necessity they had of such a Pastor; that make comparisons in their
writings, and parallels between God and the Pope; with a thousand other
extravagant flatteries, enough to ^urn the stomach of all Religious Men.

Oh how sweet are these notes in the Ears of the Popes! How harmoniously do
they Echo within the walls of the Vatican! In this manner are things now
carried at Rome; he that doubts it, had best go see, for my part I am satisfied
with what I have seen already. I am no flatterer of that Court, and therefore
not like to be so welcome, as to take a new Journey. However, I may perhaps do
better service to the Church, by blaming and pointing out the Corruptions of
its Ministers, than the false Priests do with all their Adulation and Oratory.

But whether do my thoughts wander? He who makes the Pope equal with God, may
be a favorite of Pope; but he that compares a Prince to the Pope, shall be
laid by the heels. He which maintains the dignity of a Prince to be inferior
and subordinate to a Popes, may be rewarded; but he that says Princes are
independent, is sure to be persecuted. He that asserts the Decrees of a Council
to be of more Authority than the Pope's, may be Excommunicated for his pains;
but he that affirms all Councels subject to the Pope, shall receive his
Benediction: he that affirms the Popes power to be Monarchical, and depending
of God alone, may be a favorite; but he that pronounces him inferior to the
Church, shall be sure to be hated: he that holds the Pope to be infallible,
shall have a Bishopric, whilst he that holds the other side, is sent a Slave
to the Galleys: he that preaches up the Popes power of Excommunicating and
deposing of Kings, shall be sure to be protected from receiving punishment from
his Prince; but he that says that Doctrine is false, shall be hanged in spite
of the intercession of Kings.

Thus you behold the present State of Rome, the Corruptions of this Age, the
Iniquities in the Church, and the pernicious degeneracy of the Popes. Those
very Divines that think to make the Popes holy by declaring them infallible,
render them guilty even to their own Consciences, whilst the innocent Popes
trusting to the flatteries and adulations of these Divines, walk on careless
and inconsiderate of what they do, mistaking even evil for good.

Pope Sextus the fifth, caused the Bible to be printed, and by a very severe
Bull, required not only that it should be read, but that it should be used in
perpetuum. In a few years after, Clement the seventh succeeds him, and with
another Bull as rigid as the former, suppressed Sextus's Edition, and commanded
all the Copyes that could be found, to be burnt in the Inquisition.

John the two and twentieth, with his own hands writ and published, That the
Souls of the Saints enjoyed not the Beatifical Vision till after the day of
Judgment. This opinion being contrary to the formulary of the Church, and his
Holiness being advised of his error, he disclaimed it himself, and published a
Bull (which is at this day to be seen in the 15th. Tome of the Ecclesiastical
Annals) against the erroniousness of that Opinion.

Boniface the eight, in that wild and extravagant Bull, which begins, Vnam
Sanctam, pronounced it as one of the principal Articles of Faith, that Kings in
Temporals, as well as Spirituals, are absolutely dependant upon the Pope. But
his Successor* Clement the fifth, finding the ill effects it had upon the
people, revoked that Bull some few years after, as pernicious, and published
another in favor of the Sovereignty of Princes.

And now let that Reverend Father Diana tell me, (that Diana, who in hope to
have been Worshipped like an Idol, has made himself ridiculous by his works, I
mean that great Diana that was Examiner of the Bishops, and took more pains
than all of them to defend the impeccability of the Pope) let him tell me,
whereas he writes the Pope cannot err; these Popes Sextus Quintus, or Clement
the seventh, Boniface the eighth, or Clement the fifth, did err; it cannot be
denied but one of them did err, and i^ that be clear, why must the people be
deluded any longer with so false an opinion? but that which is of most
importance is, that they deceive the Popes themselves whom they cry up for
Infallible: and of this Innocent the tenth in an instance; who when the people
complained to him of the Oppression and ill Government of his Ministers,
replied, That his Officers must of necessity be just, because he that was
infallible, ^ad chosen them; whereupon the oppressed people returned home,
cursing that opinion, and those Divines that had persuaded them to it.

Paul the fourth was not of that Judgment, for being supplicated by a person
of great quality, in the year 1557. to dissolve a Contract that had been made
by words de presenti, he refused it absolutely, and declared, That his
Predecessors had many times deceived themselves in matters of that Nature, but
for his part he would not continue in an Error with the rest.

Adrian the sixth, before he was Pope, writ in his fourth Book of Sentences,
That the Pope may err even in matters of Faith, by asserting of Heresy either
by his particular determination, or by a Decretal, there being really several
Heretics ^o be found in the Catalogue of Popes. His words are these, Certum
est quod Romanus Pontefex possit errare etiam in his quae longunt fidem,
Haeresim per suam determinationem aut decretale asserendo, plures enim fuere
Romani Pontifices Haeretici.

After he was Pope, he ordered his book to be reprinted in the Vatican
printing house, at the charge of the Church, without expunging the least word
of what he had writ before. And being importuned by the Cardinals, at least to
correct that passage, as being scandalous to the Pontifical Dignity, he
replied, That it had been always his opinion in the times of other Popes, and
he would not be contrary to himself.

When Opinions are directly contrary to one another, it is impossible but one of
the parties that maintain them must be mistaken; and of the Roman Popes, there
have been many that have acknowledged themselves subject to err, and inferior
to Counsels, and that for twelve entire Ages together. On the contrary, in
these last Ages, especially for these last fifty years, they admit not any such
thing, but (which is still more absurd) they maintain the whole body of the
Church to be inferior to the Pope, and not the Pope to the Church.

Which of these Opinions is the wrong, I leave to the Judicious to determine.
Whether they were deceived whose ashes the people do worship at this day for
their Piety and Devotion, celebrating their memories with Divine Offices, or
the other that were scarce dead before they were condemned by all the World, I
leave the very Romanists to judge.

And indeed these abuses are so great, and so frequent, that if the Temporal
Princes do not look to themselves, God knows what will follow, considering the
temper of the Court of Rome. The Popes never punishing any body, but to
advantage themselves, most of the Writers to comply with his humor, and
multiply their Estates, heap privilege upon privilege, title upon title, and
authority upon authority. There are notwithstanding many sober and solid
Divines amongst them, of good principles, and such as abominate this kind of
flattery, but they dare not speak their Opinions openly, knowing how
vindicative the Court of Rome is. And I believe, did not Secular Princes
protect these kind of Divines, as the Pope does the other, it would go very ill
with the dignity of Princes in a short time.

I do not wonder that the Roman Divines maintain the Popes infallibility at
Rome, but I am astonished that they should be allowed to do it in the Dominions
of other Princes, and that to their no small detriment, since to permit such
books, is in a manner to confirm them; and to confirm the Popes infallibility,
is to weaken and diminish the Authority of Princes. From whence it will follow,
that they must patiently sit down with what injuries any capricious Popes shall
please to lay upon them, it being irrational to complain of one they have owned
to be infallible.

About two years since, some certain Jesuits disobliged by some check which
they had received in Paris about Santarelli's Book, fell publicly to
maintain, before the Kings face, the question of the infallibility and
impeccability of the Pope.

The Gallican Divines thought themselves concerned for the honor of the Crown,
and conservation of the ancient privileges of their Church, to answer them with
a most just and well grounded censure, wherewith they rigorously condemned the
Doctrine of the Jesuits, as too remote from the general Opinion, and of great
prejudice to the Sovereignty of Princes.

Pope Alexander the seventh, having notice of what past, testified to the most
Christian King his dislike of this proceeding. The King recommending the
examination of the matter to the wisdom of the Parliament of Paris, they upon
mature deliberation, concluded that the Popes infallibility was not to be
admitted in France, as being an innovation and inconsistent with the ancient
privilege of that Church; and therefore they saw no reason to admit a new
opinion known only to such as depended on the Court of Rome, and reject that
which was of greater antiquity, and had been owned by so many Religious Popes,
which determination so netled his Holiness, that he fell immediately to his
Bulls, and with great threatening and curses, forbad the printing or reading of
the above said Censures.

Amongst other Expressions in his Bull, there were these, Praefatas censuras
uti praesumptuo sas, temerarias, at que scandalasas. It is very well known,
that those censures were made by the Sorbonists, by the Kings principal
Divines, by the Parliament it self, which is as much as to say, by the King
himself. Notwithstanding the Pope does not spare any revilings, but throws
forth peals of invectives indiscriminately, as if nothing were injurious from a
Pope; and this is the respect they bear to such Princes as the most Christian
King, and to such a State as France.

But if the Popes will persist in cursing and reviling of those that take part
with Princes, let them not take it ill, if the Princes take such into their
protection, as publish the Popes injustice, and the rights of Princes.

Let the Princes lay aside all scruples, when the Interest of their States is
in question. The Pope is but a man, and as such may err: let them respect,
honor, and reverence him, as he does them; and let them stand always upon their
guards, especially whilst he is in amity with them, for it is the ordinary
practice of the Divines, in such times of tranquillity to disseminate their
Doctrines of Papal infallibility and impeccability, whereof they reap the
profit in time of difference: so that in all policy they are obliged to have a
care of the dangerous insinuations of the Roman Ecclesiastics.

Odoardo Farnese Duke of Parma, whilst Urban the eight was his friend,
condescended to all his Holiness desired; he gave liberty for the public
preaching up of his infallibility; he gave no refuge or shelter to such as writ
against him; he ordered their books to be burnt, or at least prohibited such as
spoke ill of Rome, in short he advanced the Popes Interest, by the diminution
of his own; but when afterward they were at variance, he found his error, and
he had much ado to disintangle himself from those troubles which he had created
to himself.

I am very well satisfied that the Court of Rome had much rather see me a
Martyr than a Prophet; otherwise I could presage many things that will fall out
unfortunately to the quiet of the Church, if no stop be given to that torrent
of false Doctrine, that overflows not only the brains, but the pens of the
Roman Divines.

The Popes indeed do labor to give a remedy to these things, but how? by
persecuting and perplexing of such, as by their writings would remedy them:
nevertheless that remedy they apply (which is neither Christian nor politic)
instead of doing good, causes great hurt both to themselves, and to the Church;
for the pens of the Censurists, are like the head of Hercules his Hidra; cut
one off, and there will succeed seven in its place, and those much worse than
the former.

To take away this unhappy effect, the best way would be to remove the cause;
The Theologist should be forbidden to write such Rodomontads, and not the
Censurists to Censure. It were strange if things should by this course succeed
as they desire and design! The Popes would suffer no body in Rome to write, but
only such as write of their Holiness, their Majesty, their Authority, their
Infallibility, and their Impeccability. Those on the other side, that write in
defense of the Jurisdiction and Supremacy of Princes, must be banished,
persecuted, and exterminated; but it is to small purpose in my judgment; for
whilst the Pope incourages his party to write in his praise, the Princes will
not want Assertors of their prerogatives, and perhaps in greater numbers than
his Holiness.

If the Roman Theologists should go on as they have began, whether would things
go? For these thirty years, they have added every day new Degrees, new Titles,
new Authority, new Sovereignty to the Pope; now those that shall come after,
observing the writings of their Predecessors, rewarded either with Abbeys,
Bishoprics, Cardinalships, or good Pensions, will in all probability set their
brains upon the tenters for an invention of enlarging his authority, and not
knowing any nearer way, will attempt to take the Sovereignty away from the
Temporal Princes, and confer it on the Pope.

A certain Confessor I met lately by the City, in a conference I had with him
about the Authority of the Pope, told me in these very terms, Sir, I believe it
as an Article of my Faith that a Pope cannot possibly be damned.

I desired his reason, with as much respect as I could, but he gave me this
answer only, That many Divines now adays in Rome did assert and write so, and
likewise many of the Faithful began to believe it.

For my part, I believed he said true; and would to God the Jesuits were not in
the way of maintaining this Opinion publicly every where, it being the
highest complement they can use to him; for if he be not liable to damnation,
by consequence he is not subject to the sentence which God Almighty shall pass
at the last day upon the Souls of Mankind. Which Opinion being received, the
Pope is not only exempt from the Censures of Counsels, and of the Church, but
from the Judgment of God himself; and in times to come having gained this
point, they may perhaps persuade the people he is Eternal also; But I am
confident if Princes will gainsay his other pretenses, God Almighty will not
grant him this of Eternity, reserved as a peculiar attribute, and prerogative
to himself.

But I hope the prudence of the Popes will not suffer them to admit such
Doctrine into the Church, and then whilst they are good and just to the People,
the Princes, and the Church, I doubt not but they will be respected and
reverenced by them all.

Too great a wind bruises or breaks a Vessel to pieces, by a too hasty and
violent concussion against the Shore, though in the very Harbor it thought it
self safe. If the Popes had been contented to carry themselves with mediocrity,
they had never run that hazard of losing all, and Christendom had been of
larger extent than it is.

Whilst the Popes were satisfied within the limits of their Authority, the
Church increased to that wideness, that the most barbarous Nations from the
remotest parts of the Earth, came to Rome to pay their Devotion to the Church.
Since they found things altered, and all tending either to vanity or pride, not
only new accessions have ceased, but those have withdrawn themselves, who had
been settled in the Church before. The Divines are so insatiate to heap up honor
upon honor upon the Pope, that I fear they will one day make him lose all.

In short, let the Theologists say what they please, both Prince and people
will always take the liberty (...) commend the good, and find fault with the
bad actions of the Popes. But some will say perhaps, since they cannot regulate
the Pope, it would be their best way to restrain the people, because it is more
easy for a person to contain himself from upbraiding then from committing a
Sin. In former times, the Popes served for examples to draw people to works of
piety and holiness, and the Saints in their private Assemblies and
Conversations, took great pleasure to discourse of the charity of this Pope,
and the Martyrdom, Zeal, and Goodness, of the other. Now they talk indeed of
their Popes, but it is to their reproach and disparagement, not of their
Sanctity, but of their zeal to the preferment of their Nephews. Formerly, their
discourse was only of their Virtues, now it is only of their Errors. God
Almighty put it into the Hearts of the Cardinals to create holy Popes, and into
the hearts of the Popes to continue as the Cardinals create them.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART I.
BOOK II.
The Contents.
Wherein is discoursed of the place proportioned to the Fabric of Cardinalism.
Of some particularities about the Essence of the Greek, the Roman, and the
Jewish Churches. Of the obligations upon the Church of Rome to banish and
persecute the Jewish Church with more severity than the Greek. Of the name of
Church, and what it signifies. Of the distinctions in Rome betwixt the
Catholic Church and the Roman. Of the infallibility of the Church. Of the
Liberty of Conscience in their Divines. The reason why they are punished more
strictly that offend against the Pope, than the Church. Of the coldness of the
Popes in remunerating those that serve the Church, and their liberality to
those that are serviceable to them. Of the true remedy to hinder the Divines
from flattering the Popes. Of the Ecclesiastical charges, and by whom they are
to be dispensed. An efficacious way to prevent murmuring against the Pope. Of
the way in which the Popes served the Church in the primitive times, and of the
honor they received by being called heads of the Christian Commonwealth. Of the
great necessity of taking from the Popes il motu Proprio, and of the way to
effect it. Of the Election of Cardinals in the primitive times. Of the age of
Poverty, and of the age of Riches. Of the submission wherewith the Popes now
adays are treated by the Cardinals. Of the great Errors into which the Church
of Israel fell. Of a certain Father that preached up the infallibility of the
Pope. That the Church of Rome is subject to several Errors. Of a discourse
betwixt a Priest and a Protestant. Of the difficulty of knowing the signs of
the true Church, and that by reason of so many differences and disputes.
Antiquity believed a true sign of the purity of the Church. Of the signs our
Savior left to distinguish the true Church from the false. Of a certain
Protestant Prince that invited the Popes Nuntio to Supper in Paris. Of the
great vanity in the Habits of the Cardinals, and Priests. Of a strange Sermon
preached in the Church of Araceli in the presence of certain Cardinals. Of the
answer the Catholic and Protestant give, when they are asked whether they
shall be saved or no. Of the Confession of sins, and the manner how it is used
in the Church by Christians. Discourses betwixt the Papist and the Protestant
about the purity of the Church. How tedious afflictions are now to Christians.
Of the great affluence in which the Popes and the Cardinals live. Of the
quality of the sufferings of the Ecclesiastics. Of the beggerlyness of certain
poor Bishops. Of a Bishop that complained of the great pride of the Cardinals.
Of the great number of discontented Prelates in Rome, and for what they are so.
Of the pernicious examples the Seculars take from the Clergy. Of the misery the
Church is in. Of a Priest that desired to see the Riches of the Cardinals
increased. Of a Protestant that desired the power of working of Miracles, that
he might turn water into wine. Of the Persecutions suffered by the Church. Of
the number of Schisms, and the place where they happened. Of certain
Schismatics. Of Synods and Councels called for the suppression of Heresy that
did daily increase. Of the obligation that lies upon the Popes to acknowledge
their Grandeur from the bounty of Charles the Great. Of the weight of the
Ecclesiastical dignity, and of the honor. Of the difference betwixt Schism and
Heresy. Of the Schisms that are nourished in the Church by the Pastors
thereof. Of the excuses the Ecclesiastics do use to cover their faults. Of the
difference betwixt the Dominicans and the Franciscans. Of the true way of
converting of Heretics. Of certain Heretics that go to Rome to observe the
conversations of the Catholics. Of the great number of Murders committed in
Rome, and of the trouble their Consciences receive thereby. Of the Divines and
Confessors being called Domestic Enemies of the Church. Of the carelessness of
the Bishops in making the Friars Confessors. Of a penance given by a Friar to a
Merchant. Of a Jesuits answer to a young man that had confessed himself to him.
Of the example of Judas perverted by the Ecclesiastics to their own advantage.
Of the Aristocrasie of the Church. Of the Evils of the Clergy compared to a
Wart, which increases the more, the more it is cut. Of the maxim among the
Italians in disposing of their Children, and of their sending the most
dissolute of them to the Cloisters. Of the orders of Religious that regard not
quality, but quantity in their Convents. Of the Picture of Saint Francis with a
Church upon his shoulders, and the reason. Of a Vision Saint Francis is
reported to have seen, very prejudicial to the Cardinals. Of the great honor
they attribute to Saint Francis Saverius. Of the great number of persons he is
said to have Baptized with his own hands. That the Church ought to be sustein'd
by the Zeal and good Government of the Cardinals and the Pope. Of the Liberty
that is given to the Jesuits to enrich themselves. Of Saint Francis Saverius
that is believed to have gone to the Indies to bring the Indies back to the
Jesuits. Of a Jew that was Baptized in Rome. Of the way how Saints are to be
Reverenced. Of the Scandals committed in the Church by the Friars, being so
numerous; and many other particulars.

THE Critiques of this Age being numerous, and most Writers under the Tyranny
of their censures, I thought it but prudence to look about me, and for the
security of this Fabric, against such Storms, to choose a place for its
foundation, as solid and suitable to the Nature of Cardinalism as was possible;
for Cardinalism receiving its form and essence from the Power of the Pope, and
the Grandeur of the Church (of which the Cardinals call themselves Princes (I
thought it methodical to begin first with the Papal Power, and after that, to
make some reflection upon the Nature and Grandeur of the Church. For as the
quality of water is not to be known, but by discovery of the Fountain, so the
true medium, and end of a thing, is not to be found, without some notion of the
Principle. To me therefore it seems not improper to distinguish, not only the
good Church from the false, but also the number of the Churches, which almost
confound the good people of Christendom.

Though there have been some Popes that have scarce known the nature of their
own Church, yet there are others, or (more properly) their Theologists for
them, that give us an account of three, viz. the Jewish, the Greek, and the
Roman. The Jewish being permitted in most Ecclesiastic States to have their
Temples and Synagogues open in the face of the strictest Christians. But the
consequence of this liberty is not foreseen.

The Jewish Church is dispersed here and there thorough the whole Universe, and
in Italy, is much more numerous than the Greek, though in other places the
Greek has whole Provinces to its self: whereas the Jews are only permitted in
some Cities only with free exercise of their Religion, as in Rome where they
have their Rabines that preach to them, and many Christians to hear them, whose
curiosity swayes more with them, than the express prohibition of the
Inquisition.

The Greek Church, on the other side, which is the elder Sister of the Roman,
lies weeping like a deflower'd Virgin, and afflicted like a disconsolate
Widow, to see her Birthright, without knowing how, ravished from her by
force, and that by her too, the foundation of whose present greatness she had
laid: but by this, it is easily distinguished, which is the true Jacob, and
which the counterfeit Esau.

These two Churches, the Greek, and the Jewish, that had formerly flourished so
much, are now to their no small sorrow, become Slaves to the Roman: for she
having perverted the natural course, has made her self first, that was last,
and usurped a Sovereignty and Dominion over the rest, and has so well managed
her affairs, that she has secluded the other two, who very hungry and
distressed, would fain be sucking of that Milk, which she unnaturally has
engrossed to her self.

It Is against all Moral reason, all Order Ecclesiastic, all Humane and Divine
Rules, that the Jewish Church should be permitted by the Roman, and the Greek
Church persecuted: and the reasons are clear; in the Greek Church Christianity
is professed, the Rules and Praecepts of the Gospel observed, the Mass
celebrated, and (except some Ceremonies rejected as innovations by that Church)
they conform in all things to the Primitive Practice both in the Eastern
Church, and even that of Rome, where Christianity was at first in its greatest
Purity, and would doubtless be again, had not the Corruption of the times
brought a scandal upon it, even amongst Christians themselves: I call it
modestly the corruption of the times, though I am sensible, the introduction of
so many idle and Superfluous* Ceremonies into the Church, has been an occasion
of corrupting the times, and with them, Christianity it self.

The Jewish Church, as I have said, being a professed Enemy to Christ,
Preaching and Blaspheming in their Synagogues against the Crucified Redeemer,
and by their false Doctrine, debauching and perverting poor Christians from
their Faith, ought in all equity to be banished from the Roman, for their
perverseness or ignorance (be it which you will) being invincible. They are not
to be satisfied of the coming of our Savior, or the redemption of the World,
the only point and ground of our Salvation, and therefore unfit not only for
Protection at Rome, but for any Conversation in Christendom: it being nothing
else, but to make a mixture of Gold and Dirt, Glory and Blame, Praise and
Blasphemy.

The Christian Policy indeed (and I wish I could say, Humane also) of the
Spaniards, is to be commended: in their Dominions, they will not allow any
Religion, but the Catholic: it is a Principle with them, in a State should be
but unus Dominus and una Fides, which is the reason that the Spaniards are not
troubled with those Schisms and Factions in their Church, as they are in other
States, to the confusion of the greatest Doctors, who are able to distinguish
betwixt good and evil, much more of the poor ignorant people, who are guided
only by the outward appearances which they see in others.

But because the Interests of Religion are oftentimes overpowered in the minds
of men, by sensual passions, and worldly interests, which should rather be
subdued by them; hence things are brought to a contrary posture, and the Jews
have greater liberty than the Greeks, not in Italy only, but in Rome it self,
the Popes carrying a stricter eye over the Actions and Ceremonies of the Greek
Church, than over the pernicious Doctrines of the Hebrews. For the Jews being
of a perverse and refractory humor, in matters of Religion, are in Humane
things so complacent and flexible, that by their Tributes and Insinuations,
they have so wrought themselves into the conversation of the Christians, that
they are treated by them as the nearest of their Kindred and Friends.

And I could wish that this were the worst, but such is the force and
incantation of their money, that the very Popes have been persuaded, not only
to give them Protection in the Dominions of the Church, but to suffer them to
erect their Temples and Altars, to Preach, to Celebrate their Paschal with all
possible Solemnity, and to hold their Synagogues in all places: whereas the
Grecians wanting that Subtlety and Compliance, and not thinking it just to pay
Tribute where they are Strangers, (though in other places they have whole
Provinces, enough to evince the antiquity of their Rights, which are in many
things inconformable with the Roman) they are forced to be contented with the
exercise of some small pittance of their Ceremonies, though under the eye of
the Bishop of Rome.

But before we proceed any farther, in the particularities of the Church of
Rome, from whence our Cardinalisme deduces its original, to satisfy the
curiosity of the Reader, and to facilitate his understanding, it is fit to
consider the Universality of the Church, which is particular in the Universal,
although universal and particular too, as the Ecclesiastics believe.

The word Church (as it has been declared by several Learned men, and ought to
be acknowledged by all Christians) signifies nothing but an Assembly of many
persons; and the Scripture uses it in four principal senses.

In the first, it signifies only the Elect, and those Blessed Souls that are
separated from the Corruption of the world, and taken into the fruition of
Eternal happiness, to wit the Glorified Saints, or the Church Triumphant (which
is so much talked of in the world, and so much aspired to by the Righteous.)

Secondly, it denotes in general the Universal visible Church, comprehending
Protestants (though the Pope calls them Heretics) as well as the Catholics;
and of this Church St. Paul speaks, when he writes to Timothy, that in a great
City there are not only vessels of Gold and of Silver, but of Wood also, and of
Earth; by this Rhetorical and Figurative way of speaking, insinuating, that the
Church is composed of bad, as well as good, of those predestined to
Damnation, as those decreed to be Saved. Yet so it is, with the Roman Divines
(as if they know not what St. Paul had writ, or pretended to know more) will
admit into the Pale of their Church (which ought to be Universal) only such
particulars as can truckle and condescend to the Kissing of the Priests Hand,
and the Popes Toe.

Thirdly, it signifies the Assembly and Congregation of the Pastors, and
principal Governors of Christ's Flock, and in this acceptance, it was our
Savior speaking of Brotherly correction, admonishes, that if the party
offending be pertinacious in his fault, and worthy of reprehension, the party
offended should apply himself for reparation to the Church. From whence it is
plain, that our Savior intended the Congregations and Synods of Bishops, and
other Rulers in the Church, whose office it is to inspect the affairs thereof,
and negotiate for its benefit and accommodation. Though some there are, that
believe Christ meant by the Word; a Complete and Universal Assembly of the
Godly, which in my judgment is improbable, because the Gospel (our principal
light) declares expressly, that the power of Correction was in the Rulers only,
and not in them.

By the fourth and last signification of the word Church, every particular
Congregation of Christians is intended; which though it seem in appearance to
be separated, yet it is indeed a Member joined and fastened by an indivisible
knot to the entire and universal body of the visible Church. And in the Infancy
of Christianity, when the Apostles writ their Epistles to Corinth, Ephesus, and
Rome, those Churches were such. And I suppose our Savior intended no otherwise
in those words, Where two or three are met together in my name. I will be in
the midst of them. And indeed, when two or three are met together, either in
the Church, in Prison, in the Streets, or elsewhere, if it be to read the
Scriptures, to send up their Prayers to Heaven, or for any other action of
devotion, whether Protestant or Papist, they are in my judgment a Church, and
Christ is in the midst of them: for it is not the number of persons, but the
intention of their meeting, which denominates them a Church. Otherwise an
Assembly of Gamesters would have as much right to that honorable appellation
as they.

But there is one thing very necessary to be determined; the Romans, or the
Churchmen of Rome, are accustomed to call their Church, sometimes the Roman,
and othertimes the Catholic Church, the greatest part of them being unable to
show any reason at all for this distinction. Now the word Catholic importing
universal, and Roman on the other side particular, it cannot be Catholic and
Roman too; for if it is Roman, then it is particular, and if so, then not
Catholic. To take away this Confusion therefore, and bring things to a
consistence, one of the two names is to be laid aside, and the other retained;
and in my judgment, that of Universal Church will be best to be kept, and that
of Roman left.

The Roman Divines, are so troubled and perplexed to find some new argument for
proving the Popes Infallibility (which I have sufficiently discoursed in my
first book) and have so twisted and entangled themselves in that opinion, that
they have no time to consider, whether the Church it self be Infallible or not,
which would be a great ease to the scruples of the Faithful.

If the Church were derived from the Pope, it might with great reason be
questioned whether the Pope be Infallible; but since the Pope has his being
and existence from the Church, the question must be concerning the
Infallibility of the Church.

There is a saying, so common amongst Christians, that it has past into a
Proverb, I know not upon what reason: If a person at any time be of a lame
Conscience, and inclined to some false belief, the common saying is* that he
has the Conscience of a Divine, as if Divines had no Consciences at all: which
I fear is too true, for they write as they think good, and teach what they
please, but believe not themselves what they write or teach. And if there were
not this latitude amongst them, it is not probable they would assert the Pope to
be the Churches Elder Brother* and in respect of his primogeniture* to be the
more venerable. A Prodigy I could not have believed, had I not known it by
experience; for the irreverences committed against the Church, being punished
with some ordinary Correction, and those against the Pope with death, it is
plain his Authority is the greater, and he has been no ill husband of his
Prerogative.

But this opinion is not only ridiculous (as several other of their tenants
are) but so weak and unstable, that it threatens the whole Fabric with
destruction; true it is, they do fortify themselves very much with that
expression, which our Savior used to Saint Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church. From whence, they argue that the Church being
built upon St. Peter, St. Peter (as its foundation) supported the Church,
inferring, and upon pain of sinning mortally, injoyning the people to believe,
that Christ by that expression had pronounced the Pope chief Shepherd of his
Flock, and absolute Bishop of all Christian people; that from that time he
began to build up his Church upon the Shoulders of St. Peter, and he might
lawfully claim his prerogative; as if the rest of the Apostles had been laid
aside, and had not unanimously cooperated to the common good.

That St. Peter was the foundation of the Church, I can easily grant, nor do I
think there is any will deny it, provided the same prerogative be allowed to
the rest of the Apostles (who were comprehended also in that expression) and to
those other Pastors and Rulers that succeeded, and are still subservient in the
Church. And to this our Savior alludes, when he says, if the Shepherd be
smitten, the Flock is dispersed, intimating, that the care of the Church lies
upon the Ministers, without which, they would be but like a Flock without any
body to look to them*

But that the Pope should usurp to himself the Primogeniture, and instead of
raising the Church upon himself, abase it: destroying the Apostolical manner of
proceeding, and making for himself a particular Apostleship; and asserting the
Church to be made for him, not he for the Church, is a subject worthy the
consideration of all Christians, because it gives occasion of so many Scruples
and Schisms.

What should be the reason, that the Roman Divines find it much easier to prove
the Popes infallibility, than the Churches, I cannot imagine, unless, that
observing the difficulty of finding arguments for either, and yet being obliged
to write something of Ecclesiastical matters, they choose rather to indulge
that vanity in the Pope who is able to reward them, than to speak any thing of
the Churches infallibility, which would conduce so much to the ed(...) of the
Faithful who are ignorant of the matter.

Now every good office requiring a reward, and every reward a public
acknowledgement; the Divines therefore taking notice with what slowness and
difficulty those that promote the interest of the Church (though with never so
much zeal) are advanced, and on the other side, how free and prodigal the Popes
are in their remunerations to such as drive on their designs; hence they choose
not the Churches side which is poor, but the Popes who is rich, and has the
disposing of all Bishoprics, Abbeys, and Cardinalships in his power.

I am of opinion, (and I think no body but some Sycophant Friar will deny it)
that if the Election into Ecclesiastical preferments depended upon the
universal body of the Church, or else upon each particular Member of it; for
example, the dignity of a Cardinal upon the Consistory of Cardinals, the Office
of Bishops upon the Synod of Bishops, and so thorough all Offices, and that
with the order of the same secret votes, as is used in the Senate at Venice, I
am confident there would be few Divines found, (even of those that now with so
much vehemence exalt him) that would flatter the Pope, but apply themselves
entirely to the service of the Church.

And unless the ancient zeal for Religion (which at present is not to be found
in the breast of a Cardinal) do revive; or Secular Princes do suddenly apply
themselves to the finding out a remedy; it is most certain, things can never
proceed, but with great scandal to the Church, not only amongst Heretics, who
are always prying and observing the actions of the Catholics, but of the
Heathens also, who as yet have but little knowledge of the Roman transactions.

Were the tongues of people restrained, were all innovations exploded, and
things honestly restored to the Primitive way; that fugitive Flock that is
dispersed at present in the Wilderness of Heresy, would return to its Fold;
Schismatical controversies would cease, the differences betwixt Christian
Princes would be composed, and their united forces be directed against the
Turk: In short, were that absolute and despotical power in the Pope restrained,
or taken away, or at least, the right of Election (which for five ages was
observed constantly in the Church) restored to the Congregations, Synods, and
Consistories, Christianity would be advanced, Heresy depressed, and things
reduced again to that Primitive Sanctity, when every man's whole business was
the salvation of his Soul.

In the Primitive Church, the Popes (as may be seen in their lives) did not
intermeddle or pry into any bodies actions, but for the advantage of the
Church, that the Bishops might be holy in their conversations, as their
function was holy, and the Sacraments administered with decency.

In those days, the Bishops made the Election to vacant Bishoprics, and by
degrees came in Cardinals, who also had the creation of Cardinals. There was no
discourse then, but of the miraculous Sanctity of the Popes. No importunity of
their Kindred, pressing, and soliciting them, to turn out such a good man, and
advance a much wickeder to his place.

It was then the Glory of the Pope to be called the head of the Christian
Commonwealth, and indeed the Counsels, Consistories, and Synods, having the
Election of all Officers, and the disposal of all Dignities, it was no other
but a Commonwealth; but how the present Writers in their Volumes can call
Christendom a Republic, I cannot understand, whilst it is enslay'd to his
Holiness, and under the Tyranny of his Arms, Excommunications, and
Inquisitions, and forced by the irrational opinions of Priests, to an adoration
of the Pope in Rome, as if he were a God in Heaven.

It were much to be desired, and would be much to the advantage of the Church,
if that motu proprio, or Arbitrary power of the Pope were taken away,
Christendom reduced again to a Republique, and the Church set once more at
Liberty. I mean, if the Election of Cardinals were performed as secretly as
possible in the Consistory, by the Cardinals themselves, and so that of Bishops
by a Provincial Synod to be called upon the death or translation of any of
them, or (if that should be too expensive) by the Consistory of Cardinals, and
not left to the single disposition of the Pope, who regards nothing but the
interest and satisfaction of his Family.

When Judas his place amongst the Apostles became void, St. Peter (from whom
the Popes derive the power of the Keys) proceeded not to the nomination of
another himself, or declared his Successor without more ado, but he called the
College of Apostles together, by whose Lots St. Matthew was chosen to succeed
him, without any mention of St. Peter, or of any bodies Preceedency there. The
Apostles were all first, and all last, without any difference of priority. But
this Chapter is left out of their Bibles, they will read nothing but for their
own advantage.

And this is manifest, because when a Cardinal dies, the Pope calls not the
College of Cardinals together, to create a Successor, but in spite of the
example of the Apostles, in spite of all Justice and Equity, he chooses one
himself, and declares him Cardinal, usurping in this manner the right of the
Cardinals, who are Successors to the Apostles also, and to whom that right of
Election does belong.

This inconvenience seems at first sight very hard to be remedyed, but upon
serious consideration it will be easy. For in the vacancy of the Chair, when
they are Absolute and Supreme, when the Church is a kind of Republic, and all
the Jurisdiction is in their hands, what should hinder them (if they had any
regard to their lawful and just Privileges) from resuming that power which
they have been robbed of, and constraining his Holiness to confirm it.

Would the Cardinals but once undertake this, those Princes that have any zeal
for the liberty of the Church, would not fail to undertake it too, and second
them with Arms upon occasion, as the Emperors both of the East and West have
formerly done; then they might new model the Laws, settle the preceedency of
the Synods and Consistories before the Pope, as it was in the Primitive days,
renounce the Popes Decrees, and establish their own, declare him as an Apostle
indeed amongst the rest of the Apostles, but not as a God, and in short, clip
the wings of his Authority, so as to leave him Head only of a Commonwealth.

Nor indeed, were this well executed, would the Popes have any reason to
complain, for what can they pretend, but that they be allowed as much Authority
as St. Peter had, and why should not the Cardinals have as much as the rest of
the Apostles, whose true Heirs they are; if the Pope therefore be as St. Peter,
why should not they be as the rest of the Apostles.

I have said before, that to fill up the vacancy that was made by the Treason
of Judas, St. Peter did not by his Papal Authority make Election of another,
but by the Prayers and Assembly of the rest of the Apostles, who were as it
were the Pilots and Steersmen in the Ship of the Church.

Moreover Christ being dead, St. Peter could not hope for any greater Authority
than he had left him in these words, What thou bindest on Earth, shall be bound
in Heaven, so as from that time he had power to exercise his authority, which
(say they) was to preside in Elections, to command in their Assemblies, and to
exercise over the Apostles, the same authority which the Popes do now over the
Cardinals.

But in those days things were well managed, however they go now. Then the
Church was truly Apostolical, and obedient exactly to the Laws of the Apostles,
now it is Roman, and conformable only to the Interest or Capriccio of the Pope.
St. Peter then had no money to distribute, nor no offices to bestow, and
therefore there were no books, nor no Authors to be found that flattered him,
or attributed more to him, than Christ had given him; now they are so rich, and
have so many preferments to bestow, that they can debauch their Divines, and
make them write as they please. In that age there was nothing but poverty and
piety; in this, there is nothing but craftiness and wealth; then there was
nothing but Christ in the thoughts of St. Peter, and the Apostles, and now in
the Popes minds, there is nothing but their Nephews.

It is not to be found in any place of the Scripture, that St. Peter commanded
the rest of the Apostles, or that they acknowledged him head of the Church, or
Superior to themselves. Whereas on the contrary, it is to be seen in the Acts of
the Apostles, that Peter was sent by the rest of the Apostles, in the company
of St. John, to preach the Gospel in Samaria, and St. Paul not only writes,
that he was not esteemed inferior to the best of the Apostles, but he went up
and down ordering all things as he thought necessary for the advantage of the
Church, without communicating any thing with St. Peter of what he judged
convenient to do.

Things being so, upon what grounds is it that the Popes keep the Cardinals at
that distance? Christ recommended his Church to the Apostles in general,
without any exception, as appears by those words in St. John, As my Father sent
me, so have I also sent you; and whose sins soever you pardon, shall be
pardoned; and again in St. Matthew, Be not in any case called Masters, because
there is one that is your Master, but be as if you were all Brothers. Can any
thing be more clear? can any thing be of greater proof?

When Christ spoke these words to his Apostles, St. Peter was present, and
therefore like, but not Superior to the rest. So as, what authority is that
the present Divines give to St. Peter over the Apostles, and by consequence to
the Popes over the Cardinals? In my judgment, both sides are too blame, the
Popes to usurp, and exalt themselves so much, and the Cardinals to prostitute
and debase themselves. These are the errors that occasion, if not the greatest
part of our Heresies, at least the most stubborn and perverse part of them, it
being most certain, that a great part of their Passion and Acrimony against the
Church would be taken away, could they but see things honestly administered by
an equal concurrence both in Cardinals and Pope.

But to return from this point (from which also we have in some measure been
forced to digress) I will speak now of the infallibility of the Church. Let us
first examine if there be, or ever was, such a Church in the world, to whom God
had vouchsafed out of his profound Counsels to bestow any such privilege.

There is no need of studying or using any long and elaborate arguments, to
prove that all Churches whatsoever have been subject to Error, daily
experience presenting us with continnal examples, that they have fallen into
error, as great as can be imagined by man.

The Jewish Church, that flourished so long under their Patriarchs and
Prophets, that before the coming of our Savior had the honor to be called the
only visible Church of God, though it was governed by pious and experienced
Pastors, Err notwithstanding, and was most miserably involved in the puddle of
Idolatry, so as we read in the Chrenicles, That for many days together, the
Israelites had neither God, nor Law, nor Priest, amongst them all to direct
them. And the Prophet Esau with Tears in his Eyes, and Sorrow in his Heart,
complains, That all their Governors were blind: And the Prophet Ezechiel tells
us, that this Idolatry overspread the Church, as well in Egypt as in Israel.

But we need not trouble our brains for an instance of their erring, the Golden
Calf the people made to themselves, and worshipped as a God, in spite of Aaron
and Moses, (who went up into the Mount to receive the Tables of the Law) is too
sad an evidence.

Jeremiah complains with great anguish of the miseries of Juda, that was fallen
into that profound and bottomless impiety, it was a question whether there were
more Cities or Idols in her Dominions. And at the time of our Saviors coming
into the world, he found the Church infected with an infinite number of
Heresies and Innovations, introduced by the false Doctrines disseminated by
those very Scribes and Pharisees that governed it.

Let the Scriptures be looked over never so seriously, let the Ecclesiastical
Histories be examined never so strictly, I am sure there is not any particular
Church to be found, since the time of the Apostles, that retains its proper and
Primitive Purity, and has not deviated by some corruption or other from its
first method and form. So as St. Paul had very good reason, in the beginning of
his Epistle to the Romans, to exhort them to have a care they did not wander
from the truth.

The Church of Rome (notwithstanding all this) believes her self infallible; or
at least some Divines would persuade her so. In Genoa, there was a Priest
called Father Zachary, as I remember, (I am sure he was a Dominican) that
Preached upon that Subject; he was a great Orator, and had a vast memory, he
used all the arguments were possible to prove it, and amongst the rest, this
one in St. Matthew, And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, which he
urged with that vehemence, that he declared, that as often, and every time the
Church did err, so often should Christ himself break his promise with the
Church.

The Father being himself both Opponent and Respondent, there was no answer
given to that position; yet it may be very well alleadg*d, that Christ in those
words spoke not of any particular Church, but only of the Church of his Elect;
and therefore, assures us also in other places, that all the Machinations,
Persecutions, and Conspiracres, of the three implacable Enemies of mankind
united, shall not be able to extinguish and irradicate that Church, because
Gods Foundations are firm and unmovable, and he knows who are his own. As it
is in the Apostle to Timothy, to which may be added those words of our Savior,
The Heaven and the Earth shall pass away, but my Word shall not fail; intending
thereby, the Church where the word of God is preached. And if it happens at any
time that any particular Church deviates from the right way, which is the way
of truth, the only foundation of the Church, and upon which our Salvation is
built, God of his mercy will raise up another to convince that of the error it
is fallen into.

Amongst all the Churches, since the beginning of the world, there has not been
found that unconstancy and confusion as in the Church of Rome; so many
Anti-Popes, Schisms, Heresies, Controversies, Confusions, Suspensions,
Persecutions, so many false Opinions, Scandals, Tyrannies, and Intestine
Quarrels, as there.

Several times have they been known to adore two Popes, in the same Province,
at once, at another time three, of several Nations; the very College of
Cardinals being divided, some of them favoring one side, some another, and
some of them believing, neither of them lawful. This I am sure, that at the
Election of one Pope, there grew such Schism in the Church, the people were in
great perplexity and confusion, and not knowing, by reason of the difference
amongst the Cardinals, which was the true Christian Church they were to follow,
they remained, not only months, but years, in that irresolution, as if they had
belonged neither to God nor the Devil.

Is it not too true? Their Ecclesiastics themselves, do not only dispute in
their Councels, but fall out and quarrel with that vehemence and passion, they
will sooner leave the Council, than their Opinions, so pertinaciously proud are
they of any thing that is their own, though with the greatest scandal to the
people, who in that uncertainty of the truth, forsake not only their fiery and
unreasonable Opinions, but their Religion it self. But what shall I say? Are
there not Bishops that Preach false Doctrine in their Diocese, chaulking out
Rules of living to the people, contrary to the meaning of the Gospel, and what
is taught in Rome? And have there not been Popes that have been disclaimed by
their Clergy?

From hence it may be easily concluded, that their Opinion that hold the Church
infallible, is false and erroneous, and if the Church be fallible, much more
the Pope, who, though Governor of the Church, founded by our Savior, and
propagated by the Apostles thorough the whole world in great Sanctity and
Holiness, yet with a possibility of falling, otherwise, forasmuch as the Church
consists of men only, it would have been necessary to have Sanctified them all
both Ecclesiastic and Secular.

In Rome they speak with great Reverence of the Council of Trent, the Divines
and Preachers crying it up as a thing absolutely infallible. Yet the Pope makes
no bones to break and violate the Decrees established by so many venerable men,
and the unanimous consent of all the Churches in Christendom, dispensing with
things at his own pleasure.

It is not many years since, I obtained a dispensation for a friend of mine, in
a thing forbidden expressly in two Sessions of that Council, and all for the sum
of ten Crowns, and some little bribe by the bye to a Clark in the Registers
Office, a friend in Court being as necessary in Rome, as a penny in a man's
purse.

Those the Church of Rome call Heretics, cannot hear with patience, that the
Pope alone should have authority to defeat and invalidate in a moment, what a
General Assembly of the Church has been so many years about. A certain Priest
discoursing one day with a Protestant of France, with design to draw him over
to the Church of Rome, he thought he had brought him into a very hopeful way,
when the Protestant had told him that all the Protestants in France would
submit themselves to the Pope, if the Pope would submit himself to the
Councels; to which the Priest replied, it will be necessary then a Council be
called, and such rules established by common consent, as shall be thought
necessary for the Government of the Church; to which the Protestant replied a
little fiercely, How a Devil will the Pope observe the Decrees of a Council,
that cannot be kept from violating the Praecepts of the Gospel, but if you will
undertake to bring the Pope to a submission to them, I do not question to
convert all of my Religion to the Pope, for to tell you the truth Sir, I hold
one as feasible as the other.

At first sight indeed it appears something probable, that though a particular
Church may err, yet in respect that Christ has promised where two or three are
met together in his name, he will be in the midst of them, and that in this
case there are not only two or three, but two or three hundred, and those,
choice men and select for their Piety and Learning; it seems not impossible, I
say, but a Congregation Consistory, or Council, composed of the chief Heads and
Governors of all the Churches in general, may be infallible.

Were there a Council called in the name of Christ only, and for the real
interest of the Church, and did it consist of such Members, and no other, as
had their eyes fixed wholly upon Heaven, I could almost acknowledge that
Council infallible; but we know very well, and our constant experience confirms
it, that passion, blood-thirstiness, interest, ambition, desire of dignity,
capriciousness in the Prelates, Bishops, Cardinals, and Popes, are the principal
things that sway in Councels, so as it is manifest, Christ is not in their
hearts, and where he is not to direct them, there can be no infallibility.

The Church of Israel was reputed even to the death of our Savior, a good and
a holy Church, for which reason Christ himself conversed often with the Scribes
and Pharisees, rebuking such as profaned their Temples with their buying and
selling, not with words only, but blows, declaiming against them, that they had
made his Fathers house a Den of Thieves. His heart not being able to endure
that they should use that place as a Market, where the Jews met daily to sing
praises to their God.

The Scribes and Pharisees of the Jewish Church (when there was any tumult or
division amongst the people, about the works our Savior had wrought, some
believing them miraculous, and others not) they met in Council with the
Principal Rulers and Governors, and having debated upon all the works he had
wrought in Judea, after long argumentation and dispute, they concluded, and
condemned him as a Seducer, and a Blasphemer, and that was the result of that
Council of the Jews.

Many Councels there have been in the Christian Church, that have not only
erred, but undone and revoak'd what another had Decreed, so as several of them
have been declared Null, though the Church had made use of their Statutes many
years, as in the late Council of Trent there were four others condemned, so as
the Council of the Apostles was the only infallible Council that ever was in
the Church, and that because it was managed and directed immediately by the
Holy Ghost according to Christ's promise, as is recorded in the Gospel of St.
John.

But here is one question will arise, the solution of which, would be a great
satisfaction to the Reader, and that is, whether Anabaptists, and others that
have their several Religions and Sects apart, may in reason challenge the
honorable Title of a Church, some of them conforming themselves to the
documents of the Scripture, and drawing the rules of their conversations from
thence, others (and the more wicked) spinning out their own methods and
ordinances out of their own fancies, and yet not very dissimular to the
direction of the Gospel, it being as it were proper to mankind to guild and
color over evil with pretenses of good.

Many there are, that believe that our Savior in those words, In my Fathers
House are many Mansions, intended to comprehend all the Church Militant, and
that he did not mean it as a figure only of the Celestial Beatitude; for which
cause, he drove the Buyers and Sellers, as I have said before, out of the
Temple, calling it his Fathers house, because in that, the Jews celebrated all
their Holy and Divine Functions that were necessary to give the form to a true
Church Militant.

If it be so, it must needs be acknowledged there is but one true Church that
can be called justly the house of God, though there may be several Chambers and
Mansions divided from one another, that may pass under that name.

The Church of Rome refuses to give the Title of Church to any but it self, as
if there was no Church in being but that, cousening and deluding its self in
the very Title they assume, for by calling themselves the Church of Rome, they
do tacitly suppose there is some other Church, that is not of Rome.

It is certain, and beyond all dispute, that all the Councels and Assemblies of
Heretics may be called Churches, but with the distinctions of corrupt and
incorrupt, of sound and unsound, of polluted and pure; for a man, though
afflicted with never so many diseases, back and blew with never so many
stripes, eaten up as it were with worms and putrefaction, ceases not
notwithstanding to remain a man, till the Soul be separated from his Body,
though otherwise he may have lost something of his shape.

In like manner, the Title Cof hurch, cannot without violence or ignorance in
Religion, be taken from those Churches, who are stragled out of the right way,
and will not be subjected to their true Mother. Lucifers Pride was such, it
tumbled him down headlong from Heaven into Hell, yet he retains the Title of
Angel, with this difference only, that he was then called an Angel of Light,
but now of Darkness. The Church of Israel, though overwhelmed most miserably
in Idolatry, had the Title of Church continued to them still by the Prophets
themselves, but with the distinction of Good and Holy then, of Wicked and
Idolatrous after. So as it ought to be sufficient for the Churchmen of Rome to
allow them to be Churches, though they think them depraved* and though it be
not impossible that those Churches they think so, may be most holy and sound.

The matters of Religion appear so ordinary and low, the simplest Idiot thinks
himself a Master in them, whereas indeed they are so deep and profound, they
are enough almost to break the brain, as well as the sleep of the poor
Christian, that confounded with this scruple, and that dispute, is oftentimes
forced to go on in his ignorance, and precipitates himself into obscurities, by
the very means he was searching after light.

Every one believes his own Religion the best, and that he is predestined to
be saved, but his Neighbor to be damned. If you enquire of a Roman Catholic,
he will assure you with plenty of asseverations, that there is no Salvation out
of that Pale. Ask a Lutheran of his, and he will tell you, the true way to
Heaven is his way. And so the Calvenist, with great Learning, and no few Texts
of Scripture, will persuade you his Doctrine comes nearest the Apostles.

A certain Friend of mine, whose head is full of those niceties in Religion,
being in a merry humor told me one day, if he might have his wish, he would
wish himself in Paradise for one day, and in Hell for a month: I inquired of
him the reason why his stay in Paradise should be so short; he replied, That he
would fain be satisfied which Religion sent most souls to Heaven, and which
most to Hell; that in Paradise he knew there were no throngs, and therefore he
could dispatch there in a day; but that Hell was better planted, and would
require a longer visit. I asked him why he would profane his own Religion with
such discourse; he answered, Dear Friend, to tell you the truth I am of
opinion, that here below it is impossible to be satisfied who shall be saved,
and who not; because for ought we know, they that appear most beautiful in
this world, may be most deformed in the next; and though we look upon blackness
here as a defect, yet there as amongst the Moors it may be counted a perfection.

He stopped there, and I made some reflections by the bye upon his railery; yet
certainly that providence that governs the World, has reserved the knowledge of
Salvation and Damnation as a secret to himself, to prevent those censures that
are yet too frequent among Christians; some condemning this man, some saving of
that, as if either of them were in the power of Man.

I am of opinion, (by the leave of the Divines both Protestant and Papist)*
that as to their Fundamentals all Religions are good; yet withal, I believe
there is none of them without their defects and corruptions: The Catholic
holds the Protestant Church for a Compendium of Hell; but for what reason?
marry they cannot tell; and it is best of all that they cannot. But what
follows? when any of those that are so much possessed against it by the
violence of their Preachers, (who cry out against them in their Pulpits, as if
they had Horns upon their heads like the Devil) have occasion to travel and
converse amongst them, they are amazed and confounded to see there is no such
things amongst them, that their practices are honest, their preaching against
vice, the Psalms of David their music; that for the better instruction of the
people, they read the Scriptures in their own tongue, and that swearing and
blasphemy is punished severely.

And this is that Church the Catholic calls the Epitome of Hell, and the
wickedest Society amongst men. I will not say notwithstanding, but amongst them
also there are some dissolute and profane; it is enough that as to the Essence
of their Church, and their Divine Service, they are assured that the Catholics
themselves, nay those very Priests that kindle and foment the differences
betwixt them, cannot but commend them when they see them.

The Protestant on the other side speaks against the Catholic, with as much
passion and zeal as against the Jews. Though indeed for the most part, their
indignation is rather directed against the Pope, than the Church, as believing
him the occasion of all their corruption: But be it how it will, they also are
to blame when they censure the Catholic, without distinction made betwixt the
Church and the Pope.

The Church of Rome in respect of its original was good and holy, and therefore
with good reason St. Paul directed his first Epistle to the Romans.

The iniquity that is crept into it, proceeds from the corruption of those that
have polluted it. Under ashes that seem extinct, there many times lies fire
concealed; the outward appearance does not destroy the inward excellence. A
Vizard may give a man the similitude of a Beast, but not the nature. Let the
disguise of sin (which is that which makes Lucifer painted so deformed) be
taken away, and he will again become an Angel of Light.

If those abuses that are daily introduced into the Church of Rome, sometimes
by the Capriccio of the Pope, sometimes by the fallacy of the Priest, were but
taken away, let the Adversary say what he pleases, I do not doubt but all the
rest would be well. For my part I am of opinion, and will declare it, (let both
Papist and Protestant take it never so ill) that there is Salvation to be found
in any Christian Church whatsoever, provided they live piously, according to
the natural precepts of our consciences, and the express directions in the Old
and New Testament. And on the other side, I believe as confidently there is no
Church but one may be damned in, if we suffer the contrary corruption to
prevail* And this I write as an Historian, and not a Divine.

About the beginning of May 1667. there was a Priest of the Country of the
Grisons passing by this City, was very curious to know the state of the
Protestants, enquiring of this man, and of that; and now and then having no
capacity for greater, he would fall into some little arguments or disputes
about it. A certain Advocate of Crimona, a learned and exemplary man, to whom
also he was recommended, gave him satisfaction immediately in all his scruples,
whether of curiosity or conscience; and indeed he could not have had better
satisfaction from any body.

From general and more common discourse, they came by degrees into some little
dispute, and after that into familiar. The Priest at last having his curiosity
inflamed by the readiness of the Advocate, desired he would tell him what
number he thought the Protestants might be: The Advocate replied, that was
impossible; but if one might judge by the Provinces and Dominions they were
possessed of, they could not be less than forty Millions.

The Priest was amazed to hear them so numerous, for being not over-well
skilled in matters of Religion, no wonder if he could not see very far into
business of State. However he returned this answer to the Advocate, to his
great satisfaction; Sir, the multitude of Protestants as you call them, and of
Heretics as we, proceeds not so much from any excellence in the Orders of
their Church, as from the defect and iniquity in the Governors of ours, which
is commonly too great; And the Protestants beholding the luxury and
dissoluteness of our Prelates, but taking no notice of those blessed
consequences that would follow, were it governed according to those Holy Rules
that were given at its first institution, do upon this score grow numerous
daily. Whereas if our Cardinals, Bishops, and Religious men, would like the
Apostles, as much as in them lay, observe the Commandments of God, the number
of Catholics would quickly increase, and the number of Protestants decline.

I was present at this time, and surpised to hear the Priest discourse in that
manner; however his words (though spoke with some kind of have and immaturity)
gave me occasion to reflect upon these conferences and arguments, that happened
daily betwixt the Protestant and Papist; it being no hard matter to find out
the defects both of the one side and the other.

Amongst these disputes both public and private, it seems impossible to point
out the true Church, every one boasting of his own, and proving it from
Scripture.

It Is not many years since I also had the same curiosity, breaking my brains as
it were to inform my self in matters of Religion, conceiving by the instruction
of Learned men, I might become a Master at length, of those things that
confounded me whilst I was but a Scholar. But certainly I had better have been
contented with my ignorance, my inquiry did but confound me the more. For the
future I am resolved to leave all disputes, and to believe that Church the
best, that is most conformable to the documents of the Gospel, and gives most
obedience to the Word of God.

When the Catholic is in combat with the Protestant in matters of Religion,
the solidest argument they have against them, is to charge them as having
embraced a new and modern Religion and separated themselves from theirs that
was more ancient. The Protestant returns his own argument upon him, and
pronounces himself the antienter of the two, as retaining those Ceremonies and
Orders only which the Apostles observed themselves, and left in writing to the
Church; whereas the Catholic makes use of this Ceremony, and that Ordinance,
brought in by this Pope, and by that. To which the Catholic replies again, We
can show you in the Bible, in your own language and translation, where St. Paul
makes mention of the Church of Rome, but you cannot show us the least mention
of the Church of Geneva, that you admire so much. The Protestant replies to
that; Show us any thing in St. Paul to the Romans of your Purgatory, Mass,
Invocation of Saints, or Adoration of the Pope? St. Paul writ indeed to the
Romans, but not to the Pope; so as you can expect no privilege from thence,
because you obey the commands of the Pope, sooner than the writings of St.
Paul. Besides, St. Paul writ also to the Hebrews, and if a Letter from the
Apostles was enough, they might as well plead it for their purity as you.

True it is, Antiquity is a common sign, yet the Anabaptists themselves, and
the most desperate Heretics in the world, will assert with great confidence
their Church to be the antientest, deducing its antiquity from our Savior
himself.

To confound the Heretics therefore in their disputations, one is not so much
to insist upon the antiquity of his Church, for they commonly do urge that
against their Adversaries too* besides such arguments, would prove the Church
to be nothing but a Custom, which would be an error disallowed by our very
Enemies, who endeavor to prove us always, because Christ did not say, I am a
Custom, but I am the truth.

There are many ancient Families, both in Italy, and other Countries, that
derive themselves from Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and I believe them. Yet
having lost those Kingdoms and Principalities, the memory of their greatness
serves for nothing but to increase their sadness for the loss of it.

What advantage is it to a Church to be admired for its antiquity, if its
present Condition does not correspond. To what purpose is it to say, I am
descended from Christ, if I observe not his Commands, or to boast my self an
Heir of the Apostles, and never follow their Examples.

As often as I think of those Princes that entitle themselves to the Dominions
that are in the possession of others, and though they have no more Power nor
Jurisdiction there than I have, will by no means part with the Title: so often
do I think of the several Churches and Religions in Christendom, that retain
only the name, but are in other things corrupt, and abominable. For example,
what other thing has the Church of Rome, more than the bare honor of being
mentioned in the Epistle of St. Paul? As to other matters, the Epistle was not
writ on purpose for them, though directed to them. So also, if the Protestant
lives like a Devil, it is in vain to brag that he is descended from the
Apostles. In short, we live in an age, in which, two Princes will contend
perhaps for the Title of a Principality, that possibly is in the possession of
neither of them. And the Catholic and Protestant will fall out, and quarrel in
defense of their Religions, when there is nothing but name and title only in
their possession. As if the habit of a Monk were sufficient to make one.

But our Blessed Savior (to prevent occasion of error in a thing so necessary,
and that we might be able to distinguish betwixt the true Church and the false)
left us a clear Character, as St. John testifies, My Sheep know my Voice, and
follow me; and in another place, the same Evangelist, he says to the same
purpose, If you abide my words, you shall be my Disciples indeed.

That is the true Church, and that the true Religion, that with its whole heart
and affection, makes use of David's direction, Declina a malo, and fac bonum.
For my part, I will not judge of the scruples of other Christians; but this I
must say, I am glutted with the daily controversies and disputes between the
Protestant and Catholic Churches to no purpose, and so glutted, as to make
sport of them. They will not make me a Saint, and I suffer them not to come
near my heart, lest they should make me a Devil. Let the Catholic Divines
write as they think good, and the Protestants do the same, I am resolved to be
unconcerned, and sit down with this Doctrine of St. Paul, Non plus sapere, quam
oportet sapere, sed sapere ad Sobrietatem.

And why should we go look for our Church in the Volumes of the Divines,
whether Protestant or Papist, if we can find it out our selves in the Gospel of
Christ. This is to condemn our selves by our own folly, to hire an other man's
Horse to leap down a precipice withal, to borrow Spectacles that we may see
more plainly the way to our damnation, and in short, it is to believe our
Divines have more Judgment than Christ, and more Holiness than the Apostles.

The true Church of the Saints, according to the true Doctrine of the Apostles,
consists in doing good, and abstaining from evil, to imitate our Savior in
good works.

And let the Divines alone with their new Opinions, to make the present time
conform to the ancient, and not suffer the modern to destroy the ancient, for
if we walk not in the same way they did in the beginning, antiquity does but
distract the present proceedings. And this puts me in mind of an Example, no
less moral than curious, which I shall insert in this place.

In the time of Henry the Great, a certain Protestant Prince, invited the Popes
Nuntio, that was then in Paris, to Supper. The Nuntio refused the invitation,
excusing himself with many pretenses, but at last, overcome by the Civility of
the Prince, he makes bold with his Ecclesiastical reasons that obliged him to
the contrary, and went with his whole Court to visit him.

In the Chamber they were to Sup, the Prince had caused on one side of the Wall
the twelve Apostles to be hung in excellent Tapistry, and wrought with that
Artifice, they seemed to want nothing but words to be alive, but withal they
were unshod, ungirt, ill habited, and in every thing conformable to the Poverty
of the Apostles. On the other side, with the same exactness, he placed twelve
Cardinals on Horse back, clothed in Scarlet, their Trappings imbost very rich,
their Foot-cloth of Silk, their Bridles of Gold, and their Spurs of the finest
Silver.

As soon as the Nuntio entered the Chamber, casting his eyes about, as one
experienced in those things, he presently apprehended there was some mystery in
the business. He was surpised, and could not but show some confusion in his
looks, however, he counterfeited as much as he could, turning his eyes this
way, and that way, and pretending to look on every thing but the Hangings, till
at last having washed, as is usual amongst great Persons, the Prince observing
he would needs set on the Apostles side, that he might have them on his back,
and the Cardinals in his eye, the Prince, with no small Ceremony, would
persuade him to the other side, telling him pleasantly in Italian, but with the
grace of a true Frenchman, By your favor Sir, do me not that disgrace to turn
your back upon my Religion, but turn it rather upon your own.

The Nuntio observing the Prince to smile, he smiled a little himself, but it
was but from the teeth outward, however he replied immediately, Your Excellence
believes me of a Religion, I am not of, and your self of another, you are not
of neither. To which the Prince answered facetiously, Then there will be no
difficulty in ending our Ceremonies, the difference will be decided, if every
one takes which side he pleases. And with this they sat down, the Nuntio at
the end of the Table, where he had the prospect both of the Apostles and
Cardinals too.

But for the Readers better understanding, it will not be unnecessary to
explain what the Nuntio meant, when he told the Prince, That his Excellence
believed him to be of a Religion that he was not of, and that he himself was
not of that Religion he did believe. I suppose he alluded thereby to the State
of the Cardinalship, and the exemplary life of the Apostles. And therefore the
Prince having desired him not to turn his back upon the Apostles, but upon the
Cardinals, of whom he understood the Nuntio to be one* the Nuntio that was no
Cardinal, replied, that he was not of the Religion his Excellence took him to
be, and withal, added a little sharply, that the Prince himself was not of the
Religion he supposed; though the Prince had signified to the Nuntio, that his
Religion was Protestant, and founded upon the Example and Doctrine of the
Apostles.

The Princes words were smooth, and delivered with a good grace, yet no less
pungent than the other; they troubled the Nuntio a little, but nothing so much
as the unavoidable sight of those Hangings, which he conceived, (as indeed they
were) hung there in design. Had it been any Nuntio but he, they would have
probably taken it so ill, as to have left the Princes Supper to himself; but
this Nuntio being a prudent man, and considering how inconvenient it would be
for his affairs to disgust the Prince at that time, he past away the Supper
very well, with the variety of dishes, driving both the Pictures, and
Expressions, out of his mind. At Rome however it was ill taken, and the Nuntio
severely rebuked by the Pope, for supping with a Heretic; but he was so well
acquainted in the Policies of the World, and the Intrigues of the Court of
Rome, that he knew well enough how to excuse himself to his Holiness.

The Cardinals truly, and the Prelates in the Church of Rome, are so exorbitant
in their Expenses, not only for their Clothes and Liveries, but their Diet and
Houses, that the Protestants who are always prying, and making their
observations, cannot believe that Church to be good, in which they find such
excess of Luxury and Pride. For it is most certain, (and most Catholics will
confess it) that it is not the outward Pomp and Splendour of a Church, that
denotes it a true one, as some of their Divines would maintain. And indeed,
Christ did not promise Pomp, Magnificence, Gold, Riches, or Honor to his
Church, but Poverty, Affliction, and Persecution. For my part, I believe that
the truest Church, in which the poor Members are the least bewitched and
carried away with the interest of the World, especially the Ecclesiastics, who
ought to give example: insomuch, as in my judgment, there are many Catholics
in Rome, of very good reason, that live there, and yet believe Rome to be the
most polluted and defiled Church in the Universe; and for what cause think you?
Because they find the Prelates, and Popes themselves, so wedged and linked to
Secular advantages, they have not time to think upon God, nor Religion, nor
Faith.

In the year 1657. being by accident at Rome, to see the solemn Entry of the
Queen of Sweedland, I heard an Expression of a Roman, that gave me so great
scandal, that from my Cradle I was not in greater perplexity, than at that
time, and all upon occasion of the Grandeur the Pope had usurped under pretense
of Religion. Being one day in St. Peter's Church, to see the aforesaid Queen
Baptized, and observing the Pope and Cardinals with most incredible Majesty,
walking about in most sumptuous Habits, I turned about to my Camerade, and told
him, in my judgment I did believe there could not be richer Clothes seen in
the whole World. The Roman heard me, and crowding himself toward us, gave me
this answer, The Habits Sir of the Pope, Cardinals, and Prelates, are very rich
indeed, but my Wife shows her bare breech for it. Neither my Camerade, nor I,
gave him any answer, suspecting him for some Court Spy, that use to insinuate
themselves as it were by accident into peoples company, and speak ill of the
Pope to make discovery of what their affections are. But this poor Roman spoke
as he thought, by the rest of his discourse, making it plain, how miserable the
people of Rome were, that were forced to deny themselves bread, to enable them
to pay the Taxes, and Impositions, laid upon them by the Pope. So as the poor
man concluded, that the Catholic Religion in the Ecclesiastic State, was the
cause of the distress of the people, and of all the pleasures and
extravagancies in the Ecclesiastics.

To this purpose, I remember a certain Sermon I heard in a Covent in Rome, and
in the presence of two Cardinals, one of them Sacchetti, but the others name I
have forgot. The Sermon, and the whole design of it, made such an impression in
me, I think of it a hundred times a day, and shall in this place insert the
most memorable part of it.

The Preacher was a barefooted Franciscan, he seemed a poor pitiful creature
to look on, but he was the more experienced in morality, and declaimed with
that zeal and vigor against vice, he raised devotion in the hearts of his whole
Auditory.

The first Sunday in Lent, this Holy Father being got into the Pulpit, in the
presence of two Cardinals, and a very great Auditory besides, after an Ave
Maria, and two or three cringes with his knee, as is usual, rising up again
upon his feet, he put his Cappuce or Cowle upon his head, and pulling it down
so low, that we could scarce see his eyes; in which posture, having paused a
while without speaking a word, fixing his eyes upon the Cardinals that stood
before him, without naming any Text at all, he breaks out abruptly into these
words, St. Peter was a fool, St. Paul was a fool, all the Apostles were fools,
the Martyrs were fools, and all the Primitive Saints of the Church of Jesus
Christ our Redeemer, were fools.

The Cardinals at these words, grew as insensible as Statues; the people on the
other side, stood gaping in expectation of what would follow, most of us
imagining there was some mystery in the business, and I among the rest admiring
what freak this should be, was very well contented to attend, whilst the
Father, after some moments of silence, which he had used, on purpose to observe
the distraction of the people, began his discourse as follows;

You that are Prelates, do not you believe you shall be saved? Yes good Father
we do, I know your answer. And you of the common sort of people, you are
certain of Paradise? Without question you will say yes. Yes say I? By turning
night into day, by feasting, sporting, and luxury? with traveling all day in
your Coaches, and seeing Comedyes at night? with wearing of Purple and Scarlet,
Silver and Gold, and having your Silken trains carried after you in the Street?
yes, by spoiling the Walls of the Church, to adorn the Walls of your Chambers,
and by taking from Christ, to bestow upon the World? is it in this manner O
Romans you would be Saved?

The Apostles certainly, and all the Saints of the Primitive Church, might have
been Saved the same way, and then as certainly they were madmen and fools, to
wander up and down in solitude and misery, begging their bread for the love of
God. They were out of their wits to run up and down barefoot and bare-legg'd
preaching of Repentance, and lying whole weeks together upon the ground, and at
last endure Injuries, Imprisonments, Persecutions, and Death? you are mistaken,
O Romans, the Apostles, and Primitive Saints, were full of Sanctity and
Prudence? it is you are the fools to propose a new way of Salvation to your
selves, invented by your own intemperance and vanity: you, you are the fools,
you are the madmen, that think to save your Souls by ways, not only contrary
to the Precepts of the Gospel, but against all reason whatsoever.

And these were the express words that he used, which as soon as I went home I
set down in writing, lest I should forget them. After this the Father named
this Text, Ductus est Jesus in Desertum, admiring his patience, which he
applied with several places of Scripture, and arguments of his own (very proper
for such select matter) to us with great fervor and zeal.

I went home very well satisfied with the Preacher, but in great apprehension
for him, believing as an Article of my Faith, he would have been burnt next day
in the Inquisition. I was beginning a Psalm of Mercy for his Soul, but my
memory was too weak to go through with it; but if I had, my labor had been but
lost, the good Father had no need of it at all; for he continued his Preaching
in the same Church, and with a greater concourse than before, to my no small
admiration: for this I am certain of, a Heretic, nor the worst Enemy the
Church of Rome had, not only durst not, but could not have found out more
ignominious language against the City of Rome, when two Cardinals were present.

To speak the truth, that Sermon put a thousand thoughts into my head about
matters of Religion, which indeed are those I do most naturally apply my self
to. I would willingly have given any thing I had been absent, and have repented
me several times of going to Church that day; and not without reason, for from
that day to this, it has still run in my thoughts with what difference and
contrariety they live now, to the manner they lived in the minority of the
Church, when this City flourished with Godly men and Martyrs.

If a Heretic be asked, whether he thinks to be saved or not, I mean such a
one as would cheat his own Father, minds nothing but Roguery, a continual
Swearer and Debaucher, one that goes to Church only for fear of the Magistrate;
ask such a one what he thinks of his Salvation, and he will tell you, he is
most certain of it; if you ask, by what means, he will answer with greater
arrogance still, by virtue of the blood of our Savior that was shed for us; as
if Christ's blood were shed for any but the penitent and virtuous.

If a Catholic on the other side be asked the same question, one that is a
Fornicator, a Murderer, a violater of all Law, a despiser of Ordinances, and
one that has not God before his eyes, he will answer with the same security,
That God had brought him forth within the Pale of the Church on purpose to save
him, and that there is nothing more certain than that he shall be saved. If one
pursues his curiosity, and inquires upon what grounds he believes it, he will
tell you, by virtue of the many Indulgences his Holiness has granted him; as if
Christ had given the Keys of Heaven to St. Peter to let in Malefactors only.

To what a sad and deplorable condition is the Church of God reduced? All
people would be saved, all people believe themselves Saints: but none of them
will confess his iniquities, unless it be before the Confessors face only, and
that more out of custom than contrition. The Protestant confesses his with his
Hat before his eyes, lest any object unexpected should draw aside his thoughts.
The Catholic says his Confiteor Deo in Latin, (which he understands not one
word of) with his eyes fixed upon a wooden Grate; both of them perhaps thinking
more of what they are looking on, than what they are saying, or to whom.

The Protestant will tell you with great reason of the purity of the Church,
and the exact Rules of living in Christianity; but withal, that to live
proportionably to those Rules, and according to the purity of the Church, is
impossible, and beyond the efficacy of the most eloquent Preacher in the world.

The Catholic understands not his own Religion, yet he is sure of his
Salvation by the good Works he performs daily: Yet he is more delighted to
discourse of his Pilgrimages, his Sackcloth, Fastings, and such exterior
Mortifications, than of the Fundamentals of Christianity, or of the Church.

There are a sort of blind and perverse Heretics, that place the whole
substance and energy of Religion in fair words. They will not speak but of the
Scriptures, of Christ, and his most precious blood that was shed for us; of the
Psalms, Commandments, mercies of God, and light of the Gospel, when indeed
there is nothing of all this in their heart; that is taken up with designs upon
their Neighbors, and machinations of revenge, shutting up their breast against
pity, at the same time they discourse most earnestly of the mercies of God.

How many Catholics are there that like Wolves in Sheeps clothing, will speak
of nothing but the Privileges of the priviledg'd Altar, of Saint Mary
Maggiore, of the plenary Indulgence of Madona del Popolo, of the Disciplines of
Good Friday, of the Communion at Easter, of the abstinence of Saint Macario,
the humility of Saint Francis, the Martyrdom of Saint Laurence, the Miracles of
Saint Anthony of Lisbon, and in short, that talk more of the Sanctity,
Authority, and Impeccability of the Pope, than of Christ himself: So sad a
condition is the Church of God in in our times.

I have been several times to see the Jews at their devotions in their
Synagognes, and the Turks in their Mosques; and truly as to their exterior
morality, I found great occasion of satisfaction, observing so great exactness
and reverence in their Service, as would draw tears from the eyes of a
Christian: And for my part, by what I saw amongst them, I think I may boldly
pronounce them the Devils Saints, and our selves Christ's Devils; for to speak
truth, they express more reverence to the Devil, than we do to Christ himself.

A certain Turk that traveled for some time in Italy, and perhaps to make
observation of the ways of the Christians, being in the Church of St. Mark one
day in Venice, in the company of several, and amongst the rest a Christian, who
observing him to look with great intention on that mavelous structure, he had
the curiosity to ask him, what he thought of it? To which the Turk returned
this answer, Sir, were I sure the Conscienoes of you Christians were as neat
and as clean, as the Walls and Altars of this Church, I would turn Christian to
morrow. To which the Christian replied, What need other peoples Consciences
concern you, so you accommodate your own to our Churches.

All the Christians of this age could be contented to be glorified with St.
Paul, but not a word of the afflictions or torments he endured for his love of
Christ. I cannot but be much pleased to hear the Divines now a-dayes, both
Papist and Protestant, arguing with great cunning, that in the infancy of the
Church, indeed outward Penitence was necessary to provoke those poor sinners
that were stragled to return, and to kindle such a flame in the heart of
Christians, as might excite them to travel the World round for the propagation
of the Gospel, in spite of the Persecution of Tyrants. But that the Gospel
being now planted, it was sufficient if a Christian be holy in his heart, and
had an intention to goodness; because in the Primitive time there was a
necessity they should labor toward the planting of the Cross, which being
planted now, we are only to enjoy.

Should it please God to throw down riches and afflictions together from
Heaven, the Christians would not so much as touch one of the afflictions in
curiosity, but fall a scrambling for wealth, as if every one were desirous of
the greatest share: and if by chance one drachme of affliction happened to be
gathered up with the riches, they would presently bestow that upon their
Neighbors. So noble are we in that kind at this day.

And this (if we except with the Popes themselves) is manifest in the
Cardinals, who live in Rome in all affluence imaginable; they study nothing but
erecting of Palaces, that may contend with the Heavens in height, and making
such Gardens as may outvie, if possible, that of Paradise that was made by God
himself; and in the greatness and splendour of their Courts, out-braving the
greatest Monarch in Christendom.

Riches, Felicity, Plenty, and Magnificence* have in large showers been poured
down upon the Church, that Christians perhaps might be the more confounded at
their wickedness; but what follows? Why the Popes, the Cardinals, (and we may
join their Nephews with them) they with m(...) unreasonable avarice sweep up
all, engrossing what God meant for the whole Church to their own particulars:
and if amongst this Treasure, there falls out any affliction, inconvenience, or
trouble, to be found, they lay that a side as a present for the poor Priests
and Capucins.

But what are those incommodities the Ecclesiastics do suffer in general? The
Cure of Souls, rising at midnight to say Mass, and administer the Sacrament to
the Sick, disputing with Infidels, conversing with Heretics, serving in the
Hospitals, and celebrating Divine Functions in the Quire, But to whom do these
troubles belong? to the Cardinals? no, to certain poor Priests that can scarce
keep themselves alive with their allowance. These, these are they, that study
all night, and labor all day for the Conversion of a Soul, whilst the
Cardinals swagger it up and down in their Coaches, play the Epicures with
Music as well as Meat, refreshing and recreating themselves with the verdure
of their Gardens in the Spring, and attended with the State and Magnificence of
Princes.

It is enough to move compassion in the heart of any man, to see so many poor
drudgeing Bishops and Priests, that carp and moyl all day long, and are forced
to go begging up and down to the Seculars gates for their Victuals, whilst the
profits of their Bishoprics and Cures, are paid away in Pensions, that are
sometimes greater than their very Revenues. For which cause, many of them, for
the quiet of their Consciences, will choose rather to resign them, than to have
the smoke in their eyes, and none of the flesh in their stomach.

In a Journey I took once from Rome to Naples, in the beginning of Alexander
the seventh's Papacy, I over-took a Bishop upon the way, incognito, as it was,
without Pages, or any kind of Attendance. I knew his Dignity by his Habit
immediately, and gave him all the honor and respect that was due to him: we
discoursed, as Travelers do, of several things, and at last, about the present
State of the Church, and the Government of the Chigi; but they being but new
come to the Vatican, we had not many particulars against them.

But the poor Bishop being much unsatisfied with the Court of Rome, and the
Governors of the Church, he cried out with great sentiment, against the
extravagant Grandeur of the Popes, and the intolerable Pride of the Cardinals;
whilst I, suspecting him to be a Spy, and supposing it impossible he could
speak with that liberty of the Church of Rome from his heart, I now and then
would endeavor to excuse them, but he believing me to be otherwise than I was,
replied still with more indignation than before, complaining of the Management
of the Church Revenues, and the Officers that disposed of them. That the Church
having laid aside the Primitive rules of Sanctity, in which they lived without
difference or exception of persons, was now become so partial, it allowed more
for the fatning a Cardinals Horse in the Stable, than for the sustaining a poor
Bishop, or Curate, that pined and toiled themselves out for the preservation of
Souls, it being most certain, that one Cardinal spent more on his Coach, than
two Bishops received for their Revenues.

It made me weep almost to hear those expressions from the poor Bishop. I
endeavored what I could to comfort him, I told him that Christ would reward
those that were serviceable to the Church, before those that made the Church
subservient to them; he replied, the poor would hardly have patience, Despair
assaulting them with most violence whose Poverty was greatest.

This poor Bishop was not the only man in Rome, nor out of it neither, that had
talked to me at that rate. There are many more of them in the Court of Rome,
and it was well if they would keep there; the worst is, they run all
Christendom over, crying out against Rome and the Vatican, finding no
consolation, but in seeing misery multiply in the Church, which of it self is
not guilty at all; it not being her intention that one should be robbed, for
the inrichment of another; that of two Twins, one should be a Prince, and the
other a Beggar; that the meat should be taken from his mouth that labors and
sweats to bring Christ's Flock to his Fold, and that he should go away with the
wealth that imploys it only to the service of the world; that so many Abbeys
should be disposed to one Abbot, so many Revenues to one Cardinal, and the poor
Bishops want wherewithal to subsist; that they should heap sorrow upon sorrow
on the poor Prelate, and riches upon riches on the Cardinals; that they should
have all that do nothing, and they should have nothing that do all.

God knows what those hundreds, not poor only, but Mendicant Bishops, do say,
when they find the Revenue of their Bishoprics (which is indeed but the sweat
of their Brows, and the labor of their Brains) perverted and misapplied. When
they see the Horses, in the Cardinals, the Nephews, and the Popes Stables, kept
by the hundreds, and bought with the money good Christians gave to ransom
their poor Souls (as they thought) out of the torments in Purgatory, or to
relieve the necessities of the poor. Nay which is more, the very Horses and
Mules of the Pope and his Nephews, have more privilege in Rome, than they; the
Prelates are not permitted to complain of their grievances, of the
insupportableness of their Pensions, and of the necessity that is upon them;
whereas their Horses neigh, and domineer, and threaten with their noise, as it
were their Keeper, if they want but their Oats; which perhaps was the occasion
of that saying, It Is better to be the Popes Mule, than the Bishop of Orvietto.

These miseries, to which the Pope and his Cardinals will by no means hearken,
are of extraordinary prejudice to the Church; for the people framing their own
lives generally by the comportment of others, taking example by the
Ecclesiastics, will practice the same among themselves, robbing and ruining
one another as they do, and which is yet more lamentable, behave themselves
with the same licentiousness and liberty, as if there was no Church upon Earth,
nor no God in Heaven, to take notice of, and revenge the iniquities of mankind,
who with their irreligious discourses, does many times profane that very
Gospel, which they at other times pervert in the defense of their sensuality
and looseness.

A certain Neopolitan Priest being invited to Supper in Bolyna one night, and
I, with several other strangers, being invited to the same place. The Priest
being a facetious man, began to discourse at the Table of this thing, and of
that, and by little and little, he fell upon the miseries of the poor Bishops
and Curates; but that which was most remarkable, was his excellence of
disguising his thoughts, and making black seem white; and the contrary, like
the Be, dispensing his sting and his honey together, smiling with his mouth,
but weeping at his heart, in short, pretending to speak that in raillery, that
he spoke with indignation. Whilst he was entertaining the Company with this
kind of discourse, there was one that told him, that all that he had said was
very strange; to which the Priest replied, he wished with all his heart those
days would return again in which our Savior ^ed and satisfied so great a
number with so little bread. The other desiring his reason, he answered, That I
might pray to God Almighty that he would vouchsafe in like manner to multiply
the riches of the Cardinals, as he had done the five barley Leaves, for I
perceive we are not to have any thing but what the Cardinals leave.

Another (but a Protestant) who was a pleasant Companion, would wish often he
had the power of doing Miracles for one day, or (rather than fail) for a
moment. Having occasion to talk with him one day, and by degrees, of the power
of working Miracles which he desired so earnestly, I had the curiosity to ask
him, what he would do with that virtue if he had it, he answered me suddenly,
He would turn water into wine, a^ Christ himself had done at the Marriage of
Cana in Galilea; and he had reason for what he said, for at that time Wine was
very dear in that Country, and he had a custom of being drunk once a year, but
that fit lasted three hundred sixty five days together.

And in this condition is the Church at that time, replete with a wicked and
perverse Generation, and therefore no wonde^ if the faculty of working Miracles
be ceased, that in the days of the Apostles was so frequent and conspicuous.
Now adays, every one drives at his own interest, and prefers his particular
profit before the advantage of the Church; so as I am persuaded, should God
Almighty permit Miracles again, the people are so bewitched with their own
interest, and so inveterated in iniquity, it would be of small benefit to the
Church.

I remember to this purpose what is recorded of Sextus the fifth, who being
created Pope, would have a General Chapter of the Fathers of his Order
celebrated at Rome, where several Religious men should be present, and he
himself was present in some of the principal Transactions. The Convocation
being met, and the General made, the Pope as a token of his affection, gave
order that before their departure from Rome, the Fathers of the Chapter should
attend his Holiness and kiss his Foot; and withal, that they should each of
them have liberty to ask a Boon, and the said Sextus promised them it should be
granted.

The good Friars were very punctual, coming in Procession one by one into the
Popes presence in the Vatican. The Pope standing upon his Throne, they advanced
to kiss his Toe, and when that was performed, every one a part demanded his
Boon. There was three hundred and more Friars that entered to kiss his Toe,
three hundred and more Boons desired, and a Secretary stood by on purpose to
register them as they were granted; but what was it they desired? one asked to
be a Provincial, another a Vicar, another a Guardian, this a Bishop, this a
Cardinal, this one thing, this another, but every one for their private
advantage.

At last comes in a poor Lay-Brother of a Religious Order, that had served
forty years in a Monastery, only to draw water from morning to night out of a
very deep Well, for the use of the Kitchen, which had spoiled the softness of
his Palm: This poor overwrought creature (the Pope having made no exceptions of
persons) comes in, and with great reverence desires in these words: Most Holy
Father, if your Holiness shall please to vouchsafe me my request, it shall be
that you would condescend to bring a Fountain into our Covent, for the benefit
of our Fraternity, who are very much put to it for want of water, every Bucket
full being to be drawn up from the bottom of a deep Well, from whence your
Holiness for your own use drew your share, when you were formerly a Friar in
that Covent; and truly I am troubled for the poor man that succeeds me in my
office, which I have executed this forty years, as your Holiness may most
graciously remember, having often seen me at work from morning to night.

The Pope smiled, but mysteriously, and as if there was something more than
ordinary in the matter; casting his eyes about, sometimes on this Brother, and
sometimes on that; (for he had given order none should depart out of his
presence till the whole business was concluded) at last he casts them up to
Heaven, and cries out, Blessed be Almighty God, that amongst so many Friars
that seek their own interest only, there is one found that supplicates for the
public benefit of his Covent. And having with some vehemence for a time
declaimed against the Corruption in their Religion, he took his leave of the
Fraternity in these words; We were very bountiful in promising you your
demands, because we were of opinion you would be as zealous in desiring
something for the public advantage of your Orders: But for as much as you have
postpon'd the public interest to your own, We cannot think it just to gratify
your particular requests, that are so remote from the benefit of the public.
And with this answer he returned them to their Covents, full of indignation and
wrath; but for the satisfaction of the other, he gave order immediately to have
three or four Fountains made in the Apostles Monastery of the Order of St.
Francis; and one of them particularly in the Kitchen, which he that is at Rome,
and has as much curiosity as I had, may see at this day.

And in this manner, in my judgment, it will always happen, whilst those
words of our Savior, Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you, be applied by every one to his particular
interest; every one petitioning for his private advantage only, without the
least thought of the common good of Christendom. And if every one complains and
repines that his prayer is not heard, the fault is in themselves, that they
pray not for the Public, whose interest is always prae-consider'd by our
Savior. In the Primitive times the Saints understanding what was fit for them
to ask, and seeking the common good of Christendom, were always gratified in
what they did ask: but at present all the Cardinals desire is to be Popes; the
Abbots, to be Bishops; the simple Priests, Canons; the Gentlemen, Princes; the
private Soulders, the Governors of Towns; the Merchants, success in their
affairs, all riches and wealth; but of the prosperity of the Church, of the
destruction of Heresy* of the propagation of the Gospel, not one word: So as
it is no wonder if Christ deals with them after the same rate as Sextus the
fifth did with his Friars.

But it is time to leave these commune considerations, and with brevity to fall
upon the most remarkable occurrences in the Church, deducing them from its very
Creation to this day; it being necessary for the comfort, and better
information of the Reader, to premise some general proofs of what we say; and
that because such discourses as are interlarded as it were with matter of
History, and examples drawn from certain Experience, (as mine I conceive are)
do awaken, and with more efficacy excite the devotion of the Reader.

Though by the impiety of the Tyrants in those days, the Church was bitterly
persecuted in the persons of the Apostles; yet all their violence and barbarity
could not hinder but they went on still, serving God with all sincerity of
conscience, till at last they became forced to encounter the Heresies of
Menander the Samaritan, Ebioni and Cherinthus, (obstinate Heretics, and
perverse Adversaries to the Apostles, and so popular they denominated their
parties with their own several Names) and gave the Church great trouble and
perplexity: But St. John (who writ his Epistles about that time) though he was
at a great distance, by the assistance of some of his Disciples, refuted their
false Doctrine, and silenced them.

After them succeeded Carpocrates of Alexandria, and Epiphanes his son, the
Authors of the damnable Heresy of the Gnostics; and the Jews were about the
same time routed out of Jerusalem, and St. Mark made Bishop thereof about the
year 137.

In the year 161. Marcion the Heretic gave great disturbance to the Church,
but he was encountered, and partly convinced by Bardesanus and Rodosianus, two
learned men, and well skilled in the Holy Scriptures; but he was totally
refuted by Musanus and Modestus, who writ against Tatianus the Syrian, an
impious Heretic, and a great sower of dissension amongst young Christians.

In the year 174. there sprang up a new Heresy, by the means of Montanus
Phrygius, which was afterward called the Cataphrygian Heresy, and there were
some worse Heretics than himself joined with him; but it pleased God by
opposing the Learning and Sanctity of Irenaus Bishop of Lions against it, to
stop the violence of that torrent with the Books he writ in 184.

Against which Artemonus, one of the greatest Heretics of that age, writ also.
And in the year 246. there were new Heretics broached in Arabia, that were
called Arabians; but they were in a short time suppressed by the industry of
St. Origin.

The Clergy being divided, Novatianus the Roman was by faction created
Antipope, in opposition to Cornelius; which was the occasion of the first
Schism in the Church, besides the fall of two Bishops, Basilides Astaniansis,
and Martialis Emeritensis; and therefore to remedy and reconcile those
disturbances, that gave great scandal to Christendom, it was thought necessary
a General Council should be called. In the year 258. Noetus and Sabellius
appeared, Heretics both of them in their Doctrine, and arrogant in their
Lives. In 270. Paulus Samosatenus discovered himself, who was so much the more
scandalous in his Heresy, by how much he had been formerly a stout propugnor
of the Faith: But he was convinced by Machion a Priest of Antioch, a learned
man, and one that writ several things with great judgment toward unity in the
Church.

The second Schism began in Africa, and was called the Schism of the Donatists.
Antro a Priest of Alexandria, from whom the Heresy of the Arrians had its
original began to preach it up in the year 324. and to prevent the spreading of
those execrable blasphemies, a General Council was called, because this Heresy
of the Arrians (allowing I know not what liberty in their lives) had perverted
and debauched several Bishops from the Church of Christ. And indeed the Church
was never in that danger of being swallowed up and submerg'd, as in the days
of Arrius, in so much as there was nothing but tears to be seen in the eyes of
the Saints that stood firm, according to that expression, Ingemiscens orbis
terrarum Arrianum se esse miratus est.

The third Schism was betwixt Damasus and Vrsicinus in the year 366. and though
that also had perverted the good orders in the Church, yet it was
inconsiderable in comparison of what the Church suffered in the year 407. there
being then Heresies on foot, and Rome sacked at the same time by Alaricus King
of the Goths, who gave shelter and protection to those Heretics that afflicted
the Church.

About this time, Venice was begun to be built by those that fled from the fury
of the Goths, and particularly of Attila, whose actions were so barbarous, he
was called (and gloried in it) Flagellum Dei; as if by laying the foundation of
Venice, God Almighty intended to demonstrate the effect of his Divine
Providence, raising up as it were by Miracle, a Republique that should be a
bulwork of defense, not to the liberties of Italy only, but of all the Church
of Christ; and indeed her actions have expressed her so ever since, having been
always ready to spend the blood of her dearest Citizens in defense of
Christendom.

According as Heresy (protected by several Princes, and embraced by several
great Cities) did propagate and increase; and according as any new and more
dangerous sprung up, the Church applied all seasonable and miraculous remedies,
to repel their audacity, but in spite of all that could be done, they were
forced to call a general Council at Constantinople to suppress the Heresy of
the Monothelites, which they condemned there, and made many good Laws for the
better regiment of the Church.

In short, it is not to be comprehended by humane imagination, with how many
sorts of Heresies and Schisms, the Church of God in those days was afflicted
and torn, being for eight hundred years together in perpetual perplexity;
during which time, several Councels and Synods both general and particular were
called, more especially two at Rome, one at Antioch, two at Carthage, one of
them to determine, whether Heretics that repented and would return again to
the Church, were to be rebaptiz'd or not; the other, to conclude upon the
manner of baptizing of Infants in cases of necessity: two more there were in
Asia, one in Licaonia, the other in Phrygia, to consult upon the manner of
receiving such Heretics into the Church again as had a desire to return, which
cost great argument and dispute before it could be concluded.

During these eight hundred years, the Church was exposed to several
Persecutions, under the Tyranny of several Emperors; but nine of them were
more bloody than the rest, for thrusting and tearing into the very bowels of
the Church, the poor Saints were constrained either to lay themselves down as
Sacrifices at the feet of their Persecutors, or to fly from their barbarity, to
the protection of the Woods. But that just God (who had promised the Gates of
Hell should never prevail against the Glory of his Church) sent Charles the Son
of Pipin King of France, as a special gift from Heaven, to command the Empire
of the West. Which being found and acknowledged by the Romans, they ordered
these words to be publicly Proclaimed thorough all the Streets in Rome, To
Charles the Great, the most Pious and Peaceful Emperor Created by God, be Life
and Victory.

The Church that for so many years had been afflicted with Heresies and
Schisms, Wars both Intestine and Foreign, Ecclesiastic and Civil, found not
only ease and protection under the Government of this great Emperor, but was
propagated exceedingly; most of all the Cities of Europe, especially in Italy
and France, abounding with multitudes of new Christans won by the example of
Charles, who thought the Christian Faith more glory to him than his Crown; by
the force of his Arms, and the zeal of his Heart, profligating and confounding
those Heresies that were overrunning the Church; for which reason, the Popes
of Rome are in gratitude obliged to acknowledge the greatest part of their
Grandeur from the munificence of that Emperor.

And indeed the Popes are bound in Conscience daily to pay their Tribute o^
respect to the memory of that Emperor that gave them their Grandeur, and to
the present State of the Venetians, that with so much pains and expense has
preserved it; and indeed, were the Popes obligations to both of them compared,
I am of opinion (with Reverence be it spoken to the memory of so great a
Monarch) they would appear greater to that Republique, because though Charles
indeed gave them their Grandeur and Wealth, yet they could not have enjoyed
either without their Liberty, which Liberty they owe only to that Commonwealth.
All Christendom was in tears at the death of Charles the Great, but the Pope
above all, who had lost, as he thought, whatever had been given him by the
liberality of that Emperor: nor was it without reason he was lamented, for
within few years, the Enemies of the Church finding no impediment, and the
Christians grown curious of novelties, there began new Heresies and Schisms to
spread more fierce and dangerous than before, even the Popes differing and
quarrelling among themselves for the Papacy; insomuch that the Church was
constrained as it were to keep Councels constantly open, Leo the ninth having
called four; one in Rome, called the Lateran Council, the Council of Pavia in
Lombardy, of Reimes in France, and of Munster in Germany.

In Antioch (where by the pains and vigilance of St. Peter, and where he was
Bishop for ten years together) the Cross of Christ was set up and flourished
with so great a number of Christians, that they became emulated by their
Neighbors; yet after the year 400. Christianity began to stagger, and the
Flock of Christ to wander by degrees, so as where before it was a hard matter
to find an Infidel, it was then much more difficult to meet a Christian, to so
small a number were they reduced; and in this condition did they stand, till
the Christians of the West put the Eastern Saracens to flight, and restored
Antioch to her Primitive Liberty, and all this under the command of Godfrey of
Bollen, (who refused to be Crowned King with a Crown of Gold, where our Savior
had been Crowned with Thorns) in the year 1098.

Great was the Schism in the Church in the time of Alexander the third (as
shall be more particularly and more properly expressed in my third Book) and
all of them reconciled either by Councels or Congregations, only that which
gave him the greatest trouble, was an Assembly of Bishops at Pavia, congregated
by orders from the Emperor, but by the zeal and valor of the Venetian, that
was dissolved, and Alexander restored to the Chair, in despite of the
Emperor, who having lost his Army, was constrained by the Venetian to come in
Person to Venice to kiss the Popes Toe. So as God knows what condition the
Church would have been in, had not the valor of the Venetian interposed.

It would not be an easy matter to make an end of this History, nor would it
be easy for the best memory that is to retain them, should I enumerate every
particular Schism, and Heresy, every Dispute, every Persecution, every piece
of Cruelty, and every Mutation in the Church, and the Remedies that were so
seasonably and so miraculously applied, (as it were from Heaven) to her
afflictions.

And if it should be done, it would be only a renovation and revivement of the
memory of the ancient sorrows and afflictions of the Church: yet I am
persuaded, that as the relation and repetition of their suffering, would
enforce tears from the eyes of many a Christian; so am I satisfied on the other
side, the remedies and deliverances sent down to them from Heaven, would be a
great comfort and corroboration to the Godly. For which reason, I have in my
third Book in larg'd upon the miseries of the Church; not so much to
commemorate the unhappy and scandalous Schisms wherewith several Anti-Popes had
infested it, as to evince and make the Divine Providence more conspicuous to
the understanding of the Devout.

The Clergy of Rome, as well the smaller, as those of greatest Dignity, do
believe that they endure all the troubles and burdens of the Church, but those
burdens, as they call it, are accompanied with so much Honor and Grandeur,
it is not possible to discover the trouble they pretend to lie under. And
forasmuch as the Faithful do suffer most commonly by the Churchmen, it may be
said, it is the Clergy that enjoy, and the Laity that suffers; and indeed one
of their greatest troubles is, that they are constrained to endure silently the
insolences of the Ecclesiastics, which they commit with as much confidence,
and security, as if Honesty, and Justice, and Christianity, were intended for
other people, and not for them.

According to my natural inclination, I had the curiosity a while ago to read
over the Ecclesiastical History, and I made this observation, that all the
Schisms and Heresies in the Church, arose either from some profound and
undeterminable Disputes betwixt the Governors and Pastors in the Church, or
from the Envy that is too frequent amongst them, or from the Scandalousness of
their Lives, or from the Exaltation of their Kindred, or from some blind
passion that precipitates the people in general, and the Clergy in particular,
and reigns most especially in such persons as are dedicated to Divine Offices,
not that the Priesthood communicates any such thing to the Priest, but that the
Priest profaning the Priesthood, lives as he were under no such charge.

And this being the true Mother and Original of Schism, it behooves every good
Christian to apply what remedy he is able, not of Council and Admonition only
(because so obstinate is the nature of the Ecclesiastics, they will sooner
adhere to their own wicked opinions, than be persuaded by the best advice in
the world) but with Arms in their hands, to struggle and contend in
preservation of the just prerogative of the Church.

But since we have had occasion to speak so frequently of Schism and Heresy;
to prevent confusion in such as have not been well instructed, it will not be
amiss in this place to give some description by the bye of the difference
betwixt them; and not without reason, for it is not two months since, that a
certain Franciscan Preacher, a Missionary against Heretics, being asked what
the difference was, could not make him an answer.

Schism it originally a Greek word, and signifies in our Tongue, a cutting
separation, or division; and indeed, though there appears some little
difference betwixt Heresy and that, it is not much; both of them importing
such a division, as tares and distracts the Body and Members of the Church,
that was formerly united with so much order and decorum.

Notwithstanding all this, if we consider well the qualities of them both, we
shall find some variety in their manner of Operation. By Heresy is meant, not
only a difference in matters of Discipline, but of Faith also; and of this kind
was the division introduced in the Primitive times by the Ebionites,
Marcionites, and more particularly the Arrians. Whereas by Schism, is meant a
difference or disagreement in the Orders and Exterior Policy of the Church, and
such was the disunion the Donatists occasioned in the Church in Africa, by
reason of Cecilianus his being chosen Bishop of Carthage, they pretending he
was illegally advanced to that Bishopric, and contrary to Ecclesiastical
Rules, so as they began at that time to write against their proceedings in that
Case, without meddling at all with any principal of Religion.

But this difference does not always hold in the same manner as I have stated
it; and the reason is, because as Faith and Charity (the two principal
Theological virtues) are observed to go always and inseperably together, so
Schism and Heresy (the two professed diametrical Enemies of those virtues) go
usually hand in hand; insomuch as he that has no Charity, will have but little
Faith, and he that has no Faith, will have less Charity, and upon this score,
St. Austin (with the greatest part of the Doctors of the Church) doubts not to
pronounce Heresy nothing else but an old and inveterated Schism.

Schismatics commonly are Domestic Enemies, and by consequence more
mischievous than Heresy, which is as it were an open and declared Enemy. And
this Schism is many times nourished in the Church by the very Pastors that
govern it; so that Schism is often times the root from whence the Tree of
Heresy grows to such a height, it becomes very difficult to pull it up, and
hurts the hands of those that endeavor it. And certainly, he that has not the
power or caution to suppress Schism, must with more difficulty attempt the
eradication of Heresy, because if Schism in its Infancy as it was, be found
difficult to be suppressed, Heresy (that is but Schism adult) will be more
difficult.

I have already declared, that the greatest Schism that at this time reigns in
the Church, and insensibly tares the Bowels of it out, is the observation all
good Christians make of the great Scandals and Impieties of the Clergy; and if
any should be so far over-seen as to undertake their defense, I would ask them
but these questions.

To pass from the embraces of a wicked and meritricious woman, to the Sacred
Duties of the Altar, is not that Schism? to see the Priest of God celebrate
Mass with Daggers at their Girdles, and Pistols under their Vests, is it not
Schism? To see (I speak it with horror) that Boy serving and attending the
Priest as his Disciple in the Holiest part of his Office, with whom he lay the
night before, and must again the next, is not that Schism? To hear hourly of
Murders, and other execrable Villainies committed in the very Cloisters, is not
that Schism? To sell Benefices at a dear rate, to keep open shop to negotiate
for Simoney, to take the Rings off the Virgin Maryes fingers, and to put them
upon a Harlots, is not that Schism? to fatten up the Popes Nephews with the
Wealth of the Church, is not that Schism? In short, what is this but a
separation of themselves from the Rules and good Orders of the Church? Is it
not a dis-uniting of Faith and Charity? a taring of the Church out of the Arms
of our Savior? and a practicing of things contrary to the practice of the
Apostles?

And indeed, things may be as they will in other parts of Christendom, if we
restrain them no better at Rome, in which place there are thousands of these
Schisms that will ruin the Church infallibly, without some speedy remedy be
applied, their Corruption being at that height, it is almost impossible to look
upon a Priest with patience.

If the zeal of any good Christian carries him on so far, as to correct or
reprehend any of them for their Exorbitancies, they will answer in their
Excuse, that even among the Apostles there was a Judas, a Traitor, and
therefore as they would have them believe, they ought not to be scandalized at
the ill example the Clergy gives to them.

These kind of excuses may seem good to those that use them, but not to those
that hear them. I would to God amongst twelve Ecclesiastics, there was but one
Judas to be found; but I am afraid, amongst a hundred of them that imitate
Judas in their lives, there will be scarce one found that lives like the rest
of the Apostles.

Is it not Schism to hear a thousand of quarrels and disputes betwixt the
Bishops and the Civil Magistrates, betwixt Princes and Cardinals, Priest and
Priest, Order and Order, in the very Heart and Bosom of the Church!

The Religion or Order of Dominicans contends very fiercely with the Franciscan
about Original Sin, and will have the Virgin Mary as liable to it, as any other
Creature whatever, which they maintain very furiously in their Schools, but
with more Arrogance than Argument. The Franciscan on the other side, with the
same Ardor pronouncing her immacculate. I my self have, upon several occasions,
heard poor ignorant Dominicans discoursing with that Insolence, a poor Secular
would have been burnt for half of it. But these good Fathers are exempt from
all punishment because they can command the Inquisition as they please,
chastising who they think fit, and passing by such as deserve it, being Judges
to others, and Princes to themselves.

Can there be greater Schism, than to hear them disputing daily, and contending
about the preceedence of one Order before another, and sometimes with such
passion, that they fall together by the Ears, battering one another in their
very processions with the Crosses they bear, to the no small Scandal of the
Laity, that to prevent Homicide, and Bloodshed, are forced to interpose. Nor
has this happened once or twice, but a thousand times, not in one City, but a
hundred. I remember my self such a Combat one Corpus Christi day in the Lands
of the Church, betwixt the Agustins, and another Order of Friars, whose name I
have forgot; as they were passing out of the Cathedral with their lighted
Candles in their hands, and the Bishops Vicar carrying the Host, they fell into
some difference about the preceedency, and at last (in spite of all
exhortation to the contrary) to blows; striking one another with their Candles,
and burning one another Beards, so as the Vicar had no other way, but to
command them home again to their Covents, and adjourn the Procession a full
hour.

Nor is there any Schism, not only more scandalous, but ridiculous in the
Church, than that betwixt the Conventual Fathers of the Order of St. Francis,
and the Cappuchins, and for what great business? (I speak these things to
Foreigners, for those that live in Italy, have them hourly before their Eyes)
For I know not what Devil with a horn. The Cappuchins will needs have it that
St. Francis wore a Cap with a horn upon his head; the Coventuals on the other
side, will have it a Hood or Cappuce like theirs: in short, these Schismatics
are so Religious in these trifles, they Preach and Inculcate them into their
Disciples, that they may be ready upon all occasion to rifle the Arguments of
the other; whilst the People, either out of ignorance or partiality, run up and
down the Streets, sometimes crying up the Hood, and sometimes the Horn, as
their affection to either side leads them.

The Popes by several Decrees, as their Conscience or Passion directed them,
endeavored to reconcile them, but all to no purpose, they rather exasperated
than appeased them. Urban the eight, in compliance with his Brother Cardinal
Saint Onofrius his humor, set forth several Bulls in favor of the Cappuchins,
upon which the Franciscans took occasion to defend themselves in Print. And
accordingly, a certain Father called Catalanus, writ a large Volume against the
Cappuchins, that put all Italy into a Convulsion, so as it seemed as if the
days of the Guelphs and Ghebelli^s were returned again, the Cardinals, as well
as common People, falling into Parties. The Cappuchins also (though the book
was prohibited to be bought or read under penalty of Excommunication) published
several Manifesto's against it, though it was Dedicated to a Cardinal. Now can
there be a greater or vainer Schism in the Church? Yet these Venerable
Schismatical Fathers of the Church, will persuade you that all this is no
Schism, but a Virtue, a laudible and necessary Vindication of their Rights,
under which Title they comprehend all their Schisms and Heresies.

The Heretics that are now in Europe in such great numbers, or in any other
part of the World, have not separated themselves from the Church out of any
Fundamental Exception, as if the Foundation of that Building was not good, Oh
no! They will not say so themselves; on the contrary, they acknowledged them
Excellent, but observing Corruption and Scandal increasing daily in the Church,
they conclude the Edifice cannot stand long, but by a precipitate destruction
must of necessity fall, and bury its Foundation in its own Ruins; thereby
taking occasion to insinuate into the People, that God Almighty will prosper
the Reformers, and make their Labor and Industry instrumental in re-clearing
the Foundations, and re-establishing the Church.

He that is so curious to trace out the Original of Heresy, especially those
which abound in these days, he shall find, that from idle and impertinent
Fewds and Disputes amongst the Ecclesiastics (which nobody regarded, or if
they did, they looked upon them as inconsiderable) came Schism, and from
Schism, Heresy, which has multiplied like Corn. The least spark of fire,
meeting matter proper for combustion, kindles immediately, and if not timely
extinguished, will hazard the whole City. The Scandal the Ecclesiastics give;
is like such a spark, it seems yet inconsiderable, but if not seasonably
quenched, for ought I know, it may put the whole Church into a Flame.

One of the greatest miseries I have observed in the Church, is, that in spite
of our own reason and judgment, we are forced and compelled to applaud the
Impieties of the Clergy; and if any persons Conscience be so tender, and so
true to the Religion he professes, as to refuse it, he is pronounced a Heretic
immediately, and accordingly condemned to the Flames.

The Popes think they do a great matter, when they raise three hundred thousand
Crowns upon the people, under pretense of extirpating the Heretics in Germany,
and yet send the Emperor but thirty thousand of them; and in the mean time,
they entertain such multitudes of Schismatics in Rome, whose scandalous lives
disturb the peace of all Christendom.

Would the Pope with his Authority, and the Cardinals with their Advice,
instead of Persecuting the Heretics, reform not only the general Abuses in the
Church which are numerous, but the innumerable Scandals committed by the
Prelates in their Palaces, and the Friars in their Cloisters, in the face and
defiance as it were of all Christian people, the Church would be not only in a
better condition, but the Heretics that cannot now be reduced with force, nor
persuasion, would humble themselves, come into the Church, and throw themselves
into her Arms.

Some Popes are zealous for the Persecution of Heretics, but Heretics do but
sport themselves at the Persecution of the Popes; and indeed the Heretics have
more reason to jest at it, than the Popes have to Persecute, for in the
punishing of one, they do but raise up a thousand; if they burn one in some
place that is remote from Rome, there will twenty turn Heretics for it in
Rome; in short, if they chastise one, a thousand will be awakened to inform
themselves of the reason, and turn Heretics too.

This one thing I may say, that perhaps there is not a man in Christendom
better acquainted with the Juglings of the Roman Catholics, or the Impieties
of the Heretics, than I am. I have weighed and considered them both, and will
boldly aver^ there is not any way more ready for the Conversion of Heretics,
than the good example of Catholics, and especially the Churchmen; nor better
means to restrain those that in Rome it self do write against the iniquities of
Rome, than to take away those iniquities once for all.

What I say, I can speak with confidence, my own experience having evinced it.
Let Rome but Persecute one Tongue, and she shall raise up a hundred; let her
but put one good Heretic to death, and she creates a hundred perverse
Heretics in his place.

But some may ask me the difference betwixt a perverse Heretic, and a good
one? I will declare my self; by a perverse Heretic, I mean those the
Catholics calls good; and by a good one, him that he thinks perverse. The
perverse one praises, and flatters the Clergy in Rome, and Rome in the Clergy;
the good Heretics on the contrary, condemn the defects both in the one and the
other, not out of malice, but zeal, not to foment wickedness, but to remove it.

When the Ecclesiastics do meet with any Treatise that checks and rebukes the
Exorbitancy of their Lives, they think not of any Reformation of themselves,
but cry out presently it is the invention of Heretics; but the good Catholic,
that with sorrow observes the Ecclesiastics Conversations, know too well it is
otherwise.

The Heretics abhor me to death, and why? Because with Gentleness and Charity,
I rebuke the Extravagan^es of the Churchmen of Rome; for they making their
advantage of the disorders there, would be glad to have all things run to
ruin: and indeed, had I any design to do Rome a prejudice, I would let them go
on in their own ways, without giving them any notice of the Precipice. A
Chyrurgeon that hates his Patient, troubles not himself about his recovery; but
he which loves him, will put his Probe to the Wound, to remove the Corruption.

I call God to witness, I speak not what I say out of passion; my desire is to
see the Church in Charity and Union within it self, for this is certain that
violence, and commination, and force, have no other effect upon the Heretics,
than to exasperate and incense them.

All other applications are vain: to remove the crudeties and ill humors in
the Stomach, inward Medecines are to be taken, and those humors that tare and
gnaw the very Bowels of the Church, are to be removed, before that which
corrupts the habit and outward parts only: if the Physician purges the body
thoroughly within, he is assured the outward part cannot remain ill. The
Governors of the Church, the Prelates, and the Priests, are the Vitals and
Interior parts of that Body, let them be well purged of their Enormities, and
the Exterior will soon recover. If Rome would Cure Rome, the Heretics would be
cured by their example.

I have often said it, and will assert it again, that Heretics do daily repair
from their several Countries to the City of Rome, to observe the Conversation
of the Catholics, and embrace what they esteem most conducible. But with what
success? They come forth Christians, they return Turks; they enter into Rome
with a scrupulous and unsettled Conscience, and they go out with a Diabolical;
they come forth with a desire to become Holy, and they go back with a
resolution to become Devils; for in a word, the most part of those that come
thither, return Atheists home again. And all by reason of the innumerable
Scandals and Transgressions they observe in the Ecclesiastics; so as there
could be nothing more Charitable and Expedient for the Conversion of Heretics,
than for the Pope and Cardinals in their great Prudence, to begin and effect a
thorough Reformation in their Clergy.

A certain Protestant of Bearne, that had been long in Italy, and was my
particular friend, would often tell me, He would sooner choose to be a Devil in
Hell, than a Catholic in Rome; and his reason was, Because the Devils believe
and tremble, but the Catholics did but laugh at it, committing greater faults
in the Church than they.

For my better satisfaction, I entreated him one day to give me a clearer
prospect of his Judgment, which willingly he granted, and delivered it in this
manner* Sir, Homicide is forbidden in the Old Law by Gods express command, and
by Christ's particular Order in the new; in short, God as God, Christ as God and
Christ, all Laws both Divine and Humane, both Natural and Celestial, have
forbidden Murder. Non Occides.

Yet in Italy, nay in Rome it self, thousands of Murders are committed, and
which is worse, the Murderer has no more to do, than to betake himself to their
Churches. I have seen my self, some of those Homicides walking in State for
their Recreation in those very Churches, where but a while before, the dead
body of him that they had murdered, was buried, and can any thing be found
more Diabolical than this? No, and without doubt I have good reason for my
Resolution of being a *Devil, rather than a Catholic.

I did not fail to suggest all the Arguments the Pope and the Church use for
the defense of their Sanctuaries, but to no purpose, for he answered, and not
without passion, That the Pope could not make the house of God a refuge for
Murderers, expressly against his commands without making the world believe Gods
Commandments were false. And truly a good Conscience cannot be without some
regret, as often as he thinks upon Gods express command, Thou shall not kill;
and on the other side, observes the Violators of that Law sheltered and
protected in his house, as if the presence of Christ served only chiefly to
secure Murderers. I know there are many Divines, that with great zeal will
endeavor to defend it; but I would to God there were fewer of them in the
Church, perhaps things would be better managed in the Service of God with their
native simplicity, whereas now the minds of poor Christians are confounded with
the Opinion of this Divine, and the Explication of the other. Schism, and
Heresy, and Schismatical Conventicles, from whence had they their Original,
but from the brains and niceties of the Theologists? But let them defend their
Sanctuaries, and argue against the Precepts of God as they please, the Day of
Judgment will come, and they will have their reward.

Poor Princes, must it needs be that the Arms of your Justice must be held, and
the safety of the people impugned, by an Opinion that is without doubt
Diabolical.

A certain friend of mine that had seen the world, did use to call the Divines
and Confessors, the two Domestic Enemies of the Church; and truly I cannot
resolve my self, which of the two are the least necessary in the Service of
God. Amongst scrupulous persons, I know these words will be thought Heretical;
but certainly they are full of Pious Sentiment and Catholic. The Divines, that
will be disputing beyond what the simplicity of Faith requires, are Devils, not
Divines; and the Confessors that make Sport and Comedy with the Confessions of
their Penitents, are the same. The Theologists with their Arguments, turn Unity
into Schism, and the Confessors on the other side, turn the Confessions into
Farces. Were the Government of the Church (instead of being Monarchical, and
dependant only upon the Pope, as it is now) Aristocratical, and committed to
the care and jurisdiction of such Cardinals, as would serve the Church, and not
his Holiness, the Divines would not be so quarrelsome, nor the Confessors as
profane as the Divines. But Confession now adays is nothing but derision, the
Confessors drolling only and playing upon their Penitents, and cheating both
them and themselves.

And all this evil proceeds from the carelessness of the Bishops, in Selecting
fit persons for the taking Confessions, I am confident there are in Italy at
this time, above two thousand Confessors that can neither read nor understand
one verse in the Scriptures, and yet most of them Masters or Batchelors of
Divinity; and God knows then how the poor Sinner is absolved. Two instances I
can give of their Capacities, not Chosen, or Select, but taken up by chance out
of a thousand more that I have heard. The first is of a certain Merchant of
Parma that went to Confession to a Barefooted Friar of the Order of St.
Francis, and had this Penance enjoined him, That he should eat three Ounces of
Chafe. To ease himself a little of the disgust he had taken at the
indiscretion of his Penance, he comes to me and tells me the whole story; I had
the curiosity to ask him what his sins were that he had confessed, and he
protested to me nothing but that he had had an intention to have kissed his
Maid.

Now I leave the Reader to be judge in this case, what proportion there was
betwixt the Sin and the Penance. His heart should have been punished, not his
mouth, because 'twas that, not this, had offended. But it is ignorance and
indiscretion that causes all this, and should the like case happen to me, I
could very well make the Father an answer. The other was of a certain young
Student that went to a Jesuit to Confession; amongst other of his Confessions,
he told him that he had lay'n a whole night with his Fatherships Neice, and
began to faint almost under the shame and apprehension of his Sin, so that he
had no mind to proceed, but the good Father to encourage him, told him, That it
was no such great matter to lie a night with the Neice, for he had ly'n ten
years together with the Mother. And with this good exhortation, he sent the
young man back to his house. And this second Example I heard my self in a
Sermon in a certain Town in the Territories of the Venetian, Preached by an
Augustine Friar, who by his face, looked as like to do such a business as the
Jesuit.

And thousands of these instances may be heard daily in their Pulpits; the
Church of Rome, by reason of the licentiousness of its Ministers, being the
laughing stock of the Catholics, and the obloquy of the Protestant. And truly
it is sad, that those Confessions that were at first required, as conducing to
the Salvation of Souls, should be turned now (by the iniquity of the
Confessors) into the scandal of the Church. The Bishops shut their eyes at
every thing, because the Cardinals connive at them. The Cardinals commit all
things to the Pope, contenting themselves with the magnificence of their
Station. The Pope (because they let him alone in a Pinnacle of Grandeur above
all exhalation of scandal) leaves them to themselves, and retains his opinion
of their Piety; not regarding what Heresies the Ignorance, Malice, or
Lasciviousness of his Confessors, may create.

To this the Ecclesiastic answers, that we ought not to look so severely to
the faults of the scandalous, because they are but frailties, and so will be
judged by the Divine Justice it self. And for instance they allege the example
of Judas, who was a Traitor even in the company of the Holy Apostles, so as our
eye they say, ought not to be upon him, but upon the rest. To which I answer,
that if there were indeed but one ill Churchman in twelve, all Heretics both
Jew and Gentile, would be converted to the Faith; but as the case stands, there
is scarce one good to be found in ten thousand bad, and therefore how can they
be converted, that have so many scandals in their prospect.

But some will say perhaps, how can these things be redressed? I answer, with
the greatest facility in the world, if the Cardinals pleased. I speak not of
the Pope, because (let the Divines say what they will for His absoluteness) to
speak the truth, the Church of God is not a Monarchy, but a Republique, the
Cardinals and Bishops being Supreme and Sovereign Senators, and the Pope, as
Christ's Vicar, President of the Senate; for though Christ created St. Peter his
Vicar, he took not away the Authority from the rest of the Apostles, they
always with Supreme Authority in their College, decreeing what ever they
thought necessary for the benefit of the Church, St. Peter being allowed no
more than his single voice. So that the Care and Government of the Church,
belonging by legal succession to the Cardinals, the right of appointing
remedies against such scandals as do afflict us, belongs likewise to them. And
indeed, whilst the Church was under a kind of Aristocrasie, Miracles, and
Holiness, and Goodness, were observed to flourish. But since the Priests began
to flatter the Popes, conceiving preferment and advantages easilier obtained by
the adulation of one person, than a Senate, they put all into the hands of the
Pope, and made him a Monarch; so that Miracles were lost immediately, Sanctity
was banished, and a thousand wickednesses introduced, because that which was
Monarchy in the hands of the Pope, became Tyranny in those of the Nephews.
Insomuch that to reduce the Church to its Primitive Holiness, it will be
necessary to restore it to its ancient Aristocrasie.

Since my being at Rome, I heard of hundreds of Decrees put out by the
Congregation of Regolars, but I never heard of any of them put in Execution as
they ought to have been, the Popes for the most part having dashed them motu
proprio; besides* the application being superficial and only to the top
branches of the Tree, it was impossible it should reach the Corruption that was
in the Root. The wickedness of the Churchmen, is like a Wart upon a man's hand,
the more you cut it, unless you cut it to the bottom, the greater it grows. To
put out fire, it is necessary to remove that matter that sustains it; and if
the Cardinals would apply any remedy to the scandals that throng daily out of
the Cloisters, to the detriment of the Church, they ought not to consider the
nature of the Friars, after they are made Friars, so much as the qualities of
those who make themselves Friars.

The Method of the Italians in this age (I speak not of other Countries) is
good indeed for the advancement of their Arms, but not at all for the benefit
of the Church, For example, an Italian that has three Sons, picks out the
wisest and most gentile, and Marryes him to keep up his Family; him that is
most sprightly and vigorous, he sends to the Wars; and if any be more foolish,
or extravagant than other, he is sent to the Covent. In short, those Fathers
whose Sons are given to Theft, to Drunkenness, Lust, Dissoluteness, or
Prodigality; if they be Liars, Swearers, Cheats, Blasphemers, etc. do presently
devote them to the Cloister, where putting on the Habit of a Friar, they put
them out of their sight indeed, but put them into a Religious house, where they
become Devils, because wickedness, or rather a heap of wickedness, cannot be
taken away by fifteen yards of Cloth.

Were these disorders but regulated, a great part of the scandal that lies at
present upon the Church, would be taken away. it is a shame the worst should be
given to God, and the best to the Devil: 'twere better to suppress Cloisters
and Friars, than to suffer such Friars to be made. In the Church of Rome, the
quality of the persons that are to enter into Religious Habits, is not so much
considered, as their quantity; so their number be great, no matter for the
rest, Cheats, Back-biters, the Hunch-back'd, the Lame, and the Blind, are all
admitted into the Cloisters, as if the number, not the qualities, made the
Religion. O most diabolical policy, and fit to be exploded!

Did it belong to me to supplicate the Pope, and the College of Cardinals, I
would do it upon my knees, because I observe goodness and piety declining in
the Church, and all by reason of the multitudes of Priests, whose qualities
ought to be more regarded, than their numbers. One truly Religious man, is
worth a thousand wicked, and edifies the Church more with the explinariness of
his life, than all the rest with their Religious formalities.

When first I saw the picture of St. Francis, with a Church upon his Shoulders,
and this Inscription about it, Vade Francisce repara domum meum quae labitur. I
was amazed, especially when having the reason of it from a Father of that
Order, he told me that St. Francis had seen our Savior one night in a Dream,
who admonished him, in the same words to go and repair his Church. And in this,
the cunning of the Friars wherewith they lull and cajole the Popes and the
Cardinals, is seen. This I may boldly affirm, that that Inscription is a
dishonor to them all; to what end serve the Pope, the Cardinals, and the
Bishops? If this be true, the Pope cannot deny but his Government is naught,
because he has suffered the Church to fall into those Errors. Upon the day that
is dedicated to St. Francis Saverius, in the presence of four or five
Cardinals, and in Rome it self, I heard a Jesuit Preach in praise of that
Saint, among the rest of his Elegies, this was one, That he had Baptized a
million, and a hundred, and eight thousand Souls in the Indies. I wondered not
so much at the Priest that Preached this, as at the Cardinals that stood gaping
to hear him. To believe that Saverius did not Baptize more into the Faith of
Christ, than the whole College of Apostles may, I hope is no Heresy; and
indeed if I speak my judgment, I am of opinion he scarce Baptized any, and my
reason is, because at this time there is not a hundred thousand Christians in
the whole Indies. So that had it been true, that St. Francis Saverius had
Baptized so many, the number would have been increased, especially the way
having been open since that time to the Spaniard, Portugal, English, Hollander,
and all other Christians whatsoever. But for my part, I dare affirm it is but a
politic Stratagem of the Friars, to besot, and inveigle, the Pope and
Cardinals into an opinion of their Piety, and to shut their ears against the
report of their Wickedness.

The Church is to be supported by the Zeal and good Government of the Popes and
their Cardinals, who are absolute Governors of the Flock of Christ, and no
others; the Saints are to honor and respect them as Servants of God: but the
consequence will not hold, that out of respect to St. Francis, the Church
should be filled up with thousands of Franciscans, in which they do more
mischief than good. And if it were true, that St. Francis Baptized so many
thousand Souls as they pretend, it would be unfit to give the Jesuits that
great liberty to enrich themselves, as if St. Francis his Voyage to the Indies,
had been to have brought the Indies back to the College of Jesuits. But why
these multitudes of Religions? Why these numbers of Priests? Half a dozen good
Christians, would do more toward the Conversion of Infidels, than thousands of
such, as devour up the bread from the people, and impoverish Princes, for the
inrichment of themselves.

Pope Innocent the tenth, suspended the Superiors of all orders from investing
of Friars, but the intention of that Pope not being seconded by his Successors,
it was not executed long before the Gate he had opened was shut up again, and
it may be it was out of fear of their railing, for being naturally vindicative,
they have more sting than honey in their tongues. If the Cardinals Projectors
of the several orders about Rome, would take the pains but to Visit the Covents
under their Charge, in five and twenty Friars, they would scarce find fifteen
that could read, nor three amongst them that were fit to converse with an
honest man. To what purpose then is this loss of bread upon an unprofitable
Generation? To what purpose does the Church despoil her self of her own
Garments, to cover the shoulders of a race of people that do nothing for her
interest? It is the Pope is the greatest gainer by these multitudes of Clergy;
the Princes in the mean time lose so many of their Subjects, and so much of
their Revenue, giving out of their own Stock to the Church, whilst the Pope
sucks up at long run whatsoever they give.

I shall conclude this Book with a Jew that was baptized in Rome; to whom I
asked this Question, If there were many more of his Nation converted to the
Faith; to which he replied, The Jews might be easily made Christians, if the
lives of the Churchmen were not so scandalous, I answered, If you that are now
a Christian, do retain still such good thoughts of the Religious; it is a sign
your Baptism has no profound root in your heart. The Jew smiled, and leaving
that discourse, it was all the answer he gave me. In the mean time, let him
that pleases imagine the rest. I shall proceed to discourse more nearly of the
Cardinals, who are the Legal Supporters of the Church of Christ.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART I.
BOOK III.
The Contents.
Which is treated of the sweetness of that Fortune, that receives its original
from the Riches of the Church. Of the contemptibleness of Ecclesiastical
dignity in the Primitive times, the reason why the wealth of the Church is the
sweeter now, for being bitter at first. That the Court of Rome is the most
capable of enriching their Families, and by what means. Of the diversity of
degrees in Rome. Of the Cardinalitial dignity, and its Grandeur. Of the
immoderate desire of Prelates to become Cardinals. How much the Popes have
exceeded in aggrandizing of Cardinals. Of the illustrious name of a Cardinal.
Of the original of the Cardinalitial dignity, and the Etimology of the word. Of
the Assistants Saint Peter had in the Execution of his Charge. Of the first
Titles given and conserved to the Cardinals. Of the distribution of Orders and
Degrees in the time of the Papacy of Higinus. Of the distinction at first
betwixt Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Of some reasons that prove there were
Cardinals in the Infancy of the Church, and that in good veneration and esteem.
Of the Opinion of those that would have Cardinals to be no more than simple
Curats in the beginning of the Church, That Religion is made by men and not by
places. Of the Division of Offices in the Republiques of Greece. Of the manner
in which the Ministers of the Church were formerly ordered. Of the name of
Cardinal given first to the place where they served, and afterward to the
person that served. Of the Ecclesiastical Ministry exercised in Caves in the
beginning of Christianity for fear of the Tyrants. Of the great esteem they had
formerly of the Title of Brother, and the correspondence that past betwixt the
Ministers of the Church. Of the strange Tragedies that fell oftentimes out, in
the Councels, and in the Election of Bishops, and the cause. Of the number of
persons killed in Rome, upon a difference at the Election of Damascus and
Ursinus. Of the Persecutions of the Emperors overcome by the Church with the
force of patience. Of the preceedency of the Bishops and Cardinals, and how the
Cardinalship was a step to the degree of a Bishop. Of the effects that the
blending and confusion of Temporal things with Spiritual brought into the
Church. Of the Ecclesiastical Government, and its policies. Of the resemblance
of the Church with the Galley of Salamin. How the Supreme Government of the
Church was taken from the Bishops, and transferred to the Cardinals. How
ambition first flourished in the Church. Of the Election of Cardinals, and the
quality of their Electors. Of the great ardour with which the Italian Prelates
negotiated the Cardinalitial Dignity. Of the Honors and Dignities invented by
the World, and by fortune. Of the Titles the Cardinals enjoy at present. Of the
number that forms the College of Cardinals. Of the great Prerogative that
follow the Majesty of Cardinals. Of the time the Popes create their Cardinals.
Of the manner of their creation formerly, and of the way they are created at
present. Of a certain example of a Catholic and a Protestant, about the manner
of creating of Cardinals, Of Maldochino's promotion to the Cardinalship. Of the
seven Offices in the persons of the Cardinals. Of the Pension and Jurisdiction
of the Popes Vicar. Of the charge and antiquity of the Vice-chancellorship. Of
the number of Congregations the Cardinals hold. Of the three Arch-Priestship in
the persons of the Cardinals. Of the order observed at the death of a Cardinal,
and of the ceremonies at their Funerals. Of the diminution of the Cardinalitian
authority by the Popes. Of the manner in which they receive their Caps. Of the
ceremony of stopping the mouths of the Cardinals. Of the Cardinalitial Habits.
Of their Cavalcades. Of the usual Function when the Pope sends a Cap to a
Cardinal out of Rome. Of the visits the Cardinals receive and return. Of the
manner how the Prelates of the Church are received by the Cardinal Padron. Of
the scandal taken by the Protestants, by the irregular lives of some of the
Cardinals. Of the manner of their stopping their Coaches. Of the civility
amongst the Ecclesiastics. Of the Cardinals courtesy to Strangers, when they
are Legates of Provinces. Of the Presents the new Cardinals give to the Officers
of the Popes Court, and the Cardinal Nephews Court, and to others. Of the
manner observed by the Cardinal Legates, when they receive the relations of any
Serene Prince. The manner how the Cardinals receive the great Ladies as they
pass by their houses. Of the Popes Titles, resemblance with the Titles of
Christ. Of the great contempt the Popes in the Primitive times had of Honors
and Titles. Of the introduction of Titles amongst the Ecclesiastics, according
as Riches were introduced. Of the Titles the Popes used anciently. Of the Title
of Servant of the Servants of God, introduced by Gregory. That Schism and
Heresy were begot in the Church by the introduction of so many several Titles.
Of the variation of many Titles in the persons of the Cardinals. Of the Title
of Eminence invented by Urban the eight, and upon what occasion. Of his first
design to have conferred that Title upon his Nephews only. Of the troubles
brought into the Church, by the assignation of the Title of Eminence to the
Cardinals. Of the Title of Highness assumed by the Princes, after the Cardinals
had taken upon them the Title of Eminence. How common the Title of Excellence
became after that time. Of a Princes Secretary that refused a Letter from a
Cardinal to his Prince, because it was not directed with the Title of Highness.
Of the Divines the Cardinals keep always about them. Of the office of a
Theologist, how honorable it is, when exercised by a person of Learning and
Worth* Of a certain Divine, and his impious Services to his Cardinal. Of the
honor good Servants bring to the persons of the Cardinals, and of the
dishonor, if they be wicked; and of other particularities.

THere are some Ages past already, since all Europe (not to restrain my self to
Italy which has found the greatest sweetness of it) had had experience how
pleasant that Fortune is, that receives its. Original from the Church. For from
thence it is, that that which before was despised by the most abject Citizens,
is now eagerly aspired to by the most considerable Families in Europe.

Some ten Ages past, there was not a Mendicant, or Artificer much more, that
could be persuaded to leave his Cabane, or his Shop, to take upon him the
Authority of a Prince, in the Territory of the Church. The Pastors in those
days, choosing rather to sweat and toil like a Husbandman at Plough, than like
a Prince to command the Monarchy of Christ.

At present (or for these two last Ages rather) the nature of things has been
altered so much, there seems no Room left in the Ministry of the Church, but
for the Richest, and most Illustrious Families that are, Princes themselves
aspiring to those preferments, changing willingly their Sword, for a Gown, and
their Mantle Royal, for a Friars Cowle.

Amongst the Protestants also, I observe no small alteration; in former Ages,
one of the most able and eminent Ministers of the Gospel, could not without
great difficulty get a Wife, even amongst the meanest people of the City. Now a
days the Tables are turned, and the greatest Ladies are ambitious to marry
themselves to the most abject and ignorant of that Ministry.

To the Catholic and Protestant both, this matter appears wonderful, yet if
it be considered narrowly, the mystery is not impenetrable: the truth is, the
Pay of the Church that before was bitter, is now sweet and easy A Preacher of
the Gospel has now no more to do, than to furnish himself with a dozen Sermons
aforehand, and (according to the revolution of the year) to beat them over and
over again into the Ears of the People? whereas formerly it was their custom to
study early and late, from morning to night, and be always ready, not to
expose only, but spend their blood in the Service of the Church. Formerly, the
Clergy thought of nothing but executing the duty of their Functions, taking no
care nor pleasure in the world, and therefore the world despised them. At
present they are so far inveighed and enamored with the world, they show but
little affection to the Church, and the world respects them for it. Anciently
they served the Church for no other end, but to gain Souls to Heaven; but now
they served it only to gain applause and riches to themselves; then they were
(...) ^^d despised, now they are rich and adored.

In those days the Popes were constrained with tears in their eyes to beseech
such and such that they would vouchsafe to take the Ecclesiastical Habit upon
them, because then their humility and meekness made them contemptible to the
world. Now the Scene is changed, and people beg and entreat with their
Memorials and Petitions (not to say Bribes) that his Holiness would graciously
confer the Cassock of a Prelat upon them; their humility being turned into
pride, and their meekness into magnificence.

Oh how many Families of them would beg their bread of those very people they
despise, had not this great wealth been brought into the Church, and with
suitable dignity been conferred upon the Clergy?

There is not in the whole Universe, a Court more capable nor more likely to
enable and enrich a mean family, than Rome, and all by its introducing so great
a number of Prelates into the Church: for every man being by natural instinct
desirous of the advancement of his own family, betakes himself to Rome, with
confidence he shall raise himself one day to some considerable dignity.

There are several qualities and degrees in Rome; all of them together make up
that Lather as it were, by which the Cardinalship is to be ascended to; there
being none at present able to make one hope for a greater dignity.

To aspire to so great an honor, is an argument of great ambition in the heart
of that man; nor can any man of the Gown desire greater advancement in this
Age, than to be made a Cardinal, because with the dignity he receives an
immediate pre-eminence over all those that were his Companions before; is made
a Brother of Gods Vicegerent upon the Earth, and ally's himself with what Kings
or Princes he pleases, every one being ambitious to call a Cardinal his Cousen.

Caesar for a long time had a desire to wear a perpetual Laurel, but his
desire is nothing to that ardor and fury wherewith the Prelates of Italy, and
all Europe do aspire to so eminent a dignity.

How deep a place this desire has got in the hearts of the Prelates, may be
argued from hence, that they oftentimes dye with joy that they have arrived at
such honor, that others dye for sorrow that they cannot attain it; and others
think their labor well bestowed, if by forty years fawning upon this Prelat
and that, they can but reach it last.

For prevention of contempt which usually accompanies common things, they have
with good reason annexed both to their Secular and Ecclesiastical Dignities,
certain Titles of honor, not only that they might be known to the people, but
to communicate and infuse into their hearts such an awe and respect as is due
to their Majesty and Power.

But the Popes have of late years, very much exceeded in aggrandizing the
Cardinals, but the smoke is more than the meat, for the Popes incroaching
hourly upon the real authority that belongs to the Cardinals, they have heaped
great Titles of Majesty upon them, that they might not at one time be cheated
of both.

Some there are, that believe the dignity of Cardinals had their beginning from
the very foundation of the Church, agreeable to what Eugenius quartus intimates
in a Letter to Henry Archbishop of Canterbury; besides whom a great number of
Canonical Authors have believed they were instituted by him, that irrigated the
foundation of the Church with his own blood, that the Sacred Purple might
flourish therein, as I have read and heard preached in St. Peter's in Rome.

But it is manifest all that is but flattery, for we know the Illustrious Title
of Cardinal with which the Popes have invested the chief of the Church, was not
in use till the time of Pope Silvester, who called them Cardinals as hinges
upon which the Church Militant was to turn.

The design of Silvester was good, intending thereby to put the Cardinals in
mind, that if they would render themselves worthy of the esteem they expected,
they ought as Senators both Spiritual and Temporal of that Commonwealth, have
the fear of God, and a zeal for the Flock of Christ in their minds, and by the
piety and exemplariness of their Conversation, provoke, and excite other
Christians to the reformation of theirs.

St. Peter, it is true, had Linus, Cletus, Clement, Anacletus, Mark the
Evangelist, and others, as his Assistants, and most Religiously executing the
Offices they were under, bearing a great share in the Government and
Superintendency over the whole Church, but the name of Cardinals was not given
them, nor as then known.

There are furthermore diverse ancient Records that tell us, that Pope Cletus
did institute five and twenty Titular Priests, and Anacletus seven Deacons, in
commemoration of those instituted by the Apostles in the Infancy of the Church,
which were without doubt the first Titles that were conferred, and since
conserved by the Cardinals.

Pope Evaristus who succeeded Anacletus, confirmed that holy institution, and
to render it the more complete, he limited, and distinguished, the several
places and Parishes that were assigned to the Government of those first
Ministers of State in the Church.

In the year 156. Saint Higinus being Pope, and desirous to give a greater and
more august form to his Clergy, he divided them into orders and degrees,
placing one under the other in a just rule of Inferiority and Superiority. The
chief were called Cardinals, as principals at the first foundation of orders in
the Church; the rest had only Priest and Deacon for their Titles.

Some there were that have believed, and some there be that do think so still,
that in the Primitive times, Bishops had the Title of Cardinals, but they do
not assure us whether that name was given them in the Papacy of Higinus, or of
some other Pope. However that shows the super-intendency they had over the rest
of the Priests and Deacons of the Church, as they had over the rest that had
the care of particular Parishes.

They add also, that they were distinguished in that manner, by reason of their
Titles; that the Cardinal Bishops had belonging to their Titles, the principal
Churches both without and within Rome, to the number of eighteen, but they were
afterward reduced to six; that the Cardinals had assigned to them the other
Parochial Churches and Cimeteries in Rome, where the Priests that were under
them, did execute their several charges with great Decorum; their particular
offices consisting in the care of Souls, in the admistration of the Sacraments
of the Church, and in a charitable regard of the Burial of the Dead, and of
Martyrs. The Cardinal Deacons had the Hospitals, and other Religious houses,
assigned to them, whilst the simple Deacons under them, had the oversight of
Orphans, Widows, and the Poor. The Chapels that were ordinarily united to these
Religious houses, being called Deaconries, and in the beginning, exceeded not
the number of seven, according to the number of the Cardinal Deacons, and the
number of Parishes remaining in Rome after the dismal Conflagration caused by
Nero the Tyrant.

But it must needs be confessed, that with the revolution of time, this first
order and manner of Government founded principally upon actions and exercises
of Piety, have been very much changed, so as by degrees, both Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons (who composed the Sacred College of the Church of Christ) began to
be ambitious of the Title of Cardinals; and for this reason, Saint Silvester in
the Council held in Rome 324. called them so in common, discriminating them by
that Title from the rest of the Faithful, who began now to look upon the
Cardinals, as Cardinals indeed.

And it is clearly demonstrable by all these reasons, that there were Cardinals
in the very infancy of the Church, and that in good esteem, and veneration,
because they were always possessed of the most eminent and conspicuous dignities.

Their opinion does not please me at all, that hold the Cardinals were nothing
else but simple Curats distinguished by Titles or Parishes of Rome, grounding
that fancy upon an Epistle of Pope Gregory's, in which he speaks of them, as
those that had the cure and inspection over the Parishes; as likewise upon an
Expression of Platina, where he says, that Leo the fourth degraded and deposed
a Cardinal from the Title of St. Marcellus, for having been five years absent
from his Parish.

But this the Order and Chronology of the Church History will clearly refute,
because in Saint Silvesters time they speak of the Grandeur of the Cardinals,
and then how can Platina's opinion be true? How is it possible the Cardinals
should be but simple Curats in the time of Pope Gregory, who was above three
hundred years after Saint Silvester, and yet in Silvesters time be in great
dignity and esteem.

It will not therefore be improper to enlarge a little, and by an ampler
description, to satisfy in some measure the curiosity of the Reader; for which
reason, I will give an account of what ever I have collected out of the most
eminent Authors.

Religion truly was not made for places, but for men, however the Ministers of
the Church have been always distinguished by the offices in which they
exercised their Ministry; upon which consideration, as they were more eminent
or illustrious, they were ordained Bishops, or Priests, or at least Deacons,
who were no more than Assistants and Coadjutors to the Bishops and Priests. And
the fourteenth Canon of the Council of Nio Caesaria, declares seven Deacons
enough for the greatest City in Christendom.

The Church never wanted orders and degrees of dignities, but had always a
distinction and separation of preferments in which every one co-operated
according to his Knowledge or Zeal.

In the Commonwealth of Greece, all offices were distinct, Epaminondas
commanded the Armies Pitagoras, taught, Socrates argued, Lycurgus made Laws,
and Trasibolus executed without them; so in this visible Monarchy of the
Church, some command, others obey, some pray, others teach, some sing, others
watch. The Bishop Ordains, the Priest Baptizes; The Bishop Confirms, the Priest
Consecrates; the Deacon distributes the Eucharist, inspects the Ceremonies,
looks to the necessities of the Poor, and sees that all people approach the
Communion with requisite devotion.

In the Primitive times, the Ministers were ordained according to the quality
of their Cures. Those in which the first Functions of Christianity were
exercised, viz. where most Gentiles were converted, where the Word of God was
Preached, or where the Sacrament was administered, were called by way of
Excellence the Cardinal Churches. A word taken from a Latin word which
signifies a Hinge upon which a door turns, importing that upon the vigilance
and conduct of the Cardinals the whole service of God and the Church moves as
upon a Hinge.

So that the Title of Cardinal was first given to the Places, that is, to the
Cardinal Churches, but applied afterward to the persons that Governed them; at
first they were called The Holy Cardinal Churches, but now Cardinals of the
Holy Church.

And from hence was the original of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Cardinals;
there being several Titles and Cardinal Churches in Rome. The Priests that were
Rectors over them, were called Cardinal Priests, and some time there were two
or three at a time with the same Title, as there are sometimes two or three
together of principal dignity in some Collegial Churches.

In the like manner there were other Titles in several Quarters of the City of
Rome, which were called Deaconries, where the Cardinals had their Residence,
and those that had the charge in the principal Churches in this quality, were
called Cardinal Deacons, because of their residence in the Deaconry.

So also the six Bishops, chosen out of all the Bishops of Christendom for the
Election of the Pope, were chosen in the same order, but with this condition,
that the Election of the Pope should not be their only Province, but that they
should be assistant to them in their private and general Councels, and be
called Cardinal Bishops.

In the Infancy of the Church, these Titles were not used notwithstanding; in
the Apostles days, and for some Ages after, there was no mention of Cardinal
Churches, nor Cardinal Ministers. The Priests and Deacons were then forced to
exercise their Ministry in Caves, and the privatest places they could find, to
evade the persecution of those times; so that there could be no such Titles
allowed, all of them living in unity, the chief being ambitious to show himself
as the least, and every one congratulating the lowest as the first.

And whilst the Church was under this form of administration, the Ministers
having no other Titles amongst them, but Brothers, were assistant to one
another in the distribution of the Sacrament, and all other offices of the
Church, the light of the Gospel, and the holiness of humility shined over all;
and for what reason? Because there was not in those days the distinction of
persons that there is now, to the great scandal and prejudice of the Church.

Cornelius, who lived in the year 200. writing to the Clergy in Rome, he makes
no mention but of Priests and Deacons; and though indeed there was some sort of
difference and distinction in their offices, yet there was no disputes or
emulations amongst them, all of them living with great unanimity, and all of
them being Cardinals, all of them Deacons, and all of them Priests.

In the Election of Bishops, and in their Councels, the Priests and Deacons
only assembled with the people, so that many times great quarrels happened
betwixt them and the people; and in the year 356. there were six hundred slain
in the City of Rome at the Election of Damascus, and Vrsinus; upon which it was
forbidden by the general Council at Laodicia, that the people should have any
voices for the future in the Election of Ministers and Prelates of the Church.

After the Church, by the virtue of a long patience, had overcome the
persecutions of the Emperors, trod Paganism and Idolatry under her feet, and
set up the Standards of Christianity upon the seven hills at Rome, the number
of Ministers began to increase, out of which, in process of time, they chose
the best and most learned for the Senate and Council of the Church, and so the
distinction of places began; they that had the greatest employments were called
Cardinals, and they that had the lesser, Priests and Deacons.

Insomuch, that whereas heretofore the Priests and Deacons promiscuously, and
without any distinction, were admitted into their Ecclesiastical Assemblies,
they were after this resolution excluded, and the greater and principal of the
Clergy only received, to their no small dis-satisfaction, which they were
forced to put up, le^t they should otherwise disturb that repose they were in
pursuit of amongst the sorrows and calamities of the Church.

In those times the Bishops had the preceedence before the Priests, and
Cardinal Deacons, the Cardinalship being only a scale and step toward
Episcopacy, conformable to what is mentioned in the life of St. Gregory, where
it is said several Cardinal Priests were preferred to be Bishops. And because
there was great difference betwixt their orders, there was great difference in
their corrections also. For the conviction of a Bishop, there was seventy two
witnesses required, and if of that whole number, there wanted but one, the
whole accusation was void: whereas for the conviction of a Cardinal Priest,
forty was enough, and for a Deacon twenty seven. But the Ecclesiastical orders
and degrees have changed daily with the times, and their dignities have been
more considered for their Titles, than any reality of advantage.

The Cardinals since found means to advance themselves before the Bishops, and
Episcopacy now is but a degree toward the Cardinalship, whereas formerly, for
the space of eight hundred year they had (as principal Ministers of the Church)
managed all her affairs.

The chief causes of these changes and revolutions, was from the same mutations
in the Monarchy of the Popes, and from the medly and confusion of Temporal
affairs with Spiritual, and of the Ecclesiastic Government with the Civil. For
the Pope having ^^larg'd his Dominions by the annection of several Provinces in
the time of Pipin, and Charles the Great, his Successors found themselves
forced upon another Model, because so many Secular Principalities being added
to the Church, several important affairs did daily arise that could not be
deferred to the next Council of Bishops, which me^ not but every two or three
years.

The Church in its minority was like the Galley of Salamin, that by the
appointment of the Athenians, was never to sail but upon some Religious design,
it being sufficient now and then upon occasion to call their Councels, to
negotiate and regulate the most important affairs of Christendom; but after
the acquisition of so many States and Seignories, they were forced upon new
ways for the conservation of their Temporals. For this reason, it was judged
necessary to establish a Council or Senate that should be always near his
Holiness, and that it should be composed of Cardinal Priests, and Deacons, and
Rectors of the principal Parishes of Rome, as those that were more capable to
consult and determine in matters of greatest importance both in Spirituals and
Temporals; which succeeded without much difficulty; the Ministers of Rome (to
prevent any resentment in the Bishops that the administration of the affairs of
the Church was taken out of their hands) endeavoring to persuade them, that
what was done, was for the benefit of Christendom, that it was unfit the
Bishops should leave their charges* with so much inconvenience to the people,
and come so often to Rome to treat of affairs that more poperly belonged to
those who had no Cures to distract them; and thus were the poor Bishops
constrained to truckle to the Cardinals, and become inferior, that had been
superior so long.

The Cardinals being advanced in this manner, and the Bishops excluded from the
Government of the Church; they continued very dexterously to wrest the Election
of their Popes out of the hands of the Emperors, the People, and the Bishops,
and not contented with that, they presumed to incroach also upon the Election
of the Emperor, so as the authority of Electing the two principal dignities of
the world being in their power, in spite of their former subordination, they
advanced themselves so far above the Bishops, that the Bishops are now but
Slaves as it were to the Cardinals, and by some of them employed with great
arrogance in Mechanic affairs.

Anciently there was no greater esteem of a Cardinal, than there is now of a
Deacon, or Archdeacon, in comparison of a Prelate, because they had no other
authority in the Election of Bishops (who were then the principal Ministers in
the Church) than the common Clergy and People of Rome, without any difference
or exception, bearing an equal share with the rest of the Clergy in the Service
of the Church.

But when the world began to take notice that they made and unmade Popes at
their pleasure, choosing them always out of the College of Cardinals, they
became so incensed in a short time, that the dignity of Cardinal grew the most
envied, yet the most covered and ambition'd dignity in the world.

And this ambition which was derived from the exaltation of Cardinals in the
Church, has been the Parent and Hidra of all the mischiefs and calamities in
the Church.

And this ambition (that was so detestable even among the Pagans, that Lucian
desired that all they that aspired to any thing above their sphere, might
perish before the year went about) is indeed the source and nourishment of all
the Wars, Schisms, and Heresies that have sprang up in the bosom of the Church.

At first the Cardinals were chosen out of such Priests and Ministers only, as
served in the particular Churches in Rome, and that custom lasted for about an
Age and a half; that is to say, till the Bishops taking notice at last of the
injury was done them, and that they were excluded from any concurrence in the
Election of the Pope, they did very much insist that the Cardinals might not be
chosen any longer out of the Romans only, but out of the number of all the
Bishops of Italy, excluding Foreigners.

The Church increasing after this manner extraordinarily, and the number of
Bishops multiplying in all parts both of Europe and Asia, it was resolved that
the Cardinals should be chosen out of all the Provinces in Europe and Asia,
without exemption of any, it being but reasonable as St. Bernard says, That
they who judge the whole world, should be chosen out of all parts thereof.

In the same manner the Rules for Election of Popes were observed (as we shall
relate in the third part of this Work) the Priest of Rome not permitting any
stranger to be created Pope for the space of above nine hundred years, electing
only such persons, as were beneficed in some Church in Rome; till that in the
year 891, there happened a great contest betwixt the Romans, and the Foreign
Bishops, these last pretending to a concurrence in the Election of Popes; the
other refusing as obstinately the infringement of so ancient a custom; but at
last, the Foreign Bishops prevailed, and chose Formosus Bishop of Porto.

For some years successively, the Italians that had a great part in the
Election of the Pope, would by no means consent that any body should be
Elected, but such as was either a Bishop in Italy, or a Priest in Rome, and the
people joined with them in it; but but the Emperor opposed it, who had also a
great party in the Election.

After this, the number of Bishops increasing in all quarters of the world, the
Electors were constrained to recede from their obstinate resolution of having
their Popes Italians, or at least such as had some Church to serve in Italy;
they esteeming it but just to take the most worthy and meritorious person for
their Pope wherever he was to be found, without any regard to the place where
he was born; so that there were of all Nations advanced to the Papacy, now
Germans, now French, Spaniards, English, and from all parts of the World.

At length, the Italians who pass for the most quick witted people in the
Universe, (to say no more of them) have known so well how to accomodate the
Church to their own private interest, that for an Age last past, they have
banished both French, English, Spaniards, and Dutch, etc. out of the Vatican,
reserving that bit of Electing of Popes to themselves; which though it does not
absolutely satiate their appetites, yet it keeps them from needing or desiring
any other meat for the nourishment or fattening of their Families, to the shame
and indignation of those Crowns that had given great riches to the Church for
maintenance of their Popes, and stand now excluded from any possibility of
creating one of their own Countries.

Nor is it wonderful to any body that the Italians have reserved the Election
of Popes for the particular advantage of their own Families; seeing there is
scarce a Citizen in Rome, nor a man in all Europe, but observes or understands
that the Popedom is not so much aspired to for any zeal they have to the
service of the Church, as for their designs of aggrandizing their Families; so
that a Cardinal is no sooner chosen Pope, but the first thing he does, (before
he begins in any kind to be beneficial to the Church) is to ^noble his own
Kindred, as is amply declared in the Nipotismo of Rome.

It is not therefore to be admired if the dignity of Cardinals be affected and
pursued with that ardour as it is; if all the Princes of the Universe employ
all possible recommendations, and the Popes themselves with so much care and
dexterity advance the nearest of their Kindred thereunto; little regarding the
incongruity of their age, or the disproportion of their deserts, as Julius the
third did, who gave a Cardinals Cap to a little youth of his Kindred; and
Clement the eight, to a son of his Nephew not above fourteen years of age; and
Innocent the tenth, to that ignorant Maldachini: which fewness of years would
have been more excusable to the rest of the Cardinals, had he brought any merit
along with him.

And indeed the dignity of a Cardinal is so great, it is no miracle if the
chief Families of Christendom do account themselves much honored if they can
obtain a Cap, and the chief Crowns in the Universe do rejoice if their Heirs
can add a Red Cap to their Imperial Crown; there being many that do willingly
resign their Temporal Principalities, to be made Cardinals.

But what shall I say of these Italian Prelates, that are ambitious and drive
at this dignity with so much ardour and passion? to whom all their watching,
and labor, and expense is but pleasant, when considered with the dignity they
aim at? they can endure their Inferiors to go before them, in hopes it will
come to their turn also to go before their Superiors; so that some of them are
not concerned with the loss of their Prelacy in other places, if they have but
any voice left toward the Election of Cardinals, swallowing as it were any
injury so long as they have any possibility of a Cap; it being most certain,
the desire of that dignity is more poteut upon them, than any danger of losing
those preferments they already enjoy: And if I may speak my opinion, I believe
confidently that invention of Bishops and Prelates to wear Green Tufts in their
Caps, was only a token of their ambition, intimating a desire in them to have
them sometime or other exchanged for a Red.

But all this is but vanity, the shadow of the body is never the greater for
having the head covered with Green Laurel, or a Cardinals Cap. To see the
Cardinals marching in great state through the Streets of Rome, with a train of
Prelates at their heels, and their Robes of Scarlet, looks in my judgment as
if the World were made only for them, and that there was no greater felicity in
it, than that which they enjoy; and all is because they are not sensible of the
vanity of that honor, which will prove at last but imaginary, and but outward
appearance. They would not be worshipped and adored as they are, if they
understood what great returns are expected for the disbursement of such profuse
and extravagant venerations. They would not cloth themselves with that
curiosity in Scarlet, if they considered what that Cloth cost them by the yard;
but they reckon the price of it according to what they pay to the Merchant
only, and never think of the account they are to make to Heaven. But those that
have made the best calculation, have had no desire to the purchase of a
Cardinalship, no not if they might have it at the bare price of their merits,
chosing oftentimes to leave Rome rather than to accept of a Cardinals Cap.

Honors and Dignities are certain advantages invented by the World and
Fortune, for which reason the same are charged with so many Taxes and Imposts,
and with a reserve of so many troubles, and solicitudes, that some times are
more eligible to get rid of them.

I could say something in this place of the Titles in the present possession of
the Cardinals, but I will not involve my self in a thing not altogether
necessary to the principal drift of this History; it is enough to understand
that every Cardinal receives his Title from some Church or other, though it
affords him not a farthing of profit.

There are six Cardinal Bishops, fifty Cardinal Priests, and fourteen Cardinal
Deacons, having fourteen Churches assigned them to give them their Titles;
fifty to the Priests, and six to the Bishops, every one of which may be a
Bishop with a Cure, so that he be a Priest, and in that case he keeps the Title
of the Church that is assigned him with his Cardinals Cap: and these Titles do
daily increase according to the number of Cardinals, who from six at first,
came to be twelve, from twelve to thirty, so to fifty, and from thence to
seventy, which number (in memory of the Seventy Disciples of Christ) Pope
Sectus the fifth ordered should never be exceeded. But when the Pope pleases,
they may be more, for there is no body can give him Laws, that dissolves
Councels, repeals or destroys Laws, and makes new ones at his pleasure; but no
Pope has attempted it yet, neither is that number always complete, some
vacancies being still left to recompense the deserts of some great man, or to
gratify the desires of some King.

To enumerate the prerogative of the Cardinals exactly, it would be convenient
to insert at large a letter written by Eugenius quarius, which places them in a
Region so high, the Cardinals themselves cannot desire a higher. But I shall
content my self to say only with him, that all the Cardinals, both Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, have the pre-eminence over all Bishops, Archbishops,
Primats, and Patriarchs, who are all obliged to acknowledge them for their
Supreme Judges, as Assistants to the Pope, as the Supreme Council of the
Church, and principal Citizens in the Christian Commonwealth, as parts and
members of the Pontifical body; as Organs of their power, as Lieutenants to
Gods Vicegerent, and Coadjutors in a Monarchy that is both Spiritual and
Temporal.

The greatest good fortune that can befall a man, is to be made a Cardinal, a
dignity many aspire to, but obtained by few; and those commonly that think
least of it. And what I have read and seen in several promotions in Rome, about
those Creations, I shall set down in this place.

The Popes are accustomed to create their Cardinals four times a year, in
imitation, as some think, of those ancient Fathers that at those times did
Order their Priests should be consecrated to the service of God, as they are at
this day.

I observed very great difference betwixt the Popes manner of creating
Cardinals heretofore, and the way they use now. Formerly the Popes never
created a Cardinal, but by the advice of his Consistory, and if the major part
of the Cardinals concurred, they proceeded to nomination, otherwise the Pope
was to have patience.

But if the major voice was affirmative, the Pope declared the names of those
he thought proper, displaying before them, the merits of their persons, and
their recommendations from Foreign Princes, upon which the Cardinals consulted,
and brought in their Votes privately. If the greater part consented, the
persons named were declared Cardinals by his Holiness, otherwise they were
excluded, and the Pope constrained to begin again, and name new.

At this present, things are carried in another way, the Cardinals taking no
care of preserving their Authority, have lost a great share of it, and that of
the Popes, by the same negligence, is so far increased, that the Cardinals
cannot now hinder the Pope from making Cardinals as he pleases; the Popes at
present making but a laughing stock of the Consistory, and creating them often
without their consent.

I could instance in several examples for the proof of my assertion, but for
brevity sake I shall speak only of one. When Innocent created Maldachino
Cardinal, in a Congregation where there were but few Cardinals that were his
Creatures, or Adherents, he spoke something of it, but as it were by the bye,
and without any expectation of their advice, he pronounced him Cardinal. The
rest of their Eminencies were all astonished at the Election of such a person,
and I know above forty of them were displeased, and would willingly have gone
out of Rome to have avoided the sight of him; but in spite of their
indignation, they were forced to be content to visit him as the rest, and to
swallow that bitter Pill in the Cup of Patience, without speaking one word to
the Pope against it. And this is the manner of creating of Cardinals at
present; this is that their Eminencies are come to, all the Liberty and
Grandeur they formerly possessed, being reduced to their bare wearing of Purple.

Paul the fourth, was the first that incroach'd upon the Consistory of
Cardinals, usurping the Authority they had formerly of Electing new persons
into the Cardinalship, and creating some of them, without the least word of it
to the Consistory; since that time, the other Popes successively have taken
liberty to do the same, and with the more confidence, because they had no
obstruction; for the Cardinals apprehending to oppose themselves against their
Usurpations (though they know very well it was their Interest) they chose
rather to be deficient to that, and to prostitute the liberty of the
Consistory, than to justify the jurisdiction they had so long enjoyed.

But Sextus the fifth, more than all the rest, managed his affairs like an
absolute Monarch, sporting himself with the Consistory, and Cardinals,
promoting whom he pleased, and forcing the Cardinals to a concurrence with what
ever he proposed to them, the sweetness of which, being found by his
Successors, they resolved to follow his steps, so that to this very day, they
promote, and determine, they nominate and elect, whom they think good
themselves, without any impediment whatsoever.

But some may interrupt me in this place, and affirm that the Consistory must
of necessity have some share in the Election of Cardinals, because the Pope
never creates a Cardinal, but in the Consistory, which is true indeed; but it
is to be considered, that whereas formerly the Popes proposed only such and
such persons to the Consistory, leaving the reception or rejection of them to
the suffrage of the Cardinals; it is contrary now, and the Pope does not
propound, but pronounces them Cardinals, so as they who were at first principal
Electors, are become now but simple witnesses, having neither affirmative nor
negative voice, and serving for no more than like witnesses called in by a
Notary to attest the reading of some contract; the Popes troubling themselves
no further, than to advertise the Cardinals what they resolved in their
Chambers, and therefore let it not seem so great a matter to declare a man
Cardinal in the Consistory, for where would you have him declare it, in a
Tavern? or the Piazza del Ponte?

Five years together I was resident in Rome, in a time perhaps so proper for
the observation of the Customs and Interest of that Court, that I may say
without vanity, that I continued there with more profit (as to my inspection
into those affairs) than another would have done in twenty, for my genius
directing me, my whole prospect was that way: for whilst others were visiting
the Gardens, and the Courtezans, I was at home still, making my Annotations of
what I heard, or said, about the affairs of Court, whether Ecclesiastical or
Civil. But amongst all, my observation was most curious about the promotion of
Cardinals, which I took notice to be performed in two ways, which I shall
describe with as much brevity as I can.

Those persons the Pope designed to be Cardinals, if they be in Rome, are
advertised by the Cardinal Nephew to be ready next morning at the wonted hour
in the Palace. The Pope being entered privately into the secret Consistory at
the same time, he imparts to the Cardinals his resolution of choosing such a
number of New ones, and immediately, without attending any answer or advice
from them, he pronounces them Cardinals, and calling them into the Consistory
forthwith, they clap themselves down upon their knees, and his Holiness taking
the red Cap into his Sacred hands, puts it upon their Heads with these words,
Esto Cardinalis.

But I cannot omit inserting an example that will be very proper in this place,
there happened a great dispute one day betwixt a certain Picket-beard (as they
call them in Italy) or Protestant, as they name them in other parts; or in the
Ecclesiastic Style of Rome, Heretic, and a Catholic that had been many years
in Rome, and in Orders. The dispute was (at Pignorole) about the great error
the Catholics were in, in believing the Pope Christ's Vicar upon Earth. The
Protestant would allow it by no means; the Catholic asserted it, and would
have him not only Christ's Vicar, but like another Christ, absolute and
uncontrollable in the Government of the Church.

The dispute lasted above half an hour, in which time, many fine things were
spoke both of one side and the other. The Catholic cited the Authority of
several modern Divines, as Bellarmine, Tolido, and I know not who; the
Protestant quoted places of Scripture, backing his arguments with some
expression or other in the Epistles of St. Paul, or St. Peter. At last, the
Catholic turning to the Protestant, told him; now will I make you your self
confess my proposition true, and give you so clear and perspicuous a reason for
it, as will leave you nothing to reply.

I was present, and began to open my ears, the better to understand so
efficacious a proof; I gave God thanks that I had found one at last that could
satisfy me in a point that was always running in my head, and of which I had
seriously desired to be informed; and whilst with great attention I expected
the result of the dispute, the Catholic (that was my Camerade in that Journey)
told the Protestant, Sir, You know the Omnipotent God, by the virtue of two
words only, created out of nothing, the vast mass of the World which we enjoy:
and with two words, his Holiness the Pope, like another Deity, creates
Cardinals: God said Fiat Caelum only, and on sudden the Heavens were framed,
and the Light, and all other, the works of his Divine hand: In like manner, the
Pope by the power of two words, Esto Cardinalis, raises as one may say from
nothing to the highest dignity in the Church, a person who perhaps had not so
much as the least hopes or thoughts of it. Judge then if the Pope be not
another God upon Earth, seeing in his admirable administrations in the Church,
he uses the same power and methods God Almighty observed in the Creation of the
World.

I do not remember in my whole life I was ever so surprised; instead of a solid
and convincing Argument, to be drawn out of the secrets of Theology as I
imagined, to hear a thing that made me laugh not only then, but every time I
have thought of it since. The Protestant had enough to burst himself also, and
replied presently, You are in the right on it, I am satisfied, come let us go
drink together. But the other, perceiving not only the Protestant, but all the
rest of the Company to laugh, he pursued his discourse, recounting after what
manner the Popes created Cardinals, and the great efficacy of those two words,
Esto Cardinalis, comparing them in every thing with those words of God, Fiat
Lux; as if God Almighty had left it as an Inheritance to the Popes, that they
should have the power with those two words Esto Cardinalis, to work as
miraculously as he did with his Fiat Lux. I have spoke this only by the bye,
and the Reader may make application as he pleases.

But to return to our business; it is already understood, that let the
difference of the persons be what they will, they all of them, without
distinction, kneel down in the presence of the Pope, when he gives them the
Cap: which when he has received, the new Cardinal takes it gently off of his
head, and kisses the Popes feet; and having done that, he rises to go and
embrace, and acknowledge, all the rest of the Cardinals for his Brothers, one
by one, as they are then present in the Consistory.

The second way of creating of Cardinals is this; the Pope having nominated the
persons he intended to create in the Consistory, in the manner abovesaid, he
gives a List of their Names to the Cardinal Nephew, who sends immediately the
first Gentleman of his Bedchamber with his own Coach, to search thorough the
whole City for the persons named, (but there is no great pains to be taken in
the search, for they know well enough where to find them) having found them, he
brings them away to his Eminencies Chamber, where the Nephews Barber gives them
the Cardinals cut, for which, each of them gives him 25 Crowns as a Fee; after
which, the Chamber-men of the said Nephew put on their Cardinalitial habits,
their other habits remaining with the Chamber-men for their Fees.

This done, the Cardinal Nephew treats them; and after Dinner (in which they
drink the Popes health and his Nephews) he conducts them to his Holiness; being
come into his presence, having been thrice upon their knees, they advance to
kiss his foot, whilst he puts on the red Cap upon their heads one after another
with these words, Esto Cardinalis. Some Popes did use to inform them with great
gravity, not only of the dignity they were promoted to, but of their excellence
and pre-eminence, exhorting them very earnestly, that they would render
themselves worthy thereof: and so after an humble reply and acknowledgement,
they depart in the same habits of Cardinals, to make their visits to his
Holinesses kindred, as well Ladies, as men; that visit being over, they return
to their houses, and remain there till the next public Consistory; to which
they much with very great Trains, to receive the red Cap from the hands of his
Holiness.

If in the time of their retirement in expectation of a public Consistory, any
Cardinal, Ambassador, or other Minister, sends, or comes himself, to give him a
visit, they are received with as much kindness as may be, but they stir not out
of the Chamber he gives them their Audience in, neither to meet them, nor to
accompany them back. It Is a good Rule therefore the Cardinals observe, not to
make any visit to new ones, till they have appeared in the public Consistory;
and if by reason of their Alliance, or any such occasion, they do visit them,
it is commonly in the night, and free from the discovery of the People.

To those that are absent from Rome, after they have been declared in the
Consistory, the Cardinal Nephew dispatches a Messenger immediately with the
news of their promotion, and afterward, one of the Popes Chamberlains of
honor is sent to them with the red Cap, and a Breve from the Pope, to which
Chamberlain, such honor is to be given, as befits the quality both of the
sender and receiver, and a good Present to boot.

As soon as they have advice by the first Messenger aforesaid, they cause their
Barbers to shave them as aforesaid, and put themselves into the habit of
Cardinals, and subscribe themselves so; but they put not on their Scarlet
Robes, nor their red Caps, till they be brought them by the Chamberlain, and
then they may habit themselves in Scarlet; but the red Pontifical Cap, if they
have not received it from the Popes own hands, or from some other person sent
by his particular favor with a special Breve, they cannot use.

His Holiness sometimes commits this Ceremony of putting the Cap upon his head
to the Nuntio, or Bishop of the place, or some secular Prince, as he pleases,
in whose presence the Cardinal kneels down, and receives the Cap with these
words, Esto Cardinalis, but kisses not their feet; and this Ceremony is usually
performed in the Church after a simple or a solemn Mass.

In the first private Consistory after the public, the Pope did use to stop up
the mouths as it were of the new Cardinals, by putting his finger upon them; by
that Ceremony, forbidding them to speak their opinions in the Consistories or
Congregations for some time, and depriving them both of their active and
passive voices. Before the Papacy of Pius the fifth, the Popes did use to leave
some Cardinals from time to time in this manner to take their voices from them
in the Election of the Popes, but they were mistaken, for the College of
Cardinals, as soon as the Pope was dead, discharged them. Pius quintus
notwithstanding, by a Decree made in the year 1571. declared, that by the said
shutting of their mouths, it was not intended to take away the voices of those
Cardinals, but only a simple Ceremony and no more. So that in the next
Consistory, the Pope opened their mouths, put the Ring upon their fingers, and
declared their Titles, as he declared theirs that were absent.

But as the Popes had then found out a good way of stopping the mouths of the
Cardinals, so we may say still, that though their mouths are opened by the
Popes, yet they do shut them as they think good, for they dare not oppose
themselves to the ill Government either of the Pope or his Nephews, but choose
rather to expose, or ruin the Church, than according to their duty and
obligation, to make any defense. But of this in its proper place; we will say
something now of the preceedence and habits of the new Cardinals, and of their
gratuities to the Popes Court, and the Cardinal Nepews.

As to their Fees, it is to be understood, that as soon as the new Cardinals
are created, and received into the public Consistory, they are obliged by
ancient custom, to give to the Popes Vestry-keeper, or rather to his Vestry,
five and twenty Ducats; to the Master of the Ceremonies in waiting, a hundred
Ducats; to them out of waiting, thirity six; to the Secretary, Clerk, and
Computist of the Sacred College, each of them twenty five; to the Popes
Domestic Chaplains, twenty Ducats; to the Keeper General of the Pontifical
Robes, ten Ducats; to the Popes Chaunters or Singing-men, thirty Ducats; to the
two Clerks of the Popes private Chapel, six; to the inferior Officers of the
Popes Chamber, six; to the Deans, and Sub-Deans of the Popes Chapel, four; to
the Clerk of the Chapel, two; to his Grooms, five and twenty; to his
Mace-bearers, fifteen; to his Messengers, ten; to the Keeper of the Iron Gate,
six; to the Keeper of his Privy Garden, four; to the Keeper of the Chains,
three; to the Harbinger, five; to the four private Sweepers, each of them one;
To the Musicians of the Castle of St. Angelo, six; to the Masters of the
Ceremonies for their Mantelets in the public Consistory, twelve; to the
Officers of the Popes Privy Chamber, the least they give at their Creation in
Rome is, five hundred Ducats; to them that deliver them the Cap, out of Rome
(besides a thousand they pay for that) three hundred Ducats. And the Cardinal
Princes give much more, to four and sometimes six thousand Ducats; but beside
the Ducats aforesaid, which are all in Gold, the new Cardinals are obliged to
be as noble to the Officers of the Cardinal Nephews Chamber, who receive no
share of this, and are therefore to have a proportion of their own.

The aforesaid New Cardinals, to prevent the trouble of distributing them
themselves, do usually give their presents to the Master of the Ceremonies, to
be disposed according to just order. But one Author that writ of the State of
the Court of Rome, did advise, that the Pope would do well to oblige every new
Cardinal, besides the presents aforesaid, to give a piece of Ordanance to the
State, to furnish it with those Arms, that as then they were very much
unprovided with, though Urban the eighth, had made a hundred pieces of the
brass Pillars taken out of the Church Rotonda.

Alexander the seventh, seemed to be of the same opinion, when he ordered the
Arsenal di Tivoli for the making of Arms and Ammunition of War, and accordingly
intimated his judgment to the present Pope, who was then Cardinal Rospigliosi,
and Secretary of State. But that design vanished I know not which way, perhaps
because Alexander was unwilling to lay the first charge of that nature, upon
the many Cardinals he resolved to put into the Consistory; but it is certain it
would be very well if other Popes that are to succeed him, would enjoin it,
because it appears unreasonable, so many particular persons should receive
advantage by the Creation of Cardinals, and the Universal Church get nothing. I
am satisfied the Cardinals would give a hundred Ducats or more, for the making
of such a thing as should remain in some Arsenal o^ Fort, as a perpetual
monument of their Families, it being but reasonable to cast them with the Arms
of those Cardinals that gave them, which without doubt would create an
affection in the people toward the Cardinals; whereas now they have too great
reason to complain, to see the Church its self receive no benefit by their
creations.

There are other little gifts also distributed here and there, as I suppose,
for dispatch of their Bulls, every Cardinal having his Bull for his
Cardinalship, subscribed by the Pope, and all the Cardinals then present in
Rome, and Sealed with the usual impression of the Piscatory Ring; so that the
Bulls that are designed for the Cardinal Princes, or other of greatest quality,
have their impressions in gold, and to all those that are concerned in that
trouble, there are some small distributions, but to the public nothing at all.

I have already mentioned, that the Sacred College, which is as much as to
say, the whose University of Cardinals, is divided into three Orders, of
Bishops, of Priests, and of Deacons; amongst them, those Bishops precede, that
are of longest standing in the Episcopal Order, and amongst the Priests and
Deacons, those that are first promoted to the Cardinalship; and because it
falls out sometimes, that there are several made at one promotion, in that
case, they have the preceedence that are first named. But when it happens that
he that was but a Cardinal Deacon, becomes a Priest, he passes presently into
the place of his promotion, above all the Cardinal Priests that shall be
promoted after him, but not above those that were created before him. The
consequence is not the same amongst the Cardinal Bishops, for if they from
Deacons are advanced to be Bishops, they take place according to the date of
their orders, or promotion.

As to the Cardinals habits, which are altogether Majestic, they have been
prescribed them at several times, by several Popes. For a long tract of time,
they went habited like simple Priests or Monks, till at last Innocent the
fourth, in the year 1250. ordered them to wear the red Cap, in token of their
readiness to spend their blood for the service of Christ the head of the
Church; a while after him, succeeded Boniface the ninth, who enjoined them to
wear Red and Purple habits, in the fashion they wear them now, saving that they
are a little larger than formerly: Paulus the second a Venetian, that took
great care of the Pontifical habits, to make them the more splendid, he added
the Silken Mitre, the Red Bonnet, the Red Cloth for their Mules, and the Gilt
Staff; Gregory the fourteenth gave the Red Bonnet to the Regular Cardinals,
allowing them as to the rest to go habited in the same color as others of
their Order did, but as to the fashion and matter, they were constrained to go
like the rest of the Cardinals, that is, without Rochets, or Cassocks of
Cloth, and when others had their Caps of Red, they had theirs of watered
Chamblet, and when others wore their Purple, theirs was without watering, but
their Cap and Bonnet both of a fashion.

There are three colors the Cardinals make use of; Purple, Red, and Murrey,
but of this last they make use but two days in a year, which are the fourth
Sunday in Lent, and the third of Advent. The substance commonly is waved
Chamblet, or Wool, according to the season of the year; they wear Cassocks
also, but very light always, and either of Taffaty or Sarcenet.

I could set down the times also the Cardinals wear Purple, and Scarlet, but I
look upon it as superfluous, and not much material to the Reader. Only this I
shall mention, that though the Cardinals be in Mourning, they leave not off
notwithstanding their Scarlet habits, or Red Cap in the exercise of all those
Functions that others do wear them in; with this difference only, that whereas
others wear Purple Chamblet, they wear Purple Says. But upon their solemn
Festivals they are constantly in Red, unless they be in very deep Mourning,
walking up and down the City, or making their Visits in that habit, though
there are several Visits they are obliged to make in their Scarlet Robes.

The same measures they observe in their Cavalcades, or solemn Ridings; they
affect much to have the Trappings of their Mules of the same color with their
Clothes. They use not to wear Black upon any occasion of Mourning, either in
their Clothes, Coaches, or Furniture of their Houses; nor do the New Cardinals
wear Mourning often, and if they should, they must pull them off till they have
made, received, and returned their Visits.

The Cardinals have commonly a Silver or Gilt Mace carried before them, not so
much to signify the greatness of their Dignity, as the excellence of it. The
Barber of the house, or some other Assistant of the Chamber, do carry it
ordinarily, as often as the Red Cloak is carried abroad; unless it be when they
go to preach in the Palace, or upon Good Friday, then a Groom carries it
covered to the place where he goes; and when the Cardinal takes his Cloak, the
Barber takes the Mace.

Their Cavalcades, whether Pontifical or private, are pompous and magnificent;
when they ride in their Pontificalibus, they have their Mantles, and Red Caps
upon their heads, and their Foot-cloaths and Trappings of their Mules suitable
with their Clothes, the splendour and magnificence of which sight, puts the poor
Prelate (that has not necessary accoutrements perhaps) out of his wits. A
certain Bishop of Naples, that happened upon such a solemn occasion to be a
spectator with me, observing some of their Mules to be furnished so richly, he
turned to me and told me, that In Rome it is better to be a Cardinals Mule,
than a Prelate of the Church.

And the times of these Pontifical Ridings are not seldom; every time his
Holiness rides with any solemnity, they are obliged to attend him in their
Robes; on the Annuntiation day they do the same; the day the Pope is invested
they do so too; upon occasion of any public Consistory, if a Cap be given to
any Cardinal, when they accompany any Cardinal that goes Legate a latere to any
Foreign State, and when he returns; when they are to meet any King or Queen;
and lastly, when they go to any Chapel, or particular Consistory, they march
with the same magnificence and decorum.

They ride privately, when they accompany his Holiness either out or into the
City; if the Pope be a Horseback, or in his Litter, the Cardinals ride in
colors suitable to the season, and the garniture of the Mules are but ordinary.

The Ceremony of sending the Cap to such Cardinals as are absent from Rome, is
very curious, and happens but rarely; because for the most part the Popes will
have them to receive them from their own hands; not that it is necessary to the
Orders of the Church; but out of an ambition they have to receive their thanks
and acknowledgements from the new Cardinals from their own mouths, and to treat
with them about the interest of their Families, and the obligations they have
to their Kindred; for which reason, some Popes do give the new Cardinals to
understand, that they took the resolution of creating them Cardinals upon
several considerations, but especially at the instant request of their Nephews,
though indeed there was no such matter.

But when by the incessant importunity of some King, the Pope is constrained to
send a Cap to some Cardinal out of Rome, he sends it by one of his Chamber, or
some other Gentleman express, with a Breve directed to the Nuntio, Bishop, or
other Prelat of that place where the Cardinal is that is to receive it; who is
obliged to go forth to meet it with all his Family and Friends, as not
regarding the person that brings it, but the quality of him that sends it; and
entering the City again, the Cap is carried before him upon a Mace, exposed to
the sight of all people, as it is usually done, when the Pope makes his
Cavalcade to take possession in Saint John de Lateran the day of the
Annuntiation.

Being entered into the City in this manner, and lodged at the expense of the
Cardinal, the first Festival day that happens, they come all to the Cardinals
house, as well he that brought the Cap, as he that is to give it him; and in
short, all such as are desirous to serve the Cardinal in the performance of
that ceremony. The Cardinal, in the mean time, riding with his Cappuchins hood,
and a black Cap upon his head, with all his Train, and the Mace before (by
express order from his Holiness) to Church; where being arrived, he makes a
short prayer at the Altar, and hears Mass. That done, the Prelat designed for
that office, dresses him in his Robes very solemnly, and then disposes him into
some eminent place where all the people may see him. Then he that carries the
Mace (who is the same that brought it from Rome) puts it upon the Altar, and
presents the Prelat with the Bull, who receiving it with great reverence, and
ordering it to be read by one of his Familiars, he makes an Oration in praise
of his Holiness, and of his own readiness to execute his commands.

That Oration being ended, which must be short, if it be thought good, the
Cardinal advances to the Altar, and falling down upon his knees, he swears to
all the particulars contained in the Popes Bull in manner and form as is
ordained at Rome. The Prelat orders the Miter to be taken out upon this, and
says some prayers over the Cardinal, which are to be found in the Ritual for
that purpose; that done, the Cardinal puts off his hood, and the Prelat the
Miter; and then he that brought the Cap, delivers it to the Prelat, who
receives it, and puts it upon the Cardinals head, and gives him an Osculum
Pacis; which Cap is presently taken off again, and given to him that brought
it. After which, they sing a Te Deum, and blesses the people; and then all of
them accompany him back to his house, he riding with his red Cap upon his head,
and showing all courtesy imaginable to such as have favored him in that
ceremony, feasting and entertaining them within, whilst the Conduits run with
Wine at his Gate.

The Cardinals receive and make visits with the greatest circumspection in the
world; their Masters of Ceremonies studying and contriving from morning to
night, after what manner it is to be done, lest they should be any way
defective in their office. Those who go to Audience of the Pope, wear the same
habits they do when they go to any Congregation held in the presence of the
Pope; at which times they kiss not his feet, unless at their first Audience
only; or when they have been six months at least out of Rome; or when they take
their leaves, and are sent Legates into any place; or when they return. The Pope
gives them the privilege of setting before him upon a backed chair, he makes
them be covered, and uses them as Brethren; whereas the Ambassadors of Princes
do commonly stand bare, and if at any time they be permitted to sit down, it is
upon a chair without a back.

Many do much admire the manner of receiving Ambassadors at Rome, and I much
more, that Kings should be obliged to receive and treat his Nuntio's like their
equals almosts, suffering them to be covered in their presence always, and
placing them in the most honorable seats; whilst the good Pope, without any
reflection upon the Majesty of a King, entertains their Ambassadors with so
little Decorum, that one would in his presence believe them some inferior
Officers of the Kings Chamber, rather than the Representatives of the Majesty
of a King.

In my judgment, it was sufficient if the Ambassadors looked upon them as Gods
Vicegerents upon Earth, whilst they are upon matters of Religion, or dressed
up in their Pontificalibus, and performing some Ecclesiastical duty; at such
times, I could allow them to advance themselves above other people. But that as
a Temporal Prince he should receive Ambassadors, and negotiate with them of
matters of Policy and State only, without paying them that honor one Prince
does usually to the Ministers of another, in my opinion is not suitable to the
dignity of a King; for what greater indecency can there be, than to see a
Cardinal, the most wretched and despicable creature perhaps that is to be seen,
standing with his Cap on his head, or else sitting on his backed Chair, cheek
by jole with his Holiness; and the Ambassador of a King, and one of the
greatest Lords of his Kingdom, to stand sneaking at a distance, and uncovered,
or else setting on a a stool like a Schoolboy. But I shall leave the care of
these things to themselves, who if they saw the difference that is made, they
would doubtless find out some way to redress it; and proceed to the ceremonies
the Cardinals use commonly in their visits.

If at any time the Cardinals be ill, they receive no visits, unless their
distempers be such, as will permit them to receive their Visitants in habits
suitable to such visits; and it is the same case at the death of any of their
kindred, though never so near, they seldom give audience to any body; for which
reason, some of them (to avoid the importunity of such as will visit them,
though they know the custom to the contrary) do retire into some private place
either within the City or without. I speak this of the generality of Cardinals,
for there are some of them, in spite of all customs will be visited, in case
of sickness, or condoling; and without any great absurdity, it being at their
choice to receive them or not; though others with good reason forbear it.

If they that make the visit be Cardinals, the Cardinal meets them in the
waiting Chamber, or perhaps a little further; but no further to be sure than
the top of the Stairs: if they be Princes, with the Title of Serenissimo, they
are received as the Cardinals: if they be Ambassadors of some King, two or
three Chambers off, if there be so many, if less, they go but to the first,
which is that that is next the Chamber of his Audience: if they be Brothers or
Nephews of the Pope that is living, they receive them as they do the
Ambassadors of Kings: if they be Ambassadors from Savoy, Tuscany, Dukes and
Peers of France, Grandees of Spain, Nephews to preceedent Popes, Generals for
the Church, or Heads of some of the most eminent Families in Rome; they meet
them a Chamber and a half, and no more. The Agents of Serene Princes, the
Ambassadors of Malta, Bologna, and Ferara, have half a Stanza, or a little
more; but the Malta Ambassador has usually some paces more, than those of
Bologna, and Ferara, and not without reason

All these are permitted to sit down, and be covered without any distinction;
yet the Cardinals, and Serene Princes, set always right against the Cardinal
that they visit, both of them with their sides toward the door; but the rest
sit a little of one side, and not directly over against the Cardinal. For the
Bishops, Archbishops, and Prelates, he receives them as he pleases himself; for
some of them, he stirs not out of his own Chamber; for others, he goes as far
as the Antichamber, according to the quality of the Prelat; but he gives them
all liberty indifferently to set down.

The Cardinal Nephew of the then living Pope, suffers not any Prelat to set
before him, but treats them as his Subjects, which savours too much of Tyranny,
for the Church is a Republique, and not a Monarchy, and the Prelates are
Ministers of the Church, and no Slaves to any body. It Is a fine sight, is it
not? to fee a grave Prelat with his beard as white as snow, after forty years
spent in the service of Christ in his Church, to be forced to stand in the
presence of an ignorant young Nephew of the Popes? But if they would use
persons of worth with more respect than they do, the Church would be better
served, and Gods Service not so slighted as it is.

But that which is most considerable is, that the Cardinal Nephews have no
reason at all to treat them of the Clergy so ill, since the Office of the
Cardinal Nephew, whom they call Padrone, (and indeed he has too much of the
Master) extends no further than to the Civil Government. His principal business
is to assist the Pope His Uncle in Temporal things, and he is therefore called
Patron, for in Spirituals they have no greater authority than other Cardinals
have; so that those Cardinals that were created before them, have the
preceedence, to signify that the Popes Nephew let him be Nephew as much as he
can, ceases not to be equal, and sometimes inferior, to their Seniors in all
things relating to the Ecclesiastical administrations of the Church.

Things being so, what is the reason the Cardinal Nephews use not the Prelates
of the Church with the same respect as other Cardinals do? What pretense can
there be, that a Cardinal that has preceedence of the Popes Nephew, should give
a Prelat liberty to sit in his presence, and the Nephew that is preceeded, and
is by consequence inferior to the other, will make him stand like his Servant?
This is no other; than to advance a younger Brother before an elder. If a
Prince that is the first born, should permit a Baron of his Realm to stand
covered before him, and his second Brother make him stand bare, would it not be
undecent, and ridiculous? It is the same case with the Prelates in Rome, whilst
they receive more honor from the greater Cardinals, than from the lesser.

If the Pope be Gods Vicegerent, he cannot create another Vicegerent, and if
his Nephew be not his Vicegerent, how comes he to slight and despise the true
Ministers of God? But things are now at that pass, those Prelates are contemned
that are Servants and Friends to the Church, and by those very persons that are
her greatest Enemies; so that it is believed, there is more to be got at
present, by perplexing and persecuting of the Church, than by serving it never
so faithfully.

But I will return now to speak of the Ceremony when they take their leaves. If
they be Cardinals or Serene Princes, the Cardinal attends them to their
Coaches, but with this difference; if they be Cardinals, he suffers their
Coaches to be gone, before he offers to return to his Chamber; but if Princes,
he turns about, and goes back before the Coach be gone. The Ambassadors of
Kings, and the living Popes Nephews, he accompanies to the top of the Stairs,
leaves them there, and returns first toward his Chamber; and the same custom
he uses to all that visit him, especially to those whose entrances I have
mentioned, of whom it is not necessary I should speak again; it is sufficient
to know the Cardinals do ordinarily accompany them at their departure, some
Chambers or Paces further than he met them at their entrance: that is, those
that were received in the first Chamber, are accompanied to the second when
they go away; and so forward according to the quality of their reception.

The Cardinals do usually accompany the ordinary Prelates one Chamber, the
Bishops two, the Archbishops, Patriarchs, Treasurers, and Auditors of the
Chamber, three, and the Governor of Rome more; and all this is to be
understood of Rome, or in some place out of the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, or
Archbishops; for if a Cardinal happens to be within the Diocese of a Bishop,
Archbishop, or Patriarch, and is visited by them, he receives them with
greater civility, as being in their Jurisdiction; in the Ceremony of meeting or
accompanying back, the Cardinals do regulate themselves according to the number
of Rooms that there are. In a house therefore where there are many, they meet
and accompany them a little farther than ordinary; and where there be but few,
he accompanies them the less, for fear of being driven into a necessity of
going with them into their outward Room.

The Gentlemen and Servants of the Cardinal that is visited, do always attend
the person that is accompanied by their Master. For example, those that are
brought by the Cardinal to the top of the Stairs, are by them waited upon to
their Coach; those that he brings to the waiting Chamber, they attend to the
bottom of the Stairs; and in short, they always go two or three Rooms further
than the Cardinals do. And if it happens at any time one be visited by several
Cardinals at a time, and one or more of them will not go with the rest, the
Cardinal that is visited, leaves some of his Gentlemen or Prelates to entertain
those that stay, and goes himself with him, that is going to his Coach.

As to their manner of returning of visits, you must know the new Cardinals
return their visits in their habits, with a great train of several Coaches, to
the Ambassadors of Kings; and to the Ambassadors of Savoy, and Tuscany, they
make their visits in Cassocks, Rochets, and riding Cloaks, as they usually do.

The other Cardinals make their visits indifferently to those Royal Ambassadors
that are Resident in Rome, as to extraordinary Ambassadors, and that is, in
their habits; they do the same also to all Ambassadors of Princes, that are
admitted at any time into the Consistory, as likewise to the Republique
Ambassadors, not taking off their Mantels in their houses. They render their
visits likewise to the Ambassadors of Princes that have the Title of Highness,
although they are not admitted into a public Consistory, with this difference
only, that they visit them in their Cassacks and long Cloaks.

Those Cardinals that are returned from some Legation de latere ultra montes,
and do make a visit, they do it in the same manner as they have been received
by other Cardinals, that is, with as great a train of Coaches as they can
possibly make.

To those Barons or persons of quality, that the Cardinals cannot without too
great condescension make a visit to, they find out some other way of signifying
an amicable correspondence, taking some opportunity or other to congratulate
them, or if that be not to be found, they can vouchsafe a visit to their wives,
or what other Ladies of their Family are nearest in relation to them. The
Cardinals (if not all of them) for the most part are very liberal in their
visits to Ladies, giving them extraordinary honors, both at their coming in,
and going out. But those Cardinals that have the Papcy in their prospect, live
a little more recluse, receiving no visits from the Ladies, nor making any to
them, supposing thereby to gain an applause among the people, and a reputation
in the Church.

But those that never aim at any such thing, do but laugh at, and deride that
outward formality, passing away their time with all pleasures imaginable,
making their visits not only to Ladies of nobler extraction, but receiving
ordinary persons into their houses, and using them with great familiarity, as
if the honor and reputation of the Church consisted in such things as those.

But that which scandaliseth the Protestant most, is the small Edification they
find amongst the Catholics, and the Conversation of some Cardinals, not at all
agreeable with the Habits they wear. I say some Cardinals, because there are
some in the Sacred College that live good lives, serve the Church with great
zeal, or devotion at least, abstaining from the Commission of any sin that may
become scandalous to their Neighbors. But the Romans being well insinuated by
the examples of their Hypocrisy, that have lived with all the pretense of
severity imaginable for several years, with design to come at last to the
triple Crown; whether being arrived, instead of professing of Holiness, they
become Devils; will no more believe the outward appearance or hypocrisy they
use to delude the world withal, in order to make themselves Popes; whilst
every body knows, that at the Election of Popes, it is interest and passion only
that bears the sway.

Many Cardinals therefore, either because they will not change their own
natures to satisfy the world, or because they think by maintaining the same to
satisfy the world, or because they abhor Hypocrisy, or have not judgment
proportionable to the dignity they possess, or because they would make use of
the Majesty of a Cardinal to gratify the liberty of their own humors, run
into extravagant courses, and think themselves honorable in their Luxury,
great in their Pleasures, and majestic in their Excesses; in short, they
believe they batten in their Scandals, and they do grow fat because they
believe it. They have the chief places at a Play, and they are the first that
laugh and applaud any Buffonry. They are not the last at your Balls, and to any
kind of play they need not a second invitation.

But that which is most to be lamented is, that some of them do consume the
greatest part of their Revenues to have Comedyes in their houses, as if the
Decorum of the Church, consisted in the neatness of their Plays, and if in
Carnival time they forbear having troops of Players in their Chambers, they do
but reserve their money for some more scandalous use.

How many are there of them, that spend the whole night with a pack of Cards in
their hands? that from morning to night play at any Profane Sport, but forget
the Divine Office of a Cardinal? Oh that it pleased Heaven that they had but
any consideration of place or time! But they give themselves over to their
sensualities without any such thought, accommodating those circumstances to
their pleasures; and this I can affirm, because I my self saw a Cardinal now
living, play a whole night together with a Lady, and suffered her willingly to
win, that she might be induced to play the oftener with him.

The Apostles of Christ were not such men, nor were his Disciples like them at
all; nor can I tell why they that pretend to that Title, and to be included in
the Apostolic College, should do so. But we must not therefore seem to be
scandalized at that, which is looked upon as an ornament by the Ecclesiastics
of Rome.

But it concerns us to turn away our eyes from such as those, and fix them upon
them that refrain from those scandals, making it their care, that the people be
edified by their examples, the Church well served by their practices, and all
Ecclesiastics satisfied with the sincerity of the Conversations; amongst which
number of Cardinals, I am sure some of them are good, if not at the heart
(which God only knows) at least in appearance, and in the judgment of man.

And now it is convenient to say something about the stopping of their Coaches,
and the Customs they observe when they are Legates of some City or Province, or
when they do enter with, or accompany any Prince either Ecclesiastical or Civil.

I shall tell you in brief, that a Cardinal stops his Coach to another that is
his Senior; for it is to be taken notice of, that the most ancient Cardinal is
the last always that stops, and the first that goes forward. To the Ladies,
they are the first that stop, and the last that go, it being but civil to give
the preceedence to the Ladies; but to all other persons, under the quality of a
Crowned head, they are the last that stop, and the first that depart.

It many times falls out, that they meet the Sacrament or Host as they pass
along the Streets in their Coaches, if they do so, they come out immediately,
and accompany the Priest that carries it to the very Altar, where they fall
down upon their knees, make a short Prayer, and return to their Coaches. And if
the Priest by accident goes to the house of any sick person, they bear him
company to the Gate, where they fall down upon their knees, till the Priest be
entered, and then they come back to their Coaches. The same Custom the
Cardinals observe when it is carried in any Procession, or other Solemnity. If
a Cardinal, as he passes in or out of the City, sees another Cardinal on foot,
he dismounts immediately to make the usual Complements; and being parted, he
mounts not into his Coach, till he has gone some certain Paces on foot. To
other persons, he seldom lights out of his Coach, unless upon some particular
business. But when there is any malice or animosity betwixt Cardinals, as it
happens too often, they express it by passing whole years by one another
without saluting or speaking a word, so as that Rule has this exception, for if
one Cardinal meets another that he has a Piqueto, he not only will not alight
from his Coach, but lets him go by, and pretends not to see him, and this is
nothing but what I have seen; but the more prudent avoid all occasions of
meeting their Enemies.

There is great civility to be found amongst the Ecclesiastics of the Church
of Rome, as to their entertainment of Strangers, and Humane Conversation, I
speak in general; as to particulars, there are some will shrug up their
shoulders to their greatest Benefactors, that they may not be constrained to
make them some sort of Complement against their wills. It is sufficient, that
amongst all the Christian Clergy, the Church of Rome does far exceed the
Protestants in their entertainment of Strangers, though they force themselves
as much as is possible to satisfy them. The reason is, the Protestant has a
heart good enough, but his purse is too weak, and that little he gets by the
sweat (as it were) of his brows, must of necessity be applied to the
maintenance of his Family, not to the acquiring the applause of Travelers, to
the nourishment of his Children, and not to the entertainment of Strangers: but
those of the Church of Rome have that plenty of riches, it would be a miracle
if they should not gain themselves some friends by their superfluity; though
they have Nephews and -- to enrich instead of Children, yet they may do all
that without any inconvenience, for they knew well enough out of what Treasury
to take money to create themselves friends, and to show themselves Courteous;
besides from their Civility and Gentileness they express to Strangers, they
draw no small profit in Alms; it being more than true, that the Ecclesiastics
are in that point like the Bell of Manfridonia, which when it sounds, makes
this Echo, by common report, Dammi e dotti, etc. Give me and I Will give thee,
Give me and I Will give thee, Give me and I Will give thee. Great is the Civility the
Cardinals use to any Ambassador they find in any City or State of the Church,
receiving strangers with all possible courtesy; insomuch that some Protestants
themselves have gone away very well satisfied with their humanity. I will not
say much of their comportment to Serene Princes who have their Orders from
Rome, to the end they may be entertained at his Holiness his charge, and are
therefore received by the Cardinal Legates with the greatest honor imaginable.
And by this extraordinary courtesy, the State of the Church feels no small
inconvenience, because they take occasion upon any pretense whatsoever to lay
new imposts upon the people, as they did upon the arrival of the Queen of
Sweden, which remains (as a perpetual memorial of Alexander the seventh) upon
their shoulders to this day; and I have heard some people exclaim, It Is we that
suffer for the Generosity of the Popes.

To meet the eldest son of any Prince, any Royal Ambassadors, or the
Ambassadors of the Dukes of Savoy or Tuscany, the Cardinals are wont to go as
far as the Gates of the City, with as great a Train of Coaches as they can
possibly get, or the largeness of the place will bear. They first send one of
the chief of their Families to meet them, and with a fine Summer Coach to
invite them from their own. After that they send a company of Lances half a
days journey more or less; and a mile or two out of the City, they send their
Vice-Legats with some small number of Coaches.

But this common Rule has its exceptions likewise; for there are some Cardinals
that treat and caress such persons according to the animosity or inclination
they have for their Masters. For example, a Cardinal of the French faction will
receive an Ambassador from France, with greater Pomp than an Ambassador from
Spain, and it is the same on the other side. But those that are indifferent,
observe their Rules, and measure their Paces exactly, both for the one and the
other, having a care always to express something more of honor to the Royal
Ambassadors, than to the Ambassadors from Savoy and Tuscany, nor indeed without
reason. Sometimes the Cardinals will pretend I know not what excuses, sending
great Trains to meet them, but staying themselves at home, where they receive
them at the top of the Stairs without their Rochets. Which custom is never used
to the eldest Son of any Serene Prince, they receiving them always at the Gate
of the Town, unless the Legate be sick in Bed. In the same manner they receive
their Brother Cardinals as they pass by.

The Relations of Serene Princes, and some principal Barons, are received some
few miles off (by the Cardinal Legates appointment.) by the Master of his
Chamber, and sometimes by his Vice-Legat, who conducts them to the bottom of
the Stairs, where they are received by his Eminence; sometimes he pretends for
their greater honor to walk out into the City, and as soon as he has notice
that the Prince is near at hand, he marches into the Street by which he is to
pass, and (pretending to have met him by accident) takes him up into his Coach,
and conducts him to the Palace prepared for him.

Neither the Cardinal Legates, nor any other Cardinal in Rome, does use to make
any invitation to Marquesses, Counts, or other persons of quality, that are
passing about their own particular affairs. Yet the Cardinal Legate, if they
make him a visit (to return them some expressions of favor) will invite them
to Dinner or Supper, and appoint some of his Gentlemen afterward to accompany
him, and show him what is most considerable in the Town. The principal Ladies,
as Ambassadors Wives and the like, the Cardinals do always invite, and send
the meanest of their Relations to meet them, if they have any (which they
seldom want) or at least their Major Domo, some miles out of the Town, and
that more or less, according to the design they have to do them honor; besides
which, they do usually entreat some of the principal Ladies of the City to go
and receive them, and accompany them to the Palace, where the Cardinal receives
them at the Stairs head, and conveys them to the appartment ordained them.

The particularities of their Visits, and Receptions, I have thought good to
insert in this Cardinalism, for the satisfaction of some Outlandish Gentlemen
that did earnestly desire it. For my own part, I had no other design, but to
speak of matters appertaining to their politics: however it seems not
improper, seeing in these times the policy of the Cardinals run so much into
Ceremony.

I shall now speak of the eight Offices that are peculiar to the persons of the
Cardinals, which are the Popes Vicar; The chief Penitentiarie; The
Vice Chancellor; The Chamberlain; The Prefect of the Signature di Justitia; The
Prefect of the Signature di Gratia; The Prefect of the Breves; The
Bibliothecary. And first I shall begin with the Popes Vicar, which office is
the most ancient of all, and was for a long time executed by Bishops, and other
Prelates. But Pius the fourth, transferred that dignity upon the Sacred
College, declaring the Cardinal Giacomo Savelli Vicar, about the year 1565.
after which time it was always conferred upon Cardinals. The jurisdiction of
this Vicar, is over the Priests and Regulars in Rome, and the Territories
belonging to it. He has authority also over Societies of Laics, Religious
Houses, Hospitals, Jews, and Courtezans, besides I know not what power over the
concourses of Curats for Benefices in Rome, which are not in partibus; and this
Office affords the Cardinal Vicar for his Pension, a hundred Ducats of Gold a
month, paid him out of the Chamber. This Vicar has in his Court two Deputies,
one for Civil Causes, the other for Criminal, and a Vicegerent who is a
Titulary Bishop, and can exercise all the Episcopal Functions in Rome; and he
has the Superintendancy, and Care of the Monasteries and Nuns; he has his
Provost Marshal, and a certain number of Sergeants, and comes with the rest of
his Officials into the Congregations held before the Vicar about matters
belonging to his Court. Besides these, there are four Notaries belonging to
that Office, each of which executes his charge apart, and has eight or ten
Clerks under him perpetually.

The office of chief Penitentiary is given by the Pope to a Cardinal always,
and yields him that has it, a yearly Rent of about five thousand Ducats of
Gold. His jurisdiction lies in cases reserved for the Pope, in giving
absolution gratis ubique, and giving faculty to absolve in Parchment Sealed
with the Penitentiary Seal, to such Confessors as he approves. This
Penetentiary has a Prelat under him, that is called the Regent of the
Penitentiary office, to whom the Confessors repair upon occasion, if they
cannot have immediate dispach from the Cardinal. And here it is to be
advertised, that this Penitentiary assigns penance according to the quality of
the offense, though the Confessor perhaps conceals the person. This
Penitentiary sits in great state, sometimes in the Cathedral of Saint John de
Lateran, sometimes of St Peter in the Vatican, and sometimes in the Church of
Sancta Maria Maggiore, upon a kind Throne or Tribunal four or five steps high,
with a wand in his hand, to hear the Confessions of reserved Cases. I had once
occasion to make use of him, but I would not go to Cardinal Francisco that was
chief Penitentiary to confess my self, lest all that were present in the
Church, should understand the quality of my Conscience; for as soon as they
observe any body at the feet of the Cardinal, they imagine immediately he has
some great load upon his Conscience, which makes many people forbear going
thither. This Penitentiary can call a Congregation, and (by the assistance and
intervention of his Regent (who keeps the Seal) two or three Jesuit Priests,
and some few Canonists) deliberate about the interest and affairs of the
office, the History of whose Original follows.

About two hundred years after Christ's Incarnation, Saint Cornelius being Pope,
and many Christians having Sacrificed to Idols, there was a great controversy,
whether those that were lapsed might be reconciled, and readmitted again,
which was the Foundation of the Novatian Schism. After long dispute, it was
concluded by the major part, that they might; but because some were less
Sinners than others, some had not Sacrificed, others had endured Persecution,
but were not able to persevere. There were certain Priests deputed, who, Pro
modo culpae admissam Paenitentiam indulgerent; That is, Proportion the Penance
to the quality of the Crime. And from hence sprang the Penitentiaries, who
after the Church was in peace, and tranquillity, extended their jurisdiction by
degrees, to other delinquents; for which reason it was established, that in
every Patriarchical Church in Rome, there should be two Priests, who should
have the care of imposing of Penances according to the Penitential Canons,
which are very ancient, by the testimony of the Keeper of the Library. And this
is all is written, or recorded in the case; from whence they argue, that in
probability these Priests had a head or chief to whom they repaired to
communicate their business of importance to the Pope, and this they would have
to be their chief Penitentiary; who if so, must be very ancient, though there
be no Records of it, as Pauvinus says, before Gregory the tenth.

The antientest memorial of the Office of the Vice Chancellor, is to be found
in an Epistle about Monarchy written by Saint Jerome, who was then Chancellor,
ad Gerontiam: It is most certain the Pope is the only Chancellor of the Church,
so as the other are called Vice-Chancellors only; yet there are some that
believe it is only out of respect to Saint Lawrence, that was formerly
Chancellor, that they suffer not his Successors to enjoy the same title that he
did. Anciently the Chancellor writ whatever belonged to the Pope to write, and
sometimes he answered those quaeries and scruples in matters of Faith, as were
made him by the Bishops and others; he writ also of the Spiritual Dominion of
the Pope, and had the same Authority the Secretary of the Breves, or the
Secretary ab intimis, have now. Besides which he had the same Jurisdiction the
Chancellors have now in France, or any other Principality, as Luca de Penna
affirms in an Epistle of his to Isidore, in which he sets down distinctly the
particular faculties of this Office. He had under him twelve Scrineraries, and
one Proto-Scrinerary, all of them assisting him to undergo the weight of his
Charge according to orders: others were to have a care of the draughts, and
others to transcribe them. This Office till the time of Gregory the 7th. which
was in the year 1187. was ordinarily conferred upon Bishops, or Cardinals; and
in the year 1100. the Cardinal Bishop of Saint Ruffina was Chancellor, by
concession of Benedict the eight; during the Papacy of Alexander the second, it
came to be disused, which was in the year 1071. and so it continued to Gregory
the eights time, being frequently given to Cardinal Priests, or Cardinal
Deacons. The said Gregory having that Office, as soon as he was made Pope, took
it away from the College of Cardinals, and put into it a Canon of Lateran, who
because he was no Cardinal, was called Cancellarii vicem agens; and so it
continued for a hundred years, out of the hands of the College of Cardinals;
the Ministers instead of vicem agens, calling him that executed it
Vice Chancellor, by degrees, as a more commodious name. Under Boniface the
eight this Office returned to the Sacred College again, being given to
Richardo Padroni a Noble man of Siena, who afterward was made Cardinal as some
think, but forgetting the ancient institution, he continued Vice Chancellor, by
inadvertency taking the name of the Office upon him.

They that had this Office called themselves either Chancellors, or
Library-keepers, as they pleased, because Praeerat Bibliothecae. Whilst the
Emperor had the nomination of the Popes, the keeper of the Records was called
Archicancellarius Imperii pro Italia, and Apostolicae sedis Bibliothecarius,
vel Cancellarius, vel Archicancellarins; and they that were in Rome said, Datum
Romae per manum N. Diaconi Cardinalis, Vicecancellarii, Archiepiscopi
Coloniensis, Apostolica sedis Bibliothecarii seu Cancellarii. Where is to be
noted, the Date was made by the same Chancellor at that time the
Vice-Chancellorship was executed by a Cardinal, who got at least nine thousand
Ducats of Gold by it. Its Jurisdiction is principally about the dispatch of all
the Apostolical Letters, which are all signed by the Pope, except such as pass
by Brief sub annulo Piscatoris.

Three times a Week, viz. Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday, there meet in his
Palace all the Officers of the Apostolical Chancery, that is, the Regent, and
the Abbreviatori di Parco Maggiore, which are twelve in number, besides the
Regent in his Purple habit like a Prelate; all which Offices are sold, the
Regents for twelve thousand Ducats of Gold and more; and the Abbreviatori di
Parco for six thousand at least; which money yields the purchaser eight or ten
per Cent. six of the Abbreviators places are in the Gift of the Cardinal
Vice Chancellor, and the Regents is in his Eminencies. These thirteen Prelates
have their places in his Holiness his Chapel: But the Regent comes seldom
thither, in respect of his precedente before other Prelates. These thirteen
Prelates are called Referendaries, or Remembrancers of the one and the other
Court, and the Regent has power to referr all Causes of Appeal to Rome, which
he referrs to the Auditors of the Rota and Referendaries, distributing their
Orders with great equality, that every one might have his part.

The Office of Chamberlain yields one year with another six thousand Crowns of
Gold; the Jurisdiction is to take cognizance of all Causes, that fall under the
discussion of the Apostolic Chamber and their Clerks, being present at all
transactions in that Chamber, unless he be hindered by the Consistory, passing
the greatest part of the dispatches under his own Name, though examined and
subscribed by the Clerks.

It is observable also in the Apostolic Chamber, that the Cardinal
Chamberlain, and all the other Prelates, do come thither with their Purple
Pontifical Cloaks over their Rochets, and the other Officers with habits
different from what they ordinarily do wear. Besides, the Chamberlain is Judge
of Appeals, as likewise of the Judgments passed of the Surveyors of the
Streets, and with those Surveyors he takes cognizance of Cau^yes, Buildings,
Bridges, Streets, and other things. Furthermore, in the vacancy of the Chair,
he resides in the Palace in the Popes apartment, walks up and down Rome with
his Guard of Swisses, who are always attending his person; he coins money also
with his own Arms and Impression upon it: It being his charge to see the
Conclave made, it remains at his disposing afterward; he has a Key to the
Treasury in Saint Angelo, of which there are but three, one for the Pope, an
other for him, and the third for the Cardinal Deacon. Some few Ages since the
head of the Deacons was the Archdeacon, who was a Cardinal, and had the ear
of the Revenue; his dignity was very Noble, and continued till the year 1100.
about which time for the excess of his Greatness, that dignity was taken away,
and another instituted in its room, which is the Chamberlainship, upon
condition it should be conferred upon Cardinals only; and they had their
Coadjutors assigned them, who are Clerks in the Apostolic Chamber, and whose
Office in the first institution was the same with the Chamberlains. Now they
have the Treasurer joined to them, and the President, in respect of some late
difference betwixt the Pope and his Chamberlains.

The office of the Prefect of the Signature of Justice, is executed by a
Cardinal also, who receives out of the Chamber, for his Pension, a hundred
Ducats a Month. His business is to under-write answers to all Petitions and
References, and every Thursday, except in Vacations, the Signature of Justice
is held before the Prefect in his own Palace, for determining references;
where also twelve Prelates assist with Votes, and besides them, all other
Prelates that are Referendaries. Moreover, there are present, but without power
of Voting, the Auditor of the Rota and the Lieutenant Civil of the Cardinal
Vicar, to the end, no thing to prejudice the jurisdiction of their Tribunals.

The Prefect of the Signature di Gratia, is a Cardinal likewise, who has a
hundred Ducats a month for his Pension also. His office is to be present
always at the Signature di Gratia, which is constantly held before his
Holiness, and it is he that seals all the Petitions and Pardons that pass
there. There are twelve Prelates also that have their votes there, which use to
be the same that were present at the Signature of Justice; as likewise the
Cardinal Vicar, the Cardinal Prefect of the Breves, the Datarie, and more or
fewer of the Cardinals, according as more or fewer of them are deputed by the
Pope; however, they are never fewer than twelve.

There are present also at that Seal, the Auditor of the Chamber, the
Lieutenant Civil of the Cardinal Vicar, the Treasurer General, one of the
Auditors di Rota, a Protonotary, one of the Clerks of the Chamber, one of the
Abbreviatori del Parco Maggiore, and the Regent of the Chancery, all of them
appearing for the defense of their particular jurisdictions and offices. This
Seal is kept constantly once a week before his Holiness, on Sunday, or Tuesday,
if it falls not on a Holy day.

The Cardinals likewise are Prefects of the Breves, and the Library Keepers;
the Prefect has an allowance out of the Chamber for his Pension of a hundeed
Ducats a Month; and his office is to overlook and sign all the draughts of the
Briefs that go under a Tax. The business of the keeper of the Library (that has
his hundred Ducats a month out of the Chamber likewise) is to superintend the
Press, and the Library in the Vatican, and the people that work there, in
Printing Classick writings in the Oriental Tongues.

Out of this College of Cardinals, there are several Congregations formed,
that are called for that reason, the Congregations of Cardinals. and are
fifteen in number, viz. of the Holy Office, of the affairs of the Bishops and
Regulars of the Council, of the immunities of the Church, of the State, de
propaganda Fide, of Rights, of Water, of Streets, of the Index, of Consultation
for the Government of the Church, of good Regiment, and of easing of
grievances, of the Mint, of examination of such as are designed to be Bishops,
and of the affairs of the Consistory; but for these Congregations, the
Cardinals have only their labor for their pains, and some little honor that
signifies nothing.

The Congregation of the Holy Office, meet twice a week, on Tuesday in the
Covent of Minerva, where the Inquisition is kept by the Father Dominicans, and
on Thursday before his Holiness, where causes of Heresy are heard before
twelve Cardinals at the least, deputed according to the pleasure of the Pope,
and a good number of Divines of several Religious Orders.

The Congregation of the affairs of the Bishops and Regulars, has a particular
jurisdiction over the differences which arise betwixt the Bishops, and their
Subjects, and betwixt the Bishops, and the Regulars. This Congregation meets
the Friday in every week, in the Cardinals house that is head of that
Congregation, and that with no small trouble, for they have so many Letters of
complaints sometimes, it is scarce possible to read them.

The Congregation of the Council, has the power of interpreting the Orders and
Decrees of the Council of Trent, so that if any difference happens in
Christendom about that, they apply themselves to this Congregation, which
gives them all seasonable resolution. It is held in the antientest Cardinals
house, though the head be another Cardinal, and that he has the power of
assembling them: they meet ordinarily once a week, that is on Sunday, or
Thursday, if it be no Holyday.

The Congregation of the Ecclesiastical immunities, was instituted by Urban the
eight, who having had many controversies of that nature whilst he was Nuntio,
and before he was Pope, he took an Oath as soon he was created, to erect this
Court, to prevent those inconveniences for the future. Which Congregation has
power to resolve such doubts as happen in the confusion and diversity of
offenses, and to determine who are, and who are not to enjoy the privileges of
the Church. This Congregation meets every Tuesday, in the eldest Cardinals
house, in which there are present, several Cardinals, one Auditor di Rota, one
Clerk of the Chamber, one out of each Signature, and a Secretary that uses to
be a Referendary to one Signature or the other. The Prefect of this
Congregation has for his Pension about seven hundred Ducats a year, and the
keeping of those Seals that are necessary.

In the Congregation of State, all those Cardinals that have been Apostolical
Nuntioes are present, and the Secretary of State to his Holiness with them, and
it is generally held before the Pope, or the Cardinal Nephew.

The Congregation de propaganda fide, was erected by Gregory the fifteenth of
happy memory, to investigate and find out all possible ways for the
propagating the Catholic Faith in all parts of the World, and to advise what
may be conducible to so profitable a work. It uses to meet on Mundays once a
month before the Pope, and many times in the Palace de propaganda fide. There
are present several Cardinals, the Apostolic Protonotary, his Holiness, his
Secretary of State, one Judge that uses to be Referendary of one of the
Signatures, the Assessor of the Holy Office, the Secretary of the same
Congregation, who has built a Palace of no ordinary greatness in the Piazza
della Santissima Trinita di monti, for the entertainment of all those that have
received the Catholic Faith, and come to see Rome; besides that they lodge
several poor Bishops there, and provide them with all things necessary for a
livelihood. There is a Press in this Congregation also, for all Foreign
Languages, where they print daily their Missals, Breviaries, and such other
Books.

The Jurisdiction of the Congregation of Rights, respects the differences in
Rights, Ceremonies, Preceedencies, Canonization of Saints, and such like
affairs. The antientest of the deputed Cardinals, is head of this Congregation,
and has power to convene them in his own house once a month, or oftener as he
pleases; and it is to be observed, that all Congregations are conve'd by their
Heads.

The Congregation del Acque, has the care of all Rivers, Bridges, and such
things. The antientest Cardinal is head of it, and calls it upon occasion at
his own house, there being no precise or determinate day appointed.

The Cardinal Chamberlain is head of the Congregations di font and di strade,
and there being no fixed day, he calls them too as he thinks it convenient; but
they meet in the antientest deputed Cardinals house always, and being
assembled, they consider of the Aquaducts and Conveyances of water into Rome,
and the manner of distributing it thorough the whole City, as also the
Commodities of the Streets.

The Congregation del Judices, has Jurisdiction in over-seeing the Press, in
printing and correcting of books; it has a Cardinal to its head, who assembles
them at his own house as occasion requires, though there be a day appointed.

There is the Congregation della Consulta, for the Government of the Church,
and the head of that is the Cardinal Nephew of the present Pope, they meet
twice a week in his house, viz. Tuesdays, and Fridays. There are present, six
Cardinals, six Prelates, a Secretary that uses to be a great Confident of the
Nephews; in this Congregation they consult of the Government of the Church, all
Deputies, Prefects, Governors, Provosts, and other Officers whatever,
directing their accounts thither, of any thing considerable that happens in
their Governments, and this Congregation deliberates and decrees what is to be
done in the case: The Secretary draws up the Order, and the Cardinal that is
head, subscribes it first, and then the rest of the Prelates that are present.
The several Provinces are divided amongst them, and every one reads the Letters
in the Council that come out of their particular Provinces; but it is to be
understood, the Legate of Avignon, the Governor of Benevento in the Kingdom of
Naples, and of the City of Ceneda, in the Dominions of the Venetian, being all
free Governments, are not subject to the Decrees of this Council; the Governor
di Fermo, and that State, and the Governor of Spoleti, are exempt likewise. The
Prelates of this Congregation have three parts of the Palace, and each of them a
thousand crowns a year entertainment, and the Secretary two thousand, that is
Roman crowns.

The Cardinal Nephew to the Pope is head also of the Congregation of Grace, and
good Government; the Communities upon any grievance or oppression, repair
thither for remedy with other Subjects for present relief, and determinations
in writing manu Regia. This Congregation meets on Sundays (at the same place
where the Congregation della Consulta meets) by turns, that is, the
Congregation for good Government one Sunday, and the Congregation for Relief
another. There are five or six Cardinals present always, seven or eight
Prelates, one Secretary; (which is always the same with the Secretary in the
other Congregation) all the Letters or Orders that pass in this Congregation,
are signed by the Cardinal Nephew; all the Prelates have the same Emolument the
Prelates of the Congregation della Consulta have; they are habited in Purple,
and have the Title of his Holinesses familiar and Domestic Congregation.

The Congregation of the Treasury have a particular Jurisdiction over all
Moneys to be coined in that State, as likewise of Foreign Moneys, to observe
which way they may be spent in the Territories of the Church. There are present
four Cardinals, chosen all of them at the discretion of the Pope, and some
Officers of his Chamber. The head of them is he the Pope thinks good to depute,
and that head has power to assemble them at his own house as often as he pleases,
for there is no set day appointed.

The Congregation for the examination of New Bishops, was instituted by Clement
the eight of happy memory, who examined several persons himself, especially if
they were toward the Law; for the Professors of Divinity were examined by
Bellarmine only. This Congregation is held always before the Pope, in the
presence of eight or ten Cardinals, a certain number of Prelates, and some
Theologists of several Opinions; in which all persons the Pope intends to
promote to Bishoprics are examined; but it is to be understood the Bishoprics
belonging to the Church in Italy, for the rest are not subject to the
jurisdiction of that Court. The Person examined kneels upon a Cushion before
the Pope, and all that are present in the Congregation have power to examine
him; after he is examined and approved, it is entered into a Book that the
Secretary of that Congregation keeps, that that person has been examined, and
if it happens he be removed to any other Church, he need not be examined again.
If one has been Bishop in some Foreign Province never so long, and by accident
is translated to some Bishopric in Italy, he must submit to the examination of
that Congregation, except he be a Cardinal, for they are exempt from all
examination when they are admitted to any Church. But here it is to be
understood, that though they be examined and approved, they are not immediately
Bishops. The person designed, makes profession first of the Catholic Faith
before the Cardinal chosen by his Holiness, to propose him to the rest of the
Cardinals: that done, they give an Oath to the Witnesses that are to be
examined about the State of that Church, and about the quality, extraction, and
custom of the person designed to be Bishop of that Church: that past, the
Cardinal gives order to his Auditor to make Protess, which is presently drawn
up, either by the Cardinal Vicars Notary, or the Auditor of that Chamber;
whilst they are drawing the Process, the person recommended is to produce the
Testimonies of his Doctorship, and after that, what other privileges he has, as
Patents, Depositions, or Testimonials from him that Ordained him, which are
very proper, and will much facilitate his dispatch.

After the Testimonies, they are to swear they were born in lawful Marriage,
and that their Parents were not suspected for Heretics, and that he is above
thirty years of age, according to the Canons of the Council of Trent. After
this, there are other Witnesses examined about the State, Revenue, and quality
of the Sea, in what Province the City is, whether it be immediately subject to
the Apostolic Sea, or the Suffragan of some Archbishopric, what Lands or
^owns there are within its Diocese, how many thousand Souls, how many
Monasteries there are, how many Relics of Saints, how much the Church yields
yearly, how many Clerks, how many Canons, how many Colleges or Schools, how
many Covents of Monk, how many Priests, how many Steeples, Bells, and such like
things. The Presentation being finished, the Cardinal Ponente (which is he the
Pope chose to present the person) subscribes it, and then gives it to the three
principal Cardinals of that Order, who having perused it, subscribe it in like
manner, and return it to the Cardinal Fonente, where it remains.

In the next private Consistory he publishes it, and in the next, he presents
him, and recites in a short Latin Speech the whole contents of the Process, but
before the Cardinal Ponente assigns his Church, the Provost gives two blanck
Schedules to the Auditor of the Sacred College at the instance of the person
Elected, in which he promises to pay the Cardinal Ponente, the Sacred College,
the Reverend Chamber, and all the Officers of the Chancery, all that is due to
them for the dispatch of that business. The day before the Consistory for
determining, the Cardinal Ponente sends a memorial to all the rest of the
Cardinals, in which, he succinctly recites the manner of the whole Process, to
the end, that if any Cardinal could make any exception, he knew against whom he
was to speak, and as soon as the Presentation is over by the Cardinal Ponente,
the Pope turns to the Cardinal Deacon, and demands if he has any thing to say
to the contrary, if he has any, he declares it, if not, he rises up, says no,
and approves what the Cardinal Ponente has done, and so his Holiness decrees,
and gives the person that Church, which is entered immediately into a Note by
the Cardinal Vice Chancellor, and Sealed with his Seal. Upon this Decree, the
Cardinal Ponente draws up a Schedule, Subscribes it with his own Hand, and
Seals it with his own Seal; and by virtue of this Schedule, and another which
they call the Counter-part under the Hand and Seal of the Cardinal
Vice Chancellor, the Bull is immediately dispatched: The Cardinal Ponente
receives ordinarily as his Right, fifteen Ducats per Cent. out of the Chamber
of all the Revenues of that Church, that person is recommended to: if he be
presented by the Pope himself, the said sum is to be paid to the College of
the Apostolic Secretaries: if one be presented by a Cardinal that has not been
formerly in Rome, the Cardinal is to pay the fifteen per Cent, but if the
Cardinal be present, or has been in Rome, he is freed from that payment. The
person presented, stirs not out of his house that morning, but shaves his head,
and after Dinner puts himself into his Pontifical Habit like a Bishop, with his
black Hat, Hat-band, and a green welt about the brims. After this, he is to go
into the Popes Palace, where (introduced by the Master of the Chamber) he is
to kiss the Popes foot, who with his own hands puts his Rochet over him, such a
one as the Bishops are wont to wear of their own. The new Bishop is then to
visit the whole College of Cardinals, and without any order or precedence, he
may visit them next he thinks most convenient, provided he begins with the
Cardinal Deacon. Those that are presented to any See out of Italia, are obliged
to all these things but examination, and if they be absent, they do all per
procuratorem.

The Cardinal Deacon is head of the Congregation de negotii Consistoriali, but
having no particular business, only such things as his Holiness particularly
refers to them, which are usually, renuntiations of Bishoprics, the Taxes of
the Church, and such things; they meet but seldom. This Congregation is called
by the Cardinal its head, and held in his house.

In all the aforementioned Congregations, there are several Cardinals, sometime
more, sometime fewer, as we have said, but the greatest number of all is in the
Congregation of Bishops and Regulars, where there are sometime four and wenty
present. Every Congregation has its particular Secretary, whose care it is to
draw up the Orders exactly to the Decrees that are made in full Congregations,
every Cardinal Subscribing them, and Sealing them with his own Seal. But it is
to be understood, that when there is a Consistory, there is never any
Congregation, for upon any intimation from the Pope that he would have a
Consistory, they leave the Congregation and repair thither.

The three Arch-Priestships of the three Cathedrals in Rome, that is of Saint
John de Lateran, of Saint Peter, and of Santa Maria Maggiore, are always in
the persons of the Cardinals. And of the dignity of these three Offices we may
judge, if we consider that there is not any of them falls, but the present Pope
bestows it immediately upon one of his Cardinal Nephews, and the Popes do
seldom confer any thing upon them, but the best and most profitable offices in
the Church. Each of these Arch-Priests has his Deputy, and he assigns him what
profit he pleases, which for the most part is the Revenue of a Canon. They have
each of them power indulged them to dispose of what Benefices, Clerkships,
Chaplainships, and other things that fall within their several Churches. Every
Pope also does usually allow each of them a Canonship.

The Archpriest of Saint John de Lateran administers Justice both in cases
Criminal and Civil, to all such persons that live within a certain distance
from his Cathedral according to his Jurisdiction. In the year of Jubily, the
Archpriest goes in his Pontificalibus, with a great train on horseback to his
own Church to open the Holy Gate. The Cardinal Deacon observes the same order
in the Church of Saint Paul, and the same Ceremony is used when the Holy Gate
is shut again. This is to be understood of the two Arch-Priests of St. John de
Lateran, and of Santa Maria Maggiore, for the Pope in St. Peter's Church, opens
and shuts the Holy Gate himself, and no^ ^he Archpriest. In all these great
Churches, there are Penitentiaries, that is to say, the Jesuits in the Church
of St. Peter, the Franciscans in the Church of S* John de Lateran, and the
Dominicans in the Church di Santa Maria Maggiore. The Penitentiaries have good
Lodgings and accommodations in each of the^e places; where they live
comfortably at the charge of the Pope, or rather of the Church, being obliged
to be constantly in the Church to receive the Confessions of all that come
thither to confess themselves. Amongst these Fathers, there are some that
confess people in diverse Languages, and one of them in each Church has the
Title of Rector.

All these Offices and Dignities that belong to the Cardinals only, besides
honor, they bring great advantages to them; but the Congregations have nothing
but trouble, and if they have any profit at all, it is accompanied with so many
inconveniences, that many had rather be without it, for those incommodities
would be more tolerable, were they not joined with something that is
incompatible, by the communication of continual disgusts and peevishness into
the Breasts of those Cardinals that are deputed thither by his Holiness; there
being some of them of two or three several Congregations, as if it were on
purpose to multiply the inconveniences that do follow that appearance of honor.

Let it not seem strange if I say the Cardinals are sometime transported with
rage in their Congregations, because the Popes give them but too much occasion,
in not suffering any thing but their profit and advantage to be consulted, and
which is worse, the Popes Nephews do spoil all their Politics, and after they
are tired and lost in the business, they turn it over upon the mature prudence,
as they call it, of the Congregations and Consistory; as if the Cardinals, like
Tailors, were only to patch up what the Nephews had torn in the Church.

The business of Castro has been so sifted and bandied about in the
Congregations and Consistories, that some of the Cardinals (as is writ to me
from Rome) have it ringing perpetually in their ears, so as they cannot sleep
in their beds for it. Others there are, whose minds and imaginations are so
full of it, they run from one thing to another in their discourse, and talk of
Castro, when they would have talked of Constantinople.

But some will ask me from whence comes this delay, perhaps from the
irresolution of the Cardinals? No Sir, from the irregular authority of the
Popes, who will do things in spite of the advice of the Cardinals; but of that
we have said enough already, and shall not by a superfluous repetition rub up
those old Sores that afflict the Church, as well as the hearts of the
Cardinals. It is sufficient, if I say his Holiness erected so many
Congregations to conceal the infinite Enormities committed by the Nephews in
the Government of the Church: And these are the Congregation at Rome. The Popes
pretend, and indeed will do all things; and if the Cardinals know how to comply
with the Wills of the Popes, all is well, otherwise he turns and winds them,
till at last they come about to the humor of the Pope and his Nephews. In
short, the Cardinals consult in Rome, and the Pope decrees according as he is
advised by his Council. But the Cardinals do not so much as consult about any
thing that is proposed by the Pope, and which he is resolved to decree.

I was asked lately by a friend that was an outlandish man, what share the
Cardinals had in the Canonization of a Saint; to which I replied, that they had
a great deal of trouble by reason of the many Consistories that were held, of
which it will not be amiss to speak something by the bye. The Popes before they
proceeded to Canonization, are wont to have four Consistories of Cardinals, the
two first are in private, the third public, and the fourth betwixt both; in
the first, the Pope gives answer to such Petitions as they have received from
some Prince, Province, or City, and refers it to three Auditors di Rota to
examine the Process diligently, who having made their report that it was well,
his Holiness recommends it again to three Cardinals to be re-examin'd whether
it be agreeable to the Auditors report. In the second Consistory, the Cardinals
to whom it is referred, do declare that they have seen and considered the
Process, and that they find the report of the Auditors to be true. The third
Consistory (which is public) is in the Sala Reggia, where the Cardinals render
their obedience, and where the Advocate of the Consistory makes an Harangue of
the Life and Miracles of the Saint. In the fourth Consistory that is but half
public, and held in the Sala Ducale, the Pope comes with his Miter upon his
head, and his single Rochet upon his shoulders, and there are present, not only
the Cardinals, but the Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Auditors di Rota, and
Protonotaries.

The Pope inquires after every man's opinion whether that Canonization be to be
made or not, and if the Major part say yes, he degrees him esse Canonizandum,
and appoints the day for his Canonization, on which there are many Ceremonies
used. The Pope, and the Cardinals, are all in their Surplices, with every one a
lighted Torch in his hand, in which posture they go in Procession through the
Piazza, where the Guards of light Horse are drawn up, as soon as they are come
into the Church, the Cardinals pay their Reverences, and then there is a Hymn
sung in the Quire; that done, three Instances are made by the Procurator of
that Prince, Province, or City, upon whose request the Canonization is made, a
Mass is sung, and his Holiness presented with two young Turtles, and other
little Birds, in two Silver Baskets, many of which Birds are let go. Mass being
ended, the Cardinals put off their Habits, and attend his Holiness back again.

We have spoken thus far of what is done whilst the Cardinals are living; it
will not be amiss to observe something now that passes at their death. A
Cardinal being dead, he is carried to the next Church to the place where he
died; his body is laid upon a high Scaffold built on purpose, on a quilt of
Cloth of Gold, dressed in the same Habit he wore when he was admitted into that
Order, that is, if he was a Bishop, in his Rocher, if he was a Priest, in his
Choppines, if a Deacon, in his Cassock, with his wonted Mitre at his head, and
two Pontifical red Caps at his feet. After Dinner, all the Fryeries go to that
Church, and there say the Offices for the dead, and cause a Nocturral to be
rehearsed, during which, the Cardinals are in their Purple Habits, and entering
into the Church, they put on their Copes of the same color; and that done,
they go and pray to the Host, after that, they advance to the feet of the
Corpse, where saying a Pater Noster, they sprinkle the Carcass with Holy water,
repeating some usual Ver^^s and Prayers for the dead, and then they return to
their places, and this is performed by every Cardinal that is present; but if
there come more Cardinals than ordinary, the anuentest performs the Ceremony
for the rest, they sitting still in their orders in the Church till the service
is done. The four Masters of the Ceremonies are assisting in like manner with
their upper Garment of Purple Serge, the Sergeants also in their long Purple
Gowns, with their Silver Maces in their hands, with every one of them a Priests
Cap given them for a present. There are also two of the dead Cardinals Crowns
standing by in mourning, with two Bannerols of black Taffaty, with his Arms
painted upon them, in their hands; the Church is hung also with black, with the
Cardinals Scutchions fastened upon them, and such Trophyes as are usual at the
Funerals of great Persons.

They are buried for the most part in the Churches of their Titles, with great
Pomp, the Friars marching with great Tapers in their hands, and after them the
Major Domo, the Bishops, the Apostolical Protonatories on Mules pontifically,
with the Masters of the Ceremonies, and his Holinesses Family in long red
Robes; and this Ceremony is always performed about the four and twentieth
hour. But those that desire to be buried without any Pomp, are carried
privately in a Coach about two a Clock in the morning to the place where they
are to be interred. Those Cardinals that are descended from great Families, and
have rich Relations, have their Exchequer in the Church where they are buried,
with noble Herses, where the whole College of Cardinals are assistant at the
singing of Mass, making Orations in praise of the Cardinal departed, and
performing other Ceremonies not unlike those before mentioned.

It is now time I return, and say something to the general satisfaction; and
indeed, though I may wander a little in some particulars, my chief design is
common satisfaction; above all things else, I think convenient to touch
something in this place upon the Original of the Title of Eminence, which is of
that value now adays amongst the Cardinals, they would think him almost a
Heretic, that should deprive them of it.

But before we pass to the Titles of the Cardinals, it will be requisite to say
somewhat of the Titles of the Popes, which are as great, if not greater, than
the Titles of our Savior, differing only in point of duration, ^ur Saviors
being Eternal, and the Popes but Momentary. By the Law of Nature, the Popes
must leave their Title of Holiness taken up in the Vatican, and dye like a
corruptible worm, whereas our Savior, whose Holiness is natural to him,
remains to all Eternity: for what cause is it then, that the Popes take such
pains themselves, and their flatterers also lay about them, to heap Title upon
Title upon them; seeing in spite of all they can do, they must dye, and return
to their first principals of dust and vanity.

The Holy Scripture pronounces Christ Impeccable, the Books and Theologists of
Rome, do the same for the Pope; Christ was called Holy, so is his Holiness,
Blessed, and so is he. In the infancy of Christianity, the light of Holiness
shined out in the Consciences of Christians, blessedness in their minds, and
their Impeccability in their Zeal and Ardour for the service of the Church,
which rewarded their labors with a Crown of Martyrdom. Those Titles that are
now in such esteem, were not only undervalu'd then, but with a Pious Zeal
despised and abhorred, the Popes and the Ecclesiastics taking more glory in
the humility of their Lives, than in all the variety of Titles could be given
them; and upon what grounds? Because being instructed by the Celestial love of
the Holy Spirit, they understood very well, that giving way to the outward
applause of the people, it could not but communicate something of the venom of
Ambition within, which is the Harbinger of all the mischiefs in the Church.

Had any one in those days gone into the Popes presence with those Titles that
are in such request at this present in Rome, and the Vatican, that is, with the
Titles of Blessed, or Holy; he would have been looked upon as a most pestilent
flatterer, and have been banished the Vatican, and made incapable of any part
of the benignity of the Pope, or of any preferment in the Apostolic Sea; and
for what reason? Because the Popes had then no need of begging those Titles
from man, when by their Repentance, and Sackcloth, their Fasting and Prayers,
their Mortifications and good Works that over-flow'd, like a River the banks of
the Church, they both challenged and deserved them. The good Popes did then
labor from morning to night by their good works, to demonstrate that they were
blessed already by that God that can alone give blessedness to man; and
therefore they despised that happiness that was got by ambition, which make
people happy only in the sight of the world. They abominated as a Serpent that
Holiness was given them by the Priests, because they knew that that Holiness in
the Tongue, would be a pernicious Poison in their Hearts.

Many there are, as well devote as ingenious, that have broke their brains
almost to find out the reason for the introduction of such throngs of Titles
into the Church, and after no small toil, they observed that the Pope and the
Ecclesiastics have scrambled as it were for them, since there was brought in
so much Riches to the Church; so that the Wealth being increased, their
Ambition and Vanity is increased with it; the luster of Gold, and the splendour
of Silver, do illustrate the Majesty of the Popes, and gild over the comeliness
of the Ecclesiastic. And this Metal, that with so much labor both of Prince
and People, is drawn out of the Bowels of the Earth where it was buried, as if
it had been ashamed to appear before the face of the Church, as conscious of
corrupting it at the very first sight, and being entered. of making such a
noise in the breasts of those Ecclesiastics that embrace it so greedily, that
in a short time there should be nothing but Echoes of flatrery heard in the
Church, every one striving with emulation to tickle the ears of the Pope; who,
lulled as it were with the Harmony, delighted himself in that imaginary glory,
which by degrees raised up a whole Army of Vices to beleaguer the Rock of the
Holy Church, laboring by all means possible, to banish Piety and Holiness of
life, from the Sanctuary of the Church.

For four Ages together, the Popes lived without the least tincture of Vanity
or Pride, Humility and Modesty was all their practice, whereby they kindled and
excited Devotion in the hearts of the Faithful, who had the good fortune to see
the Church Governed by Pastors, whose thoughts were humble, and whose actions
were modest. The Titles the Popes then chose to distinguish themselves from the
people, were so poor and abject, it inflamed them with Obedience, and
communicated a Zeal to the most obstinate Sinners, who could not but triumph in
their Obedience to such Superiors, as took more pleasure to serve, than to
command the Church.

What Heart of Stone, what Conscience of Flint, what Rock of Pride or
Obstinacy, would not have been reduced to powder, to hear the Popes, Christ's
Vicars, Gods Vicegerents upon Earth, Heads of the Church, Supreme Ministers of
Christianity, and Pastors of the Flock of Christ, call themselves with so much
humility, Poor Sinners, Humble Servants of God, and Servants of his Servants?
These were the Titles of Honor the Holy Popes in the blessed time of the
Churches Infancy, did so much glory in; with these Titles (which our present
Ecclesiastics do so much abominate) did those Primitive Pastors draw millions
of Sinners to repentance: whereas now in this Age, that abounds with so many
Ecclesiastical Titles, there is scarce one Proselite made after several months
pains, with all the Menaces of their Arms, nor all the power of their whole
Troops of Apostolical Missionaries; but who could have been able to have
resisted the Tears of those Popes that humbled themselves to all men? Who would
not willingly have turned to the Church of Christ, to see the Governors of it
so Humble, Holy, Devout, and Pious?

Pope Gregory (who was the first that took upon him the Title of Servant to the
Servants of God) presaged very well when he gave this answer to a Cardinal that
advised him against speaking so humbly of himself, That there was not a more
efficacious way to be found out to call sinners to Repentance, than the
humility in the Ecclesiastics that had the care of them; and another time, it
being told him by a Bishop, that it was a prejudice to the Majesty of the
Vicarship of Christ, to debase himself as he did, his thoughts being fixed
wholly upon humility, he returned this answer, And how? Christ our King saved
the World by his Humiliation, and shall we that are but his Servants, govern it
with Pride?

Experience teaches us, so that we cannot pretend ignorance in this case; and I
know the Prelates that are enemies to flattery, and zealous in the Service of
God, will not oblige me to lie, they understanding very well the detriment the
Church has received by the introduction of ambition into the hearts of the
Ecclesiastics, and if they be silent, it is because they are fearful of
disgusting those that command in Rome.

Every one knows, that whilst the Popes lived with their low and humble, their
abject and contemptible Titles, Holiness of life did blaze as it were in the
Lap of the Church; the Christians living with a certain devout simplicity, and
glorying with just reason to acknowledge them for true and lawful Vicars of
Christ, and for worthy Successors to St. Peter, those Popes that aspired not to
the Papacy for the augmentation of the wealth of their Families, or for
multiplying worldly honors upon their own persons; but as Servants of God, to
be serviceable to his Flock. Those Popes I say that sought the Popedom, not to
domineer or insult to the prejudice of Princes, but to humble themselves in
favor of the people. Who is it that is ignorant of the great miseries the poor
Church has suffered? Who is it that is not sensible of the dangers with which
it has been many times overwhelmed, since that time in which the Popes began
with so much vanity to disdain those low and humble, those holy and devout
Titles; and to take upon them the most arrogant and lofty ones imaginable,
passing from Modesty, to Pride, from Humility to Haughtiness, and from
Ecclesiastical simplicity, to the vanity of the World, which at this present is
too predominant.

Schisms, Heresies, and the destruction of Kingdoms, from whence had they their
original, but from the invention and vanity of so many Titles that seemed to be
invented on purpose to disturb the peace of the Church? Many do observe, and
that with no small displeasure, that the Christian Church began to abate and
fall off from its original splendor, from that very time the Popes began to
usurp the Titles of Holiness, and Blessedness; with these Titles were scruples
brought amongst Christians, so that what the faithful did before
affectionately, and with all their hearts, worshipping and owning the Popes to
be Christ's true Vicar upon Earth, they could not afterward be brought to, by
all their promises, entreaties or threats; being fearful they should err, in
calling the Pope Holy, that had no Holiness, and Blessed, that had no
Blessedness; but what the Commodities of the world do usually afford.

The same thing (or very like it) is happened in the person of the Cardinals,
by the introduction and heaping of Titles upon Titles. In the first Ages of the
Churches Infancy, the Cardinals were so humble and modest, they thought the
Title of Fratello nel Signore observandissimo, most observant Brother in the
Lord, too high, too great, too eminent and fa^^ig^^us for them; yet the same
Title that the Cardinals took so much glory in then, is now despised as too
low, by the vilest of the Clergy, and the most abject Cook, or Butler of the
Cloister.

The first Ebullitions of humility being over, and the Rays of modesty that
glittered formerly in the persons of the Cardinals, beginning to decay, they
looked out for Titles correspondent to the ambition of their hearts, with which
they studied to advance themselves to the degrees and honors of this world;
and therefore laying aside the Title (which was ordinary to the Cardinals) of
Reverendo, they took that of Reverendissimo, upon them, which they kept for the
space of eight in^re Ages, till at length the simple Prelates growing ambitious
(for they had already usurped the Title of Reverend, which the Cardinals had
rejected) they gave them occasion to take the Title of Illustrissimo in
exchange, which was very well liked of by the Cardinals, they believing that
Title sufficient to illustrate the actions of a Cardinal, whether good or bad.
And so the Cardinals having rejected the Title of Reverendissimo, and assumed
that of Illustrissimo, all the Abbots and Prelates began to make bold with the
Title of Reverendissimo, which is grown at present so common amongst the
Ecclesiastics, the Canonists themselves disdain it, and the most vile and
inconsiderable little Priests, will challenge and expect it.

The Cardinals were contented with the Title of Illustrissimo, and they show it
by experience; living for much above two Ages in that manner, not regarding the
acquisition of greater Titles and Prerogatives, they changed as it were a
little smoke, for a great piece of meat. But if the Cardinals were contented,
Pope Urban the eight was not; who in the beginning of his Papacy, not being
satisfied to pervert and misapply the riches of the Church, to the advancing
the Fortunes of his languishing Family, he would go further yet, and upon the
Anvil of Ambition forge a higher and more sublime Title, than that with which
the Cardinals were contented; and which is worse, not moved by any respect to
the Decorum of the Church, or the Majesty of the Cardinalship, but for the
greater honor of his own Nephews only.

Many and various were the thoughts of Pope Urban about this matter, troubling
and distracting himself (as is reported) several hours in the night, to find
out greater Titles and Prerogatives. At first he thought to have given the
Title of Highness to the Cardinals, as knowing he could not ennoble his Nephews
with a greater Title than the rest, so that under pretense of advancing them
all, he engrandiz'd his own Nephews amongst them. But desirous to give the
Cardinals some Title that might be peculiar to their Dignity, it was some
trouble to his spirits to consider that Title was common to other Princes; at
last after much watching, and ambitious study, he found out the Title of
Eminence, which was received with great applause by all the Cardinals, who gave
the Pope solemn thanks that they were made Eminentissimi in his Papacy; and to
take away all suspicion of ingratitude, they suffered him to dispose of the
Treasure of the Church at his pleasure, of which price of gratitude the Church
is sensible at this day.

The improvident and capricious introduction of the Title of Eminence in the
persons of the Cardinals, gave not only occasion of argument and dispute
amongst the People, but discomposed and s^bverted (as one may say) the repose
of all the Princes of Christendom, and especially of Italy; for they being
jealous to see the Cardinals so exalted in their Titles, that they might not
become their Inferiors that had been their Superiors so long, especially in
the excellence of their Titles, they began to hold conferences, and to consider
of ways to restrain the pride of the Cardinals' and at last after several
debates, they resolved to leave the Title of Excellence, and take up the Title
of Highness, which is used at this day in Christendom as the Highest of Titles,
and assumed by many Princes without State, or Principality, or merit, or money,
who are transported to hear themselves called by the Title of Highness; as if
the ambition of a bare Title were sufficient to maintain that grandeur they
aspired to; and which is worse, those persons are more ambitious of those
Titles that enjoy them by force, than those that are possessed of them by their
merit.

Of the Title of Excellence I say nothing, holding my peace for my reputation
sake, because it is become now so common, I will not say in all Europe, but in
all Italy, that it is usurped by Marquisses, or rather Counts, that have nothing
else to Count (I speak it with reverence to their Dignity) but Lice; and I can
speak it with good reason, that I have heard in the State of Saint Mark only
(for I will not restrain my self to the City of Venice) the Title of Excellence
given to above six hundred persons, (if I should say eight I should not
exceed;) yet fifty years since there were not a hundred in all Italy, men and
women and all, that carried the Title of Excellence: And the reason was,
because that Title was then in so great esteem, it was given only to Princes,
whereas now a-dayes it is given even to the Staffieri; besides the Doctors,
those especially that have least Learning, will not give you an answer if you
call them not Excellentissimi Signori.

And from whence is this unmeasurable inundation, or corruption rather, of
Titles amongst Secular Princes, but from the ambition of the Ecclesiastics in
Rome, who forgetful of the humility the Ecclesiastical habits did formerly
show, are given up wholly to the study of Pride, and guided by an ambition that
has been always connatural to them that believe they can alter the order, even
of Nature it self. It is certainly a great shame to all Christendom, to say
that the Secular State is constrained to beg Examples of humane greatness, from
the worldly greatness that is in the possession of the Ecclesiastic? It is a
great and deplorable misery, to observe Princes obliged to leave their proper
Titles, to beg new of others, if not improper to their Births, at least lofty,
and contrary to ancient Custom; and all for the conservation of the Majesty of
their persons, being persecuted by the pride and insolence of those
Ecclesiastics, that ought rather to have given them Examples of humility.

But that which is most curious and remarkable, is that at the same time that
the Princes began to treat of, assuming (with just reason) the Title of
Altezza, least they should be wanting to the dignity of their Characters, the
Cardinals being jealous of becoming inferior in the degrees of honor that they
so much aspired to, with great passion, and violence of words, they endeavored
to obstruct them; from whence it is that Pope Urban the eight (as if all
Titles, and Honors, had depended upon him) declared that he would give the
Princes no other Title than that of Excellence: which they had so long enjoyed.

But they despising with good reason his irrational threats, betook themselves
also to threatening, and protested they would not give the Cardinals the Title
of Eminence, if they did not give them first the Title of Highness. And this I
know that a certain Secretary of State having received a Letter one day
directed from a Cardinal to his Prince, with no other Title but Excellence, he
sent it back again with this writ in a Note, My Master receives no Letters from
him that knows not his Merit. And a Prince receiving a Letter that was sent to
him from a Cardinal (that is now alive) without the Title of Highness, having
read the Superscription, he returned it to the person that brought it, and told
him, That the Cardinal had a drunken Secretary, and one that did not know what
Titles Princes deserved. I could instance in several examples of this kind, but
I forbear, left it should render my History too prolix: it is enough to let you
know, that the Cardinals (to prevent the loss of the Title of Eminence, which
had been already denied them by many) did find themselves obliged to give the
Princes the Title of Highness.

I had spoke of the Chamberlains of the Holy College, when I spoke of his
Holiness his Chamberlains; but I thought it convenient to discourse of it in
particular, but with brevity. It is to be understood then amongst the
Cardinals, there is always one of them Chamberlains of the Sacred College.
which is altogether distinct from the other Chamberlain I mentioned among the
Offices belonging to the persons of the Cardinals. The chiefest difference lies
in this, that the Popes Chamberlain is for life, but this of the Sacred
College but for a year; the Cardinals that are present in the Court,
succeeding one another according to their Seniority. His business is to take
care of the the Revenue of the Sacred College, and at the years end, when he
is to resign up his Office, he gives every CArdinal his proportion; but those
that are absent enjoy their share but for 6. months after their departure from
Rome.

There are many other things I could have inserted sufficiently pertinent to
the Cardinalship; but that would be to ingulf my self in an Ocean too far off
from any Port: for the Majesty of the Cardinals being really so ample, and so
considerable in the Church, it follows by consequence that they must have an
infinity of considerable particularities; however I think what is spoken
already, sufficient to give the Reader full satisfaction. For the abbreviation
therefore of my History, I shall pass to the particular of the Divines which
the Cardinals have always about them, and indeed it is a point of no small
concernment.

Before we proceed therefore to find out the cause why the customs of keeping
Champion Divines, was first introduced, it is to be understood, that the
Cardinals are obliged by the nature of their dignity, to defend the Church from
all those Heretical molestations with which it has from its infancy been
disturbed; and are besides bound to propugne and maintain the excellence of the
Roman Religion, with such arguments as are necessary for the conviction of all
contrary opinions. And forasmuch as to a small number of learned Cardinals (as
is mentioned in another place) there is a much greater number of ignorant ones,
that are not only unable to defend the Church of Christ, but to understand the
Essence of the Religion they possess; to prevent any danger that might occurr,
they do keep their several Divines ready upon all occasions in their behalf
with the two Swords of their Tongue and their Pen, to justify the verity of
the Catholic Faith, that it be not swallowed up and overwhelmed with Heresy.

But to speak the truth, all this is but a Ceremony, whilst the Cardinals
instead of choosing learned persons and exemplary for their Champions, they
many times choose such as are more ignorant than themselves, and like those
that have read Divinity in the Kitchen, having nothing but the Beard and the
Conscience of a Divine. Yet it is true, there are some of them so prudent
notwithstanding, that they will oftentimes withdraw themselves from disputes,
under pretense of some Office they are to recite for the dead; so that instead
of giving the Heretics a sight of their Errors, they suffer them to diffuse
and disseminate their false Doctrines, even in the very Court of the poor
Cardinals, who are guilty of no other fault, than to have received such a
generation of people into their Service.

Ordinarily these Divines are of the Regular Orders, and sometimes Priests and
Secular Canons; but whether they be of the one side or the other, they know
very well to make the best use, and perhaps too much, of the charge that is
given them, not for their merit, for that is but little regarded in Rome (and
that in the very Election of the Pope also) but for some great and violent
recommendation, which is that which preva^^^ most now adays amongst
Christians, and Ecclesiastics in all Europe, but especially in Rome, where
this Proverb is very frequent, Che gli offici, fanno gl^ amici.

And from hence it comes, that the charges of Divines are most commonly
bestowed upon ignorant, insolent, proud, vainglorious, and perverse persons;
because the virtuous, modest, worthy, and good ones, will not prostitute their
deserts, but choose rather to lie languishing in their Cells, believing the
merit of their virtue, and other good qualities, will some time or other knock
at the door of the Cardinals Consciences, to demand them; but they dye in their
Errors, for living too much in that hope, and why so? Because the most
ignorant are privately conscious of their ignorance, and will not have it
exposed to the eyes of all the world, nor suffer their insufficiency to be too
far known; besides being refractory and untractable, as it is the nature of
ignorant people to be, they endeavor what they can to free themselves from the
obedience of the Cloister, in consideration of some respect that is given to
them, or to their pretended office They run up and down from morning to night,
at all hours whatsoever, traversing of Rome, and the greatest part of the
Princes Courts in Christendom, to get Letters of recommendation, and they are
mightily deficient if it goes no further than Prayers; the worst is, they
promise this Secretary a dozen of Silk Stockings, and that Major Domo a purse
of Gold stolen out of the Alms of the poor Cloister of which they boast
themselves to be Sons, which Sonship, is oftentimes purchased notwithstanding.
With these ways they obtain their desired Offices, under the shelter of which,
they commit a thousand enormities either out of ignorance, or malice, all of
them falling heavy upon the reputation of the Cardinals, who deserve to be
paid by such people, in such coin; that is, for so easily believing a bundle
of recommendations, in matters of that importance.

This office of Cardinals Divine, were it exercised by some true and able
School Divine, with its just decency and decorum, and not rudely and ignorantly
by those Kitchen Divines, certainly it would be honorable to the person that
executed it, profitable for the affairs of the Church, and no small assistance
to the Cardinal that maintains it. But whilst Election is still made of
unworthy persons, and such as are only recommended, Adieu all Theological
dignity, Adieu the Advantage of the Church, Adieu all Assistance to the
Cardinals.

That which some of very good judgments admire, is, that ordinarily that
office of a Divine, has the office of a Consultor joined with it, and indeed
the Theologist ought to consult of the roughest and most intricate matters that
occurr in the Congregations; but because he oftentimes, without Counsel, not to
say judgment; instead of advising his Cardinals, opposes the good Councels of
him, who seems obliged to find fault with them that had recommended him. And
would to God things would stop here: I would to God they would not pass the
bounds of all honesty, nor give any further scandal either to Rome, or
Christendom. He that knows the affairs, and intrigues of the Court,
understands me without more ado; but I will make my self understood by those
also that are ignorant of them.

There are some of these Cardinals Divines, that knowing their own inabilities,
and incapacities to serve their Padroni in matters of Theology, either with the
pains of their Pens, or the frequency of good Councels, they endeavor to
obtain the favor of the Cardinals they serve, by inveighing him to dishonesty,
and opening the Gate for him to Sensuality and Lust. I could produce several
examples of this Nature, and cite such Divines as are of the same humor, but I
will forbear it out of several respects; Yet I cannot forbear telling of a
certain Divine now living, who besides his Theological Service, having received
I know not what Benefice or Dignity by the recommendation of the Cardinal he
served, he did him other good service too as a Pimp, conveying into the
Cardinals Chamber, most nights, a certain paultry Queen in man's apparel, that
would pass for a Lady amongst the rest of the Whores, the good Divine keeping
the Chambermaid for his own use in the mean time; but the best part of the
History was, that he did confess and absolve the Cardinal and the Lady, and her
Maid; those Courtiers receiving no small offense, that were constrained to be
Spectators of such actions as these.

I will not say for all this, but there are some of these Cardinals Divines in
Rome, that are worthy Theologists, and accomplished with all things requisite
for the edification of the Court, for the defense of Christianity, and for the
reputation of those Cardinals that have received them into their houses; but
they are so rare, one must fix his eyes very well that searches for them, or
walk up and down like the Philosopher with his Lanthorn, that was seeking an
honest man in that posture at noon day.

Some Cardinals there are, that have none of these Divines at all in their
Courts, for being doubtful of finding a good one, they will avoid the danger of
having a bad. Certainly those Cardinals deserve great commendations, that are
so careful to Elect their Divines; as well virtuous and learned in Theology, as
zealous in the Divine Worship, fearful of God, and of their own Consciences,
whilst by the Council of their Divines, and the advice of their Counselors
that serve them on purpose, they may be able to serve the Church in her need,
that gave them their greatness, and bring great advantage to Christianity, that
is, in want of such Protectors as they, if they will employ them as they ought;
for to say the truth, it is not enough to make choice of a virtuous Divine, but
it is necessary also to know which way to employ him suitably to the charge
that is given him. On the other side, how much greater praise do they deserve
that, endeavor to call the Divines to their duties as loud as they can. Others
are as much to be condemned, that suffer themselves to be served by such
Divines as are accustomed to write all day in the Chimney-corner with the Pen
of a Ladle, upon the Paper of a Pipkin.

The Courts of the Cardinals are they, that either honor or dishonor the
Cardinals themselves, the scandals of their ill Courtiers being oftentimes like
poison, that though pleasant in the Pallat, yet taken down into the Body,
gripes and torments the reputation of the Cardinal that had no other fault
perhaps, than to suffer himself to be served by so unworthy a person; and on
the other side, it falls out as often, that the good and modest actions of
deserving and meritorious Courtiers, do make the people believe a bad Cardinal,
a good one, so that the Ecclesiastics ought to use great caution, especially
the Cardinals in the Election of their Courtiers, that they may not suffer by
other peoples offenses.

But some will say, the Cardinals have no need of such advice, they know their
own business better that are in Rome, than they that are at a distance. I
answer, that that Rule is fallable, for the Cardinals see what is before their
faces, but not that which is behind their backs. Let that Censurist consider a
little, that believes all that I have writ to be erroneous. There departed from
Rome not many years since, a certain person that had served a Cardinal above
six years, being arrived in Holland, he changed his Religion, and his
discretion also, and ran up and down the Streets all day long, publishing of
things that reflected very much upon the Reputation of the Cardinal whom he had
served.

But for my part, I believed not the Satirical relations of that person, as not
conceiving it possible a Cardinal should be so weak to commit matters of great
consequence to such a person. But let it be as it will, it is sufficient that
the Ecclesiastics use no small diligence in the Election of their Courtiers,
lest their private errors become public offenses.

Ancient custom has not permitted the Cardinals to keep young Pages that may
give occasion of scandal to the Court; notwithstanding there are some Cardinals
(that know very well the Papacy is not for them) who break those Customs and
Laws, because several Popes had by express order applied remedies thereunto,
which thing ought not to be; not that I can charge the Cardinals with making
any ill use of it; but that the rest of the Courtiers make none of the best. It
edifies exceedingly both Strangers and Citizens to see a Cardinals Court full
of grave, and wise, and modest men; and on the contrary, it gives as much
scandal to the world, to see a Court consisting of scandalous, rash, and
insolent Courtiers, as it happens for the most part. There have been some
Cardinals have been seen taking distaste at other Cardinals their friends,
others have fallen quite out in defense of the rogueries of some of their
Servants, that under the name of the Cardinal they served, broke up the doors
of the most honorable Matrons.

God knows at what price those wicked Courtiers do sell the reputation of the
Cardinals; God knows how many untruths they tell in a day, to make it be
believed, that they do nothing but by order from their Patron, although they be
for the most part but the taste of their wickedness; I know a Canon, who to
obtain his Canonship, had served a Cardinal formerly several years, but the way
that he served him was strange, he went very often to the handsomest and most
famous Courtezans in Rome, pretending that he was sent by the Cardinal his
Master (that lives yet) to let them understand the affection he bore them, and
his great desire of entertaining them in private. To others, he gave hopes that
they should enjoy the Cardinal, for above two months time, during which space,
he forbore not to enjoy them under the name of his Patron, who thought of
nothing less than a Woman. In short, this good Courtier understood the mystery
very well to make the name of the Cardinal subservient to his Lusts, and which
makes it the better, without the expense of a shilling, whilst the Courtezans
of Rome would give themselves willingly to the Devil, so that they might obtain
the favor of any Cardinal, or of the Nephew of any Governing Pope. This Canon
has not been the only man that has done such exploits. There are others that go
up and down doing a great deal worse, and with that secrecy, that they pretend
themselves Confessors, but act like Pimps, and which is more, playing the Pimp
and the Whore-master together: I know what I say, because I have heard it
whispered a thousand times in Rome; but I hold my peace, that I may not at this
time appear to be a Roman.

THE ITALIAN PRINTER TO THE READER.
THE Second Part of Cardinalismo, to speak truth, has been Printed abruptly,
and twice or thrice laid aside, the Author (by reason of the difficulty of
receiving the memoires) not being able to send me his Manuscripts in due time,
however (though it be not without its share of Errors) it is notwithstanding
more correct than the rest; the principal faults is (and which he could not
possibly avoid) the confusion in matters of Order and Preceedence, which he
promised to observe; but that in my judgment is not of much importance; it
being no great Error in History, if a Cardinal of the first Rank be mistaken,
and put in the second. Another is, that there is no Alphabetical Order
observed, which could not be done, because the Author received not his Memoires
in an Alphabetical way, and besides he was in expectation of the promotion of
these last Cardinals. One thing kind Reader I can assure you, and swear before
the Divine Majesty, that the Author being uninterested and impartial, has
mollyfy'd and sweetened several expressions that were very bitter and pungent
in the Memoires he received from Rome. For it is too well known thorough the
whole world, that the Shears wherewith the Romans cut out the Habits of the
Clergy, have as many teeth as a Hand-Saw. Nay I will go yet further, and
affirm, that the Ecclesiastics, even among themselves, do write oftentimes so
invectively, that they give great occasion of scandal to the Protestants. I
that have been a Printer this fifty years and more, can with a good Conscience
say, I have Printed many Manuscripts concerning the State of Rome, consigned me
by both Protestant and Catholic Authors; but the Catholics Writings have
still dissatisfied me more than the Protestants; insomuch, that I have
oftentimes, contrary to the Authors mind, taken upon me to expunge several
injurious and undecent expressions. The Catholics for the most part being
Satirical in their Writings against Rome, the Protestants only Historical; so
as I would choose rather to Print a Protestants works, than a Catholics. But
let us leave these kind of Complaints, the Catholics knowing much better how
things are carried amongst themselves, than the Protestants do. Thus far only I
shall advertise the Reader, that I am about putting a History into the Press,
that is well worth the reading in this Age.

All that have read the Manuscript, have told me, I did well to Print it, and
that it could not but take. And the Author assured me, that having found
several curious Manuscripts in Ascoli, he was encouraged to undertake the whole
trouble, and that he had spent more than ten years in searching of ancient
Records. In short, kind Reader, it is the Life of Sextus Quintus, a Work
repleat, with infinite political Annotations, and multitudes of Curiosities,
and Copyes of Letters, both written and received by the said Sextus, besides
thousand other things very grateful to the understanding of the Learned
Virtuoso; I shall only add, that if you read it with attention, and it proves
not delightful, wish a thousand ill years to the Author, and he will be
contented. But I will say no more, lest I should lose time, for my desire is to
have it extant within two Months.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART II.
BOOK I.
The Contents.
In which is treated, of the protection of Crowns given to the Cardinals in
Rome. Of the reasons moving those Crowns to declare their Protectors in the
Court of Rome. Of the advantages the said Protections do bring to such as
exercise them. Of the Protection of the Regular Orders. Of the Causes for which
they have introduced the said Protection. Of the reputation the Regulars have
lost by the introduction of the said Protection. Of the Protectors that cannot
with a safe Conscience protect the Friars, and the reason why. Of a Friar that
writ several private Letters to a Protector, as well against his Friends, as
his Enemies. Of the Roguery committed in the Cloisters, and the reason thereof.
Of the manner by which the Religious advance themselves to preferments Of the
Letters of recommendation to the Cardinal Protectors, which are obtained with
very great cost by the Friars from the hands of the Courtiers, Of the Cardinals
that dare not disoblige the Pope in what concerns the Protection of the
Regulars. Of a Letter written by Cardinal Sachetti before his death, and
directed to Pope Alexander the seventh. Of all the particulars contained in the
said Letter, Of the effects occasioned by zeal in the hearts of the
Ecclesiastics that is not mixed with a holy magnanimity. Of the affliction the
Cardinals suffer, to see the Wealth and Substance of the Church imbezled and
destroyed. Of the Bishops that purchase their Miters with ready money. Of the
Cognizance the Cardinals have of the evils that happen daily to the Church, and
of the small care they take to prevent them. Of the pretenses the Cardinals use
to make themselves to be thought innocent. Of the evils that Rome endures. Of
an opinion of St. Jeromes, about such as are more sorrowful to see themselves
condemned for other peoples offenses, than for their own. Of that which will be
replied to the Cardinals at the day of Judgment, when they shall endeavor to
excuse themselves with pretenses. Of the torments those Cardinals have
suffered, that would not consent to thr infamous desires of Alexander the
sixth's Bastards. Of the proud and imperious humor of Paul the fourth. Of
certain Congregations called by the Cardinals for the disposing of Urban the
eight from the Papacy, and of the course he took to evade that conspiracy. Of
the chastisement received by Alexander the sixth for having treated the
Cardinals so ill. Of the small zeal those Cardinals expressed that endeavored
to depose Pope Urban. Of the great commendations Cardinal Pallavicino (before
he received the purple Robe) gave Pope Alexander, because he kept his kindred
so far from Rome, and of his opinion after they were brought in. Of the
principal points the said Cardinal Pallavicino left in writing in the last
period of his life. Of the Title of Prince of the Holy Church which the
Cardinals at present enjoy. Of certain annotations upon that particular. Of the
Authority the Popes have wrested out of the hands of the Cardinals. Of an
example of Paul the second mentioned by Platina in the lives of the Popes. Of
the common opinion about the Government exercised by the Popes Nephews over the
Church. Of Saint Peter that would never commit the command of the Church to any
of his Kindred or Relations. Of the Cardinals true Successors of the Apostles.
Of the necessity of restraining the Nephews. Of a Letter written by the most
Christian King to the Cardinals, about the accident that happened to his
Ambassador in Rome, Of the answer the Cardinals returned to his most Christian
Majesty; and of certain other particulars beside.

AMong all the Cities of the Universe, Rome alone can boast it self, not only
the Mother of Nations, and the Head of the World, but (which is more) a true
Court of Kings, for as many Cardinals as are promoted in the Church, so many
Kings are created in Rome. The two Monarchies, France, and Spain, that are as
it were the two Poles of Christendom, do labor and tire themselves out with
Arms in their hands, to defend that Church of which they are Sons and
Protectors, and without whose protection, it would have certainly been sucked
to the very Soul, by the ravenous and unsatiable lips of those Ecclesiastics,
who forbear not notwithstanding to engross great part of its nourishment, in
spite of all their Royal diligence. But that which is most worthy of
admiration is, that these two Monarchs which pretend to the Protection of the
Church, and do indeed protect it, do yet beg and implore, as it were, to have
their interests protected by some Cardinal or other in the Court of Rome, as if
their own merits were not sufficient to defend the interests of those Monarchs,
who are the very founders of the Monarchy of Rome. But that the Reader may be
the better informed, I shall acquaint him, that at present it is the custom for
every Crown to give the protection of its affairs to some of the Cardinals that
are resident in Rome; and this protection is with good reason aspired to by the
Cardinals in the highest degree. Insomuch as Alexander the seventh before he
died, used his utmost endeavor to have Cardinal Chigi his Nephew declared
Protector of Spain; but he could not obtain his desire, the Spaniard deluding
him, sometimes with fair promises, and sometimes with excuses. Of all the
protections of Crowns, which are five, the Empire, France, Spain, Poland, and
Portugal; that of Spain is the most considerable, and by consequence most
ambition'd. Not that Spain has merited more than the rest, and particularly
than France; but in respect of the Territories they possess in Italy, in which
it seems the Protector has great authority, disposing of many things at his
pleasure, if not by an absolute jurisdiction, at least by his recommendations
to the Governors of the Provinces, who do seldom omit to gratify his
desires, and to acknowledge him the Protector of their King; besides which,
there are a thousand other considerations that make the said protection so much
coveted and aspired to by the Cardinals.

And many are the reasons that induce those Crowns to declare their several
Protectors in Rome; but if my judgment may pass, the greatest of all is to
satisfy the ambition of those Cardinals, that from morning to night, study no
other book, than the augmentation of their own Grandeur; and this is most
certain, there is no greater dignity that a Cardinal can attain to, than to be
made protector of some Crown. And to speak truth, there is something of
magnificence in the Name of Protector, implying, that he which protects, has
some superiority over him that is protected: however that rule does not hold in
this case, for those Kings bestow not those Protectorships upon the Cardinals
to receive, but to confer honor upon them, the Cardinals ordinarily making
great application for the protection of a Crown, whereas in other protections,
they are sought to themselves. It is not many years ago, since these
protections of Crowns were introduced into the College of Cardinals,; in
former times the Kings disdained them, their swords being their sufficient
protections, the Pens of their Secretary doing that office, upon any emergence,
gave immediate notice to the Court of Rome of their Masters pretensions. But
since the Popes began to advance themselves so high to confound the Church and
the World, Politics and Morals, Spiritual things with Temporal, the Sword and
the Cross, and in short, to transferr all the interest of Secular Princes to
Rome, those Crowns have been obliged to have, not only their Ambassadors, but
their Protectors in Rome, and that not so much for the defense of their
Kingdoms, defended by themselves, nor of their persons defended by their
Kingdoms; but for the protection only of those interests that have been sto^^
as it were from the Princes, and carried to Rome.

This protection is no small advantage to the interest of the protected Crown;
but it is much greater to the Cardinal that is its Protector, because things are
not managed with that order they ought to be, the Cardinals for the most part
having one hand upon the Rudder, and the other upon the Sails. The Crowns may
do what they please, oblige their Protectors with their Benefices and Abbyes,
yet they will never move out of their Sphere, nor give those Crowns more than
an outward appearance of protection, reserving the substance for the benefit of
the Pope. And indeed many examples might be brought out of hundreds of
Histories to confirm what I say, I having for many years read much, and made
frequent observations upon this point. The Princes are deceived, if (in the
controversies that happen betwixt them and the Popes, or the Nephews) they
believe to have their interests protected by those Cardinals, that are their
Protectors. The protection a Cardinal gives to his Crown, goes to a certain
pitch, and no farther; if the Grandeur of the Pope be not diminished, nor the
Ecclesiastical privileges entrenched upon, all things go well, as much
protection as you please; but if these be touched in the least, the Cardinal
instead of being a Protector, becomes a Councellor, instead of defending the
interest of his Crown against the Pope, he maintains the Popes interest against
his Crown; exhorting him to comply, and to give up some part of his Right, in
Testimony of the cheerfulness of his obedience to the common Father of
Christendom. And this is so far from being a wonder, that it cannot be
otherwise, the Cardinals growing great with the Popes, their Reputation and
Honor increases with theirs also, so that the Majesty of the Cardinals cannot
be lessened by any other means, than by the diminution of the Popes; forth
conservation of which they are most diligently vigilant, they themselves being
Protectors of the Grandeur of the Popes, as the Popes are Protectors of theirs.
And now I leave it to the consideration of any man of reason ^f any Cardinal
Protector, let him be never so much obliged to the Crown he protect, will do
any prejudice to the Pope to satisfy the desires of that Crown. True it is,
they will as near as they can manage their affairs so, as the Honor and
Reputation of the Crown they are obliged to serve, shall not be violated; yet
so it is, the interest of the Pope is always more dear to them, for reasons
both Politic, Moral, and Ecclesiastic; nor ought Princes to expect the
contrary.

There is another thing likewise introduced into the Court of Rome, as some
think to render the Cardinalitial dignity more majestic, and that is the
protection of Religious orders, every order having power to elect a Cardinal
for its Protector; sometimes some Cardinals a^e Protectors of several orders;
and one of that sort is Cardinal Francisco Barbarino, as I take it, by reason
of the long time he continued Cardinal Nephew, and Padrone; the several
Fraternities being ambitious to have him for their Protector that was nearest
the Pope, eight several orders chose this Nephew for their Protector; it is true
the Popes sometimes will assign them Protectors, contrary to the desire of the
orders, so as it happens too often they have Cardinals appointed them, that
have so little affection for their orders, they would willingly change them;
but it is not always allowed them, nor to all, and particularly in the times
of Innocent the tenth, and Alexander the seventh. For my part I cannot imagine
this kind of Protection was introduced for the benefit and advantage of the
poor Religious, but to subject them the more rather to ^he Court of Rome, and
by that means as with a Bridle to manage and ride them. For indeed, before
these protections of orders in the persons of the Cardinals were introduced,
the Religious were so venerable in Rome, and in such esteem for their devotion,
that the Popes did take delight to employ great numbers of Friars out of the
Cloisters in the most considerable offices of the Church, and with eminent men
to fill up the Sacred College of Cardinals, which was thought incomplete, if a
good number of Friars in their Purple, were not seen amongst the rest of the
Cardinals; but since the Cardinals began to assume the protections of Religious
orders, and to work and insinuate themselves into the intrigues of their
Convents, the Religious Friars are become the scorn of the World, the obloquy
of Nations, the scandal of the Church, the dishonor of Rome, and that to such a
height, that whereas heretofore the Cardinals thought they gave Testmonies of a
good Conscience, as often as they gave their Votes for any poor Friar in
Purple: at present the Popes do believe they offend God and the Church, every
time they are as it were forced by the accumulated merits of some Friar that is
eminent in Learning and Piety, to admit him into the College of Cardinals;
insomuch, that if no other interest does move the heart of the Popes, it is
most certain their Goodness, their Virtue, nor their Sanctity it self, will be
too weak to prefer them, I will not say to the Popedom (for of that they took
their last leave with the person of Sextus the fifth who was in spite of all
envy, the greatest Pope that was ever seen in the Vatican) but to the College
of Cardinals, from whence also they seem to be banished; and God knows whether
they will ever be recalled, whilst the malice of those Priests that have Saint
Peter's Keys, and St Paul's Sword in their hands, is so fierce against the poor
Friars, that they have not so much as wherewithal to knock at the door.

But some may wonder at this, and think it impossible that the protections of
the orders given to the Cardinals, should have been the occasion of lessening
the Reputation of the Religious; to remove therefore this miracle, and make the
business more clear. I shall inform them, that during the time the Friars lived
without Protectors, the iniquities of the Cloisters, went no further, but lay
concealed amongst themselves, because the underlings went only to their Pryor
for Justice, the Pryor to the Provincial, the Provincial to the Visitor, the
Visitor to the General, and if things could not be accommodated by them, the
Chapters, and Congregations, applied their remedies, with absolute authority.
And whilst the affairs of the Religious were carried in this manner, neither
the world, nor Rome, nor the Court, saw any thing but their outward actions of
Piety and Religion, which kindled a flame of devotion in the hearts of the
people. But no sooner were the protections introduced, but their vices became
public, every Friar, either to destroy the reputation of his Superior, to
revenge himself of his Enemies, or to demand Justice, upon every inconsiderable
occasion, battering the ears of their Protectors, with informations of their
Rogueries, that perhaps would have been better determined in the Cloisters
amongst the Friars, than in the Courts of the Protectors amongst those
Courtiers.

But to speak truth, how can the Protectors of these orders, with a good
Conscience, protect these Friars? How is it possible to edify by them, if
every Post-day they send them whole dozens of Pacquets of Letters, not
mentioning the Discipline of that Friar, nor the abstinence of this; but the
rogueries and cheats of all together. For in these times, one of them no sooner
receives any disgust from his Superior, but to discredit him for ever, after
having recorded it in the Congregations and Chapters, he writes immediately to
the Protector of it, Baptizing him as it were in Satirical Ink, so as every
Character appears an Original Sin (both in the one and the other) in the mind
of the Protector. I my self know an Augustine Friar that I could name, if I were
sure of his life, that took delight to write every year forty or fifty private
Letters to the Cardinal Protector, sometimes against one, and sometimes against
another, and which is worst, sometimes against his friends, with so incredible
secrecy inventing his lies, that Lucifer himself could not in that point have
outdone him.

These Letters pass from the hands of the Protectors, to their Secretaries, and
from their Secretaries, to the rest of their Court, who give what judgment,
and inflict what punishment they think good, mocking and deriding the whole
orders in general; so as it fares with them in Rome, as with Mice, who are all
persecuted and endangered, though it be one only that devoured the Cheese.
Every Letter that any Friar writes to his Protector, to the prejudice of his
Companion, is like an Axe that cuts off a Bow from the Tree of the reputation
of the whole order; and hence it is, that the Cardinals (who are all of them as
it were Protectors of some order or other) taking offense in this manner,
instead of protecting, they persecute them. Alexander the seventh suppressed
two, and (had not greater affairs diverted him) he had doubtless destroyed more
than four orders of Friars, so full was his heart with the scandals of the
Friars, and so desirous the Cardinals to see those Friars further from Rome,
that they did seem to defend. In short, either by their Letters, or their own
persons, the Friars do nothing but molest, and disturb the Gates, and the
Spirits of the Cardinals, not reguarding the repulses that are given them, but
laboring and persisting with new importunities to arrive at their designs;
which makes the Cardinals sometimes resolve upon violent courses to disincumber
themselves.

But this that I have said hitherto of the ill consequences of the protections
of orders that are given to the Cardinals, is but a slight and superficial
scandal; there is another (and perhaps unknown to the very Cardinals
themselves) that unless timely remedy be applied, will grow up to that
greatness, as to beget new Schisms and Heresies in the Church: an evil which
appears but little being upon earth, but is really so great, as to make War
upon Heaven it self: an evil that gives so much occasion of scandal to the
Heretics, that it fortifies them in their false opinions, and makes them give
God thanks that they have no Friars in their Religion. But the Reader will ask
what evil this is? why it is this; in the Cloisters of the Friars they rob
their Treasury, they break open the Alms-box, they steal away the Mass money,
they tear down the Silver Tablets from the Walls, they plunder their Altars of
the richest of their Consecrated Ornaments, selling them privately when they
have done, even to the Vest of the Virgin Mary.

But to what end is all this? possibly, to employ the money in the Christians
Wars against the Turks? Oh no, it is to give presents to the Courtiers of their
Cardinal Protector, to procure them Letters of Recommendation. It seems
incredible to all people, the manner in which these Friars advance themselves
to preferments, there being whole bundles of recommendatory Letters, and all of
them driving at the principal preferment. I know my self that in one Chapter of
Augustine Friars held in Romania, there were two and twenty Friars, each of them
with his Letters of recommendation, this to be made a Vicar, that a Prior, a
third a Provincial, this for one office, that for another; And all these are
purchased at a dear rate. Are they bought of the Cardinals themselves? No sure,
they are most of them innocent* but of their mercinary and self-interested
Courtiers that sell them, for so many pair of Silk Stockings, such a present of
Plate, or perhaps so much in ready money; I knew a Secretary that distributed
in this nature above fifty Letters a year, in the name of the Cardinal he
served, who is (if I be not mistaken) the Protector of two Orders. He got great
sums of money by the means (and it went as freely in the Stews) but the
Cardinal was unconcerned in the business, unless it be, that he must give an
account to God Almighty for his neglect, in not watching more narrowly over the
actions of his Servants.

In short, I find no great advantage that these Friars receive by the
Protections the orders have from the Cardinals, and yet the evil is manifest.
For to what purpose are Protectors, if they protect them only in trifles? Not
that they want a good will; I know several Cardinals, that (weighing the honor
(which is not small) with the duty of their office) would with all their hearts
upon sundry occasions, act according to their obligations, and defend the
orders under their protections; but they are fearful of displeasing his
Holiness. The Cardinalitial Authority is great, but the Cardinals are unwilling
to put it in execution: they are afraid of their own shadows, and least they
should disgust him, they leave all things to the management of the Pope, and
had rather burst in silence, than ease themselves by a Declaration of their
troubles; for which reason, Cardinal Sachetti never durst speak to Pope
Alexander against those errors he knew in his Conscience were too frequent;
till at last for the discharge of his duty, he writ a Letter to him in the last
period of his life, which I think will not be amiss to insert, for the greater
satisfaction of the Reader, and for the stronger confirmation of what I have
asserted, viz. that the Cardinals are afraid to speak. The Letter follows.

A Letter written by Cardinal Sachetti a little before his death, and directed
to Pope Alexander the Seventh.
Most Blessed Father,
IF before your Holiness fixes your benign eyes upon these lines, you consider
by whom, and for what end they are writ, you will find them sent from a
faithful and most humble Servant to your Holiness, to give (in the last Article
of his life) new testimonies of his affection and passion for the glory of your
Holiness.

The zeal and obligation of a Cardinal have put this pen into my hand, and it is
possible death may take it out again before I have thoroughly displayed, that
(which for the greater honor of your Holiness and the Apostolic See, and the
greater benefit of Christendom, and the poor people of the Church) God Almighty
has dictated to my languishing mind.

Being risen from my bed, with great anguish and pain, my sentiments disturbed,
my hands trembling, and my head not able to rest upon my shoulders, and having
got my self to the Table, I do first of all protest before my Crucified
Redeemer, whom I embrace with all dutiful affection, that I have no other end
than his Sacred Service, the satisfying that debt which is due from all such as
his Divine Majesty has appointed as Collaterals or Counselors to his Vicar
upon Earth and that I might not have occasion to cry out at the day of
Judgment when there is no remedy to be had, Vae mihi tacui. Hoping likewise
that other Cardinals my Colleagues, seeing things ^^n so violently to
destruction, may be induced likewise to the discharge of that charitable duty,
that they owe to God, to your Holiness, and to all Christian people. I do hope
also from the innate benignity of your Holiness, that these my most humble
demonstrations will not be unacceptable, as proceeding from a sincere heart
passionately affected to your Honor, driving only at the Establishment of the
high opinion the world has conceived of your virtue, and to stop the mouths of
those Heretics, whose invectives will be obstreperous and high, when they see
your Holiness (contrary to your protestations and promises both within the
Conclave and without) going on in the same road with those, that with so much
scandal to the world, and so much desolation to the people, have called in
their Kindred, have destroyed the Patrimony of Christ, and built themselves
Palaces for their Luxury, out of the rubbish of the Church, and with an
insatiable appetite suck up the very blood of her Subjects.

But that I may not consume the little time I have left, in superfluous
discourses with a Prince so pious as your Holiness, I shall principally beseech
you in visceribus Christi, that you would out of your profound prudence find
out some way to extinguish those sparks, that otherwise will break out into
such a flame, as may put the whole world into a combustion.

The Apostolic See, did never commit a greater fault against its honor and
authority, than when desirous to act like a Temporal Prince, it quarreled with
those Princes that were as it were the Arms that sustained, and rendered it
formidable and respected. Examples of this kind are too frequent, and which is
worse, too well known to every body; so that if it did not belong to me to
judge of the actions of the Popes (which indeed ought rather to be reverenced
than rebuked) yet with your Holiness I may take the confidence to lay before
your eyes the example of Urban the eight, one of the worthiest amongst all the
Popes, whose memory is immortal, and to whom I do confess my self a servant
with all my heart.

That good old man suffered himself, to our great misfortune, to be engaged
into a troublesome war, the success of which will be sadly remembered for
several reasons, but particularly for the expense of fourteen millions of
money, for the indigence it brought upon the Treasury, for the total desolation
of the Ecclesiastic State, for the oppression of the people, for the disesteem
brought upon the Apostolic See, and the Pontifical dignity, by so
dishonorable a peace, for shortning the life of so great a Pope, who for his
Heroic virtues deserved to have lived several ages. What advantages that War
left to his family, the whole world is witness of; thence it was from the
highest achme of authority, from a long and absolute dominion, it became the
laughing stock of fortune, the contempt of the whole world, and reduced into a
little Kingdom, amongst the storms and calamities of the War, to seek Sanctuary
for their lives, against the universal hatred and persecution of its Enemies,
and forced to beg patronage and restoration from a Prince that was not at all
satisfied with their proceedings.

The great and undaunted courage your Holiness expressed, in not truckling to
their threats, nor suffering your self to be affrighted by any violence, is
commendable indeed, yet let me with all humility suggest, we live not now in
that age which immortalized the magnanimity of Alexander the third, Gregory the
seventh, and other Popes, who armed themselves with invincible constancy in
defense of that which belonged to God and his Spouse. At this time the world is
so possessed with an opinion of the wickedness (or frailties rather) of the
Clergy, and that the cause is but Temporal and Capricious; that the case is
quite altered, and I do easily foresee it will be the greater diminution to
your Holinesses honor, the longer you delay with the Sword of Prudence to cut
asunder that knot, that will otherwise grow daily more inextricable. And this
your Holiness is obliged to do in imitation of him whose person you represent,
Discite a me quia milis sum, and humilis Cord, in charity to his exhausted
Flock, for the safety of your own Family, and for the suppression of a
Malignant report, that the present disorder in your Holinesses Court, is but
the effect of a visit the French Ambassador denied to your Nephews. God forgive
them that persuaded your Holiness to Arms, how contrary to the judgment of the
Consistory, your Holiness cannot but remember, by the humble instances of your
faithful servants. God knows when the fatal consequences will be removed, which
portend so much mischief and calamity, that make me desirous to end my days
quickly, rather than live to be a spectator of so lamentable a Catastrophe.

Your Holiness is alone against a Powerful, Victorious, Rich, and Fortunate
Monarch, that declares himself affended, the Cardinals (by misfortune, rather
than by any fault of yours) dissatisfied, the Treasure exhaust, the people
drawn dry and discontented, so as there are hardly any of them that will
espouse the interest of the Nephews, when they will do so little for your own.
In these great advantages, your Holiness knows very well how often I have
reminded you (and I do it more earnestly than ever) of that Parable in the
Gospel, Quis Rex iturus committere bellum adversus alium regem, non sedens
prius cogitat si possit cum december millibus, occurrere illi, qui cum viginti
millibus venit? and who knows but the Princes themselves (that bear so little
affection to the Temporal power of the Popes, that they are always undermining
its foundations) do for politic reasons encourage and foment those murmers,
and (though they promise your Holiness their assistance to engage you) but that
they will afterward desert you as they did Paul the fifth in his a^fference
with the Venetians. Or else your Holiness relying upon some of them (and they
perhaps weak and declining) upon any sudden or unhappy accident what strange
resolution will be taken?

But if by the benefit of things confederacy should succeed well what would the
world say, when it sees, that to oppose the satisfaction desired by the first
born Son of the Church, in reparation of certain injuries pretended, it was not
valued, though there was a new rupture occasioned between the two Crowns that
had been but lately united after so many years Wars? and perhaps it would fall
to the share of your Holinesses family to remain exposed to the indignation of
a Prince, whose authority extends as far as Europe it self.

Especially if (which God forbid) it makes not its reconciliation in your
Holiness his days, because your Holiness being tired with delay in a business
that ought to have been composed as soon as it was begun will leave the care of
it to your Successor, with great hazard of seeing the Tragedy of the house of
Caraffa; so memorable to all ages, acted over again. The Princes also are
dissatisfied to see the Popes, after they had oppos^d the Temporal Sword
against every body, pretend at last to recover themselves under the Standard of
the Cross, and to she^ld themselves with the dignity of the chief Priesthood:
Now begins contempts, irreverences, murmurs, and many times seditions to arise
the Laity by little and little losing the veneration and opinion they had
formerly of the Ecclesiastic Piety and Justice. And of this you have a good
instance and account in the banishment of the Ministers of the Apostolical See,
out of France, in the commotions at Avignon, in the audacious liberty of those
people, that heretofore were obsequious and reverent in the whisperings and
murmurs of all the other subjects of the Ecclesiastic State, and in Schisms
and Separations in all the rest, both in Italy and other Nations.

These are the things, the memory of which, is a sharper affliction to my mind,
than my infirmites are to my body.

Our Divine Master, most Holy Father, taught us in that command Mitte gladium
in vagina, that there was nothing more undecent in him that had the Government
of our Holy, Innocent, and meek Mother the Church, than Temporal Arms, and that
she ought not to defended M^re Castrorum. From hence it is, I am greatly afraid
that God Almighty being offended at our manifest diffidence in him, and our
making use of improper means, and contrary to the practice of the famous Popes
of former ages, will leave us to our selves, and suffer us to be reduced to one
of these streights, either to be forced by our own necessities, or our Enemies
power, to some disadvantagious agreement or else by a long and excessive
expense, be reduced to extreme misery and distress. To give way to time and
necessity was always the Doctrine of a very wise Prince. Paulus quintus
undertook (but merely for the cause of God) to proceed against the Venetian
with his Spiritual Arms, and was firmly resolved to have joined his Temporal
with them, but at last out of his great prudence and compassion, and upon
consideration of his want of money, the incapacity of the people to supply him,
the danger of overrunning Italy with Foreigners, and perhaps with some new
Heresy or other, for fear lest by the loss of the liberty of the Italians, he
should kindle an unextinguishable fire in all Europe, and lest he should create
too great animosittes against his own Family, he suffered himself to be brought
to a milder temper, and perhaps not without some scruples and remorses of
Conscience, if the Church of God should by his fault receive any considerable
damage and diminution.

Convert (most Holy Father) your Courage and Arms against the perils of
Christendom, and the pride of the Turk, who as I hear to my extreme sorrow, is
marching into Transylvania and Hungary, to overwhelm those Countries as it were
with an inundation; against the Turk, against the Turk, let your magnanimity be
opposed, and with a generous emulation of Pius the second, your most renowned
fellow Citizen, lay aside all unprofitable controversies with your well
deserving Son, and let him and the other Princes of Christendom unite in a
firm League, and your Holiness be the Head and the Author of it.

What better occasion can there be than this to render your Name and Honor
Immortal in all Ages. If of late necessity constrained the impositions of some
light Taxes upon those Religions that are now suppressed, forced you to make
other use of the tenths imposed upon the Clergy for the assistance of the
Emperor, and of the two hundred thousand Crowns left by the late Cardinal
Mazarin, to be expended in the War against the Turks, tying up your hands as it
were from actions of Charity and Alms, with how much more glory and merit may
you do it now. Besides in so great and just an opportunity, the application of
the assignments to other use, will open a large field to the maledictions of
the people, that the Flock of Christ is forsaken, and exposed to the capacity
of that Woolf of the East, the Patrimony of Christ destroyed, and all to
maintain a private, and merely Temporal quarrel, and to feather your own nest
in the mean while.

And since by way of incidence, I have spoken of Alms, I will not omit
representing to your Holiness the great trouble I receive by the relations of
several Orders, and Parishes in Rome, of the great miseries that many poor
familyes suffer, which I shall not for brevity sake name, though I am sure it
would break your very heart, and enforce you to tears, should I give you an
honest and sincere narrative of what they endure. Oh how often do I remember what
before your happy Exaltation your Holiness used to tell me, when inflamed with
a most charitable zeal, you deplored the Exaltations that in the preceding
Popes time were obtained by the advancing of twenty thousand Crowns out of the
Alms-money; as if they would have it be believ^d (as your Holiness said then)
that there was no poor to be found in Rome, and for that reason it was lawful
to put that into their own purses, which for their sustenance was gathered
daily from the Charity of the Faithful. They took likewise out of the Office
de^la Componenda (as your Holiness very well knows) the Pontifical Almsmoney,
against which the Heretics have writ whole Volumns of Invectives, and Satyrs,
not knowing perhaps that the Componenda is nothing but a kind of wholesome
Penance imposed by the Popes upon such persons as have received from them some
considerable favor (not to be granted by any body else) which said sum is
afterward to be dristributed amongst the poor, or disposed for the nourishment
of those that embrace our most Holy Religion. And so I remember Pope Urban the
eight was wont to say, that the Popes Purse ought to be opened freely, and
administered faithfully. I humbly beseech your Holiness to take care that the
same thing be observed in your Holiness his Papacy.

This Office della Componenda invites me to say something of the Dataria, and
other Tribunals, your Holiness knowing very well, that the most noble, and most
deserving quality that the people admire in any Prince, is his generosity and
munificence.

May your Holiness advert, that neither the superfluous zeal, nor the forward
severity of your Ministers be suffered to obscure, or eclipse your Glory,
remembering always that amongst the disadvantages in Elective Principalities,
it is one of the greatest, the leaving so much liberty to the Ministers to
raise their own fortunes, at the charge of their Prince, as Pope Innocent knew
how to do very well to one of his own. That the good or bad report of either
Pope or Prince proceeds from the mo^ths of their Friends or Domestics, was the
saying of Urban the eight, and all the Court of Rome, by reason that as they
were ill or well satisfied, so they spread their Characters about the world
either to the prejudice or advantage of their Masters.

To keep the Cardinals poor, abject, and contemptible, the Prelates idle,
without esteem or reward, the Nobility neglected, the Courtiers without hopes
to see any recompense of their labors, and all to bestow that upon a few, and
many times the most undeserving, that by distributive justice ought to be
divided amongst all, can certainly be the production of no good. To leave
virtue it self after a long and painful peregrination, unrewarded and forsaken,
cannot sound well in the ears nor heart of an Ecclesiastical Prince, that ought
to be a Protection, and Assylum to the learned, and deserving, especially your
Holiness who has raised the Fabric of your fortunes, upon the foundation of
virtue and worth.

Rome abounds with persons of all sorts of Learning at this day more than ever,
but they want encouragement, and are buried as it were in sorrow, there being
no body that will so much as trouble themselves, to represent their parts and
capacities to him that can reward them. Your Holiness that in the beginning of
your Papacy, with so much praise to your self, did own and caress them, will
find what advantage it will be to continue the b(...) actions of a Mecenas, and
to allure them by your countenance and esteem (which is the most grateful
aliment of virtue) encouraging them with favors, and providing them
employments, that they may not consume and pine away in the Lethargy of
idleness.

I speak not most Holy Father of those Pensions wherewith the Bishoprics and
Parishes are by the Ministers of your Holiness so extravagantly charged, that
(to the scard^l of the whole world, to the disparagement and contempt of the
innocent Clergy, and to the prejudice of the reputation of the Church) several
poor Bishops are rendered subject to interdictions and censures, or reduced to
that indigence they are forced, of loving Shepherds to become ravenous Woolfs,
by their rapacities and extortions, to satisfy the exorbitant pensions that
are charged upon them, squeezing as it were out of the extreme necessities of
the Church, and her already too much afflicted and exhausted Flock, all that
are constrained to contribute to the Profit, Luxury, Lasciviousness, and
Intemperance of those who God know, had but little virtue to advance them. May
your Holiness for the love of Christ open your eyes in a business of that
importance, which carries along with it consequences so pernicious to the
Church.

Let not your Holiness for the love of God suffer so many poor Churches,
Spouses of Christ, to remain robbed and dispoil'd of their Dower, nor that at
the Lords Table, U^us ess^riet, alius vero ebrius sit; but rather let the bread
of the Church be distributed equally amongst her Ministers according to their
merits. Although in the Courts of Rome there are many Prelates and Ministers to
be seen, that have integrity of manners joyn^d to the nobility of their birth;
he nevertheless, that for so many years (though undeservedly) has had the
direction of the Signiture, may perhaps have seen further into some things than
they v^z. that the Dependencies and Relations of the Popes and Cardinals, do
not suffer the poor Prelates to act according to the Dictates of Equity and
Conscience. I do most humbly beseech that your Holiness in your great Prudence,
would provide for the extirpating of this custom of recommendation, that the
condition of all people may be considered, and that Liberetur pauper a Potente,
and pauper cui non adest Adjutor.

Neither would it be less grateful to God Almighty, if your Holiness would
provide against the tediousness and delays in matters of Law, which sometimes
are so long, that besides the ruin and extinguishment of many Families, they
become the dishonor of the Courts of Rome, when those causes that might have
been determined in a few days, are by several years suspense grown old and
inveterate.

Though I believe the Ministers, and Governors of the State, and all they that
administer justice to the people in our Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, are of
themselves inclined to do all things equitable and right, yet it would be a
greater stimulation if your Holiness would cause it to be inculcated into them,
that justice is not attended by interest or passion, but is the only instrument
for the conservation of peace, quiet, and human Society, and that they search
all enormity to the bottom, and destroy it root and brance. Legibus enim
delicta (...)r, quanto melius provideri ne p^ccare^^r.

But above all, let that scandalous authority that the Ministers arrogate to
themselves of making Buts and Marks for their Persecutions of all such as have
recourse to the highest Tribunals at Rome, oftentimes making use of threats to
deter them from such appeals.

This in my judgment is a matter of great consequence, th(...)s the Supreme
Authority of the Prince, and takes away without cause the confidence his
Subjects have in him* or otherwise occasions such jealousies as have been the
subverson of States and Kingdoms both Protestant and Catholic.

Above all, it is necessary that care be taken not to afflict the poor people
with their severities, and vexations (as they have formerly) nor with their
Cavalcades their troubles being too much already with their Subsidies, and
Taxes, with the frequent Com^^ssions to the Commissaries of the Buildings, of
the Archives, of Saltpeter, of Gunpowder, of the Streets, with their solemn
Ridings, Reprisals, and other cruel inventions to exact innumerable sums from
the people, which being little or no advantage to the Pope, are of no other
use, but by the inrichment of some few ill Conscienc'd Ministers, to contract
the Odium of the people, and employ the tongues of the discontented.

These afflictions do very much exceed what the people of Israel suffered in
Egypt, they cannot be mentioned, but with admiration and scandal to Foreign
Nations, especially if they consider them as effects of the immoderate
inclinations of the Popes to their own Kindred and Families. And your Holiness
may ascribe it to your good fortune, that you employed your gracious care in
Foreign parts, that they might not have so full and exact notice of it, as
would have drawn tears of pity and compassion from the eyes of all that heard
it, and perhaps for the better, because the wound thereby would have been
opened, and rendered more cas^c for the Cure.

And indeed who is there that could hear with dry eyes, that a people not
conquered by the Sword, but by the Munisicence and Piety of some Prince, by way
of Donation annexed to the Patrimony of Saint Peter, or that otherwise in
confidence of the Piety of their Successors, submitted themselves freely to the Sea of Rome, should be now under a harder and more insufferable Yoke, and
treated with more inhumanity, than the very Slaves in Africa, or Syria.

The Debt upon the Chamber, according to the account I made of it some nights
since by my self, amounts to above fifty millions of Roman Crowns, and that not
only without any hopes of lessening, but with assurance it will be increased;
insomuch that the People, not being able to comport themselves under so
excessive a burden, desperate of any relief, do many of them leave their
Native Countries, wandering up and down in great indigence with their whole
Families, perishing with hunger in the fields, begging in other Countries, or
submitting themselves to other Princes, to our great reproach. And indeed for
the reasons aforesaid, there are not now above half the number of Subjects in
the Ecclesiastic State, that there has formerly been, and in the numbers of
his people, consists the power and riches of a Prince.

The Genoeses that are found to have employed above fourteen millions of our
money, though they were careful enough in their affairs, do now perceive it
desperat^, either from our disability to pay it, or from some urging necessity
upon the people, that incites them to shake off from their necks, so
insufferable and tyrannical a Yoke.

God Almighty forgive the Ministers of that time, who with so little Prudence
and Equity, persuaded your Holiness (in the Infancy as it were of your Papacy)
without any necessity at all, to the reduction of the Banks, out of which so
many millions were drawn, as would have immortalized your Holiness his name,
had they been applied to the satisfaction of those debts, in part, if not in
the whole.

Your Holiness had not those sentiments heretofore, when it pleased God to give
us you for our Pastor, and I dare affirm, as I have done often, and that to
more than one, that the first stings and compunctions that disturbed your
generous breast, was those of compassion toward the exhausted people: to that
purpose you deputed a Congregation to inspect their grievances, and was more
than one time present there your self, so that not only the Cardinals, but all
the rest of the Prelates expected an universal redress.

But God did not permit that your Holiness his good mind, should be seconded by
the good practices of your Ministers, who opposed themselves against it, to the
great dissatisfaction of all that were well inclined. It is now time most Holy
Father to reap the fruits of it, as you did when you provided against the
abuses introduced in the administration of the Annona, or annual provision of
Corn, which arrived to that excess, as might have irritated the minds of the
people to such disorders as would have been beyond all remedy.

But the exemplary chastisement of a single Minister only, that for several
years has with great corruption, and universal dissatisfaction, executed his
office, is no competent provision, unless the cause be removed, all occasions
for others to do the same be prevented, and the opinion that the Cardinals have
their share, be pulled up and irradicated out of the hearts of the people. The
authority of these Officers is arrived at that height, that in spite of all
Laws, both Humane and Divine, and all rules of Charity and Justice, they
endeavor to make the name of your Holiness odious to the world, by their
sque^zings and extortions out of Corn, Oil, Flesh, and whatever is most
necessary to the life of man, it deserves certainly a severe reprehension, if
for no other end, than that your Holiness might not appear consenting thereunto.

But although your Holiness, even to these open and pernicious Enemies of the
public, has been pleased to abound in your most admirable Clemency, I could
wish nevertheless your Holiness would in a particular manner regulate the
affairs of the Annona for the future, that those Subjects which your Holiness
is obliged to provide for, both as the Shepherd of their Souls, and their
Temporal Prince, be not brought into a worse condition than the Beasts of the
field, who feed and sustain themselves with the Fruits of the Earth, as their
Creator ordained, without being cosen'd and defeated by the malicious
covetousness of others.

In the Congregations (that I might not be wanting to my charge, as being one
deputed amongst the rest) I have endeavored to display my opinion in this
matter, and as to the particular of keeping the City of Rome, and the whole
Ecclesiastic State likewise, if not in a plentiful, at least in a competent
provision of Corn, I have nothing to add to the report I made by your
Holinesses Commission in the very beginning of your Papacy. This I shall only
say, that if no relief be immediately applied to the sufferings of your
Subjects, their ruin and destruction I see most eminently and unavoidably at
hand

Your Holiness would do well to take off part of the impositions upon Edibles,
and to restrain the insatiable voracity of the Treasurers of Provinces, and
other public Ministers, who to Monopolize and forestall the Markets, by a
barbarous invention, do render the people miserable, and not so much as Masters
of that, which by the blessing of God, they do gather upon their own ground.

It would be a great relief to your Subjects likewise, if the Commerce with the
Venetian (which with much detriment has been interdicted till now) were opened
again; nor would those most prudent Senators make any difficulty to consent, as
well for the mutual advantage it would bring, as that it would be a means to
make the Apostolic See more ready and disposed, upon any Exigence of theirs,
to tax its own Subjects to relieve them.

In short, a Prince that desires the relief and ease of his Subjects, cannot
want ways to effect it. And this your Holiness may do, by encouraging and
introducing arts into several places in the State, by making Civita Vecchia,
and Ancona, free Ports, by favoring Agriculture, that is almost forgotten in
most places, by employing able and dexterous men in all Governments and
Offices, and not call in so many strangers to usurp and ingross, what belongs
naturally to your Subjects. By this means, your State would be repeopled, the
golden Age restored, and your Treasury recruited.

I should have had something to say about the affairs of Portugal, but finding
my breath to fail me, my head (no less than my hand) to tremble, and that I
might not be any longer tedious to your Holiness, I will only beseech you to
ponder and deliberate with your self in a business of so great consequence, and
having asked Counsel of God, rather than of man, (who is swayed and actuated by
passion) that you resolve, and perform that zealously, that shall be directed
by his infinite wisdom.

It troubled my very Soul to consider the small hopes with which you suffered
the English Gentleman to depart, that was sent to your Holiness to endeavor
the promotion of the Abbot Aubigny, a person so qualified by his Birth,
Abilities, and Piety, that he would without doubt have become a Pillar and
Support to the tottering Catholics in England, as Cardinal Poole did formerly.

Having heretofore with great vehemence and fervor supplicated your Holiness,
to bestow upon a person so honorable, and so necessary to the Church, that Cap
that has so long (though unworthily) adorned my head, and which still I would
with all my heart lay down at your Holiness his feet, for the investure of such
a person. I do now with all my heart reiterate those Prayers, that it being
likely to be vacant in a few hours by my death, it may be conferred upon so
worthy a person, that the malevolent may have no occasion to say, it is
reserved for him that will give most, without respect to any ones merits, or to
the necessities of our Religion in that Kingdom.

It remains that I should speak something about easiness of access, which is a
thing that gives a Prince good intelligence of his affairs, makes his
Government easy, prevents the corruptions of his Ministers, and conciliates
love and veneration in the people.

Your Holiness who in the beginning of your Papacy did imitate herein the
laudable Customs of your Predecessors Pius quintus, and Clement the eight, by
the continuation of it, will make your self admired, Interpellantibus faciles
praebendo aures, nor will you be at any time upbraided with the saying of that
importunate old Woman that cried out to Philip of Macedon, Si non vis audire,
nec regnes.

In this case only I shall be bold to supplicate your Holiness, and that with a
most humble and devout zeal, that you would permit your self to be diverted
from that melancholy retirement, and not suffer your self to be immured as it
were betwixt four Walls, and kept at that distance from the knowledge of the
affairs of your State, and the condition of your Subjects; because that is the
highest of all errors in a Prince, and an occasion that Justice is ill
administered, the Ministers corrupt, the people ill governed, and oppressed, and
the Prince no more beloved nor respected; Colligunt se quatuor vel quinquies,
aut unum Consilium ad decipiendum Imperatorem capiunt. Dicunt quod probandus
sit Imperator, qui domi clausus est, vera non novit, cogitur hoc tantum facere
quod illi loquuntur, facit Judices, quod fieri non oportet, amovet a Republica
quod debeat obtinere, quid plura? bonus, cautus, optimus venditur Imperator,
was the saying of Dioclesian, and God grant it may never be verified in the
happy time of your Holiness his Government.

And here it would not be improper to speak something relating to the Election
of Ministers and Counselors, for though a Princes ill fortune may have some
share in the miscarriages, yet for the most part mala electio est in culpa, it
being great difficulty to err, where all necessary diligence and
circumspection is used.

The profound Judgment of your Holiness, renders all advertisement in this
affair superfluous, however I will not omit supplicating you with Gregory
Nazianzen, and to admonish, that in those that are by their Counsels and
endeavors to assist in the management of the most weighty affairs of State,
these three signal Qualifications be resplendent, Rerum usus, Ingens charitas,
Os ^berum.

As to what concerns Spiritual things, they ought to have been treated on in
the first place, (but God knows whether the greatness of the peoples
afflictions will suffer them to think on Heaven) yet if I should have touched
upon them, I could not have done it without reflection on the great Piety of
your Holiness, who from your very assumption, has made them appear to be the
principal objects of your Pastoral care.

Nevertheless it will not be amiss to renew your Holiness Orders, to such as
have the superintendance and custody of Souls, even to the Parish Priests and
Confessors, as well Regulars as Priests, that they give no scandal themselves,
that they restrain the exorbitant liberty of sinning, that they persecute and
extirpate Blasphemy, grown too common and familiar amongst the people in these
unhappy times; that they observe due reverence in the Church, and set with more
zeal and devotion in the Confessionaries, Ne Deus iram suam effundat super nos.

The Evangelical Law, most holy Father, is at this day too much depressed, and
the observation of the Divine Precepts, with great blindness neglected, in so
much that Saint Cyprian, and Saint Eusebius Bishop of Caesaria, would with more
justice have bewailed the corruption of our age, than they did of their own,
seeing now a days, student augendo Patrimonia singuli, and obliti, quid
creden^es, aut sub Apostolis ante fuissent, aut semper facere deberent,
insatiabili cupiditatis ardore, ampliandis facultatibus incumbant. Non in
Sacerdotibus religio devota, non in Ministris fides integra, non in Operibus
misericordia, non in Moribus disciplina, ad decipiendum corda simplicium,
callide frauds, circumveniendis fratribus, subdolas voluntates, non jurare
tantum temere, sed adh^^ etiam pejus perjurare.

And what can be expected from such detestable causes, but those lamentable
effects, which Jeremiah prognosticated with so many tears, Obscuravit in ira
sua filiam Sion, and dejecit de coelo gloriam Israel; Non est recordatus
Scabelli pedum ejus in die irae suae, sed demersit Dominus omnem decorem
Israel, and demolitus est omnes spes ejus, so as we may too justly cry out with
Policarpe, Bone Deus, ad quae nos tempora reservasti?

God grant that our Church one day be not forsaken by the Divine protection, by
reason of the faults and enormities of the Ministers that govern it so ill; and
that she have not t^o just cause to cry out with tears in her eyes, Deus, Deus
meus, ut quid dereliquisti me?

Hence it is that (being more afflicted with the unhappy condition of the
World, of Christianity, and of Religion, than with the bitterness and atrocity
of my dis^ase) I betake my self to our Savior, and cry out from the very
bottom of my heart, Cupio dissolvi, and esse tecum.

And now finding my spirits failing me, I lay by my pen, (that I had taken up
again three or four times) and prostrate my self with all Reverence, begging
your Holiness his Benediction, and recommending to your Paternal charity the
soul of your most sincerely devoted Servant, who (being in a short time to
appear before the Tribunal of God, to give an account of every one of his
thoughts) is certain he never had the least, of deceiving your Holiness by
these faithful representations.

I do on the other side assure your Holiness, that in the very life to come I
will not cease to pray to our most loving Father, ut sis longaevus super
terram; and that he would preserve your Holiness from all dangers, and from the
malice of Flatterers, that are the plague and destruction of all Kingdoms and
Principalities, that he would give you, Cor docile, and sedium suarum
assistricem sapientiam; and the same special grace, as to the rest of his
Servants, ut si^ transeatis per bona temporalia, ut non ami^^atis aeter^^a. May
that infinite Goodness that governs all things, assist and alleviate with his
Divine arm the great weight of your Holiness his charge, that you may not be
obliged to rely upon the help of Man. And thus with most tender and entire
Reverence I bid your Holiness adieu, embracing and kissing your most sacred
Feet.

From my house the 17 June 1664. Your Holiness's most humble, most devoted, and
most obliged Servant, G. Cardinal Sacchetti.

Oh how true is it, that fire may be buried and preserved under ashes, but with
an effect contrary to the very nature of fire; to what purpose is a spark of
zeal in the breast of a Minister, if he has not the devout courage to blow it
up into a flame. Where are now a days those Prophets that were not afraid to
reprehend the faults of King David, even to his own face? God forgive those
Cardinals, that have rendered the Cardinalitial dignity so abject and timorous,
(to say no worse) that there is scarce any thing left of Greatness in it, but
the Title. He who is silent at the iniquities of his Neighbor, and exhorts him
not to leave them; he that may rebuke them with Authority, and does it not,
gives not only manifest evidence of defect in his duty, but charges himself
clearly with the same faults, as fearing to correct offenses in other people,
lest his own (some time or other) should be found out and chastised.

I do not doubt but the Cardinals may have judgment, and conscience, and
insight enough, to penetrate and discern the evils that for many years the
Church has lain under, and which are hourly multiplied by the Nephews of the
Popes. I am satisfied that in the secret of their hearts, they are afflicted to
the very soul, as often as they see the substance and subsistence imbezel'd,
that belongs to the poor Subjects of the Ecclesiastic State, if those may be
called Subjects, that are every day like Slaves constrained to truckle to the
barbarous insolences of so many new Ministers, that by the favor of the
Nepotisme, do revive as a man may say a new N^ronisme of Tyranny. I do
certainly believe, that the most zealous of the Cardinals are fully informed of
the Scandals the Heretics receive, to see from time to time Gabels added to
Bulls, Taxes to Breves, Tenths to Pensions, Customs upon the People,
Impositions upon Religious Orders, and the very ground it self where people are
to be buried. I am persuaded they cannot be ignorant of proceedings at Rome,
seeing there is not a Bishop at present but may thank Simony for his Mitre, nor
a Prelate, nor other Minister of the Church that has not gained his preferment
by money or interest. They know, they know very well almost all the Cardinals,
that they who embrace the Ecclesiastical habit in these days, whether it be
Secular or Regular, they do it not to consecrate themselves to God, but to
gratify their ambition and covetousness, and to establish greater foundations
to their hopes, of which design they give daily and most evident tokens to the
people.

But what advantage is it that they know it? To what purpose is it if the
Physician understands his Patients disease, if he has not courage enough to
apply such remedy as is necessary? It seems to me an aggravation, and renders
the Cardinals more Criminal, whilst they see the precipice the Church is upon,
and either take no care to deliver her, or pretend they did not see it at all.
That one Brother should suffer another to run headlong upon his own
destruction, may be written in the Politics of the World; but there is no such
toleration in the Law of God. I would ask the Cardinals, if they should see a
Thief breaking (in their presence) into their Houses, would they let him
ransack and rifle all without speaking a word? No certainly, they would sooner
awake all Rome to have him stopped, and make the Judges thunder out their
Proclamations for his apprehension, though their loss was never so small:
Notwithstanding all this the Cardinals can behold the Church of Christ robbed,
the people of the Church ruined, the blood of the poor sucked up, the propriety
of the City invaded and taken away, to raise lofty and new Palaces for the
Nephews, yet dare not speak one word in behalf of the Public, for the
recovery of the Poor, for the edification of the People, or for the glory of
the Church, but leave them all abandoned to destruction.

But they are not without their excuses, using always a hundred pretenses to
conceal their hypocrisies; and indeed the people (that judge every thing by
appearance) are satisfied with the multitude of excuses the Cardinals bring to
convince the World of their innocence, and to make it appear they are not at
all accessory to the Extorsions committed by the Nephews, upon all the
afflicted Subjects of the Ecclesiastic State. They say, but what? Shall we
(say they) disgust his Holiness, the acknowledged Head of the Church, and upon
that score adored by the whole World? Shall we oppose our selves to his
pleasure, the actions and resolutions of whose Government are directed by the
Holy Spirit? Shall we dare to make resistance against one, before whose feet
the greatest Monarchs do throw themselves with Reverence.

To these they add many other excuses, full of policy and cunning, but they
are not sufficient to satisfy Heaven and Earth too; the Cardinals must give an
account to God, as well as the World; To God I say, in whose presence no
excuse, or pretense, is received: There are no Rhetorical flourishes, no
circumgiration of words, no fictions or pretenses there; the Process is read
openly there, in which not only they which rob are condemned, but they which
connive, that had ability to hinder it, and did not; and therefore it is that
Saint Jerome says, that those souls endure more pain that see themselves
condemned for other peoples faults, that they pretended not to see least they
might disgust those who committed them, than for their own proper offenses. And
God grant the Cardinals be not of this number, who I fear will be able to give
but a small account of the damage the Church does daily receive, by the ill
Government of the Popes, that are themselves but a prey to their own ravenous
Nephews. Nor will all their excuses be able to clear them, because our Redeemer
knowing the secrets of all hearts, will have his answers ready, and perhaps
reply to them in this manner.

Do you believe therefore that I am inferior to your Pope, because you are
more fearful of offending against his Courts that are but Temporal and
momentary, than mine that is most holy and eternal? My Apostles were not
afraid, even in my own presence, with great confidence to rebuke the good
Woman, who with a little oil was come to refresh my feet after so long and so
many journeys; and you, you can every day behold Assassinations, Robberies,
Sackings, Burnings in the Church; my blood (represented in the blood of the
poor) swallowed down and devoured; my bowels (in the bowels of the Church) torn
in p^^ces; my nourishment (in the nourishment of the people) perverted; my
Patrimony (which is the Patrimony of Saint Peter) misapplied, without speaking
one word, pretending not to know, pretending not to see it? Would you, would
you, who are afraid to defend the interest of the Church in the presence of
your Popes, that suffer it to be destroyed by the insatiable hands of their
Nephews, would you bear the Title of Apostles? God grant the Cardinals meet not
with these interrogations at the day of Judgment. I know there are some that
are partial in defense of the Cardinals, who will produce hundreds of examples
to prove their zeal toward the Church, and instance in several tortures and
injuries have been suffered, for opposing the ill Government (to speak no
worse) of the Popes, of whose wickednesses all Christendom rings to this very
day.

Is it not true (will they say) that by Alexander the sixth those Cardinals
were miserably afflicted, that would not consent to the barbarous will of his
Bastard, that tyrannized over the world, and imagined by fear and violence to
make the Popedom hereditary to the house of Borgia; so that according as the
zeal and constancy of the Cardinals was augmented, so did indignation increase
in the Breast of the Pope; insomuch that every word, and intimation of their
resentment to the Pope, begat in him fresh thoughts of revenge, till at last to
remove and free himself from all opposition, that Table was prepared, in which,
instead of seeing the destruction of the Cardinals, and the establishment of
his own house, Rome recovered her liberty by the death of the Pope, who was
poisoned with the same potion he had provided for the Cardinals.

Is it not true, that the proud humor of Paul the fourth, not being able to
endure a Companion in the Government, to stop the mouths of those Cardinals
that, excited by their zeal, reprehended the barbarous deportment of the
Carafechi, gave himself over to the destruction of all respect, and confounding
his spiritual weapons with his Temporal, he threatened them sometimes with
Excommunications, and sometimes tormented them with Imprisonment, without any
regard to the scandal Christianity received thereby; so as he had but room for
his revenge, he cared not how any thing went, by which means, all the Prisons
in Rome were full of innocent Prelates and Cardinals.

Is it not true, that several Cardinals (and those the most Catholic and
Zealous amongst them all) foreseeing the detriment the Church would, and indeed
did receive, by the tedious Pontificacy of Urban, to prevent further
inconveniences that were like to follow upon all Christendom, assembled
themselves many times, and had several Congregations, for the deposing the said
Urban from the Papacy, which he had already enjoyed for the space of thirteen
years, with small satisfaction to the Cardinals, though with much advantage to
his own Family. Insomuch, that whilst his Holiness under pretense of change of
Air after a long indisposition, had removed himself to the Castle of Gondolfo,
the Cardinals had secretly assembled a Congregation, for the Election of
Cardinal Zacchia Pope, upon pretense of Urban Barbarino's indisposition, with
resolution to shut up the said Urban in the Castle of Saint Angelo. But their
design miscarried, for the Pope having intelligence of all, returned privately
to Rome, and calling a Consistory, in which all the Cardinals were present, the
said Urban with a loud voice demanded Where was their new Pope, that he might
pay him his respect? An expression that struck confusion into the hearts of
those Cardinals that had conspired his deposal, and found themselves so
unexpectedly discovered. And this gave so great occasion of Revenge to the
Pope, that he immediately published a Bull, in which he commanded all the
Cardinal Bishops, and Archbishops, and all such as had the Cure of Souls, to
repair forthwith to their several Churches and Residences, upon pain not only
of Excommunication, but of being deprived also of their Dignities and
Benefices; so that all those who were assisting in the foresaid Congregation,
were in great trouble and perplexity, and particularly the Cardinal Ludovitio,
and Zacchia, being principal contrivers of the design, fell into so great
melancholy for the miscarriage of it, that they died with very apprehension
that it was discovered.

To this it may be answered, that Alexander the sixth received the punishment
he deserved, by which it may be clearly discerned, that God Almighty fails not
to justify the cause of his Church, and protect such as address themselves to
its defense, and to the ruin of such as endeavor to trouble the repose of
those that go about to defend it. So that the example of Alexander (who was
poisoned by the same Cup he had provided for those Cardinals that had opposed
him with so much zeal) may rather excite that Sacred College to the
encouragement and protection of the people, and the Church, being secure, that
if they shall be persecuted by the Popes, they shall on the other side be
rewarded by God himself. In the same manner it happened to Paul the fourth,
though he was a severe Enemy to those that with great and continual
acclamations cried out against his Nephews, to the end that Rome might be
delivered from so great a Plague; nevertheless that Pope (by the means of the
continual twinges and compunctions that he felt) recollected himself,
discovered his error, and not only banished his Nephews from the Vatican, but
seemed likewise to own and gratify their importunities, that had opened his
eyes, and given him occasion to discover the danger his own Person, and the
Church were in.

Of Vrbans Case I shall speak but little, for though he was a Pope indeed too
much addicted to the interest of his Kindred, who governed the Church with that
insolence and pride, that rendered them odious to the whole world. Nevertheless
in matters relating to the benefit of Souls, he was very solicitous to give
general satisfaction, whilst the mischief from his Nephews extended no further
than to the Ecclesiastic Treasure, which is the Patrimony of Saint Peter.

Besides this, those Cardinals that negotiated his deposal, did it not so much
out of any Christian zeal, or ardent instigation from their duty, but rather in
compliance with the Spanish Interest, which was then thought with great reason
to be offended, and therefore in all this conspiracy there were none but the
Spanish Cardinals concerned; so that if the crime be considered, the punishment
was but small, for when the hand is once put to the Plough, there is no looking
back. He that attempts to correct the Errors of the Pope, must divest himself
of all Humane interest, and arm himself with the Celestial only. The Cardinals
must lay aside particular interests, in the defense of the Church, and have
regard to nothing but the Public. It Is the glory of God, and not the love of
the World, that ought to animate them to the protection of Christ's flock, lest
they be devoured by those Shepherds, that are too often no better than Wolves.
If in the hearts of the Cardinals a flame of Divine zeal be kindled, in vain
will all the tempests and calamities of this World endeavor to quench it. To
what purpose is it to expose ones self to Martyrdom; To what purpose to pass so
many Seas to preach up the Name of Christ, with so much peril in the most
remote parts of the Earth, amongst the greatest Infidels, if it be depis'd even
in Christendom, in the very bowels of Religion, and in the midst not only of
Rome, but the Vatican it self. And now I would fain know what likelihood there
is, that the Cardinals should oppose their own breasts against that violence of
the Barbarians, that seem to threaten so nearly the destruction of Christendom,
if they be afraid to speak one word to the Pope against those Governors, that
by fleecing the people do bring the State into great misery and distress? How
shall they take the Sword into their hands to encounter those Heretics, that
destroy our Images, and violate our Holy Temples, if they can patiently behold
the plundering of our Altars, and the robbing of the Alms that is given to the
poor? How shall they defend the Christian Faith, that suffer the blood of
Christ to be devoured? How shall they dare to preach to such as are in
Rebellion, and Enmity, if they be afraid to speak to the Popes that are their
Friends? How shall they be faithful keepers of the flock of Christ, if they be
fearful as Lambs, toward those Wolves that devour his flock? In short, how can
they stop the mouths of those (with a good conscience) that do blame the
defects of the Popes, when they themselves are the causes of those defects?
This I am sure of, the Purple they wear would be much more honorable, did they
take more care to preserve the Treasure of the Church; and for my part I am of
opinion, the Popes would be more wary of introducing their Kindred into the
Vatican, if they observed the Cardinals more vigilant; nor would the Nephews
commit such notorious robberies, if they did but see that their eyes were upon
them.

The Cardinal Pallavicino the Jesuit, who in plain terms was a person that
could frame and accommodate himself to another man's humor, thereby to work him
over to his own; he was one of those that cried up Alexander in the beginning
of his Papacy, above the Skies, and all because he would not admit his Nephews
into Rome. Insomuch, that in his History of the Council of Trent, that came out
from the Press about that time, he made a Parallel betwixt his Holiness, and
his Savior; and upon this ground, because being asked by a certain public
Ambassador, if he would not receive his Kindred, his Holiness replied in the
words of our Savior, Who are my Brothers? but they that do the will of the
Lord.

It is not possible to imagine the great and extravagant praises he gave the
Pope in all quarters of Rome, for his aversion to the Nipotisme, extolling him
for the greatest Pope that ever sat in the Vatican; he prophesied a golden Age
again to the Church in a short time, and supplies of Inhabitants to the City;
he went up and down all the Courts of the Cardinals, giving God thanks for his
great mercy toward the Church, in sending it a Pope so clearly disinterested,
and unaddicted to the advancement of his private Family. In short, he exhorted
them all by the authority his reputation and intimacy with the Pope gave him,
that it was the duty of the Cardinals themselves to conserve that great benefit
to the Church, and in case Alexander should relapse, that they should oblige
his Successors to keep their Nephews out of the Vatican.

But the humor of the Pope being altered at length in this point, and instead
of his former aversion, he become most partial to his Nephews; Pallavicino also
began to change his note, and harp no more upon that string, he found himself
obliged to stop his mouth in all things, and to sanctify the defects of the
Nephews (as he was the Popes Confessor) or else to ruin and precipitate his
own fortunes, and those of his Order.

This politic deportment was a great affliction to his Conscience, for he was
indeed a well meaning man, and entirely devoted to the benefit of the Church.
He found out a hundred querks and pretenses to excuse the commendations he had
formerly given the Pope; and being one day in discourse, and asked by a
Cardinal that was his Confident, if he would magnify no more his Holiness his
impartiality to his Relation; he courageously replied, That he then had spoke
of the Pope, as Pope, and did now speak of Alexander as Alexander. He
endeavored by all possible means to force his own nature, and not to be
concerned at those evils which he was too sensible did hourly increase, to the
great detriment of the Church, by the ill Government of the Nephews. But
notwithstanding all this, the more he saw Don Mario advanced, the more did
indignation swell in his Bowels, to think that there could be no remedy found,
to quench that fire that seemed formerly extinct; insomuch that he many times
shut himself up alone in his Chamber, and made as many Soliloquies as King
Midas his Barber.

At last it pleased God (as he himself declared to a friend of his upon his
death bed) by his special grace to take away his life in the vacancy of the
Apostolic Chair. He was much affected with the great affairs of the Church, as
he signified in a paper he left written with his own hand, wherein he protested
his intentions were always so far from defending the errors of the Nephews,
that he would not so much as excuse them.

The writing contained five principal points. The first was, that the Church
would never find any repose in her afflictions, nor be free from the Calumnies
of the Heretics, till the Nephews were banished from Rome.

The second was, that whilst every Pope had liberty to enrich his own Kindred
as they did, the Treasure of the Church in a short time would be imbezled, and
dispersed into Foreign Countries.

The third was, that there was no hopes of seeing the Charity and Benevolence
of the faithful increased, for they being scandalized to see the Charitable
Alms (bestowed and left by other people to the Church) dissipated and consumed,
did choose to squander away themselves what they had, rather than by giving it
to the Church, to increase the number of Extravagants there.

The fourth, that the Cardinals could not with a safe Conscience suffer the
dissipation of the Treasure of the Church, by the prodigality of the Nephews,
and that they were obliged therefore as his Holiness Assistants, to endeavor
to remedy it.

And in the last place, by good arguments he showed which was the most proper
time for the application of so necessary an expedient, and he concluded the
vacancy of the Chair would be the most convenient, because if a new Pope was
once Created, and a new Nepotism set up, it would be impossible to compass
their ends.

This writing fell into the hands of the Cardinals, who called a particular
Congregation on purpose, to find a remedy in some measure for the disorders the
Nepotismo occasioned in the Church. But their words were more than their deeds,
for though some were of opinion a definitive decree should be passed, by which
all succeeding Popes should be obliged from calling their Relations to Rome
without the consent of the Sacred College. Nevertheless the major part thought
it more convenient not to meddle in it at all, lest they should give fresh
occasion of scandal and derision to the Heretics. So that Pallavicino's Paper
had no better success, than the resolution of Cardinal Cena, who had fancied to
himself the extinguishment of the Nephews a ^^dicul^^us fancy; because in my
judgment the extinction of the Nephews would be a great prejudice to the
common re(...) of Rome, if the Pope was constrained to trust himself rather to
the Councels of his Enemies, than his friends, and to introduce persons unknown
to him, into the Vatican.

The Duty of Cardinals, as they are Senators of the Church, should be to watch
over the Nephews, that of Governors, they become not Princes, of Keepers of
the Patrimony of Saint Peter, they prove not barbarous devourers of the very
blood of Christ; and indeed if the Cardinals pleased, they might do wonders for
the benefit of the Church. Were they all unanimous for the destruction of all
corruption, they would give the Pope and his Nephews matter to think upon; but
they have no mind to it, this for one consideration, that for another, this for
this interest, that for that; so that faction, and division, ruins the Church,
and gives opportunity to the Popes in the mean time, to prosecute the
advancement of their own Families.

Some few years since, the Cardinals amongst other Titles, called themselves
Princes of the Holy Church, which gave sober men great occasion to wonder; for
my own part, I look upon it as so strange and incongruous an usurpation, I
cannot tell which way to excuse it. That they call themselves Senators of the
Christian Commonwealth, Counselors of the Supreme Senate of Christ upon Earth,
Apostles of the Catholic Religion, Assistants to Christ's Vicar, Supreme
Ministers of the Gospel, I can allow, as what they may reasonably deserve, but
I know not how they can assume the Title of Princes of the Church. Are they
Princes, that are many times used worse than Slaves by the Nephews? Are they
Princes, that are forced to wait from morning to night, not upon Christ's Vicar,
but the Popes Nephews? Are they Princes of the Church, that know not so much as
where her Treasure is? Are they Princes of the Church, that suffer her to be
ransacked, and ravished, before their own eyes? Are they Princes, that can see
their Principalities destroyed with so much patience?

Your true Princes, from the rising to the setting of the Sun, and from its
setting to its rising again, do study nothing more than the conservation of
their proper Principalities; they endeavor with all possible care the
augmentation of the number of their Subjects; they suffer not their people to
be pressed or overlay'd with more grievances than the condition of his
Principality does necessarily require. If any go about to disturb the peace of
their Neighbors, they arm themselves immediately, marching up and down their
Dominions to hear the grievances and complaints of their Subjects, and to
comfort them with his presence, and due execution of Justice; and these are
Princes indeed: But what kind of Princes are your Cardinals? Or what service do
they do the Church, to deserve that Title?

But their Sovereignty, or (to speak more properly) their Dominion and
Government is not in spiritual things; forasmuch as the Pope is he that
dispences indulgences, gives dispensations, sends out his Bulls, and creates
Bishops and Cardinals as he pleases, so that the Pope only is Prince of the
Church, and not the Cardinals; and although they may seem to have some share in
the creation of Bishops, because they are examined usually in a Congregation of
Cardinals, yet that is only form, and outward appearance, for in strictness the
Pope can make whom he thinks good, and without the consent or knowledge of the
Cardinals, send a Bishop into any City, whether the whole College of Cardinals
dare not so much as send a Deacon, to recite the Offices for the dead, withcut
the Popes permission.

And this is a thing that gives me no small discomposure as often as I think of
it; for indeed we all know, and all History both Ecclesiastic and Profane do
confirm it, that Saint Peter never did any thing but by the concurrence of the
Apostolic College, but the College often without Saint Peter; nor can I tell
how the face of things came to be changed, for above twelve Centuries the Popes
never insinuated, or pretended to the creation of Bishops, Cardinals, or other
Officers of the Church, that belonging always, to the Synod, and College.
But now the Popes do all things as they list themselves; and yet the Cardinals
must needs have the Title of Princes of the Holy Church, which the Popes do
willingly allow them, as not caring who have the smoke, whilst they themselves
run away with the roast.

But if the Popes have usurped upon the Cardinals Jurisdiction in Spiritual
things, much more have they robbed them of it in Temporal. One of them being
taken away, drew the other after it: Whilst the Popes began at first by degrees
to entrench upon that Authority in Spirituals that the Sacred College was
legally possessed of, and finding by little and little that they parted with
patience, with what they usurped with pride, the good Popes took courage and
seized upon all, driving them out both of their Spiritual and Temporal
Authority too, so that at this present the Cardinals have nothing left them but
the benevolence of the Pope. The worst is, the Cardinals cannot yet tell in
what manner they came to be robbed of those Privileges they in former times
were possessed of; but for my part I believe it was from nothing else but their
negligence, and too little care they took of the conservation of that Authority
that was given them by God, by the Church, by the Emperors, and by the People;
for seeing their Authority very great, they used not sufficient diligence to
preserve it; whereas the Popes being conscious of the weakness of their own,
they made it their business to enlarge it, and they have done it so
effectually, they have left the other none at all. Platina in his first
impression of the Life of Paul the second, gives an account, that amongst
others being accused of I know not what, and brought Prisoner before the said
Pope, he petitioned his Holiness that he might be tried before the College of
Cardinals, in whose Judgment he would willingly acquiesce. But the Pope
enraged at the request, told him, What do you talk of Judgment? know you not
that I am infallible, and carry all their Judgments and Reason in the Cabinet
of my breast? I consider no man's person: I am Pope, and it is in my power to
null or confirm their Acts, as I think good my self.

Let not the Cardinals inquire now, what means the Popes made use of, to invade
and usurp the authority they formerly enjoyed, because they are sure to be
answered with nothing but violence, insolence, and threats: against which, they
having not courage enough to defend themselves, do sit down contented only with
the Title and appearance: and it is certain at this day, that the Cardinals
have no more authority over the Church, than the Duke of Savoy has over the
Kingdom of Cyprus, of which he will be called King notwithstanding; so the
Cardinals will be called Princes of the Church, whilst the Pope runs away with
the power, doing, and undoing, as he pleases, giving offices and preferments at
his pleasure, and imposing his own Laws without contradiction; insomuch that
the Consistories, Congregations, and Colleges, are only for the service and
assistance of the Pope, who suffers not the Cardinals to transact any thing but
by his direction, and if they do, he revoaks it; so that it is too true they
have nothing left but a bare outside authority.

All this would be past over nevertheless, and their affliction would not be so
great, were it the Popes only that commanded the Cardinals; but the misery is
for more than an age past, so many Nephews as have been in Rome, so many Popes
have there been to command them; for the Popes communicating the authority they
usurped, with each of their Nephews, they know very well which way to put in
execution, and have no need to be taught how to make their advantages. Is it
not a melancholy and most deplorable sight to see two sorry little-headed
Nephews, make so many Logger-headed Cardinals to tremble? that one poor single
Nephew, should keep the whole College in awe? That two pitiful Relations of
the Pope's, born, and brought up in obscurity, should be more considerable in
Rome, than so many Princes of most noble Extraction? That the Popes should give
more ear to the advice of a Nephew, newly taken from School, and many times
from the Shop, than to the Councels of so many Cardinals, used and accustomed
to public affairs, and zealous of the Service of God? That they should
command, that know not how to command, and they be forced to obey those, they
ought in all equity to command? That the foreign and extraneous Nephews should
have freer and more uninterrupted access to the Vatican, than the Cardinals
that are born in Rome?

Now if affairs be carried in this manner in the Court of Rome, in respect of
Spiritual and Temporal Things, how can the Cardinals be properly called
Princes, that leave the Church in the hands of other people? It is the Nephews
that are the Princes, that hold the Patrimony of Saint Peter in their
possession, that divide it from the Church without any resistance, and
appropriate it as a Patrimony for their particular Families. Nor ought the
Nephews on the other side to permit (seeing they have the authority in them)
the Cardinals to bear the Title of Princes of the Church, lest very ill
consequences should follow. They have no other right of Dominion over them,
than by Usurpation and Tyranny, and Tyranny is sometimes raised above the
Majesty of Princes; Now if the Cardinals be Princes of the Church without any
Sovereignty, the Nephews that have got that Sovereignty without any title must
be Tyrants; and therefore to remove this inconvenience, it is necessary either
to leave the Dominion of the Church to the Cardinals that have the Title, or to
give the Nephews the Title that have the Power already, and exercise it with
great Authority.

There is not a Heretic, a Gentile, a Jew, a Catholic, nor a Protestant, but
knows the Government of the Church by the Nephews is Tyrannical, because the
Authority they have to govern it, is derived only from the Popes, who have no
Authority to dispose of that which belongs legally to the Cardinals; Christ (as
if on purpose to prevent disputes) said expressly, when he gave the power of the
Keys to Saint Peter, Tibi dabo claves Regni coelorum: observe the word Tibi,
to Thee, that is, to Peter I give the Keys of my Church, and not to his
Nephews: It is my pleasure that you Command, and give Laws, not your Relations
and Kindred, Tibi dabo claves Regni coelorum. And therefore Saint Peter, who
understood his duty very well, would never admit any of his own Relations to
the Government of the Church, but only such as were called by the Divine mouth
of our most blessed Savior. Now a days the Popes proceed quite contrary,
glossing as they please upon the Gospel, robbing them (as soon as they are
entered into the Vatican) of all their Authority, and giving it to their
Nephews; and instead of governing the Church with the assistance of the
Cardinals, (in whom the power is directly from our Savior) they govern with
the assistance of their Nephews, that cannot with any justice enter into the
Vatican, nor take possession of an Authority that belongs only to the Cardinals.

It is clear the Cardinals are the true successors of the Apostles, so that if
the Apostles received none of their Jurisdiction from Saint Peter, but
immediately from God; and if Saint Peter did never command them, neither can
nor ought the Popes to command the Cardinals; nor are they obliged to obey them
in what relates to the Government of the Church, seeing they have as much power
in those affairs as the Popes: For my part when I shall see the Popes hold the
same correspondence with the Cardinals, that Saint Peter did with the Apostles,
I shall believe them true Popes; so on the other side, I shall believe the
Cardinals true Princes of the Holy Church, when I shall see them replete with
holy zeal, and laboring for the recovery of that Jurisidiction which has been
so unjustly taken from them. If they shall at any time be restored to the
exercise of that Authority, they formerly for several ages possessed, they will
make the Popes, the Church, and themselves happy, and fortunate, and blessed;
themselves blessed, because that respect which at present is given by the
Faithful to the Purple only, will be kindled in the hearts of all Christendom,
and break out into a flame of devotion, to behold them with such passion and
solicitousness endeavoring the good of Christianity, the Church fortunate,
because it shall be no more worryed nor tormented with the tongues and pens of
Historians, but see every day new Christians sprouting up in her bosom. And
lastly, the Popes shall be happy, in having Companions in the care of the Flock
of Christ, in discharging themselves of a part of that burden, that is not to
be sustained by one, but with great danger of sinking under it. Let not the
Cardinals therefore any longer delay the wresting again that Dominion out of
the hands of the Nephews, that by Divine ordination belongs to themselves. Let
them force themselves, and endeavor the repose of the Church; let them have an
eye over the affairs of the poor, whose lawful Princes they are; and let them
not (as they value the praise of the World, and the benediction of Christ)
forget the Jurisdiction that was given them by him.

If the Popes by debasing the Authority of the Cardinals, have erected their
own Monarchy, why do not the Cardinals (by depressing that of the Pope) exalt
themselves to the condition of Senators in the Christian Commonwealth? If the
Popes have thought good for the private advantage of their particular Families,
to change (to the great detriment of the Cardinals) the Republic of Christ,
into a Monarchy for their Nephews, why shall not the Cardinals for the benefit
of the Church, subvert that Monarchy, and re-establish the Republic of Christ?
Christ did not call them to the Apostleship, to make them Deacons of Apostles,
but that they should watch over, and superintend, that the Offices of the
Deacons were executed well. In Republics the Dukes are not chosen to destroy
the Senators, but on the contrary, they keep up the Grandeur of the Senators,
to render their own Authority the more Majestic. Let the Cardinals therefore
have a care it fares not with them, as it did with a Soldier of Alexander, who
being asked his Name by the Emperor, and answering Alexander, his actions being
not answerable to his Name, the Emperor replied, Either leave the Name of
Alexander, or do as Alexander does.

And certainly the Cardinals ought either to act like Cardinals, and vindicate
that dignity God has given them as principal Ministers in his Church, or
relinquish that Eminent Title. The habit makes not a Monk, nor the Purple Robe
a Cardinal; if that were so, there would not want Purple to make Cardinals, nor
habits to make Monks. The zeal of Religion, the safety of the Christian
Commonwealth, the protection of the People, the care of the Cures, the
administration of the wealth of the Church, the banishment of Vice, Sweatings,
and Labourings, and Watchings for the augmentation of the number of the
Faithful, and the propagation of Christianity, are as the Poles upon which the
Wheel of Cardinalism ought to turn. If a Cardinal goes this way to work, tyres
and harrasseth out himself in prosecution of the virtues aforesaid, he will be
a Cardinal indeed, though he wears no Purple; but if he shuts his eyes, and
leaves all things forsaken and deserted, he may have as much of the Purple as
he please, but he will have nothing of the Cardinal. The Cardinals tremble at
the very Name of the Pope, and yet it is they themselves that give him his
Papacy: They humble themselves at the beck of him, who proceeds from their own
bowels; they are contented to be stripped of their Authority, to invest him with
it that robbed them.

The Protestants deny the whole power of the Pope, and in their Schools bring
many arguments to refute it; yet they allow more dignity to the Cardinals, than
they know how to ask of his Holiness. They say that if the Pope could be
contented to be a Cardinal amongst the Cardinals, and the Cardinals as Popes
with the Pope, the Church of God would be restored to the true form in which it
was created in the infancy of Christianity, when the Apostles were Peter's, and
Peter as the Apostles; and they would not find that difficulty of closing with
our Church, which by that means would be Universal, and not particular; whereas
now they are glad of any opportunity to distract it, because they see it
particular, by reason of the absolute Authority that is given to the Pope.

I was a while since invited to dinner by a Friend of mine, and by accident
there were several Protestants, and some Catholics at the Table. About the
latter end of dinner, the Catholics with great freedom began to discourse (it
was in the time of the vacancy of the Chair) of the discord and dissension
amongst the Cardinals; one of them instanced the example of the Apostles, who
when the Holy Spirit descended upon them, were Congregati in unum; applying all
to the difference betwixt the Apostolic College in these times, in which they
are at variance; and what it was in the Primitive, when there was nothing but
meekness, and charity, and love.

Amongst the rest there was a French Gentleman indifferently well learned, and
of a pleasant conversation, who taking the word from the other, replied
smilingly, that those words Congregati in unum, might very justly be applied to
the Apostolic College in being, with this difference only, that the Apostles
then were Congregati in unum with Christ, and now they are Congregati in unum
with the Pope. And ^e had gone further, had he not been interrupted, and forced
to rise from the Table, upon an unexpected visit that was made, which altered
the whole discourse.

I who had then this Cardinalism in my head, and resolved to make an end of it,
and publish it to the world, began to make some reflection upon what the French
man had said, and I found his opinion was not ^ll grounded, so much did it
correspond with mine. For in truth in Rome where the Congregations are
infinite, the Cardinals are Congregati in unum, not in their judgments or
desires (in which many times there is so much discrepancy, that every Cardinal
has a several opinion) but in a resolution to do whatever his Holiness commands
them. They are Congregati in unum, because in the Consistories they conclude of
nothing, but what is dictated by the Pope. From whence it happened that a
Cardinal of a very profound judgment, that lived in the time of Innocent the
tenth, being asked one day whether he went, he answered, To Donna Olimpia's
Congregation, implying, that that Lady having the absolute management of his
Holiness, her Cousin, it was necessary to observe her orders exactly whether
they were good or bad: and indeed, some few that would needs peevishly and
obstinately withstand her Commands, found but little ease or advantage by it.
Were the Cardinals Congregati in unum, for a good understanding amongst
themselves, as they are Congregati in unum, to do what ever they are commanded
by the Pope, the Church would be better served than it is, the State would
flourish in plenty and peace, and the Nephews reduced to their primitive
indigence and necessity. The Popes do rejoice (if not contrive) to see the
minds of the Cardinals divided, as much fearing the consequence of their unity;
and a certain great Pope that lived in our age, was wont to say, That the
division of the Cardinals, was the exaltation of the Popes; a saying, as
Diabolical as Politic, which discovered clearly, that the intentions of the
Popes were fixed upon the Supremacy they enjoy, that is, to keep and conserve
the Monarchy of the Church, in their own absolute Dominion, though to the utter
destruction of all that opposed them; and because there is no visible
opposition to be made, but from the Society of Cardinals (who are indeed the
true Senators of the Christian Commonwealth) for that reason the good Popes
make use of a thousand wheedles and pretenses, to bereave them of that
Senatorial dignity, and to bring the absolute Dominion both in Temporals and
Spirituals, to depend upon their own pleasures and wills.

But here it may be objected, that I do contradict something I have said in
another place, viz. that many Popes have by their particular vigilance,
endeavored to aggrandize the Cardinalitial Majesty; sometimes by magnifying
the reputation and credit of the Cardinals, sometimes by declaring them to be
like Kings, and sometimes by advancing their Titles. To which I answer, that if
things be examined nea^ly, there will no contradiction be found. True it is,
the Popes have taken great pains to increase the Grandeur of the Cardinals, but
not to raise by that Grandeur any real profit to the Cardinals; but that the
Majesty of the Cardinals may contribute to the augmentation of their own
Grandeur. The Popes allow the Cardinals as much authority as is sufficient to
render them serviceable to them; but in other things they regard them not a
jo^. They are not so weak to divide that Monarchy that in their hands is
entire, to give it to the Cardinals, by whom they will be served. That Pope
that declared the Cardinals equal to Kings, had no regard but to his own
ambition, to the end, the height of his Pontificacy might be the more
illustrious, by how much he had Kings in his Service.

In short, the Popes are very liberal in conceeding ample Privileges, and
outward Magnificences to the Cardinals. Let them have the preceedence of
Princes, let them go Cheek by Jole with Kings, let them have the Prelates for
their Slaves, and transcend the Episcopal dignity, all is well, these things
shall be allowed them by the Popes, and the people obliged under pain of
Excommunication to be contented. But let them have a care withal, that they
meddle not with the public Treasure; that they touch not the Almsmoney; that
they question not the actions of the Pope; that they do not recommend the
causes of the afflicted; that they press not the disposal of offices and
preferments to persons of merit; that they look no further than they are
desired; that they do not work or insinuate themselves into any command, but as
they are directed; and in a word, not so much as to mention the Robberies and
Extortions of the Nephews; if they do, they will be banished the Court, frowned
upon by the Nephews, turned out of their Offices, and treated as the vilest of
their Subjects, without any respect at all to the Purple they wear. And of
this, several examples have been seen in our days. I could name more than four
Cardinals that are now alive; (and perhaps I shall name them when I come to
speak of them in particular) who, for having followed the dictates of their own
reason, and for refusing to comply with the extravagant desires of the Nephews,
were reduced to that exigence, they were forced to beg their protection from
Foreign Princes. So implicitly do the Popes pretend the Cardinals are to obey
them, without asking so much as why or wherefore.

This method of proceeding was very well known to a certain Cardinal Padrone,
or Nephew of a Pope that died not full thirty years since, who being in
discourse one day with his Uncle about certain persons that were to be
promoted to the Cardinalship, his Uncle insisting upon the merits of some
persons, and the service they had done to the Church. The Nephew did what
possible he could to put them out of his Holinesses mind, and to recommend
others that were in his head, if not in his purse; and because the Pope
considered his Pastoral obligation, he would not turn from his resolution, but
to pacisie his Nephew, began with sober and grave reasons to demonstrate the
advantage that would accrue to his Family, by obliging persons of that virtue
and merit to his party. But the Nephew that was of another opinion, replied
boldly to his Uncle, That be had no need of Cardinals but in the Conclave, so
that it was of little importance to him whether his Creatures were virtuous or
otherwise, if they were but wise enough to give their voices there.

I doubt not but if there are already none, there will be others of this
opinion, and which is worse, the Cardinals will not know what remedy to apply,
the evil being ulcerated, and gone too far. But that would be done by the trial
of one single medicine which should be by renewing that Congregati in unum, not
in unum with the Pope, but in unum with Christ; by serving the Church before
the Pope, and the Flock of Christ before his Nephews; otherwise to repeat what
I said before, let their names be changed, and instead of Cardinals of the Holy
Church, let them be called the Popes Cardinals, as indeed they are. If the Pope
creates them for his own service only, and his Nephews, let them not pretend to
the Apostolic office; and if they be created for the Churches service, why do
they stick so close to the interest of the Nephews? if the affairs of the world
go on with the same vicissitude as formerly, other things will be seen in time.
However, either death must follow, or some remedy must be applied; a disease
that increases so fast, can never last long; but perhaps that which men are
afraid to do, lest they should prejudice their own interest, may be done by God
Almighty himself, who takes the only care of the interest of the Church.

I was upon a time in a Stationers Shop in Bolognia, in which they were
discoursing of the insatiable desire the Nephews had of heaping up wealth, and
of the carelessness of the Cardinals in preserving the Treasure of the Church
as they ought: and to speak truth, I had a particular fancy to understand an
expression of an Academick of Bolognia, who said the Cardinals were of three
sorts; the first, were such as aimed to be Popes, the second, of meaner
designs, and the third, the Princes. That the Cardinal Princes took that habit
upon them, for the interest and advantage of their particular houses, and took
but little care of the Church, because they had little from her but their bare
Titles; the poorer and more interested Cardinals, looked no further than the
gaining of some Abbeys or Bishoprics for their own conveniences, laying aside
all other considerations, lest they might lose their designs; the Cardinals
that pretended to the Papacy (that they might not hazard that fortune that
depended upon the votes of other people) would pretend not to see the Turks
themselves, should they come to take possession of the State. And of this
opinion, I suppose there are many more in Rome, than in Bolognia.

But that which seems most strange to me is, that the Cardinals should have all
the trouble, and the Nephews go away with the profit. That the Nephews break
Treaties, and the Cardinals are left to make them up again. If there be any
business of importance transacted in Rome, and it succeeds well, though done by
the advice of the Cardinals, the Nephews have the honor of it; if the Nephews
interrupt or break off any important Negotiation, without the knowledge of the
Cardinals, the miscarriage and disgrace is taken from the Nephews, and imputed
to the Cardinals; though the good Nephews do ordinarily declare and profess the
spoiling, and perplexing of whatever they manage, to give the Cardinals the
trouble to find out a remedy by their frequent consultations, which they are
forced to do, though to their very great affliction.

Paulus quintus (as a certain Politician of our time writes) being brought to
an exigence in a business of great importance, by the ill conduct, or at least,
the ill fortune of the Cardinal Borghese his Nephew, in great melancholy and
distress told him, Nephew, you have brought this affair into a very ill
condition; to save your Reputation, it must be turned over to the Cardinals, if
they can remedy it, it shall be our care to see you have the honor who began
it so ill, and not the Cardinals that accomplished it. Such Presents as these
the Popes Nephews send the Cardinals very often; though generally by their
insufficiencies they ruin what ever comes before them, and then send the
business they have broken to pieces, to be patched up again in their
Congregations and Consistories.

The Cardinals are enraged, and like to burst with indignation, and indeed they
can do no less than be angry with those that ruin their affairs, by not
advising with them, or by thinking themselves not obliged to do so; but when
they consider that the Cardinals their Predecessors took but little care of
rectifying the ill ways of the Court, they leave things at sixes and sevens as
they found, according to the example of others that were before them.

The Nephews do but laugh and mock at all this, they live with that latitude
and licentiousness, as if there were neither God, nor Justice for them. If the
Church has any thing that is good, they know how to make the profit on it; if
any thing evil, let the Cardinals look to that. It is reported, that Donna
Olimpia being in a fear one day that the Cardinals would not espouse the
interest of the Duke, out of animosity to the Pope her Cousin, he pacified her
with these words, Cousin, the Cardinals will be of our side in spite of their
teeths, and defend the State for their own interest, although we would ruin it
for ours.

Another Prelat, of a sound Judgment, and Zeal toward the worship of God, and
no less experienced in the Intrigues of the Court, was asked by a Gentleman of
his acquaintance that traveled with him, what it was the Cardinals did treat
on in their Congregations, to which he answered, Sir, Let me advise you not to
trouble your head about the actions or interest of that Court, for it is enough
to confound the understanding of the most experienced Minister in the world:
the less you know the better, yet in few words I will satisfy your curiosity;
know then, that the Congregations (which are very numerous) serve only as a
pretense to the Pope, whereby he would persuade, that his affairs are managed
with great prudence, seeing he has the judgment of so many Cardinals in
Council.

If an old Prelat of that Court spoke in this manner to a stranger, it is a
sign he was well acquainted with the Intrigues of that City; and therefore
there may some reflection be made upon those words. There is certainly great
difference betwixt saying, and doing, betwixt acting and advising: I believe
really the Popes do consult with the Cardinals, but they act with their
Nephews; that is, if the Pope find the Councels of the Cardinals profitable to
their Families, in the name of God their Councels are received, they are good
Councels, and the Cardinals are commended as learned Counselors; but if it
falls out on the other side, that the Cardinals to satisfy their Consciences,
advise any thing for the public advantage of the Church, and of Christendom,
and contrary to the immoderate increase of Riches and Grandeur in the Nephews.
In this case, the Popes laying aside all reason, turn tail upon the Council of
the Cardinals, and aspersing them with inexperience, they call their Nephews to
the Cabal, with whom they do not so much deliberate, as operate, in spite of
whatever was propounded by the Cardinals; and which is worse, the Popes in all
these cases pretend and excuse themselves with the advice of their Cardinals,
though the business be resolved with their Nephews only, and of this I shall
give you an example.

Paul the fifth envying the Sovereign Authority that was given to the Venetian
by God, Nature, and the liberality of the Emperors, and Popes, as soon as he
had assumed the Papacy, he began to search out for ways to subvert it,
supposing by his threatening, to gain some part of his unjust pretensions from
that Commonwealth; and having a fair opportunity, by the means of some
Ecclesiastics that were legally imprisoned by the mature deliberation and
prudence of that Senate, to bridle the insolence of those that pretended to be
exempt from the Supremacy they had gained, with Sword in hand, in defense of
the Christian liberty. The good Pope thinking this a fair occasion to disgorge
the hatred which he had kept so long in his stomach against this Republic, he
began to thunder out his Excommunications and Interdictions against their
Subjects, and the liberty of the Senate, without any regard to the trouble and
disquiet it gave, not to Italy only, but to all Europe, to see that Republic
used at that rate, which God had so miraculously erected to be a Bulwark to
Christendom, a defense to the Liberties of the Italian Princes, a protection
and re-establishment to those Popes that were chased out of Rome, and
persecuted by the Barbarians; the ornament of Europe, and the terror of Asia.
The most Christian King Henry the fourth, who had a particular esteem for this
Republic, dispatched away an Ambassador Extraordinary, to divert his Holiness
from a Resolution so dangerously prejudicial to the interest of the Public.
The Ambassador failed not to perform his duty with all sincerity, and being one
day in private discourse with his Holiness, he told him freely, He wondered how
his Holiness came to be so easily transported into a resolution, that would be
so transcendently prejudicial to the reputation of the Church. To which the
Pope answered with some indignation, That that resolution could not be called
light, which came from the breast of Gods Vicegerent on Earth, and who was
acted by Divine inspiration, and assisted by the counsel and deliberation of
so many Cardinals. Thus do they ordinarily excuse themselves, thus do they
pretend the advice of the Cardinals; thus are the guilty made innocent, and the
innocent guilty. However if the Pope did really believe so, the Ambassador was
of another opinion; he knew very well, that when his Holiness called that
Consistory, in which Pope Paulus resolution of Excommunicating the Venetian was
for several days in debate, there were three factions of Cardinals; one of
them denied absolutely to concur, and with good reasons demonstrated the
Error his Holiness was in; the second was of opinion to protract a while, to
consider more of it, and to try if by another means the Venetian might be
brought to accommodate with his Holiness his demands: The third faction (which
consisted of Cardinals either created by him, or obliged to him for some
Bishoprics, Offices, or Preferments) gave their voices clearly for the
Interdiction. Not but that they knew in their Consciences the prejudice the
Church would receive, and the danger of introducing some new Heresy into
Italy; but seeing the Pope resolute, and impatient to be thundering his
Excommunications amongst them, to satisfy his designs, they stuck close to
him; and would have done the same to the detriment of the whole World, if the
Pope had desired it. And therefore it was that Paulus insinuated, that he had
done nothing but with the advice of his Cardinals; but he said not, that he had
followed the bad part of them, and neglected the good.

The case of Urban the eighth is not much unlike it; he was a Pope otherwise of
great worth, and had left a nobler memory of his actions, had he not (toward
the end of his Papacy) obscured the splendour of his labors, by suffering
himself to be transported by the furious counsel of his Nephews, to a certain
violence, destructive to the Ecclesiastical Decorum, the reputation of his own
person, and the peace and repose of all Italy. I say, then when he undertook
the invasion of the Duke of Parma, who had deserved very well of the Church;
turning all Europe as it were top-si-turvy, and obliging all the Princes in
Italy to stand upon their guard, against those Arms that were taken up and
managed with passion. Urban at that time excused himself, with the same
pretense that Paulus did, assuring all the Ministers that were then in his
Court, negotiating a Peace, That he was certain he had not erred, for besides
that as he was Christ's Vicar he could not err himself, he had not resolved
upon that War without the deliberation and advice of the whole Consistory of
Cardinals. Which thing was so said, but not so done, for the least thing that
prevailed with his Holiness, was the opinion of his Cardinals, who with all the
prayers and exhortations imaginable, beseech'd him to desist, laying before him
the universal scandal it would give to all Christendom, and the insufferable
calamities it would bring upon the people; but there was no room for such
arguments in the breast of the Pope, the Nephews had resolved to turn the Cross
into a Sword, and the Rochet into a Mantle de la guerre; not at all regarding
those counsels that were inclining to peace. But let us leave this, and grant
that that War was undertaken by the advice of the greatest part of the
Cardinals; Let it be as Urban said: but what then? shall the Pope be excusable
by that? or the Cardinals blamed? Oh no: I affirm, that though the Cardinals
had given their voices for the undertaking of that War, it would have been to
be pardoned. And that this is true, let us see what kind of Cardinals they were
that were present when Urban proposed this War against the Duke of Parma? They
were either Cardinals created at the instance of Francisco, or Anthonio;
Cardinals obliged for their Caps to the whole House of the Barbarini. Now what
could such Cardinals do? deny to satisfy the desires of the Barbarini, who had
given them their Dignity? refuse to give their voices for the War, if Francisco
and Anthonio recommended it? I know very well Reason ought to take place of
Passion; that Gods interest is to be preferred before Man's; the universal
advantage, to the particular; the honor of the Church, before any private
person: and I know again, there is not any of the Cardinals so weak, but they
know it; but the business is, the Ecclesiastics are fed with Flesh, and not
with Divinity: and the interest of this world outweighs the interest of the
next, and the reason is, they are not Angels but Men.

Afterward Alexander, who was (I speak under the permission of the House of
Chigi) Master of the turnings and equivocations, the jugglings and pretenses
that he used, understood this point better than the rest; and some are of
opinion, that for many years backward there was not to be found in the Vatican
a Pope more inclined to Monarchy than he, taking no small pleasure in humouring
and indulging himself, according to the dictates of his own fancy; nevertheless
he broke the brains as it were of the Consistories, and hourly tormented the
Congregations, and by his usual equivocations and falacies, he appeared
dis-interested in all things, committing all things to the Councels of the
Cardinals; in so much that in the beginning of his Papacy, there was a certain
Cardinal so far deluded by his outward appearance, that he cried out one day in
company where he was, God be praised we have at last found a Pope, that is a
lover of good Council. But when the sack came to be shak'd, there was nothing
but dust; for whilst he said all the trouble upon the Cardinals, to lull and
inebriate the World, he himself went away with the wealth, not deviating in the
least from the Capriccious Monarchy that was exercised by his Predecessors,
unless it were in this, that he did it with more neatness and cunning. And
indeed he not only left his Treaties, and matters of greatest importance, to be
lifted in the Congregations and Consistories, but his common and more ordinary
affairs; and yet he did but refer the cause from Herod to Pilate, by a Maxim of
policy spun and contrived in his own brain. If the Judgments and Votes of the
Cardinals did not agree with his desires, though the business was determined
and concluded in this Consistory, or in that Congregation, he would still refer
it to another; but if they were suitable with his designs, then there was an
end of the business, and the Cardinals discharged from any further trouble. In
short, Alexander made the affairs that were to be discussed, to be so much
tumbled and tossed in the Consistories, that at last things would of necessity
fall out as he would have them.

It happened one day a Consistory being called, for I know not what business,
already examined, and perhaps several times decided, two of the Cardinals going
together to the said Consistory, and discoursing of the subject they were again
to deliberate, the one said to the other, The Pope will make us come and go in
this manner, till we guess out his mind; it is better to make an end of it
quickly and be at ease, then to let him tire us out, and at last carry the
victory. It is not ten months since I met in a Journey with two Roman
Gentlemen, one a Priest, and the other a Secular, who were discoursing betwixt
themselves about the business of Castro, the Priest swearing that upon that
single subject, there had been more than two hundred Consistories held; I who
had already wrought my self into the discourse, (for to speak truth when any
thing is spoken of the interest of Rome, I open my ears as wide as is possible)
had the curiosity to desire the cause of it; to whom he answered like a true
Roman, though not like a good Priest, You must know the Pope does nothing in
Rome but what is conformable to his own designs, so that the Cardinals not all
of them agreeing with his resolutions in the business of Castro, the Pope to
weary them out tumbles them up and down at that rate; and I am persuaded there
will never be an end of their Consistories, till they comply with his Holiness
his pleasure; and you shall yet see this affair of Castro brought about again
to the Congregations and Consistories, which is as much as to say, kept in a
perpetual dependence in Rome. True it is, Alexander found out a good way to
excuse his obstinacy, and in that he out-did both Innocent and Urban; nor
indeed was there ever any Pope knew better how to wind himself out, and throw
the fault upon the backs of the Congregations and Consistories. When that
infamous affront was offered to the persons of the Duke and Duchess of Crequy,
the King of France being himself injured in the person of his Ambassador, writ
many Letters full of resentment, and amongst the rest one to the Queen of
Sweden, which is inserted at large in the Nepotismo, complaining not so much of
the Pope as Pope, as of Alexander and Fabius, that is to say, of his Kindred. A
Cardinal of no small authority and zeal being informed of it, forbore not upon
a good occasion to speak to the Pope himself in these words; Most Holy Father,
his most Christian Majesty does not complain of your person who is Christ's
Vicar, and Head of the Church so much as of your Brother and Nephews, who have
too great inj^unce upon you. Alexander answered, That he had not received his
Kindred into Rome but upon the persuasions of the Sacred College. Which being
told the Cardinal Albici when he was at his Table, he replied in the absence of
the Pope, what the other Cardinal omitted in his presence, That it is true the
Holy College had entreated him to bring his Nephews to Rome, but not to
destroy both Rome, and the Church too, to advance them. All this was told me by
a Gentleman of credit that was then present in the Cardinal Albici's Chamber
when the words were spoke; and it is no hard matter to believe it, to them that
know the humor of his Eminence, who freely discharges himself of whatever is
in his mind, and justifies reason in spite of the World.

It must needs be confessed then, having so many examples to corroborate, and
so many experiments to attest it, that the Popes use the Cardinals in the
Government of the Church for a pretense, and no otherwise, laying the fault
upon those Cardinals rather that comply with the desires of the Pope, than upon
themselves that act according to the pleasures of their Nephews, or for
satisfaction of their own private passions. Of this kind of proceeding I dare
not for my part accuse the Popes, who are forced to do what they can for the
preservation of their Monarchy: But the Cardinals I dare, who can so easily
suffer themselves to be robbed of their Authority, be contented to take Eggs
(as it were) for their money, and either out of mere pusillanimity, or some
other thing, part with that which is legally their own, and permit their
private passions to overruled the interest of the Public.

The Church without doubt would be a hundred times better served, and the Court
in greater esteem, if the Cardinals would restrain the Nephews, and not ^nff^r
the Pope to operate as he pleases. When the attempt was made upon the Duke of
Crequy, his most Christian Majesty (supposing it able to oblige the Pope to
give him a proportionable reparation) applied himself to the Sacred College
for redress, and his Letter was exactly as follows.

Cousin,
THe assault that was made the twentieth Current upon the person of my Cousin
the Duke of Crequy, my Ambassador Extraordinary, his Lady, and all the French
the Corsi of Rome could meet with in the Streets that day, is an enormity so
great in all its circumstances, that perhaps in no time, nor place, even
amongst the Barbarians themselves, can an instance be found in which the jus
Gentium has been with so much inhumanity violated and abused: And for as much
as your Eminence is a Member of that Sacred Body, that is the natural Council
of the Popes, I have encharged Monsignor Burlemont, Auditor of the Rota, to
wait upon you in this conjuncture, and acquaint you with my resentment of so
great an offense, to the end that by your interposition, (which I doubt not but
you will willingly undertake as far as you shall be able) I may receive a
satisfaction adequate to the quality and extravagance of the affront. But if
your Eminences good offices should happen to be ineffectual, they shall not be
imputed to me (after this application) whatever mischiefs or calamities shall
happen, assuring my self I shall be excusable both to God* and to Man, whatever
the consequences be; and thus referring the rest to what Mr. Burlemont will
present to you by word of mouth, I beseech God my good Cousin to preserve you
in his holy favor.

LEWIS.
St. Germans en Ley, 20 Aug. 1662. De Lominie.

This Letter was read and deliberated in the Sacred College, but only in the
particulars relating to the satisfying of the King, not in his Majesty's
Complement in these words, Of the Sacred College which is the Natural Council
of the Popes. The Cardinals spent no long time in reflecting upon that which
was the principal point, and ought well to have been considered, because when
one of the greatest Monarchs in Christendom does Canonize the Sacred College
for the Natural Council of the Popes, what is it but to remember and excite
them to maintain that Station God Almighty has placed them in, that is, to have
a care the Popes usurp not an absolute authority over the Church, and that they
do not, and undo not at their pleasure, without any respect to the quality of
the person they offend. What is natural to the Church, is by special favor
from God, if the Council of Cardinals be the natural Council of the Popes, the
Popes ought not to usurp any jurisdiction over the Cardinals, so as not being
at any time subordinate to the Popes, when they are united and assembled in the
Sacred College, it must of necessity be granted that the Popes are inferior
to that Council, so that the Cardinals as Members of a Supreme Council, and
depending only upon the power of God, and the protection of Princes, are
obliged to constrain the Popes to an obedience of those Councels, that proceed
from that Council that indeed is natural. But the Cardinals will not understand
this, but turning the Natural Council into a Bastard, they advise nothing that
in their Consciences they think necessary for the Service of God, for the
Honor of the Church, or the Repose of the Faithful, but only sift out the
Councels, Advices, Sentences, and Opinions of their Popes, and then making
their Decrees as they desire them, they take but little care of the rest, not
that they want good will, but courage, and audacity, to put that good will in
execution, which is a thing so prejudicial to their Grandeur, that it detracts
and lessens their dignity. This I am sure of, that would they once take up a
resolution of resuming that authority they formerly enjoyed, and renounce the
Tyranny of the Nephews, the greatest Princes of Christendom would take their
parts, and provide them with all manner of assistance. But let us see the
Cardinals Answer to the Kings Letter, which in my judgment will not improperly
be inserted in this place.

Most Christian and most Royal Sir,
I Am very sensible of the transcendant favor your Majesty has done me, in
vouchsafing to impart to me your resentment for the unhappy accident betwixt
the Corses, and certain of the Duke of Crequy's train; besides the honor you
have done me by the benign confidence expressed in your Letter, and by the
mouth of Mr. Burlemont, your Majesty has also given me occasion with all
reverence to represent the great displeasure conceived by our whole Court, but
more especially his Holiness, in whose heart there is already so great an
impression of esteem, and so tender an affection for your Majesty, produced and
augmented by so many glorious actions, so many perpetual testimonies of your
Valor and Piety, in demolishing the Garrisons of the Heretics, and shutting
their Churches in places under their command: so that his Holiness could not
evidence with more paternal demonstration the disgust that action has given
him; which he has not only declar'^ publicly in his Briefs upon that
occasion, but in the Consistory also, and in his private discourse, but much
more in his actions, bending all his thoughts to your Majesty's satisfaction,
as he has always designed. I hope therefore your Majesty, with your wonted
generosity, will reflect upon the just motives, and remain satisfied even for
the entire quiet and consolation of your Servants, amongst which, I being not
inferior to any in point of observance, neither have, nor will fail in my
obedience to your Majesty, nor in employing my self to the utmost of my
abilities in your Majesty's Service. On the other side likewise I shall
rejoice, if in your Majesty's resolutions, your Majesty's Royal Bounty and
Prudence does more and more show. So that to make me perfectly happy, there
remains nothing but your Majesty's fresh commands, which I most obsequiously do
beg of your Majesty, and make my most humble Obeisance.

Rome the 24. of Sept. 1662.
Had these Cardinals have been to write in Paris, as they were in Rome, the
Letter would perhaps have been otherwise, and not have flattered his Holiness
as it did; and indeed in any public Conflagration, people run with water, and
not with wood. Yet it is no such wonder to me, that the Cardinals sided with
the Pope, as that they rob themselves of their authority, and make show of
certain independency, giving the world to understand, that the composure and
accommodation of the business belonged wholly to the Pope. There would not so
many scandalous offenses be committed in Rome; there would not be so many
Murders in the State; the Church would not be ha^ra^'d as it is, nor thousands
of Families run away from the Tyranny of the Popes; the Court would not swarm
so much with dissolute and ignorant persons, nor the people be so deplorably
miserable; Virtue would not be banished the Vatican, nor Flattery received into
the Capital; Miters would not be bestowed upon Asses, nor Monkeys introduced
into the College; Caps would not be sold at that rate, nor Offices conferred
upon him that bids most; in short, all things would go well, if the Cardinals
would exercise the authority that God has given them, and not depend upon the
Humor, and Capriccio of this Nephew, or of that; did the Popes see the
Cardinals vigilant over their actions; were they sure of their diligence and
sincerity toward the well governing of the Church, they would consider of it a
hundred times before they would call their Kindred to Rome, and put their whole
Dominion into their hands; they would make many a serious reflection before
they would disoblige any Prince, and not suffer themselves to be drawn by their
Nephews into the displeasure of one or the other. But in short, if they meet no
impediment, if they see the Cardinals loytering and asleep, why should they go
about to satisfy their wills. Whilst the Popes are sure to have the Cadinals
Canonize their errors, why should they forbear to commit them.

I shall tell one Story very lamentable for the Catholic Church, though in
this only, that it makes sport for the ignorant and pragmatick Heretics; for
those of better judgment, are troubled at any misery that befalls the
Catholics, and which is more, do give God thanks when he delivers them from
any extraordinary calamity; but because what I am about to say, is sufficient
to break a man's heart, I shall for this reason accompany it with such examples
and arguments, as I have been able to draw from the discourse of some persons
it was my fortune to be amongst, and particularly two Divines, but both
married, which is enough to prove they were no Catholics.

These two reading of a Gazet one day (do not wonder kind Reader if I say they
were reading a Gazet, for we live in an age in which the Ecclesiastics spend
more time about the affairs of the world, than about their Sermons; and of this
sort I knew one my self, that in public was reserved and grave, and in
company a very honest man; however he privately translated out of Italian into
French, a book so Profane and Satirical, that even the worst of Christians are
afraid to read it) these two Preachers then being reading a Gazet, in the time
of the vacancy of the Sea, they found in it, That the Cardinals had concluded
upon certain Ordinances and Rules to be observed by the Pope, when he shall be
created, and that they had propounded in the Vestry of Saint Peter the
abolishment of the Nipotismo. One of the two (which was he that was attending)
with a grave voice, that seemed to proceed from a heart full of zeal, said, God
Almighty remove those good thoughts out of the minds of the Cardinals, for the
scandals of their Church, are the edi^ications of ours; disturbances in their
Church, giving ours repose.

He that has ears to hear let him hear, he that has zeal enough to make
reflection upon these words, let him make it, whilst I betake my self to more
deep considerations. It is not above a hundred and sixty years, since this
Nipotismo began to Lord it over the Church and the Cardinals in Rome.

They insinuated by degrees, and multiplied their authority daily to that pass,
that at present of a custom, it is become a necessity; there being little
difference either in their Grandeur or Command, betwixt a Pope and a Nephew; so
strangely is their Majesty confounded.

About the same time Luther, and Calvin, one after another began to appear,
preaching with great vehemence against the errors of the Catholic Church, and
the exorbitant covetousness of those that governed it, and in a short time
putting the whole world into disorder, introducing Reformations in those very
Kingdoms that were thought the most Catholic.

Against this Torrent that ran down with great Victory and Triumph, the
Emperor Charles the fifth thought good to oppose his zeal, perhaps more
ambitious of gaining Success to his arms, than Provinces to the Pope; so that
with his Sword in his hand, Tryumphing thorough Germany, he conquered their
Captains, but not their Preachers; he subdued their Soldiers, but not their
Consciences; the Reformists increasing every day.

It was not Luther and Calvin only that opposed themselves against the abuses
in the Church, or that made themselves heads of the Religious, and Reformists.
There were other persons that appeared, of greater learning, of better
extraction, and of more eminence and credit. Nevertheless the Popes of those
times knew how to find a remedy, and with most accurate diligence they hindered
its growth, crushing the Brat as it were in the Cradle. And yet the Popes then
had not so many thousands of men, were not in that esteem amongst the Princes,
had not so many Cities and Provinces under their Dominion, nor so many thousand
Crowns to expend, nor in short, made use of their Spiritual and Temporal arms
so easily.

And O God, who is it that can dive into the secrets of Heaven, or understand
why the Church should in its poverty be able to oppose it self to the very face
of its Persecutors, and so weak and unable now the Popes are grown rich, to put
a stop to an inundation, that sprang from so small a beginning? Oh God, why
have the Popes, that pretend to an universal Monarchy, given place and
submitted to too weak and unarmed men? that their hearts should be able to
endure to see themselves devoured without so much as speaking a word? that they
should be contented to condescend though with shame, rather than to contend
with honor.

In this condition do things stand, though it ought to be otherwise; did not
our experience teach us all this, it would very hardly be believed; did not
example confirm our Faith, our Faith would stagger to believe it; did not our
eyes behold the Enemies of Rome multiplied daily, and Rome it self neglected,
these relations would be counted false, though they be never so true.

But let admiration cease, when reason appears; the minds of the faithful are
disturbed, and wander in the very sight of that light that directs them. Let
all amazement cease, seeing the cause of these ev^s is so manifest. He that
would know why the Popes for so many ages have shown themselves so zealous in
defense of the Church that is committed to their custody; let him go no further
than Rome; Let him visit the Coffers of the Popes, and he shall see that, and
the reason why (being really besotted and asleep, notwithstanding their
pretenses of vigilance) they have been this hundred and fifty years purging the
Church of Christ of so many Persecutors, to the great scandal of Christendom,
and the great derision of the Heretics.

Before the said hundred and fifty years, the Popes had no other thoughts than
the espousing the interest of the Church; so far have some of them been from
preferring their own Families, that they would sooner have exposed all their
Kindred to the greatest misfortune, than in the least have been deficient in
their Pastoral Cure. As soon as they were sensible of any new Heresy that was
broached, they stirred up immediately zeal in their breasts, and indignation in
their hearts, they united their Prayers, sent Ambassadors every where, and
opened their Treasures of Indulgences to the Reformists, and of Gold to the
Soldiers.

The people being fortified in this manner, and the Princes excited, they
cheerfully drew their Swords against the Heretics, postponing their own, to
defend the interest of Christ. They gloried in exposing themselves to a
thousand inconveniences and disasters, and to spend their bloods in the
preservation of the Christian Faith. They emptied their Chests of their
Treasure, to replenish the Flock of Christ. They raised Armies of Christians,
to destroy the barbarous Enemies of Christendom. And in a word, they thought
of nothing but following the example of those Bishops, that followed the
example of Christ.

But for these hundred and fifty years last past, things have gone clear
otherwise; the Princes are grown cold, the Infidels multiplied, the Heretics
increased, the Credit of the Clergy diminished, and the Church on all sides
afflicted; and why so? because the Popes, of Pastors of Christ's Flock, being
become Monarchs of the Church* have had no other thoughts but to make Princes
of their Nephews; casting off Gods Interest, lest they should destroy the
Interest of their Kindred.

History does show us (as the curious may observe in a hundred places) and
clearly evince, that for the space of fifteen ages, the Princes took a pride to
spend their Treasure in opposition of those that opposed the Religion of
Christ: the reason that excited them, was the example of the Popes, who having
but little, gave all they had notwithstanding, to the supply and reimbursement
of those Princes that employed theirs against the Enemies of Christ. And in
truth, till within these fifteen hundred years, the Emperors, Kings, Princes,
and Commonwealths, did strive and contend to join themselves in Leagues with
the Popes, against the Heretics and Infidels; and rejoiced more to be
acknowledged Defendors of the Faith, and Persecutors of the Infidels with their
Swords in their hands, than Princes with their Scepters; and the same glory the
Popes took likewise, not spending their days in pleasure in their Castle of
Gondolfo, nor strutting in their Gardens of Monte Cavallo, but in soliciting
and uniting the Princes in a League against the Infidels, offering on their
part for their supply, not only to sell their Consecrated Vessels from their
Altars, but their very Clothes from their backs. But how comes it, things being
thus managed, that the Arms of the Christians advanced not victoriously to the
farthest extremities of Asia? How could Heresy reign so long, if the Sword of
the Catholics was always ready drawn against it?

But one may ask here, how it comes to pass that the zeal of the Princes is
grown so cold, seeing that for a hundred and fifty years last past, they have
been more ready to persecute the interest of the Popes, than to defend the
Faith of Christ. To this it may be answered, That the Princes are grown cold,
because the Popes are so; whilst they were zealous for the good of the Church,
so were the Princes; but since they began to throw Religion behind their backs,
and give themselves over to the aggrandizement of their Nephews; since they
began to empty the Coffers of the Church, to fill the bags of their own
Kindred, the Princes are fallen off, as not conceiving it prudence to strip
themselves of their Clothes, to cover the nakedness of that Church, that is
robbed and dispoil'd by the Popes her Governors, or to supply their Nephews,
who are Enemies to the Princes.

It would certainly be ridiculous, not only to the Infidels, but to the
Christians themselves, should the Princes suffer the Nephews of the Popes in
Rome, to batten with the Blood of Christ; and they consume the Treasure of
their Subjects, in making War upon those that do not so much mischief to the
Popes, as their Nephews do to all Christendom.

When the Knights of Malta took the Grand Sultaness, (which was the occasion
without doubt of the War with the Venetian) I was present in Rome, where they
discoursed generally, that the Turks would not fail to be revenged, to the
detriment of all Christendom. And one day above all the rest, as they were
talking in this manner, a certain Roman adventured to say in these very words:
I would to Heavens the Turks would take Rome; for it is most certain the Slaves
in Constantinople are better treated by the Grand Signiour, than the poor free*
born Romans are in Rome.

And another discoursing likewise upon the same subject, in the company
(amongst the rest) of a Prelate that was discontented, and talking that there
was a necessity of the Princes joining in a firm League against the Turk; the
Roman replied, That it would be a better deed to drive the Nephews out of Rome,
than the Turk out of Constantinople, because the Turk had never done so much
mischief to Christendom, as the Nephews had done to the Church.

A Friend of mine had the curiosity to calculate the Money that has been given
to the Nephews, and he began at the year 1500. and after a great deal of pains,
he found issuing from the Treasury of the Church, above seventy Millions of
double Ducats, all delivered into the hands of their Kindred; and this is to be
understood of visible Moneys, for of private and invisible sums there may
perhaps be twenty Millions more: And those Romans that are within the Town, and
have more time to cast up what has been extorted from them, if they would take
the pains to examine it more strictly, I am satisfied would find it much more.

Now if these seventy Millions of double Ducats had been spent in persecuting
Heretics, or in making War upon Infidels, where would any Infidels be? where
would any Heretics be? Those seventy Millions would have been enough to have
overrun all Asia. And (which is of importance too) the Princes would have
contributed as much more, had they seen the Popes more tenacious against their
Kindred, and more free to the Soldiers that were fighting for Christ.

The Protestants apply all this to a Miracle of the Divine providence; for God
Almighty, say they, began to send Popes that were zealous and passionate for
the enrichment of their Kindred, from the very time the Reformists began to
appear, to the end that the Popes having given all to their Nephews, and
wanting money, they should have no mind to assist those Princes that would
willingly have made War against the Reformists; and hence it was that it was
said by the Minister that read the Gazet, That he desired that God would put it
out of the minds of the Cardinals, to oblige the Pope to turn the Nipotisme out
of Rome. And not without reason, as fearing those great Sums that have been
robbed from the Church, and hoarded up by the Nephews, should be employed
afterward to their ruin and destruction. I leave it to the zeal of the
Cardinals to make reflection, who if they cannot obtain from the Popes that no
more moneys of the Church be given to the Nephews, let them at least prevail so
far, as that they would pretend no longer to any Wars with the Heretics and
Turks, which would be more reputation to the Church, and give less scandal to
the Catholics: Who are engaged upon any tidings of War with the Heretics, and
in that rapture cry out, How a Devil should we make War with the Heretics,
whilst the Nephews run away with the means, applying that money to their
private use* that was given by the Faithful for maintenance of the Christian
Religion, and the destruction of the Enemies of Christ.

Hundreds of Examples we have to confirm these opinions; What Succors were
sent to the Emperor Ferdinand (who was then fighting against the Protestants in
Germany) by Pope Urban? plenary Indulgences, hortatory Epistles, and dilatory
Excuses: Yet it is certain there never went in all the times above 200000
Crowns in ready money, and most of that was kept in the hands of the Nuntioes,
or Merchants; and whenever his Imperial Majesty demanded supply, he was
answered with pitiful Remonstrances, and tedious Representations of the
miserable Estate of the Church, the poverty of the people, and the emptiness of
their Treasury. However the Barbarini were in Rome at the same time, and
enjoyed an annual rent of 400000 Crowns, and yet in a War of that importance to
the Catholic Religion, they could not find above 40000. But oh God! (I speak
it with tears in my eyes) against the most Catholic Princes of Italy, whole
Millions were nothing; they could turn the Cross into a Sword, to revenge their
particular injuries; but in relief of the Emperor, who was vindicating the
Christian Faith against the Enemies thereof, they could not find so much as a
few Hundreds.

Innocent the tenth, to satisfy the fancy of a Kinswoman, spent a hundred
thousand Crowns upon a Fountain, yet with great difficulty could scarce find
40000 for the supply of the Emperor, who seeing himself abandoned by his
Holiness in his Wars with the Protestants, he was forced to patch up a Peace,
with no small disadvantage to the Catholic Religion. And yet this good Pope
could leave to his Cousin, to the House of Pamphilia, and other Houses allied
to that, above eight Millions of Crowns, with which sums they flourish in Rome
to this very day.

The same story is reported of the King of Poland, besieged as one may say by
the Protestants of that Kingdom, and brought to a necessity of lo^ing that
Crown from the Catholics, or the Catholic Religion from that Crown: And yet
for all this both Urban and Innocent thought of nothing less than relieving
him, because perhaps the Religion of the Nephews (which was nothing but riches
and honor) was dearer to him than the Religion of Christ. In short, (and let
those Parasites not prosper that write the contrary) the Church of God was
never so harrass'd in Poland and Germany, as in the time of those Popes. Not
that the Emperor wanted heart, or the King of Poland courage, but because they
saw the Pipes (that conveyed the Supplys formerly from Rome) broken and cut
off, and those two Popes resolved to spin out and protract the War, with bare
hopes of relief; that they might not bring the rest of the Catholics into an
extremity of misery, they concluded to leave the Church of Rome to its self,
and make the best use of their own policies, though to the prejudice of
Religion, seeing Rome took no care of the Church, nor the Popes of any thing
but their Nephews: He that has judgment, and zeal, and understands affairs,
let him correct me if I speak amiss.

But what shall I say of the Venetians, who have spent the dearest blood of
their Citizens in defense of the Faith, of Religion, of Christ, and even of the
Popes themselves, and yet many times for all that have they been deserted, and
persecuted by the Popes; of which ingratitude I shall not speak much in this
place, as hoping for the consolation of all zealous Catholics to publish ere
long a Book entitled, The ingratitude of Princes toward the sole Virgin of
Christendom.

This Republique, that for the Glory of God, and the Benefit of the Church,
undertook so memorable a War against the Emperor Frederick, and all to restore
the Vicar of Christ to the Apostolic Chair, out of which he had been chased,
could not notwithstanding obtain for the maintenance of its Armies employed
against the Enemies of Christianity, any thing but a pittance of supply drawn
by Prayers and Supplications, not from the purse of the Popes, who had sworn to
bestow all the Riches of the Church upon their Nephews, but from the tears of
the Ecclesiastics that were destroyed.

To that Republique that spent ten millions of Crowns and more, in two years
time for the Service of his Holiness in a War against Frederick the Emperor,
the Popes ought in all reason to have given at least two millions in ten years;
that those Senators that want neither courage, nor zeal, might have been
completely inabl'd to have defended the Interest of Christ. Oh God! to what
purpose will they keep so many Jewels at Loretto, so much consecrated Plate in
Rome, so many Abbeys for their Nephews, so many Benefices for the Cardinals, so
much Wealth for the Popes; if abandoning this Commonwealth, and refusing it
that Humane supply that is necessary for the maintenance of the Celestial
Glory, it be constrained to submit and truckle to the Ottoman power, which
threatens it now with its greatest effect. If the Wealth of the Popes be
devoured, the Benefices of the Cardinals given to the Priest of Mahomet, the
Abbeys of the Nephews usurped by the Turks, the Sacred Vessels in Rome
profaned by those Infidels, and the Seraglio adorned with the Gemms of
Loretto. God grant my eyes may never see that spectacle.

Against this, your zeal, most eminent Princes, against this you care, is to
watch. In our days (or rather) yours, we have seen the victorious Swede
entering into Germany to the great detriment of the Catholics, because the
Popes were pleased to have it so, that fatten'd up their Nephews with that
nourishment, that ought to have been reserved for the beating back the Swede to
the very walls of Stockholme. God grant, that for want of our utmost assistance
the Turk be not seen triumphing in the middle of Italy, nay of Rome it self.

The Ottoman Emperor knows very well that Popes think of nothing but shearing
the Flock of Christ, and giving the Wool to their Nephews; and this it is that
secures the Turk that little assistance is to be expected from the Popes, and
less from the Princes; concluding rationally enough, that the Princes will not
do much, when the Popes that are Christ's Vicars, do so little for his service.

The Infidels laugh, and the Heretics rejoice, to see the Wealth of the Church
so irreligiously devoured, whilst the poor Christian weeps at their merriment.
They know they are safe enough for having any more Leagues made against them;
and understand the emulations and dissentions amongst the Cardinals. The
Protestants are much more liberal of their utmost supplies to those Princes
that make War upon the Catholics, than the Popes are of their assistance to
those that fight against the Protestants: and from hence it is, the Turks are
so victorious over the Christians, and the Heretics over the Catholics at
this day. That heat and passion which the Popes show hourly for their Nephews;
to gain Principalities for them, to bestow Pension upon Pension upon them, to
build Palace upon Palace for them, and to fill their Coffers with Treasure to
the Brims, is that which cools the resolutions of the zealousest Prince, and
exasperates the Infidels in their wicked designs. A great shame it is indeed,
that the Heretics should have more ground to accuse the Catholics, than the
Catholic has to impeach the Heretic. And of this the Cardinals are obliged
seriously to consider, as persons thought worthy to be Members of that Sacred
Body, that is, the Natural Council of the Vicar of Christ.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART II.
BOOK II.
The Contents.
In which several particularities of the magnificence of the College of
Cardinals are treated. Of the manner in which the Popes have endeavored to
debase the Cardinalitial Majesty Of the ill usage Cardinal Astalli received of
Innocent the tenth. Of a remarkable saying of a certain Cardinal, upon the ill
usage the Cardinals receive from the Popes. Of certain Popes that have had
thoughts of increasing the number of Cardinals to a hundred, and the causes
that moved them thereunto. Of certain politic reasons, about this advancement,
and diminution. Of the causes why the Popes delay to make Promotions till
toward the latter end of their days. Of the reasons that moved Urban the
eighth to continue seven years without creating one Cardinal. Of the industry
of the Nephews in raising their Fortunes, and procuring wealth to their
Families. A parallel betwixt the Families of the Medici and Barbarini, in the
time that Florence was a Republic. Of the small esteem they had at Rome,
before the creation of Urban. Of the promotion of Francisco Barbarino to the
Cardinalship. Of the time that Urban alone governed the Monarchy of the Church.
Of the causes that moved him to leave the whole Dominion in the hands of his
Nephews. Of the natural inclination of the Romans to count all the Popes
Nephews Devils. Of the number of voices Cardinal Francisco had in one scrutiny.
Of the false opinion some people had, that Cardinal Francisco bought the Papacy
in the last Conclave, with the disbursment of a round sum of money. Of Cardinal
Ginetti, of the difference of his manners and inclinations, from Cardinal
Barbarino's. Of his immoderate covetousness. Of the Vicarship, and other
Benefices conferred upon him by Pope Urban the eighth. Of the number of Nephews
that he has, and of their virtues and vices. Of some particulars of Cardinal
d'Arach, and how little he was regarded in the Court of Rome. Of his zeal in
the reprehension of the iniquities of that Court, in their secret
Congregations. Of Cardinal Antonio Barbarino, and the reason why he was called
Romano. Of the Dignities conferred upon him before his Cardinalship. Of his
inclination toward Women. Of the prudence he used in defense of the French
Interest. Of the great severity Cardinal Palotta used in his administrations of
justice. Of his sentencing Cecca Buffona, a famous Courtezan, and Cardinal
Anthonio's Mistress, to be whipped. Of the animosities it begot, and the great
persecutions that followed thereupon. Of the dis-intere^t he showed toward the
Crowns. Of the manner how Cardinal Brancaccio obtained the Cap. Of a notable
saying of a witty man. Of the great number of his Kindred. Of the assiduity
wherewith Cardinal Carpegna was always ready to serve the Barbarini. Of his
humor that was something melancholy. Of one of his Brothers called Don Mario.
Of the difference betwixt the Youth, and the Age of Cardinal Durazzo. Of the
way by which he arrived at the Cardinalship. Of his affability in conversation,
and other particulars of his nature. Of his death. Of the advancement of Mr.
Julio Gabrielli, from being Clerk of the Chamber, to the Cardinalship. Of his
Bishopric of Ascoli, and his Legation from Urban. Of his nature, and his
ignorance in letters. Of the great merit of the House of Ursino, and the
promotion of Virginio Ursino to the Cardinalship. Of his protection of
Portugal, and the great ardour with which he defended the Interest of France.
Of the good life of Cardinal d' Este. Of his art in equivocating, and his
affability in conversation. Of Cardinal Facchinetti, and his reputation in the
College. Of Urbans promotion of Girolamo Grimaldi, a Genoese, to the
Cardinalship. Of the esteem they had for him in the Court of Rome, and in
Paris. Of Cardinal Rosetti, and his Negotiation into England. Of that which
exalted Cardinal Donghi to the Cardinalship, and of the reputation he got in
his Legation to Ferrara. Of the principal causes that moved the Pope to conferr
a Cap upon Monsignor Rondanini. Of the fortune Nicolo Ludovisi had to he
advanced to the Cardinalship, and other particulars of his nature. Of the
kindness Innocent had for the Cardinal Cibo, and of the esteem he had in the
Court for his good behavior. Of the great respect and reputation Cardinal
Sforza is in. Of his humor, that has more of a Soldier in it, than of a
Prelate. Of the Cap that was given to Cardinal Odescalco, upon the importunity
of Donna Olimpia, and of the opinion they have of him at the Court. Of the
promotion of Monsignor Raggi to the Cardinalship, of his comportment, and what
they thought of him at Court before his promotion. Of Cardinal Maldachini his
humor, his promotion, and other particulars of his life. Of the promotion and
Persecution of Cardinal Rhetz. Of the ambition Cardinal Homodei had for the
Cardinalship, and of his virtues. Of Cardinal Ottobuono, and his qualities. Of
the Cardinal Imperial, and his qualities. Of Cardinal Borromeo, and of his
promotion. Of Cardinal Santa Croce. Of the Cardinal d'Hassia. Of the Cardinal
Charles Barbarino. Of the Cardinal Spada. Of Cardinal Albici. Of Cardinal
Aquaviva. Of Cardinal Pio. Of Cardinal Gualtieri. Of Cardinal Azolini, and
several particulars of the Cardinals aforesaid. Of the number of Cardinals
created by Pope Urban the eight. Of the saying of a great Wit upon the number
of those Cardinals. Of the number of Cardinals created by Pope Innocent. Of the
principal end the Popes ought to have in the promotion of Cardinals. Of the
causes that render the Court of Rome so Majestic. Of the opinion of a Tuscan
Gentleman thereupon. Of the glory wherewith Innocent began his promotions. Of
the Cardinal Princes created by Innocent the tenth. Of the little inclination
Urban had for the creation of Cardinal Princes, and the disgust given to the
creatures of Paul the fifth. Of the zeal wherewith Alexander the seventh began
his Papacy. Of his intention at first to make many Cardinal Princes. Of the
discourse he held thereupon with his Domestiques. Of the power given to Signour
Majetta Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy. Of the misery the College is in at
this present, for not having a greater number of Cardinal Princes. Of the great
pleasure the Popes take at the news of the death of any Cardinal. Of the
Cardinals that are created by the Douzanes, and obliged to follow the interest
of the Nephews. Of the cause why the Cardinal Princes do wear the Purple, and
of the great honor to receive it.

THE Magnificence of the Cardinalitial College is so great, and its splendour
so immense, the Cardinals themselves could not wish it to be greater. The
respect and observance that is paid them, is very little different from what is
given to Kings, and in some things they exceed the condition of Princes. Yet
the Grandeur of the Sacred College would have been much greater, if (after its
first institution, or at least after the multitude of Prerogatives conferred
upon it by so many several Popes, by whom it has been enriched) it had
maintained and continued its ancient virtue and decorum. But I know not how it
is come to pass, that the Popes either repenting that they had raised the
Cardinals to so high a pitch of magnificence, or that they did not regard (as
it is too likely) the pulique benefit of the Church, postponing it to their own
private interests. It is sufficient that they have endeavored not the
conservation or advancement of the Cardinalitial Majesty, but the abasement and
destruction of it, and that two several ways, but one much more pernicious
than the other.

The first is, in having admitted into the College persons of mean extraction,
and of as little virtue, with which they are not able to cover in the least the
baseness of their birth, for certainly it would be a less evil, had they either
virtue or learning to atone for their natural defects. Nor would this be so
despicable and dishonorable for the reputation of the College, were the Caps
given only to persons of mean extraction, but the worst is, they are conferred
upon most infamous persons, abounding with all wickedness and mischief, and
perhaps fitter for the Galleys, than the College.

The second is, that the same Popes (who with so many Bulls and Ordinances have
ing^andiz'd the College) either forgetful of their former policy, or blinded
by some Mundane passion, have for a certain time past given themselves over to
lessen and abuse them, as has been many times seen, not only in the times of
Paulus quartus, and Sexi^s quintus, and other Popes; but in the milder and more
moderate days of Innocent the tenth, who upon a single relation (whether true
or false) received by Azoleni, against the person of Cardinal Astalli (as shall
be related in its proper place) without process, or information, nay I may say
without any offense, prejudicial to the Church, or scandalous to the Court, he
used the said Cardinal Astalli so ill, he could not have used the greatest
Rogue or Criminal worse; to which may be added the same usage that Cardinal
Anthonio received from the same Pope.

And after this manner it is, that the Cardinalitial dignity is brought into
great obscurity by the Popes themselves, which serves as an example likewise to
the greater Princes, who seeing the Cardinals handled at that rate by the
Popes, they in time take their opportunities to entrench upon their authority,
and usurp upon them, inspight of all the clatter of Rome. Insomuch that there
are some Cardinals ashamed as it were of their Purples, to see themselves
subjected to the insolences of mean persons, that for the most part are they
that are advanced to the Papacy. To this purpose I remember, that one day two
Cardinals of great judgment, talking together about the above said ill usage
of the Cardidinal of Rhetz in France, the elder of them, told the other, That
it is better to be abused by a great Monarch, than a great Clown. Nor is this
dignity ambitioned by Princes to add honor to their birth, but only because it
is the office of the Cardinals as I have said before, to make election of their
Popes. For this reason the greatest Monarchs are glad to have them their
friends, and to oblige them with large pensions, which custom was introduced by
the Spaniards, amongst whom it is practiced with more liberality; that the
Popes may thereby be made the more inclinable to their party. There have been
some Popes that have had it in design, to incraase the number of Cardinals,
from seventy to a hundred, according to the example of Romulus the founder of
Rome, who elected a hunhred persons, the most excellent in the whole City, and
called them Fathers.

But the Popes of this Age, who are so taken up, and devoted to the interest of
their private Families, would with more readiness reduce, than increase them,
in respect of the great reverences that are requisite to the dignity they
possess, it being necessary they should leave some considerable subsistence to
persons obliged to live in Pomp and Grandeur. Yet the augmentation of their
number would be more advantage, because if their number was greater, the more
frequent would their promotions be, and by consequence they would be the more
able to create more creatures to for their Families and Nephews, which is the
only thing their Holinesses think on.

But on the other side, if things be considered more nearly, the smaller the
number of the Cardinals is, the better for the Purse of the Nephews, for by
that means they receive the profits of all vacancies, the Popes not making a
promotion, but with a great deal of trouble, whilst they bestow all the vacant
Rents of the Cardinals upon their Nephews* who knowing very well there can be
no better supply than ready money, they part with any thing that may furnish
them with that. However they are zealously industrious to get whatever they
can; the Popes whilst they are vigorous and strong, and free from infirmities
and diseases, do keep their Cardinalships vacant and unsupply'd, drawing the
whole profits to themselves; but when they find themselves sick, or in
extremity, they fill them up immediately, as Urban the eight did, who for seven
years together did not create one Cardinal; but afterward, toward the latter
end of his Papacy, he created fifteen at one Ordination, and eleven at another.
And Alexander the seventh, would have put it off likewise to the last; yet the
truth is, he left not the Sacred College long unsupply'd, because he had no
other way to fortify and sustain his own Family, but by augmenting the number
of Cardinals with his own creatures.

But it is time now we discourse something of the qualities, merits, customs
and adherences of all the Cardinals, to give the greater perfection to our
Cardinalism, and the greater light and illustration to the Reader, by
consideration of the natures and humors of all them that make up the
Apostolical College, which are in all sixty eight, viz. of the creatures of
Urban, sixteen, of Innocent the tenths, twenty, and of Alexanders, thirty two
(of Clement the ninths addition we shall speak in its proper place) and to
avoid confusion, we shall proceed according to the order of preceedence,
beginning with the creatures of Urban, amongst whom FRANCISCO BARBARINO
presents himself first to our consideration.

This Cardinal is at present Dean of the Sacred College, to which dignity he
arrived after the death of Cardinal Carlo de Medici, Uncle to the Great Duke.
I shall not enlarge my self here by the description of the Family of the
Barbarini, which considered in the time when Florence was a Republique,
appeared to be equal, and in competition with the house of Medici, that had the
preceedence of them all, which Family, increasing in Riches and Grandeur, and
growing by degrees to the Supremacy in command, the other could not brook the
Tyranny of the Medici's, but dispersed his branches here and there, and
particularly in Rome; where Maffeo Barbarino being made Cardinal, Francisco,
and Anthonio, two Brothers, and Sons of the said Maffeo's Brother, were put to
study in a certain College, in which, the esteem they had of them was so
small, that the Sons of Artificers would scarce give them the place, especially
to Francisco, who was so little known, so ill shaped, and of so unrefin'd a
wit, they could not believe him to be the Nephew of a Cardinal who was witty
and judicious indeed, but otherwise fit for any thing else than to make a Pope.

Fortune notwithstanding, who sports her self with whom she pleases, disposed
things in that manner, that she rendered Cardinal Maffeo worthy of that
dignity, in spite of the whole College (if it be lawful for me to say so) who
little thought of making such a man Pope as was inducd with so arrogant and
haughty a mind. No sooner therefore was Maffeo leaped into the Vatican by the
name of Urban, but he promoted Francisco to the dignity of a Cardinal in the
very first Consistory, which was in the year 1623. on the second of October,
with the Title of Saint Onofrio first, and then of Saint Agata, to the wonder
of all those that would have thought it an injury to him, should they have said
that he was in so short a time to leap over their heads. And Pope Urban
understanding how unfit this Nephew was for Council, how little read in
politic affairs, and in the interest of the Court, he kept him a while from
the management of business, and did not suffer him to be present at any debate;
and under the Title of Master of his Chamber, he gave him Monsignour Filo
Marini to be his Tutor and Governor, which Filo Marini had served the said
Urban in the same Character of Maestro di Camera.

But it was not possible for Barbarino to submit himself to the Tutelage of
Filo Marini, although he was but three and twenty years of age, he avoided not
only his Councels as much as he could, but his Conversation and Company, having
conceived so great an aversion to his person, that forgetting all the services
he had done him, he endeavored to hinder his exaltation to the Cardinalship: a
few months after he gave Filo Marini to understand that he should not take too
much upon him, or behave himself as his Schoolmaster, for he had judgment
enough to govern himself and other people too. And indeed he began to govern
after his own fancy, and with so much insolence, that he little regarded the
displeasure either of the Court, or his Uncle, who to satisfy his pride and
ambition, gave him the quality of Cardinal Padrone, that was never known in
Rome before, nor usurped by any Nephew of the Popes.

About the same time Urban created Anthonio Brother to the said Francisco
Cardinal, and sent both of them his Legates a Latere, Francisco into Spain, and
Anthonio into France, one of them taking upon him the protection of one
Kingdom, and the other of the other. Francisco obtained much more in Spain,
than Anthonio did in France, returning with great presents and pensions, and
with an affection wholly devoted to the service of that King, whom he
afterward always observed with much more punctuality, than Anthonio did the
French King.

For the space of ten years Urban governed all the Dominions of the Church, as
well Spiritual as Temporal alone, in which time he got the reputation of being
one of the most renowned Popes that ever was in the Vatican, not permitting his
Nephews to thrust themselves into any business, till they had twice received
his commands from his own mouth; so that the Cardinal Barbarino, who had the
Title of Padrone, could not dispose of so much as one flower in the Garden of
the Vatican without his Unckles knowledge; but the ten years being expired, and
Urban growing infirm, and overlay'd with so many cares, and diseases, Francisco
began to lift up his head, and to take the whole Government of the Church into
his hands, and to manage it with great Magistery and Dominion. But this
absoluteness of his, brought him no small disrepute, for thereby he palpably
disgusted all the Princes of Christendom, even the King of Spain himself, upon
his own private Capriccio, opposing the Abbot Perretti's having a Cap, though
that King did earnestly desire it.

But in this, Barbarino showed his great policy, revenging himself for a long
time of Perretti, and preventing his having the Cap so cunningly, that the King
had not the least shadow of suspicion that it was he, but believed the fault to
proceed rather from another.

However this I shall say, that had not the Papacy of Urban been so long,
Francisco had not had so many occasions of disgusting the Princes, he having
otherwise qualities worthy of a Pope, both in respect of his Learning, his
Prudence, and the Candor of his Converse, which (though some people conceived
to be counterfit and forced) I could never imagine, he having given so many
evident proofs to the contrary. The truth is, it being the nature of the Romans
to look upon the Nephews as so many Devils, though they be never so good men
(which notwithstanding happens but seldom) Francisco could not during the
Pontificate of his Uncle obtain the least air of reputation, unless from the
common people, in respect of the great alms that were given them, not only from
his own house, but from the Coffers of the Church.

Innocent the tenth, a sworn Enemy of the house of Barbarini, endeavored to
debase it, and reduce it to its primitive State; so that not contented with the
process made against Anthonio, he would needs take out new against Francisco,
but there were not so many Articles against this, as against the other. However
this persecution proved at last to the glory of the Barbarini, Pope Innocent
recalling them from their Banishment in France, he made an alliance with them,
and made use of them in the management of his principal affairs so much, that
in his time Francisco began to get great credit, reconciling himself to all the
Princes, and to the College of Cardinals, so that after the death of the said
Innocent, he wanted but little of leaping into the Vatican, having received in
several Scrutinies, thirty four voices or more.

Certainly, considered as a private person, this Cardinal deserves so much
praise, as is not possible to describe; he is reckoned of so immaculate and
untainted a virtue, that he is by many people supposed to be a Virgin, and
indeed I never heard the least scandal or aspersion upon his Chastity, he being
always a great Enemy of all sort of scandal.

His manners were of that uprightness and integrity, that all those gifts that
Saint Paul recommended to the Pastors of the Church, were applicable to him.
There was never the least Oath or Blasphemy known to come out of his mouth; and
if at any time he chanced to be transported with anger, he was never so far
overcome, as to be carried out of his road of Modesty, for which he had always
a great value, abroad, as well as in his own Court. There is not a day but he
performs his Divine Offices, as well of Charity as Devotion, and so frequently,
and so devoutly visits the Church, that he makes all people believe him a Saint.

Amongst all his Virtues, his Charity toward his Neighbor is most
conspicuous, he relieves very liberally, not only those whose necessities are
visible to every one, but such as are privately in misery, giving several
largesses of Alms to the Widows, and Fatherless, and such poorer Families, as
being ashamed to beg, are wont to starve betwixt four walls, before they can
ask.

In short, these works of Piety in him have so captivated the affections of the
people, that it is verily believed, were the Election now in them, they would
pull the present Pope out of the Vatican, to put Francisco in his place. But if
we consider him as a Prince, his qualities are much different from his
qualities as a private person, and I believe in those, few Cardinals can
compare with him. In his irresolution he had no Peer, being so much unresolved,
he can scarce be brought to a resolution after very long debates: his fear lest
things should not succeed well, keeps him in so great a suspense, that he
forgets still to come to a conclusion. He believes no man so wise as himself,
and therefore can hardly be brought to take advice from any body else, and if
he does, he spoils all commonly with his arguments thereupon.

The weakness of his judgment does not suffer him to undertake great matters,
so that he always endeavors to oppose them that would, contrary to his
Brother Cardinal Anthonio, whose judgment is so strong, that it is an easy
matter for him to believe the whole world may be put into his hands: besides,
if at any time he has taken an impression of any thing, whether good or bad,
into his mind, which indeed happens but seldom; the power of God only is able
to remove it, and not the Council of man. His love to his Family is so great,
that he advances them as if he Idolized them, and thinks them impeccable, even
at the same time he sees them offending.

But all this would be nothing, were he not overruled by a great desire of
revenge, as being an implacable Enemy to all that he hates: however he is no
Hypocrite to his Enemies, for he carries that malice always in his brow, that
is rooted in his heart. Notwithstanding all this, the defects that he has as a
Prince, are obscured by his virtues as a private person, with which virtues he
has so effascinated the hearts of the Court, that he is generally thought
worthy of the Apostolic Chair.

There are four things considerable in him, and capable to advance him to the
Throne of the Vatican.

The first, is the affection of the people, purchased as I have said by so many
actions of Charity, that they do firmly believe he would not fail to find out
some expedient, to ease the people of those grievances in which they are so
miserably involved.

The second, is his long practice and experience in public affairs, there
being not one Cardinal to be found more skillful in the Intrigues of governing
the Church; in the time of his Uncle, he Governed all, and in the time of
Innocent, he did it further, who toward the latter end brought him into no
small reputatation, and though he had had some slips when he was Cardinal
Padrone, and disobliged several Princes, however it is now believed, being
advanced in years, he will administer with greater maturity and judgment.

The third, is the great Wealth of the Family of the Barbarini, besides vast
sums of money lying by them, so as this argument of E^ecting a Pope, whose
Family has no need of greater supplies, as being already on the Pinnacle of
Felicity, may perhaps induce the Cardinals to exalt him, to stop the mouths of
all Christendom which murmures incessantly against the Popes, who for the
inrichment of their Families, give themselves over to the destruction of the
Church.

In short, if the Chair were vacant, his pretentions would probably bring it
happily about, especially if with his infinite wealth, and above all, with his
ready money, he should resolve to follow the example of Alexander the seventh,
a most barbarous and abominable Pope, that made it lawful, at a very dear rate
to purchase the voices of the Cardinals; and this infamous Merchandising, was
by many people believed to be shut up in this last Conclave; but it has been
found clear contrary by all people, and but the invention of false and
malignant tongues, to pollute the reputation of the Barbarini, and the
Conclave; such a thing being not to be believed in honesty, or piety (reasons
of too weak foundation when a Kingdom is the price) or rather because Barbarino
is studious of appearing as he is, would not, nor never will, by so foul an
action, defile the luster of his Virtues.

And there wants not another way for him to make his utmost attempt, and that
is, by endeavoring to get the Chigi to his side, that they may cooperate with
the rest of his Creatures, the Spaniards being with him already, or at least
not against him; but observing new rubs in his way, he betook himself to his
Politics, and prevailed to have the Papacy thrown upon Rospigliosi, that is
older and more infirm than he, as not despairing but he may outlive him, and
have a new push with his pretenses; but I will say as another man did.

Evecchio Barbarino, ed e Decano, Dean Barbarino is an ancient man, Ma e troppo
d^ro, e saria gran fortuna, It Is hard, and would be strange, if ere he can
Calcar due volte il soglio Vaticano. Twice get possession of the Vatican.

GINETTI is the next in order of preceedence to Barbarino, a person in his
converse, and inclination, different from him to a wonder, there being no
conformity betwixt them, but in the integrity of their lives, and the
irreprehensible preservation of their Chastity, both of them being believed to
be Virgins. For other things, Ginetti contrary to Barbarino, would be a good
Prince, as loving good Council without an obstinate adhaesion to his own
opinion, a great enemy to Revenge, and a friend to all good Resolution.

But on the other side, as a private person, he is very unfit in many respects,
but especially for his extraordinary Avarice, for which he is called by an
Antonomasia il Giud^o, a vice that is, and will be much to his prejudice,
having already rendered him ungrateful to all good people, and subject to many
falsities and lies: and it may be said very truly, that this height and
extravagance of Covetousness, has twice snatched the Papacy out of his hands.
That Cardinals not thinking it possible he can be a good Prince that is so
polluted with a desire of gain, though otherwise of very great virtues and
endowments.

He was born in the City of Velletri, the Son of a Merchant* of but small
fortune, yet very industrious in the acquisition of Wealth, and trading in
trifles, so he might but turn the Penny; and from him it was Ginetti learned
his Covetousness, and proved his Fathers own Son.

His name of Martio, made him never the more Martial, his inclinations bending
him to Peace and not War, to idleness rather than labor; and finding the
scarcity in his own house not agreeing with his desires, he came to Rome, and
took upon him the Ecclesiastical Habit, as proper to conceal the defects of his
nature; and it fell out very well, for after he had courted certain Cardinals,
he gave himself wholly to the service of the Barbarini, serving Cardinal
Francisco, as he would have him himself, and with as much humility as was
possible. And Barbarino well satisfied with his service, and approving the
intireness of his dependence upon his Beck, made him be created a Cardinal,
that he might be sure of one that would be true to his interest. And Urban
moreover, that he might stick the closer to his Family, declared him his Vicar
in Rome, which is a considerable charge; and for life, he gave him several
other Benefices likewise, and great authority in the Apostolical Palace, and
made him Protector of the Order of the Carmelits besides.

Urban also would needs have him acknowledged amongst the Princes, but it is
most certain he had better have suffered him to have staid in Rome, than to
have sent him his Legate into Germany to negotiate an universal peace amongst
the Princes, seeing that Legation turned to his perpetual dishonor, by reason
that he addicted himself more to the interest of his own Family, than of
Christendom; but that which is most strange is, that at his return (as if to
do the Church ill service, was to merit reward) he was declared Legate of
Ferrara, where for three years time he heaped up much wealth, and transacted
underhand with the Jews themselves, and all to leave his Kindred rich, if he
should dye before he arrived at the Popedom: he having not omitted any thing
imaginable to advance them to diverse offices, and civilize that rusticity that
was natural to them.

The affection he has for his Family, and the desire he has to advance them
both in Honor and Wealth, though in him it be very exorbitant, yet it is a
fault rather of the age, than of his person particularly: for in the Sacred
College at this very time (by the secret judgment of God perhaps) there is
scarce one person to be found that is not overwhelmed with that abominable
Vice, and would not be glad to see the whole Treasure of the Church in his
private Coffers.

Ginetti has three Nephews, and two Neeces, the elder that is a Prelat, helps
much toward the expiation of his Unckles miserableness, by the luster of his
own liberality; he is Chierico di Camera, and in his inclinations as bountiful,
as his Uncle is sordid, noble in his conversation, studious, intelligent in
matters of Law, and not ignorant in Politics, and the art of Government; so
that many believe the Papacy would be very happy in the hands of Ginetti,
because this Nephew would be as it were chief Minister, and ma^e good the
defects of his Uncle.

The other Nephew is a Prelat likewise, and in his nature resembles his Uncle,
but not in his ablities; for that reason he is not much considered, every one
being satisfied, that though his Uncle should be elected Pope, he would never
make much use of such a man as he.

The third is a Secular, an honest man, but of very small parts, however his
Uncle is pleased that he has married him into the Family of Emilio Cavalieri,
forasmuch as great Alliances carry no small advantages along with them.

What to presage of him further I cannot tell, because he is fourscore and two
years of age, and the Pope that was made not above three months since, is but
seventy: and yet it happens many times the Lamb dies before the Sheep; but
though they have leaped over his head twice already, he may live to be leaped
over again, though the Spaniard be his friend, he having always carried
himself with great circumspection toward him, and the Barbarini must
acknowledge him their constant creature.

If he should live to see another Conclave, in respect of his great age, he
might possibly have a great party, though otherwise his extravagant parsimony
would be no small impediment; for it may be said with Pasquin;

Ecco che nella giostra entra Ginetto, Ginetto for the Popedom (like a Dog)
Grave d'eta, ne sperarebbe in va^o, Does wait, nor would he meet with any clog,
Se il Consistoro sifac^sse al Ghetto. Were but the Consist'ry a Synagogue.

ERNESTO ALDALBERTO d'ARACH, a Dutchman, troubles himself not much with the
Court of Rome, for diverse reasons, but especially because he finds the Romans
to have as little regard for him; not but they have an opinion of his merits,
but because he observes his Country to be almost always infested with wars and
troubles, so that every time he appears in Rome, he fills them with a thousand
jealousies and suspicions; and therefore with great prudence he keeps himself
at a distance, and never comes to Rome, but upon a Vacancy, and then only to
keep up the interest of the Emperor, to whom he has always been a most
affectionate Subject, and not ungrateful for the benefits he has received.

He was a Priest at the time Pope Urban the eight conferred the Cap upon him at
the instance of the Emperor, to whom he had done so many transcendant
services, that he seemed obliged to advance him to a Cardinalship, there being
nobody more worthy, both in respect of the greatness of his parts, and the
goodness of his life; which qualities, gained him the Archbishopric of Prague
also; which office he exercises so well, that the people adore him, all Nations
reverence him, and the Germans acknowledge him a person of great Morality and
Virtue.

He has a great aversion to the artifices and dissimulations of the Court of
Rome, and in the last Consistory for Clement the ninth, it astonished some of
the Cardinals that were present, and had their residence in Rome, to hear with
what frankness and integrity, he reprehended (in their private Congregations)
those iniquities that afflict the Court, and are a scandal to the Church.

This Cardinal in his converse is very affable, and familiar with every body;
he is very generous to his Servants, and no less charitable to the poor. He was
promoted in the year 1626. the 19. o^ January.

ANTONIO BARBARINO, a Floretine, is Brother to Cardinal Francisco, is
Chamberlain of the Holy Church, has an infinite number of Abbeys, and
Protections of Orders, and is Archpriest of Santa Maria Maggiore; he was born
in Rome, and for that reason was called Romano. His Uncle made him Prior and
Grand Croce di Malta; not being willing to violate the Decrees of the Popes,
who do expressly forbid the making of two Brothers Cardinals.

But Antonio being impatienty ambitious of a Cap, solicited his Uncle so
earnestly, that he declared him Cardinal in the year 1628. though Francisco was
not pleased with his preferment, and privately opposed it as much as he could.
Great were the employments Pope Urban conferred upon Antonio, being much
pleased with the gallantry and generosity of his deportment; he was declared
Generalissimo in the States of Bolonia, Ferrara, and Romania, against the
Venetian, the Great Duke of Tuscany, of Parma, and Modena, and behaved himself
very honorably in his charge; but the people that were sa^^ated with the
Government of the Barbarini, and looked upon that War with an ill eye, and as
an affliction both to their Bodies and Souls, approved not the manner of his
proceedings, though in truth he knew well enough how to manage his affairs.

The great inclination he has had to women, has been no small blem^sh to his
reputation, nevertheless he knew how to wash out that stain. At first he was a
great Enemy to learning, but he is since grown a great lover, and protector of
it.

Splendor and Generosity are so natural to him, he has gained off several
creatures from other persons, by his liberality and magnificence, and although
in the the opinion of the people he be fallen into some errors, yet he is so
far from being hateful, he is exceedingly grateful to the people of Rome.

He uses great prudence in defending the interest of France, to which Crown he
is infinitely obliged; he speaks of the French with very great respect, but so,
as to give no just offense to the Spaniard. Though he receives great emoluments
from France, yet he spends much more than he receives in regaling the French.

GIO. BATTISTA PALLOTTA of Cald^rola in the Province of Marca, is the Nephew of
the late Cardinal Pallotta, who left him not only his Estate, which was great,
but his Maxims also: and a certain austere way of proceeding, in his
distribution of Justice.

The house of Pallotta deduces its nobility no further, than from the dignity
of these two Cardinals, and particularly of him that is living, who had
Benefices and dignities conferred on him, as soon as he had taken the
Ecclesiastical Habit upon him. Urban the eight loved him so well, he thought
him a proper person to do the Church good Service, and therefore, as it were in
the beginning of his Papacy, he declared him Governor of the City of Rome, in
which office he gained the affection of the whole City, exercising all things
impartially, without respect of persons, not regarding so much as the Nephews
themselves; which was evident enough, when he ordered Cecca Buffona (a famous
Courtezan, and very dear to to Cardinal Antonio) to be whipped thorough Rome*
Cecca Buffona believed, under the protection of that Cardinal, she might do
what she pleased, so that she made no scruple to transgress against a severe
order of the Governor Pallotta, but he was not long in revenging it; and that
he might do it with the less trouble, and impediment, he charged his Servants,
that for the space of two hours, nobody should be introduced to his Cabinet,
where he shut himself up, whilst justice was executing upon her. Cardinal
Antonio having the news of her Imprisonment, dispatched a Gentleman to
Pallotta, who was very civilly entertained by his Domestics, till the two
hours were expired, and then he being brought into the presence of Pallotta,
presented him with an order from the Cardinal Antonio, for the immediate
enlargement of the Prisoner Cecca; Pallotta replied, his Eminence was his
Padrone, and without more ado, gave order for her dismission. He arrived with
his order at the Prison, just as the Officer brought her back from being
whipped, which put the Cardinal into such a rage, he swore he would be
revenged. Pallotta owned all to his Holiness, who was well pleased with the
action; but knowing well his Nephews humor, to prevent any mischief he might
contrive against Pallotta he sent him in the quality of Collettore into
Portugal, where in the maintenance of some Punctilio of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, he excommunicated the Royal Council of the City of Lisbon; who
sending their Officers to carry him to Prison, he was forced to leap out of a
window to escape, with no small danger of breaking his neck: and so posting to
Rome, a few months after his arrival, he was promoted to the Cardinalship, in
spite of Cardinal Antonio, who did his utmost to prevent it.

But his promotion notwithstanding did not secure him against persecution, for
he did not only meet with many troubles, and affronts, during the time of Pope
Urban, by means of Cardinal Antonio, who studied day and night which way to do
him an injury; but was forced likewise to retire out of Rome in the Papacy of
Innocent the tenth, by the contumelyes he received from Donna Olimpia, incensed
against him for being one of those that endeavored her expulsion. His great
zeal not enduring to see a woman domineering in the Vatican.

In the Congregations, and Consistories, his judgment is as much regarded as
any man's, nay even by the Barbarini his professed Enemies themselves: his
conversation is pleasant, his life Angelical, and retired from all vain company.

He is inclined to do good to all people; there is no body comes to him, but he
goes satisfied away; he gives his Letters of recommendation very freely,
provided it be not to restrain the hand of Justice; in that case he by no means
concerns himself for any one, nor will hinder the course of Justice that is
always to be free.

In his Legation of Ferrara he gained the ill will of the Venetian, by some
controversies that they had, but certainly they had no reason to complain of
him, because he upon all occasions speaks well of them: For the Crowns indeed
he shows no great concern, as shunning all occasions of giving jealousy either
to the one or the other: yet it is generally believed he is inclining to the
Spanish party. He is more feared than beloved in the Court; he is a man of
great integrity, and irreprehensible in his conversation. In his transactions
he is something too long and irresolute, and too much given to the affairs of
the Friars: Not only his Lodgings, but his Palace is perpetually full of
Solicitors, in private affairs as well as public; and it is believed by every
body, that if he were Pope, he would go very far in the reformation of the
Friars.

But this tediousness and delay in his affairs, may be excused by a certain
abhorrence, and impatience of idleness that he has in his nature, that spurs
him on to be doing, though it be never so little, and raises him business out
of every trifle. Yet were his employments greater, he would appear no less
resolute than he was in his Government of Rome. For my part I think him not
likely to come to the Papacy, and that out of chastisement to the People, that
are not worthy of so good a Pope; for this I dare affirm, that in the whole
College of Cardinals there are not any more deserving the Chair than Pallotta,
Farnese, and Elci, for their integrity, justice, love of the people, for their
impartiality, and that they are not lovers of their Kindred; only Pallotta is
seventy years old, and were it not for the Gout wherewith he is often
tormented, he would be very healthful and strong.

FRANCISCO MARIA BRANCACCIO is a great Lord, and Knight of Nido in Naples,
which is as much as to say, one of the principal Nobility. He received the Cap
from Urban the eighth, at a time when he little expected it, and was created,
more in despite of the Spaniard, than for any merits of his own; for they
going about to violate some of the Immunities of the Church, Brancaccio
undertook to defend them, and caused the Captain of a Company of Spanish Foot,
that was over-active against him, to be shot. The Spaniards resenting much the
death of their Captain, (who was Nephew to the President of that Province) sent
out immediately to take the Cardinal (that was then Bishop of Carpasio)
Prisoner; but he to avoid the violence of the Kings Officers, escaped by night,
and arrived safely at Rome, where within certain months he was made Cardinal,
and gave occasion to a witty person to say, That he who kills one Spaniard is
made a Cardinal, and he that kills two a Pope.

Urban did this to animate the rest of the Prelates against the Spaniards, and
one there was that attempted in the same nature, but he was clapped in Prison,
and came not out but with his heels forward. Brancaccio is a great Lord,
moderately generous, but irresolute and inconstant.

He loves Learning well enough, but gives not much countenance to learned men;
he is a good Lawyer, and sustains only such causes as are equitable and just,
which makes him to be thought worthy of the Papacy, though his excessive
kindness to his Kindred, makes him not take the right way to attain it.

The number of his Relations is infinite; for the House of the Brancaccio is so
numerous, and divided into so many several Families in that Kingdom, as will
supply (upon occasion of his Exaltation) all the Charges and Dignities of the
Church. So as should he live to see another vacancy, there would be but little
hopes for him, the Spaniards having no great affection for him, though they
pretend to be reconciled; and besides he has but a very small party of his own.
He is about 69 years of age, much addicted to his pleasures, and too frequent
at Balls and Comedies, though his age takes him off very much.

VLDERIGO CARPEGNA of Vrbino, in regard of his Nobility, has some small respect
in his own Country, but his poverty obscures it; and to the end he might not
always remain so, he devoted himself with great assiduity to the service of
the Barbarini: and they to remunerate his services, and add another Creature
of their to the College, got him created Cardinal in the year 1633. the 28. of
November.

He is a great lover of Learning, and Learned men; he is a good man, of an
exemplary life, but his parts not extraordinary; in affairs of State he is
competently well practiced, but the best is, he knows well enough he is not the
most experienced man in the World, and therefore hearkens very readily to other
peoples counsel, as having wit and judgment sufficient, to choose and select
the most proper for his own affairs.

His humor is something melancholy, but without asperity or moroseness,
speaking always kindly to every body; to the poor he is very charitable, and
would be more, if his Estate would bear it.

His complexion is weak, and his age about seventy: He is a most partial
Friend to the Great Duke and his Family, who would govern all in case of his
exaltation to the Papacy: And the truth is, the Barbarini and the Grand Duke
have endeavored his exaltation to the utmost in the Conclave of Chigi, but in
this last there was no great mention of him, because there were no Cardinals of
the House of Medici to promote his interest.

He has a Brother called Comte Mario, a name not at all acceptable in Rome, for
Don Mario Chigi's sake, though he be of a humor clearly different; for this
Count is of a good nature, and a profound judgment, so that were his Brother
Pope, it is probable he would have the Government of all things. But if the
Chair should come to be vacant, I know not what to say of him, he having
nothing to recommend him but his being a Cardinal, nor nothing to support him
but the Grand Duke; so as I shall say of him as they did in the last Conclave,
Carpegna c'ha una debil complessione Carpegna's of a weak complexion, Si tien
spedito, perch questa volta And may despair of his Election, Li Medici non
fanno ordinatione. Since Medici give no direction.

STEPHANO DVRAZZO, was born in Genoa, of a Noble Family, and considerable
amongst the greatest and most ancient in that State, though his Order be but
modern; his youth and his age were very different, for he may pray with all the
reason in the world, Delicta juvent^tis mea, and ignorantias meas ne memineris
Domine.

And indeed before he was Cardinal, that is whilst he was a Prelate only, he
regarded nothing but his pleasures, and indulging his Genius, playing from
morning to night very often at Cards and other recreations, both with men and
women, but especially with women, his nature inclining him more particularly to
that sex; in so much that whilst he was young and under thirty, he was more
than once or twice constrained to kiss the Holy Cross, and keep Lent with
Biscuit and hard Eggs only; nor can he now he is old number the money that he
has spent upon Ladies, and Luxury.

But as soon as he was made a Cardinal, he altered his humor so much, that it
may be said, there are very few equal to him, in the unblamableness and
devotion of his present life. As soon as he took upon him the Ecclesiastic
habit, he bought the Office of Chierico di Camera, and a while after that of
Tesoriere Generale Apostolico; but he enjoyed that but a short time, for the
Barbarini that they might have it to ^ell to another, made Durazzo a Cardinal,
and as report goes at this day in Rome, there was a Present extraordinary in
the case.

Urban the eighth having no mind he should be idle, gave him employments good
store, and particularly he made him Legate of Bolonia, in which Office he
deported himself so well, he gained the universal affection of the people. But
the Nobility looked not so kindly upon him, because when Justice was in action
he considered not the difference of degrees. He was likewise Legate of Ferrara,
but he staid not his full time there, being obliged to give place to Cardinal
Antonio, during the Wars with the Princes of Italy; so that he retired to his
Archbishopric of Genoa, from whence he seldom came forth unless it were to the
Conclave.

There is nobody, but he perhaps could have told how to have disintangled
himself from those many difficulties he met with in that Archiepiscopacy; he
having upon sundry occasions disobliged the Senate. In his Conversation he is
affable, but not always of the same humor; so that oftentimes the best way is
to comply with that, and they that know how to do it, obtain what they please
themselves.

He is accessible enough, but not too liberal to the poor, especially for a
person of his fortune. He has not been over happy in the Election of his
Vicars, there having been some of them that have served him very ill. He seems
to interest himself zealously for the Crown of Spain; but when it comes to an
Election of the Pope, he does no great matter, which makes some people of
opinion, he is for the French at his heart. If he has had hitherto any thoughts
of being Pope, having past the seventy fifth year of his age, I imagine he has
laid them by now. In the last Scrutiny he had seventen voices, and had he had
thirty more, it is probable he might have carried it. But I shall speak no more
of him, for at this very time* when I am concluding the aforesaid particulars,
I have news that he died the tenth of July; God Almighty send him peace, for he
has left a great number of Masses for his Soul.

GIVLIO GABRIELLI a Roman, from the Chiericatura di Camera, was advanced to the
Cardinalitial dignity without any merits of his own, only the good disposition
of Urban would have it so; and the Nephews were resolved to sell his place to
another.

He was made Bishop of Ascoli a while after, nobody else being to be found that
would accept it, because it was so unreasonably overcharged with Pensions. But
he ventured on it, merely that he might have his residence out of Rome;
according to the judgment of many, believing, that the less a Cardinal is
present at Court, the more likely he is to arrive at the Papacy; he is a true
Roman, when he has a mind to discover himself freely, (which he does but
seldom) he uses great variety of Complements, which at first were looked upon
as very great instances of his goodness by some persons, but since it has been
generally known, that it was only to imitate and revive the Modes of Innocent
the tenth, they have for the most part changed their opinion.

In the time that he was Legate of Vrbin, under the Government of Urban the
eight, he showed no small rapacity, or (to give it a milder name) avidity; so
it is, by his parsimony, and other ways, he has known how to enrich his own
Family vastly, and would do it more, should it come into the Cardinals heads
but to make him Pope; but I see no great probability of that now, for Clement
the ninth, that is but lately Elected, is a year younger than Gabrielli, and
will scarce leave him his place so soon. It is true, he has the Spaniard on his
side, with whom he holds correspendence; but for the future it is supposed his
intelligence may be greater with the French, in respect of an alliance he
pretends to have with the Cardinal Vandome.

He has many other noble Kindred, as being allied to several of the principal
Families in Rome, as the Altieri, Lancelotti, Coccini, and others.

The people of his Diocese are not wes^ satisfied with him, not for any defect
in the exercise of his Pastoral Cure, but because he pressed and exacted
several Taxes that were imposed by the Pope.

His virtues are, that being conscious of his own ignorance, he endeavors what
he can to improve himself, and to that purpose disdains not the conversation of
learned men, in whose company he is very sweet and affable, but something too
ceremonious. Some there are, that look upon him as malacious, and revengeful,
and truly I think him so, but it is only in great and serious matters that he
shows it, for small things he passes over with gentleness enough. He was
promoted in the year 1641.

VIRGINIO ORSINO a Roman, known all Europe over, as well as in the Court, is
esteemed by all that understand the merits of the house of Orsino; this Family
of Orsino has for several ages past, kept the Barbarians from Rome, and
preserved the Apostolic Chair in tranquillity, so that with good reason may it
be said, that the whole Church of God are particularly obliged to the Orsini,
and that the Popes will be very ungrateful, if they suffer not them to have a
Cap now, as they have formerly had, there having been above three hundred
Cardinals in that Family.

He was an Abbot; and whilst it was in agitation to make him relinquish his
Abbey, to qualify him to marry the Princess Ludovisi, Pope Urban being alarmed
at the conjunction of two such Families, to prevent the match, promoted him to
the Cardinal^^ p, as soon as he understood the design.

Some there are that imagine he was made a Cardinal at the great instance of
Cardinal Antonio, who induced by the importunity and presents of the Duke of
Bracciano, Uncle to the Cardinal Orsino, who being troubled to see his Family
without a Cap, applied himself so effectually to the Cardinal Antonio, that at
length he obtained his desire.

But for my part I cannot believe it, for his Nephew the Abbot, by his virtue,
and his parts, did sufficiently deserve a Cap, besides the nobility of his
house; and in truth the College of Cardinals receives more honor to have one
of the house of Orsino, to be a Member thereof, than the house of Orsino to
have a Cardinalship; and therefore it is not to be believed that those
advantages can have made him purchase that so dearly, that was due to him
without it.

Formerly the house of Orsino was of the Spanish faction, but now it has the
Protection of France, and his most Christian Majesty has Cardinal Orsino in
great estimation, and not unreasonably, for there is not any body that regards
the interest of that Crown with more ardour and integrity, than that Cardinal
does.

Some years since, to the great dissatisfaction of the Spaniard, he was
declared Protector of Portugal, yet the Marquess of St. Romano forbore not to
invite him amongst the rest of the Cardinals when he made his Entry into Rome;
but repenting of it afterward, he sent to him that he should not incommode
himself, unless he would declare upon what score he would send his Coach, lest
afterward he should give out he sent it as Protector of Portugal. This was
reckoned a great weakness in the Ambassador, and a thing that might have
produced ill consequences to himself; but all was pacified and set right again
before the Entrade, by the interposition of Monsignor Burlemont, a person of
great worth, that by the prudence of his deportment does the French great
honor in Rome.

This Cardinal is much respected in Rome, because he is much feared, some
people believing him vindicative, but his anger is only a sudden impetus, not
lasting or durable at all.

In one of the Congregations held during the vacancy of the Sea after
Alexander, the revocation of the Decree made by the Congregation of Ceremonies,
about the Title and Entertainment the Cardinals were to give the Roman Princes,
being proposed and pressed by the Cardinal Aquaviva, Orsino was so much
disgusted, that he departed an hour before the Congregation did rise, and
continued in open defiance with the said Cardinal.

He lives splendidly enough, if we consider what he has, and keeps up that
Grandeur, and Liberality, that have been always connatural to his Predecessors.

There are some that asperse him with Pride, but unjustly; for he is very civil
to all persons that come near him, and particularly obliging in his Letters,
which he vouchsafes to return in very familiar language to all that write to
him, especially if they be of any quality.

RINALDO d'ESTE a Modenese, is a Prince of an Angelical life, a great Enemy to
Epicurism, and voluptuousness, which in some Cardinals Princes seems to be
their only design, they being oftentimes ambitious to be Cardinals for no other
end, but to live profusely and high.

Yet is not this Cardinal so severe, but that he uses such recreations and
divertisements as are honorable, and may consist with the dignity of his place.

Amongst the rest of the Virtues in this Prince* there are two more especially
resplendent: one is his affability in treating readily with all such as come to
him, making no scruple, as others do, to give access to every body, and to
dispatch them with good satisfaction: the other, is the great affection and
alacrity with which he protects all such as have their recourse to him, and to
be protected by such a person, is not amiss.

All the world holds him very well read in the Art of dissembling, and keeping
his designs close and reserved: yet he could not dissemble at the news that was
brought him, that the Admiral of Castile, Ambassador extraordinary from the
Crown of Spain, had declared at his arrival at Rome, that he would visit all
the Sacred College, but the Cardinal d'Este; which the Cardinal disdaining, he
took a resolution to go immediately to Rome, where having entered into some
difference with the Ambassador, they both fell to their Arms, and as some
Histories report, put the whole City into confusion. Nor could he dissemble any
more when Pope Urban told him, that he did believe, that he having been
formerly against the Family of the Barbarini, and now tacked about to their
side, did it only to obtain the Abbey he desired, with which the Cardinal was
very much netled, and replied hastily, I suppose your Holiness likes not my
being in Rome, if I were sure of it, I should depart immediately; and the Pope
having told him, God be your speed, the Cardinal took Coach forthwith, and
returned to Modena.

This Abbey of Nonantola came into his hands by means of the Marriage the
Barbarini made with the Duke of Modena his Nephew, the Barbarini having given
nothing to that Cardinal, but that Abbey which yields him but twenty thousand
Crowns a year at the most. He was promoted to the Cardinalship in the year
1641. the 16. of December.

CESARE FACCHINETTI, is a Gentleman of Bolonia, Innocent the ninths Nephews
son. He is a worthy person, and lives with the reputation of an honest and
prudent man. He has been employed in the principal offices of the Court, and
has shown great judgment and dexterity in them all, but especially when he was
Nuntio in Spain, where he carried himself so well, he got the applause of the
whole Nation, the King declaring him a person of worth, and recommending him to
his Holiness, so as upon his return, he was made a Cardinal by Pope Urban.

He was afterward made Bishop of Si^gaglia, a strong City and Port in the
Duchy of Vrbin; but his merits being more worthy, he had the Bishopric of
Spol^to given him in exchange, where he now remains, to avoid all occasion of
involving himself in the interests of the Court, which are too often but a
prejudice to such persons of desert, as think that way to advance their
fortunes, though many believe the way to arrive at the Papacy, is to keep out
of Rome.

He has no Cardinals his Enemies in the whole College: the Spaniards are his
friends, and the French have no reason to complain on him; his merits also are
so great, that if the Sea were vacant, he would have no small party for his
Election. But the mischief is, an unlucky custom that is lately introduced, and
that is, that the Nephews of the last Pope, will have one of their own
creatures to succeed him. He was promoted to the Cardinalship in the year 1643.
the 13. of July.

GIROLAMO GRIMALDI a Genoese, was promoted to the Cardinalship by Pope Urban,
and that for four reasons. The first was, because he was born of one of the
principal Families of Genoa, with the quality of Sovereign, as he was Prince of
Monaco. The second was, to recompense the office of Chierico di Camera that was
purchased by the said Grimaldi, and devolved afterward to the benefit of the
Pope. The third was, the prudence of his carriage in his Government of Rome,
with which he gained the affection of the whole people, as also when he was
Nuntio in France, and began with all integrity imaginable to incline to the
interest of that Crown. And the fourth was, to find him so firm to the service
of the Barbarini his Nephews.

By several persons I have been informed of his qualities and humor, in the
relation of which, his virtues and his frailties have been described as follow.

He is said to be very thoughtful and cogitative, a great designor, jealous of
himself, bold in his enterprises, and full of tricks and windings to support
them, inclined to his own accommodation, though with never so much
inconvenience to his Neighbor, a friend to Novelties, pleased to hear his
enemies ill spoken off, a free discoverer of his own mind, and not a little
given to the conversation of Ladies.

As to his Virtues, they say he has many likewise, with which the French were
much taken; and particularly he is loving and courteous, and desires with
gentleness to satisfy all that have business with him; he is respectful to all
people, without exception of persons, that is, every one according to his
degree; he rewards his servants liberally, and willingly receives the
recommendations of his friends; he loves learned men, and delights himself to
converse with them in the time of his recreations; he has a quick judgment,
and discerns very well betwixt what is to be retained, and what is to be
rejected; in short, he is well beloved both at Rome, and at Paris, as a person
dexterous inbusiness, and exquisite in the most eminent affairs.

CARLO ROSSETTI of Ferrara, was a wild and dissolute young man, and insolent in
all the Company he came; and because ordinarily the Italians believe, to put a
Religious habit upon such shoulders as his, is to consecrate a Sacrifice to
God, Rosetti was advised to repair to Rome, and take the Ecclesiastic habit
upon him; which he did immediately, and applied hemself to the service of the
Barbarini, who were then regnant, and particularly to Francisco, who took so
extraordinary an affection to him, that he provided him such employments as
might lead and introduce him into the College of Cardinals.

He was sent in the quality of Nuntio into England, to negotiate with that
Kingdom for the ease of the Catholics, but his Negotiation had but little
success, his life being in no small danger amongst those tumults; and indeed he
would have withdrawn himself with more reputation, had he been wiser: but he
had much ado to escape with his life.

When he was Nuntio at Colen with Chigi, he spoiled all that transaction, by
the too much partiality he showed to the Spaniard, and had not the prudence and
conduct of Chigi been interposed, all things had gone top-si-turvy: At which he
took so great a displeasure, that he alone opposed the Election of the said
Chigi, although he saw the Barbarini on his side, to which Family he was
grateful only in this, that he opposed himself publicly against Pamsilio's
Election, and for no other reason but that the Barbarini were against him.

In short, in the person of this Cardinal, there are two things considerable,
his moral virtue, and his politic dexterity; as to the last he never had any
great success in all his Negotiations, either that he had no fortune, (which
oftentimes has its share in the greatest transactions) or that he had not that
subtilty or sagacity in business as is necessary. It is enough that he deserved
not the Title of an Excellent Politician, though some of his Friends, and
particularly in the Grand Dukes Court, do cry him up for an Arch Politician:
But they that look nearer upon him, do but laugh at those Elogiums.

As to his morals, he is indeed worthy of commendation, not having given the
least scandal since he took the habit upon him. He is inclined to do justice
impartially, and therefore in the Bishopric of Faenza where he is ordinarily
resident, he is beloved of all people; he is charitabls to the poor, especially
if they be sick; he is zealous of the Worship of God, and has other virtues
that render him worthy of being Cardinal and Bishop, but not Pope, which is no
less Prince. He was promoted to the Cardinalship 1643. the 13. of July.

GIO. STEPHANO DONGHI is a Gentleman of Genoa, worthy of the Purple from the
very time he took upon him the Ecclesiastical habit, yet it was not his worth,
but his wealth, that opened the door to his promotion to the Cardinalship.

He first bought one of the Clerkships di Camera, and a while after Cardinal
Spada's negotiation proving unhappy, he was sent into Lombardy in the quality
of Nuntio and Plenipotentiary, to agitate the Peace with the Princes of Italy,
in which employment he spent above fifty thousand Crowns of his own money, and
being returned to Rome, he complained very much of the Barbarini, that so many
persons of less merit than he, were preferred before him that had done such
service to the Church, and that Family, at his own trouble and expense. In so
much that Urban to avoid the imputation of ingratitude, and that he might have
the Clerkship di Camera to dispose of again, promoted him to the Cardinalship
on the 13. of July 1643. in which Dignity he behaves himself with so general
applause, that they have good reason to bless God for his promotion.

In his Legation of Ferrara he acquired immortal reputation, as a person that
understood which way to distribute justice, with sweetness; and upon several
occasions he obliged the Venetian so, that they give him the greatest
commendation imaginable.

He is apparently engaged to follow the interest of Spain, his whole Family
depending upon the protection of that Crown, yet he manages himself with that
prudence, that he gives no disgust by his expressions, to the other party.

As he is rich, his expenses are great, but it is in things that are honorable
and necessary, not in vanities and trifles. He is of a benign, affable, and
pleasant nature, and charitable above all, so that were it not for his
unhappiness in being a Genoese, he would be very worthy of the Popedom.

PAVLO EMILIO RONDANINI, the last Cardinal of Pope Vrbans Creatures, he was
promoted the 13. of July 1643. and that for two reasons especially: The first
was the desire the Barbarini had to be selling his Office of Chierico di
Camera, and fingering the money. The other was, to recompense the several
services he had done them, particularly when at his own charges he raised a
Troop of Cuirasiers for the service of the Barbarini, against the Princes of
the League.

He has many virtues that render him worthy of the Dignity he possesses, but
those virtues are eclipsed by certain natural defects, and above all by his
pride, he disdaining to take notice of the salutes that are given him; but he
is striving by art to correct these infirmities in his nature: he loves to be
acc^sted, and comes not with the last to Comedies and Pastimes. In matters of
business he is not much considerable, his brain is too weak to receive any
thing of consequence, though he should engage himself in any such affair, so as
I fancy he will dye before he will arrive at the Papacy, and be content rather
to enjoy what he desires.

It follows now that we speak of the Cardinals created by Innocent the tenth at
several promotions, which are now living, and the first that presents himself
is NICOLO LVDOVISI a Bolonian, who was advanced to the Cardinalship on the
sixth of March 1645.

This Lord obtained the Cap by fortune merely, his merits not rendering him
worthy of that honor, though he was endued with judgment and other qualities
good enough for a Prelate.

The Cardinal Colonna about the beginning of the Papacy of Innocent, resigned
the Archbishopric of Bolonia to him, but so over-charg'd with Pensions, there
remained not a thousand Crowns clear, for the maintenance of himself and his
Court. His friends advised him not to engage himself in that manner, nor to
undertake so troublesome a Cure, where the profit and reputation was so small;
for it was the general discourse that Colonna had a long time sought out for a
person that would accept of it, and could find none, it seeming impossible to
most people to live with so great a charge. So that it may be rationally
concluded, that the Archbishopric was not conferred upon him in consideration
of his merits, so much as of the Pensions that were upon it; however the
Nephews out of an ambition of having an Archbishopric at their devotion in
their own Country, encouraged him to take it, and he did so.

The Prince Ludovisi being about this time married to a Niece of Pope
Innocents, was consequently introduced into the favor of the said Pope, though
but indifferently, ( Donna Olimpia not suffering his greatest graces to depend
upon any but her own authority;) he began to imagine it would be convenient to
have a Cardinal in his own Family, that he might have the better intelligence
of the secrets of the Court; and ruminating with himself of this, and of that,
the Archbishop came at last into his mind, who was his Cousin by the Mothers
side, and carried the Name of Nicolo Albergati; so that he entreated his
Holiness at his request to confer a Cap upon the said Albergati, but upon
condition he should renounce the Name of Albergati, and be called Cardinal
Ludovisi.

His Holiness satisfied the desires of the Prince, and dispatched away a Brief
immediately with the conditions proposed by the Prince; which Albergati made no
difficulty to accept, and to take upon him the Name of Ludovisi and the
Cardinalship together, which in Honor and Nobility exceeded much the Name of
Albergati; and these were the degrees by which this person ascended to the
Purple.

All the expenses that are usual in such cases, were defrayed by the Prince,
for his own poverty affording him little to spend, he made use of the House of
the Prince, his Cousin, as if he had been his own Brother.

The Pope having an eye upon his indigence, gave him some other means to
sustain himself, and among the rest made him Chief Penitentiary, and sent him
Apostolic Legate to Florence, to Christen a Son of the Great Dukes. In which
Legation he was presented with very fine Arras Hangings, and other curiosities
for his Chamber, the Grand Duke very well understanding what he had principally
need of.

Many believe that in time, being a little ripened with age, he may raise his
fortunes in some Conclave or other; and this their opinion is founded upon the
exemplanariness of life which he pretends to (though many suspect it to be but
forced from the exactness with which he has governed his own Church) upon the
reputation all his Brothers carry in Bolonia, being esteemed persons of
judgment and integrity, and upon the affection the Spaniards bear to him,
whose interest upon all occasion he takes great glory to espouse.

These reasons amongst the common people do ascertain him to be Pope, but they
that understand him better, and converse with him often, are of another
opinion, and do find him incapable of governing such a Kingdom, by reason of
his invincible obstinacy, which is so natural, and so great in him, that
amongst many it is counted perfect madness; for he renders himself thereby
unacceptable to all that deal with him, especially when they treat of matters
of Conscience, he is so refractory, all the arguments in the world are not able
^o alter his opinion.

This is the judgment of him amongst the Cardinals; but it may be when he
grows riper in years, this obstacle may be removed, for excessive obstinacy is
doubtless an obstacle to any that pretend to the Papacy, as may easily be
proved by the example of Sextus the fifth, who was the most fantastical and
g^ddy headed person in all the Cloisters; yet when he came to be Cardinal,
ambitious of fishing in the Sea of Saint Peter, he offered violence to his
nature, counterfeiting meekness so much, that he was counted ignorant,
submitting always his own opinion to the judgment of the other Cardinals.

If he will do so, the Papacy it is possible may fall into his hands, whereas
otherwise he will fall out of the hands of the Papacy, as he fell out of the
Padronage. When Innocent took his resolution to create a Cardinal Padrone, for
his assistance in his Pastoral Cure, the Prince with all the importunity he was
able, recommended the said Cardinal Ludovisi his Kinsman; but Innocent knew him
too well, denied to satisfy the Prince, and promoted Astalli to the peace, not
that his Talents were greater than the others; but because Panzirolo (who had
great influence upon his Holiness) had told him, that he was a person able to
distinguish betwixt good and evil, that he was solid in his Councils, and not
peremptory in his opinions as Ludovisi was; it is enough to say that Ludovisi
was laid aside, and Astalli, received into the place; and indeed it was better
for him to have been rejected, than to have run the same fortune with Astalli,
which will be memorable in all Ages.

ALDARANO CIBO da Massa di Carrara, was promoted to the Cardinalship the 6. of
March 1645.

Innocent always loved him very well, and looked upon him as worthy of
preferment; insomuch, that as soon as he was created Pope, he declared him
Maggior-domo of the Apostolical Palace, he having in his Prelacy gained some
reputation; and afterward made him Cardinal in the year aforesaid, both for
his particular inclination to his person, and a respect he bore him as he was
descended from the Noble Family of the Cibo in Genoa, from whence Innocent the
eighth was descended. But the principal motive, according to the common opinion
was, because Innocent was persuaded by Donna Olimpia to get Monsignor Cibo's
Palace that was joining ^ his own, and laying them together, to make a
magnificent one for the Family of Pamfilio: which design being apprehended by
Cibo, he made his Holiness a present of it, refuring any consideration. And
though the Pope paid for it, would by no means accept it as a gift; yet it left
an obligation upon him, that he was offered it, so that for this reason, and
the other, he created him a Cardinal, in which dignity he has comported himself
so well, he has the applause of the whole Court, and will increase i^ daily, he
being esteemed a person of great justice and integrity; and in his Church di
J^si, where he ordinarily resides, his reputation is so great amongst the
people of that Country, that they swear there cannot a more worthy Pastor be
found in the whole Universe.

In two L^gations that he performed, he signalized himself so, that he acquired
the reputation of a great Statesman, and a person proper for the highest
employments.

He is very studious, and indeed a little too much, for his study makes him
something Melancholy; his diversion is Music, which delights him exceedingly,
especially if it be Spiritual Music. He is Spaniard both in his inclination,
and interest, his Family being all under the protection of that Crown.

He is as retired, as he can possibly, which makes all people suspect he
aspires to the Papacy, and in my opinion, were merits rightly considered, he
might obtain it; but the mischief is, in the Conclaves at present, the interest
of factions, and nor the merit of the person, carries it, would the Cardinal
satisfy their own Consciences, and give their voices for so worthy a person,
there might be some good expected from such an Election, the Church would
certainly be better served, and the State better governed; provided he changed
not his humor as Alexander the seventh did, who of a Saint of a Cardinal,
became a Devil of a Pope as soon as he received the Keys; which will make the
Cardinals consider for the time to come, before they give their Votes for an
honest man, that is, for such an one as counterfits, and pretends honesty only,
which I cannot believe of this person.

FEDERICO SFORZA a Roman, is a most considerable person in respect of the
Nobility of his Family, that have formerly been Dukes of Milan, with the Title
of Sovereignty, besides an infinite number of Cardinals, that have rendered it
conspicuous with their Scarlet.

In the Pontificate of Urban, he took upon him the Habit of a Prelat, with
hopes to obtain what he has now got; but he could not reach it in that Popes
days, nor get any higher than to be Vice-Legal of Avignon, which was given him
by Cardinal Antonio, with promise also of a Cap; but that promise vanished into
smoke, Cardinal Antonio finding excuses enough, to withdraw himself from his
word.

Innocent the tenth, that so noble a Family might not be without that Purple,
created him a Cardinal 1645. and because he knew he was disgusted at the manner
of Antonio's proceeding with him, he gave him the office of Chamberlain, which
the said Antonio was possessed of, but rather in despite to Antonio, than
affection to Sforza; who (without regard to those benefits, being unable to
bridle his nature, that was always inclined to speak his Sentiments freely
against whoever it was) fell a murmuring against Donna Olimpia the Popes
Cousin, with such Satirical arguments, that she not being able to bear them,
was forced to put him out of favor with his Holiness, who discharged him of
his office of Chamberlain (which was no small honor and advantage to him) and
obliged him to retire to his Bishopric of Rimini.

He was always thought a Frenchman in his humor, by the activity of his
spirit, and the liberty of his tongue, besides, that his residence at Avignon,
had contributed its share.

But for all this, he followed the Spanish interest, in which he prosper'd very
well; several were the causes that moved him thereto; the first inducement was
the rich Ecclesiastical preferments that were given him by the Spaniard; the
second, in aversion he had to Mazarine, with whom he could not possibly hold
correspondence, if he were for the French; the third was, that he could not (as
he said himself) go along with the designs of the Cardinal Antonio; and the
last, because his Father held several Feuditary Lands, as Heir to a Milanese
Lord, that was his Kinsman, in the Duchy of Milan.

The Cardinal Antonio did really show this Cardinal Sforza a Roman trick, and
that was the reason of his animosity: he kept him in so sly a suspense for the
Cardinalship, that Sforza resolved to let him have his Palace of Sforza, as it
were for a song, Antonio persuading him he should not fail of his Cap; but the
contract being made and secured, not a word of the Cap more, which netled
Sforza to the quick.

At present things seem to be composed, yet every time that Sforza looks upon
that Palace, that is since given by the Cardinal Antonio to the Crown of
France, for a Residence to the French Ambassadors, it troubles him to the heart.

In short, this Cardinal has a head more for a Soldier than a Priest, is
feared at Court rather than beloved, and given to all kind of pleasure.

BENEDETTO ODESCALCO of Como, was promoted with Sforza, and the rest, the 6. of
March 1645.

His design was from his youth to put himself into the Prelacy, and therefore
in the beginning of Vrbans Pontificate, he began to court the Cardinal
Barbarino, with hopes to obtain the Clerkship di Camera; to which end, he not
only gave him moneys by way of advance, but quickn'd and reminded him daily by
some new present or other, so that Barbarino was obliged to procure him that
office, in which he left him for a while, and designed to promote him to the
Cardinalship, which was the principal thing Odescalco aimed at.

Pope Urban being dead, ambition augmented in the breast of this person, that
could not sleep for contriving which way he should arrive at the Cardinalship;
he knew he was well enough provided with wealth, and therefore thought it best
to take that way, to ingratiate himself with Donna Olimpia, Cousin to Innocent
that succeeded Urban; he presented her several times very nobly, and amongst
the rest, he gave her a most stately Cupboard of Silver Plate, which was the
thing indeed that opened the way to his Cardinalship: for Donna Olimpia being
obliged by his presents, that she might not be taxed with ingratitude, and that
she might give encouragement to other pretendors in the Court, to address
themselves to her in the same way, she went to her Cousin the Pope, and begged
a Cap for Odescalco, which she obtained, but not without the intercession of
Cardinal Pallotta also.

Whilst he was but a Prelate, he took great delight in Comedies, and Balls, and
such recreations; but since he has been a Cardinal, he has altered his ways,
and taken such as are more necessary and direct for the acquiring the Papacy:
many people wonder at the great charge in him, from so great a liberty in his
life (yet not to vice) to see him retired to that degree, as if he hated now,
what he formerly loved. He is of the humor of the Lombards, free, and without
Hypocrisy, and cannot hold from speaking his mind whether it be good or bad;
resembling Cardinal Sforza very much in that point, with whom he is a great
correspondent, and is often seen in his company. But Sforza is more fierce and
violent, which passion over-masters his judgment, whereas Odescalco is more
moderate. He is no great Politician, yet he is wise enough to make use of the
policies of other people.

The Spaniards love him very well, because he professes himself their true
Subject, and in the whole College, I believe he has scarce an Enemy, unless it
be the Cardinal Imperial* and that by reason he was one of those that decreed
his Banishment, upon the attempt that was made upon the French Ambassador in
Rome, which so disgusted Imperiale, that in the last Conclave he did Odescalco
all the mischief that he could, who paid him again in his own Coin according as
he was able.

LORENZO RAGGI Bishop of Casania in Sicily, is descended of a new Family in
Genoa, not many years since introduced into the number of the Noble houses.

In the time of Urban the eighth, he had the Treasurership General of the
Church given him, at the request of his Uncle Cardinal Raggi, who went under
the name of Ottaviano, and was one of the most ridiculous persons that ever was
seen in the College; he was ignorant, dissolute, and malicious, and so
impertment, he ordered a Cardinals Habit to be made for him (before he was
promoted to the Cardinalship) and put it on two or three times a day in the
presence of his Servants, commanding them to tell him how it sat upon his
back, who could do no less than to give him such answers as he would like:
animated therefore by an ambition of that dignity, he went to the Pope one
night late, in the habit of a Cardinal, who loved him very well for several
reasons, but especially for the simplicity he observed in him: as soon as he
came into his presence, and had kissed his foot, he told him, Most Holy Father,
I beseech you to vouchsafe to gratify the Old man my Father, and make me a
Cardinal, it is a thing he desires very much, but I ten times more.

In the next Promotion after this gentile visit, Urban created him a Cardinal,
whereupon, as soon as he had received his Cap, he went immediately to giver his
Holiness thanks, and embraced him in the most ridiculous manner in the world.
The Pope desired him to desist, and told him, That he hurt him, to which he
replied, I am so glad that I am made a Cardinal, that I could eat you for joy.
In short, he that would recount all the impertinencies of this person, would
make the best far^e in the world, and worthy to be recited at a Carneval.

When the Nephew Lorenzo was made Treasurer as aforesaid, he called him to him,
and in the presence of all his Courtiers told him, Nephew, if you have a desire
to arrive at that dignity I am at, you must study, and be sure you follow my
steps: which words of his, set not only his Servants a laughing, but the Nephew
himself.

This Nephew, who at present is Cardinal Raggi, his Uncle being dead, was by
the Barbarini made Superintendant General of the Gabels, through the whole
State Ecclesiastic, and that for no other reason, but because he was known to
be a great friend to Parsimony and Thrift: and the Barbarini believing that he
being ambitious of a Cap, he would not fail to be a friend to their Coffers;
nor were they mistaken, for Monsignor Raggi that he might be serviceable to
them in heaping up money, and to satisfy himself in his covetous humor,
carried himself so ill in his employment, that he gave occasion to several
disorders, and particularly in the raising Arms against the Duke of Parma, and
the Princes of the League, at which time the Soldiers could not receive their
money, though the Pope had given express order they should have four Musters
pay: In so much that the next day after the Election of Innocent the tenth, the
Soldiers appointed as a Guard to the Conclave, fell a plundering whatever they
met with, and because Raggi would give them but one half of their pay, they
took it so ill, they with great fury fell upon the place where their money was,
broke up the Chests, and carried all away they could find; and in that rage,
they assaulted the Palace of Don Tadeo, searching every where up and down for
Raggi; but he having notice of their designs, leaped out of a window to save
his life: And indeed so highly were they incensed, every body was afraid of
some popular revolution, which had certainly fallen out, had not Pope Innocent
(who was but newly elected) applied remedy immediately.

Such a business as this, could do no less than give offense to the whole
Court, and to imprint a disgust against the person of Raggi, in the breast of
the Pope; so that every one believed his Office would be taken away, because it
was privately hinted to him, that he should offer to resign it: But it happened
clear contrary, for in the year 1647. in the month of October, he was created
Cardinal, to the admiration of the whole Court; though afterward, when he was
promoted to that Dignity, he framed himself exceedingly to the Customs of the
Court of Rome, which in him appeared more remarkable than in any other person,
because he understood how to accompany them with such Ceremonies, as allure and
inveagle the hearts of all such as have business with him. But when it comes to
the drawing of his purse-strings, he does no great matter; all that is to be
got, is but civility and good words: he has a smattering in Learning, and if he
would study more, he would become more considerable.

His manners and humor would not be ill, were they not obscured by his
ambition and avarice, vices that have too great dominion over him.

In the Court he passes for an indifferent person, and is spoken of only as he
makes himself notorious by his defending the interest of Spain, he being one of
the most Spanioliz'd Cardinals of them all.

To be short, he is about 45. years of age; he abounds not over much with
charity; he is a Genoese, and by consequence out of all hope of being Pope,
unless the face of affairs be altered. But he seems not to have any ambition
for it, because he does not take the right way to arrive at the Papacy; so that
though the face of affairs should alter, there would be but little hopes for
him.

FRANCISCO MALDACHINO, is the Son of Marquess Andrea Maldachino, that was
Collateral General to all the State of the Church; he was promoted to the
Cardinalship, out of the great affection his Holiness bore to Donna Olimpia,
Sister to the said Marquess, and Cousin to the Pope, the seventh of October
1647. to the wonder not only of the Court, but of all Christendom.

His Holiness to speak the truth was with great difficulty brought to
condescend, for six months together he refused all the importunities his Cousin
could make, as not willing to burden his Conscience, by admitting such a
Monster in Nature, into the number of so great Princes, and into a College of
worthy men; but he could not resist her multiplied prayers any longer, but as
it were blindfold he created him Cardinal, in the 18th. year of his age.

But that which is most strange is, that Donna Olimpia not contented to see her
Nephew in Scarlet, (notwithstanding the irregularities both of his person and
manners) would needs introduce him to the Government of the Ecclesiastic
State, and give him possession of the same credit and authority, that Cardinal
Barbarino had, during the Popedom of Urban the eighth; seeing his Holiness her
Cousin resolved (that he might have assistance in the sustaining so great a
weight) to adopt a counterfeit Nephew, because he could have no real one, since
Pamfilio that was his Nephew indeed, had renounced the Cardinalship, to marry
the Princess of Rosanno, as noble a resolution perhaps as ever fell into the
heart of man, though disliked both by his Uncle the Pope, and Donna Olimpia
his Mother; he having by that marriage perpetuated the Name of Pamfilio, by two
little Sons that he has, worthy of such a Princess to their Mother, and which
do contribute much to the honor of Rome.

Donna Olimpia employed her utmost interest with the Pope, to have made him
Cardinal Padrone, or Cardinal Nephew; and because his Holiness was I know not
how engaged in his affections to this Lady his Kinswoman, and durst not
absolutely deny her, so on the other side being unwilling to promise it, he
temporiz'd and dally'd with her, that he might not displease her: But she to
make all sure, by his Holiness consent, put him under the institution of the
Cardinals Panzirolo, and Cherubino, that he might be well instructed in the
affairs of Court. But this was no more than to sow Corn upon a Rock; Maldachini
had no capacity to receive any thing at all, having brought an incredible
stupidity along with him, even from his Mothers belly.

Panzirolo that understood very well the humor of Maldachini, and the Popes
resolution not to entertain such a Statue into business of State, advised his
Holiness to create Astalli Cardinal Nephew, and he did so, but with so much
dissatisfaction to Donna Olimpia when she heard it, that she fell almost mad
upon it, thundering out her maledictions and invectives against Panzirolo with
such fury, that it was a great cause of her falling out of favor with his
Holiness.

All the while Innocent lived after the Creation of Maldachini, he expressed
great regret for having made such a person a Cardinal, and could not endure to
have it mentioned upon any occasion. Alexander the seventh was not well pleased
neither to see him cheek by jowle amongst so many select persons, and therefore
gave himself over to use him ill, sending him away without any respect to a
place that was a greater distance from Rome; but the rest of the Cardinals
looking upon the misusage of his person, as a reflection upon the Order in
general, they made their complaint to his Holiness, and he was immediately set
at liberty.

Donna Olimpia persuaded him to espouse the interest of Spain, which he did,
but (finding by degrees the little esteem the Spaniards had for him, by their
several times neglecting to call him to their Assemblies, in which the
intrigues of that Court were transacted, and all because they knew he had not
judgment enough to give them any Council;) he turned to the French, who
received him very readily, (if for no other reason) to secure his voice in the
Conclave. And this is certain, his negotiating with the French has not a little
instructed him in his Complements; it being the general observation of the
Court, that since his Voyage into France, he is grown much more conversable
than formerly.

In the last Conclave of Rospigliosi he suffered himself to be transported into
some expressions (rather dictated to him, than spoken by him) against the
Spaniards. The Spaniards were nettled, and bit their thumbs (as the Italians
use to do) in private, though in public they seemed but to laugh at it: Some
say the Spanish Ambassador having notice of it from one of the Conclave, who
being no great friend of Maldachini's, had told the story a little too sharply,
replied laughing, The voice of an Ass reaches not to Heaven; which coming
likewise to Maldachini's ears, displeased him exceedingly, so that he fell a
railing against all that belonged to Spain; which the Spaniards likewise
understanding, (for the Spies in Rome will not fail to do that good office) to
mortify and rebuke him, they resolved to stop the Rents of those Abbeys and
Benefices that he held in the Kingdom of Naples, and other Catholic States;
and he finding himself in this manner necessitated to renounce, has within few
months resigned three Abbeys into the hands of the Pope; one of which is given
to Monsignor Strada, the second to Monsignor Polini, both of them of the
Privy-Chamber, and the third to a Son of the Marquess Astalli, Nephew to the
Cardinal aforesaid, whose Father is of the Faction of Spain. In short, I would
not swear this Cardinal should not be Pope, if there was need of nothing but
his own single voice; but otherwise I fear he will dye without it.

GIO. FRANCISCO GONDI a Frenchman, called Cardinal di Retz, he was promoted to
the Cardinalship the 19th. of February* in the year 1652. at the instance of
the King of France, with whom he was afterward disgusted, having received some
considerable affronts, though he was Archbishop of Paris.

The Court cried out exceedingly against Mazarine, who governed all at that
time, and was the principal cause of the persecuting this person, and that upon
good grounds. The Ecclesiastics pretended, that the greatest Princes that are,
cannot repress the power of a Cardinal, when they are treating of matters of
State, no though the Cardinals be contriving the ruin or disturbance of the
Public Peace: But this is a doctrine the Princes do but laugh at, and amongst
the rest, the Kings of France, who upon any such occasion do fly presently to
their Gallican Rites.

It was strange to Innocent, that after the Crown of France had with so much
instance and importunity, recommended this person to be promoted, and after he
was advanced to so honorable a Dignity, he should be slighted, and ill used
immediately by the same Crown, of which he made frequent complaints to
Mazarine, who wanted not his pretenses to excuse them. However the Politicians
looked upon it as a great oversight in Mazarine, to present that person to the
Cardinalship, without pre-considering what might follow; and indeed they that
understood the Spirit of the man, inclined always to disturb and perplex the
quiet of his Superiors, were much scandalized to see Mazarine instead of
keeping him at a distance, by some politic pretense, to endeavor to make him
equal in Dignity to himself; and by consequence to give him greater opportunity
and encouragement to undertake what in effect he did enterprise.

But Mazarine was obliged to do what he did, for private and occult reasons,
not imagining the said person could have been able to have kindled so great a
Conflagration as he did.

The timid, though unquiet Nature, with which he observed Gondi to be governed,
persuaded him that he was not to be parted from that Country where he managed
all; so as the judgment of so great a Headpiece as Mazarine, is many times
deceived, he finding by experience, that the most timorous man, if backed and
supported, grows most troublesome and ambitious.

The Spaniards endeavored what they could to fetch over this Cardinal to their
party, promising him, as is reported* much more than he could hope for in
France; but he that had his aim upon France, and not upon Spain, kept himself
close to the interest of that Crown, demonstrating upon several occasions, that
his adherance to the Malcontents, was not from any animosity to that Kingdom,
but only from a desire to humble the fortunes of Cardinal Mazarine.

At the time that accident happened to the Duke of Crequy in Rome, which was
the twentieth of August 63. amongst all the Cardinals there was none that stuck
so zealously to the French party as he; to the admiration of every body, that a
person that had been turned out of his Church, and other Benefices, had been
imprisoned, persecuted, and banished, should appear with such ardour in defense
of that interest, that was the cause of his troubles, and (which is worse)
resolved never to readmit him to the Dignities he had lost. But his proceedings
in this point were prudent enough, for having voluntarily disobliged his Most
Christian Majesty, it was but reason he should be voluntarily obliged. And the
King of France unwilling to let the constancy, or generosity of Retz, with
which he maintained the just Privileges of his Crown, to go unrewarded, he
admitted him again into his favor, which he enjoys to this day, but with some
conditional limitations, as retaining still in his mind the prejudice he did
formerly to the Crown, though he often declared, that all his designs were
against Mazarine.

LVIGI HOMODEI, from his very first entrance into the Prelacy, had an ambitious
hankering after a Cap, and it cost him and his Family no small quantity of
money before he did compass his ends.

It was thought very strange, his Family being like to extinguish for want of
Heirs, that he would suffer it to perish, rather than marry; it is reported,
that a friend of his advising him to marry, he replied, That he had higher
thoughts. However, things have succeeded to his desires, and that without any
disadvantage to his house, which had Children afterward, and is become one of
the most conspicuous, richest, and best allied Familyes in Spain.

He had first the Archbishopric of Milan given him, which was in his own
Country, where he was resident for some time, and performed his Pastoral
Function like a good Sheepherd; at last, on the nineteenth of February 1652. he
was promoted to the Cardinalship by Innocent the tenth, a while after
discharging himself of his Bishopric, and in good part, by the means of the
Spaniards, who have this for a particular Maxim to make their Cardinals live
in Rome as much as possibly they can: and though he was a Spaniard both in
respect of his Family, and Inclination, yet in the Conclave of Innocent, where
Alexander was created, he went against the judgment of the Spaniards, but they
took not much notice of it, because there were so many concerned in the
Conspiracy.

This Cardinal is in short of a noble Extraction, of an exemplary life, and
good manners, having shown himself in all Congregations and Offices, a person
of much worth, and one that sticks close to the business that belongs to him.
However in his obstinacy he is a (...) to blame, yet he yields if he be pressed
with good words; he is otherwise of a merry disposition, and by the sweetness
of his Conversation, shows that he has no secret grudge against any body. For
which I would not answer, though he be a good Lumbard, which is as much as to
say, an enemy to Hypocrisy.

He would be no ill Pope, but I much fear he will dye a Cardinal, yet not
without some hopes of the Papacy, in which so many of them die.

PETRO OTTOBVONO a noble Venetian, was created Cardinal at the same promotion
on the 19. of February 1652. being Clerk of the Chamber; but he was promoted at
the instance of the Commonwealth of Venice, and his own, in that promotion in
which the Pope was desirous to satisfy all the Catholic Crowns, and
Potentates, amongst which, after the two Crowns of France, and Spain, Venice
has much the greater place; the Popes being obliged to give them as much honor
in Rome, as is due to the greatest Crowns, seeing God has made that
Commonwealth as a Bulwork to all Christendom.

The nature of this Cardinal is, to carry himself with all possible
complaisance to his own Republique in whatsoever he is employed.

He is not very rich, but endued with good qualities, and his parts are more
than ordinary. The Venetians look upon him as a person of great worth, but the
Court that believes nothing but what they see, have not that opinion of him, as
not having had any experience of him in any considerable affair, he having been
confined as it were to his Church at Brescia, and kept at ^ distance from the
Court, without ever being employed in any Legation. His friends say, that from
that very thing proceeding from the envy they have for him at Court, the
transcendent worth of his person may be known; which indeed is not unlikely,
for Princes trouble not themselves so much to find out persons of any excellent
endowments, as to find such weak poor spirited persons as they can command at
their pleasures: from whence it happens, that they which preside, do suffer
them to be discontented, that are otherwise in favor.

In the Conclave of Alexander, he had a great share in uniting that party that
thwarted and crossed the designs of the Crowns, who were not at all satisfied,
either with him, or his party. And in this last Conclave of Clements, he had a
great part in facilitating the Election of that Pope, who as soon as he was
possessed of the Pontificate, to show his gratitude to the Senate, and to
Ottobuono, declared him Datary, so that the said Ottobuono having been Auditor
di Rota, he may execute that charge very well, and demonstrate his worth to the
Court, he having given them already some Essays of his Virtues.

LORENZO IMPERIALE of Genoa, was promoted the second of March 1654* being
Governor of Rome. It was a great wonder to many people, to see so many persons
of much more merit than he, past by, and a person made choice of, that had done
so little service for the Church.

But those that looked deeper into the business, ceased immediately to wonder,
as knowing the riches of his Family, and the great ambition they had to have a
Cap: nor was that juncture of time amiss, for Donna Olimpia being again
received into favor, designed to re-establish her self by getting of moneys,
which is all that can be said for his exaltation. He is of an affable and
pleasant nature, and of great frankness and candor in his conversation, and
doubtless he would be much more acceptable to all that converse with him, were
not he a little too tedious in tracing out other peoples thoughts.

His judgment could not have been more dexterous in finding out defects, than
it is, nor his judgment accompanied with more prudence in applying seasonable
remedies to them, so that from hence it may be argued that he is a person fit
for the management of great affairs.

There are but few so well acquainted with the interest of the Court, as
himself, having spent a good time of his Prelacy therein; he is so constant in
his resolutions, that it passes almost to obduracy. Yet his judgment being
very good, he hardens not himself, but where he has reason on his side, and in
that case the whole world cannot move him.

Did he design any higher than his Cardinalship, which I can hardly believe he
will, he would meet with many rubs in his way: it being almost impossible to
succeed, he being known so well by the Kings, Princes, and Cardinals, to be a
man of such high thoughts, as would attempt that in a short time, which other
Princes have labored at for several ages, and without effect; which is
sufficient to obstruct his pretensions, were not the Spaniards likewise who are
his friends, likely to give him greater impediment, than the French that are
his Enemies; the Spaniards being never inclined to those persons, that will
enterprise too high.

In the two last Conclaves, he managed himself so with his flying Squadron,
that it gave no little disgust to the Crowns, to see such a Combination of
Cardinals driving with great resolution at the destruction of their interest,
to make the Papacy wholly dependant upon their own. But in the last Conclave,
and in the Exaltation of his Nephew Bonetti, he made it more clear than it was
before, that he cared not to verefie the Opinion the Court had on him, viz.
that he was inclined to attempt impossibilities, in despite of any body that
should oppose him.

The affront he received in his banishment, not only out of the lands of the
Church, but out of all Italy, for the Insolences committed by the Corsi upon
the Duke and Duchess of Crequi, kept him under for a while, all his judgment
and sagacity being too weak to clear him of his accusations; the others having
found out evasions, and tricks to shift the fault of their own backs, and lay
it upon poor Astalli, who was constrained to suffer the greatest part of the
French indignation toward which King he was forced to address himself, by his
mediation to obtain the favor of having that sentence revoak'd: and yet for
all that, he retains an animosity against the French, though he promised his
most Christian Majesty to be his particular servant; and accordingly some few
months since, with most inconsiderate audacity, and contrary to the judgment
of Cardinal Farnese, he opposed the validity of the Bull for the incameration
of Castro; for which he was sufficiently blamed, and in danger of experimenting
the effects of that Kings indignation: which will always be recorded of his
manner of proceeding.

GIBERTO BORROMEI of Milan, was created Cardinal in the resolution of the Pope,
at the promotion on the 19 of Frebruary 1652. with Cardinal Imperiale; but they
were not effectively declared till the 2d. of March 1654.

This Cardinal being great Grandchild to San Carlo Borromeo, he deported
himself modestly in all his actions, not at all degenerating from those virtues
that are natural to that Noble Family, which has always given conspicuous
examples of their goodness. From the time he took upon him the Prelatical
Habit, he has in all the offices he has gone thorough, given great Testimonies
of his modesty, sincerity, and justice, qualities too rarely visible in persons
of that authority and command.

In his Legation of Romania, he behaved himself so well, there was not the
least complaint against him; though some of his Court fell into some kind of
errors, as having more mind to get money, than reputation: however they
abstained from many acts of injustice, for very fear of falling into the Legates
displeasure, who they knew was averse to such inequitable designs.

In short, the whole Court unanimously gives a good Character of his Sentiments
toward the Public; yet there wants not some Critics that suspect him of
some degree of Hypocrisy. It is enough he would make a Pope answerable to the
desires of the Spaniard, which is, to keep what they have got, and not trouble
themselves to acquire what ever is possible, as too many do.

But there is no great hopes for him whilst Milan is the Spaniards; for in the
Conclave, they look not so much upon the merits of the person, as the interest
of State.

MARCELLO SANTA* CROCE a Roman, is a person that has added virtue and desert to
the Nobility of his Birth; confirming daily by a hundred examples, the
inclinations he has for the public good, insomuch that in the Congregations
and Consistories he is one of those, that laying aside all private passion,
devote themselves wholly to the advantage of the Public; and therefore many
are of opinion, in time there will be great hopes for him in the Conclave.

He was promoted to the Cardinalship the 19 of Febr. 1652. and the principal
reasons that moved Innocent to promote him, were two, a General, and a
particular; the General reason was, because the Pope had taken a resolution to
re-advance all the Noble Families in Rome, that began to lessen and decay in
their splendor, that thereby he might render the City more Pompous and
Majestic: but whether he was induced to this out of pure generosity, or out of
an ambition he had to oblige all those reinvigorated Families to his own, I
cannot tell; be it one or the other, the design was noble, and had been
executed more exactly, had not the importunity of his Cousin diverted him, and
forced him to sell that which he pretended to give.

The particular was, that several occasions being given to Santa Croce, to
defend and represent ^in his Holinesses presence, certain intricate and
difficult points, he did it with that plainness and facility, it made such an
impression upon the Genius of the Pope, that he thought him worthy of the Cap.
And declared many times before certain of his Cardinals, that he never gave
sentence with less injury to his Conscience, than after he had consulted and
been well informed by Santa Croce; and yet Innocent was esteemed a good Lawyer,
as he was indeed, yet his understanding was but dull and obtuse, and therefore
he loved them best that could make things most easy and perspicuous to his
capacity; but whether it was for one reason or the other, this I know his
advancing Santa Croce to the Cardinalship, was much commended.

FEDERICO d'HASSIA a German, created the 19 of Jan. 1652. is a person of spirit
and generosity suitable to the nobleness of his extraction.

He is very just and exact in his judgment, distinguishing betwixt good and
bad to a hair; so that it may be said with reason, his commendations are
without flattery, his reprehensions without envy, because his praises, or
rebukes, (void of all passion) are exactly proportioned to the merits of the
Party.

He was translated from the Camp to the Cloister, from the Sword to the Cross,
from the Protestant Religion to the Catholic, which at the beginning of his
promotion, made several persons believe that he would gain but little honor by
the Cardinalship, supposing he had imbibed too much of the confused principles
of the Protestant, and Soldier; but they were undeceived when they saw him
give such Testimonies of himself, by expressing himself a good Catholic, and a
true observer of the Maxims of the Court of Rome. However the general opinion
is, that his Talent would have been better employed in matters of Arms, than
the Gown, which seems to be something forced and unnatural to him, because
imposed, not generated with him, whereas this inclination to Arms was born with
him, and he has retained it from his Cradle.

The being utterly without, or at least not over-well furnished with the
ornaments of learning, which do oftentimes work upon the hearts of the Popes,
to confe^ subsidies extraordinary upon such Cardinals as are Foreigners, is
the reason that he wants more conveniences than he enjoys, every one
withdrawing himself from his supply, because that to relieve him according to
the largeness of his own thoughts, would require too much. The Spaniards
themselves, whose Maxim it is to enlarge their hands to persons of that
quality, have been close enough as to him, because they see that to maintain
him in his original Grandeur, would ask as much as to maintain six others, so
as they have rather chose to oblige many than one; and hence it is that this
Cardinal is necessitated to hunt after Foreign assistance, as he did for two
years time, that he was in Rome, after the creation of Pope Alexander, so
straightened and distressed by the disappointment of his Assignments, that were
promised him but not paid, that to avoid falling into greater, he was forced to
retire into Germany, to attend some fortune that might put him into a condition
to live again according to his desires in Rome; to which he has a great
inclination, as thinking that place more pleasant than Germany: But the truth
is, when he is in Germany, his inclinations are after Rome, and when in Rome,
they are the same for Germany.

CARLO BARBARINI a Roman, was designed in the promotion the 19th. of February
1652. and afterward declared Cardinal alone, on the 25. of June 1653. to the
admiration of all the World, that by such an excess of favor, he should admit
three Cardinals living at one time, of one Family, a thing never seen nor heard
of in former times; and that which magnified their astonishment more was, that
they saw them initiated into the favor of that Pope, who looked upon it as a
matter of great importance to destroy, or at least to debase that Family, as
knowing how strong their interest was in gaining the people, and working over
the hearts of the discontented to themselves.

The Reconciliation was brought about by means of an Alliance contrived by
Donna Olimpia, who foreseeing the death of the Pope her Cousin approaching,
and considering there was no body of her party that could sustain her, upon any
accident or adversity, she having disobliged even her own Sons, she resolved to
undertake something extraordinary, and that was to negotiate an Alliance with
the Barbarini. And the Princess her Daughter, that was married to the Prince
Justinian, having at that time a Daughter that was marriageable, she entered
into treaty with Cardinal Francisco Barbarino, for the Prince di Palestrina
their Nephew, and promised restitution of whatever had been sequestered from
them.

The Barbarini though they had need enough to have businesses accommodated,
were not so weak nevertheless as to give them their eldest Son, but they told
her, that he was inclined to take the Prelacy upon him, (which was as much as
to say he desired a Cap) and that he would resign his Prefectship to the Abbot
his Brother, and take the Abbey to himself, as it afterward happened, with
advantage to them both; and in this manner Charles having resigned his
Primogeniture to Maffeo Barbarino his Brother, the marriage was concluded, and
the said Charles created Cardinal in respect of the said Match.

Yet this accumulation of honor upon honor, was not to be blamed in the Pope,
if the excellent qualities of this young Cardinal be considered; his modesty is
so conspicuous, and his life so unblamable, that he constrains the very Enemies
of his Family to love him, and draws respect from every person in the Court.

Cardinal Francisco's virtues are visible in the virtues of such a Nephew, who
depends so entirely upon the beck of his Uncle, that his obedience appears
little less than adoration.

The greatest part of the day he addicts either to Study, Devotion, or other
Spiritual exercises, retaining some time also for politic affairs, under the
direction of his Uncle Cardinal Francisco, a person of great experience in
those things, to whose model and example he frames himself exactly.

In short, he takes the same way with his Predecessors that pretended to the
Papacy; but I shall say no more of him, because he is not above forty years
old, but in time he may be elected, as soon as the greatest pretender of them
all.

GIO. BATTISTA SPADA, a Luchese, (otherwise called di Santa S^sanna) was in his
Prelacy entrusted by Urban the eighth, with certain great and considerable
Offices, which he discharged to his commendations; yet though Urban promised
him a Cap, he was not so good as his word. But Innocent being informed of the
excellency of his qualities, that the services that he had done to the Public
might remain unrewarded no longer, he created him Cardinal the 2. of March 1654.

He is a person of great prudence, of a good humor, skilled well enough in the
Law, and of no small experience in the Court: Cardinal Barbarino (that loves
him at his heart) cries him up for one of the greatest Politicians in the
World, and adds many things more then that to his commendations.

The Spaniards have great confidence in him, as looking upon him of a quiet
nature, and not given to novelties. But his being so strangely united in
affection with Barbarino, has given the Grand Duke occasion of Jealousy, and
so much the more, because they have espoused the interest of their Country.

In his Legation of Ferrara he was a little faulty, but they were rather of
Omission than of Commission, he leaving the Reins too loose to his Ministers to
be corrupt, in so much that they who had any business in his Tribunal,
complained of the rapacity of his Officers, and the too great goodness of the
Cardinal.

FRANCISCO ALBICI of Cesena, is a well deserving and well affected Servant to
the Duke of Tuscany, whose Vassail he is originally, though was born in Cesena,
where having exercised his pragmatical humor for some time, and according to
the usual impetuosity of his nature, he constrained a Gentleman of that Country
to handle him like a Vassail indeed: and after such an affront, not being able
to stay longer in those parts, he came to Rome, and entered himself into the
family of Panzirolo, who carried him along with him into Spain, in spite of
several of his Court that were unwilling to have associated with so extravagant
a brain.

At his return from Spain, he was employed by Innocent in the business of the
Jans^nists, which he transacted so well, that he was looked upon as a person of
great abilities, and cunning, if for no other reason, for complying so
exquisitely with the humor of the Pope, that he made him a Cardinal on the 2d.
of March 1654. which otherwise, with all Panzirolo's interest he could never
obtain. But the principal cause that some will have for his promotion, was the
known animosity betwixt him and Cardinal Maculano, a person exceedingly odious
to Donna Olimpia, and the whole house of Pamphilia; pretending that by
introducing into the Conclave a person of his temper and vehemence, all the
hopes Maculano had, would be dashed; so that it it may be said, he was not
advanced upon the score of his merits, but that he might be an impediment to
all such practices as should be used in favor of the said Maculano.

The Tongue of this Cardinal is extremely Satirical, and he utters many times
things that are insufferably sharp; he has utterly disobliged the Chigi with
his talking, against whom, now they are out of authority, he speaks more
frankly than formerly.

But he reckons that a virtue in himself, pretending he does it not out of any
malevolence, but justice, as being naturally averse to the corruptions of the
Age, not of the Court; and therefore he cannot content himself to reprehend the
vices of other people at their private meetings, but in his public Orations
he takes delight to ostentate his eloquence in that manner; every body admiring
that he (that is not without his defects himself) should give himself over to
the censuring of other persons, without any respect.

This Satirical way of proceeding, obscures the luster of his learning, and the
great experience he has in the affairs of the world; for other things he has a
very good head, and is therefore hated by the Spaniard, who is always jealous
of such persons, as they that by their contrivances are able to disturb the
repose of the whole Universe.

OTTAVIO AQVAVIVA a Neopolitan, has a general applause, as a person that has
virtue sufficient to render him worthy of that honor, besides that the
Nobility of his Birth makes him as illustrious as his virtues.

He is very well practiced in the politics of the Court, and indeed so much,
he needs no addition to qualify him for the Congregations, or other offices;
but as to the Supremacy, he could not in any manner attain merely by that
experience he has already; it would be necessary for him to look out for
assistance, which he could scarce want having no small number of Allies, and
Kindred, who (whether good or bad) are they which govern the Church in behalf
of the Pope.

He retains much of the Neapolitan still, though he has been a long time out of
that Country, that is, he is liberal of his tongue, but very sparing of his
^urse. Not that he does no generous actions, but only that he wants judgment
to distribute them with discretion, giving all sometimes to one, and to another
nothing, and commonly he offers more than he can give, and then gives less than
he promised.

He obtained the Cap the 2d. of March 1654. but I know not whether of Pope
Innocent, or of his Cousin Donna Olimpia; For of two persons, one of them was
beloved by the Pope, and hated by Donna Olimpia, and the other beloved by Donna
Olimpia, and abhorred by his Holiness; this Lady was able to eradicate from the
Popes heart the person he affected, and place her own favorite there, sooner
than his Holiness could put her friend out of her mind, to make room for his
own.

But that which gave greatest occasion of wonder to the Court was, to see that
Lady that was wont to regard nothing but money, without thinking on the merits
of the persons recommended, that she should fix her eye upon a person of his
worth and deserts, without a feeling in the hand.

Her considerations were politic and good, and so allowed by Innocent himself,
for Donna Olimpia having got money enough, she thought it time to lay about her
for friends; and therefore seeing his Holiness declining a pace, she betook her
self to her politics, endeavoring to fortify her Family and person, by
obliging such persons of worth and nobility, as could upon any sinister
occasion give them protection.

Many believe that this Aquaviva being so generous a person, left not so great
a benefit unrewarded; but be it as it will, this is most certain, that upon the
bare score of the Cap, there was not the least present made: and if afterward
he was created Cardinal, he did any thing in that kind (which I do not believe)
it was not for that reason, but some other; for this I am sure of, he knew so
well the worth of his Family, that he would a thousand times sooner have been
contented to have remained without a Cap as he was before, than to have tainted
it, with the least thought of Simony.

The Spaniards love him, and honor him; but I know not whether they be
thoroughly satisfied with him, or not, because in many things he behaves
himself as a Neuter, not expressing that ardour and zeal, he ought to do, as he
is a subject to that Crown; besides in the Conclaves he gave them no perfect
content.

CARLO PIO of Ferrara, was Nephew to the lately deceased Cardinal of that name,
who by his ill life, left occasion to many people to discourse of him, with no
great advantage to his reputation.

This Nephew of whom we are speaking was Tresoriere di Camera, an office that
cost eighty thousand Crowns; and therefore in the vacancy of such offices, they
advanced persons not for their merits, but their moneys. The same case exactly
happened in the promotion of Carlo Pio, for Innocent decaying daly, his Cousin
was still at his elbow, egging and soliciting him perpetually to some new way
of drawing more sums to her Coffers; and to give her content, he created him
Cardinal the 2d. of March 1654. selling the Treasurers place to another, and so
two several ways augmenting the Treasury of his Cousin.

The Family of this Lord, for its nobility and deserts, might well have
deserved a Cap, without this manner of dealing; however he did well to come by
it as he did, otherwise he might have gone without it as long as he lived.

Many things might be said of the nature of this person, if the number of them
would not confound both the Writer, and Reader; he never enjoyed his health
perfectly from his youth, he was troubled with many infirmities, that disabl'd
him for several functions; but he finding himself incurable, forced his nature
by some kind of exercise* as much as was possible, and with success above the
opinions of those Physicians that governed him.

He had the Church of Ferrara given him, in consideration rather of his Family
than his person; but it would have been better for him to have refused it, and
continued in Rome, than by accepting it to render that pittance and remainder
of his health more weakly and infirm, by the labor of his Pastoral Cure, and
to let the people of his own Country know, the quality of his complexion.

The principal cause that put him upon that resolution, was, that he also had
imbibed that commune Maxim, That the less a Cardinal is present in the Court;
with the more case will he in time arrive at the Papacy: which saying, though
it be universal* bears no place in the Politics of the Romans, who being
become Masters of experience, they can easily see through their designs that
think that way to conceal them, and do give precedence rather to those that
comport themselves handsomely at Court, than those that retire themselves into
the Country. This Cardinal therefore observing, that by reason of his Youth, or
at least the immaturity of his age for the Popedom, those hopes were too remote
from him, he concluded to resign his Church of Ferrara, and to change his
principals under pretense that the air of Rome was more agreeable to his health.

And now to come to the particulars of his humor, I shall say, that the most
politic do think him very blamable, as being excessively severe, and
untractable in extremity. He would fain have reformed all the Clergy in his
Diocese, upon the mere authority of a Bishop; beginning not with Fatherly
exhortations, so much as with comminations and threatenings, in so much that he
has taken a course to publish certain offenses, that were but private before,
and to divide those he designed to have united, only to get the reputation of a
good Magistrate.

But he intended to have done all this to a good end, having an ambition to
make himself thought an honest man, and zealous for the Church, without
observing, that when Zeal is not accompanied with moral Prudence, to moderate
the impulses of Nature, it becomes odious even to good men, and instead of
Zeal, discovers it self to be Tyranny.

But this is an infirmity peculiar in this present age to those Ecclesiastics,
that if by weakness of Age, or strength of Continence, they forbear those
public scandals of the Flesh, they presently swell, and boast up the
excellency of their Nature, with which they come afterward to a certain heat,
and arrogance, they call Zeal: and of this sort is the Zeal of this Cardinal
esteemed, who to speak truth has but few frailties to correct, either that his
infirmities do debilitate his Nature, or his virtue overpower it; it is
sufficient that there are no considerable faults to be found in him, unless it
be that he is but little inclined to do kindnesses for any body, and that he is
too fierce in the con^utation of him that refuses to yield at the first dash,
especially if it be in matters of Conscience, in which he is scrupulous to the
highest.

As for his Negotiations he cannot expect much, having had no occasion to be
exercised in great affairs; besides his temper is too tender, and would not
suffer him to take such employments upon him, though perhaps he would force
himself rather than be behind the rest, his brain being stimulated by the same
thing, that excites the whole College to the Papacy: In time he might make an
offer at the Papacy, as others do, I know not whether he would obtain it; but
this I know, that many persons inferior to him have leaped into the Vatican.

CARLO GVALTIERI of Orvietta, was by the mediation of Donna Olimpia promoted to
the Cardinalship, the 2. of March 1654. not that he was a person worthy of a
Cap, or that the Pope had made use of him in any considerable affair, but
because it was his fortune to be allied to the House of Pamphilia.

Innocent was really in his own mind averse from introducing persons of so
small virtue as this, and Maldachino, into the Sacred College, amongst so many
Eminent persons, and so many great Princes. But Donna Olimpia, who was
Paramount and did what she pleased, cast such a mist before the eyes of that
Innocent Pope, that he discerned not what he did himself, by the promotion of
those two persons, uniting them and fixing them upon her, and which is of
greater importance, leaving so many persons that for many years together had
worn themselves out in the service of the Church; which his poor Holiness
forgot, till the error was committed, and all the Streets of Rome in a tumult
to have it remedied. If the qualities of Maldachino and Gualtieri were
compared, Gualtieri's though they are good for little or nothing, are yet less
ridiculous than the former.

Donna Olimpia employed him in her secret affairs, that is, she made him
negotiate the selling of Benefices, in which she did very ill, to entrust
things of great importance in the hands of a person of no experience, and less
judgment; but as bad as he was, he knew well enough to make his advantages of
the Election she gave him, from whom he learned also a great dexterity in
shearing of his Flock; and in his Church of Fermo, (of which he is Bishop) he
disdains not from time to time to receive presents from his Clerks, not that he
demands them, but when they are offered he never refuses them.

The Pope gave him this Bishopric, not to recompense any desert he had found
in him, nor that he thought him worthy to execute that Pastoral charge, but
only to send him packing from Rome, it going against the hair to see in the
Consistories and public meetings, such a creature sitting amongst so many
Cardinals of renoun; and he had done better yet, had he by as honorable a
banishment sent Maldachino as far from the Court.

If there be any thing good in this Gualtieri, it is that he is not envious,
and that knowing his own ignorance, he takes kindly the advice of any one that
knows more than himself; being very seldom obstinate in his opinion, but in
case of anger, or some particular passion.

DECIO AZZOLINI is the last Cardinal of the Creation of Innocent the tenth; he
is of a Sicilian Race, though born in the City of Fermo in the Marquisat of
Ancona, where we have said Gualtieri was Bishop.

It would be a long story, if we should set down the whole cause of his
Exaltation, and we should be forced to repeat much of what has been said
already; I shall only say, that being conscious of his incapacity of arriving
at that Grandeur his ambition prompted him to, as having no means nor merits to
advance him, nor any thing besides a simple Prelature, he took upon him that
way which takes very often in the Court of Rome, and that is in plain terms he
turned Spy; in which he improved himself so well, it was generally believed
there was not any one more dexterous in discovering the corruptions of others
than he; and this he manifested, when Pope Innocent was in transaction of
something with the Barbarini, upon the acquisition of the Kingdom of Naples,
the Barbarini having a great thirst after certain Principalities of that Crown,
which falling into the hands of the Church, they doubted not by the power of
their purse to have a competent share thereof. Cardinal Astalli having notice
of all (though the Barbarini had rendered him so suspicious to the Pope, that
he was kept at a distance from this design) he gave immediate intelligence to
the Spaniard, with whom he kept a strict correspondence. Which being smelt by
Azzolini after his wonted manner being Clerk of the Breves, a charge of no
ordinary importance, and confidence, he gave a private account of it to the
Pope, who used Astalli very ill upon it, depriving him (as every body knows) of
all he had given him, except his Cap; by way of recompense making Azzolini
Cardinal the 2d. of March 1654. and so it was first discovered, that the ruin
and fall of Astalli was occasioned in great part by the Relations, whether true
or false of this person, who has since made the mystery of a Spy so honorable,
that at present, in hopes of great rewards, there are Prelates of greater
reputation than he have undertaken the same way.

But most of them find themselves mistaken, every one not being of Innocents
mind, to love the Treason and not the Traitor.

In the last Conclave he bestirred himself very much for the interest of
Rospigliosi, to whom he gave relation several times of all the obstructions he
met with* wherewith Rospigliosi was so well satisfied, that the very night of
his Election, he declared the said Azzolini his Secretary of State, a place of
great trust, and which he had executed himself thorough the whole Pontificate
of Alexander.

The friends of this Azzolini do cry him up for a person of very great
judgment and experience in politic affairs; but those that have tried him in
business, do say there is nothing in him extraordinary, but a certain dexterity
of the pen, which he has acquired by long conversation in the Secretaries place.

But if there were any thing in him more than ordinarily conspicuous, it would
be eclipsed by certain defects that overruled him, and particularly by his
amors to all kind of Ladies, both Virgins, and Wives, he passing most of his
time in car^ssing of them, not regarding whether the Republique receives any
advantage, or no.

Of how poor and abject a spirit he is, appears by this, that even whilst he
was a Cardinal, he has yielded himself up to certain Doxeys brought into his
Chamber, by a certain Friar his Pandor; but since he began to have familiar
converse in the Court of the Queen of Sweden, his thoughts are somewhat
advanced.

Alexander not enduring the publiqueness of this Cardinals amors, sent him
Legate to Ravenna, rather to remove him out of his sight, than for any thing
else; after his departure there were many things discovered, which gave great
occasion of discourse about the Court. Yet it is as true, he was no sooner
returned, but his very presence stopped the mouths of the people, if not of the
Court.

The whole number of Cardinals created by Urban the eight, were 72. which made
a good wit of the Court say, That amongst all the Popes of Rome, Urban was the
only Vicar of Christ; for as Christ had chosen for the service of the Church 72
Disciples, so had Urban called 72 Cardinals to the Apostleship; with this
difference only, that the first were made by our Savior to be serviceable to
the Christians, but the last to make the Christian serviceable to them: which
gives the Protestants occasion to laugh both at Cardinals and Pope too.

These Cardinals were created in eleven several Ordinations, and to speak the
truth, the greatest part of those that were promoted, were but ordinary
persons, of no eminence, either for learning, or extraction, having more regard
to advance the interest of his own Family, than the Ornament of the Church.
True it is, his intention was to have filled the College with persons of
eminence, but he was either diverted by his Nephews, or repented himself of
those inclinations, and gave the Cap to such, as had scarce wit enough to know
which way 'twas to be worn.

Innocent the tenth made 39 in ten Ordinations, making as many Ordinations in
ten years, as Urban did in twenty; yet if the merit of the persons be compared
that were created in Innocents time, and in Vrbans, those that were promoted by
Innocent, will doubtless transcend those very much that were created by Urban,
though Innocent himself had his failings too, and introduced persons into the
College that were fit to wear the habit of a poor Friar in a Cloister, rather
than the Robes of a Cardinal in the College. But this is certain, had it not
been for Donna Olimpia, Innocent would have chosen such as had been worthy of
the College; for those that he created himself, of his own proper motion, and
without the advice of his Cousin, were all persons of eminence; whereas all
that were promoted by her means (except one or two at the most) were rather to
fill up the number, than to adorn the Church.

The principal care of the Popes should be to fill up the College with such
persons, as should be an honor and reputation to their Robes, and not with
such as stand gaping in hopes to receive honor by them. A great shame it is
for the Church of Christ to say, that for an age backward, the Popes have had
no other design but to make their Grooms and their Footmen Cardinals, and to
pass by Princes, and persons of worth, and such as have with so much labor and
sweat, endeavored the advancement, not of the Nepotismo, but Christianity it
self.

For my part I cannot see by what policy it is, that the Popes of our days (to
go no further) have in their Creations of Cardinals, had more regard to the
number than the qualifications of them, although their qualities be of much
more importance than their number, and of more benefit both to the Church and
Pope.

Two Cardinal Princes, of quality, of birth, and esteem, are more capable of
adorning the Cardinalitial dignity, of defending the interest of the Church,
and of adding splendor to the Court, than a dozen such Clowns, as (be it
spoken with reverence) are too often to be seen in the College, with the
Scarlet upon their shoulders. He that receives a Cap, to do it honor, forces
himself what he can to let the world see he is able to do it, and that he be
not indebted to his dignity; but he that receives his Robes to be honored by
them, looks no further than his own interest; it is sufficient to him he is
accounted a Cardinal, as if the Cardinalship were in him, not he in the
Cardinalship; so great a difference is there betwixt receiving the Purple, and
being received by it.

There is no doubt but it would be more for the advantage of the Popes, to
create their Cardinals, few in number, and great in worth, than it is to have
whole Troops of them, inconsiderable in their qualities, and great only in
their number. The principal end of the Popes (as I have said in another place)
in the creation of Cardinals, (unless it be the filling of his purse) is
nothing but the supporting the fortunes of his Family, and the leaving his
Nephews such Friends in the Conclave and College, as may stand by them in case
of persecution, and be Advocates in their causes.

Nor is this (if it be considered nearly) ill policy; yet it would be much more
profitable, if instead of making inferior persons Protectors of the Nephews,
they would choose such potent Cardinals, as could defend them by the greatness
of their own Families, and not by the virtue only of another man's Gown. Great
persons are always great, and their words are valued accordingly, so that if
the Purple be but added, they throw flame and luster about every thing: Those
that are but ordinary, and of but moderate Talents, though they have the honor
of the Purple, yet they can do nothing but meanly, because the luster they cast
is unnatural and forced, and turns all their glory into smoke. Moreover, it
would be much more for the advantage of the Popes, to create few Cardinals, and
those Great, than to create many, and those ordinary and mean; when I say
Great, I mean Princes, that not only honor the Purple with their persons, but
spare the money of the Chamber, (I should have said, of the Popes) whereas poor
Cardinals do weaken and disable the Datary, the Popes being obliged with
Pensions, Benefices, and Bishoprics, to maintain and put them into a capacity
of supporting their Cardinalship honorably: But all that money would be
reserved, either for the Chamber, or for the Nephews, or for the Pope; because
Princes receive not the Cap, out of any regard to the profit of the
Cardinalship, but by their being Cardinals to add profit to the Church.

On the other side, the Court of Rome is so far Majestic, and reckoned among
the principal of the World, by how far the Cardinals do render it so; for by
how much the persons are considerable, that carry the Purple, by so much is the
Court more splendid and magnificent, because the Court is made magnificent by
the Cardinals.

To this purpose I remember I was speaking one day with a Foreign Gentleman, of
the Grandeur of the Court of Rome, and I having said, that its greatest
ornament and glory, consisted in the persons of the Cardinals, who resembling
Kings, the Court by consequence was adorned with as many Kings, as Cardinals:
But he having been in Rome, and holding particular intelligence, had good
information of the interests and policies of the Popes, answered me thus; Sir,
the habit makes not the Monk, but the Monk the habit: An ill man though he
wears a Religious habit, is but an ill man still; but a good man in the worst
habit, shall be esteemed good notwithstanding. In like manner, it is not the
Purple that makes the Cardinal, but the Cardinal the Purple; so that the
Cardinals would be Kings indeed, if the Popes would choose them amongst the
Princes, and not amongst such as they too often do.

To speak the truth, how can that Cardinal be an honor to the Court, that
cannot read? how can he add splendour to the Papacy, that cannot write? how can
he give Majesty to an Imperial City, that is but the offspring of a Country
Village? how can he merit the Title of a King, that never conversed but with
the vilest of the people? Yet of such kind of stuff the Popes make their
Cardinals too often; and then how can that Court be thought great, or
serviceable to the Church, if they that serve it are Kings indeed by name, but
Scoundrils in fact? Let that Cap be bestowed on those that know how to wear it;
let him be advanced to the Cardinalship, that has deserved to be a King: In
short, those Popes that desire to see the Church and the Court shining in
Majesty and splendour, let not them conferr that honor upon the quantity, but
the quality of the Persons.

Innocent the tenth began his promotions with the greatest glory in the World,
having opened his Creation, by giving his first Cap to the most Serene Prince
Gio. Carlo di Medici, Brother to the Great Duke of Tuscany, and that on the
14th. of November 1644. a person of that worth, that for those twenty years he
lived a Cardinal, he may be said to have been the glory of the College. The
next year continuing in that good humor, he created Francisco Maria Farnese,
Brother to the Duke of Parma; who joining the Highness of his Birth, to the
Eminence of the Cardinalship, added honor to the Order, and had done it more,
had not the untimeliness of his death prevented it. The third year he gave the
Cap to Giovanni Casimiro, the King of Polands Brother, which he afterward
resigned in the year 1648. being called back to receive that Crown in the room
of his Brother, that was lately dead; by that means making it clear, that the
Purple can produce a Scepter, if the Purple be taken from the Scepters. And
last of all, in the last year but one of his Pontificate, ambitious perhaps to
immortalize his Name, by admitting the most Eminent persons into the College,
he created Prince Frederick Lantgrave of Hassia Cardinal, of whom we have
spoken already in his proper place.

Paul the fifth had a particular aim through the whole course of his Popedom, to
ennoble the Court, to add new Majesty to the College, and to select such
persons as were proper by their own grandeur, to defend the honor of the
Church; and accordingly in three promotions, he advanced five Princes of very
great quality to the Cardinalship; viz. Mauritio Son to the Duke of Savoy, who
renounced it afterward, to marry one of the Neeces, holding it less scandal to
subject himself to a Lady, than to be a slave to the Nipotisme of Urban the
eighth; Ferdinando, and Vicenzo Gonsaga, both Sons to the Duke of Mantoa; Carlo
di Medici, Son to the Duke of Tuscany; and Ferdinando Infant di Spagna, who as
Histories report, immortalized the honor of the Cardinalship, by fighting for
the Faith of Christ.

Urban the eighth that lived Pope so long, although he created three Princes
Cardinals, viz. Nicolo Francisco, Brother to the Duke of Lorain; Gio. Alberto,
Brother to the King of Poland; and Rinald d'Este, Brother to the Duke of
Modena; yet for all that he was either diverted by his Kindred afterward, or
else his own inclinations were not fixed upon such Noble objects, and he
endeavored to keep at a distance from the College such persons as deserved
the Cap, not only for the glory of their Birth, but for the many services they
had performed for the Church: In this manner Urban kept several Princes as far
from the Cardinalship as was possible, and amongst the rest Francisco Maria
Farnese, Brother to the Duke of Parma, who as many ways deserved it, as any
one: But the Pope postponing the public interest of the Church, to the fancy
and Capriccio of his Kindred, deprived the College of so Honorable a Member,
the Church of so considerable a Protector, his own Family of so potent a
support, and his own person of the acquisition of a Fame, more immortal than
that of his being Pope: For when the Popes do give occasion and matter to have
it immortalized, they immortalize their own Names themselves; nor can they find
any more honorable way, than by filling the Cardinalitial College with
persons of Honor.

But that which is most considerable is, he not only disobliged the Cardinal
Princes that were created by Paulus, but those few also that he created
himself, being forced thereto for certain pitiful and poor-spirited reasons,
in so much that they were leaving of the Court, and retiring out of Rome,
rather than to see the Prerogative of their Births, prostituted to a few
persons that had not wit nor education enough to use them civilly, especially
such as had deserved their promotion by their other virtues. And it is most
certain, (I beg the pardon of their relations that are living, because I write
only the common opinion, and what is declared in several Histories) the Church
would have been in great perplexity, to see it self out of all hopes of being
served by Princes, if another Urban had succeeded the former, and not an
Innocent. But that God that governs all things, above the comprehension of man,
put clear other thoughts into the heart of Innocent, (who by his Divine
providence, was called to the Papacy) than what were in Urban; for as the one
endeavored what he could to keep the Purple from the shoulders of the Princes,
the more did the other labor to place it there.

Alexander the seventh, that began his Pontificate with the zeal of a Saint,
and the magnificence of Alexander the Great, expressed a great ambition that he
had, to see in his time the Court more Majestic than ever; and he sought out
all the ways he could to adorn it, not only by endeavoring the number of
Ambassadors of Foreign Princes might be increased, (who do add indeed great
splendour to a Court) but he declared also, he would fill up the College with
more Eminent persons, than had ever been seen there before; and at this rate he
discoursed frequently, not only with the Cardinals themselves, but with his
Familiars and Domestics, protesting his whole design was to promote half a
dozen Princes at the least; which being related to an old Courtier, he told a
Friend of his, that had a mind to a Cap; Sir, till now I looked upon you as a
Cardinal, because Cardinals were made formerly of any thing, but now the Pope
is resolved to make them of the best only, there is but little hopes for you. I
understand you, (replied the other) and I had rather wave the services I have
done to the Church for the sake of a Prince, than of an ignoble Competitor.

To the Marquess of Majetta, Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy, Alexander made
no small protestations, that he was very sorry he could not find one person in
that Royal Family of the Duke, that was capable of the Cardinalitial Dignity,
whereby he might satisfy his natural inclination, of adding new splendour to
the College, by introducing persons of that eminence, and extraction.

And such pretenses as these he used to the Ambassadors of other Princes, that
is, of such in whose Families he saw no hopes of finding a person proper for so
great an honor. But it was known very well, he used no such discourses but in
mere hypocrisy, because he never made any such Propositions to those Princes
that were able to have furnished him. And this piece of dissimulation, for
which he was suspected at Court, was verified toward his latter end, when as
there being two Cardinals of the House of Medici dead, who without doubt had
been the greatest Ornament of that Sacred College, and it being in his power
to have immortalized his Name, by the promotion of others out of the same; he
shut his eyes, and his ears, against all the overtures that were made, so that
instead of re-admitting one at least of the said Family into the vacancy, he
filled them both up with Sieneses, choosing rather to rob the Church of so
great an honor, than deny himself the latitude of his passions, in so much as
after his last promotion, which he made dying as it were, and in his Bed, many
people began to cry out, that it was but fit the Church should remain a Widow,
without a Pastor, seeing it was his will, the College should remain a Widow,
without any more of the House of Medici.

And indeed for a whole age to this time, there has not been found in the
College so few Cardinal Princes, as at present, especially of the House of
Medici, the Cardinals of which, have not only labored by their outward
magnificence to preserve the splendour of the Court, but upon several occasions
have demonstrated to the Popes, that it was necessary to continue such persons
in the College, for defense of the reputation of the Popedom, and the honor
of the Church; and this the House of Chigi above all others would acknowledge,
did not their passions blind their belief, for without the assistance of the
two Cardinals of the House of Medici, Alexander would have found himself more
than once, or twice either, in such a Labyrinth of business, as would have been
prejudicial not only to his own Family, but to the common good of Christendom;
and particularly, in the time of that accident to the Duke of Crequy: But for
all that, he regarded not to deprive his own House, of the protection of that;
it being the custom (by natural instinct) of such as are born Subjects, to kick
and repine against their natural Lords; and this was manifest in Pope
Alexander, who in the beginning of his Papacy, spoke of nothing more in all his
Consistories both public and private, than of the transcendent worth in the
House and Person of the Great Duke; but afterward toward his latter end,
having opportunity of showing the effects of his pretended affection, and the
obligations he ought to him, as his Subject, by promoting some person of the
House of Medici to the Cardinalship, forgetting what he had talked in the
beginning, the Grand Duke was the last person in his thoughts.

It is most certain, that for these hundred years and more, there has not been
a Pope like Alexander in the Church, so little inclined to make Cardinal
Princes, he not having had the honor to have created one in his whole time, a
thing that has not happened in a whole age before; some Popes having created
two, some three, some more, some less, as is to be seen in the Catalogue of the
Popes, only Alexander alone created not one. But this I cannot attribute so
much to the ill disposition of Alexander, as to the ill fortune of his
Pontificate, that could not accommodate the times to the will of Alexander, nor
the will of Alexander to the times; in so much that the Church was the greatest
sufferer.

When the Cardinal Princes dye, the Popes may well mourn, especially if they
have not an intention to fill up their places with new Princes.

And now I speak of mourning, I will be bold to say, before I pass any further,
that instead of that, the greatest pleasure the Popes receive at any time, is
the news of the death of a Cardinal; and on the other side, the Cardinals are
as glad at the death of the Pope, and that either out of hopes to arrive at the
Popedom themselves, or at least by virtue of their own negotiations, to prefer
some person depending upon their amity and beck. The Popes rejoice to have
vacancies in the College, out of a desire to leave great numbers of Creatures
obliged to follow the interest of the Nipotisme: And because the Cardinal
Princes do usually walk in ways that are independent, and most agreeable to
the interest of their own Families, and to the public advantage of the Church;
or rather because they are ashamed to give their Votes at the direction of the
Nephews, therefore are the Popes so careful of their interest, so shy and
cautious in promoting them, holding this as a Maxim, that so many Caps as are
given to the Princes, so many Votes are given away from the Nephews: And this
it is, that inclines them to make Cardinals rather of such persons as will
(with Reverence be it spoken) be led by the Nose by the Nipotisme, than of the
Princes, that would certainly make the Popes Nephews to follow them.

Nor is it a wonder, seeing in truth, the more those Cardinals that are made by
the dozens, are obliged to follow the Commands of the Nipotisme, the more are
the Cardinal Princes concerned to preserve the liberty of the College, and to
endeavor that the Nephews do follow their steps. The ordinary Cardinals
receive the Cap, because it suits with the interest of the Nipotisme: The
Princes receive the Purple, because the Majesty of Christendom, and the
reputation of the Sacred College requires it; and besides these are obliged to
defend the privileges of the College, and the honor of the Church; whereas
the other are tied only to gratify the Nipotisme, and show themselves slaves
as it were to their wills. The Popes therefore being well instructed in this
kind of learning, do for the most part fill up the College with persons fit to
be commanded, and in spite of the honor of the Church, keep off those that
are able to Command, and that indeed have deserved it.

At least if the Popes be not inclined to the honor of the Church, and the
glory of the Cardinalitial College, and do not therefore create them Cardinals
that are Princes born; yet they ought to take care to advance such as are
learned, for their own private reputations, the Church having great need of
them; for seeing the Heretics write so learnedly against it, it is necessary
it should be defended with learning.

The College of Cardinals was never so ill provided with learned men, as now;
it is true, it abounds in imaginary learning enough, every one believing himself
wiser than Solomon; and these are not my Sentiments only, but the opinion of
such as are daily in Rome, and nearly conversant with the Cardinals themselves,
and have frequent opportunities to make the experiment.

When I first took a resolution of publishing this Work, which I had before
conceived in my mind, I writ several Letters to my Friends in Rome, and in
other places, that they should give me a relation of the several Cardinals, and
of their virtues and vices; particularly I requested, with reiterated
instances, that they would give me advice, what Learning there was amongst
them, which of the Cardinals had the most of it, and whether any of them was
more learned than other people.

The Answers were different in this particular, but they agreed well enough in
the main: One writ me word, That learning was so rare amongst them, that with
all the diligence he could use, he could not find the least print of it.
Another writ, That there were so many ignorant Cardinals, they would not suffer
a learned one to be seen. There was one, and (which is more considerable) a
Priest, that sent me word, That he could not find a Cardinal in the Sacred
College, that had spent so much time at School, as he had lost in enquiring
what improvements they had made by their study. An Academick returned me this
answer; That Literature was out of fashion at Court, because every one
pretended to be learned, in so much that the Cardinals valued not to be so,
because they looked upon learning as Pedantique and beneath them. A Roman all
wit, and indifferently well learned* returned me this answer, That the
Cardinals were created by the Popes, and their Nephews, and they had rather
find rich persons, than learned. Not unlike to this was the answer of one of my
greatest Confidents, who writ to me in this manner.

SIR, Your humor is not at all corresponding with the humor of the Nephews,
they look for money from the Cardinals, and you for learning; but I can assure
you the Nephews understand them better than you, because money is easier found
amongst them* than learning: had the Church the power of electing her
Cardinals, I am sure the College would be of another mold; but the Nephews
having the creation of them at their pleasures, is the reason why there are so
many ignorant ones; because they think not so much of the advantage of the
Church* as of their own. Formerly they chose persons eminent in all sorts of
learning, because the genius of that age was inclined to virtue, but at
present, virtuous men may lie and rot in their studies, it is an age of gold in
Rome, I mean for the Popes, who have absolute power to make* and unmake, and to
bestow his Caps, as he pleases. Forbear I beseech you to inquire after learned
Cardinals any further, lest you your self be thought ignorant, for with us
everybody knows there is nothing less thought on in Rome.

With this Letter, I received another at the same time, but from another of my
friends, that writ thus, Among the Cardinals there are many ignorant to be
found, few that understand latin, but of those that you call moderately
learned, the number is so small, I am ashamed to give you an account on it;
nevertheless I would force my self to endure that discouragement (for it is
certainly a discouragement for a man to seek a thing in a place, where it is
not to be found) if their virtue was accompanied with modesty; for to say the
truth, those few Cardinals that have any learning, have so overlay'd it with
vice, that ignorance would be more desirable with a good conversation, than the
greatest depth of learning with an ill one.

And this is the discourse at Rome of the Scholarship of the Cardinals; a thing
that brings no small incommodity to the Christian Religion, because it cannot
support it self without the assistance of learned men, who are they indeed that
serve as banks against the impetuosity of that torrent, that springs daily from
the Fountain of Heresy, by a stream of false opinions, indangering the
pollution of that pure Evangelical River, that purles so sweetly and sonorously
in the ears of the Faithful.

And this is demonstrated by sundry eminent persons, that by the labor of
their hands, and the sweat of their brains, have confuted thousand of Heresies;
and it is well enough known to our age that has had the fortune to see those
two Lamps of learning* Bellarmine and Toledo, combating with so much ardour
against Heretics, and spending more sweat in the service of the Church, than
can easily be imagined.

At present, such as they seem to be banished out of the Church, as well as
from the Consistory of Cardinals, for there is not any one now adays that
undertakes the defense of Christianity against its enemies: yet I am unwilling
to think that learning is banished out of the Church, but rather out of the
hearts of the Popes, who forgetting their duties in the promotions of
Cardinals, have no other aim, than to accommodate their own Families, before
the Church of Christ; so that they not only take no care, to find out learned
men, but they despise them when they are offered.

This is the reason that all that are in Rome do strive to be aforehand with
the world, and to obtain the good will of his Holiness, not by such means as
were formerly used; for of old, the Popes required nothing but learning of
those persons that desired to pass to the most conspicuous degree in the
Church; and therefore no body durst so much as pretend to any office or
dignity, that was not largely endued with that, and the more Scholarship they
had, the sooner were they received by his Holiness. At present they have other
methods; learning is so ineffectual in the Vatican, that there is no one dares
venture to carry it thither, it being much better to batter their Gates that
rule the roast now with Gold, than with any thing else, for it is that which
will open them soonest.

It is not many months since, I asked a certain Curate that was reading these
words, In principio erat Verbum, the cause why ignorance reigned so much
amongst the Priests, and he answered me in these words; Men would be beasts to
study to be Priests, whilst the Popes makes Cardinals of Asses: Every body
knows, that if it be easy for the beast of a Priest to obtain a Cap, 'twill be
much more easy for a Secular Ass to be made a Canon.

The Religious, that are in so little request at the Court (I mean those of any
reading) retire themselves from their Studies, with hopes, that by forbearing
to prosecute and improve their learning, they shall be able to advance
themselves, because they observe it is ignorance, not learning, bestows the
places in the Vatican. In short, I find the strictest account the Popes are to
give at the Tribunal of Gods Justice, is, that they have discouraged learning,
and promoted ignorant. I know all this is better known to the Popes, than to
me; but the misery is, they will not know what they are obliged to do, and
which would immortallize their names much better than the Gold they leave to
their Nephews.

Their Gold will fail them, but their good names will never, and yet this good
name is nothing so dear to the Popes, as the other; but if they would content
themselves with a little of both, the business would be something tolerable.

If the number of the Cardinals were but six or seven, as they were in the
infancy of the Church, the Popes indeed might have some excuse, that might
satisfy such Princes as deserve Caps, and such learned persons as the Church
have need of; but what can they say now for refusing to introduce learned men,
and Princes, into the College? I will not stand here to make an Epilogue, nor
recite many places in the History of the Popes, in which they speak of dozens
of Cardinals created without so much as one Prince, or one learned man; there
being no other design, but the satisfaction of private interest.

He that understands the History of the Court of Rome, let him have the
curiosity to see whether I lie or not; let him read the description of the
Promotions, that would know the quality of the persons that are created
Cardinals. Urban the eighth, after he had created seventy and more, toward the
latter end of his life resolved to make one person a Cardinal, out of pure
consideration of his learning, and that was Father Gio. di Lug^ a Spanish
Jesuit; but if the truth were known, there were other reasons beside, for that
would have scarcely been sufficient. In short, it is necessary that we pray to
Almighty God to inspire the Popes to search out for persons worthy of their
Promotions, and proper by the Majesty of their person, and the excellence of
their parts, to defend the Church of Christ, that lies afflicted both within
and without; without by its public Enemies, and within by its private;
without by the Heretics, that torture her with their false opinion, within by
the Nephews, that destroy and devour her. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART II.
BOOK III.
The Contents.
Wherein is discoursed of the birth and advancement of Cardinal Flavio Chigi,
Nepew to Pope Alexander. Of the intention of Don Mario his Father to Marry him.
Of the arrival of the said Don Mario at Rome. The declaration of a Cardinal
Padrone, in the person of Chigi. Of his abilities in the beginning of his
Padronship. Of the little covetousness he showed to laying up money. Of his
Legation into France. Of Cardinal Bonvisi, and of his design to remove himself
to Rome, to try his fortunes. Of his resolutions to keep from the Court. Of the
renuntiation of the Prefectship. Of his being declared Maestro di Camera, and
of his promotion to the Cardinalship. Of his good qualities, and the ill
actions of Francisco Bonvisi his Nephew. Of the evident tokens of virtue
Cardinal Elci showed from his youth. Of the satisfaction that he gave to the
Senate, when he was Nuntio at Venice. Of his passage from Venice into Germany.
Of the great esteem Innocent the tenth had of the person of Cardinal Farnese.
Of what he had done in favor of the house of Chigi. Of the prejudice he might
have had against it, in case of a vacancy. Of his disgust with Cardinal
Barbarino. Of the animosity betwixt him and Cardinal Imperiale. Of his great
obstinacy in defending his opinions. Of the promotion of Anthonio Bichi of
Siena to the Cardinalship. Of the great pains the Chigi took to exclude Prior
Bichi from the College, and the reasons of that exclusion. Of the fair
entertainment this Cardinal gives to those that have business with him. Of the
means by which Cardinal Giacomo Franzone arrived at the Purple. Of his offices
before he was made a Cardinal. Of his Love to Justice, and of his Charity to
the Poor. Of his Kindred in Genoa. Of Cardinal Bonelli. And of the authority
Cardinal Imperiale has over him. Of the promotion of Celio Piccolomini to the
Cardinalship. Of his leaving of Paris. Of what befell him by the way. Of his
conference with the Spanish Ambassador. Of a Letter written by Monsignor
Tellier. Of the trouble it was to his most Christian Majesty, to be obliged to
use the Nuntio so severely, and yet it was but just. Of the opinion of the
Court, that he would be made a Cardinal as soon as he arrived at Rome. Of the
deserts and qualities of Cardinal Caraffa. Of the great dexterity wherewith he
negotiated the return of the Jesuits to Venice, when he was Nuntio. Of his
Legation of Bolonia. Of Cardinal Angelo Celsi a Roman. Of certain faults that
he fell into in his Youth. Of his abilities in politic affairs, and how great
they are. Of the Family of the Savelli, and how much it is esteemed. Of
Cardinal Paulo Savelli. Of his great knowledge in affairs of State. Of Cardinal
Litta, Archbishop of Milan. Of the excellence of his life. Of the Pique he had
to the Spaniards, and of the common opinion about it. Of Cardinal Nerio Corsini
a Florentine. Of his qualities. Of his Legation to Ferrara. Of the great pains
wherewith Cardinal Paluzzi has served the Church. Of his goodness and
decrepitage. Of the qualities of Cardinal Rasponi. Of the conclusion of his
Nuntiature in France. Of his clear and unbiased judgment of the Abbot Rasponi
his Nephew. Of Cardinal Conti, and of the worthy persons that Family has
afforded several times. Of his qualities that are an ornament to the
Ecclesiastical Habit. Of Cardinal Pietro Vidoni of Cremona. Of Cardinal
Barbarigo a Venetian. Of Cardinal Pascale d'Aragona a Spaniard. Of Cardinal
Mancini a Roman. Of Cardinal Buon Compagni a Bolonese. Of Cardinal Nini of
Siena. Of Cardinal Roberti a Roman. Of Cardinal Spinola of Genoa. Of Cardinal
Visconti of Milan. Of Cardinal Caraccioli a Neapolitan. Of Cardinal Delfini a
Venetian. Of Cardinal Baldo de Tun a German. Of Cardinal Vendosme a Frenchman.
Of Cardinal Moncada a Sicilian. Of the last Cardinals made by Clement the
ninth, and of some other particulars.

I Ought not to omit in this place to enter upon an Anotomy of the customs,
qualities, effects, and inclinations of the Cardinals created by Alexander the
seventh, for several respects, but more particularly, because the greatest part
of them are but little known in the Court* as having worn the Cardinalitial
habit no long time in Rome, as well as because they profess there to make their
inclinations investigable; however, having hitherto taken great pains to
procure Memoires from all parts, that the work I exhibit might not be
altogether imperfect, I shall with that taste taken from the Memoires that were
sent me by several persons actually in the service of Cardinals, proceed in the
relation following in this book; but so, that in the multiplicity of
occurrences touching the Cardinals created by Alexander the seventh, I shall
endeavor to be short, and that the impression may be the greater in the memory
of the Reader, I shall restrain my self only to the most substantial and
material things. I shall begin therefore according to the order of precedence
with those that were first promoted to the Cardinalship.

FLAVIO CHIGI Nephew to Alexander the seventh, born in the year 1631. in the
City of Siena, was the eldest Son of Don Mario, Brother to Alexander, and Donna
Berenice a Lady of Siena of the Family of Ciaia, who always had a particular
affection for Flavio her son. Don Mario took what care he could to have him
brought up to learning, but his inclinations leading him another way, he made
small progress in that; but contrary to the documents of his Father, he applied
himself to divert amongst other young men, rather than to converse amongst
books: and that the more, because he found himself to be the only male of the
Family of the Chigi, and therefore was sure he should be married to keep up the
house.

Don Mario though he was inclined for several respects to marry him* he
endeavored nevertheless to ease himself of that charge, by recommending him to
his Brother Cardinal Chigi, who was afterward Alexander the seventh, to the
end, that being near him he might be instructed in such politic Maxims, as
passed daily thorough his hands, as he was Secretary; an office the said
Cardinal Chigi, had enjoyed for some time in Rome.

But he whose designs were wholly bent upon the Vatican, most hypocritically
pretended, not only to show himself impartial and disinterested to his own
Family, but their enemy rather, refusing to admit any of them about him*
especially his Nephew Flavio, who he knew wanted such parts as were worthy to
be seen in the Court of Rome. Don Mario perceiving which way things went,
resolved by all means possible to provide some advantageous match for his Son,
and had several of the most considerable Ladies of Siena in his eye; though he
was sure enough in respect of the smalness of his Estate, he was not likely to
carry them. In short, Flavio lived there, making of love, Courting of this Lady
and of that, and minding nothing but his amors, without the least thought of
ever being a Cardinal; and indeed, had any one told him he should one day be
one of the principal Cardinals in the College, and provided with so many
Benefices and preferments, he would have thought without doubt he had but
droll'd: so small an opinion his Associates had of his person.

But fortune that goes far in Rome, and is as it were Arbitrator of all the
Families in Siena, changed the face of affairs in such manner, that by the help
of some small merit that was found in the person of Cardinal Chigi, he was
assumed to the Papacy, under the name of Alexander the seventh. This news was
so welcome to Don Mario, he almost ran mad at the hearing it, and would have
been marching immediately to Rome; but the Pope (keeping close to his
Hypocrisy, as he had promised long before he was exalted) declared, he would
by no means admit any of his Relations into Rome. And this whimsey continued
for some months to the great displeasure of Don Mario, who went fretting, and
distracted up and down, to see his younger Brother the greatest Monarch in the
world, abounding in all manner of wealth, and himself to live poorly in Siena
without any command or authority. Wherefore, besides his own, he desired the
prayers of the Religious Mendicants, that God Almighty would change that
obstinate humor in his Brother; and accordingly by the Prayers of the one or
the other, it was changed, and all of them called to the Vatican.

No sooner did Don Mario appear triumphantly in Rome, with the pre-eminence
that was due to a person so nearly related to the Pope, but he began by the
impu^^ion of his own ambitious Spirit, to endeavor the advancement of his Son;
he pretended that himself as the most ancient, and his Son as the eldest of all
the youth of the Family of the Chigi, ought to take upon them the perpetuation
of their name; intending thereby to do his ^tmost that his Son might marry some
Princess or other, according to his own request, who was much more inclined to
a Wife than a Cap; but the Pope would not hear of that ear, but commanded
Flavio to be contented with a Cap, having resolved to find out a Wife for Don
Agostino, a Nephew of the Popes likewise, but by another brother, whose memory
had more influence with his Holiness, because he had received greater kindness
from him than from Don Mario, and would therefore renew his memory in the
person of Don Agostino, whom he declared head of the Chigi, to the no small
displeasure of Flavio, that was made a Cardinal at the first Promotion, and
retained in his heart some sparks of envy toward his Cousin; but his Holiness
to extinguish them, comported himself so, that by showing them favor
alternately, he took away all occasion of Jealousy and emulation.

Flavio being declared Cardinal, and which is more Cardinal Padrone, with power
to give audience to Ambassadors, and with authority to negotiate the greatest
affairs of the Church, in case of any indisposition in the Pope; he began by
little and little to take upon him exceedingly, and apply himself wholly to the
execution of it, But the Pope his Uncle, who understood his debility too well
to commit such a charge entirely to him, he left him no liberty at all, but in
appearance, dispatching all things himself, and using all possible care to
instruct him in such things as were requisite in that place. It seemed to the
Cardinal, that with the authority and superintendency that was given him, he
had received trouble enough to break his brain, a thing he abhorred in his very
nature; insomuch, that as often as his business increased, so often would he be
disgusted, and repine at his Cousin Agostino, that enjoyed all the felicities
and applauses of the Court, without the least disturbance at all: and therefore
without any respect to the admonitions of his Father, who exhorted him to
acquaint himself by all possible diligence in the mysteries of the Court, he
exercised the office of Padrone only, in taking recreations, and turning his
back upon all business that would give him any trouble, to the no small
dissatisfaction of his Uncle, who was forced thereby to swallow more of it
himself.

In short, he began to be so well known to all the public Ministers that were
resident in the Court, for his weakness and indexterity in politic affairs,
that in matters of importance, they thought it better to make their addresses
immediately to his Holiness, than to make use of the interposition of the
Cardinal Padrone, who for the most part was entertaining himself with his
ordinary pastimes, to which he was inclined more naturally, than to the
troubles of the Court; and indeed all those that had a mind to try their
fortunes, and to negotiate with him, lost their labor and their time, he
forgetting every circumstance of what he was informed, so strange an addiction
he had to his sports, and so strange an aversion to any thing of business.

Toward the latter end of the Pontificate of his Uncle (by reason he was
tired with the multitudes of business he had undertaken at the beginning of his
Papacy, and began to allow his Nephew more reins) he showed himself diligent
enough in his office of Padronancy, but yet without renouncing his ordinary
recreations. He is indifferently well versed in the History of Italy* and
discourses of it upon occasion, with some sort of judgment. They that have
business, go away contented still, but not satisfied, for being very civil, and
courtly, he sends them off well furnished with complements and good words,
though in strictness, they signify nothing: yet some few months before the
death of his Uncle, when he had absolute authority to dispose of things as he
pleased, he precipitated as it were, the businesses that were before him, using
at that time more deeds than words, and yet nevertheless the greatest
satisfaction any of them had, was fair promises, and civil usage, he showing
himself indifferent to all, though otherwise he was of a nature that would
truckle to the first difficulty that appeared.

In the time of the Padronancy of this Cardinal, he showed no great
covetousness, but chose rather to spend, than to lay up, and that, as was
supposed for two reasons; the first, for that he had no other Nephew for his
Brother, his branch determining in himself, and envying also on the other side
Don Agostino his Cousin, he contented himself to be careless of getting, lest
thereby he should render his Cousins branch more considerable. The other reason
was, because he saw his Father Don Mario so anxious and greedy, whose Estate he
knew would fall to him, as the only Male of his time, as indeed afterward it
did. But the last year he changed his opinion, and gave himself with that fury
to the filling his Coffers, as if he cared not for the ill name he would leave
amongst the people.

In his Legation into France, he gave more instances of generosity, then of any
thing else, endeavoring to give every body satisfaction; and truly all the
French that had any thing to do with him, were well pleased with the humanity
of his entertainment; though in strictness he kept not his word with his
Majesty in the business of Castro, and of the next Conclave. At the beginning
of his Unckles Pontificate, not knowing which way was most fit for him to
follow, whether the interest of France, or of Spain, he carried himself with a
certain indifference to both. But the Spaniards found a way, though not wholly,
yet in great part, to gain him, so that in many things he favored the Spanish
interest, to the utmost of his power, yet so as not to disoblige the French,
whom if he did not love, he did not hate at all. But after the attempt upon the
Duke of Crequy, he became for the Spaniard clearly at his heart, though he
durst not do any thing to provoke the King of France, whose anger he dreads
exceedingly. After the death of his Uncle, it was impossible but he must
receive some affront both from the people, and the College; yet he knew how to
swallow all with prudence, endeavoring with large presents, to gain the favor
of the Nephews regnant.

GIROLAMO BONVISI, a Noble man of Lucca, repaired to Rome with design to try
his fortune, as others of his Countrymen were wont; to that end he applied
himself to the courting of the Barbarini then regnant, with all patience and
assiduity, for he knew very well how to gain their affection. Cardinal Antonio
knowing him to be inclined to secrecy; began to have confidence in him, and to
entrust him in matters of no ordinary importance, and particularly in the time
of the Wars with the Princes of Italy, he made use of him as of a well-affected
Minister; which being ill understood by some Courtiers, they made sport with it
in their discourse.

He bought the Chiericatura di Camera, in which he gained some reputation,
especially in the Assemblies da Cameranti, being very well practiced in matters
concerning the profession of Law. Afterward being grown into particular
favor, he discharged himself in several Offices that he executed with good
reputation. But being troubled at the inconstancy of the Court, to see persons
preferred to eminent degrees, that were less deserving than himself, he took a
resolution to leave them, and return into his own Country, as he did
afterward, and remained for a long time out of Rome, to the great admiration
of many, because he had at first expressed such constancy to the Court.

The principal cause of his absence was, because he could not endure that
insatiable liberty, that Donna Olimpia used in getting of money, with so much
diminution of the Treasure of the Church; and particularly, when he saw the
bartering for the Taxes upon Provisions, he generously refused the Prefecture,
that he might not be instrumental in so infamous a business; which Innocent,
and Donna Olimpia especially, taking in dudgeon, they began to contrive some
way of doing him a displeasure: which he having notice of, retired, and thereby
escaped that Rock he might otherwise have fallen upon.

This renuntiation of the Prefecture, gave Bonvisi a great reputation in the
Court, and made him be looked upon as a person of great conscience and
integrity. But amongst all, Cardinal Chigi took a particular kindness for him,
and as soon as he was made Pope, by the name of Alexander the seventh, without
any supplication or intercession at all, he called him into his service; he
being satisfied thereby, that Alexander looked no further than the merits, and
qualities of the persons, he began to rejoice, and revive those hopes he
thought had been utterly extinct.

Being arrived at Rome, it was not long before he was declared Maestro di
Camera to his Holiness; in which he gave so good satisfaction to the Pope, that
in the first promotion he (with five others so qualified) were created
Cardinals, to the great joy of the whole Court.

The qualities of this Cardinal are commended every where, he having all the
virtues and good parts that are requisite, to make a man esteemed; he loving,
and respecting every one again, endeavoring by the sweetness of his converse
to gain the affections of the Court, but of the Princes especially; using all
dexterity, and avoiding with all possible caution to show himself devoted to
either of the Crowns. So that amongst all the Cardinals that desired to live in
a Neutrality, this may be most properly said to have managed it the best. He
negotiates with every body, with great candor, gives audience ^o such as have
business with him, with incredible benignity; and which is more, he endeavors
by all means to send them satisfied away, at least with good words, in which he
does not a little abound; but not with that flattering and complemental style
that is used in Rome, for to that he is a very great enemy, though there be
many other Cardinals and Prelates of that Court, which follow nothing else.

But all the luster of his good qualities, is in some measure adumbrated by
certain defects that are observed in him. He being indisposed, and naturally
disinclin'd to business, loves his ease, and sometimes to the prejudice of
affairs, which he pursues not with that vigor and assiduity that is necessary.
So that many believe he will scarce arrive at the Papacy, and that the rather
because he has a Nephew that he loves exceedingly, called Francisco Bonvisi,
Maestro di Camera to Chigi, a cruel and barbarous person, full of a thousand
vices, who in case of his Unckles exaltation, would be the Protoquamquam in
Rome. But for all this Bonvisi may have a pull for it in his turn.

SCIPIONE DE CONTI d'ELCI, of Siena, from the beginning of his youth, gave
great tokens of his capacity to try his fortune in the habit of a Prelate; by
his own inclination therefore, and to satisfy his Parents that put him
forward, as thinking so great ingenuity would be injured in not doing it, he
went to Rome, where by degrees he wrought himself into the most conspicuous and
most intricate affairs there.

He was sent Nuntio to Venice, and carried himself so much to the satisfaction
of the Senate, that he was adored amongst them as an Oracle. Yet his
negotiation for the Churches, for provision for the Bishops, succeeded not so
well, some of them remaining without Pastors all the time of his Nuntiature, by
reason of the differences betwixt the Pope, and the Senate; but this was no
small trouble to the Nuntio, especially being by frequent Letters solicited by
his Holiness, as if he could have turned and wound the Venetians about, as he
had pleased: but they are too careful and vigilant, to suffer Rome to set his
foot upon any Privilege of theirs.

About the end of his Pontificate, Pope Innocent sent him Nuntio from thence
into Germany, whose departure displeased the Senate in some measure, as being
doubtful to have some giddy Capriccious Nuntio sent in his place, that would
be fitter to foment, than extinguish their differences; whereas Monsignor Elci,
had for many years managed the business with that prudence, that if the
quarrels were not absolutely composed, they were at least kept from increasing,
by a peculiar and Noble way he had of transacting.

He remained about two years in Germany, in which time Alexander the seventh
his Kinsman, being made Pope, he thought he could not discharge his Conscience,
as he declared to several, without promoting a person of his worth to the
Cardinalship; yet he would not promote him for his Title of Nuntio, but as he
was a grateful man, and worthy of that honor; and besides, he was desirous
his Kindred should have their share in that Promotion. This is most certain,
this Cardinals qualities do render him worthy not of the Purple only, but of
the Popedom; in the obtaining of which, (if the Election happened in his time)
he could meet no impediment but his being of Siena: for to speak truth, the
Court has been glutted with Popes from Siena. He is charitable, kind, and a
great lover of his Friend: He intends his business is of great Authority in the
Consistory, and his opinion in the Congregations more respected than any ones.
His Kindred trouble him not much, but perhaps would do more if he were Pope: He
can dissemble well, and seems to take no notice of an injury, though it be
written very deep in his heart.

GIROLAMO FARNESE a Roman, has made a shift, without any Foreign assistance, to
scramble into several Honors. In his youth he was thought wild and unconstant,
and he was so indeed; but he grew more discreet, and prudently by degrees
wrought off all those imputations that might hurt him, reserving only, or
endeavoring to acquire, those virtues that are necessary in Rome to the
gaining of a Cap; which design breaks the sleep of many a good Prelate.

Innocent the tenth, who was so difficult to accommodate with another man's
opinion, had so great an esteem for this person, that in all his affairs he
would have his judgment still, and pris'd it so, as to prefer it to his own;
and which is more, to give him further credit in the Court, he declared
publicly to all that he conversed with, that the Counsels of that man were
worthy to be embraced by any Pope whatsoever, because they were delivered with
prudence, integrity, and learning, which are in effect the virtues that ought
to illustrate the Counselors of a Pope.

This great affection of the Pope, gave no small jealousy to the rest of the
Prelates who pretended to have deserved better than those for which Farnese was
called to the new Cardinalship, every body being assured that Pope Innocent
would promote him. But this I shall say more, that some wits that envied his
good fortune, made Libels on him, calling him most commonly the fifth
Evangelist.

But those persons that were sounder in their judgments, did but laugh at
these reports, and the reputation Farnese had amongst the people; knowing the
inconstancy of his Spirit, they were patient, and cried still, observe the end.
And indeed it succeeded as they presaged, for Innocent being disgusted by him,
that he had before looked upon as an Oracle, either because he would not sing
as he would have him, or that Donna Olimpia had given him a lift, or for other
considerations unknown, he not only made no use of him in his affairs, but
turned his love into disdain, reviling that person as extravagantly as ever he
had commended him.

Alexander the seventh, that pretended to understand the merits of a man, as
well as any body, and was resolved to use no man's judgment but his own in the
Election of his Cardinals, was no sooner leaped into the Chair, but he made him
his Maggior domo; and because he knew this person to have a brain capable to
dispatch several businesses at once, he gave him a hundred employments, there
being never a Congregation; where there was any affair of importance to be
transacted, but he was present, and yet he discharged exactly his duty, as he
was Maggior domo, to the satisfaction of the Pope, endeavoring with might and
main to secure himself of the affection of the house of Chigi, by whose favor
he facilitated the acquisition of the Terra Farnese, which was his own
jurisdiction, and found out a way to exclude the Duke of Parma, who was to
succeed him in case the right line failed.

All these things considered, the Pope resolved to give him a Cap, and at the
same time sent him Legate to Bologna, in which, he carried himself to his
Holinesses satisfaction; but he found things well disposed, by the good
management of Lomelini his Predecessor, who had governed that City to the
incredible satisfaction of the People.

He is a man of a very great brain, which perhaps would be a prejudice to him
if the Chair was vacant, because they all know too much wind does more hurt to
a Ship, than too little. In all his Negotiations he has behaved himself like a
true Roman. It is a hard matter to find a man so devoted to business as he. He
administers justice with such exactness, that it appears severity. He is old,
and of a weakly complexion, and yet of a strange extravagant life, going to
supper, either when other people rise, or go to bed.

He is not much inclined to Piety, nor Charity; he gives Alms sometimes, but
it is more out of policy, than any thing else: all the injuries that are done
him, stick close at his heart, so that he does best that offends him not at
all, and so much the rather, because he can dissemble his malice so well.

For some months past, he has forborne coming to the Congregations del Annona,
upon a disgust that Cardinal Barbarino gave him, by obstructing some
resolutions of his, under pretense that it was necessary to stay till the Abbot
Rospigliosi was present; but he had a greater quarrel with Imperiale, because
he opposed himself in one of the Congregations against Farnese, about the
validity of the Bull for the Incameration of Castro, for which Imperiale had no
great thanks, he having thereby exposed himself to the indignation of the Crown
of France. In short, Farnese is something refractory in his opinion, and is
angry with every body, when things go not as he advises; and sometimes he is
angry alone.

He has but few Kindred, and those he has, have so little esteem for him, that
they do not care to trouble him; yet some suspect that all is but Hypocrisy,
and like that of Alexander the sevenths, who always express great alienation
to his, till he was Pope, and then he changed his mind to some purpose, so that
the more he hated them when he was a Cardinal, the more he loved them when he
was Pope; and just so it is believed Farnese would do, were he in that quality.
He is moreover no great rewarder of his Servants, nor do his Friends receive
much benefit by his protection, he showing himself but indifferent in the
affairs of his greatest Confidents.

ANTHONIO BICHI of Siena, is Nephew to the Sister of Alexander the seventh, and
Brother to Prior Bichi, a Knight of Malta, and one that has the commendations
of a very worthy man. The Popes design was to make a Cardinal of the Knight,
and to leave the other alone in his Bishopric of Osimo; but to prevent that,
the whole Family of the Chigi conspired, I mean the branches of Don Mario, and
Don Agostino.

The Knight had intelligence of all, and made all imaginable submission to
redintigrate with Cardinal Flavio, and Don Agostino, and such as perhaps the
worst Servant he had would have scorned to have done; but ambition was too
predominant in his heart, and the extreme desire he had to be a Cardinal, would
have made him do ten times worse to obtain it. However he was not so fortunate,
for the Chigi were too positive for his exclusion, though they seemed well
enough satisfied with his obsequiousness.

The principal cause of this opposition of the Nephews, proceeded from a
suspicion they had, that if that Cousin of theirs should arrive at the
Cardinalship, that is, into such an eminent degree, as would authorize him to
speak his mind freely, he would not fail to create some differences betwixt
them, and that the rather, because they had already more jealousies of one
another, than the Pope, or their Con^anguinity would allow: nor indeed was
their fear without reason; for though he be outwardly civil, he has a strange
dexterity at setting other people by the ears.

In this manner the Cavalier being excluded, with no little satisfaction to the
Chigi, who thought they had achieved a great matter; the other Brothers
interest was set on foot, against which the Chigi made not only no opposition,
but recommended him to his Holiness, who to revive the memory of his Sister,
was resolved to make of them a Cardinal. Alexander having resolved from the
beginning of his Papacy to give the Cavalier a Cap, could not without some
repugnancy be persuaded to quit that resolution, and give it to the other
Brother, that he never intended; nor was it a wonder, for the Cavalier knew
well enough by acts of submission, and obsequiousness of behavior, how to gain
upon his Uncle: whereas the other remaining as it were shut up in his Church
at Osnno, had not those opportunities to ingratiate with him that had the power
to advance him to the degree he is now in, perhaps by the ill fate of his
Brother the Cavalier.

Whilst he was Bishop of Osimo, he gave good demonstration of his ability in
governing the Church; having wrought himself into the hearts of all people,
especially the Clergy, who magnified him for one of the best Bishops that ever
was in that place. After he was promoted to the Cardinalship, his Holiness
began to employ him in several important and politic affairs. But in a short
time it was plain, that what credit he got in his Pastoral Cure, he lost in his
Negotiations, insomuch that in many Congregations he was almost ridiculous. The
Pope understood very well, that his parts were but indifferent, and therefore
he gave him some lea^ure to improve himself, which he has done so effectually,
that if in the Congregations his Vote be not the first, it is not most
certainly the last, he having grown to a capacity of penetrating into the good
and bad of an affair, and of choosing the best when he has done.

He receives all persons that come to him, with great civility, and endeavors
to ingratiate with the Ministers of Princes, without giving occasion of
jealon^ie either to one or other. He seems a great enemy to tumults and noise,
yet fails not upon occasion to speak his own sense, and that with some violence
of words. He was very devout and pious when he was a Bishop, and they are much
increased since he was made a Cardinal. In short, he also is driving at the
Popedom, but I fear he will miscarry, as all the rest have done that have taken
his way.

GIACOMO FRANZONI of Genoa, Cardinal with the Title of Santa Maria in Aquino,
advanced himself to the Cardinalship by the same means which are commonly used
by his Countrymen. In the Popedom of Innocent he had several Offices, besides
the Tesorieria della Camera, which he bought with ready money; for the Pope
either at the request of his Cousin, or because he knew him a person of worth,
would not suffer him to be idle, but heaped Governments upon him continually:
He was made General of the Holy Church, Keeper of the Castle of Saint Angels,
General of the Popes Galleys, and Commissioner for the Arms, all of them
executed by him at a time. By reason his Employments were so many, he was
thought by some to be too tedious in his resolutions, and not unjustly, he
himself not knowing sometimes which way to turn him, but mistaking his
business, he dispatched that which was last, having forgot what was before. By
this many people suffered not a little in their affairs, and complained much of
his delay, which proceeded not so much from any ill principle in him, as from a
torrent of business that overwhelmed him, and left him scarce time to take his
breath: in one Scene, like a Comedian, acting two persons, the Soldier and the
Prelate, not only to the admiration of the people, but the indignation of other
persons of merit, that were left idle, without any employment at all.

This Cardinal in all the Congregations where he came, was very doubtful and
irresolute, and all from a certain subtilty that he has, in penetrating into
the affairs that are before him, sifting and deliberating what is to be done,
without considering it will be determined without him.

He is a great lover of Justice, very zealous, and a particular favourer of the
poor, in so much that when he was Legate of Ferrara, (which he exercised to his
praise) he recommended daily to the Judges, that they should have special
regard, that the Poor should not be oppressed by the Potent, in their Trials at
Law; and hearing upon a time that there was a Suit betwixt a Noble man, and a
Commoner, he would not trust it to the Judges, but took it into his own hands,
least the Noble man some way or other might have wrought upon the Judges to
have given sentence in his favor.

This Cardinal has store of good qualities, he is a person of a good
Conscience, candid, subtle, and has not those scruples, that make other
Cardinals be thought hypocrites, rather than honest men; he is very well read
in the Rules of Friendship, studies what he can to preserve it, and it is good
therefore to have him for one Friend. He is very chaste, and therefore it was
never heard that he committed any sensual sin: Toward the Princes he is
indifferent, keeping himself equally betwixt both the Crowns, and without
giving the least token or inclination of depending more upon one than the
other, keeping the middle way. He is not prodigal, but liberal enough in
rewarding his Servants. In short, he is not over covetous, though he be a
Genoese. The Ecclesiastical habit sits well upon his back, because his manners
and humor is proper to ennoble it; he is employed in rectifying the abuses in
his Bishopric of Camerino. His age is about 55. and he is not much subject to
infirmities.

As to his Kindred, he has two Brothers, one married, the other not; he has a
Nephew also, the Son of the elder of the two Brothers, who is called Anfrano
Franzoni, a youth of good humor, studious, and much addicted to Learning. Of
the two Brothers one of them is called Agostino Franzoni, a person of good
conversation too, particularly intent upon the discharge of such Offices as are
given him by that Republique, and very curious in the liberal Arts; but he
spends his money alla Genoese. The other Brother is called Paulo Geronimo, and
wholly devoted to the interest of that Commonwealth. I will not say whether
this Cardinal aims at the Ppoedom, because he is a Genoese, which is as much as
to say, he does not.

CARLO BONELLI corresponds in great part with his Name, which signifies little
goodness; he offends in many things, more out of an affected simplicity that he
pretends to, to be counted Holy, than for any thing else: But he has one great
fault indeed, and that is, that he suffers himself to be led by the Nose in
matters of greatest consequence, and in trifles and things of no importance he
is so peremptory, fifty yoke of Oxon cannot remove him.

Cardinal Imperiale his Uncle manages him, as a Rider does a great Horse,
making him gallop, and change as he pleases, so that his Vote depends clearly
on his Uncle, to whom to speak truth, Bonelli is bound by all obligations to
be obsequious, because it was by his contrivance and intercession the Cap fell
upon Bonelli's head, he never being able to have obtained it himself. This is
certain, there has not been a relation to be found that has shown more zeal in
the advancement of another, than Imperiale has demonstrated to Bonelli; for as
if he were not contented to have made him a Cardinal, he endeavored what he
could to make him Pope, and if he had succeeded, Bonelli would have had the
honor, but Imperiale would have gone away with the profit.

This Cardinal before he obtained his Cap, was put very young upon the
principal employments of the Court; he was made Governor, and sent Nuntio into
Spain, more at the instance and intercession of Imperiale, who had a great
interest at that time, than for any merits of his own. In which charges he
neither diminished, nor increased his reputation amongst them that knew him.
And indeed his parts are as small, as his stature, though Imperiale cries him
up for one of the greatest Politicians in the Court. Alexander had never any
great opinion of him, nevertheless he created him in the quality of Cardinal
Nuntio* under the Title of Santa Anastasia.

CELIO PICCOLOMINI, of a very good Family in Siena, is descended of a
Pontifical branch, though its leaves are much fallen. In the Popedom of
Innocent, he went up and down courting those with great submission, that were
in any esteem with the Pope, to advance himself to the place he is now in. He
obtained some charges which he executed well; his talent is but small; he is
full of good words, but loves always to cross the stream; he sticks close
enough to his Relations, but has not the liberality to give them any thing; he
has no faults that make him unworthy of his honor, the Ecclesiastical Habit
sitting well upon his back* Most of his Countrymen envy him, and especially
they that have not prosper'd so well: he departed from his Nuntiature of France
with no little disgust, of which it will not be impertinent to give a short
description.

The 20th. of August, there arrived a Courier from the French Ambassador, the
Duke of Crequy, with an account of the accident that happened betwixt his
Excellences Servants, and the Corsi. The King of France called a Council
immediately, which lasted for two hours and more, after which, the Comti di
Brienne was sent to the Nuntio in his Majesty's name to command him to leave
Paris the next morning, and to retire to Meaux, and not to stir from thence
till further order from his Majesty; pretending it as an expedient to secure
his person* against some such tumult as happened in Rome.

Piccolomini replied with all possible respect, that he would obey his
Majesty's order but he desired first to be heard, and went therefore that very
night to Court; but being heard with nobody but Mounsieur Lion, he declared the
Sentiments of the Pope, the order he had taken for the punishment of the
offenders, the demonstrations of kindness the Pope had made to the Ambassador;
endeavoring with all the art of Rhetoric, to clear the business, and by
contrary relations to what came before, to let him understand he could not
receive a Relegation. The next morning, the Nuntio retired to Saint Germans,
and stirred not out of the Castle, that he might not seem to disobey the Orders
of the King. Mounsieur Tellier came to speak with him by his Majesty's
permission, but being stiff and inflexible to the requests of the Nuntio, who
by all his submissions, by laying before him the reflection, the ill usage of
his person, would have upon the Church, not being able to prevail for the
Protraction of his departure, as soon as he was returned to his house, he writ
him this Letter.

Most Excellent Sir,
I Can by no means admit that the Kings religation of me is a favor, if it be
said that it is in order to my security, how great a reflection will it have
upon the Grandeur of his Majesty, when it is reported that an innocent person,
and his Holinesses Nuntio, could not be safe in Paris Let it be lawful
therefore for me with all due reverence and submission to say, that indeed it
is at the Kings pleasure to retein or command me whither he pleases, but it is
not in my power to consent without particular permission from his Holiness, or
at least an apparent necessity for me to do it: His Majesty cannot ascribe it
to any want of profound Obedience in me* which for my part I shall always show
with the greatest demonstrations of humility and service I am able, and
therefore I conceive he cannot in justice impose any penalty upon a Nuntio, for
so contingent an accident, especially his Holiness having already declared his
resolution to chastise the offenders, and begun to execute that resolution. I
hope your Excellence will have so much compassion, as in this case to endeavor
the protection of

Yours

The Nuntio persisted that there ought to be an apparent and precise necessity
for his departure; and accordingly on the 31. he received Letters from Monsieur
de Lion, with reiterated orders from his Majesty, for his removal to Meaux; so
that all the intercession of Foreign Ministers, who endeavored to mittigate
the business, being in vain, by their advice he went out of Paris, but went
instead of Meaux, to Saint Dennis, that he might not seem to consent to his
dismission, and by the mediation of the Ministers about the King, and the
interposition of Foreign Representatives, he obtained, that his resolution was
allowed at Court, without further irritation to his Majesty. It was reported at
first, that the Duke of Crequy had orders to be gone out of the Territories of
the Church, and to retire to Siena; and when that order should be known to be
executed, the Nuntio was to be dispatched likewise out of France.

On the seventh of September, the Nuntio found himself beset by a party of
forty Soldiers a horseback, drawn by order out of his Majesty's Musquetoons,
who guarded all the passages into the Covent of the Dominicans, where he
lodged, and accompanied the Nuntio and all his Servants when ever they went
forth. He complained to the Court of this action, but he was answered that they
knew nothing of it. The Nuntio dissembling the business, pretended to take no
notice of it, but gave orders that the Soldiers as strangers should be invited
to dinner, and to what civilities the house could afford, but they accepted not
the invitation, but refused it with reciprocal civility.

The same night there arrived a Courrier to the Nuntio from Rome, with his
Holiness his first Breve written to the King, with more distinct information of
what was past against the delinquents there by the Popes orders, as the price
that was set upon their heads, the deputation of two Congregations, the visit
Cardinal Chigi made to the Duke of Crequy, and a long Letter of narration to
Monsieur de Lion.

The next morning the Nuntio dispatched it to Monsieur Lion, with a Billet of
his own, desiring him to present the Breve to his Majesty, give him an account
of the rest, and to prevail that the Nuntio might be admitted to speak with
himself. Monsieur Lion receiving the Billet, said he could do no less; he
carried both the one and the other to his Majesty, expecting what he would
please to command; after he had read the Breve to his Majesty, he returned him
this answer, That he should read the rest of the dispatch that day to his
Majesty; and accordingly he appointed a Conference with the Nuntio at Turrene,
whether the Nuntio passed the same night attended by 40. Musketeers.

The Conference was long, the Nuntio laying before him, what upon the
foundation of truth, reason, and the paternal inclination of his Holiness, was
like to mittigate his Majesty. The Sieur de Lion assured the Nuntio that he had
endeavored to quench, not to kindle the fire. That his Majesty at the reading
of the Brief, expressed much satisfaction to see his Holiness so well disposed
to an accommodation, and at last it was concluded, that on Sunday the tenth of
December he should have an answer. The Nuntio had intelligence, that the Brief
being read in Council, they began to be appeased; but at the same time a
Gentleman arriving from the Duke of Crequy, with advice that he was commanded
out of the Territories of the Church, incensed his Majesty so much, that as
soon as he was gone out of the Council, orders were dispatched immediately to
the Nuntio to depart that Kingdom the next day; and though he sent another
Breve from his Holiness, and an answer to Mr. Lion from himself, there was no
further Treaty to be had.

The Letters from the Nuntio to Seignour Lion and Tellier, were not opened at
all. The 14 in the morning before he departed, he made another overture, but
could not be heard, so that then he prepared himself to obey, and accordingly
departed under the conduct of 50 Musketeers on horseback, 25 before his
Coach, and as many behind, not suffering him to discourse with any body,
forcing him to march ten leagues a day, and carrying him every night out of the
Road, without acquainting him which way he was to pass. In ten days time he
arrived in Savoy, and staid there for some time in the Chambery, till he could
receive further orders from his Holiness, to whom he had given particular
advice of all that had past.

Whilst the Nuntio was marching in this posture, the Marquis de Fuentes,
Ambassador from the Crown of Spain, came to give him a visit, but the guards
denied him admission; Fuentes persisted, and pressed very hard, but all that he
could get, was liberty to enter with two guards with him, who understanding
neither Italian nor Spanish would needs have obliged the Nuntio and Fuentes to
have spoken in French; but they could not be persuaded, but discoursed three
hours together in the presence of the guards, that understood not a word that
they said. The news that was brought by the Gentleman from the Duke of Crequy,
was, that he was forced to go out of Rome for the security of his person, that
he was limited in his Victuals, and tied up to a certain allowance every day;
but this in time was found to be false, and only an invention to exasperate his
Majesty the more.

His Majesty was troubled to find himself in a necessity of using the Nuntio
accordingly, because he had been not a little pleased with his proceedings
during his Nuntiature. Many believed, that as soon as these difficulties should
be composed, and due satisfaction be given to the King, that Piccolomini would
be remanded into France; but with this general opinion, the policy of the
Ecclesiastics did not agree: it was imagined likewise, that the Pope (for his
own reputation, and to recompense the Nuntio's disgrace in being turned out of
France) would send him a Cap before his entrance into Rome, which would have
been very acceptable to Piccolomini. But there were other reasons that diverted
his Holiness from such thoughts; however he was with other Nuntio's promoted to
the Cardina^ship 1664 with the Title of San Pietro al Monte d'oro. Were he
better furnished with humility, it would be better for him, for he is generally
reckoned a very proud man.

CARLO CARAFF A a Neapolitan, is a person of great parts, and worthy of higher
advancement, did not the memory of Paul the fourth (who was not at all
propitious to the Spaniard) give some obstruction to the maturity of his years,
he being yet fresh, healthful, and vigorous. He was sent Nuntio to Venice by
Innocent the tenth, and confirmed by Alexander the seventh, who employed him in
a business of the greatest difficulty perhaps, that ever Nuntio was imploy^d
in; and that was the re-establishment of the Jesuits in the State of Venice,
which the said Alexander recommended to him with the greatest earnestness
imaginable.

Caraffa to satisfy the ardency of the Popes desire, undertook that
Negotiation, but he met with so many obstacles, he despaired of it himself,
though in his Letter to Rome, he dissembled it as much as he could, writing
always ambiguously, least he should put his Holiness too into despair, who had
a great fancy he should weather that point. In short, he behaved himself so
subtly in the Senate, and knew so well how to manage his affairs, that he
brought the Venetian to his Luer, and willingly to condescend to the
importunities of the Pope.

In this transaction, Caraffa's parts, and dexterity in great affairs, was very
well known: he having received several testimonies of commendation from the
Pope himself. But yet things did not follow the expectations of the Court;
where it was reported, that if he happened to effect the re-establishment of
the Jesuit sin Venice, the Pope would without doubt reward him with a Cap; and
this was writ in a Letter from Rome, to one of the principal in the Nuntio's
Court. But the Jesuits were restored, the Pope pleased, and the Senate
satisfied, yet the Nuntio uncapt for some time, and not one word to be heard of
his promotion.

From Venice, he was sent Nuntio to the Emperor of Germany; where he met
likewise with several difficult affairs, but they lasted not long, because he
knew very well how to disintangle himself with honor; and certainly he is a
person sufficiently dexterous, active, and proper for the management of the
most considerable transactions. Though he be pleasant always, and merry in the
conversation of Ladies; he lies under no great imputation of vice; he protects
his friends cheerfully, and rejoices to do good offices for all that desire
him; he has many Kindred in Naples, and not few in Rome: if he transgresses any
way, it is in his severity, his justice having too often more of rigor than
mercy. He was promoted with the other Nuntii, 1664. with the Title of Santa
Susanna. At present he is Legate at Bolognia, from whence it is hoped he will
come away with the applause of the people, he having given already an essay of
his good Government.

ANGELO CELSI a Roman, was created Cardinal with the Title of Saint George in
the year 1664. being Auditor di Rota, in which office he made himself some
Enemies, things for no considerable reasons. In his youth he fell into some
faults, suitable but little wore the Ecclesiastical habit which he wore; for
though he was a Priest, he could not abstain from several sensualities, many
people believing him given over so much to luxury, that he was fitter to have
been a Husband than a Priest. However he now restrains his natural inclinations
with great prudence, or at least transgresses in secret.

He is very much inclined to revenge, but has not the faculty to dissemble it,
for where he is an enemy, he professes it, and where he is a friend, he does
the same. He is ancient, but of a strong complexion, though subject to
infirmities. He is severe in his nature, and inclined to justice with too much
punctilio. In certain Congregations, his Vo^e has been almost Tyrannical, and
all to do justice, so as the concerned and offended parties have said, that he
was a Phalaris, or a person of a cruel and carnal nature; because ordinarily
they go together, and your cruel people are observed to be most carnal.

Many are of opinion, that if his life corresponded to his parts, there would
not be a more worthy person in the whole College. He has certainly a sound
judgment, a brain capable of any thing; he is more learned than ordinary,
curious in all kind of History, politic, dextrous in treaties and business,
assiduous in what he undertakes, not obstinate in his opinion; in short, he is
a person of general parts, which in the Congregations, and Consistories, he
daily discovers.

He has but one Brother, an ancient man too, but inclined as much to pleasure,
as this is to severity. He has great store of friends and adherents in Rome;
his nearest are Caraffelli, and Capranica, with whom he holds very good
correspondence; the great affection he bears to Ravizza (a person odious to the
Romans) has given some check to his reputation, and the rather, because he
appeared in his defense against Cardinal Chigi.

PAVLO SAVELLI a Roman, is the Nephew of the late Cardinal Fabrisio Savelli,
that served a long time in the wars of Germany, in the quality of General. This
Family is the most considerable in Rome, and that not only for its antientness
and nobility, but for the great Prerogatives it enjoys, as the office of
Marisciallo di Santa Chiesa, and to that Marshalship, belongs the keeping of
the Conclave. During the vacation of the Sea, the said Savelli has no small
authority and jurisdiction in Rome. He may raise Soldiers for a Guard for
himself, at the charge of the Apostolical Chamber, upon any emergency or
apprehension, and chastise those that transgress the orders of the Conclave; as
he did in the Conclave of Urban the eight, when he sent several little Clarks
to the Galeys, for conveying Letters to the Cardinals in the Conclave, and
threatened others with death.

Though this Family has had two Popes of it, and a great number of Cardinals,
yet it has been in great danger of falling; and this is most certain, had it
not been for the inheritance of Montalto, it would have been very low. But so
opulent an estate falling to them by a marriage contracted with a Sister of
Montalto, (that happened to be the last of the house of Perretii) and the
Prince Savelli, was sufficient to make him lift up his head again, though to
speak truth, he had never abated of his usual splendor, unless in some small
retrenchments of his Court.

This Paulo that we speak of, purchased the Chiericatura di Camera, with firm
confidence, to be chosen a Cardinal, as indeed it fell out; for Alexander
retaining the same inclination to the Roman Families, as Innocent had* that he
might not see so honorable a house without a Cap, at the death of Cardinal
Fabritio, he made him a Cardinal 1664. with the Title of Santa Maria della
Scala.

This Cardinal has no great knowledge in the most considerable affairs of
State; but he has capacity enough to inform himself. If he would read History a
little more, he would do much better in the Congregations, though his judgment
already is none of the worst. He is a Spaniard, but concerns not himself too
far in defense of that Crown. His Conversation is good, and grateful, yet some
there are that think him proud, but I could never see but he was humble enough.

ALPHONSO LITTA a Milanese, has been employed in several important affairs, in
which he has always expressed himself by the honourableness of his success, a
man of great parts, and experience. He is certainly a man very proper for
business, indefatigable in searching and perpending of every thing he
undertakes, that he may not afterward be at a loss, when he comes to give his
judgment or vote; so that this is most sure, that he that loses any thing in
his presence, may be satisfied very well, for he is not used to do things
blindfold, as others do even in Rome it self.

He has given tokens of his parts and good life from his very youth, yet he
fell into some light miscarriages, but not considerable; he is a person of good
learning, great practice, no ordinary experience, and has a strange head for
solid and profound business. Whilst he was Archbishop of Milan, he showed
himself an excellent Pastor, conciliating the affection of the whole people
there; but for all this, some there be that believe that he failed in a little
punctilio of prudence, when he appeared so stiff for the immunities of the
Church, and other things, in which he might have winked with more discretion.
In short, he has so much disobliged the Spaniards, that they are grown his
implacable enemies, and doubtless were not their fortune at present so low,
they would handle him so, as to force him to leave the Church, as they have
done before to other Prelates in the Kingdom of Naples. Did things therefore go
as they would have, they would not fail to give him a lift; for it is not their
custom, to pardon till they be revenged.

His promotion to the Cardinalship, was no welcome news to the Spaniards, who
had not concerned themselves at all in his assistance, but rather by their
private suggestions done what they could to obstruct it. But Pope Alexander
knowing his deserts very well, and the high services he had done the Church,
that he being Pope might not seem ungrateful, the last promotion but one he
made him a Cardinal, with the Title di Santa Croce in Jerusalem, giving him the
Archbishopric with it. Very few Cardinals there have been, that have attained
that dignity upon the bare account of their merits, as this person has done to
his immortal reputation.

He holds the same Maxim with other people, that to be Pope, it is necessary
to be at odds with the Spaniard; and therefore being Cardinal, he is the more
incensed against them. Don Lewis d'Haro, Governor of Milan, with whom he had
some variance, writ several Letters to the Spanish Ambassador at Rome in the
time of the vacancy of the Sea, against the promotion of Litta; insomuch that
it is the opinion of many wise men, that a Cardinal that is born a Subject to a
Prince, and has considerable dignities in his Principalities, cannot but be
thought imprudent, if he quarrels and contends with that Prince. But for my
part, I do not question but there were many considerable reasons to work a
person of his discretion and worth to such a resolution.

NERIO CORSINI a Florentine, was Treasurer, and afterward Cardinal, with the
Title of Santi Neri Achillo; which Title was given him for its correspondence
with his name. His Kindred are but of indifferent quality, but he endeavors
what he can to advance them upon all occasions. The Great Duke loves him very
well, but imployes him not in any business of consequence, perhaps for his
private interest. In his Treasurership, he got the reputation of a person of no
ordinary Talent; but it is not so much as it ought to have been, for when he
drove at the Cardinalship, he was fain to worship and fawn upon those at the
Helm, and it succeeded as well as he could wish.

In the Congregations, he has shown himself a person of worth, a good
politician, and impartial in all matters of consequence; and indeed he has a
great capacity, and some good learning. He is not over rigid, and severe, yet
he suffers not himself to be led by the Nose too much, as loving his own fancy
and capriccio, especially if he knows he has reason on his side. At present he
is Legate of Ferrara, a considerable Legation, and of great trust, because upon
the Confines. He will have great opportunity of showing his parts there, of
which he has given good essay already, though it is not above three months
since he arrived. Every body is in expectation of the success of this Legation;
for my part I do not doubt but he will come off honorably, if his servants do
not make him transgress, for to speak the truth, he is sometimes too indulgent.

PALVZZO PALVZZI a Roman, has served the Church above forty years with
extraordinary diligence, yet had never any remuneration from Pope Innocent,
though he knew what pains he had taken very well; so that it was no small
wonder to see many persons of less merit than he, that had not done half the
service he had done for the Church, advanced before him, and which is more, in
so difficult conjunctures.

Yet Innocent would confess that this Prelates shoulders deserved the Purple,
but that his tongue spoiled them; and truly he has too little Phlegm, and is
too fierce in condemning the actions of others, without any regard to the
quality of their persons, insomuch that speaking in public, and with too much
liberty, of the actions of the favorites at Court, he has retarded the
progress of his fortunes. Yet his way of Mutining is not without its grace, for
he pricks them with honey, and kindles the fire in the Censer, to burn the
hands of the Priest, under pretense of doing it for the benefit and glory of
the Altar. This I will say, he is as zealous in all his expressions, as is
imaginable; but he does it not upon any particular interest, but for the
public advantage. But he is out in his politics now, because this age is for
nothing but dissembling at Rome; zeal indeed is good with respect to the time
and the place, but not when it will be taken for faction and repining.

Many people observing that he was old, and had no Cap, concluded for certain
he would never have any; and indeed he did not look for it himself. But
Alexander considering, that to leave a person who for so long time had been
serviceable to the Church, without any reward, would but discourage and
intepidate the rest, he resolved to take away that scandal, and created him
Cardinal with the Title of Basilica degli dode^i Apostoli.

He is an honest man, well versed in the Canons, and not a little in the Civil
Prudence, but improper for the Cadinalitial Function in respect of his
blindness, which suffered him to come but very seldom into the Congregations;
but he was present in the last Conclave, and gave his voice. In brief, he is so
decrepid, that he looks every moment for death, and therefore has but little
regard for the things of this world.

CESARE RASPONI of Ravenna, has by his handsome designs insinuated himself at
Court, in such manner, that he is arrived at that honorable degree he
deserves, as being a person worthy of the Cardinalitial dignity. He has always
had a great ambition to advance himself in offices and employments, but he has
had the prudence to conceal it; he is very obsequious to such as have any
abilities to assist him, yet so as not to fall into any extravagant flattery.

He was made Secretary of the Council, and in many Controversies with those
Prelates, he gave good demonstration of his parts. And because that charge is a
charge of great confidence, with the Cardinal Padrone, he found out a way to
satisfy the Chigi, without receding from the Privilege of his place.
Alexander had a good opinion of him, and therefore in several of his businesses
of importance, he took his judgment along with him, which he willingly, and
with his wonted modesty delivered, so that Alexander left this advice to Chigi
his Nephew, that in all intricate matters he should make use of the judgment
of Monsignor Rasponi.

A few months after the fatal disaster, as one may call it, that happened to
the Duke of Crequy in Rome, he was sent Nuntio Extraordinary into France, to
endeavor to accommodate the business, to satisfy the King of France, but
without diminution to the Majesty of the Pope. This was an affair of great
consequence, and therefore his Holiness several days together consulted with
his Cardinals about the election of a fit person for such an employment; after
the nomination of several, and the rejection of all, Rasponi was judged the
most proper and habile person, from whence may be argued the reputation he had
amongst the Prelates of the Court.

At the very beginning of his Legation, there happened a certain difference
that constrained him to depart from Lions, where he was arrived, and to return
into Savoy, to some Neutral place; But his Negotiation had no great success, so
that the Duke of Crequy returned to Paris, and he to Rome; nevertheless Rasponi
had so well accommodated things to his Majesty's satisfaction, that he had
almost pardoned the affront offered to his Ambassador: But the business of
Castro, which the King would have comprised in that Treaty, and without which
he was resolved to have none, put all things into a suspense. For all that, the
Pope was so well satisfied with the transaction of Rasponi, that to recompense
him for it, and his other services to the Church, he created him Cardinal in
his first promotion, with the Title of San Giovanni in Porta Latina.

This Cardinal has a sound judgment, and great dexterity in business, and that
the more, because he is not too much enamored with his own opinions, nor
adheres too much to them as others do, who though they know another man's advice
be more adequate and beneficial to the matter in hand, yet in despite of all
reason, will defend their own judgments, be they never so false; he carries
himself indifferently, and labors much to be counted impartial His Kindred are
of condition good enough, but not rich, and in particular a Nephew that is
called the Abbot Rasponi, which being but a youth of 27-years of age, he
carried into France with him, being a person of good behavior, and great
generosity; and though he abounds not with any extraordinary Learning, yet his
judgment is so good, that with a little exercise he may very well go through
the most important affairs. This Cardinal may with maturity of years make a
pass in the Conclave, as well as any of the rest.

GIO. NICOLA CONTI is a Roman, of an ancient Family, that has several times
afforded illustrious persons to the Church, and by whom it has been served with
all punctuality and honor. This Lord has had several ordinary employments, and
discharged himself indifferently well: The greatest of his Offices was the
Government of Rome, which he began to exercise with great severity, having
declared to his Holiness himself, that he would proceed in an exact way of
Justice, without partiality to any body. But in a short time he had changed his
opinion, and was observed to follow other things instead of severity,
especially if any thing relating to the satisfaction of the Nephews was in
debate; for he was grown very careful of giving them any disgust, as complying
in every thing there, though with never so much injury to Justice: Besides
this, he is thought to have been too indulgent to the recommendations of the
Cardinals, and Nobility of Rome, that are his Friends and Relations, at whose
instances he has discharged several Prisoners that were more worthy to have
been corrected. Not that he can be charged with Bribery, his hands are clean
enough from that, though he be none of the liberalest persons about the Court.

It cannot be denied but there are several good qualities in him, that may make
him capable of being an Ornament to his Dignity, although he fell into some
frailties (before he took the Prelacy upon him) that are not worthy to be
remembered, though he be now prudent enough to make the goodness of his
deportment, satisfy for the evil that is past. He fails not to endeavor to
raise himself as much as he can, and he takes that way that is most likely to
give him reputation in the Conclave. He deals with the French and the Spaniards
so, that when he is arrived at a competent age, if there be occasion, he may
incline them both to be his Friends. He has many Relations both Soldiers and
Prelates, that would not be at all offended to see him Pope. Alexander had
several reasons for his Creation, but the chief was to fortify his own Family,
by obliging of a person of so great Alliance in Rome; he made him Cardinal with
the Title of Santa Maria in Traspontina.

GIACOMO NINI of Siena, has been scrambling after Honors and Offices from the
time he took the Ecclesiastical habit upon him, and has left no stone unturned
to arrive at his designs. His ambition put him forward so, that he several
times attempted to have been made Nuntio, but his insufficiency was too well
known at Court, to succeed therein, he having but little of the Politics that
are necessary to make a good Minister of State, as failing often rather out of
honesty, than any thing else. Yet he thinks himself able to deal with the
greatest Politicians in Rome, because he has a little smattering in Learning,
and an obliging way with his Complements, and fair words, which in reality
signify not much, for he speaks oftener with his tongue, than his heart,
because he has no great foundation of reason, though he wants not some ordinary
Maxims.

Alexander the 7th. in consideration of his Country, and other things, made him
Maggior domo of the Apostolical Palace, after he had honored him with other
offices, and finally created him Cardinal in his last Promotion but one, with
the Title of Santa Maria della pace, which Promotion gave great disgust to the
Cavalier della Ciaia Uncle to Chigi, that at the same time pretended to the
Cardinalship, and seeing Nini preferred, was ready to run mad. But though Nini
had scarce merits enough for a Cap, yet he deserved more than Ciaia.

The report was at first, that Cardinal Chigi was the person that had driven on
the interest of Nini, and made him a Cardinal; but it appeared afterward, that
it proceeded from the mere pleasure and inclination of the Pope. Before his
death there happened some differences betwixt Chigi and Nini, but by the
interposition of the Conclave, Chigi was obliged to reconcile himself with Nini
after the best manner he could, which he did.

When Cardinal Anthonio Barbarino went thorough France to the possession of his
Archbishopric, he left his Vineyard near San Pancratio, to Cardinal Nini,
during his absence, which gave the Spaniard great suspicion that he was
inclining to the interest of the French.

GREGORIO BARBARIGO a Venetian, was created at the nomination of the State of
Venice, with the Title of San Tomaso in Parione. Nor did the Pope make any
difficulty in the Promotion of so worthy a person, that had given continual
testimonies of an excellent Prelate, from the very time he first entered into
the Ecclesiastical habit, and has confirmed them since by the exemplariness of
his life, free from those scandals that at present are so numerous in Rome.

Amongst the rest of his virtues, which are considerable and proper for a
person of his dignity; one eminent one is, his Cordial affection for his
Country, by which he obliges that wise Senate (that is seldom ungrateful) to
continue a grateful correspondence with him upon all occasions.

After the death of Monsignour Giorgio Cornaro, the Bishopric of Padoa was
conferred upon him, which is one of the best Bishoprics, I will not say in
that State, for they have no other like it, but in all Italy; and because his
Predecessor (being a great Cavalier, and of one the most renowned Family in
Venice) had suffered some abuses to grow, till they had obscured in great part
the glory of the Clergy; Barbarigo not being able to see so considerable a
Church under such enormities, he instituted a Congregation of pious and good
Priests to reform them; giving them ample authority to effect it. This new
manner of Congregation, unknown to the rest of the Bishops, was at first ill
interpreted at Rome; so that some envious people spoke of it after a pungent
and satirical way; but the Pope commended it much, and exhorted them to follow
so good an example. The Clergy of Padoa that were dissolute and loose, thought
that resolution too severe, but those of any Piety or Religion, commended it to
the Skies. In short, this Cardinal was always full of zeal both to his Church
and to his Country.

PIETRO VIDONI of Cremona, made up his fortunes, not so much by the exemplarity
of his life, as by the subtlety of his wit. His mind was always inclinable ^o
holy Orders, and averse to Matrimony, though not altogether free from such
Carnal affections as are too common in the Clergy of our days.

In the beginning of his Prelacy, he fell into certain little errors, but he
knew well enough how to excuse himself, and to stop the mouths of all such as
spoke any thing to his prejudice.

In the beginning of Innocents Pontificate, he was employed in certain offices,
but they were of no considerable trust; and though he endeavored all he could
to hit the humor of his Holiness, yet he had not the success he desired.

In his Nuntiature in Polonia (which is usually the touchstone whereon they try
the ability of their wits) he met with such rubs in certain businesses
committed to him by his Holiness, that he was very near losing of that
reputation he gained in the beginning of his Nuntiature. But he disintangl'd
himself with such prudence, that he received thanks from his Holiness for what
he had done, for the advantage of the Catholic Religion, and the ease of the
Catholic Princes in that Kingdom; King Casimir recommended him very earnestly
to the Pope, and favored him much at his Court; so that the Pope, who was
inclinable enough to reward the deserts of such persons, as had done best
service to the Church, created him Cardinal, with the Title of Saint Calisto.
Nor was this creation displeasing to the Spaniard, his Eminence being as it
were a Subject to that Crown, and one that had always held a fair
correspondence with it, but without disgusting the French, using such
dexterity, that he obliged the one, without giving jealousy to the other. In
the Congregations he did always very well, and what he said, was upon good
foundation: yet he might have been a little more short and succinct in his
discourses, for he would amplify so much, he would often lose his way, not
knowing how to get back to his Post; but in things of higher importance, he
took more time and consideration. He neither exceeds in clemency, nor rigor,
but keeps a middle way betwixt both; only in certain cases where the interest
of his own or his friends is concerned he will mistake sometimes, and be rigid,
where he should be merciful, and merciful, where he should be severe; at Court
he has but an ordinary reputation.

PASCALE d'ARAGONA is a natural Spaniard, of one of the most illustrious
Families in Spain, if not of the Royal; he was made Cardinal at the nomination
of the King of Spain, with the Title of Santa Balbina; before his Creation he
had served his Majesty in very considerable employments, and much to the
advantage and satisfaction of that Crown.

In Rome where he received the Cap from his Holinesses own hands, he was
certain months in the character of Ambassador; but in a short time he was
declared Viceroy of Naples, which is one of the greatest Governments that
depend upon that Crown, substituting Don Pietro d'Aragona his Brother,
Ambassador in his place; he went from Rome to take possession of his new
Government, where he was received with all imaginable Pomp by those people, to
whom he expressed all the tokens of integrity and justice, taking off at first
dash several of their Grievances and Gabels; though he was afterward enforced
to lay others in their room, which he did without any way disgusting the people.

The King of Spain dying in the mean time, this Cardinal was declared one of
the Principal Counselors to the Queen Dowager, called back into Spain to
assist in the Government of that Monarchy, and his Brother Don Pietro, declared
Viceroy in his stead; but rather in consideration of the Cardinal, than the
proper merits of Don Pietro, who was indeed, next him, the most worthy of that
charge, which he does still execute with honor to himself, and satisfaction to
the people.

Whilst he was Viceroy, the dignity of Sopremo Inquisitore was conferred upon
him; but he held it not long, resigning it to the Queens chief Confessor in
exchange for the Archbishopric of Toledo, which he has in possession at this
time. This Cardinal is certainly a person of great intelligence in politic
affairs; generous upon many occasions, but not upon all; he delights in certain
magnificencies and pastimes, provided they be honorable. The Queen has him in
great esteem, and makes use, not of his public Counsels only, but his private;
insomuch that there are many Grandees in the Court that envy him exceedingly,
calling him the Spanish Mazarine; but they are very much mistaken.

FRANCISCO MARIA MANCINI a Roman, was made Cardinal by Alexander, at the
nomination of the most Christian King, with the Title of Santi Visto, e
Modesto. Cardinal Mazarine, who was his Cousin, and resolved to make all his
Relations considerable both in wealth and pre-eminence, seeing his Brother
Cardinal Michele Mazarine was dead, for whose exaltation, he had set his
authority upon the Tenterhooks, he began immediately to bend his mind to the
ingrandizing this Kinsman; and to that end he conferred honors upon him, and
introduced him into the service of the King, that he might not seem to exalt a
person to the Cardinalship (though his design was no other) by the intercession
of the Crown of France, till he had given some testimony of his affection to
his Majesty's service; and he had reason, for when by his services to the Crown
of France, he had prevailed with his Majesty to recommend his Brother Michele
for a Cap. Pope Urban refused for some time to consent, and either stimulated
by the Spaniards, or induced by some other reasons, he excused himself, by
pretending that his Majesty ought not to interpose for a person, that had done
no service for his Crown. But be it as it will, he obtained it at last, though
he enjoyed it but a few months, death taking him out of the World without
regard to the power of Mazarine, who was much afflicted at the news thereof.
And that Mazarine might not have it again cast in his dish, that he made the
Crown of France nominate another Cardinal of no merit nor desert, he put forth
his hand to this Gentleman also, and gave him opportunity of serving his
Majesty, in things that redounded more to the honor of Mancini himself, than
to the service of that Crown; for Mazarine performing many things by his own
great and fortunate brain, afterward gave out that all was performed by the
conduct and affection of Mancini, who perhaps knew nothing thereof himself,
though he wanted no will nor desire to serve well. Alexander (that envyed the
great Authority of Mazarine in France, and in his Nuntiature to Colen had taken
some ill impressions against him, as supposing him the great obstructer of the
Peace) liked not this Exaltation of his Cousin, but endeavored underhand what
he could to defeat it; but finding the inconveniences that would follow, he
created him, and seemed to do that willingly, that he could not prevent.

This Cardinal is not ungrateful to the Crown that gave him his Cap, having
carried himself always with great fervor in defense of its interest. But he
has not that headpiece that is necessary for them that undertake the protection
of Crowns. In the Congregations he shows himself a person of indifferent
judgment, delivering his opinion temperately and modestly, though he be
naturally subject to choler. He would be glad to take any way would bring him
to the Papacy, but knowing that those Cardinals that have been proposed by the
Crowns, do but lose their times to think on it, he alters his mind, and contents
himself to be counted a good Cardinal, as he is indeed, having very few vices
or defects, but forces himself what he can to preserve the reputation of his
Dignity. In the Sacred College he has more Friends than Enemies, and amongst
all the Cardinals that follow the interest of France, he is the least hated by
the Spaniard, though he be Cousin to Mazarine, a Name that is odious to Spain
to this day, for his great fortune in the time of the Wars, and for the cunning
he showed at the surrendering of Cassal. He converses civilly with every body,
he is generous upon occasion, but not overmuch; he protects all willingly that
are recommended to him; he loves Learned men well enough, and it is no fault of
his if he obliges not all of them.

GIROLAMO BVONCOMPAGNI of Bolonia, is Gregory the thirteenths Great Nephew;
that Pope was very well inclined to the advancement of his own Family, from the
time he was admitted to the Papacy in the year 1572. in so much that in the
twelve years he was Pope, he brought the Buoncompagni to that grandeur, that
for above thirty years they lived like Princes. Giacomo Buoncompagni, General
for the Church, and Grandfather to the Cardinal we are now a speaking of, left
several Sons, all very rich, and well allied; yet in a short time after, though
there was not any prodigal in the whole Family, all was dispersed and gone;
besides though some of them were Cardinals still, and had considerable Offices,
yet they left their Families worse and worse in respect of their Estate; and
had not two Marriages sustained it, and put them into a moderate degree of
subsistence, in respect of what they were in before, without doubt they would
have run a great hazard of being in a worse condition.

Girolamo Buoncompagni took the Ecclesiastical habit upon him for no other end,
but to see if he could advance his F^mily again to its former grandeur, by the
acquisition of a Cap: for amongst the Italians they that fall to any decay,
have no other hopes to reestablish themselves, but by taking the Priests habit
upon them, as knowing very well the Church has eminent ways enough to raise
them that use the right means.

In the time of Innocent, he courted and insinuated what he could, to work
himself into some considerable employment, but he could not effect it, for
several reasons, but especially in respect of his youth, which in Rome is
usually a great impediment; besides Innocent looking on him as a person but of
indifferent parts, and small experience in matters of consequence, durst not
trust him, least he should not come off with that honor that he ought to do:
However he employed him in such Offices as might exercise him, and by degrees
he instructed him in greater affairs, doing what he could possibly to make him
conceived a man of abilities, and worthy of greater preferment.

Alexander that had a mind always to be esteemed a Pope that was zealous for
the public honor of the Church, having created Cardinal Farnese that was
Maggiordomo of the Apostolic Palace, with design to advance some other person
of equal merits to the place he resigned; he declared Buoncompagni Maggiordomo,
who began in a short time to execute it exactly, though it was joined with a
hundred several employments; he knew very well how to comport himself with the
two branches of the Chigi, without giving occasion of jealousy to the one or
the other, obliging them so that they made no scruple to recommend him to the
Pope, especially Cardinal Chigi did him good offices, as glorying that he had
amongst his Creatures, so considerable a person; so that Alexander persuaded by
their arguments, created him Cardinal in his third Promotion, with the Title of
San Pietro, e Marcellino.

A while after the said Alexander gave him the Archbishopric of Bolonia, in
which this Cardinal gave great proofs of his making an excellent Prelate; he is
charitable to the poor, benign to all that have business with him, impartial
to the highest degree, and free and unbiased in his judgment. The Sacred
College has so great an esteem for him, there is not a Cardinal has any
considerable animosity against him; so that if he increases in goodness, as he
may do in years, he may have no small party in the Conclave.

CARLO ROBERTI a Roman, has labored might and main, that he might not come
behind the rest, and has made courtship to more than two or three, that he
might the better advance himself; for he discerned the necessity wherein his
Family stood of considerable assistance, and how ambitious it was to have a Cap
amongst them. Innocent employed him in some places of ordinary importance, and
though he did what he could to gain the reputation of having well served the
Church, yet (whether it was that the Court was then forming extravagant Scenes
of their own, or whether it was that he could not hit the humor of the Pope)
there was little or no notice taken of him.

But in the Popedom of Alexander, being employed in greater affairs, he began
to gain some reputation both with People and Pope, who spoke of him often to
his relations, as of a person adorned with several good qualities, and fit to
serve the Church in the most troublesome and calamitous times.

After the pacification betwixt the Pope and the King of France, upon the
rupture about the Duke of Crequy, this Roberti was created Nuntio, and sent
into France in the room of Piccolomini that was driven from thence; which is an
evident sign his Holiness had a good opinion of him, when he put that
Nuntiature into his hands, that required so great prudence and dexterity to
manage it: For though the gross of the quarrel was composed by the Treaty at
Pisa, yet there were certain relics remaining, that without good management
might have unravelled all again; above all, his Holiness gave Roberti in
charge, that he should as much as possible redintegrate into the favor of his
Majesty, and the principal Officers in his Court, the opinion the Chigi had
lost in France, and that he should endeavor to make them appear innocent, and
full of affection for that Crown. Which said orders were observed by the
Nuntio, according as they ought to be, he having in a short time gained the
reputation of an excellent and impartial Minister in that Court. At length in
his last promotion, Alexander made him a Cardinal with the rest of the
Nuntioes, and sent him his Cap to Paris.

Before his Nuntiature into France, this Prelate was much inclined to the
interest of Spain, but after he began to be acquainted with the Christian Kings
manner of Entertainment, and the civility of the French Court, he changed his
mind, and followed the humor of the French. The Cardinals of that Kings
faction, endeavored what they could to gain him, though but extrinsecally,
whilst they discovered what was intrinsecally in him; however they gained but
little upon him, their discourses being only in general terms.

It is not known what good success he would have had in the management of the
Congregations, because he stayed not long in Rome after the assumption of
Clement the ninth, being immediately sent Legate to Romagna, where he ordered
his affairs with great regularity, and justice; but it is supposed he would have
done very well, because he is a person of sound judgment, modest in his
opinion, and one that will give both God and Caesar their due, which is as much
as to say, he is both a good Statesman, and a good Churchman too, and would
be much better, were he not addicted so much to the benefit of his own Family.

GIVLIO SPINOLA a Genoese, is a person of excellent parts, generous,
magnanimous, and full of civility, and meekness; he is an enemy to prodigality,
yet loves not covetousness; the darling of his Countrymen. He arriv'ed at the
Prelacy (though he was otherwise deserving enough) by the ordinary way of the
Genoeses, who have taken an oath as it were to buy all the offices that are to
be sold in Rome by the Church. In his very first employments, he expressed
himself a person of worth; and indeed he is not a little learned, nor a little
conversant amongst learned men; his delight is to be discoursing amongst such
as are experienced in Politics, and Ecclesiastical affairs, observing with
great diligence, which way he may make the most profit of them; and this he
loves as his Recreations.

In his youth he was not so chaste altogether as he should have been, having
suffered himself to be carried away too much with the love of Women, to the
scandal of all that had affection for him; but since he took the habit of a
Prelate upon him, he has been more circumspect, and if he has not girt himself
so close with the girdle of Chastity, as he ought, yet he has brought himself
to so formal and exterior modesty, and so seeming a prudence, in covering those
frailties which cannot be forsaken by those that carry them along with them,
that at present he is esteemed chaste, whether he be so or no.

He (being a person descended from a Family so famous through all Europe in
several respects, particularly in consideration of the Marquess Spinola the
great Captain, and Cardinal Agostino Spinola, a most noble person, and very
beneficial to the poor) had no great difficulty to obtain a reputation at
Court, which every body is ambitious of at Rome; many people admired rather
that he was employed no sooner in more considerable affairs, seeing that to the
Nobility of his Birth, he wanted not the good endowments of mind. Alexander
having experienced him in some intricate business, and found him a person of
worth, he sent him Nuntio into Germany, in Caraffa's place, who was created
Cardinal. In which he comported himself so well, to the satisfaction both of
the Emperor and Pope, especially in matters of Religion, and the differences
betwixt the Catholic and Protestant, that in the last Promotion of Pope
Alexander, he deservedly obtained a Cap; and a while after, he left the
Imperial Court, to be present at the Conclave in Rome.

His voice will always be in favor of the house of Austria, as well from his
natural inclination, as from the obligations the Family of Spinola has always
received from the Catholic Crown; from whence it acknowledges the greatest
part of its fortunes. He delights much in walking, in Comedyes, and Balls, and
perhaps his dignity has altered his humors; however he is assiduous enough in
business, and is very sincere and affectionate in what eyer he undertakes: he
is very apt to be angry, if things succeed not according to his designs: he
looks closely enough to the people of his Court, and allows them not such
latitude, as other Prelates and Cardinals do allow to their Courts. It Is
supposed he would do very well in the management of some Legation, which he
might have, if there was any regard had of the desert of a person; but in those
cases, the Popes aim no further than to satisfy them they are pleased with,
not those that deserve it. He uses great prudence in gaining upon such Princes
Ministers, as are resident in Rome; and speaks of the merit of his Country so,
as gives occasion of jealousy to all that envy them.

VITALIANO VISCONTI of Milan, is a Gentleman of an illustrious Family, and
descended from the ancient Dukes of Milan. He devotes himself to the service of
the Church, that sometime or other he may come to the Cardinalship, for which
he had always a particular fancy. His friends did what they could to have
persuaded him to the Wars, but he liked the Cross better, as that which brings
ordinarily more profit, more honor, and less danger. The beginning of his
Prelacy was not so successful as he looked for, so that he was often changing
his profession, being weary as he said, to see things go on so slowly; but he
had no reason, for he thought honors would have been shower'd down upon his
head, though it came as fast as he could reasonably expect.

Pope Alexander, who had the first occasion to try him in matters of trust, did
it in his Papacy, honoring and loading him with offices, till that when
Monsignour Bonelli that was Nuntio in Spain, was created Cardinal; he gave that
Nuntiature to Visconti, though there were others that put hard for it. But the
Pope, who knew well enough the merits of the cause, declared Visconti Nuntio,
at one blow satisfying his own inclination, and the Spaniards too, who were not
displeased to have for their Nuntio, a Prelate not only born their Subject, but
bound by many obligations to the Catholic Crown. In this Nuntiature which
lasted but three years, Philip the fourth King of Spain died, upon which
occasion, the Nuntio showed himself both a faithful Pastor, and a great
Politician, assisting in many things with favor to the Church, and without any
prejudice to the Crown of Spain. Before he ended his days, Alexander thought
good to promote him to the Cardinalship, as well to recompense his services to
the Church, as that he might not see so honorable a Family without the dignity
of a Cardinal, which had had heretofore the Sovereignty of Milan.

From the advice of his Promotion resolved, to the news of the unhappy and
dying condition of the Pope, there were but few days past; so that (either out
of his own desire to be in the Conclave, or otherwise to comply with the
importunity of the Spanish Ambassador at Rome, who pressed him earnestly to
make have, that the Spanish interest might be made stronger thereby) he
resolved to take Post, and make his journey by land. But the Counsel of Madrid
would not admit his Auditor to propose it, and therefore he was forced to stay
in Spain, and expect new orders from the new Pope, with great disgust to the
Ambassador at Rome.

The Spaniards caress him much, hoping he will do them some important service,
as well because he is born their Subject, as because he has a particular
inclination for them. He is a person of good qualities, liberal of his
promises, generous to a certain proportion, for he loves not to cast away too
much of his own; affable, benign, and of such a Majesty, as appears pride
outwardly, but in effect is no such thing.

INNICO CARACCIOLI a Neapolitane, although he is descended of a Noble house,
and the chief of Nido in Naples; he was forced for all that, to dig his
fortunes from underground, that is to say, to acquire the reputation of the
Prelacy by buying of offices, and by his courtesy and obsequiousness, obliging
this Popeling sometimes, and sometimes that. He is of a nature to dissemble
very well, and like a true Neapolitane, entertards the fury of his heart, and
the ebullition of his blood, with a counterfeit medesty and goodness. From
hence it is, some men conceive him a person of an unsettled head, capriccious,
and giddy; and indeed he will talk sometime of this thing, and sometimes of
that; sometimes of the reformation, sometimes of the decorum of the Church; now
he defends its frailties, anon he would be Pope, and reform them. Others will
have him as honest, and as able, as his age will bear; but be it one way or the
other, this is most certain, he has a heart of Steel, covered over with Gold,
that in case of necessity, would be able to withstand all the comminations, and
violences of other people, and with humility make his arguments prevail,
inspight of all their contradictions.

The Chigi had always an affection for him, and held him employed in many
businesses of trust, till at last Alexander toward his latter end, either to
recompense so deserving a person, or to have the office of Auditor di Camera
void again, created him Cardinal, and gave him the Cap with his own hands the
16 of March 1667. injoyning him earnestly to hold fair correspondency with
Cardinal Chigi his Nephew, who treated him at his Palace that day at dinner
with great magnificence.

He seems to be more inclined to the service of Spain, than the other
Neapolitane Cardinals, and Subjects of that Crown, have formerly been; and
indeed the Spaniards reckon him in the number of their Confidents, though to
his great dissatisfaction they trust him not, as they ought to do. But many are
of opinion, that he is not of an humor to continue long in that correspondence
with the Spaniards, because he is supposed to be of the nature of the late
Cardinal Filomarino, that had a perfect hatred for the Ministers of Spain, and
as great an affection for the King, toward whom he carried himself with the
greatest humility, but to his Ministers with the greatest pride. Some say it is
better to treat with him now he is a Cardinal, than it was before, when he was
but Auditor di Camera: He was then an exactor of certain punctilioes, but now
he shows great ripeness and dexterity in the Congregations, perhaps with design
to advance himself higher yet, when his years will make him capable. He has
Kindred good store, but being all of them persons of quality, they do not
trouble him; however he does not fail to assist them that are of the Church: He
loves the divertisement of Comedies, and such other recreations, but so as to
give no scandal, as much as he can.

GIO. DELFINI a Venetian, has always expressed himself a good Prelate, and
maintained the Ecclesiastical habit with great Decorum, in so much as that
Republique taking notice of his merits, having a convenient occasion, they
recommended him to Pope Alexander, who was resolved to do that honor to those
Princes, who had for a long time a right of nominating one of their Subjects,
as well as any of the Crowns. For this reason resolving not to fail in a
business of that consequence, amongst the rest that were recommended, he chose
Monsignor Delfini, and created him Cardinal with the rest that were recommended
by the Crowns, in March 1667. his Holiness having dispatched Monsignor
Falconieri his Chamberlain of Honor, to present him with the Cap, whose
arrival was celebrated with the public solemnity of Fireworks, Balls, and
Festivals, for three days together; particularly the House of Delfini, that is
of the antientest Nobility, made great expression of their joy, by their
charity to the poor, and their Fountains running with Wine, to give the people
entertainment; though to speak the truth, the Venetians are too near the Water,
to be much given to Wine.

The Republique of Venice according to their usual generosity, ordered him six
thousand Ducats, as they are wont to give every Cardinal of that Nation, as
soon as they are promoted, toward their expenses, and to put them into an
Equipage proportionable to their Dignity. He has as yet no great reputation at
Court, but he may in a short time, having a particular way of civility, whereby
he obliges all such as have any affairs with him; and he has already shown such
manifest tokens of it in some of the Congregations, that he has discovered
himself to be much more capable, than the common sort of Cardinals do imagine.
He has declared, that he will keep fair correspondence with all the Ministers
that are resident in Rome, provided the interest of his Country obliges him not
to the contrary; for to speak truth, he bears as cordial an affection to his
Country, as can be expected from the best of Subjects, postponing his private
interest, to the public service of the Senate, though he be not quite void of
affection to his own. Amongst his other virtues, the modesty of his language is
such, he suffers not himself to be transported to any body.

GVIDO BALDO DE TVN a German, and Archbishop of Salsburg, was made Cardinal at
the instance of the Emperor, and by him dispatched with all speed to Rome, to
be present at the Conclave, to fortify the Spanish interest in the election of
a new Pope. The Duke Altemps invited him to take his Lodgings in his Palace,
but he excused himself, upon pretense that he desired rather to lodge in the
German College, where he had been sometimes a Student, and had given hopes of
those excellent qualities, which he discovered more plainly, after he had taken
the Ecclesiastical habit upon him, by restraining himself as much as possibly
he could, from giving any public scandal.

The people of his Diocese hold him very honest, an excellent Pastor, and one
that leaves no stone unturned that may make his Clergy serviceable, and
assiduous in the Divine Worship. The Emperor caresses him very much, as a
person of desert, and as a person of Estate; his Treasure being so vast, that
upon an exigence he can furnish him abundantly, not by way of Benevolence, but
Loan. The greatest defect the Germans observe in him, is his Covetousness,
adhering with great affection to his own interests: yet for all that it cannot
be said, that he ever committed any unworthy action, to accumulate wealth, his
ways were rational, and by frugality: Yet some Germans have told me, that upon
occasion he has spent with great generosity, and especially at the Empresses
arrival in Germany, he showed himself as liberal and magnificent as the best.
Whilst he was but a Prelate, he distributed his Alms with a little too much
temperance, but since he has been a Cardinal, his heart is enlarged
proportionable to his Dignity: He is a person of a sound judgment, and one
that traces Corruption to the bottom, though in appearance he seems no such
person. But that which is more considerable is, the candor which is natural to
his Countrymen; he is never transported with passion, but blames or commends
people impartially, as they deserve. He is slow in his Negotiations, advancing
like a Tortoise, so that it is thought he would be a fitter Minister for Spain,
than for Germany: He speaks his mind freely, and is not troubled to be
contradicted, provided they bring reasons enough to oppose him.

LEWIS Duke of VENDOSME a Frenchman, is descended from a Natural Son of Henry
the 4th. who marrying with Frances of Lorain Duchess of Mercoeur, had this
Lewis by her. He had no great inclination to the Ecclesiastical habit, his mind
running more after Matrimony, and the affairs of the World. Accordingly when he
was arrived at a competent age, he married a Neice of Cardinal Mazarines, who
was then the Dominus fac totum in France, hoping by means of his favor, to
open a way to some honorable employment. This Lady was of the same stock with
Cardinal Mancini, that is now living, but lived not many years with her Husband
the Duke, to whom she left two very hopeful Sons, but not old enough to know,
or lament, the loss of so incomparable a Mother.

No sooner was this Lord fallen into the condition of a Widdower, but he
changed his mind, and as when he was young, he was all for Matrimony, so now he
is altogether for the Ecclesiastical habit, not in any penitential way, but
only to capacitate him for the Cardinalship, which is that he has always aimed
at, and with all industry endeavors. Finally, his most Christian Majesty,
according to the Prerogative of his Crown, being to nominate a person in the
last promotion of Alexander, presented this as a person of great merit, and fit
to be an Ornament both to the College and Cap; and the rather, because in his
Vice-Royship in Catalonia, and in his Government of Provence, he had shown
great assiduity in his Majesty's service.

A few days after he had received his Cap, the tidings of the languishing
condition of his Holiness arrived; so that with directions from the King, he
parted immediately for Rome, to be present at the new Conclave, where he met
exactly with the rest of the French Cardinals. In this Conclave he behaved
himself with great prudence, and perhaps more than was expected by the elder
Cardinals, that had been a long time acquainted with the intrigues of the
Conclaves. The Election being made, he prepared for his return into France, but
first he recommended to his Holiness, the interests of his Master, particularly
in the business of the disincameration of Castro, according to the Treaty at
Pisa; during his stay at Rome, he gave great evidences of his generosity,
dispatching all that came to him with great satisfaction.

The Republique of Genoa, which is not backward in obliging the Subjects of his
most Christian Majesty, and his Cardinals much more, endeavored what they
could to find out away to oblige this; and being in his way at Savona, where he
was complemented by the Governor with all due respect, they sent him six
Corsaires of Provence, that had been condemned to the Galleys, and were set at
liberty at the instance of that Cardinal, for which he expressed great
satisfaction, and thankfulness to that Commonwealth. In short, this Cardinal is
not to undertake any matters of great importance, though his judgment is well
enough, and he manages indifferent things to a hair.

LEWIS MONCADA is a Sicilian, and the last Cardinal created by Alexander the
seventh; he was promoted at the instance of the King of Spain, with three
others, nominated by the Emperor, the King of France, and the State of Venice.
The Spaniards design in the nomination of this person, was not so much to
remunerate the services he had done to that Crown upon several occasions, as
that they might have in the Sacred College, a Cardinal considerable both in
Birth and Authority, of which the Spaniards have great need at this time,
considering the lowness and languor of their condition, especially in Rome,
where they are regarded by the Ecclesiastics for nothing but the profit and
authority they receive from the Catholic States, and that King: so that their
authority must needs lessen, and their Revenews diminish, if the Ecclesiastics
do withdraw themselves from their affection to Spain.

He has a great reputation in the Court of Spain, but not so much for the
integrity of his manners, or the goodness of his life, (for he is but a man,
and subject to frailties, though he be prudent, and abstains from such
scandals, as are offensive to his gravity) but for his exquisite knowledge in
Government, which he signalized in several charges committed to him by his
Catholic Majesty. Yet he would scarce make so good a Pastor in the Government
of the Church, having had but little converse in Ecclesiastical affairs,
especially in certain Spiritual matters, he has had little or no occasion to
know, as one that has been drawn away by matters of State Policy of greatest
importance, the mysteries and intrigues of which, he understands very well, and
will be always faithful to the Spaniard; and indeed his vigilance is so
great, they must rise betimes that deceive him. It is supposed the intelligence
betwixt him, and the Cardinal of Aragon, is not very good, which last, looking
upon himself as a person that has been longer employed in the affairs of that
Crown, would pretend to do all; and this, who professes to act with all
sincerity and affection in his Majesty's service, will not be brought to
condescend to receive orders from the Cardinal of Aragon; Especially their
humors being different, for though they are both Spaniards born, yet one
retains the manners of a Sicilian.

In Rome, which is the touchstone of wits, they speak not as yet either good or
bad of Moncada, because they have not seen him in his Scarlet, which the Romans
do very much desire. A German Lord that is acquainted with him, told me, that
he is of a most extreme jealous nature, not much liberal, though not much
covetous, grave in his audiences, majestic in his words, outwardly charitable,
and full of Spanish Maxims.

Here ends the College of Alexanders Cardinals, who are now living, some of
his Creatures being dead, as Cardinal Bagni, Pallavicino, Bandinelli, and
Vecchiarelli, of which I shall speak something by the bye, because as yet their
memory is fresh. In the death of Cardinal Bagni, it may be said, and said
truly, the Church received no great loss, because he was so old before he
received the Purple, that it was talked up and down in Rome, that the Cap was
bestowed on him, in hopes he would not keep it long; but in other respects his
death has made a great breach in the College, for he was certainly a learned
man, of great experience in the Arts both of War and Peace; so that Alexander
with great judgment, not only promoted him amongst the rest, but admitted him
amongst the greatest of his Confidents, and received the news of his death with
great sorrow, and affliction. The same may be said of Cardinal Bandinelli a
Genoese, a person indeed of no profound learning, yet of great practice and
experience in the mysteries of Court, which Alexander understood very well,
when he made him a Cardinal, to the general satisfaction of the Court, that
looked upon him as worthy of the highest command; but he dying just in the nick
of the vacancy of the Sea, deprived the Conclave of a person they talked much
of at that time, and perhaps he might have succeeded. Whether the Church
sustained any great loss by the death of Cardinal Pallavicino, may be argued
from his qualities, for indeed he was an honest man, bent wholly upon the
benefit of the Church, in which he always expressed great sincerity. He was
very well read, both in Divinity, Morality, and speculative Philosophy, but
principally in Morality; and therefore his Holiness conferred with him still,
in all matters of Theology, and Morality, in which he was so perfect, there was
not one amongst all the Cardinals did equal him His Holiness consulted him
likewise in matters of State, not but that he was sensible enough of his
inexperience therein; but he did it to show him honor, and to manifest his
confidence in him: not sticking always to his opinion, because he found him a
little too rigid, and zealous for the Ecclesiastical Laws, and subject to those
errors, which those persons do ordinarily fall into, who stand so stiffly to
the punctilio's of reformation, and will go no way but their own; and these in
plain terms are they, that are obstinate, and intractible in their opinions, be
they good or bad. His name survives in the History of the Council of Trent,
written to the shame of what Father Paulo Servita had published; for which
reason the Venetians thought themselves obliged to prohibit it in their
Dominions. His manner of life, was like a Friar, or rather like a Jesuit; he
never visited Ladies, not so much as the Wives of Ambassadors; and therefore
they considered him no further, than as a good Cardinal. He died likewise in
the vacancy of the Chair, and so poor, he scarce left wherewithal to bury him;
insomuch that Cardinal Chigi, as if he designed to make him sensible of his
liberality, even after his death, ordered a thousand Crowns to be laid out in
the Celebration of this Funeral, which was performed in the Jesuits Church:
Odoardo Vecchiarelli da Ricti, that had been Auditor di Camera before his
Promotion to the Cardinalship, had the honor, or good fortune, to see the
Conclave, and be present at the Election of a new Pope, and afterward to dye,
which was more than Pallavicino and Bandanelli had. The death of this Cardinal
was not so resented by the Court, because he was not of any extraordinary
parts, though otherwise well enough practiced in the business of the world: and
not altogether unskilful in Ecclesiastical affairs, though not well enough to
give Counsel, yet sufficiently to speak his mind frankly in the Congregations;
but the greatest loss the Church sustained, was in the death of Cardinal
Farnese, who at this very time, I have notice died, the last Sunday but one in
February 1668. but because I have said enough of him already, I shall speak no
further, only that as soon as Cardinal Chigi had the news of his death, he
turned about to his Friends that were with him, and said, Had we made Farnese
Pope, as Grimaldi would have had us, we should have been now striving again to
elect a new one.

And now it is time we come to Clement the ninth, and speak something of the
Cardinals created by him: But first it will not be amiss, to premise something
about his Government of the Church, which can be no great matter, because he is
but newly entered as it were into the Papacy. And certainly to apply himself
wholly to business, is a most worthy humor in his Holiness: He gives Audience
daily to every body, without regard to the weakness or infirmities of his
Nature; whilst he was Cardinal he was retired, shunned all conversation as much
as was possible, and would admit of no employment but his Charge; but now the
Scene is changed, and he converses with more freedom; and that which is most
considerable, he does not decline those persons that come to negotiate with him
about public affairs.

At the happy beginning of his Papacy, he caused Medals to be made, and gave
them about to his Friends, with this inscription, Constantia Silveri ad
imitandum proposita. Which by the Wits of the Court was interpreted thus, That
as San Silverio the Pope, though deposed from the Apostolic Chair, and for
some time a Prisoner to the Emperor, could never be brought to renounce any
thing, that justly belonged to his Predecessor, so Clement the ninth was never
to be persuaded to the discameration of Castro; and indeed it has appeared so
since, for all the art they could use, could never bring him to the execution
of the Treaty at Pisa, in which it is articled, That Castro should be
delivered. Nor can all the instances of the Ambassador of France, nor his
pressing that that Treaty was subscribed by the greatest part of the Cardinals,
work upon his resolutions. And yet for all this, the King of France has invited
him to be a Godfather to a young Princess his Daughter. And the Pope has sent a
Bull to Cardinal Vendosme, declaring him Legate a latere, and thereby
qualifying him for that Function, which is to be suddenly performed with all
magnificence imaginable.

This Pope would not go the way of his Predecessor Alexander, and keep his
Kindred so many months out of Rome, to acquire the Epithet of Holy. Clement
knew very well it was but formality, and so reckoned by the people, and
therefore that they might not be deceived in him, he called in his Relations
immediately to the Court, that is, his Brother, and his Nephews, and Nieces,
assigning the same preheminences to all of them, that his Predecessors had
given to theirs. True it is, there happened some disgusts betwixt the Pope, and
the State of Malta; for the Pope having an eye (as was but reasonable) that
nothing should escape his hands, that might aggrandize his Nephews, gave to Fra
Vincenzo his Nephew, (a Cavalier of Malta) the Priory of Santa Eufemia, which
by Seniority belonged to Brancacci, another of the Knights: at which, the Grand
Master being disgusted, threatened to turn the Inquisitor out of the Island, and
gave him other tokens of his Resentment; but all was composed by the good
conduct of his Holiness, in such manner, that Brancaccio was satisfied, by the
persuasion of a Cardinal of that name, that for the Popes interest, and his
Nephews, accommodated all.

The Nobility of his Holiness, and the Family of the Rospigliosi, is as
considerable as the City of Pistoia can make it; it is reckoned amongst the
most ancient of that place, and has not o^^y maintained it self in the
principal Honors that Town could afford, and allied it self with Families
their equals, but has in all ages afforded eminent men in Tuscany, and
elsewhere, so as it may well stand in competition with any that enveighs it, in
several respects; his Holiness however, aims to aggrandize his Family in spite
of them all, especially in the person of the new Cardinal his Nephew, whom we
shall yet consider as Abbot Rospigliosi; and indeed, there are many Provisions
and Offices suspended till the said Abbot arrives in Rome, who by unhappy
accident sell sick by the way; all people being big with expectation,
parturiunt montes, but they know not whether they may say, nascetur ridiculus
Mus, or laugh out as is hoped, nascetur ingens Elephas.

His Holiness in the mean time, being always intent upon the easing and
indulging of the people under his Care, has ordered it to be published in all
the Parishes, and to all the Ecclesiastic Ministers within the district of
Rome, that the several Diocesans be called, to the end that if they find
themselves aggrieved by the Roman Barons; or other Governors, they should
appeal immediately to him, and he would relieve them with all possible justice
But all was but show, as many believed, it being the property of the Romans to
complain, with excess of ill Government, and to call what is good, but
Hypocrisy; so that this benignity of his Holiness, was looked upon but as a
Copy of his Countenance. He was reported likewise to be too easy in granting
favors to the Ladies, but that report was raised upon the Lady Marchess of
Paleotti's prevailing (by her insinuations, and the prettiness of her
discourse) with his Holiness to bestow upon her Father the Duke of Nortumbia, a
Pension of five hundred Crowns a year, with this additional favor, that it
might be paid from time to time by the Congregation de propaganda side. From
this bounty of the Popes, the Romans took occasion to say, that his Holiness
was very ready to gratify the Ladies in any thing; but the contrary appears in
the person of the very same Lady, who thinking to find the same easiness as she
did in the Pension, she adventured so far as to desire to be divorced from her
Husband; but she found his Holiness impenetrable as to that, who reproving her
for her demand, sent her away much discontented.

The Pope was highly accused upon the resolution he took as soon as he was
leaped into the Vatican, to confirm the Invenstiture of the Prefectship of
Rome, given by Urban the eighth to Don Tadco, and to his third Generation,
although Innocent and Alexander, his Predecessors, had refused to confirm the
same to Don Ma^t^o his Son, the Prince of Palestrina; however Clement was
willing to gratify him, in remembrance of the obligations he had always
professed to the Barbarini, but with this condition notwithstanding, that the
said Prefect should give place to the Ambassadors of Crowns only, allowing them
precedence not only before all Roman Barons, but even before the Popes Nephews
pro tempore. A business that did not please the Barons at all, and gave great
disgust to the Historiographers, who all of them knowing this Minister to be a
second Emperor, and that all the former Popes (except Urban for his own
interest) had endeavored, out of a politic maxim, to abolish the very memory
of it, did wonder to see Clement confirming it, at his very first entrance into
the Chair.

The first of his Nephews that came to Rome, were two, one of them called Fra
Vincenzo a Knight of Malta, and the other Tomaso: They were persons of no great
noise, but resolute, modest, courteous, and full of humility, in a word, not
unlike their Uncle in their modesty, who though he had called them to Rome,
declared notwithstanding that he would not suffer them to fix their Families in
Rome, nor take any other Titles upon them, than what belonged to their Births:
But that resolution was of no long continuance, for he left them at liberty to
their Titles, and whatever pre-eminence they pleased, in so much that his
Holiness one day did solemnly rebuke Seignour Giacinto del Bufalo, Mastro di
Camera to Fra. Vincent, because he had made Gio. Battista Vallasi to stay at
dinner with the said Cavalier, and his brother, as a person that not being of
Noble Extraction, did not deserve to dine with his Holinesses Nephews; a clear
sign he intended to render them Majestique: having given likewise eighty
thousand Crowns toward the furnishing of Ludovisi's Palace, designed for the
residence of the Nephews, besides thirty thousand he sent the Abbot at one
time, and above fifty thousand at another, to help to defray his charges in his
Journey.

I shall now pass to the Promotion of Cardinals by Clement the ninth, about the
end of December. 1667. and the first that presents himself, is Prince Leopald di
Medici brother to the Grand Duke. Whilst Alexander was living, several
instances were made to him, that he would do the College of Cardinals that
honor, as to bestow a Cap upon such a Prince as this, of a Family that was of
a Neighbor State, and had deserved well of the Church; but Alexander reserving
it for his Successor, denied himself that glory: as it happened afterward
indeed; for no sooner was Clement got into the Vatican, but, either moved by
the natural merit of his person, or by a desire to do good, he declared he
would promote the said Prince Leopald to the Cardinalship, without attending
the Grand Dukes mediation; which fell out afterward, but rather to preserve I
know not what kind of right of nomination the Grand Duke pretended to, than for
any thing else. The Popes having ordinarily contended to satisfy the instances
of the Great Dukes, by the Promotion of some person of the house of Medici, as
well for the benefit of the Church, as the State Ecclesiastic.

From this new Prince Cardinal, and called Cardinal in quality of a Prince,
there can be nothing expected but good actions, favorable, propitious, and
equitable to the common good of Italy, as the rest of the Cardinals of the
house of Medici's, have upon all occasions expressed: particularly Gio. Carlo,
and Carlo that dyed last, who with great prudence promoted the advantage of all
Italy, as zealously, as the benefit of their own Families: so that it is
believed this Cardinal will not prove inferior, either to his Uncle, or
Brother, as having, besides his generosity and natural Majesty, talents
sufficient for the management of State affairs; besides a competent skill in
matters Ecclesiastic and Military; but in the first especially, as having from
his youth been curious in History, and very serious in making reflections to
his advantage. In a word there cannot, nor ought not any thing to be said, but
that this Cardinal is a great and most excellent Prince.

GIACOMO ROSPIGLIOSI is his Holinesses Nephew, with that Title created
Cardinal, and which is of more importance, Cardinal Padrone; he is the eldest
Son of Seignour Camillo Rospigliosi, the Popes Brother, a person that deserves
to be Brother to the greatest Monarch in the Universe. The great expressions of
joy that he made at the exaltation of his Brother, was nothing but a liberal
distribution of provisions to the poor, benignity and charity to the
distressed, being his natural endowments; nor was it the poor of Pistoia only,
that participated of his alms, but the poor of the whole Ecclesiastical State
almost, for in his journey from Pistoia to Rome, he dispensed so largely
amongst them all, that it was much admired from whence that Treasure should
come; which indeed was his own, for he had not began to suck the honey of the
Church.

In the Castle of Gondolfo, which was the first place in which he presented
himself to his Holiness, his Magnificence and Piety to the Poor, and to the
Religious, was most conspicuous; for besides, that at his arrival he opened the
prisons, dismissed the Debtors, and with his own money satisfied their debts;
he restored those Criminals that were restrained upon any honorable accounts,
and relieved all such of the poor, as were inclined by the great noise, and
report of his Charity, to come to that place, having relieved the Church of the
Mendicants in like manner, so that the acclamations were too great to be
expressed in Paper: many there were nevertheless, that thought all this but
hypocrisy, and a design upon the popular applause, that he might afterward
have the management of the Treasure of the Church with more liberty; and this
opinion increased much, when it was considered that in the beginning he denied
to go so suddenly to Rome, that he had refused to take the charge of General of
the Holy Church upon him, which was usually conserr'd upon the Brother, or next
Kinsman to the Pope; and upon his refusal, it was accepted by the Duke of
Sermoneta, who out of his natural bounty offered to execute it without pay, and
to set out that for the payment of the debts of the Chamber: yet he altered his
mind nevertheless, and got possession of the said command, and of all the other
opulent offices that were vacant by the death of Don Mario Chigi. But be things
as they will, he is most certainly a generous, charitable, and noble person,
and as yet not so much given to covetousness as several others are.

The Mother of the Cardinal, and Wife to Don Camillo, of the house Cellisi, and
own Sister to the Cavalier Cellisi, of the order of Malta, is a Lady of good
judgment, and well experienced in the Government of her own Family; but being
born in a pitiful City, out of all courtship, and entertainment, she seems to
be discomposed with the multitude of her visits, so that the Nephews do strive
to instruct and render her the more gentile a Princess, which thing is feasible
enough, for Donna Beruice Wife to Don Mario, had no better breeding than this
Lady when she came first to Rome, and yet in a short time she became so
exquisite in all the formalities of the Court, that she out did all them that
were born in Rome.

The Cardinal has three Brothers besides, the first is Vincenzo, a Knight of
Malta, about thirty years old, of indifferent parts, civil, and something
Lordly in his deportment. The second is Don Thomaso, about twenty five years of
age, but not so crafty as his Brother, though his humor be busy and cunning
likewise. The other Brother that is but young, is called Don Gregorio, who
without doubt in time will be the most skillful of any of them in the affairs
of Rome, as having opportunity to acquaint himself therewith, even now in his
youth. It is believed if his Holiness lives another year, he will without fail
make one of these three a Cardinal, as Urban the eight did, who notwithstanding
all the Decres of the Councels, created two Brothers Cardinals; but in those
days they thought of-nothing but heaping up wealth without measure. The
Cardinal has two Sisters likewise, one of them married to a Nobleman of the
house of Pangiatici, and the other, to a Noble man of the house of Banchieri,
whom they likewise instruct in the manners of the Court.

The Abbot Rospigliosi had always a particular inclination to follow the
Ecclesiastical habit, and the person of his Uncle, who being admitted into the
Prelacy, began to make himself taken notice of for a person of great hopes; and
on the other side his Uncle, who had always a great affection for his Brother
Don Camillo, who had already a numerous Family; to ease him of those cares that
Sons do usually give their Parents, and that he might have one of his own blood
to be near him, for his Confident, and that he might instruct him in public
affairs, he writ to his Brother Camillo, that he should send Giacomo his eldest
Nephew to him; which he did, and he arrived in his Unckles Palace, in a very
youthful and brisk age.

About this time Monsignour Rospigliosi being declared Nuntio to Spain, was in
great doubt whether he should carry his Nephew along with him so young, for he
was not then past 15; but knowing the good Genius of his Nephew very well, and
that he was given to no vice that might rob him of the bounty of his Uncle;
but that on the other side, his age being considered, he was endu'd with a
modest gentleness, that gave him great hopes: being advised therefore by his
friends, and disposed by his own inclinations, he resolved to take him along,
with intention to improve his studyes at Salamanca: and indeed he was no sooner
arrived in Spain, but he sent him thither, where he took his degree of
Doctorship before came away.

Rospigliosi being created Cardinal, and first Secretary of State, and being
returned from Spain, took his Nephew Giacomo with him, employing him first in
drawing Letters of no great importance; for great business he deserved wholly
to himself. In brief, this Abbot whilst he bore that Title, as young as he was,
did great honor to his Unckles Family; who slipped no opportunity on his side to
advance him, as he did in making him Cupbearer to Cardinal Chigi, in which
employment, he gained much upon the affections of Chigi, who held him for a
youth of no ordinary knowledge. About this time the accident happened to the
Duke of Crequy, of which we have spoke sufficiently before: and Chigi having
satisfied his Uncle the Pope, that it was necessary to send some person of
worth to the French Ambassador that was then retired to Saint Quirico, in the
Grand Dukes Dominions; the Abbot Rospigliosi was pitched upon, both by the Pope
and his Nephew, to be the man into whose hands they would put the first
overtures of accommodation; so that from hence may be argued the opinion the
Court had of him, when they dispatched him immediately with their Orders, or
rather their necessary Memoires, as may be seen in the following Letter written
by the Cardinal, to the Ambassador, who was then at Quirico, as aforesaid.

Most Illustrious, and most Excellent Lord,
I Understand by Mounsieur Burlemont, and by word of mouth from the Tuscan
Ambassador, that your Excellence has received from his most Christian Majesty
an ample faculty and power in order to the composure of what has happened by
the exorbitance of the Corsies, and that if a person were sent from hence to
understand his Majesty's resolutions, they should immediately be imparted; upon
this information, which his Holiness received with very great pleasure. I have
dispatched my Cup bearer, the Abbot Rospigliosi, to receive from your
Excellence what part you shall think fit to communicate of his Majesty's mind
and desires, not doubting but they are such, as will evidence to the World his
Majesty's great piety, and your Excellences most singular prudence and respect
toward the Holy See, as Mounsieur Burlemont has assured me: To the end I may
have a happy opportunity of operating with his Holiness for his Majesty's
service, as I am bound to do always to my utmost, I beseech your Excellence to
believe whatever the said Abbot says of my desire to serve you. And thus
committing the rest to him, I do with all my heart kiss your Excellences hands.

Rome the 3d. of October. 1662.
The Ambassador received the Abbot very kindly, but entered not into any
discourse with him about the Accommodation, upon pretense that he could not
negotiate with him, he having brought no Orders along with him from his
Holiness to that purpose. His answer to the Cardinal was thus.

Most Eminent, and most Reverend Lord,
I Have received your Eminences Letter, which you were pleased to write to me
the third instant, from the hands of Seignor Abbot Rospigliosi, but it
appearing to me, he had no Order from his Holiness to treat with me about
satisfaction due to the King my Master, I could not believe I had any
opportunity of entering into any such debate with him: I have desired the Abbot
to assure your Eminence of my just intentions, and so I most humbly kiss your
hands.

Whilst things were thus tending to a composure, the Abbot was declared
Internuntio to Brussels, having been always inclined to hold a good
correspondence with the Spaniard, ever since he was so long in Spain: It being
in his way to Brussels, Cardinal Chigi carried him along with him in his
Legation to France, in which journey he did the Cardinal good service, and gave
great satisfaction to the French. The Spaniards esteemed very well of him at
Brussels, in as much as in the management of his Charge, he gave particular
evidence of his prudence.

About this time the Cardinals Uncle being advanced to the Papacy, and he
having dispatches and advices from all parts, but particularly from the Great
Duke, who sent a Courier with all speed on purpose, who was received with that
affection by the Abbot, that he gave him not only a Billet for a thousand
Ducats, but a Carcanet of Gold worth five hundred Crowns, and a purse of fifty
Ducats for his journey. But he would not stir from Brussels without order from
his Holiness, who being resolved to employ him in the Peace betwixt the two
Crowns, that were in a new rupture of late. He commanded the said Abbot his
Nephew, to negotiate with his most Christian Majesty about the differences in
Flanders, and the rather, because the Spaniards did earnestly beg it of the
Pope. The Abbot went accordingly into France, and that sooner for the
convenience of his passage, than to begin his Negotiations, which required
great time and assiduity. His Majesty received him with all imaginable
benignity, giving Orders that he should be treated like a Nephew of the regnant
Pope: and it is most certain, that his passage from Brussels to Rome, was like
a continued triumph almost, all Ambassadors, Ministers of Princes, and
Prelates, making him their Visits. He fell sick by the way, and was forced for
some time to take up at Susa, where he experimented the generosity of the Royal
House of Savoy. The Cardinal Antonio that was then passing into France, and had
shown his affection to the person of the Abbot in Rome, having left a deed of
resignation of the Arch-Priestship of Santa Maria Maggiore, and the Prefecture
of the signature of Grace, in favor of the said Rospigliosi, he past from
Savona to Susa to visit him, and to communicate some important affairs with
him: being something recovered, though still feavourish, he embarked upon the
River Poc, in his voyage to Rome, because his Holiness expected him with
impatience, being desirous to make him a Cardinal suddenly, as it followed; for
as soon as he was arrived at Rome, and received with all possible magnificence,
he staid but a few days before he was created Cardinal, with the Title of
Padrone, and with all due pre-eminence.

His Holiness left him not so large an authority as he would have had, with
which he was not over-well satisfied: he endeavored by all means to cashier
all those that were in favor with his Uncle, that he himself might remain
absolute; as it appeared a while since, when coming to make his Holiness a
visit, his Holiness asked him what they said of him in the Court; To which he
replied immediately, that he was applauded in every thing, but one, and that
was, that he was too prodigal of his favors to Paulus Strada, which the said
Paul sold afterward at a very dear rate: His Holiness with a severe brow
returned him this answer, That he wondered he would be the Messenger of such
news, Strada being the best Minister he ever had yet, that he could not believe
Strada would do such unjust things; and that otherwise he took great pleasure
in Strada's advantages: To which he subjoined, (and indeed that was it that
netled the Cardinals) That if he himself who was his Nephew, would have any
favor from him, he should sooner obtain it by the intercession of Paulus
Strada: At which words the Cardinal shrinking up his shoulders, departed very
melancholy, that he could not compass his designs. However he cannot complain
that he has not full liberty to aggrandize and ^nrich himself; because, no
sooner is any good Benesice or Abbey void, but it is immediately bestowed on
him: and indeed he is already so well provided, that let his Holiness dye as
soon as he pleases, he is sure to be left rich enough. The Romans that are
always prying upon the actions of the Nephews, are better pleased with the
Father than with the Son; and this is most certain, that in charity, and in his
charge, Don Camillo exceeds him far. It seemed strange to the Court to see the
said Cardinal going abroad at first dash with Cardinal Sigismond Chigi and Don
Agostino in his Coach, without any other Cardinal or Prelate: whereas at first,
the Cardinal Nephews appear with great trains of Principal persons, and not
with inferior Cardinals: from hence they infer the lowness of his mind: But
the wiser sort see well enough into the design, which is, that both Uncle and
Nephew are resolved to tie an indivisible knot betwixt the two Families, and to
render themselves invincible to the rest, by redoubling of marriages. And of
this daily proof is to be seen, his Holiness having commended the friendship of
the Chigi to all his own friends, persuading them they are bound to kiss the
place where the Chigi set their feet.

As far as may be guest by outward appearance, it is a great trouble to the
Cardinal that he has so many Brothers, because the multitude of Nephews lessens
the authority he would have wholly to himself; insomuch that there has been
already some disgusts betwixt him, and his Brother Vincenzo, about I know not
what reducement of the Light Horse, Vincenzo telling him with some bitterness,
that it did not belong to him to wind and insinuate himself into such affairs,
seeing he did not concern himself in Ecclesiastic; But the greatest obstacle
in his Eyes, is Paulus Strada; for to speak truth, his Holiness consults him
from morning to night, and follows his advice as if he were an Oracle.

The Ministers of Princes that are resident in Rome, have not yet had
experience of the Cardinals worth in business: for knowing that his Holiness
follows other peoples advice, and not his Nephews, they apply themselves
immediately to the Pope, till they shall see the Cardinal a little more settled
in his Padronancy; but the Cardinal being naturally ambitious of authority,
thrusts himself many times upon things he is not called to: and his Holiness to
satisfy him, more than any thing else, gives him liberty to give audience to
some of the Ministers of Princes; which he performs, both receiving, and
dispatching them with very good Complements, in which he abounds perhaps beyond
any of the antientest Courtiers; whereupon an Ambassador from a King being in
discourse about this Cardinal Padrone, said, That he believed his Eminences
virtues consisted not ^n any thing besides complements and fair words; To which
it was replied, That he would have made a better Master of the Coremonies, than
Cardinal Padrone.

He is of an humor very contrary to Cardinal Chigi, who shuns all business
that may disorder his mind, betaking himself only to his recreations, and
leaving the most difficult affairs to be dispatched by other people; whereas
Rospigliosi on the other side, (though he be not so void of humanity, but that
he loves likewise to pass the time honorably, and divert himself as well as
other people) yet he would g^^dly have all difficult affairs go thorough his
hands, and be thought the person of greatest authority, which may happen for
ought I know in a short time; because his Holiness will not fail to lay upon
him as many of his troublesome affairs as he can undertake, as well for the
ease of his own age and indisposition, as to give opportunity to his Nephew to
do all, which is the only thing he desires.

A few days since he made his solemn Cavalcade to go and take possession of
his Arch-Priestship of Santa Maria Maggiore, and a while after his Holiness
introduced him into the Signatura di gratia; opened his mouth (as the custom
is) in the Public Consistory, and gave him the Title of San Sisto, which his
said Holiness had himself when he was a Cardinal. But at the same time hemet
with some kind of dissatisfaction, because his Holiness being desirous to
accomodate his Adjutants of the Chamber, gave order to the Datary, to dispatch
upon the first vacancy, Bulls for 200 Crowns a piece, to the three
Chamberlains; and one of them of 1300 Crowns falling void, the Datary drew the
said three Bulls, and afterward another for the remaining 700 Crowns, in
favor of Rospigliosi; which his Holiness observing, ordered the Bull for the
700 Crowns to be torn, and that the three other, one of 200 for Cardinal Nini,
another of 200 for Azolini, and a third of 300 for the Datary himself, should
be paid: of which Rospigliosi had no reason to complain; for the Pope, it is
true, takes away the Crumbs as it were that would be lost betwixt his teeth, but
he gives him the substantial Morse^s which will stick by the Ribs, and satiate
the Appetite, whereas the other do but provoke it.

The Cardinals have not that affliction, and perplexity they were used to have
in the beginning of other Popes Pontificates, when they were constrained to be
subject to certain Cardinal Nephews, who by their inexperience, knew not which
way so much as to honor the Sacred College. And truly it is above 10^ years
since any Pope had a Cardinal Nephew so well practiced, and of so mature an
age; for other Nephews never surpassed 25, and this is 35 at least; and which
is more, most of them has been employed in instructing himself in the most
considerable affairs of Court; he being a person always very curious in
matters of State. There is a great desire in him of gaining the good word of
the people, and to keep fair correspondence with the Roman Princes, though as
yet it is not known upon what design. The unhappy rupture betwixt the
Palestrina, and Don Agostino, in the Palace of Don Camillo, set the Cardinal
Padrone a work, (without showing any interest or partiality) to endeavor to
pacify them; and having confined them both to their houses, he sent the
Marquess Luigi Matt^i to negotiate the peace, which followed indeed, but so,
that it is supposed there will always be some difference betwixt those two
persons, about precedence.

The Cardinal took some distaste at this accident, and amongst some of his
Domestics, spoke with some heat in defense of Don Agostino, which being
understood by the Prince Palestrina, he also gave out some expressions of
resentment, upbraiding the Cardinal of ingratitude; but it was in private,
amongst his most intimate friends: and indeed the Rospigliosi must needs own
more obligation to the house of Barbarini, than to the Chigi, because Urban the
eight, was the first that opened the door to the honor of the present Pope;
and Francisco Barbarino was a great favourer of him in the time of Innocent the
tenth, using all his art to advance him into some great office; whereas
Alexander gave him only a Cap: for which the house of Chigi have been paid in
their own Coin, in Don Sigismonds having another, with this difference only,
that Alexander gave his Cap to one that had served the Church with great honor
for a long time, and that he could not but promote him, without doing an
affront both to himself and the Church: whereas Clement gave the Cap to a
Youth, who though he was indeed qualified very well; yet he had no merit, nor
any service to promote him, but merely the good fortune to be Nephew to the
Pope. But be it how it will, there is great likelihood the Rospigliosi, will be
more for the Chigi, than the Barbarini; though in the Conclave Cardinal
Barbarino bestirred himself much more for Rospigliosi, than Cardinal Chigi did.

The Spaniards having observed him a little too favorable to the French
Ambassador, begin to be a little jealous of the Cardinal Padrone, as doubting
his journey into France where he was so honorably received, may have corrupted
his mind, and cooled that affection he had always for Spain; which it is
possible may be true: yet the most learned, are of opinion he runs along with
the Fide, not caring to engage in disputes; and will do what he can to have a
suck at the honey without the sting, and the rather, because he will not budge
from the Councels and designs of his Uncle the Pope; for this is most certain,
he that has the Pope on his side, has his Nephew also, unless something happens
that renders his Holiness infirm, and then the Cardinal is Commander in chief.
The Avignon Ambassadors that came out of France, to congratulate his Holiness,
had their conference with the Cardinal Nephew, who was declared Legate of
Avignon, a Title that he received with the highest satisfaction, and expressed
it, by a most magnificent Feast. All the time of this Carnival, this Cardinal
had great entertainments in his house, to which he invited most part of the
Prelates of the Court; and Don Camillo did the same, with design to delight the
people by their Comedies and Music, for which, his Holiness had ordered ten
thousand Crowns to be disburs'd; yet there wanted not those that libelled their
liberality, but without reason, for they distributed great store of Alms
amongst the poor, that they might have their share in the Carnival: and besides
they paid off all the Workmen which were employed about Don Camillo's house, a
thing which the Relations of other Popes never did willingly; but with great
clutter and noise, they would make them be contented with half what was due. So
that thus far all goes well enough, seeing the Air of Rome changes not now the
nature of persons, as it has former^y done many times.

SIGISMONDO CHIGI has the last place amongst the Cardinals, as he that was last
promoted by Clement, with the Title of Santa Maria in Dominica: he is Brother
to Don Agostino, and Cousin by consequence to Cardinal Chigi. Don Agostino
suspecting he would marry, and by dividing the Estate, weaken the fortune of
the Family, he labored night and day to make him a Cardinal, by that means to
quiet his mind, which every body began to be afraid of; but in this point
Alexander would not gratify him, either that he would not put a Youth of his
age into the Sacred College, or that he otherwise presaged what did afterward
follow. In short, he left him in a little obscurity, but provided with Abbeys
and Pensions good Store. Clement the ninth, as soon as he was received to the
Papacy, as well for the obligations he always professed to Alexander, and the
house of Chigi, as also because it was become an usual custom in the Church,
for the Pope to resign his Cap, to the Relation of that Pope that promoted him:
and there being no other person of the Family of the Chigi's capable of the
Cardinalship, he resolved to place his Habit upon the shoulders of this young
Lord, thereby obliging at one stroke all the Relations of the late Pope; but
especially Don Agostino, and Cardinal Chigi, to see their party re-inforc'd
again by a new Cardinal, inspight of all those, who envious of their good
fortune, desired to see that Family the most inconsiderable of all the Papal
Familyes.

If the age of this Cardinal be seriously considered (who to difference him
from the other Chigi, was called Sigismond, as is usual amongst the Barbarini,
amongst whom, one only bears the name of the Family, the others distinguishing
themselves by their Christian names) it will appear a defect in his Holiness to
introduce amongst so many reverend and grave Cardinals, a Youth that had not
then reached nineteen years. But if on the other side, the wit, and judgment,
and virtue of the young man be considered, the resolution is not so much to be
condemned: his Holiness in that case may answer with the Ambassador who was
upbraided by his youth, That Virtue consisted not in the Beard. And would to
God that all the Cardinals that are created with their white Beards, were but
as well provided with judgment and zeal, as this young Gentleman that has
nothing to be charged with, but his minority.

In the year 1660. his Uncle Alexander the Pope sent for him to Rome, (being
as yet but about twelve years of age) about the same time that the Cardinals
Sister appeared there, and that to take away all occasion of jealousy; because
he saw the branch of Don Mario was well enough pleased to see the Sister of
Cardinal Chigi entertained li^e Princesses of the Popes own blood, to the end
that he might not suspect himself less beloved by Don Agostino his Cousin,
though he solicited might and main, to have the younger Brother to Rome, out of
a desire to put him into the Clergy.

Don Mario, and the Cardinal were much pleased, to see this little Nipotisme at
Rome, and Don Agostino forced himself to dissemble the jealousy, that lay
gnawing in his Breast, and to caress his Cousins with all appearances of joy to
see them there. The Pope himself that distributed his favors indifferently,
could not but rejoice to see Sigismond in his his presence, and so like his
brother in his features. At his first arrival, he asked him several questions,
to which he answered so appositely, his Uncle was as well satisfied with his
replies, that he wept for very tenderness, and gave immediate orders he should
be furnished with such experienced Masters, as might instruct him in all manner
of learning.

The people of Rome were much surprised to see the disparity of humors in
these two brothers Agostino and Sigismondo, and that they should love one
another so entirely, when the one was as proud as the other was humble. And
indeed Agostino, (either because his present felicity had made him forget his
primitive condition, or that the levity of his nature, produced higher thoughts
in his heart) is so lofty and high, he will scarce vouchsafe to salute those
again that salute him, though otherwise he is civil enough, and gentile in his
conversation, if not with every body, at least with his friends; but he begins
now to abate a little, but without desertion of his ordinary Grandeur, because
he observes his Holiness so much affected to the house of Chigi. Don Sigismond
however has another way, and has pleased himself still to converse familiarly
with all people, and civilly to salute the ordinariest person about the Pope;
but with Majesty enough too, which makes him be beloved, and respected, not as
a Nephew of the Popes only, but as a person of worth.

He was always observed to be highly prudent, but especially at the death of
his Uncle, when the people being enraged against the Family of Chigi, ran up
and down the Streets exclaiming against them in such bitter language, that the
Chigi being netled, threatened nothing but revenge upon the persons that were
the occasions of those insolences. But Sigismond who had ambition after the
Cardinalship, dissembled all, and kept himself from all such discourse, that he
might have no occasion to quarrel, and this he did either out of the design
aforesaid, or out of the natural benignity, wherewith he is so abundantly
stored. The truth is, the branch of Don Agostino had no reason to be troubled
at the people, for they troubled themselves not much either with him, nor his
brother Sigismond; but rather with Don Mario and the Cardinal, against whom
their Insolences ran very high: but for all this, all things are quiet, and
they seeing the inclination of the present Pope to that Family, the people do
now honor and esteem them more than ever. In this Scene there were many
extravagancies to be seen, the nature of Metamorphoses being too obvious at
Rome; for Clement, either that he reserved his other designs, or that he
counterfited, to the end that he might not draw upon himself the odium of the
People, by the defense of a Family they hated so much; at the beginning of the
Pontificate he pretended a longius ire, and abstained from conferring any
honor, or showing the least appearance of affection to the Chigi, in so much
that it was the general discourse of the City, that Don Mario was thinking to
retire to Siena, Don Agostino and Don Sigismond to Riccia, and Cardinal Chigi
under pretense of visiting his Abbeys, would withdraw himself from Court for
some time in discontent: whereupon many of the Wits went up and down the
Streets dispersing of these Inscriptions.

SEDENTE CLEMENTE NONO, PONTIFICE OPTIMO MAXIMO, NOVO ROMANAE REIPVBLICAE
REPARATORE, DE CHISIO SEMINE TARQVINII PVBLICAE QVIETIS, APERTO JANO AB VRBE
EXVLARVNT. Anno Domini 1667.

Of all these extravagancies of fortune, Don Agostino, who is the least hated
by the people, felt the most trouble, as holding now all his hopes desperate,
of ever seeing his Brother Sigismond a Cardinal, upon which all his designs
depended. Cardinal Chigi that had got all the money all this while, did but
laugh, or at least pretend to laugh at the business, expecting to see the fury
of the people, to cool by degrees, as it did in a short time; his Holiness with
great prudence taking off some of the Gabels, made them forget their animosity
to the Chigi, who were the Authors of laying them on. However there were
thousands of Libels and Satyrs flew abroad, against Don Mario and the Cardinal
his Son, but not one against Don Agostino, or his Brother: But as soon as Don
Mario dyed, the odium of the people dyed with him, and seemed to be buried in
his Grave. About the same time his Holiness began to show his partiality to the
Family of the Chigi, giving Don Sigismond hopes of a Cap, and turning his ear
to the proposition of Matrimony, betwixt the Princess Chigi, and his Holiness
his Nephew, which is believed already concluded, or at least in a very fair way.

The people rejoiced exceedingly at the promotion of Don Sigismond, and much
more than the Family of the Chigi did expect. Seignor Agostino, and Cardinal
Chigi, solemnized it with great Feasts, as well to express their own joy, as to
comply with the congratulations of other people. The Visits were innumerable,
and the whole World amazed at the Magnificence. The Ambassadors, Cardinals,
Prelates, and Noblemen of Rome, though the most of them were acquainted with
him when he was but a private person, yet upon this occasion they took no
ordinary delight, to see with what Majesty and Decorum his new Cardinalship
received his Visits, corresponding with every body, and satisfying them not so
much with multiplicity, as with the materiality of his Complements, which is a
quality remarkable in him ever since his coming to Rome.

It is generally believed he will be assiduous in the Congregations, because he
has shown himself so in his Domestic and Scholastic Exercises; besides which
he gives great signs of good nature and affection, in whatever he undertakes,
nor are the poor in the last place with him; he is often seen in public, as if
he took delight to ostentate his Purple: yet he does it not out of pride, being
as humble as is necessary, and no more. He speaks his mind freely, but is never
transported, correcting himself still when he finds himself in the wrong, which
he is in but very seldom, In short, he would do all that is possible, would he
but endeavor to suppress certain passionate effluctions from his youth, that
make him ambitious of being thought the best Cardinal in the Court, that he may
arrive at a higher fortune thereby. The Spaniards caress him, and begin to make
use of their Statagems to get him over to their party, which may be compassed
in several respects, but especially because Don Agostino is a F^udatary to the
Empire.

It will be now necessary we expect the success of the other promotions of
Clement the ninth, whose intention of filling the Sacred College with persons
of Eminency as well in Name as in Action, is honorable and good: he has
declared he will be very vigilant, that no passion of his may adumbrate that
Holy resolution, but to speak the truth, there have been infinite of other
Popes that have arrived at the Vatican with the same thoughts, who in a short
time have altered their minds, and chosen their Cardinals winking, if not
blindfold, suffering themselves to be overswayed by their own passions, or by
their Nephews. The World is certainly corrupt all over, and inferior people
prevail sooner for Preferments, than their superiors, especially in Rome,
where the Ecclesiastics are but men as in other places.

The Court murmurs exceedingly to see so many deserving persons stand idle
without employment, and yet his Holiness has taken many Offices from some, to
bestow them upon others, according as Cardinal Albici advises him, who has a
great share in his affection. There are two reasons may be the cause of it,
either that the number of the meritorious is very great, or his Holinesses
capacity of discerning them very small: Let it be which way it will, it is our
duty to pray to God to inspire him with judgment to select persons of piety
for the service of the Church, and that he will fill up the Sacred College
with Cardinals, illustrious by their Blood, their Virtues, and their Bounty.

THE ITALIAN PRINTER TO THE READER.
THE absence of the Author has been the occasion that certain little Errors (if
you will not Christen them great ones) have slipped in this Third Part. The
truth is, when the Author sent the Manuscript to my hands, by one of his
Friends, we being at great distance from one another, I promised to do my
endeavor to Correct it; and I was as good as my word, doing all that I was
able, though my good will was above my abilities; yet I believe there is scarce
any Error to be found, which your discretion may not correct in the reading,
and that is it I do most humbly entreat. I am obliged also in the behalf of the
Author to admonish, that if you find any palpable Error in point of History,
you would dispense with it, because the time was so short from the Composition
to the Printing. The curiosity and impatience of some persons, made me snatch
the Manuscript out of the hands of the Corrector, and perhaps some of my
Workmen printed some of them, before he saw them at all. I am to desire you
likewise from the Author himself, that you would not censure him, that he has
inserted into this Third Part some things which have been written by other men,
he believed he has done for the best, and truly I am of opinion you will not
say the contrary, there being no reason a thing should be left out, where it
will stand well, because it was in another place where perhaps it stood worse:
Your Bricklayers, and your Writers, are in my judgment alike, or rather, your
Writers and your Bricklayers; the Bricklayers think Old Materials much better
to build with than New, as finishing more exquisitely with a mixture of Old and
New: The Old is New to him that begins, and the New is Old to him that
finishes. Whilst this whole Work was a Printing, I gave it leaf by leaf to a
Friend of mine (very well versed in the greatest Curiosities) to peruse: He
told me, this Third Part was the best, and more necessary to be published than
all the rest; and I do easily persuade my self you will be of his opinion: But
you must read it impartially, or it will scarce turn to account. Have a care of
doing as he did, who read Books only to satisfy his Friend: Yet in this Work I
shall be obliged to you, if you will correct the Errors of the Press as you go
along. The Conclave of Clement the 9th. (after which the Politic Aphorisms do
follow) was taken out of the hands of a Conclavist who indeed had no intention
to publish them, but only to show it to his Friends; I suppose it is
conformable to the truth of the History, being the person who collected it is
very impartial. I had two of them in my hands, which I showed to a Friend of
mine, a Virtuoso, and well skilled in the Interests of the Court of Rome, that
he might judge which of the two were the best, and most proper to be published;
having kept them some days in his hands, he returned them both to me, with his
opinion in writing, that this was to be preferred. Those who know already how
passages have gone, may read it for Observation, and those who know nothing,
for their Curiosity. Of the Politic Aphorisms I shall say nothing, because
they carry their Subtilty, and Excellence in the very Name of the Author: Some
would have had the Author taken pains to make a Table of the most Considerable
Matters, with reference to the several Pages; but the Author did not think it
convenient to lengthen it out unnecessarily with another Table, seeing in every
Book there was one large enough before. However I have made an Index of some
proper Names, especially of the Cardinals, and Popes, but left out (for the
greater ease of the Reader) some such Sirnames, and Names, as are many times
multiplied according to the necessity of the History. If you find no
satisfaction in this Cardinalisme, you will find it perhaps in his EVROPA
MORTA, which the Author has promised a while ago, and I do promise on my part
to use my utmost endeavors to facilitate the Reading, by a careful and
faithful Correction of the Press. May you live happy in the mean time, and be
as candid in Correcting the Errors, as I am affectionate in declaring my self,

Your Servant.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OF THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART III.
BOOK I.
The Contents.
In which is discoursed of the resemblance of the Church, to a Ship, and the
reason why. Of the City of Rome born to Lord it over other Nations. Of what is
requisite for the understanding of the Pontifical Election. Of the age of
Holiness in the Church. Of the reasons why there were no difficulties in the
infancy of the Church, about the Election of Popes. Of a Pidgeon that sat upon
the head of Fabianus Romanus, and made him be declared Pope. The reason why
Sanctity decayed in the Church. Of the felicity of Peace experimented by the
Ecclesiastics. Of the introduction of Pride. Of the Emperors, and how little
they regarded the Spiritual affairs of the Church. Of a dissension at the
Election of Pope Simacus. Of certain scandals which sprang up during Pope
Bonifaces vacancy of the Sea. Of Pelagius Romanus, and his succeeding of
Virgilius. Of certain Privileges granted by the Pope to Attila King of the
Goths, called FLAGELLUM DEI. Of the authority assumed by the Emperors in the
Election of the Pope. Of the Reception given by the Emperor to Constantine the
first at Constantinople. Of the great hatred Philippus called Bardono, bore to
the Pontifical Grandeur. Of the Election of Pope Zachary a Grecian, without any
Communication with the Emperor. Of the deposal of Chilperick by the Pope, his
being stripped of all Title to the kingdom of France, and the reason
wherefore. Of the Emperors being declared, excluded from all right in the
Pontifical Election. Of Berrha's (the Widow of Charlemains) journey to Rome,
to demand justice of the Pope, and of the success of her journey. Of a
particular alliance betwixt Charles the Great, and the Pope. Of a popular
tumult that happened in Rome against the person of Pope Adrian. Of the Creation
of Pope Stephen by the people, against the consent of the Emperor. Of the
Popes journey into France, to clear himself to that King of the accusations
against him. Of the industry Pope Pascal used to increase his authority. Of the
Election of Eugenius the second, a most eloquent man. Of the threatenings of
King Lewis against the Pope. Of the reason why the Popes changed their Names at
first. Of the desire the Romans had to shake off the Yoke of the Empire. Of two
Popes, successors to Adrian. Of Adrian the third's Bull against the Emperor.
Of Otho's seeking revenge for the said Bull. Of the deposal of John the XIII.
from the Papacy, and of his restoration to the Sea. Of Pope Benedict's
banishment to Hambourg by the Emperor. Of Leo's restoration to the Papacy,
after he had been deprived by the people. Of a Declaration of Leo's against the
privileges of Charles the Great. Of the hatred conceived thereupon by the
Romans against the Pope. Of the Popes being imprisoned by the people, and of
the revenge the Emperor took upon the Authors thereof. Of the Popes
imbezzlement of the Treasure of St. Peter. Of his flight to Constantinople. Of
the Election of the Pope returned into the hands of the people. Of the
Emperors resolution to have one of his kinsmen Pope. Of Pope Gregory's being
driven out of Rome by the fury of the people, and what followed thereupon. Of
the Election of the Emperor transferred by Pope Gregory upon certain Princes
of Germany, and upon what grounds. Of the exclusion of the people from the
Pontifical Election. Of the Creation of three Popes at once. Of the Schism
appeased by Pope Alexander. Of the Election of the Pope remaining only in the
hands of the Cardinals. Of the Assumption of Pope Alexander, and the Schisms in
his time. Of the service the Venetian did to the Church against the Emperor.
Of the obligation the Popes do profess to the Venetian. Of the absoluteness of
the Cardinals authority in the Pontifical Election. Of the place where they
assembled to Elect. Of the manner of their proceeding in the Election, and the
ill consequences thereupon. Of a two years and nine months vacancy of the Sea.
Of the Assumption of Pope Gregory the X. Of the Reconciliation of the Venetian
and Genoese. Of the Conclave introduced by Gregory the X. Of certain tumults in
Viterbo. Of the Apostolic See, being transferred into France by Clement the V.
Of Saint Bridgets Letter to Gregory the XI. Of the return of the Apostolic See
into Italy. Of the indignation of the Italians to see the Pontificate so long
in the hands of the French. Of a Schism that lasted 15. years. Of certain
accidents in the Papacy of Eugenius. Of Amadeo Duke of Savoy's Creation. Of his
virtues, and renuntiation of the Papacy. Of what happened in the Conclave of
Eugenius, and of the exaltation of Nicholas the V. Of the Assumption of Calisto
the III, and of his death. Of many politic discourses at the Creation of Eneas
Piccolomini, who was afterward Pius the II. And of some particulars in relation
thereunto.

THE Church has been (and not improperly) resembled in the first cries of its
Infancy, to a Ship tumbled by the Waves, and battered by the Winds, because She
was to be nourished and brought up in the midst of the proud Billows of so many
Ecclesiastical Disputes, so many Theological Opinions, so many Dissentions, and
Politic Reasons, and exposed by the ambitions of their own Mariners, to
thousands of Dangers and Storms, which Schism and Heresy have constantly
produced with such fury, as would have doubtless not only hindered her happy and
victorious entrance into the Haven of Safety, but have hazarded to have sunk
and overwhelmed her in those very Waves, had not a favorable Gate of
Protection been opposed by that Redeemer, who has not, nor will not endure to
see that Vessel perish, which he built (at the expense of three and thirty
years sweat) with the Wood of his own Cross; joined together, and rivetted with
the Nails of his Hands and Feet; cemented it with his Divine Blood; (which by
the blows and stripes that they gave him, was become pitch in the hands of the
Jews) setting up that Spear that pierced his side, for a Mast; stretching out
that Linen in which his most Sacred body was involved, for its Sails;
recommending it to the Vigilance and Government of the Apostles, and their
Successors; and finally for their greater encouragement to Lanch out into the
Sea of this World, he not only offered himself to become a Lanthorn to their
feet, but gave them a Motto worthy of such a Builder; Et Portae inferi non
praevalebunt adversus eam.

But though the Gates of Hell have had no power to destroy her, they have been
sufficient notwithstanding to give her great trials, that by her agitations and
tempests in this world, her victories and triumphs might be the more glorious
in Heaven, and that by those wrecks and persecutions, the Church Militant and
Triumphant might be distinguished. The greatest Calamities this great Ship of
Christianity has suffered, have (by the judgment of the most pious and devout
persons) proceeded from the investiture of the Supreme dignity in the persons
of the Ecclesiastics, who being ambitious of advancing themselves one above
another, and being sensible, upon the score of their own merits, they cannot
obtain the charges they pretend too, they have betaken themselves to compass
the end of their pretensions, by imploring the recommendations of Secular
Princes. Which tend to mix Heaven and Earth together.

Rome, which was built as it were to Lord it over all the Nations in the
Universe, and give an ample testimony and relation of thousands of wrecks the
Church has suffered, by the recourse the Ecclesiastics have almost always had
to the Seculars; and from hence it is, that in these times, there is a certain
natural instinct and inclination in the minds of all Politicians, to inform
themselves distinctly of all particularities in the Court of Rome; as if a man
could not any way render himself more acceptable in his conversation, than by
his discourses of that. And indeed, the Pontifical dignity, which is the most
considerable, the Majesty of so many Cardinals, who are the Senators of the
Christian Commonwealth; the splendor of so many Bishops, who receive all their
aliment from the Popes, do render it worthy to be numbered amongst the most
famous Cities of the world, and to be called the true Mother of Nations. By
this means, the Popes being ingrandiz'd, and raised to so eminent a degree, as
to be acknowledged above all other Monarchs whatsoever: every one endeavors to
inform himself of the quality of the great jurisdiction the Popes do at present
enjoy; in so much that the greatest part of the Writers now adays, do tire
themselves out with relations of the Pontifical State.

From the mutations and evil events which have followed the Election of Popes,
I will not say in Rome, but in all Christendom, it may be clearly argued of
what moment the said Election is, seeing that for so many ages, with her
private interests, and her public, she has obliged the principal Monarchies of
the Universe, to interpose with the whole power, both of their Pen and their
Sword. In the Infancy of the Church, there was nothing desired of Rome, but
Prayers and Orations, and Preachings, and Administration of the Sacraments,
because Rome expected nothing from the faithful, but the zeal of a good
Conscience, the safety of their Souls, and to be frequent in Holy Duties.

The first Pastors of the Church rejoiced to keep themselves at a distance from
the Interests of Princes, as fearing to defile the Innocent Purity of the Flock
of Christ, with the Diabolical pollutions of Secular policies. But their
Successors beginning to be curious, and to pry into the most occult and private
policies of Princes, they would not suffer the Court of Rome to be meddling
there, but gave themselves over to endeavor the introduction of their own
Interests, into the Cabinet of the Interests of the Popes.

For certain ages, Rome was free from those intricacies that are familiar in
Temporal States, contenting it self to conduct the Flock of Christ to the Fold,
with her Pastoral Sheephook only, I mean her Spiritual Arms; but no sooner was
she become greedy of Principality and Dominion, but the Princes (observing her
Crosier to be changed into a Sword, and the Book of the Gospel, into an Epitomy
of Politics) began also to imitate Rome, seeing Rome following their Rules in
Temporal Affairs.

For three hundred years and upwards, the Primitive Church continued in a most
Holy decorum, without the least obstacle in the Election of her Popes, they
being then contented with the bare Title of Bishops of Rome. The Elections were
not made by the Interest of Princes, or the Capriccio of Nephews, as they are
now; but by a Holy Zeal in the Bowels of the Electors, who used to meet
sometimes in this place, sometimes in that, and many times in the Woods, by
reason of the cruelty of those Tyrants, that envied the tranquillity of the
Christians.

They had in those days no secret nor private Votes, because the inward
designs of those Primitive Chistians, were suitable and correspondent to their
outward zeal and profession of good works. The Deacons (that is they who endued
with greater Charity and Devotion, served the Church, sometimes in collecting
of Alms for the common necessities, sometimes in distributing Relief to the
necessities of the poor) were admitted to the Election, together with such
Priests and Curats as were nearest to the City of Rome. With what simplicity
and integrity they proceeded to the Election of Popes, in the Primitive times
of the Church, may be argued, from what happened in the Vacancy of Pope
Anthero, who dyed according to Eusebius's calculation in the year 243.

The Holy Fathers were met according to their usual custom, to consult about a
Successor, and whilst they were discoursing of the virtues, of this man, and
the abilities of another, it happened that Fabiano Romano passed by near the
place of their Assembly, in order to the looking to some grounds of his, which
he did not disdain to cultivate many times with his own hands. He was no sooner
come over against the place wherein the Electors were met, but a Pidgeon from a
Neigbouring Dove-house alighting upon his Shoulder, gave occasion to the
Fathers to arise from their Seats, at the first notice of it, and esteeming it
a Prodigye, they proclaimed him Pope unanimously, every one being confident, it
was the intention of the Holy Ghost, who was represented in that Dove.

Fabianus, who thought of nothing less than to be chosen Pope, was astonished
at the business, and not judging himself worthy of so great a Ministry, he
begg*d upon his knees to be excused; but his humility being overcome by the
persuasion of the Electors, he at ^ast embraced the Pastoral Cure of the
Church, in which, after he had exercised it for the space of seven years, with
great advantage to the Christians, he ended his days under the Tyranny of the
barbarous Emperor Decius, who at that time used great cruelty to the
Christians, constraining them from the City into the Woods, which they were
glad to make their houses of God, seeing that the Emperor was pleased to make
Cities, places for wild Beasts, and for Devils.

The Popedom was not ambition'd, but avoided by the Ecclesiastics, because it
commonly lost them their lives that exercised it. He that found himself too
weak and timorous to suffer Martyrdom, renounced the Papacy, and confessed the
imbecility of his nature; and indeed, who would ever have received, much less,
have sought an office, which brought no other advantages along with it, than
the persecution of Tyrants. Now adays, what broyls, what intrigues, what
differences are there at the creation of Popes; where is he, who would desire
Votes to be made a Martyr? For my part I dare affirm, the Church would be as
Holy in these times, and perhaps more, now we are as it were in the latter end
of it, than it was then in its beginning; if the Popes were called to Poverty,
and not Riches; to Martyrdom, not Magnificence; and to the care of the Church,
and not of Governments.

But whether do my thoughts transport me? Let us return to our business, and
assert, that the Church was Holy, without Discord, or Schism, or Heresy, to
the days of San Silvester, which were about the year 325. till that time the
Popes having been Elected with tranquillity and peace, and no small satisfaction
both to the Electors and Elected.

The Holiness of the Church, (I mean that Holiness that respects the Election
of Popes) began to cease under the Emperor Constantine, because the
Persecution of the Christians ceased; Constantine suffered the Church to enjoy
Peace, that is of the body possibly, but with greater torture to their minds;
for with the ease and wealth which he bestowed upon the Ecclesiastics; with
the conveniences of Houses, and the Government of Cities, which he assigned to
the Popes, Charity began to grow cold, Zeal to be weakened, and Devotion to be
lost, and those Ecclesiastics who formerly employed their whole times in
heaping up Penitencies and Fastings, by those good works to purchase the Glory
of Heaven, began after that time to apply themselves to the acquisition of
money, to the begging of Abbeys, and Bishoprics, by those means to procure the
glory of the world.

As soon then as Riches were introduced into the Church, Schism and Heresy
were introduced amongst the Clergy, and Pride which began then to spread, and
worm it self into the hearts of those who were formerly meek and humble, and
s^c^ as shunned dignity, and hid themselves from preferments; insomuch as that
Papacy which was avoided by every body, as a thing that brought nothing but
persecutions along with it, began to be aspired too, as soon as they perceived
their fear turned into security, their flight into repose, and their torments
into happiness. For if formerly, by reason of the poverty of the Popedom, they
were subject to Tyrants, they believed afterward by virtue of their wealth, to
make Martyrs even of the Tyrants themselves.

No sooner did the Popes appear with their Miters of Gold, and with their
Scepters in their hands, commanding the people, but all of them designed the
destruction of the Secular Power, to ingrandize the Pontifical Majesty, to make
themselves courted by the Vulgar, and honored by the Great ones: but the
Emperors growing jealous of them, began to open their eyes, and watch over
their actions, that they might not be taken at unawares; endeavoring to defend
that Jurisdiction, which the Popes began by degrees to usurp, with the
Spiritual Arms of the Cross: so that though they thought not before of the
Interest of the Church, they found themselves obliged afterward, to have an
eye upon those of the Popes; yet not so much out of any inclination of their
own, as because the Popes had the same designs upon them.

Notwithstanding all this, whether it was out of respect to the memory of San
Silvester, or Constantine, I know not; it is sufficient that the Emperors
suffered several years to pass after the death of those two persons, without
meddling or concerning themselves at all in the Election of the Popes, which was
a great error in their Politics. For the succeeding Popes had opportunity in
that time to advance their own Interests, to the prejudice of the Empire, and
Emperors, who taking no care to bridle and restrain the Interests of Rome,
contented themselves to live quietly at Constantinople, and to send out their
Orders to their Vicars and Prefects in Rome, that they should endeavor with
all possible industry to hinder the proceedings of the Popes; but with express
caution, that they should by no means interpose in the Election of the Popes,
that being to be left to the Clergy and the people, who by unanimous consent
had had possession of the said Election for several years.

The introduction of the people into the Election of the Pope, may be said to
be casual, there being no Pontifical Bull visible that gave them admission; but
it is to be supposed, it fell out by reason of the Deacons, who were admitted
from the very time of the Apostles, into the disposition of Ecclesiastical
Charges; and because as the Churches increased, and the number of the Faithful
was augmented, so also was the number of the Deacons in the Assemblies; in so
much that by little and little they grew so numerous, (the said Deacons being
not of the Order of the Clergy, but of the Laity) that they brought in the
people; and the Clergy having introduced the Deacons, thought it not meet to
turn out the people, who possessed the places of the Deacons.

At first the number of the Ecclesiastic Electors, was much greater than the
Deacons; but the Deacons being become the people, there became a greater
inequality in the Electors, and perhaps not without some displeasure to the
Clergy, who would willingly see the people excluded.

Whilst the Clergy were holy, that is, addicted to the service of God, to the
edification of their Neighbors, to the augmentation of the Faithful, and the
propagation of the Faith; whilst they were retired from the Corruptions of the
age, and macerating their Flesh with Sackcloth, and Fasting, the people
willingly joined with them in the Election of the Popes, because it belonging
to the Clergy to give the first votes, the people could not imagine those
persons subject to Error, who had no other aim than the service of God, and
therefore they willingly concurred, delighting to confirm the opinion of the
Clergy, because they judged it holy and good.

But as soon as pride began to have place in the breasts of the Ecclesiastics,
and that they pleased themselves with the enjoyments of Mundane advantages; as
soon as they began to deviate from the ways of Heaven, and the people observed
their tendency to be too great toward the Earth, they began likewise to press
and insist upon their own opinion, not trusting to the opinion of the Clergy,
because they saw them so deplorably void of all holiness. From hence there
succeeded infinite disputes, and innumerable dissentions, in so much that that
action which was formerly sacred and solemn, became profane and scandalous, by
degrees; they contending not only with words, and invectives, but with blows
many times, the people laboring to the utmost the division of the Clergy, and
the Clergy the disunion of the people; so that they formed themselves into
flying Squadrons, both on the one side and the other.

Great was the scandal which happened in the year of our Lord 500. by reason of
the differences in the Election of Simacus, betwixt the Clergy and People, each
of them endeavoring to engage those that were without, in so much that the
Communalty of the City were forced to take Arms, and with threats to oblige
the Electors to a conclusion.

The Prefect, or Imperial Vicar at Rome, signified in the behalf of the
Emperor, that if they did not agree, his Master would be constrained to bring
an Army to Rome, to the prejudice of the whole City; with which the Electors
being affrightned, they agreed in the Election of Simacus.

For certain years after this, they chose their Popes with little or no
controversy, till that in the year 531. they began to relapse into their
former disputes, obliging the City to take Arms the second time, whose
threatenings prevailed to put an end to that Election also, by their declaring
Boniface the second Pope; which said Boniface, being an Assertor of the
interest of the Clergy, as soon as he was assumed to the Papacy, he endeavored
to apply a remedy to those scandals, and to give the greatest share to the
Clergy. And Virgilius his successor in the Papacy, observing things to run
clearly with them, established a Decree, that the Election of the Popes should
remain absolutely in the hands of the Clergy for the future, to the exclusion
of the people; which Decree gave so great dissatisfaction to the Romans, that
they watched for an opportunity to revenge it.

About this time Attila, who was called Flagellum Dei, with great triumph to
the Goths (whose King he was) overrun all Italy, and with great cruelty and
slaughter threatened the total destruction of Rome: Pelagius the Pope, who
succeeded Virgilius, not thinking it safe, in such a conjuncture, to have a
discontented people, and Tyrant upon his shoulders at one time, to gain the
favor both of the one and the other, published a Bull, forbidding the Clergies
Election of the Pope, without the consent both of the People and Emperor, and
so it came to pass that they introduced into the Elections, the Ambassadors of
the Emperor, and the People, in the same numbers as before.

The Emperor and People were very well pleased with it, and took possession of
their Privileges in the next vacancy of the Chair, all of them together
electing John the 3d. But in the year 583. Rome being besieged, the Clergy and
the People chose Pelagius the second Pope, without giving any share or
participation to the Emperor, who vowed revenge, as soon as he had the news:
But the new Pope to pacify his choler, dispatched an Ambassador to make his
excuse, and to assure him for the future, there should be no Election made
without his consent, to which end he confirmed the Bull of Pelagius the first;
which Bull and confirmation continued in force successively till the year 607.
in which time the Emperor Foca would needs create Boniface Pope, in spite both
of the major part of the Clergy, and the People, who rejected him as a person
unworthy of so eminent a Dignity.

However Boniface expressed himself much more affectionate toward the Clergy,
and the People that were his adversaries, than to the Emperor who would have
elected him; and the reason was, because he saw what Authority the Emperors
were usurping in the Pontifical Elections, and therefore by new Orders and
Decrees he confirmed the Privileges of the people, commanding expressly that
they should not for the future make any Election, without the intervention of
the People, and Clergy, to whom he gave Authority to do all.

The Emperors for all this did but laugh at their proceedings, and betaking
themselves again to the force of their comminations, they asserted the
Privileges granted them by the Pelagiusses, and would either by force, or fair
words, make the Popes as they pleased: Hence it was that Severus the second
being chosen in the year 535. by the Clergy, and the People, and the consent of
the Emperor also, would not act any thing till he was confirmed by Isacius the
Emperors Lieutenant in Italy; and all to publish how great the Authority of the
Emperor was in the Election of the Popes.

And the pretenders to the Papacy, observing the greatness of the Emperors
Authority in the Elections, almost all of them applied themselves to him, for
the obtaining of their designs: In so much that in the year 688. one Pascal an
Archpriest, and Treasurer to Conon who was then Pope, did earnestly solicit
John Platina at that time the Emperors Vicar in Italy, and with great sums of
money endeavored to oblige him, upon the death of the present Pope, to assist
him in the succession.

Platina took his money, and sent him away well pleased with his promises; but
the Pope being dead, instead of assisting of Pascal, he endeavored the
promotion of another, which was Sergius the first: Yet it is certain, had he
found the Electors disposed, he would have chosen him; but the Clergy being
wholly averse, he would not undertake a thing, he could not compass without
dishonor, seeing it was very well known what way Pascal had taken, and what
money he had consigned to that purpose. But the good Pascal no sooner saw
Sergius in the Chair, and himself without money, and deluded, but he did what
he could to make the people rise against Sergius, but without any effect.

This faculty of electing* of Popes, began to lessen in the time of Gregory,
who being Pope, and a zealous assertor of the Ecclesiastical Liberty, that he
might render the Popedom more considerable, he endeavored by an insurrection
of all Italy, against the Emperor then reigning, to banish the Emperors of the
East out of Italy; and to that end he declared all such as yielded them
obedience, Excommunicate for the future; and the people, partly for fear of
Excommunication, and partly to set themselves at liberty, declared themselves
free, and threatened with Arms in their hands to defend themselves to the last
drop of their blood, against whoever should endeavor the contrary; and thus by
the contrivance of Gregory, were the Emperors of the East excluded from their
Dominion in Italy.

Zachary a Grecian was chosen Pope in the year 743. by the Clergy, and People
only, without any participation with the Emperor, who was wholly excluded from
the Election of the Pope.

And this exclusion continued till the year 760. in the time of Charles the
Great, and Adrian the first, who entering into a League, for several respects,
they granted many Privileges one to the other, viz. Adrian granted to Charles
the Great, the Title of MOST CHRISTIAN KING, and CITIZEN OF ROME, (which was
but a small business for an Emperor, and King of France) with power to call
himself Roman Emperor, and last of all, Authority to interpose in the Election
of Popes.

Charles the Great on the other side, declared Adrian true and lawful Prince
of the City of Rome, Patriarch of all Italy, establishing the Empire of the
Pope above all Empires, and declaring his own inferior to it.

There was but one Pope chosen by the consent of the Emperor, and that was Leo
the third; after his death the Clergy and people (in despite of the
Privileges granted to the Empire, in regard of the Election of the Pope)
assembled themselves and created Stephen the fourth, without attending the vote
or assent of Lewis the Good, who succeeded in the Empire after the death of
Charles.

Lewis was disgusted at the Election, and declared he would go in person to
Rome, and by force of Arms pull Stephen out of the Vatican, and put another in
his place, as he thought good himself. But Stephen having advertisement
thereof, prevented that mischief, by going personally into France, and in the
presence of Lewis, pretending to deposite all his Authority in the hands of the
said Emperor; which act of humility working upon the natural goodness of Lewis,
he confirmed the Privileges granted by Charles the Great, and sent him back
again to Rome, with considerable Presents.

After the death of Stephen, which was in the year 817. the people and the
Clergy created Pascal the first, without any notice given to the Emperor, who
made his complaints, and threatened the Pope who was newly elected; but he was
persuaded to send two Legates in a solemn Embassy to make his excuse, which
they did so effectually, that Lewis was not only satisfied with the Election of
Pascal, but remitted and renounced all the pretensions he had to the Election
of the Popes.

It was not without difficulty that Lewis agreed to a thing of such prejudice
to the Empire, but at length his goodness prevailed, and he granted it. In so
much that as soon as Pascal was dead, there arose great differences and
disturbances betwixt the people and the Clergy; but being grown more politic,
that the Emperor might not have occasion to put to his hand, they endeavored
to accommodate all, by the choice of a third person, which was Eugenius the
second, excluding Zinzimus for that time.

In the interim Lewis repented that he had given away his right of Election, at
the instance of Pope Pascal; and therefore Pope Valentine the first being dead,
in the year 828. he sent to make his claim, and to declare, that if the next
Pope was chosen without his consent, he would not fail to bring his whole force
into Italy, to the detriment of Rome, and the Electors especially.

But the Clergy and the people opposed those instances, by showing his Writing
of Concession, and without more circumlocution, by common consent they elected
Gregory the fourth, who being fearful of the Emperors indignation, dispatched
an Ambassador to him to desire his Confirmation, but he could not obtain it,
till by Bull he had restored the Emperors to their former Prerogatives in the
Elections; which Gregory willingly consented to, in compliance with the humor
of the said Lewis.

For a while, with difficulty sometimes, and sometimes without, the Emperors
conserved the faculty of Electing and Confirming the Pope, till that in the
year 884. the Clergy and the people having created Adrian the third, a fierce
and arrogant man, he not only refused to expect Confirmation from the Emperor,
as some of his Predecessors had done, but as soon as he was Crowned, by a
particular Bull he decreed, that the Election of the Pope was not by any means
to be participated with the Emperor, nor his Confirmation to be attended,
declaring that the people and the Clergy, ought to Confirm those Popes which
they elected.

Adrian would not have undertaken such an enterprise, and injury to the
Emperor, had he not known him to be very low, by reason of several Wars in
which he was engaged, so that this news did but add to the afflictions of the
Emperor.

Otho being received to the Empire, disdaining to endure the injuries which the
Popes offered to the Emperors, he deliberated revenge, and contrived which way
he should restore his affairs to their former condition: and therefore in the
year 957. with the consent likewise of the Clergy, he deposed and deprived John
the 13. of the Papal dignity, he being accused of not reciting the Canonical
hours, of ordaining Deacons in Stables, of Swearing and Blaspheming at Dice, of
Ravishing of Virgins, and several other delinquencies; for which, he being
driven out of the Vatican, there was substituted in his place by the sole order
and authority (as it were) of the Emperor Leo the eight, who was a Citizen of
Rome, and principal Treasurer of the Church of San Giovanni Laterano.

This Leo continued Pope, while the Emperor continued at Rome; but he
departing the next year, the Adherents to John by a popular tumult, prevailed
to have John restored to the Papacy, and Leo discarded; but John lived but few
months after his restoration. When he was dead, several instances were made in
the behalf of the Emperor, that Leo might be chosen and restored, that thereby
they might avert the dangers impending, from the indignation his most Christian
Majesty had conceived for the affront done to Leo; notwithstanding all which,
the People and the Clergy laid Leo aside, and chose Benedict the fifth.

How much the Emperors mind was disturbed with the news of these proceedings,
may be collected from the violent resolution he took; for resenting the injury
to Leo, as done to himself, he turned the whole power of his Arms against Rome,
which City after two months Seige, was constrained to open her Gates at
discretion, and to deliver Pope Benedict into his hands, who sent him presently
in exile to Hambourg, where he ended his days in a thousand sorrows and
afflictions.

The next day after the Emperors entrance into Rome, Leo was with the usual
Solemnity, restored to the Pontifical Chair, to the no small dissatisfaction of
his Adversaries. But Leo understanding his obligation for the Papacy was wholly
to the Emperor, by whose affection and authority he was chosen in defiance
both of Clergy and people, he sought by all means, in spite of them both, to
comply with the Emperor, and therefore took away the power of Electing the
Pope from the Clergy and people, declaring the privileges granted by Charles
the Great, void; transferring the absolute authority in Elections, upon the
person of the Emperor; and all as he pretended, to prevent the tumults and
scandals that happened daily betwixt the People and the Clergy: by virtue of
which Concession, Leo being dead, the Emperor created John the 14. with the
greatest tranquillity imaginable.

The rancour of the Romans, to see themselves deprived of the faculty of
Electing the Pope, (which they had for so many ages enjoyed) was so great, that
from morning to night they had their public and private meetings, to find out
some way to recover the privileges they had lost. Peter who was Governor of
the City of Rome, with two Consuls, and twelve Senators, entered into a
Conspiracy against the person of the New Pope, as one that in favor to the
Emperor, did much prejudice to the privileges of the people, and being
accompanied with great number of the Nobility, they entered one day with Arms
in their hands, into the Church of San Giovanni Laterano, took his Holiness
Prisoner, and carried him to the Castle of Saint Angelo.

By this it may guessed, how great the insolence of the people was, whilst they
were unbridled and free, and acting without either reason or judgment, or
consideration of the power of the Emperor, who being at that time without
wars, was very potent and strong: and indeed the Emperor no sooner received
the alarm, but he turned his Forces again the third time against Rome, with
resolution not to pardon any of the Principal in that Sedition; and indeed he
was as good as his word, for having entered the City with more anger than
difficulty, he commanded the greatest part of the Criminals should be hanged,
contenting himself with the Confiscation of the rest. But Peter who was the
principal Author of the Conspiracy, was delivered into the hands of the Pope
(who was discharged of his Imprisonment, and restored to the Papacy) from whose
hands he received incredible Cruelties, before he was suffered to dye.

This Slaughter and Vengeance of the Emperor upon the Romans, abated the pride
of that people in some measure, leaving the Emperor in free liberty of
Electing whom he Pleased Pope, which appeared in the year 975. when he declared
Boniface the seventh Pope, who was a person so odious to the people, they were
almost ready to run mad at his creation, forbearing the very Churches out of
hatred to Boniface, who understanding well enough the animosity of the people,
took a resolution to run away to Constantinople, and that he might not be
unprovided with moneys when he came there, he made bold with the whole Treasure
of Saint Peter, carrying every thing along with him, that was of any value or
price.

The Romans were displeased both with his Robbery and Flight, but made their
advantage of what was happened, making use of this as an occasion of
repossessing themselves of what they desired so earnestly; and accordingly,
without communicating any thing with the Emperor, they created John the 15.
Pope, who dyed miserably in Prison, by order of Boniface; which said Boniface
having sold his Jewels and Plate, came back again to Rome, and by virtue of the
Sums he brought with him, reconciled himself to many, and repossess'd himself
of the Papacy, chasing away John from the Throne by force of Arms, and clapping
him up in Prison when he had done.

By this occasion the People of Rome reassumed their power, and votes in the
Election of the Pope, which the Emperor likewise conceeded to them, upon
condition that his assent should be expected; by which means, all parties being
pleased, they created their Popes quietly for several years, till that in the
995. John the 17. being dead, and the Emperor in Italy with his whole Army; he
let the Clergy and the People understand, he would have a Pope of his own
choosing, and accordingly he named a certain German called Bruno who was his
Kinsman.

The Clergy and the People excused themselves at first, pretending that the
Election was free, and that it was convenient that several persons should be
introduced into the Scrutiny: but the Emperor insisting that he would have no
other, to avoid the falling into his displeasure, the Electors were constrained
to create the said Bruno under the name of Gregory the fifth. But as soon as
the Emperor was returned into Germany, the People took up Arms under the
conduct of the Consul Crescentius, and drove the poor Pope Gregory, not only
out of the Vatican, but our of Rome, who betook himself immediately to the
Emperor to make his complaints of their insolence toward his person; but
whilst he was upon his way, the People and the Clergy created the Bishop of
Placenza (a Grecian born) Pope, who took upon him the name of John the 13.

The Emperor received Gregory very kindly in his Court, treated him as Pope,
and with his whole Army brought him back to Rome, which he took by force, and
exercised the greatest cruelty imaginable against the Romans; but the greatest
part of his indignation fell upon John and Crescentius the first of which was
killed in Prison, strangled as some report, poisoned as others; but be it which
way it will, he died there: and Crescentius was hanged without the walls of the
City, in the sight of all the people.

The Clergy endeavored what they could to exclude the people from the Election
of the Pope, but they knew not which way to bring it to a resolution, because
they understood very well they were naturally inclined to Novelties and
Sedition.

In the year 1004. it happened that John the 19th. was created Pope, and had
the Title of Secco added to his name; and because the people at the beginning
of his creation, were averse, and with great difficulty consented at last, when
they saw the Clergy resolved to have no body else. John (who was an Italian, as
soon as he was created, retained it in his mind) applied himself to be
revenged, and endeavored the total Exclusion of the people from the Election
of the Pope, being provoked by the constant solicitations of the Clergy. And
that he might with the greater facility bring it about, he ingrandiz'd the
Title of Cardinal, giving them great Privileges, and amplifying their
Authority and Jurisdiction to a great height; which design succeeding, and the
Cardinals rising to an eminent pitch, John published a Bull, for the Exclusion
of the people, pretending they were to be instructed, and not to instruct; and
that they were to follow the Clergy, and not the Clergy them, which Bull was
afterward confirmed, and much enlarged by Gregory the 7th. in the year 1075.
and by Innocent the second a Roman, in the year 1135.

This Bull of Pope John the 19th. was effectual for a while, according as they
were able to deal with the Emperors Forces, and to their affection to the
Apostolic See: yet the people did not forbear in the mean time, by their
insolence and power, to endeavor their re-establishment, in so much that the
Cardinals were oftentimes constrained to go out of Rome to elect their new
Popes, upon the vacancy of the Chair.

The more the people strove to work themselves in again, into the Elections,
the more the Cardinals sought to exclude them, which occasioned great scandals
and schisms in the Church; and of this there happened so tragical an instance
in Rome, in the year 1045. that the Christians had reason to bewail it for
several years.

And this happened, by reason that the Emperor pretended to a power of electing
the Pope, by virtue of several Bulls which were extant to that purpose, and did
clearly make out his claim; the people on the other side, pressed very hard to
be restored to the posture they were in, before they were interrupted by John
the 19th. The Cardinals who for several years had had the sole faculty of
electing the Pope, resolved to adhere to their Privileges, and keep out both
Emperor, and people; and all parties continuing firm to their pretensions, each
of them created his Pope, viz. Benedict the 9th. a Florentine, Silvester the
3d. a Roman, and Gregory the 6th. all three of them residing in Rome, Gregory
in the Palace of Santa Maria Maggiore, Silvester in the Palace of Saint Peter,
and Benedict in the Palace of Saint John Lateran, which was one of the
antientest in Rome.

These dissentions gave no small impediment to the growth of Christianity, nor
no little diminution to the number of the Faithful, but of great advantage to
the enemies of the Faith. A thousand cogitations and jealousies boiled in the
hearts of the Christians, in every City they discoursed of it, and the service
of God grew languid and cold.

Henry the third, who was at that time Emperor of Germany, foreseeing the ill
consequences these Schisms would bring upon the Church, and the quiet of the
Empire in particular, without losing one moment of time, he came with great
diligence to Rome, where he was no sooner arrived, but by his own absolute
Authority he called a Synod, in which the three good Popes were condemned, and
Clement the second chosen.

The Cardinals made many instances and supplications to the Emperor, that the
Pope might be elected by the Ecclesiastical Synod alone, without the
intervention of the people; but the Emperor thought it not seasonable to
disgust them, least after he was departed, they should fall again to their
Schisms; and by this means Clement was elected by the votes both of the Clergy,
the people, and the Emperor. The first solemn Ceremony this Pope performed, was
the Coronation of the Emperor, in which there was no consideration of expense.

That Ceremony being past, the Emperor prepared for his Voyage, but Clement
beseech'd him, to give him his helping hand before his departure, in what he
was resolved to do, which was to renew the Bull of John the 18th. for exclusion
of the people de novo from the election of the Pope; and because History did
mention the Tragedies that succeeded by reason of such exclusion, attempted so
many times without effect, the Emperor and Pope, in spite of the people,
consulted together, and resolved to make the people themselves condescend to
their own exclusion, by a solemn abjuration.

The people refused it with a thousand protestations, but finding the Emperor
resolute, and threatening corporal punishments to such as durst oppose it, the
Pope preparing to thunder out his Excommunications against all that refused it,
and they being on the other side tired out with Wars, Sackings of Towns,
animosities and calamities, suffered upon the score of Elections, they
condescended to their demands, and submitted to swear upon the hands of the
Pope, who held the Book of the Gospel open, in the presence of the Emperor;
which Oath was taken not only by the Consuls and Senators, but all the chief of
the people, to the number of three thousand, each of them engaging to transferr
his right of Election to the Cardinals.

Yet for all this Oath, the people ceased not to trouble and molest the repose
of the Electors, if not with intention to be included in the Election, at least
with design to have the Pope after their own way; renouncing many times the
Pope which was recommended to them by the College of Cardinals, or the Clergy,
and demanding another; and these kind of violences were used in the Elections
of Damasus the 2d. of Leo the 9th. Stephen the 9th. and Nicholas the 2d. but
these violences lasted not long, in regard of the Cardinalitial Majesty, which
grew greater and greater every day. However the Emperor looked well enough to
his own interests, preserving his share still in the Elections; but he also was
excluded in the year 1064. to the universal dissatisfaction, and I shall in
short tell how it fell out

Nicholas the 2d. being dead in the year 1062. the Clergy assembled for the
election of a new Pope, and resolved to create one without the intervention of
the Emperor, there being little danger of any obstruction from him, by reason
of the Wars in Germany wherewith he was infested; and that things might proceed
with greater order and decorum, they resolved to find out a Pope experienced in
the affairs of the World, and courageous both in his Actions and Councels, and
having weighed and considered the lives of many, they at last concluded to
choose Anselme a Milanese, and Bishop of Lucca, a man of great spirit and
resolution; for which reason the Cardinals willingly consented to his Election,
as judging him capable of defending their interests, and opposing the violence
of the Emperor, if he should attempt any thing against the Apostolic See.

The Emperor understanding the creation of Alexander, without his assent, was
exceedingly enraged, and called immediately in his presence an Imperial Diet of
Lombards, and made them create one Cadolo Bishop of Parma Pope; he was a person
more addicted to the Wars, than to the Word, as he demonstrated by his actions;
for being followed by the Lombards themselves, and other Soldiers given him by
the Emperor, as soon as he was declared Pope in the aforesaid Diet held at
Basil, he marched with a powerful Army toward Rome, with hopes to drive away
Alexander, and place himself in the Vatican; but he was mistaken in his
accounts, for the Romans being besieged, drew out to give him Battle, in which
they had the Victory, put Cadolo and his Army to flight, and pursued them
toward Lombardy.

The Emperor having the news of this defeat, and seeing all things favorable
to the Romans, he resolved to accommodate things fairly if it was possible, and
to send Otho Archbishop of Colen to Rome, with full power to treat with the
said Alexander, and to find out some way of composing those Schisms.

Otho was received in Rome with great kindness, the Pope himself desiring to
enjoy his Dignity more peaceably: In the first Audience they discoursed of
nothing but the Emperors interest in the Pontifical Elections, from which he
could not in any ways be excluded, having so many Bulls in Confirmation of his
faculty, and therefore he complained greatly of Alexander, that he would be
elected without the Emperors concurrence, and suffer himself to be Crowned
without his advice. Hildebrand a Senese, a Counselor, and Consident of the
Popes, being present, would not permit the Archbishop to finish his discourse,
but interrupted him, and justified his Holinesses cause, asserting, That his
Election belonged not to the Emperor, but the Cardinals, by whom he was legally
chosen, and might be called Canonically Pope, and exercise the Papacy, as the
true Vicar of Christ. Otho (who as he was an Archbishop, was more inclinable
without doubt to the defense of the Popes interest, than the Emperors, at least
in his heart, if not in his tongue) suffered himself to be easily overcome by
the persuasions of Hildebrand, desiring only, for the honor of his Embassy,
that he would condescend to the publication and convention of a Council, in the
City of Milan, for the abolition of the Schism which was then on foot.

The Council being held, in which it was established, That the Election of the
Pope should belong to the Cardinals, and to no body else; Alexander remained as
it were under the Dominion of Hildebrand, who tyrannized and governed him as he
pleased.

But though the Election was placed in the hands of the Cardinals, the Schisms
were not appeased ever the more, but increased and grew numerous more and more,
and always with new scandal to the Church. But the greatest Schism was in the
year 1159. the Cardinals being assembled to choose a Successor to Adrian the
4th. they could not agree, the Emperors party refusing publicly to concur
with them, who pretended to exalt a very worthy person.

The greatest part of the Cardinals therefore chose Roland the Chancellor, born
in Siena in Tuscany, who would be called by the name of Alexander the third.
The other Cardinals, who followed the interest of the Emperor, and were nine
in number, withdrew themselves from Rome, and chose another Pope, which was
Octavian a Citizen of Rome, and Cardinal Priest, with the Title of Saint
Clement, as he would be called himself, or of Victor the fourth, as they called
him: That Pope being dead, the said Imperial Cardinals remaining firm to their
opinions, they proceeded in their schism, chose a new Pope, and would by no
means acknowledge Alexander for the lawful successor of Saint Peter; and the
Pope which they chose was Paschal: But God Almighty not suffering this
Antipope to live long neither, perhaps to make the schismatic Cardinals
sensible of their Errors, (there having four of them died since Alexander was
created) the Emperor, to put an end to those troubles, being excited by the
compunction of his heart, rather than by his Cardinals, who advised him by all
means to continue the schism, he called a Synod in the City of Pania, with
design to accommodate the differences betwixt the Cardinals, ordaining that
Pope Alexander should be present, to whom he sent a solemn Embassy to the same
purpose.

But Alexander in great indignation replied to the Ambassador, that the Popes
of Rome ought not to be judged by any body; that the Council; and Synods were
subject to him, not he to them: that the Emperor being but as the Son, was to
pay obedience to him as the Father; and with this answer he sent back the
Ambassadors very ill satisfied with their entertainment; especially he having
thundered out his Excommunications the very same day, against the Emperor and
his Antipope; with which the Emperor being provoked, he marched forthwith
toward Italy with his whole Army, to be revenged of the Insolence (as he
called it) of the Pope: and this was the occasion of that memorable war which
is so obvious in History, and was stopped by the mediation of the Venetian, who
taking up arms likewise, constrained the Emperor to acknowledge Pope Alexander
the true Successor of Saint Peter, and (after he had restored all those Cities
and Lands which he had illegally usurped) with all humility to kiss his
Holinesses foot.

To the Articles of agreement betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, there was one
annexed, in which the Emperor renounced all the right of Election, to which he
pretended, in the vacancy of the Chair; obliging himself by Oath to leave the
Election free to the Cardinals for the future.

For all this Alexander failed not to chastise some of those who had been of
that schism; so that some of those nine Cardinals which followed the interest
of the Emperor, dyed in despair, seeing themselves bitterly persecuted by the
Pope, and those who had stuck to his party, rewarded abundantly; But Alexander
besides that endeavored what he could to ingrandize the Title of Cardinal, and
that they might more strongly preserve their faculty of Election, he
constituted a new form of Elections, contrary to what was formerly by the
majority of voices; for till the time of this Pope, it was sufficient to create
one Pope, if he had the advantage but of one voice. But Alexander declared that
no body should be admitted for Pope, who had not two thirds of the votes of all
the Cardinals then present at the Election, which custom continues to this day.

After the death of Alexander, the Cardinals continued in the creation of Popes
for above sixty years (that is from the creation of Lucius the 3d. who was
Alexanders Successor, to the time of Gregory the ninth) in great quiet and
tranquillity, and without any obstruction, either from Emperor, or people.

But the said Gregory being at wars with the Emperor Frederick, about the year
of our Lord 1239. the greatest part of the Cardinals were taken prisoners by
the Emperors Army; for which reason, after the death of Gregory, which
happened in the year 1241. the Church was necessitated to remain without a
Pastor, the space of twenty months, till that the Cardinals (being by the
intercession of several Princes, discharged of their imprisonment) assembled
themselves as formerly, for the creation of a Successor, which was Innocent the
4th. a Genoese called Simbaldo Fieschi before: he was a person very well
qualified, chosen by common consent, without any discrepancy of voices at all.

This Innocent was no sooner crowned, but he began to think of revenging the
injury the Emperor had done to the Cardinals, in keeping them prisoners so
long. In order to this, he ordained a Council should meet at Lions, and
commanded that Frederick should be there present, within so many days; and
because Fredericks Ambassadors insisted upon longer time, making it appear by
good reasons, that it was not possible to perform such a journey, in the time
that was assigned.

The Pope being enraged at their answer, declared the Emperor a contumacious
and disobedient son of the universal Father, and accordingly he Excommunicated
him, deprived him of his Imperial dignity, declared him a Schismatic; and
(having absolved them from their Oaths of Fidelity which they had given to the
Emperor) he excited all the Princes to depose him from his Empire, and chose
another in his place, as it followed in effect, Henry Landgrave of Turingia
being elected presently after.

Frederick prepared himself, both for defense, and revenge; but he dying the
next year, made an end of that quarrel. In that Council the Pope gave the
Cardinal the Cap and red Mantle, in token of their readiness to spend their
blood in the service of the Church; But to say the truth, before they received
the Red Cap, there were several Cardinals that suffered Martyrdom. But since
the time they received it, to this day, there has not been so much as one; so
that we may believe, the Cap took away their desire to be Martyrs.

The Lord Cardinals proceeded with great freedom, and liberty, in the Election
of Popes, being become absolutely sovereign in that affair: They created
several Popes with great satisfaction to all Christendom, because they were
chosen with great unanimity. But by the death of Clement the fourth, who died
at Viterbo, the face of things was altered, the Church (to the great scandal of
all Christians) remaining two years without a Pastor, because the Cardinals
could not agree in the election of a Successor.

The Causes of so long a dissension, are variously represented, by several
Historiografers; but the chief were as follow: The first and most forcible of
all, was the contrariety in the Natures of the Cardinals which were present at
the Election at Viterbo, who were 18 in number, all obstinate and untractible,
and had sworn each of them, never to yield to his Companion in the least.

All of them believed themselves worthy of the Papacy, and (which was of most
importance, and gave the greatest delay to the Election) every one negotiated
for himself, without speaking a word of other Pretenders; so that it was not
possible amongst eighteen several Competitors, that they should come to any
resolution: But that impediment being removed, in which the Cardinals continued
obstinate for above ten months, there arose another, which lasted above a year,
and was the second occasion of the tediousness of the Election; and that is,
the Cardinals were divided into two factions, one of them Italians, the other
French, these would have a Pope of their own Nation, and the Italians would
have him of theirs; neither of them complying with the other, and the number of
the French being equal to the Italians, there being no way to be found of
gaining the two thirds of their Votes, they remained whole weeks obstinate, and
doing nothing, unless it were heaping dissension upon dissension.

The other reason was, that this delay growing redious to the Princes, and in
particular to Philip King of France, and Charles King of Sicily, these two
Princes resolved to come in person to Viterbo, and solicit the Cardinals to
expedite the creation of the Pope; upon this occasion the Cardinals which were
adherents to these two Crowns, having notice of their resolutions, would do
nothing till they were arrived, who when they did come, served for nothing but
to protract the Election, though their desire was to hasten it; each of them
recommending different persons; But the Cardinals being resolute not to depend
upon any body whatsoever, lest they should again reduce themselves into
subjection, the Princes finding all their intercessions ineffectual returned as
they came, leaving the whole business to the Cardinals.

In the first Assembly after the Kings were departed, John Cardinal of Porto
observing the pertinacity of the Cardinals, whilst they were together inv(...)
the Holy Ghost, cried out publicly, and with a loud voice. Let us uncover (my
Lords) the (...) Chamber, perhaps the holy spirit will not come where we are,
through ^o (...) it would be necessary to have a Holy Ghost for every one,
seeing there is no two will agree. The Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles,
because they were met together with one mind, but how can we expect him, who
are so strangely divided?

At length, all these disputes being ended, and the Cardinals weary of going up
and down to the places of their Assemblies, and doubting moreover, by their
delay, to bring in some new schism into the Church, which seemed already to be
whispering in Germany; two thirds of the Cardinals agreed to the Election of
Tibaldo Visconte a Milanese, Archdeacon of Lodi, who was not as yet returned
from his Voyage into Asia, whether he was sent by the command of Innocent the
4th.: upon whose Election Cardinal G^ovanni del Porto made these Verses in
Latin.

Papatus munus tulit, Archidiaconus unus,
Quem patrem patrum fecit discordia fratrum.
The Cardinals themselves being out of hope,
Archdeacon Tibald was created Pope.
Gregory as soon as he received the Keys of the Vatican, endeavored what he
could to make peace betwixt the Venetian and the Genoese, who for several years
together, had been at wars with one another, with great effusion of Christian
blood, and no small detriment to the Apostolic See. He Excommunicated the
Florentines, for usurping certain Cities belonging to the Ecclesiastical State.

Having perpetrated these things, and all things succeeding according as he
designed, he went into France in the year 1273. he gave beginning to the
Council of Lions mentioned before. Philip King of France was present at that
Council, with an infinite number of noble and learned persons, both French and
English.

Michael Paleologus the Emperor of Constantinople, agreed the second time to
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; though his Predecessors had done as much
twelve times, and always revolted: upon that business, there were several
Sessions and disputes, and all of them in the presence of his Holiness and the
King of France.

The principal cause of this Assembly was, that Gregory might be enabled to
remedy several abuses in the Church, and more particularly by their advice to
find out some way of preventing the tedious vacancies, after the deaths of the
Popes.

And because Gregory understood well enough the root from whence that evil did
spring, and that it proceeded from a liberty the Cardinals took, of assembling
where they pleased, of breaking up and meeting again as they thought good,
delaying and protracting the Elections, by the Contentions and Correspondencies
they had abroad; Gregory ordained that the Cardinals for the future should be
obliged to shut themselves up in some particular place, from whence they should
not stir, till the Election was finished, but in case of sickness, or other
urgent necessity; nor should any body be permitted to go into them, besides
such as were appointed for the service of the Cardinals, none of them being
allowed, during the whole time of their seclusion, to have communication with
any of the City. And this is the place called at present the Conclave, which
indeed signifies no more then the place where the Cardinals are shut up for the
Election of the Pope.

Before Gregory's days, that is from the time of San Silvester, to Gregory's
Popedom, they were not used to be shut up in a Conclave; but if they were in
Rome, the Electors met, either in the Church of St. John Lateran, or of Saint
Peter, or in some other place, as occasion offered; if they were out of Rome,
they met in the Cathedral of the place where they were, or in some other
Church, more convenient: But all this brought nothing but prejudice and
inconvenience to the Church, because the Electors did many times neglect to use
that diligence which was due, not regarding expedition in their Elections of
the Pope, whilst they had liberty to command, to go and come as they thought
fit, and to live in their own houses at their pleasure: and therefore it may
rationally be said, that the invention of the Conclave by Gregory, was holy,
and good, and worthy of a Pope of his piety and zeal. There were likewise
established by the said Gregory several Laws and Orders for the Conclave, which
were afterward by several Popes put into better form, till that in Process of
time they were reduced into that state, which for greater convenience I shall
insert in this place.

The Principal Laws which are usually observed in the creation of the Pope.
THe first Article is, That the Election be made in a proper and convenient
place, and ordinarily there where the last Pope died. If it should happen the
Pope should die in any Town or Village, in which the Election cannot so
commodiously be made, let it be made in that City to whose jurisdiction the
said Town or Village does belong, provided it be not under interdiction; for in
that case, they are to choose another City in the same Diocese, or at least not
far off. But if the Residence was in another place, in the time of the
preceding Pope, then the Conclave is to meet, not in the place where the Pope
shall die, but where he kept his Residence whilst he lived: and this is
established in two Bulls, of Gregory the tenth, and Clement the fifth.

The second is, That after the death of the Pope, there shall be no discourse
of the Election of a Successor, till ten days be past, in which time the absent
Cardinals are to be expected, and the nine days obsequies for the deceased Pope
be celebrated with due respect, by all the Cardinals that are present in the
place.

The third, That it be not permitted to any Cardinal that is absent to send his
vote in any manner whatsoever, by which it is intended, that they are deprived
of their Voice, as often as they are absent from the Election, though for
considerable reasons.

The fourth, That the nine days Ceremony for the death of the Pope, being over,
the Mass dello Spirito Santo solemnly said, and the Prayer de Eligendo
Pontifice, recited, Let all the Cardinals that are present in the Palace, which
shall be called the Conclave, (which is to be in a secure place, close in all
parts, and well guarded) be shut in, with two or three servants only, for their
necessities. Let it not be lawful for any to enter after the Conclave is shut
up, nor for any to come forth, except in the case of infirmity: and if any body
be obliged either to go in, or out, let it be by the consent of the whole
College; Nor is this Conclave to have any Wall or partition, to distinguish one
Chamber from another; but let there be certain traverses or Curtains of Linen
or cloth to divide their Lodgings: and be they given to the Cardinals by lot,
to prevent all controversies for place.

The fifth, That it be not only unlawful to elect those that are absent, but
that it be not permitted to the Cardinals to choose any but one of their own
Order, and of those that are present in the Conclave. And this is decreed by
Paul the second.

The sixth, That the place, and the gates and doors of the Conclave be well
guarded; if the Election be made in Rome, the first Guards are to be kept by
the Soldiers of the Popes ordinary Guards; after them by the Barons of Rome,
and the Ambassadors of Princes, who are all to be sworn in the Conclave it self
before it be shut up; that they will keep the said Guards, with diligence and
loyalty, as is convenient; and last of all in the nearest places to the door of
the Conclave, by the Bishops, and Conservators of the City. If the Election be
made out of the City of Rome; the Guard of the Conclave is to be made by the
Temporal Lords of that place, with the same formality, and oath, as in Rome.
The duty of those that are deputed for Guards is, to prevent any violence shall
be offered to the freedom of the Cardinals votes, to observe well the
provisions that come in, that there be no Letters conveyed in them; and in case
any such be found, let them be consigned to the Marshal, to be kept till the
Conclave be finished: That they further take care the Cardinals be not
incommoded, that they be all ready at their beck, and in case of delay, that
they force them (first gently and with intreattes, but afterward even with
threats) to hasten the Election. The Soldiers of the Conclave (that is those
who are appointed to guard it) and the Barons of Rome, are to preserve the
Conclave from all disturbance and violence.

The seventh, That the Cardinals may not go out of the Conclave, or adjourn
their Assembly to an other place, for any person whatsoever, but upon any
emergent necessity, let them put an end to the Election, and then they may go
forth, if otherwise they should go out, let them be forced back again by the
Guards of the Conclave.

The eighth, That those Cardinals who come after the Conclave it shut, and
before the creation of the Pope, may enter and give their voices as the rest:
and that no Cardinal can, upon any occasion or pretense whatsoever, (although
he be Excommunicated) avoid being present at the Election, and giving his Vote.
But all this is to be done by the consent of the whole College, and not of the
Governor of the Conclave only.

The ninth, That three days being past after their entrance into the Conclave,
if in that time the Pope be not chosen, the Prelates and Barons of Rome, and
such others as are deputed Guards to the Conclave, may require an account of
the Cardinals transactions within, and restrain them of their variety of
dishes, reducing and lessening them by degrees, according as they find the
Election delayed.

The tenth, That in the time of the Election, no person whatsoever, whether
Secular or Ecclesiastic is to give, or promise, or entreat, thereby to move or
incline the hearts of the Cardinals to their private desires, and this under
pain of the Popes Excommunication. And that it be not permitted that the
Cardinals discourse of any other matter, than the Election of the Pope, to
expedite the Election, and to prevent occasion of exasperating the minds of the
Cardinals other ways.

The eleventh, That no person whatsoever, may by reason of the Bull of
Alexander the third, be declared or elected Pope, if he has not first two whole
parts in three of the voices of the Cardinals which are present in the
Conclave, which Votes are to be given in secret, and afterward read publicly,
that all persons may take notice who is chosen.

The twelfth, That after the death of the Pope, all Magistrates and
Ecclesiastical Offices are to cease, except such a^ are in the persons of the
Cardinals, which are perpetual; which Offices are to remain unexecuted, all but
the Office of the chief Penitentiary, and the Chamberlain.

The thirteenth, That there be a Governor of the Conclave, that he be a worthy
person, and of good qualifications, that he be chosen by the Body of the
Cardinals, before they enter into the Conclave; whose Office it shall be, to
give seasonable Orders, that things may go within as they ought to do, and that
the Lord Cardinals may not want any thing convenient.

The last is, That an Oath be given to the Cardinals, to keep secret all the
transactions and argumentations of the Conclave, relating to the Election; that
it be not permitted to any body to bear arms in so sacred a place, nor to
revenge any injury whatever, either with words or with deeds, but that they
bear all things patiently, and endeavor to avoid that mischief.

And thus Gregory being exceedingly pleased with the introduction of this Form
into the Conclave, he dismissed the Council of Lions, (in which many things
were decreed, as the Enterprise into the Holy Land, the Union of the Greek and
Latin Church, and the Peace betwixt the Princes of Christendom) and then he
began his journey, in order to his return into Italy; and refusing to pass by
Florence, (least he should be obliged to take off the Interdiction) he took his
way toward Arezzo, in which place he arrived, fell sick, and dyed in the year
1276. in the fifth year of his Popedom.

The Cardinals who followed his Holiness, were the greatest part of them at
Arezzo, the rest by another road were arrived at Rome, which occasioned some
difficulties amongst them, some pretending the Election was to be made in Rome,
others insisting it was to be at Arezzo, where Gregory dyed.

But because the greatest number of those who were at Arezzo prevailed, those
Cardinals who were in Rome came thither, that they might not be excluded from
their Votes, seeing those at Arezzo had declared their number was sufficient,
and they would create a Pope without them: Besides Gregory's decree, which
ordained expressly, That the Election should be in the place where the preceding
Pope dyed; to which those in Rome replied, That that was intended, if the place
was convenient, producing a thousand pretenses to prove the incommodities of
Arezzo. It is enough, be it one way or the other, those who were in Rome were
made to know, that they were in the wrong, and therefore being arrived at
Arezzo, they went into the Conclave with the rest of the Cardinals the 21. of
January; this Conclave was guarded with good Guards, by the Aretines, who were
not a little elated to see the first Conclave celebrated in their City: But
these Guards lasted but one night; for the same night the Cardinals entered,
they agreed to choose Pietro Farantasio, (a Burgundian and Dominican Friar)
Pope, who took upon him the name of Innocent the 5th. In this manner coming out
of the Conclave, with the new Pope, on the 22 in the morning, all the Cardinals
began their Congratulations; Innocent, though he was requested to pass away the
Winter where he was, yet being resolved not to be Crowned at Arezzo, where he
was Elected, but in Rome, the true Apostolical seat, and where he designed to
have his Residence, prepared immediately for his journey thither; as indeed it
succeeded, making himself to be Crowned as soon as he came to Rome, in the
Church of Saint Peter with great solemnity, 40 days after his Election.

But here it is to be advertised, that the Constitution of the form of the
Conclave established by Gregory in the Council of Lions, was annulled, and
restored, three or four times, some Popes being chosen without any Order of the
Conclave: In the mean time, after the death of Innocent the 5th. which happened
in the year 1276. six months exactly after his Election; Alexander the 5th. who
succeeded him, being created in Rome, and with all the formalities of the
Conclave, which was held in the Court of Lateran, as soon as he was received to
the Popedom, revoked the Order established by Pope Gregory, concerning the
affairs of the Conclave, though in due form it had the approbation of a General
Council.

This revocation, or suspension, as you please, was declared invallid after his
death, as having been pronounced before his Coronation: But Pope John the 21
succeeding, both in his Papacy and humor, and having no kindness at all for
the Name of the Conclave, he not only confirmed Adrians Bull, but by another of
his own, of greater force, he annulled the said form of the Conclave in all
respects whatsoever, and so the Popes which succeeded him, which were Nicholas
the 3d. Martin the 4th. Honorius the 4th. Nicholas the 4th. and Celestine the
5th. were all created according to the Order observed before the time of
Gregory the 10th.

Celestine the 5th. being received to the Popedom in the year 1294. moved by
the same considerations, wherewith Gregory was moved, he revoked and annulled
Pope John's Bull, and confirmed the Law and Constitution of Pope Gregory, in
relation to the Conclave. And Boniface the eight, who succeeded Celestine, was
so well satisfied therewith, that he confirmed it again, and ordered it to be
Registered in the Book of the Decreetals; so that from Celestin's time, to this
present time, the formalities of the Conclave have been punctually observed,
and may they be so eternally; for, to speak truth, the introduction of that
form into the Conclave, has put an end (as one may say) to the Schisms in the
Church, and settled the true Catholic in tranquillity and repose.

Indeed this Capriccio in Pope John, who annulled the form of the Conclave, had
no other effect, but the introduction of delay and animosity among the
Cardinals; by whom Innocent the 10th. was created Pope, according to the
constitution of Gregory the 10th. after the said Gregory was dead, with
expedition, and quiet, and satisfaction to the People, in the year 1276.

After Innocents death, Adrian the 5th. was created in Rome, he was a Genoese
of the Family of Fieschi, called before, Ottobuono, without any discrepancy:
accordingly after him, in the year 1276. John the 21 was elected at Viterbo,
without any difference at all: These three Popes lived all three but a little
above a year.

These three Popes being created according to the form of the Conclave,
instituted by Gregory the 10th. things began to proceed in good order, and the
Election; to be made with care, and quiet. But after it was annulled by Pope
John, all things fell to dis-order, in so much that the Sea was vacant after
the death of the said John (who dyed under the ruins of a Palace) five
months, and upwards, of which I shall give the reasons in brief. John being
dead in the City of Viterbo, the first scruple arose amongst the Cardinals,
was, whether they ought to follow the form of the Conclave, established by Pope
Gregory, or the decree of annullation, published by Pope John; the most voices
prevailed, and they were for Pope John's decree; and accordingly, without
shutting themselves up in any place, they met for several days in the Church,
early in the morning, and returned to their own houses at night, about their
own affairs.

It is well known in the mean time, what delay there was by that means in the
Election; and to remedy the matter, the Cardinals were supplicated, I had
almost said, constrained by the people of Viterbo, to reassume the form of the
Conclave, which was agreed to, and orders given immediately to have the
Conclave accommodated, into which, according to the Constitution of Gregory,
all the Cardinals then present at Viterbo, did enter.

But for all this the Cardinal Electors could not agree about a Successor,
because there were so many French Cardinals, and Italians, all of them standing
firm to their resolutions, of choosing one of their own sides to be Pope, and
to remain shut up in the Conclave, till such a number of the one, or the other,
should die, as should be sufficient to render the other party the stronger.

At this time the Guard of the Conclave was given to one Richard of the
Anibals, one of the principal Families in Rome; which said Richard having a
while before taken the Government of Viterbo, from Orso, a Nephew of Pope
Nicholas, to whose family he was a severe and fierce Enemy. The two Cardinals
Orsini, who managed the Italian faction, cried out that Orso was to be restored
to the Government he had lost, before they came to the Election of a new Pope.

The people of Viterbo being backed by the said Richard, and excited by the
French, entered into the Conclave, took out the two Orsini, and clapped them in
prison; upon which the Italian party being rendered the weaker, the French
taking hold of the occasion, chose a Pope as they pleased themselves, and this
was Martin the fourth, called Simon before; he was born in Tours in France, and
was Cardinal di Santa Cecilia. And thus that Conclave was brought to a
conclusion, after a tedious debate, to the great detriment of the most noble
house of the Orsini, who were driven out of Rome by the Anabali, and obliged
with all their followers, to retire to Preneste.

Martin being dead in the first month of the fifth year of his Papacy, the
Vacancy was but very few days; the Cardinals who had their Conclave then at
Perugia, for the Election of a Successor, agreeing very readily in the person
of Honorius the 4th. of the Noble Family of the Savelli: But it was not so
after the death of Honorius, the Church being vacant for ten months together,
yet not so much from any dissension amongst the Cardinals, who were all
moderate and quiet; as by an accidental sickness, and Earthquake that happened;
for whilst the Conclave was held in Santa Sabina for the Creation of a new
Pope, several Cardinals fell sick on a sudden, amongst which five of the most
considerable died in a week, and they were Giordano Orsino, Il Conto a
Milanese, Hugo an Englishman, Gervasio Dean of Paris, and Anterio a person of
great worth and renown.

And because many of the rest were forced to keep their beds, the Conclave was
opened, and dissolved, and that election reserved to a better time, and the
rather because the Earthquakes continued so frequent, they were frighted into a
resolution of deferring it till another time, which happened afterward, in the
month of March, 1288. in which Nicholas the 4th. of the Order of the Minors of
Saint Francis, was created Pope with general satisfaction.

The Cardinals after the death of Nicholas, that the Election of the next Pope
might be with more freedom, and liberty, the whole City being in a Mutiny and
Confusion, removed to Perugia. But the misery was, they carried such
animosities along with them in their hearts, that they spun out the Election
for above six and twenty months, with very great scandal.

In this long vacancy of the Chair (which was occasioned by not observing the
form of shutting up the Conclave, for in that case they would have dispatched,
that they might not be shut up so long) the Emperor Paleologus died, and the
Grecian Priests would not that he should be buried in any consecrated place,
because he had consented in the Council of Lions to an union of the Greek and
Latin Churches. Andronicus the son of Michael Paleologus would willingly have
joined with the Latins, if ours would have assisted him in the least: but
seeing himself desperate of any assistance from the Romans, during the vacancy
of the Sea, he resolved to desert the Catholics, that he might not run the
same fortune whilst he was living, as his Father did when he was dead.

Charles the second King of Naples, foreseeing the inconveniences which were
likely to follow, and which indeed the Church did already feel, by the long
vacancy of the Chair, he came from Provence to Perugia, many times admonishing
and exhorting the Cardinals to Concord, and a speedy Election of the Pope. But
he was reprehended by Benedetto Gaetano, who was Cardinal of Anagni, because
with his instances and importunity, he seemed in some measure to obtrude upon
the College, which in the creation of the Pope ought always to be free.

This same Cardinal, who was in great esteem amongst the whole Sacred College,
to shorten the Election of the new Pope, exhorted the Cardinals to re-establish
the Form of the Conclave, without which they would never have ended the
Contest. They shut themselves up therefore in the Church, with resolution never
to come out, nor negotiate with any one whatsoever, before they had chosen a
Pastor for the Church. Yet so great was the differences amongst them, they
could not agree to choose one of themselves, but to put an end to the Election,
they pitched upon Peter Morone a Hermit, who was absent, and in his solitude,
not far from Sulmona.

The greater part of them believed confidently, that he being far from the
least ambition, and of a long time accustomed to his retirement, would not by
any means have accepted of the Papacy; nor were they mistaken, for upon the
first notice he declined it absolutely, and received it at last upon the
importunity of Charles King of France, who sent his Ambassadors to him, to
persuade him that he would not suffer the Church to continue any longer in her
Widdowhood; upon which Exhortation he condescended, and accepted of the
Popedom; and assuming the name of Celestine the 5th. he came immediately to the
City of Aquila, whither he called all the Cardinals which were at Perugia, but
they with reiterated Letters begged of his Holiness, that he would vouchsafe to
come to Perugia, as a place much more convenient for the Dignity of a Pope.

But King Charles suggesting to the contrary, Celestine's opinion prevailed,
and the Cardinals came to Aquila, where they paid their Reverences to him as
the true Pope, and Crowned him afterward with due solemnity: at which
Coronation, as Ptolomeus writes, who was present, there were above two hundred
thousand people met together, but the most of them more out of curiosity, than
devotion.

The Government of Celestine, by reason of his extravagant bounty, was a great
diminution to the Pontifical dignity, for not having the power to deny any
body, he gave the same thing to two or three several persons, with which the
Consistory of Cardinals being disgusted, they-began to think of a remedy,
especially because the Clergy hated him, for a resolution he had taken to
reform them. The Cardinals had some thoughts of deposing him, but they forbore
that, for two reasons; the first was, that they might not give occasion to any
new Schism, or at least any great scandal to the Church; and the other, not to
provoke the indignation of King Charles, who defended him with great ardour.

There never was seen certainly any Pope, so little practiced in politic or
Ecclesiastic affairs, as this, and all by reason of the Hermitical life which
he had led in the Wilderness, far from such administrations; Celestine
therefore being conscious of his own insufficiency, left the Reins of the
Government to Cardinal Latino, who was a person of transcendent wisdom, but he
being dead, Celestine by his inexperience, without any malice at all, fell into
so many Errors, that the Cardinals made several instances to him, that he would
be pleased spontaneously to renounce the Papacy, and not expose the Church to
so many perils, by his incapacity.

The Cardinals would not have been inclined to such a resolution, but by the
instigation of Benedetto Gaetano, (who was afterward Boniface the eighth, as
we shall show in its proper place) he was a Cardinal of great learning and
experience, but so extremely ambitious of the Papacy, he left no stone unturned
to compass his designs: And because he saw by his great judgment, he might
easily bring it about, if Celestine happened to renounce, he applied himself so
hard to the business, that Celestine resolved to resign, at the great instance
of Gaetano, who by reason of the great credit he had with him, spoke to him
freely, and which is worse, laid it to him as a scruple of Conscience, and to
fright him, persuaded him, that at the day of Judgment it would be imputed to
him, if any ill did happen to the Church.

King Charles, who understood the subtility of Gaetano, and the superstitious
lenity of the Pope, conducted him to Naples, forcing himself to turn him from
so dishonorable a thought. And because the people cried out every where, they
would have no other Pope but Celestine, he answered, he would make no other but
him whom God should inspire for the good of the Christians. But the Christians
discerned very well, that he did nothing but what was inspired to him by
Cardinal Gaetano; who found out a most Diabolical invention, and it was this;
he suborned some of his friends to make a hole corresponding with that part of
the Chamber in which his Holinesses Bed stood, from whence they cried all night
long, with a most dismal voice, as if it had been the Judgment of Heaven,
Celestine, Celestine, lay down the Popedom, for it is a charge too great for
your abilities.

The innocent and devout Pope being wrought upon by all these reasons, and
assisted no longer by King Charles, whom Gaetan had gained to his side, he
resolved to condescend to the renunciation: But first that he might seem to do
it upon good grounds, he would needs make a Law, that it should be lawful for
any Pope to renounce the Papacy, and commanded it should be established by the
consent of all the Cardinals, who willingly made him a Golden Bridge, to send
him going. This Law and Constitution was afterward confirmed by Boniface the
eighth, his Successor, as is to be seen in the sixth Book of the Decretals; but
the Popes are not so simple to make use of it for all that. It was proposed
that this renunciation should be made in some public place in the Church, but
that was not thought convenient, least the people, who loved Celestine very
much, should commit some extravagance, and by violence hinder Celestine's
resolution; wherefore they thought it expedient to have it done in the
Consistory of Cardinals, as it followed in the sixth month of his Papacy, after
which Celestine returned to his Cell from whence he came.

The same day in which Celestine did renounce, (things being well prepared
before hand in Gaetan's favor, who was the forger and contriver of all this
mischief) the Cardinals without the form of the Conclave, chose the said Gaetan
with open Votes, that they might not leave the Church without a Pastor, much
apprehending the popular fury, for as much as there was not any of them
consenting to the renunciation. Benedetto Gaetano being declared Pope, and the
name of Boniface the eighth assumed, he began his Reign with so much insolence,
arrogance, rashness, and tyranny, that in a short time he gained the Title of
Nero the eighth. Sciarra Colonna took him Prisoner at Anagni, and carried him
to Rome, where at the end of 35. days he dyed of anger, in the eighth year of
his Pontificate: So that some took occasion to say, that he was made Pope like
a Woolf, he governed like a Lion, and died like a Dog; which character was so
true, that Histories have taken great delight to mention it, reporting it with
great infamy to the Roman Church, and to those who elected him.

Great was the joy all Christendom received at the death of a Pope so unworthy
of that dignity; the Princes and Cardinals celebrated the news with Bone-fires.
The people hated this Pope, for several reasons, but especially for having
ordered Celestine with so much ingratitude to be slain, and persecuted the
Gibellines in such sort, that the Noblest Families in Italy were glad, for
fear, to hide themselves like savage Beasts, in the most profound Caverns of
the Mountains. Some report he was poisoned with an Italian Fig, which is not
much wide of the truth: But be it as it will, he died in prison the 11th. of
October 1303. and the Cardinals went into the Conclave the 21. of the same
month.

Many believed the Election would be tedious, by the great care the Princes
seemed to take, that they might not be ill satisfied, as they were with
Boniface.

Amongst the Cardinals some there were which adhered to the Guelfs, and others
to the Gibellines; these were very curious that the succeeding Pope should not
be of the humor of his Predecessor, the Guelfs desired such another, so that
in appearance there was great likelihood of a long Conclave. But things fell
out clear contrary, for the next morning after the Cardinals entered, they came
to an agreement to elect the Cardinal d' Ostia, called Fra Nicholas di Treviso,
of the Order of the Preachers, who took upon him the name of Benedict the 9th.
or the 11th.

The Guelfs condescended readily to this Election, Benedict being a Creature of
Boniface's, and by consequence a Guelf. And the Gibellines did so too, as not
knowing amongst all the Cardinals, where to find one less their Enemy than he,
and the rather, because though Benedict had been secret Counselor, and privy
to the most occult designs of Boniface, he never seemed by his Counsels to have
done any thing contrary to the repose of the Gibellines, but endeavored to
mollify Boniface, and to remove the great prejudice he had to the poor
Gibellines, who being satisfied with his proceedings, they concurred willingly
to the Election of Benedict; who was not ungrateful, for he received into
favor all the Cardinals who had been persecuted, and (as Gibellines) deprived
by his Predecessor.

Benedict dyed in Perugia, in the eighth month of his Pontificate, in which
City the whole Court being at that time, it was resolved a new Pope should be
chosen; but private interest, prevailed against the public good, for the
Cardinals for above two months together, went up and down, trifling away their
time in disputes and clamours, scandalous to Christendom, but pleasant to the
Infidels.

The reason was, the Cardinals were divided into three factions, one stuck
close to Charles King of Naples, who would have a Pope according to his way;
another was for the principal Barons of Rome* who being backed by several
Princes of Christendom, endeavored to spin out the Election as long as they
could, expecting by such delay, other Votes from abroad; and the third stood
firm to the interest of Philip King of France, who with a very liberal hand,
had sent no small sums of money and other Presents to Cardinal Pietro Colonna,
to the end that with James his Uncle, a Cardinal of the same name, they might
keep up the interest of France. On the other sides, there were the Cardinals
Vr^^^o, Napoleone, and Mati^o, every one negotiating for himself, and with
steadfast resolution never to yield to one another. The Cardinals not being able
to endure their restraint any longer in the Popes house, which was the place
appointed for the Election, and observing things go on the pace of a Tortoise,
that is, tediously slow, for as much as their animosities continued, they left
their apartment, went abroad into the City, some here, some there, into the
most delectable places, following their pleasures and recreations, and thinking
of nothing less than the Election of his Holiness.

The people of Perugia taking offense at all this, and having more affection
for the public good of the Church, than the Cardinals themselves, who were
Senators thereof, took up Arms immediately, and with threats obliged them to
first up themselves in the Conclave, who were managers of the Ship of Saint
Peter. The Cardinals failed not to be present at the place appointed, but
persisting still in their passion and pertinacity, the people not only put
Guards upon them, to prevent all Communication without, but straightened them in
their diet, reducing their allowance to a small volume, (as one may say) and
threatening, that if within five days they did not finish the Election, they
should have nothing given them but Wine and Bread, which the people of Perugia
did not spare to let them understand.

Cardinal Peter, moved by his hopes from the King of France, applied himself
with the money he received from him, to corrupt the minds of such as he knew
were covetous of Gold, feeding them on with promises besides; so that part of
the Cardinals being fast in those Chains, and part of them intimidated by the
threats of the Perugians, they agreed upon the Election of a Bishop of
Gascoign, and so Cardinal Colonna proposing the Bishop of Bordeaux, who was a
great lover of the King of France, he was chosen by common consent, and a
Courier sent post to him, (who was then at his Bishopric) to know what name he
would carry; he replied, he would not change the name he was Baptized with,
which was Clement, and so he was accordingly published to the people. After
publication in the usual place, the Cardinals dispatched several Messengers to
the New Pope, to entreat him to hasten his journey to Italy: But his Holiness
being instructed by the King of France, made answer, That the Flock was to
follow the Shepherd, and not the Shepherd the Flock, commanding the Cardinals
immediately to repair to him in France, and particularly in the City of
Poictiers, as they did.

The transferring of the Apostolic See into France by Clement the 5th.
displeased the Italians highly; so that Clement being dead, the Chair was
vacant for two years and upwards, the Italian Cardinals not enduring a French
Pope to be chosen, least if the Italians should fail, and the French increase,
the residence should be always in France. The Conclave was held in Lions, but
without the formality of being shut up, according to Gregory's decree, for they
went and came at their pleasure.

The number of the Cardinals was 23, twelve French, and eleven Italian, the
Italians would have the Pope purely Italian, or of any other Nation, but he
should promise to continue his residence in Italy. The French seeing themselves
more in number, and every day encouraged by their friends and allies, stood
firm to their principles, and would have none but a French Pope, which at
length they obtained, by reason that the Conclave was held in France.

In this manner after so great a vacancy, Giacomo di Cahors Bishop of Porto was
created Pope by the name of John the 22. who as soon as he was created,
departed from Lions, and with his whole Court, took up his residence at
Avignon, where he died in the ninetieth year of his age, 1335. after he had
reigned eighteen years.

The Cardinals lost not so much time, to find a Successor for John, as they did
to make one for Clement; for the next week after they went into the Conclave at
Avignon, they agreed to choose Fra. Giocomo Cardinal d^l Titolo di Santa
Prisca, of the Family of du Four in France, he was a Cistercian Monk, though
others believed him a Carmelite.

The cause why they came so soon to an accord, was no other, but because the
Italians understood very well the inability of their party, to contend with the
French, who were resolved to have the Pope of their Nation; besides they
growing by degrees to be acquainted, and pleased with the Country, and the
humor and liberty of the French, they condescended with alacrity to what they
must of force have consented to (though for three year they had been of a
contrary opinion) and the rather because the said Fra. Giacomo was worthily
qualified for so honorable a dignity, which he received, if not with an
universal, at least with the applause of all France, and called himself
Benedict the 12th. Clement the 6th. Innocent the 6th. and Urban the 5th. were
all French, and created at Avignon, and for the same reasons almost their
Conclaves were dispatched, for which Benedicts was hastened.

In the year 1370. Peter Belforte of Lemousin, who took the name of Gregory the
Eleventh,, was created at Avignon likewise, who thought good to transfer the
Apostolical Chair from Avignon back again to Rome, a thing almost incredible;
for so many French Popes succeeding one another, they had so weakened and
debilitated the Italian party, that there was no Italian Cardinals amongst them
all, and of the French there was more then twenty.

Several reasons are alleag'd that moved Gregory to that resolution, but
particularly these following: The first was,, that he saw all Italy in arms,
not only by the wars betwixt Venice and Genoa, but by a resolution several
Cities had then, to shake off the yoke of their servitude, and re-establish
themselves in a state of Liberty, which he believing to be occasioned by the
absence of the Pilot from the Vessel of Rome, he began to think of re-setling
his Pontifical residence in Italy. The second was, reprehending one day a
certain Bishop (his familiar) that he left the Bishopric to follow the Court,
the Bishop confidently replied, And you who are Pope of Rome, why are you in
France? Why do you give example to others to repair to their Churches.

Others will have it, that a Letter from Saint Bridget (upon whom his Holiness
looked, as upon a true Saint) contributed much, in which she advised him, as
from God, to return to Rome. Be it which way it will, he gave order for twenty
Galleys to be ready in the Rhone, pretending to go some whither else with them,
because he suspected, that the French (who had so much advantage by the
residence of his Court in France) would obstruct it, if they had the least
notice of his removing the Sea to Rome. But indeed they took not the least
umbrage, or allarm at all the preparations which were made, as not imagining
possible, a French Pope would put such an affront upon his Nation. So as they
had notice of it only when his Holiness was at Sea, being past as far as Genoa,
and from Genoa to Cornetto, where being weary of his Galleys, he made the rest
of his voyage by Land, and being arrived at Rome, he began to accommodate apt
Medicines, and specifical, to the Maladies of Italy.

But whilst this good Pope was exercising his Pastoral cure with extraordinary
zeal; he dyed in the year 1280, of a great distemper in his Bladder, after he
had reigned six years in France, and five in Italy.

After the death of this Pope, the Church began to be miserably torn with new
schisms which began to arise betwixt the French and Italian Cardinals, each
Nation choosing its own Pope, in its own manner; the French not able to digest
the affront they received from Gregory, in transporting the Sea from France
into Italy, departing privately from Rome, they removed to Fondi, and being
arrived there, they used many invectives and Satyrs against Urban the sixth,
whom they had already, with the Italian Cardinals, Elected in Rome; they
pretended they were forced to it by the people of Rome, otherwise it was was
never their intention, to make an Italian Pope.

For these reasons, the Chair (in their judgments) being vacant, by the favor
of Joan Queen of Sicily, who was their friend, they chose another Pope, which
was Roberto a Cardinal, with the Title of the Holy Apostles, he was of Geneva,
and particularly of the ancient family of the Conti, in that City he took upon
him the name of Clement the seventh. From Fondi, Clement removed with his
Cardinals to Avignon, where he was adored by the French, and the Spaniard;
these disputes lasted a long while, the Legitimate Pope at Rome, and the
Antipope at Avignon, firing their Bulls upon one another, and sending them
forth into all parts of the world: the adherents of both sides put forth
several defamatory Libels, calling one another, Schismatic, Heretic, Tyrant,
Thief, Traitor, wicked sower of sedition, Son of Belial, and such stuff as
that, of which there are two treatises extant at this day, one of them written
by Doctor John de Ligni, in favor of Urban, against Clement, and the other by
the Abbot of San Vast, in favor of Clement against Urban.

Whilst Clement was contriving which way to remove the true Pope, who had his
Residence in Rome, he died in the year of our Lord 1392. and was buried in
Avignon: he being dead, Boniface the 9th. who was Pope at that time in Rome,
writ a fatherly Letter to the French Cardinals, exhorting them to desist from
their Schism, and return to their obedience to the Holy Mother the Church, of
which he was the lawful head: But the French laughing as it were at such
persuasions; chose a Successor to Clement, which was Pietro della Luna, who
took the name of Benedict the 13th. who had argued very much in Clements
justification, and that was the principal point upon which he was chosen by the
Cardinals, who concluded, that he who defended another cause with such ardour,
would doubtless defend his own with more.

Whilst this good Antipope held his residence in Catalonia, particularly in
the castle of Paniscola, administering the Sacraments, and conferring of
dignities, as if he had been the true Vicar of Christ, he was condemned
(together with the Cardinals which Elected him) by the Authority of a General
Council.

Afterward he assembled a Council at Perpignan, where he created several
Cardinals, and commanded them, after his death, to follow his Orders, which
were to choose another Pope without loosing of time: and indeed they took his
advice; for no sooner was this Antipope dead at Paniscola, but the Cardinals
chose one Giles Mungos, a Canon of Barcellona in his place, calling him Clement
the 9th. who at the instance of King Alfonso, created Cardinals forthwith, and
began to act in every thing, as the true Popes were wont to do.

But upon Pope Martin the 5th's accommodation with King Alfonso, Giles (being
commanded) renounced those rights of the Papacy which were not his due, and was
declared Bishop of Majorca; and the Cardinals likewise which he had created,
were forced to renounce the Cardinalitial dignity.

On the other side Urban the 6th. being dead in Rome, after he had for eleven
years managed the Popedom, with small satisfaction (by reason of the Rusticity
and his severity of his humor) either to the People or Clergy; the Cardinals
observing the schism daily to increase (that they might not leave the Church
without a Shepherd any longer) they entered immediately into the Conclave, and
created Boniface the 9th. in the three and thirtieth year of his age, who gave
great demonstration of his prudence, in the whole course of his Papacy.

He governed the Church 14. years and 9. months, in very troublesome times, and
dyed in the year 1405. The Cardinals failed not to supply him immediately with
a Successor, they called a Conclave out of hand, in which they remained not
above four days, for after they had composed some small differences there,
they created Cosmo di Sulmona Pope, (who was Cardinal di Santa Croce) in a time
when all Italy was in confusion.

He would fain have been called Clement, but the Consistory did not think it
fit, the memory of the Antipope (who was called by that name) being so fresh,
upon which score he took the name of Innocent the 7th. but I know not whether
properly, or not, he having amongst variety of other vices, a very large stock
of revenge: he was very eloquent notwithstanding, and believed that by the
suavity of his tongue, he could like another Mercury, bring the whole World
over to his opinion. He lived but two years, and died, leaving Italy in a very
ill condition, for there being neither true Pastor, nor Emperor in Christendom,
every Gentleman gave Laws as he pleased.

Whilst Christendom was lamenting the ruin which that Schism brought upon the
Church, by having one Pope at Rome, and another at Avignon, both of them
reverenced by several Nations, and both of them acknowledged true and lawful
Successors of Saint Peter, though but one of them could be the Vicar of Christ:
Three Princes in France, (who by reason of the Kings indisposition did then
govern that Kingdom) viz. the Dukes of Berry, of Burgundy, and Orleans, moved
by their Christian zeal, and a compassion they had for the sufferings of the
people, by reason of that inundation of Schism, they went all of them together
to Pietro di Luna, (who was called Benedict the 13th.) to Avignon, beseeching
him that he would provide against this disorder, by renouncing the Papacy;
urging, that it was much better to have the public interest take place, than
the private, and the rather, because he had promised at his Election, to lay
down, whenever things should be adjousted with Rome.

To these Exhortations they added others, promising him, that that Pope which
should be made in Rome after Innocent, he should do the like, because those who
desired the common benefit of Christendom, or had the service of God in their
hearts, did believe, that if these two Favorites (one of France, and the other
of Italy) were dispossessed of the power of the Keys, which they both exercised
at the same time, as lawful Successors to Saint Peter, a third ought to be
created, who should be the certain and indubitate Pope.

To which Exhortations Benedict replied, that he did believe, he could not
without offending of God Almighty, consent to the Counsels proposed, for his
renouncing the Church, and abandoning the Flock of Christ, which by the common
consent of so many persons, of so many good and worthy Electors, was committed
to his custody; being unwilling to bring a thing in question, that he had so
legally obtained: That for what respected the taking away of the Schism, and
restoring concord to the Church, it pleased him very well, and he would
condescend to it with all his heart, provided a secure place was chosen, in
which every one might speak his mind freely. For his own part he promised, (and
affirmed it with Oaths) that in case the Schism could not be taken away by any
other means, than by renunciation of the Papacy, that he would renounce, upon
condition the other at Rome would do the same, otherwise it was to no purpose
to solicit it.

The Princes understood Benedicts mind, and how little he was disposed to an
accommodation; they began therefore as soon as they were departed out of his
presence, to deliberate among themselves, of some way of bringing him over to
their desires. Benedict who was cunning in other things, apprehending some
violence, fortified himself in his Palace, and was besieged there the space of
five or six months: But being weary of being close so long, he embarked in the
Rhone upon certain Galleys, (which he had caused to be put in order for such an
enterprise, whilst he was besieged in his Palace) and in them he escaped into
Catalonia, which was his own Country.

Some there are who will have it, that these Princes undertook to discourse in
this manner to Benedict, at the great instance and importunity of the French
Cardinals, who hated the said Benedict, because he was a Catalonian, and not a
Frenchman; besides which there were other reasons that rendered him odious, and
particularly whilst they were treating, after the death of Clement the
Antipope, to choose a Cardinal of France, they could not agree among
themselves, so that to remedy that, they thought good to choose a third person,
which was Benedict; as soon as he was created Antipope, to show his zeal for
the good of the Church, he began to make Laws for the reformation of abuses,
and many times he admonished the Cardinals to live with more Sanctity, and
abstain from Simony, otherwise he would have them punished severely: In short,
he was outwardly as meek as a Lamb, but inwardly as rapacious as a Woolf: The
Cardinals therefore not being able to endure his humor, they unanimously
solicited these Princes, to put a remedy to the business, and prevail, that
Benedict should be deposed, and another more worthy be elected Pope in his
place.

The Italian Cardinals, and the Cardinals of other Nations which were present
in Rome, after the death of Innocent, having observed the great negligence the
three last Popes had used, and how little care they took to prevent the ruin
which so long a Schism carried with it; besides other evils they saw daily
springing in Christendom. Being entered into the Conclave, in a place near
Saint Peter's, they swore all of them solemnly upon the Holy Evangelists, which
their Dean held in his hand, that they would every one of them renounce the
Papacy, if they were chosen, so that the French, or Catalonian Antipope,
renounced his Anti-papacy first. The cause of this resolution was to satisfy
the French, who having introduced the custom of creating of Popes according to
their own mode, it seemed impossible to turn them out of that way with
reputation, unless the Italians resolved to do the same; and the rather,
because Benedict declared, it would be in vain to think of a remedy for the
scandal of the Church, without a renunciation of both the Popes; whereas if
they renounced, another would be chosen out of the whole College of Cardinals,
that would be true and undoubted Pope, whom the Princes and the people would
make no difficulty to obey.

In the year 1406. Angelo Corraro a Venetian, was created in Rome; he was
Cardinal of Saint Mark, and took upon him the name of Gregory the 12th. before
he came out of the Conclave, they made him promise in writing under the hand of
the Notary, to observe what he had promised, and subscribed with his own hand,
and at last gave him an Oath; but the place where these two Popes were to meet
(as we shall see by and by) being in dispute, and they not like to come to an
agreement, both Gregory and Benedict alleging a thousand difficulties, the
French Cardinals resolved to abandon Benedict, and the Italians Gregory, and to
declare them breakers of their Faith. The Cardinals of Avignon, and of Rome
both, being come to this resolution, they met at Pisa, and by common consent
deprived Gregory, and Benedict too; all the rest of the Nations concurring with
them, but Catalonia and the hither part of Spain; (a strange thing, the
Spaniards who have been the greatest Schismatics in the World, are at present
the zealousest Catholics in the Universe:) The King of Scots, and the Comte
d'Armignac, were favorers of Benedict.

But in despite of their contradictions, the Cardinals resolved by common
consent to create a Pope, who in such calamitous times should govern the Church
of Christ with Holiness and Piety; and accordingly they elected Pietro Filardo,
a Minor Friar, and Archbishop of Milan, who took upon him the name of Alexander
the 5th. a name suitable with his actions, he being the most generous person,
that perhaps ever was amongst the Princes; for which reason it was pleasantly
said by himself, that he was a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a beggarly
Pope. Gregory understanding the news of Alexanders creation, and the sentence
of the Cardinals against him and Benedict, fled toward Romagna, urging and
insisting (wherever he came) upon a General Council; he stayed at Rimini for
some time, where he was magnificently entertained by Carlo Malatesta.

Benedict after he had held a Council in the City of Perpignan, by the
intervention of his own friends, he retired again for his greater security into
his Castle of Paniscola, where he had been a long time before. But though these
two Anti-popes, had been deprived by the Council of Pisa, nevertheless they
desisted not from their Ecclesiastical and Papal functions, creating of
Cardinals, and particularly Gregory created Gabriel Condolmero Cardinal, who
was afterward Eugenius the 4th. as we shall show in its proper place. He lived
not above eight months Pope; after his death, the Cardinals assembled at
Bologna, where Alexander dyed, and created Baltasar Cossa (a Neopolitan) Pope,
who would be called John the 22. This Election, according to the opinion of
several Writers, was violent and forced, because the said Baltasar being
Legate, not only of the Town, but the Province of Bologna, he had a certain
number of Soldiers under his command, which as soon as Alexander was dead, he
began to double and augment, from whence it was collected, that not being able
to obtain it any other way, he did it in order to his Election to the Papacy:
Be it as it will, he was created Pope, a Dignity he always aspired to, and
that so ardently, that having studied the Law for some time in his youth at
Bologna, and having commenced Doctor, he departed for Rome; on the way he met
with a Friend of his, who asked him whither he was going, he answered him
immediately, I am going Brother to acquire the Papacy. Being come to Rome, he
was made secret Chamberlain to Boniface the 9th. and a while after created
Cardinal of Saint Eustachius; he was sent Legate to Bologna, which City, and
the Country belonging to it, he reduced in a short time to the obedience of the
Church, and a great part of Romagna therewith, banishing and driving away some
malefactors, and executing others. For the space of nine years he gained great
honor and authority in Toland, and a vast quantity of wealth. After Alexander
was dead, he bribed the Cardinals with his money, especially those poor ones
which Gregory created, by which means he arrived at his so much desired Papacy.

Christendom being weary to see so many Schisms on foot, was contriving which
way to give ease to the Church, and therefore by the Orders of all Nations in
Christendom, John was cited to appear at a General Council, to extinguish the
said Schisms; he sent two Cardinals immediately into Germany, to negotiate with
the Princes of that Country, and of France, about election of a place proper
for the celebration of so great a Council. By the major part of the Nations
Constance was pitched upon, as the most convenient city of all. At the time
appointed they met, and John amongst the rest, though he had been dissuaded by
the soberest of his friends, presaging the danger he was in, of going a Pope,
and returning a private person, as it happened.

For all this John would go, and he carried along with him certain persons
excellent in all manner of learning, with whom he held the Germans for a long
time in variety of disputes, and a thousand ambiguities and doubts to resolve
upon that which ought to be resolved on. But Sigismund arriving at the same
time, and free liberty being given of discovering other peoples defects; there
were several great delinquencies objected against John, who being conscious of
their truth, and fearing corporal punishment, as well as to be deprived of the
Papacy, he fled out of Constance in the disguise of a footman, and retiring to
Shaffusen, a City belonging to Frederick Duke of Austria, whither several
Cardinals of his creation fled also.

By the authority of the Council, John being recited, he fled again from
Shaffusen to Fribourg, designing to throw himself under the protection of the
Duke of Burgundy. But he was taken, and by Order of the Council imprisoned in
the Isle of St. Mark, near Constance, in the fifth year of his Pontificat. The
Council not suspecting John's Escape, chose certain grave and learned Judges,
giving them authority to form diligent process upon the actions and life of
John: and to report his misdemeanors to the whole body of the Council: There
were above forty Articles proved against him, some of them so small, they might
have been excused; but others there were would have beg^t great scandal to the
church, if they should have passed unpunished; and these were such as declared
him a Heretic, a Sodomite, a Murderer, a Simoniac, a Perjured person, a
Blasphemer, a Hypocrite, a Gamester, an Adulterer, a Fornicater, a Poisoner, an
Usurer, a Profaner, and so forth. Upon these considerations, all the Fathers
concurring in the sentence, John was legally deposed, and the sentence sent to
him to subscribe, which, being in prison, he willingly did.

That being done, he was delivered into the hands of Ludovico Bavaro (a great
favourer of Gregory the 12th.) to be kept in safe custody, till the Council
should determine otherwise of him. Three years he continued a prisoner in the
castle of Haldelberg, under no few afflictions; the greatest of them all was,
that he was not permitted to have any Italians to his servants, and the
Soldiers that guarded him, being all Germans, they understood not one word
that was spoken on either side, so as their discourse was only by signs.

What manner of life this Pope had led, may be argued from his sentence, which
was given by those only, who had been formerly of his parry, and had created
him Pope; for those who were of Gregory's and Benedicts faction, were not yet
arrived at the Council, and received the news of it upon the way. In this
Council a Decree was published, by the Fathers which presided, declaring that a
General Council lawfully assembled, was unquestionably above the Pope, and had
its power immediately from Christ's, and that therefore the authority of the
Pope must needs be inferior to theirs.

Gregory was resolved not to be there himself, being so persuaded by the
Emperor Sigismond* and therefore he sent Charles Malatesta, a very worthy
person, in his name, who seeing all the Fathers of the Council resolved upon
their sentence, that Gregory should renounce, got up publicly upon the Seat,
which was prepared for Gregory, and as if he had been present himself, having
read the power he had from Gregory to renounce, he renounced the Papacy in his
name, and declared him but a private person. For this prompt and liberal
resignation, Gregory was immediately declared Legate della Marca, and went to
his charge; but he lived not long in his Office, dying at Ricanati, of pure
discontent, because Malatesta had made his renuntiation so soon, believing that
if he had delayed his renuntiation for a while, he might have found out some
expedient, to have kept the sacred Mantle upon his Shoulders. He died therefore
before the creation of Martin, and was buried in the church of Ricanati; and
thus two Popes John and Gregory being taken out of the way, there remained a
third still, which was Pieter del Lnna, called by the name of Benedict the
thirteenth, who made more difficulty of renouncing the Popedom than the other
two; and because he had declared that he would never consent to the
renuntiation, to make him do it by force; the Emperor Sigismond, with the
Orators of the Council, went in person to the Kings of France, and of England,
persuading them that they ought to be instrumental in the safety of
Christendom, and the ease and security of the church, which was to be done by
forcing Benedict to renounce the Papacy, as the other two had done: Sigismond
having received a satisfactory answer from these two Princes, he went to
Narbon, discoursed personally with Ferdinand King of Arragon, whose Subjects,
or at least the greatest part of them, paid obedience to Benedict. Amongst the
rest, one of their resolutions was, that Benedict should be persuaded with
efficacious arguments, not to remain so untractable in resolving to do that,
which the other two had done: And if notwithstanding, force of argument was not
sufficient to remove him from his pertinacity, that in such case the King
should force his Subjects to desert the said Benedict, and follow whom the
Council of Constance should ordain; and accordingly he sent a most eloquent
Ambassador to him. But Benedict who found himself in a strong place, and the
people affectionate to him, suffered himself neither to be overcome, nor moved
by their persuasions, alleging still for his answer, that he was the true
Vicar of Christ, and that Constance was not a place convenient for the liberty
of an Ecclesiastical Council, seeing that John had been condemned and deposed
from the Papacy, by those very persons who had been formerly his friends, and
received him to the Pontifical Dignity.

The Princes of Spain observing the pertinacity of Benedict, concurred with the
opinion of the Council, which was managed by five several Nations, viz. Italy,
Germany, France, Spain, and England; all that these Nations had then done, was
approved, and was published by a Trumpet, or a public Notary: As soon as by a
general consent all was confirmed, and Benedicts cause had been discussed, in
this order and method, for several days; At last he was deposed, and declared
void of the Papacy; no reckoning being made of those Nations which were absent,
and continued their obedience to him, as the Scots, and the Comte d'Armignac
did. About this time John Hus, and Jerome of Pragne his Disciple, were burnt
and declared Heretics, because they asserted, that the Clergy ought in
imitation of Christ, to be poor as he was, seeing that from affluence and
superfluity of riches, sprung nothing but scandal to the people. If this
opinion be Heresy, I would be a Heretic, and dye a Martyr with all my heart,
for I have always believed, and always shall, that the opulence of the
Clergy, is the cause of their damnation.

All these things being ratifyed in the Council, the Fathers began to consider
of the Corruptions in the manners of the Clergy, and many there were of
opinion, that certain Laws and Ordinances were to be established, for their
reformation. But the greatest part held it not fit, to meddle with that, in the
vacancy of the Sea. Whereupon they fell upon the principal point, which was the
Election of the Pope, and that, to give the Decrees of the Council the greater
Authority. And to the end the Election should be without the least scruple or
jealousy, they concluded to choose six persons of each Nation, to go into the
Conclave, and give their Votes with the Cardinals. On the 8th. of November
1417. thirty two Cardinals entered the Conclave, with thirty others for the
several Nations, which is six apiece; and the Church having been four years
with so many Popes, and never a true one, contrary to the judgment and desires
of all people; on the 11th. of the same month, which was the Feast of Saint
Martin, about three in the morning, Cardinal di San Gregorio (called Oddo
Colonna before) was created Pope, with great joy and satisfaction to every
body. The Emperor Sigismond, transported (...)e tidings, without consideration
of his Dignity, went immediately into the Con(...)d having given thanks to the
Electors, who in the great necessity of the Church ^^^ made so good an
Election, he threw himself at his Holiness's feet, and kissed them. The Pope
embraced him, and seemed to treat him as his Brother; he gave him thanks
(...)i will, that he by his industry had been the occasion that the Church, after
so many t^^pests and wrecks, was brought safe home into her harbor of repose.
Martin would (...)ds be (...) by that name, because his Election happened upon
that Saints day; and (...) expressed himself another Martin, in his zeal for
the Government of the Flock of Christ, giving place neither to rest, nor to
sleep, but devoted to his business wholly; ^e heard, he approved, he persuaded,
he dissuaded, he encouraged, and deterred, such as had business with the
Apostolical See, according as he was convinced the desires of the Agents were
honest or dishonest; many times turning himself to such as had Governments in
their hands, he cried, Diligite justitiam, qui judicatis terram. And certainly
the Church of God at that time had great need of so skillful a Pilot, who with
the Rudder in his hand, should conduct the Ship of Saint Peter, tossed and
tumultuating in so many Seas of Schism and Sedition; and he did it with that
zeal and affection, which so eminent a dignity requires.

That which was the greatest affliction to the new Pope was, to see that there
was yet one head of the Schismatical Hydra remaining, which was Benedict di
Luna, who with certain Cardinals and Prelates, had shut up himself in
Paniscola, as in a Rock of Schism, and so much the more, because there were
several of the people of Aragon, who continued doubtful whether they should
incline to the Orders of the Council, and acknowledge Martin to be Head of the
Church, or pursue their opinion of Benedict. By the judgment of the Council
therefore, the new Pope sent a Legate to Aragon, which was the Cardinal di
Fiorenza, a German, and a learned man, to the end that under pain of
Ecclesiastical Censures, he should in due form admonish Pietro di Luna, that he
should lay down the Papacy, and not run himself into the displeasure of the
Council, and of so many Christian Princes. The Cardinals which were with Peter,
understanding the ultimate resolution of the Pope, and the Council, and seeing
their destruction at hand if they persisted in their pertinacity, they went all
together to supplicate Peter, that he would put an end to the Schisms in the
Church, seeing that for the benefit of Christendom, Gregory and John were
already contented to lay down their pretensions. Peter replied with his usual
cunning, with which he was abundantly provided, that it was not a time to do it
then; but that he would come to an agreement with Martin, if that which was
reported of the goodness and integrity of his manners, should be true; and of
that, they should leave the thoughts to him, and not trouble themselves at all.
These Cardinals that were speaking with Luna were four, two of which, observing
his resolution to continue the Schism still longer, left him, and came in to
Martin. The other two followed the perverseness of Peter. But in short all Spain
submitted to the authority of Martin, by whose example the Scots and Armignacks
were induc't to do the same, and with them, the whole Christian Commonwealth,
except only Paniscola, which remained divided.

The affairs of the Church being thus made quiet, and serene, by the diligence
of all the Christian Princes, as well secular as Ecclesiastic, and
particularly by the Emperor Sigismond, who took no small pains in the business,
They began to canvas, and consider of the licentious manners of the Clergy, and
seculars both, and to propose certain ways of Reforming them. But because the
Council had been already of above four years duration; Martin observing them
all to be tired, and the Prelates to have suffered a thousand inconveniences,
he was contented by the unanimous consent of the Fathers to put it off, till a
more convenient time, in which they might discourse of the said reformation
more fully: It being true (as Jerome said) that every Province having a
peculiar inclination, it was impossible easily to reconcile them. Besides
Martin knowing very well that that Schism proceeded from a small inconsiderable
occasion, and lasted with so much misery to Christendom so long, and
understanding moreover the news of the flight of John the 23. he was jealous
least it should give a foundation to another Council, and therefore published
this Decree upon the calling of Councels, viz. that the Council of Constance
being determined, they should not hold another till the space of five years
were run out, upon any account whatsoever, and that after that, they should
stay seven years more, and after that ten more, and so after every ten years,
they might be assembled in some convenient place, to consider of things
appertaining to faith, and the Christian Commonwealth; and to the end that this
Decree might be invigorated, and in force, Martin would have it confirmed by a
Bull, and authenticated in the usual form: and besides, that every one might
know how well he was inclined to the meeting of Councels, and to take away
those suspicions, which some people would have conceived, of the rectitude of
his mind, he declared, by the consent of the whole Council of Constance, Pavia
to be a proper place, and accordingly he sent out his Briefs every way, and it
followed in the month of April the next year. At length being desirous to put
an end to the Council, in the year 1418. he made a public Assembly, after
which by common consent, but especially of Sigismond, Ibaldo Cardinal of San
Vito, by Order from his Holiness pronounced these words of dismission, Domini
ite in pace, and therewithal, all of them had liberty to depart to their
houses. In the mean time the Pope was entreated by the Emperor first of all,
to remain in Germany for a while, and afterward he was invited by the Princes
of France to retire into those parts; But Martin excused himself to them all,
demonstrating that he could not do it, by reason that the Patrimony of Saint
Peter, which was in Italy, did suffer much by the absence of the Pope, and
Rome, the head of the Christian Religion, was (as being without a Pastor)
involved in such civil seditions, as caused the Churches of the Saints to go
utterly to ruin, for which reason it was necessary for him to hasten his
journey to Rome, as indeed he did, traveling by Milan as the nearest way.

He was Pope 14 years, and died of an Apoplexy the 20. of Febr. 1421. The first
of March the Cardinals entered into the Conclave, with a general agreement to
choose Gabriel Condulmera, a Venetian, Pope, who in his Legation della Marca,
given him by Pope Martin, gave great essays of his prudence, in the correction
of those, who under pretense of ill Ministers, had rebelled against the Church.
Before their entrance into the Conclave, things seemed not a little imbroil'd,
one part of the Cardinals pretending to Elect Cardinal Cesarino, another
proposed Anthonio Cassino, both of them persons of greater parties than parts.
But those kind of projects remained without; for as soon as they were entered
the Conclave, in the first scrutiny, which followed the very next day after
their entrance, Condulmera was chosen Pope, by the consent of all but 3 in 40.
which was the number in the Conclave: This was the most expeditious and
peaceable Election that had ever happened before; for it is certain, there was
never any Pope chosen in the first scrutiny but he. Being demanded what name he
would be called by, he took a little time to resolve them, and desiring to
retire into a private place, he staid there a considering above half an hour,
from whence some of the Cardinals took occasion to say, That it was easier for
them to choose a Pope, than for him to choose a Name. Some there were that
believed, that he would draw lots for his Name, as if the goodness of the
person consisted in his Name; it is sufficient that about half an hour after,
he came forth, and declared he would be called Eugenius the 4th. The People
received the Election with great applause, but a while after, taking disgust,
they took up Arms against him, and he was forced out of Rome, in the habit of
a Monk, to escape the fury of the people.

There were many accidents which happened in the Papacy of Eugenius, in which
he commonly remained Victor; He chastis'd those Cardinals who under the name of
the Council, endeavored to depose him. In the Wars he was always neutral, and
unconcerned, and it was he who drew over the Jacobites to the Christian Faith:
But that which afflicted him most, was to see that he had lost the obedience of
the Germans, which happened in this manner. Philip de Florentini had taken a
prejudice against Eugenius, because it was he, that had caused Sforza to be
sent into the service of the Venetian; to be revenged, he fell in treaty with
those who were assembled in the Council of Basi, to cite Eugenius, which they
did three several times; and because Eugenius refused to appear, and his design
did not take, he made him be declared divested of the Papacy, and got Amadeo
Duke of Savoy, his Father-in-Law, to be created in his place, who lived then in
the company of some Gentlemen in Ripalta, like a Hermit.

Amadeo having received the news of this new Election, which was made by 26
Cardinals, after he had caused himself to be shaved, stripped of his Hermitical
habit, and taken upon him the name of Felix, he went immediately for Basil,
accompanied with a multitude of the Gentry of his own Country: where being
arrived and consecrated, he began to exercise the functions of a Pope,
ordaining, confirming, consecrating administering the Sacraments,
excommunicating, creating Cardinals and Bishops, granting pardons and
indulgences, and in short deporting himself as he had been Pope indeed.

By reason of this Schism, great seditions were hatched in the Church, the
Christians dividing themselves into three factions, one was for Felix, another
for Eugenius, and a third being neuter, was for neither of the two; one side
maintained, that the Pope was to be inferior to a Council, another asserted
the contrary; and there wanted not others who denied the greatest part of the
Popes Authority, making a dispute, whether he should be called the Head of the
Church, or not.

About this time Eugenius dyed, on the 23. of February 1496. after whose death
the King of Aragon dispatched Ambassadors to the Sacred College, to assure
them, that they need not have any apprehension of him, he being resolved to
give them assistance upon occasion, in the Election of a Pope, to which he did
exhort the Cardinals. At the same time Cardinal Capuano arrived at Rome, a
person of great worth, and whom the people cried up, as a fit person to be
chosen Pope: But the opinion of the people, and of the College, did not agree,
in which there were very few for Capuano's Election. It was ordered that the
Conclave should be kept in the Church della Minerva, though the Canons opposed
it, so that the obsequies of Eugenius being over, the Cardinals entered into
the Conclave; the command of their Guards was given to the Ambassador of the
Order of Saint John, which is as much as to say, of the Knights of Malta, then
of Rhodes; but the Keys were kept by the three Archbishops, of Ravenna,
Aquileia, and Sermoneta besides the Bishop of Ancona. When the Cardinals were
entering into the Conclave, many of the Roman Barons came to them, and Gio.
Battista Savelli amongst the rest, pretending a right they had to be present at
the Election: But they were refused, and made sensible, that they had not now
the same reason for that, as in former times they had had.

There were but 18. Cardinals in the Conclave, though there were 23. living, so
that the two thirds came to be 12. those of the first Scrutiny which was made,
divided their Votes in 10. Cardinals, and therefore that Scrutiny being void,
another was made the next day, in which Cardinal Prosper Colonna had 10.
voices, and Cardinal Firmano 8. This gave some small addition to the opinion
people had of Colonna, many believing him certainly to be Pope, especially when
they saw he wanted but two voices. The next day they came to a third Scrutiny,
and the 8. voices were divided, they having proposed some persons without the
Conclave, yet the 10. voices for Colonna were entire. From whence Cardinal
Firmano (who defended Colonna's party) taking courage, he began to cry out: Let
us lose no more time in vain, in these contests, seeing the Church is so great
a sufferer by them; let us open our eyes (I beseech you) which are sealed up as
it were by particular passion, and look upon the evils impending: Behold Rome
is divided into two factions; the French County declared our Enemy; the Schism
of Amadeo Duke of Savoy, is grown stronger by our differences; the King of
Aragon threatens us with his Armies: and why then do we lose time? why do we
not resist these evils, by giving a Pastor to the Spouse of Christ? why do we
not e^^ct Cardinal Prosper Colonna, who wants but two voices, and is a person
qualified with virtue for so honorable a charge?

The Cardinal Bolognese, being moved by these persuasions, rose up to go to
Colonna, and give him his voice; which Cardinal Tarentino observing, plucked
him by the sl^eve, and said, Stay a while, not in such have; a business of this
importance requires time, and maturity of counsel; we are now deliberating
about the Election of Gods Vicegerent upon Earth, a Shepherd for the whole
Flock of Christ, and a Governor of the Universe, and shall we precipitate in
this manner? Cardinal Aquilegiense replied, Your words, Cardinal Tarentino, do
import as if you would make a Pope o^ your own, and wrest the Papacy out of the
hands of Colonna: Explain your self then, who is it you would have Pope?
Bolognese, replied Tarentino; and I the same, said Aquiligiense. Cardinal San
Six^o went toward the Cardinal Bolognese, and said, Thomas I make you Pope, it
is appointed this day that we celebrate the Vigils of Saint Thomas; upon which
words there was a common cry of all the Cardinals, We will have no other Pope,
but Thomas Sarzana da Luna Bishop of Bologna, who was named by San Sixtus, and
so with a general acclamation he was made Pope.

This Cardinal was so modest, that in the presence of them all, he declared
himself unworthy of so great a charge, beseeching the Cardinals that they would
fix their eyes upon some body, that might be more able to do the Church service
than he; to which Cardinal Tarentino replied, that he ought not to withstand
the pleasure of the Holy Ghost, who had directed his Election; he submitted
thereupon to the will of the Lord, and took upon him the name of Nicholas;
every one admiring to see him Pope, who never aimed at it at all, and those
remain Cardinals, who fancied they were already created.

It is scarce credible with how much zeal this Pope began his Pastoral Cure, he
spent the greatest part of the night, in ruminating and considering of a way,
to extinguish the Schism of the Antipope, to which he by several reiterated
instances pressed the Emperor Frederick; who (being willing likewise to do any
thing for the satisfaction of his Holiness) forced Felix to renounce the
Papacy, which he did in the year of our Lord 1449. about two years after
Nicholas was created: however Nicholas used Amadeo with this courtesy, that he
made him Cardinal, and Legate of Germany, that he might not be destitute of
Dignity, in regard of the Nobility of his Family, which was reckoned amongst
the principal of Europe, as it is esteemed at this present. For the abolishment
of this Schism, and of so pleasing an agreement, the people and Clergy all
Italy through made no small expression of their joy, showing their thankfulness
with Bone fires, and Processions, especially in Rome.

This deposal of Felix was very displeasing to the poor of Germany, for he was
certainly one of the most charitable persons living: Being one day desired by
certain Ambassadors, to show them his Hounds, he replied, that they should not
fail to see them the next day; the time, and the Ambassadors being come, the
good Felix (who was then Don Amadeo) showed them a multitude of poor Beggars,
all of them set down at his Table, telling them, Behold these are my Hounds,
which I daily feed, and do hope by following them, to be carried to glory
everlasting; (many Princes of these days would have need of such an example.)
He lived Antipope nine years, although he was very old, having seen his
Grand-sons marry with the Daughters of Kings. After his renuntiation, he lived
but a few months, and dyed in Ripalta, though others suppose in Lusana, where
it is believed he was buried, because he has a fine Tomb of excellent Marble
there, at this day.

Felix his Schism being composed in this manner, and the Cardinals elected by
him, confirmed by Nicholas, they all embraced one another, obliging themselves,
both the Cardinals created by Nicholas, and they who were created by Felix, for
the future to a Religious concord, and to look nearer into the duties of their
Dignity, and the inconvenience the Church had received, by their differences
and disputes, swearing to one another, after a true resentment of what was
past, a firm resolution of moderating their private passions in the Conclaves,
and not to expose the honor and quiet of the Church any more. They promised
moreover, that they would not only endeavor to put the Popedom, in the time of
the vacancy of the Sea, into the hands of a deserving person, and one capable
of exercising an Office of that Grandeur, but that they would hasten the
finishing of the Conclave, to the utmost of their power, that the people might
not have time to embarque themselves in any mischievous design, and that the
Princes might not be obliged to put their hands to the Work, because they,
being troubled to see the disunion amongst the Ecclesiastics increase, were
uniting themselves to give a remedy to the Schism.

After the death of Nicholas the 5th. which happened in the year 1455. (as it
were with extreme grief which he conceived to see the City of Constantinople
fall into the hands of the Enemies of the Gospel) it was apparent that all
which the Cardinals had promised, was with their mouths only, and not with
their hearts; for the Cardinals being entered in the usual form (though with a
small number but of 28.) into the Conclave, they began immediately to divide,
not as Brothers, but Enemies, making four factions, that the election of the
Pope might be sure to be difficult, eleven of them pretending to the Papacy
themselves, and yet there were but 15 for any one; so that by this means there
were two scrutinies ineffectual; after this there began strong practices in the
behalf of Cardinal Bessarione, of Constantinople, a Grecian, who was one of the
chief, which had opposed themselves against the Latin Church, he had disputed
much against Purgatory, unleavened bread, and against the very person of the
Holy Ghost, who he maintained, proceeded from the Father alone, and not from
the Father and Son.

Cardinal Bettone, Archbishop of Avignon, being advic'd of this, and
discovering the two thirds of the Cardinals declared in the design, he failed
not to use his utmost endeavor to frustrate that Enterprise, and with great
zeal he expressed himself in words like these. Most illustrious Lords, what?
shall we make a Pope upon a present appearance only, without reflection on what
is past, or what is to come? shall we prefer a Grecian to the Latin Church, and
establish a Neophite in the highest place of the Vatican? who is it that can
assure us his conversion is true? heterodox opinions in matters of Religion,
though renounced and altered with the tongue, do yet leave a muddiness and
disturbance upon the heart? shall we give the Keys of Heaven to him, who for so
many years; and with so many arguments, denied there was a Purgatory? shall we
make him head of the Catholic Church, who opposed it with so much audacity? Is
it possible our Church of Rome should be so poor, and indigent, that there
cannot be one person found out, who was born in her bosom, and is worthy of the
Government of the Flock of Christ? what will the rest of the Nations say, to
see us go up and down, begging our Popes of this Country and of that? Rouse up
your zeal most noble Companions, and permit not a thing so scandalous in the
Church of Christ? this I am sure of, he which is a friend to Christianity, will
not give his voice for such a Pope.

These words being spoken with great energy, had such an effect upon the hearts
of the Cardinals, that they began to change their designs, and place them upon
Cardinal Alphonso Borgia of the City of Valenza in Spain, a person of great
experience in Politic affairs, and of maturity in respect of his age. The
usual scrutiny being made, the said Cardinal was chosen Pope, and took the name
of Calisto the 3d. verifying the Prediction of Beato Vincenzo, who upon his
deathbed prognosticated, that not long after his death, a Countryman of his of
Valenza should succeed in the Papacy.

Calisto lived three years, and died the sixth of August 1458. and on the 20th.
of the same month, Cardinal Aeneas Piccolomini of Siena was created Pope, by 18
Cardinals which were present in that Conclave, in which there were but two
Competitors for the Papacy viz. Cardinal Rotomagensis, and Aeneas aforesaid: so
that for the four days time in which it was debated in the Conclave, they had
no other difficulty but to make choice either of the one, or the other of these
two; because Pietro Barbo, and the Cardinal of Pavia, who likewise made some
pretensions, were excluded at the first. But that which was most curious, and
worthy to be remembered, was to see each of these two persons, driving on his
own promotion, magnifying his own virtues, and debasing the qualifications of
his adversary. Rotomagensis in this manner went from one Cardinal to another,
and said, What have you to do with Aeneas? what reason is it that moves you to
think him worthy of the Papacy? what passion is it that blinds you, so as to
confer an Office of that Majesty and importance, upon a Gou^y Beggar* how can
he that is poor and infirm himself, relieve, or support the Church, which is as
weak, as infirm, and as poor as he? Where is his learning? where is his
knowledge? will you make him a Pope, because he is a Poet? It is not long since
he came out of Germany, and who can assure you but he may have thoughts of
transferring the Sea into Germany? for my part I should not have ambition'd it,
if I had not seen a person stand for it, of much weaker parts than I am? I am
the antienter Cardinal of the two, for it is scarce two years since he was made
a Cardinal, and in my Conscience there is none of you but knows, I have
Learning and Parts enough to govern the Church of Christ very well, to the
Government of which, learning and parts are absolutely necessary? Besides all
this, I am of Royal Extraction, and have friends, faculties, and wealth,
wherewithal to accommodate, and alleviate the necessities of the Church: and
last of all, you your selves will have advantage by my Election, by reason of
the many Benefices I hold, which upon my renuntiation will be divided amongst
you.

Thr Cardinal of Avignon, an audacious, rash, and avaricious person was there,
in favor of Cardinal William Rotomagensis, whose interest he pursued with all
imaginable zeal, not so much as he was a Frenchman, as because upon his
promotion, he pretended the Church of the said William, his Palace, and
Chancery: He assembled therefore several Cardinals in a House of Office, as in
a private and secret place, and began with many fair promises to inveigle them
into the Net, and taking an Oath of each of them, he agreed with them about the
way Rotomagensis was to be chosen. The business was held as good as done; nor
was there any thing expected but day, to meet in the chapel about the Scrutiny.
Cardinal of Bologna seeing things at this pass, went to Cardinal Aeneas after
midnight, and spoke thus to him: I am come to bring you news, that the Pope is
made; that several Cardinals having met privately in the necessary house, they
have determined among themselves to make Rotomagensis Pope, as will follow as
soon as a is day. For my part I am resolved to have a care of coming again into
the noose, having experimented already, how inconvenient it is to have a Pope
to ones Enemy; and this I can say from Calisto the 3ds. kindness, who never
looked upon me with a good eye, for having spoke against his Election. My
advice is therefore, that you put your own things in order, that you get up
immediately out of your bed, and tender your service to Rotomagensis, as you
desire not to have him your Enemy. Aeneas lost not his courage at the tidings,
but animating himself rathe^ the more, he replied, Avoid Satan! seeing you come
hither ^ut to give that devilish counsel to me, which you have taken your self:
Keep therefore such Councels to your self, my conscience does not serve me to
choose a person, who to my knowledge is not only not (...), but the most
unworthy of all. God keep me from falling into so great a crime; and if others
shall choose him, let it lie upon them to give an account of it at the latter
day. I know well enough how inconvenient it is, not to have the Pope to be ones
friend, but yet ^i^ much better to have the Pope than God Almighty to ones
enemy. He will not take away my life sure, because I gave him not my Vote; I
believe he will lessen my diet, de^y me my Pensions, banish me his presence,
and never consider me in my distresses. Why? in Poverty I have been hardened, I
have lived in poverty till now, and in poverty I will die. He will not take
away my Muses, who are my greatest refreshment; In short, I trust in God for
the rest, who will never suffer the Church, his Spouse, to fall into the hands
of so impure and lascivious a person. The goodness of God will not endure that
Vatican to be turned into a Den of Thieves, and an infamous receptacle of
Harlots, which has hitherto been the habitation of so many holy and religious
Popes. If the Holy Ghost makes the Pope, he will not be the man; if the Devil
makes him, let him give his consent that has a mind to*t. The power of the
Conspirators will vanish, the design being laid in so sordid a place. In the
morning, by the Grace of God, it will be seen, whether the Pope be made by the
combination of men, or the inspiration of Heaven; and if you be a good
Christian, as well as a zealous Cardinal, you will not give your vote for one,
who is a perfect member ^f the Devil.

In the morning early Aeneas went to Cardinal Roderigo a Spaniard, and one of
the Conspirators for Rotomagensis, who had received a promise in writing from
the said Rotomagensis, and the Cardinal Avignon, that the Chancellorship should
not be taken from him. He excused himself to Aeneas that he had concurred,
because he did certainly believe he would be chosen, and he was unwilling to
hang off and lose his Chancellorship. But Aeneas returned him this answer. And
will you then sell your Vote? and by the sin of Simony, run your self into the
displeasure of God? do you take so little care then, to obtrude a youth upon
the Vatican, and one that is an Enemy to your Nation? Oh blindness! Oh folly!
will you give credit to the words of a person of no credit? know that the
Chancellorship, which is promised so faithfully to you, is promised likewise
and confirmed to the Cardinal of Avignon; so that for you, there will be
nothing left but the bare policy; for, it can never be, that a French Pope will
do more for a Spaniard, than for one of his own Nation. But if he should give
you the Chancellorship, which never will be, the worm of Conscience will be
still gnawing at your heart, as often as you remember, that you concurred to the
giving such a Vicar to the Church of Christ. In short, if you will not have an
eye to the Christian Religion, to the interests of the Church* nor to the
honor of Christ, have at least some care and compassion for your own
reputation.

Such was the contumacy and indignation of Roderigo Borgia, that he gave him
not a word; so Aeneas departed to find out the Cardinal of Pavia, who was one
of the Conspirators likewise, and having found him, he accosted him in this
manner. I am informed of your resolution to choose Rotomagensis Pope, which I
could never have believed* as esteeming you another person, than it seems you
are: You ought to be ashamed, to degenerate so much from Cardinal Brando, your
Uncle, who with so much labor and sweat, tired himself out to transfer the
Pontifical Court from Germany to Rome; and you that are his Nephew, would
transport it from Italy into France; it must necessarily be believed, that
Rotomagensis will never give the Italians the precedence before the French, and
you that are an Italian, will confederate sooner with France, than your own
Country; what a sad thing Italy will be without a Pope? what light can we see,
without that light? and have you the heart to be instrumental, with your
authority and counsel, to deprive us of the greatness and splendour of such a
Guide? if he should stay still in Italy, what a shame would it be to see her
enslaved to a Foreign Lord? must Italy therefore, who is the Queen of all other
Nations, beg her Monarchs from amongst them? can you have the heart to see your
self a slave to the French, when it is in your power to make the French
obedient to our Nation? is it not enough that you have had experience of the
Catalonians, but that you must try the French too? who perhaps when you think
least of it, will make himself Master both of Sicily, and all the Cities and
Fortresses belonging to the Church; and the rather, the example of Calisto
being so fresh, who gave his Countrymen the Catalonians, his utmost assistance
to get possession of all.

Cardinal Pavia replied, (but with a very low voice) that he did not believe
the French had any thoughts against the profit and advantage of the Church,
they having given with so much generosity, the greatest part of the Provinces
it possessed, and they would not probably take that away, which they had given
so lately; to which Aeneas replied thus: But suppose that should be, ought it
not to stir up your heart against Rotomagensis, to consider the infamy of his
manners? are you not ashamed to choose a man Pope, given to lasciviousness, and
of so unconstant a mind? do you not abhor to prepare such a Bridegroom for the
Spouse of Christ? and to recommend the innocent Flock of Christ, to the tuition
of a ravenous Woolf? where is your justice? where is your conscience? where is
your zeal to God? where is your prudence? how are you so much altered from your
self? you have told me many times, you would sooner dye, and endure Martyrdom,
than give your Voice for Rotomagensis, knowing the wickedness of his nature;
and yet now you make him Pope in despite of your knowledge? what is the reason
of so great a chang^? is he in the twinkling of an eye become an Angel of a
Devil? or are you become a Devil of an Angel? Pavia was astonished at these
words, and wept (I know not whether for sorrow or disdain) but fetching a deep
sigh he replied, It Is true indeed Aeneas all that you say, but I have past my
word to make Rotomagensis Pope, and if I do it not, I shall be held infamous,
and a Traitor. To which Aeneas answered: As far as I see, things are reduced
into such a state, that which way soever you turn you, you cannot escape the
blemish of a Traitor, it is in your power yet to choose whether you will betray
Italy and your Country, and be true to Rotomagensis, or betray him, and be
faithful to your Country and Italy.

Cardinal Pavia was overcome by these words, and took a resolution to betray
Rotomagensis, as the lesser evil of the two; and therefore meeting with
Cardinal Pietro di Santa Maria Nova, and other Italian Cardinals in the
Cardinal of Genoa's Chamber, they altogether began to contrive the destruction
of Rotomagensis pretensions, resolving to prefer Aeneas Piccolomini before any
body else.

Seven Cardinals there were of this opinion* who past their words to one
another, and engaged before his Divine Majesty, to do nothing to the contrary:
Cardinal Aeneas was against his own Election, as thinking himself unworthy, and
declaring that he believed all the other Italian Cardinals very fit, except
Cardinal Rotomagensis a Frenchman whom he excluded.

How great the ambition of Rotomagensis was, was visible even in the Scrutiny,
for being timorous and fearful things would not happen as he expected, seeing
Cardinal Aeneas going toward the Schedule, he said to him with an humble and
submissive voice, Aeneas I recommend my self to thee, remember me I beseech
thee, and have compassion on me. Aeneas answered him only thus, Poor worm, thou
mistak'st in recommending thy self to me. His ambition was moreover conspicuous
in the prayers he went mumbling about, yet so, as his neighbors might
understand them, lifting up his eyes, and his voice to heaven, and joining his
hands he cried out, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. The Scrutiny being
published, it appeared that Aeneas had three voices more than Rotomagensis, but
they could not obtain their two thirds: however what was done, astonished the
French Cardinals, and gave great encouragement to the Italian.

Cardinal Bertone and San Sisto to hinder the accession, rose up, and pretended
to go to the House of Office, in hopes that others would have followed, but
seeing no body come after them they returned to their places. The Cardinals
Roderigo, and Santa Anastasia in the mean time declared Aeneas with a loud
voice, which Cardinal Prosper Colonna observing, being ambitious to have the
honor of making the Pope, for as much as there wanted but one voice, he arose,
took his way toward Aeneas, and though he was hindered and restrained by
Cardinal Niceno, and Rotamagensis nevertheless without regarding their
violence, or that he had given his vote for Rotomagensis, he cried aloud, I
join my self to Cardinal Aeneas, and do make him Pope: which being heard by the
rest of the Cardinals, without more ado, they threw themselves down at Aeneas
his feet, saluted him Pope, and confirmed the Election afterward, with the
usual suffrages. This being past, Cardinal Bessartone spoke to the new Pope, in
the name of all those who had favored Rotomagensis, and his words were as
follow.

We rejoice most sacred Father at your assumption, although we have not
consented to your Election from the beginning, which proceeded not nevertheless
from any malevolence in us, but from an infirmity and indisposition in you; as
judging you by reason of your Gout, in more need of rest, then of business, We
do now acknowledge you most worthy of the charge, and do confess your Election
to come from God himself; and we do hope therefore that the same God which
Elected you, will pardon our ignorance, and supply the weakness of your feet.

According to his natural benignity, Aeneas returned him this answer.

Certainly according to my opinion, you have made a better judgment of things,
then I my self; having imputed no defects to me, but those in my feet; and yet
I am sensible how little I am worthy of so holy a Chair, and so sovereign a
command. I know very well it was not any deserts of mine which advanced me: I
acknowledge my self unworthy before his Divine Majesty: and I speak it from the
bottom of my heart, I would not embrace that honor, nor charge my self with a
weight so much above my power to bear, did I not sear the judgment of him, who
called me to it, which call may be argued from what happened in my election:
for that which two parts of the College do decree, must be believed to proceed
from the Holy Ghost, whose inspirations we cannot, we ought not to resist. Let
us give obedience then to the Divine call, let us give thanks to that God who
has ordered things so: and to you likewise O Niceno, together with the rest,
with whom if you continue in unity, we do praise you: if according to the
judgment of your Conscience, you thought me unfit to be chosen by reason of my
insufficiency, you did well, and I assure you, you shall be all equally dear to
me, for I acknowledge my Election, not from this person, or from that, but from
God, and the whole body of the College, inspired by the Holy Ghost, from whence
all perfection comes.

This said, the Masters of the Ceremonies stripped him of his Cardinalitial
habits, and put on him the white garment of Christ: after which he swore to the
observation of certain Articles, which were agreed on by the College three
days before the Election. which being past, he placed himself upon the footstep
of the Altar, where according to custom, the Cardinals, and other persons of
the Conclave kissed his foot: The Adoration being over, he was shown to the
people, with the name of Pius the 2d. which he chose as soon as the scrutiny
was ended.

You must understand there was a certain custom introduc't, I know not how,
into the Conclave, of plundring and rifling (as it were) that Cardinals Chamber
which was created Pope; no sooner therefore was the scrutiny published, and the
number of Votes in favor of Piccolomini, but the Officers of the Cardinals
which were then in the Conclave, ran with all speed to his new Holinesses Cell,
and (in a manner very indecorous, and unsuitable to the sanctity of the place)
robbed him of every thing, taking away all that little plate he had there, and
plundering not only his Clothes and his Books, but his very writings of
importance which he had locked up in his Cabinet.

In the like manner the people of Rome not only only sacked, but demolished his
Palace, carrying away the Windows, the Gates, the Floors, the Beams, even the
Marbles themselves. However the loss the new Pope sustained in his old Palace,
could not give him much trouble, for at last he found another, incomparably
more noble, and more rich, and a revenue of so many millions to make him
amends. But the prejudice the other Cardinals received was more to be lamented,
for the Populary being in suspense, by reason of the variety of reports, which
said sometimes this Cardinal was chosen, and sometimes that; the most insolent,
and audacious sort of the people, ran to them all, sometime to this house, and
sometime to that, plundering and robbing even the Images of the Saints. And it
being talked I know not how, that a Genoese was created Pope, (perhaps by a
mistake in the pronuntiation, calling him a Genoese for a Sienese) many of them
ran immediately to the Palace of the Cardinal of Genoa, and plundered it so,
he had much ado to find a bed to sleep in, when he came out of the Conclave.
When the usual Balcony was opened, for the publication of the creation of the
new Pope, the People not having patience to attend the publication from the
mouth of a Cardinal, cried out as loud as they could, some of them, long may
Rotomagensis live, others, long may the Genoese, and others the Medanese: So
that it was not known which of them was Pope, a thing very displeasing to the
said Cardinals, who began to curse those who were the occasion of their
exclusion, as receiving no ordinary disturbance, from so unusual an affront.

The people were obstreperous, and in a tumult, but when they were assured
Cardinal Aeneas Piccolomini was the person which was placed in the Chair of
Saint Peter, as universal Father and Governor of the Church, they immediately
laid down the arms they had taken up to satisfy their vehemence and passion,
having no confidence but in their sword, and the face of the City was altered
in a moment, so that that City which a little before seemed dedicated to Mars,
in the twinkling of an eye became, (I will not say the City of Venus the Mother
of the Trojan Aeneas) but a Paradise of Peace, and an Epitomy of tranquillity,
which every one expected from the Exaltation of such a Pope.

This Election was generally to the satisfaction of all the Princes of
Christendom, particularly, Ferdinand King of Sicily was very well pleased, to
see so good a friend of his Fathers, admitted to the Government of the Church.
Borso Duke of Modena was so much over-joyed at this Election of Pius, (as one
with whom he had a mutual correspondence and friendship, from the time he
obtained that Dukedom from Frederick the Emperor, in which concession also
Aeneas had been instrumental) that in testimony of his congratulation, he made
Tournements or Tiltings, hoping under his Pontificate to meliorate his fortune,
and augment his Estate: To that end in Ferrara, and in all other places of his
Dominion, he commanded solemn Festivals to be kept for the Election of that
Pope, which the people failed not to observe.

Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, though perhaps his wishes were to have seen
another Pope, nevertheless understanding Aeneas was Elected, he made his
expressions of joy: having received him honorably in his own lodgings in
Milan, and treated him with great generosity, a little before his Election. The
Marquesses of Mantoa, Mon^^rrat, and Salussi, who were all Aeneas his great
friends, were very much pleased, and ordered their Subjects to make
demonstration of their joy. The Venetians, and the Florentines, were the only
people dissatisfied with this Election; the Florentine (from a natural fear and
animosity they had to the Sieneses their Neighbors, with whom they had
frequent disputes about their Confines) took so great a disgust at the
assumption of Aeneas, that as he was walking in the Street, and saluted by
those which met him, with a Dio vi salvi, they replied with great contumacy, ci
salvera perch no: the Venetian likewise had no great correspondence with him:
yet for all that, both the one and other dispatched most sumptuous Embassies to
him, to congratulate, and pay him the usual obedience.

The Nobility of Siena, being jealous of the house of Piccolomini, as well for
other considerable respects, as for fear the Pope should usurp upon the liberty
of the City, and make it a Principality hereditary to his own Family, received
but little delight at the news of Aeneas his Election: However the generallity
of the people, seeing a fellow Citizen of theirs, exalted above the Cardinals
of all other Cities, celebrated his E^ection for several days, with bone-fires,
and such other transcendant Expressions of their joy, as seemed madness and
extravagance, as commonly most of your popular solemnities are.

But that which was most remarkable, and most for the glory and reputation of
the Pope, was, that almost all the Barons of Rome assembled themselves on
horseback, to Congratulate, and on the 28 of August about shutting in of the
Evening, they made a solemn Cavalcade, every one with his lighted Torch in his
hand, attended with a great number of Lacqueys and Grooms, with Torches
likewise; which train being disposed into order, extended all along, from the
Castle of Saint Angelo, to the Church of Saint Peter. The Ceremony was so
Pompous, his Holiness stood at the Window all the while, to behold so
illustrious a spectacle, designed and dedicated to the honor of his Exaltation.

But above all the Princes of Christendom, Frederick the Emperor was the most
satisfied: and not without reason, because it was by his instance, and
mediation, Aeneas was made a Cardinal; and therefore transported with joy, he
not only dispatched Ambassadors to congratulate his Creation, but he commanded
Justs and Tiltings to be celebrated for several days: The King of Spain did the
same, and indeed all the Princes of Christendom, except the Kings of France, of
Scotland, of Denmark, of Poland, Hungary and Cyprus, who for several reasons
had no great opinion of that Election: But all the rest of the world (I mean of
Christendom) were glad.

I will not omit (though I shall mention it but by the way) to remember the
great zeal this Pope expressed toward the recovery of the Holy Land, especially
when he saw the Turk had got possession of Greece and Sclavonia: it brought
tears of compassion from his Eyes, as often as he heard of the miseries which the
poor Christians suffered who were under the Dominion, I may say Bondage, of the
Barbarians: This zeal carried him in person to the Council of Mantua, in which
he negotiated the cause of Christ so well, with his most excellent eloquence,
that all the Cardinals and Fathers concluded that enterprise into the East was
necessary; in which he confaederated with the King of Hungary, the Venetian,
and the Duke of Burgundy; as knowing those Princes most disposed to so sacred
a work, against which all good Popes ought principally to bend their whole
power, and designs, and lay aside, deprive, themselves of their passion to
their Nephews, rather than see the Church ruined by its barbarous Enemies. Pius
sent his Legates about through all Christendom, injoyning the Bishops, to
excite, and inanimate their Subjects to an expedition of that advantage and
importance to the Church.

In the City of Siena, as he was making his journey to Ancona; he understood
that Philip Duke of Burgundy (who had promised to go himself with an numerous
Army) had changed his resolution, and united with several other Princes, and
People, as well Italians, as strangers, and out of envious and ambitious ends,
were using all possible means to divert others from so holy a design;
pretending and declaring that the consequence of that expedition could be
nothing but certain danger, and uncertain reward.

This news troubled his Holiness to the very soul: so that he sent away Legates
immediately to try if he could reduce them to more rational resolutions, at
least to sit still, and not discourage others, if they would do no good
themselves: From Siena he returned to Rome upon some new occasion, and
afterward departed again for Ancona, in which Port the whole Christian Army
was to Rendezvous* at least that of Italy. By the way he met great numbers of
Soldiers, designed for Asia, but more for their pay and profit, than to gain
glory by the design. These kind of people were not at all welcome to his
Holiness: he caused a Muster to be made, and selecting those he liked best, he
sent the rest back again, laden with indulgences and Pardons, as judging them
fitter to pray to God in a Cell, than to draw a sword against the Turk.

This Holy and Zealous Pope being arrived at A^cona, but tired with the length
of his journey, was received with great demonstrations of affection, whilst he
lay in expectation of his forces, which was dispatched from several Ports of
Italy; being worn out with a tedious fever, he saw his end approaching, and
calling therefore all the Cardinals together, who were then present in his
Court, he exhorted them, not only to the hastening of a Successor, but that they
should give the Keys to such a one as would zealously pursue the design against
the Turk: In short he departed this life, earnestly recommending this
honorable enterprise, in which he did resolve, to have employed his whole
force, and to have spent the whole Treasure of the Church.

And here would I have those Popes to reflect upon themselves, whose thoughts
reach no further, than their recreations at the Castle of Gondolfo, and the
Promenades of Monte Cavallo: But what do I say? I would have this Pope be an
example to all those, who contrive more to destroy the Treasure of the Church,
for the accommodation of their Nephews, than to ruin the Turk by incommoding
their Nephews, or themselves. Asia laughs, Europe mourns, and both the tears of
the one, and the exsultation of the other, will be judged and rewarded in
Heaven, because they are regarded so little by the Popes, and the Cardinals on
Earth.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART III.
BOOK II.
The Contents.
Wherein is discoursed of a Decree of Paul the 2d. which forbids the Creation
of the Pope, without the whole body of the Cardinals. Of the death of Pius the
second, and Cardinal Barbi his assumption to the Papacy. Of the name of Formoso
refused by the Cardinals to the said Barbi, and why. Of the reasons why he
would be called Paulus the second. Of the time he was Pope, and the number of
Cardinals which were present in the Conclave. Of the creation of Sixtus 4th.
and of his death. Of the assumption of Cardinal Cibo, called Innocent the
eight, of his death, and of the time of his Papacy. Of the detestable courses
used by Cardinal Roderigo Borgia to obtain the Pontificate. Of the Cardinals
suborned, and of his ingratitude to those who Elected him Pope. Of the violent
death of Alexander the 6th. and the disturbances his Son Duke Valentino gave to
the Church. Of the Election of the Cardinal of Siena, called Pius the third, of
his death, and the time he was Pope. Of the assumption of Julius the second,
and of what he did for Duke Valentine, who was against him, of the time he was
Pope, and of the Vacancy of the Chair, after his death. Of the number of the
Cardinals in the Conclave of Julius the second, in which Pope Leo the tenth, of
the house of Medici was Elected. Of the creation of Adrian the sixth, and of
the differences amongst the Cardinals, about the names of other pretenders, of
his life, and of his death. Of the factions of the Cardinals of the house of
Medici, and Colonna, and of the disputes which happened in the Conclave, before
the Election of Clement the seventh. Of the sacking of Rome in the days of this
Pope. Of the assumption of Paul the third, of the house of Farnese. Of the
introduction of the factions of the Nephews, and the Crowns into the Conclave.
How the interests of Princes were brought into the Conclave. How the liberty of
the Cardinals was reduced to a slavery, and servitude to the Nephews of the
Popes. Of the Cardinals which do adhere to the faction of the Nipotismo, and of
the reasons which moved them to it. Of the opinion of a certain Roman Abbot
concerning the Debates of the Conclave. Of certain reasons which make the
Popedom appear, not Elective, but hereditary to the Nephews. Of the death of
Paul the third, and the controversies which followed in his Conclave. Of the
French exclusion of Cardinal Polo, and of the endeavors of the Imperials for
his creation. Of the creation of Cardinal di Monte by the name of Julius the
third, of his death, and the time he lived. Of the great, but short differences
which arose at the creation of Cardinal Caraffa, who took upon him the name of
Paul the fourth, of his death, and the barbarity the people used to his Statue.
Of the Exaltation of the Cardinal di Medici, who was called Pius the fourth. Of
the number of Cardinals, and of the factions in the Conclave wherein Pius the
fifth was created. Of the time he was Pope, and of the Cardinals which entered
into the Conclave after his death. Of the creation of Cardinal Boncompagno,
called Gregory the thirteenth, of his life, death, and the ingress of the
Cardinals into the Conclave. Of the course Sixtus the fifth used to compass the
Papacy, some particulors about his Government, and the time he was Pope. Of the
creation of Cardinal Castagna with the name of Urban the seventh. Of the good
will Sixtus the fifth had always, that Castagna should succeed him in the
Papacy. Of the promotion of the Cardinal of Cremona under the name of Gregory
the thirteenth. Of the peaceable Conclave in which Cardinal Facchinetto was
created, with the name of Innocent the ninth, and of the shortness of his life.
Of the creation of Cardinal Aldobrandino, and the differences which happened in
his Conclave, by the inclusion, and exclusion of other persons. Of the name of
Clement the eight which he assumed, and of the time he was Pope. Of a Report in
Rome, that the Cardinals were fighting in the Conclave of Leo, and of the
resolution taken to choose the Cardinal Borghese, who would be called Paulus
the fifth. Of the life and death of Paul, and of the creation of Cardinal
Ludovisio, with the name of Gregory the fifteenth. Of the number of Cardinals
present in the Conclave of Gregory, where Urban the eighth was created. Of many
particulars happening at the creation of Innocent the tenth. Of his death, and
the exaltation of Alexander the seventh. Of the form of the Scrutiny used in
the Conclave, and the difference between Adoration, and Accession. Of the
manner of the Engagement wherewith the Pope was sometime Elected, and of
several other particulars of all Conclaves in general.

THUS far we have spoken of the Election of the Popes in a general way, for
till the Pontificate of Paul the 2d. who succeeded Pius the 2d. the Cardinals
had liberty to choose persons out of the Conclave; which being looked upon by
Paul as an occasion of delay, in respect of the time which was lost in
inquiring after the qualities of the persons recommended: he commanded they
should choose none for the future, but out of the body of the Cardinals; by
which means, the Cardinals became of extraordinary reputation, the Princes
being obliged to give them no little honor, as seeing the Papacy like to be
always in their hands.

These remedies notwithstanding which Paul thought rational, and good, have
proved vain, and ineffectual, having produced no other fruit, but the
increasing of the Cardinalitial Grandeur: seeing there were the same passions
in the Conclaves as formerly, and perhaps greater, for the Cardinals being
jealous of one another, protracted the Elections out of envy, none of them
yiedling to his Companion, but multiplying their quarrels, they appeared rather
Enemies, than Brothers, making more difficulty to give place to a Cardinal
Competitor in the Conclave, than to any other uninterested pretender. For the
better satisfaction of the Reader in this Cardinalismo, I shall give a short
description of the causes from whence these discords have sprung.

After Pius the 2d. was dead in the year 1464. who had Governed in his
Pontificate six years, and his body removed from Ancona, where he died, to
Rome: the Lords Cardinals assembling together as soon as they could, they
entered the Conclave to the number of 20. the six others (for the whole number
of Cardinals was at that time 26.) remaining without, in respect of the
greatness of their distance from Rome. The 28th. of August they made their
entrance into the Conclave, with full resolution to create Cardinal Petero
Barbi (a Venetian) Pope, in whose favor, 15. of the Cardinals had declared,
and there were but 14. necessary for his creation.

Being come to the Scrutiny the third day after the shutting up of the
Conclave, there were but twelve voices among the names for Barbi, the rest
being divided, this way, and the other; so that two voices only being wanting,
they came to Accession; and the Cardinal Deacon having asked them all, if they
did approve the Election, and finding them firm to their opinions, he embraced
him on a sudden with these words, I make you Pope, and immediately the
Adoration followed.

There were some controversy happened about his name, he desiring to be called
Formoso; which the Cardinals would not concede, lest it should be looked upon
as a piece of vanity, because his Holiness was naturally beautiful and
handsome: upon the refusal of that name, he took the name of Mark upon him,
with which the Cardinals were as little satisfied as before; upon which, he
smiling said, Well then I will be called Paul, and by this name he was
published to the people. But the Cardinals did not think it fit again, he
should bear the name of Paul the first, seeing there was never another Paul in
the Vatican, so they assigned him the name of Paul the 2d. which he received
willingly enough, affirming that he vallu'd not to be the second in name, so
long as indeed he was the first.

Cardinal Giovanni di Mela a Spaniard, was a great adversary to this Election,
he carried the Title of SS. Aquila, and Priscilla; he discovered great
indiscretion and malice, because he would never recede from his obstinacy,
though he saw the Pope was made, he went not to kiss his feet, according to the
order of his preceedence, but pretended to go forth, that he might seem to be
the last.

This Pope lived six years and 10 months, and died the 28 of July 1471. 27
Cardinals entered into the Conclave, 4 only being absent, two of which set out
as soon as they received the news of his Holiness his death, to come to Rome,
but they could not get thither before the Conclave was ended.

From the very first day they began to talk of creating Francisco d'Alberola of
Rovere, Pope, who was of the Order of Saint Francis, and was made a Cardinal by
Paul the 2d. in the year 1467. But those Cardinals which were created by Pius,
and some few of Calisto's Creatures, did what they could possibly to disturb
the good designs the rest of the Cardinals had in favor of Rovere; not that
they had any thing to object against him, but that they could not endure to see
themselves out-stript by a Cardinal of fewer years, and the last which was
dignified with the Purple. There were present in the Conclave amongst the rest
of the Cardinals, Latino Orsino, a Creature of Nicholas the 5th. Roderigo
Borgia, a Creature of Calisto the 3d. and Cardinal Gonzaga d^ Mantoa, created
by Pius the 2d. who being all persons of great authority in the College,
endeavored to draw over the rest of the Cardinals to Rovere's side, which they
defended, with a firm resolution to dye, rather than to elect any other Pope
than Rovere: which discovered by the other ambitious pretenders, they desisted,
and promised the Cardinals Orsino, Borgia, and Gonzague, that they would go
along with them: In so much that in the second Scrutiny (though they could do
nothing in the first) of the 27. Votes, there were 18. for Rovere, a thing not
heard of before, to have so many voices for one man, in one Scrutiny.

They came afterward to the Adoration, and his name being desired, he said he
would be called Sixtus, and accordingly he was proclaimed to the people by the
name Sixtus the 4th. they having not continued in the Conclave three full days.

This new Pope (either in despite to such as had opposed him, or to show
himself a generous rewarder of good Offices) gave the Office of Chamberlain to
Cardinal Orsino, the Abbey of Sbiaco to Cardinal Borgia, and the Monastery of
Saint Gregory to Gonzague: Yet there were some believed, he had purchased his
Papacy with the^e promises before hand, but it could not be so, for he was too
zealous in his Religion, to be tainted with Simony.

This Pope reigned 13. years, and dyed the 13th. of August 1484. on the 23. of
the same month, after the usual solemnities at his Funeral, 28. Cardinals
entered into the Conclave, so divided in their judgments, that many believed
the Election would be very tedious. There were three Scrutinies ineffectual,
there being none but Cardinal Barbo only, who was Nephew to Paul the 2d. and
was called Cardinal of San Marco, which could reach to the number of eleven;
the rest of the Competitors arriving a^ not above two or three.

Some of the Cardinals opposed themselves against this Saint Mark, out of envy
which they bore to the Republic of Venice, not enduring to see two Popes
succeeding one another so nearly, out of the same City.

Giuliano della Rovere, Nephew to the late Sixtus, otherwise called Cardinal of
Saint Peter in Vinculis, went one night to the Cardinal of Saint Mark, and told
him, that if he would give his Palace to the Cardinal of Arragon, King
Ferdinando's Son, he would oblige himself to make him three voices more in the
next Scrutiny, which amounted in all to 14. so that in the accession after he
would be sure to be Pope. But the Cardinal San Marco replied, that he would not
come into the Vatican by Simony, nor make a bargain for the liberty of the
Church; it being easy for King Ferdinand, by putting himself in that House,
and fortifying it, to make himself Master of the whole City.

Cardinal Juliano being very much disgusted at this repulse, went to Cardinal
Borgia, a great Enemy of San Marks, treating earnestly with him for the
exaltation of Cardinal Cibo, a Genoese, who though in other things he was
deserving enough, yet in this case he suffered himself to be carried away with
ambition, so that he gave license to the two Cardinals aforesaid, to negotiate
as they thought fit, and to promise Offices and Dignities at their pleasure,
obliging himself by an Oath to confirm them; and thus by means of those liberal
promises, they got 18. or 19. voices, who being got together, went up and down
the Dormitory publishing the creation of the Pope, and indeed they chose him in
the night.

In the mean time six of the antientest Cardinals were asleep, and little
dreamt of a Cibo to be Pope; and when they came to tell them, they must come
away, the Pope was created, they were astonished at the news; being got up, and
come to the Chapel, they found things beyond all remedy, there being more than
two thirds of the Cardinals of his party, so as they judged it best for
themselves also to condescend, and in this manner Cibo was made Pope, with the
name of Innocent the 8th. afterward he rewarded them very well who had given
him their Votes, some with money, some with Benefices, and some with Honors.
His Election was on the 5th. day after the Cardinals entrance into the
Conclave, and the 16th. after the vacancy of the Sea.

He governed the Church about eight years, and died the 25. of July 1492. after
whose death, there was a tumult of the people, whole Troops of Banditi and
Thieves running up and down the Streets, committing insolences and murders,
with such noise, that the very Cloisters were not thought to be safe.

Roderigo Borgia ceased not all this while to negotiate the Papacy for himself,
in the most ^a^^^ and detestable manner has been formerly heard of: The
Cardinals, the greater part of them, were bribed by Cardinal Ascanio Sforza,
(one of the greatest promoters of that barbarous Pope) to that pass, that 22.
Cardinals entering the Conclave on the 8th. of August late in the night, on the
11th. which was the first Scrutiny, by common consent Borgia was chosen.

An accident sufficient to convince us, of the effects of the natural
perverseness of Man; for it has not been known that ever a holy and pious Pope
was chosen with so much applause, a^ this Jugler was, even honest men giving
him their Votes, perhaps by Divine ordination, to mortify their pride: There
was present then in the Conclave Cardinal Girardo Patriarch of Venice, from
whence he was come Post thither, having understood the incurable infirmity of
the Pope; though indeed he pretended to go to Rome, to receive the Cap from the
hands of the same Pope, who had given him the Purple.

This Cardinal therefore, who could not stand upon his legs, being so
decrepid, and in an age of 92. years, foretold all the calamities in which the
Church was afterward involved, and with strong reason opposed the Election of
that person; but seeing the ineffectuality of his words, and the press of
Cardinals, he held his peace, and proceeded to the Adoration with the rest,
which was performed the 11th. of August before day, and at the same hour he was
published t^ the people by the name of Alexander the 6th.

The greatest part of those Cardinals who were bribed, out of a principle of
ambition and covetousness, received the reward of their wickedness and
corruption, in giving the Papacy to so unworthy a person; some of them being
put to death by Alexanders order, others banished from Rome, and others
confined to perpetual imprisonment; Ascanius Sforza himself, who had been his
principal promoter, though in the Conclave he obtained the Vice-Chancellorship
from the hands of his Holiness, in recompense of his pains, yet he had
afterward his share of chastisement, God Almighty not exempting him from his
just punishment, to the end that by his example, the rest might be taught to
banish Simony from the Conclave.

Alexander dyed of a violent death the 12th. of August 1502. after he had
reigned in a most barbarous manner 11. years: The Duke Valentino, his Son, gave
many troubles to the Church, and no small molestation to the Cardinals, who
thinking not convenient to enter into the Conclave, after the 9. days usual
obsequies, kept out 16. days longer, in expectation of the march of the French
Army out of Rome, which was going against the Spaniard, the Cardinals
apprehending least any tumult should happen in the City, whil^^ they were in
the Conclave, into which they entered at length on the 9th. of September, to
the number of 37. divided into five parties, and so dis-united in their
thoughts, that it was believed impossible to unite them, without some great
tumult.

Those who were of the Duke Valentino's faction, negotiated for a Creature of
the said Dukes, with the most infamous and detestable Simony in the world; yet
in the Scrutinies there was not any had above 9. voices, for which reason they
came not to the access. The Spanish and French Cardinals, each of them pursued
the advantages of their own Nations, and the nearest Competitors, kept firm to
their resolutions, of not yielding to one another.

At length the Cardinal of Siena, whose teeth watered at the Papacy as well as
the rest, seeing all the Pretenders drive on their interests with promises, he
also would follow their example, and accordingly taking the same measures, he
went one night to the Cardinals Rotomagensis, Sforza, and Valleteravo, as
persons which had the greatest party of followers of them all, promising them
many things, if they would be pleased to assist his Election.

These Cardinals saw it would be hard for them to happen upon the person they
desired, and to fasten it upon the Cardinal of Siena, would be easy, and being
satisfied with his prayer's and his promises, they consulted among themselves
to make him Pope, and to that purpose they met in Rotomagensi's Chamber, after
which, as a thing done and concluded, they went to be merry, and congratulate
in his own Chamber, where it being his Ague day, besides his Gout, they found
him in bed. It was said (whilst the Cardinals were upon agreement for the
Election of the Sienese) that it would be best to choose him by the way of the
Holy Ghost, to which Rotomagensis replied, that the Election by the way of the
Holy Ghost was dangerous, in respect one single contradiction sufficed to
render it null.

In the mean time the Scrutiny was made, and the Cardinal of Siena had two
thirds of the voices; which the Cardinal of Naples observing, though he was
very averse to that Election, yet he went to the Adoration with the rest; and
afterward the usual Balcony being opened, the said Cardinal of Siena, was
pronounced to the people by the name of Pius the 3d. a name he had chosen for
himself, and leaving his proper name of Francisco, which indeed he ought not to
have done, he being chosen Pope on the day of the Stigmata of Saint Francis,
which was upon the 17th. of September, eight days after their entrance into
the Conclave, and 34. after the vacancy of the Sea.

Pope Pius the 3d. lived but 27 days after his Election, dying on the 13th. of
October, not without suspicion of poison, many believing it was conveyed into
the sore of his Leg, by the appointment of Pandolfo Petruccio Tyrant of Siena,
out of an apprehension lest his Holiness by force of arms should drive him out
of his Country.

On the 29. the Duke Valentino, called all the Spanish Cardinals together into
his presence, obliging them by Oath to give their voices for nobody, but for
Cardinal Georgio Ambrosio of Roano, who had promised the said Duke to make him
Gonfaloniere, and General of the Church, if by his means he should be chosen
Pope.

The last day of the month, the Cardinals entered into the Conclave, to the
number of 32. the two thirds were already agreed upon the Election of Cardinal
Julian della Rovere, Nephew to Sextus the 4th. but that which is most
wonderful is, that all this was transacted during the time of the vacancy of
the Chair, with great secrecy, lest the Duke should have given any
obstruction, who insisted much upon having one of his own Party. Six hours, and
no more, they continued shut up in the Conclave, in which time they dispatched
all things in favor to Julian, who was proclaimed Pope, with the consent of
almost all the Cardinals, but with great dissatisfaction to the Duke, who would
sooner have condescended to any ones Election, than to his, and that because he
had treated him very ill in the time of Alexander.

Cardinal Alessandrino, who was of the Dukes party, would not go into the
Cardinal Julian's Chamber to congratulate, though he saw all the Spanish
Cardinals go: a piece of obstinacy that Julian did not like at all, though he
dissembled it for the present. The Scrutiny being made, there were above 24
voices which nominated Saint Peter in Vinculis, which was Julian himself, but
all of them concurred at the Adoration, and being asked about his name, he said
he would be called Julius the 2d. and by that name he was published to the
people upon all Saints day, which was the first of November; and the same day,
in the sight of all the people, they came forth of the Conclave.

Many people believed this Pope would be the destruction of the Duke Valentino;
but he thought it best to make his Enemy a Bridge of Gold, and suffer him to
escape, according to his desire.

After Julius had Reigned ni^^ years, and some months, with great reputation,
though almost always in Wars, he died the 21. of Febr. 1513. On the 4th. of
March, 25 of the Cardinals entered into the Conclave (7 being absent, the whole
number then living being 32) it could not be discerned that there was any
design amongst them then, though they had all their suspicions.

In the first Scrutiny, there were not votes enough for any body, all the
Cardinals being honored, some more, some less, only the Cardinal Alborenze,
who out-number'd them all, having received 13. which was no small terror to
his Competitors, gave them occasions to make sad reflections thereupon. After
dinner they went briskly about their affairs, but they could not discover in
whose favor it was like to be carried, all the old Cardinals, and most capable
of being Popes, remaining in no small jealousy and fear.

Late in the night, in the great Hall, the two Cardinals, Medici, and San
Georgio, discoursed together above an hour in that public place, without any
bodies perceiving upon what subject they discoursed, yet every one suspected
they were negotiating the Papacy for one of them; and therefore the rest of the
Competitors went up and down, endeavoring what they could to interrupt their
designs.

In the interim the younger Cardinals, viz. the Cardinal of Arragon, Gonzague,
Cornaro, Petrucci, Sauli, and Sedunensis, resolved amongst themselves to make
Medici Pope; which business was so well managed, and prepared, that it was
publicly discoursed every where, that Medici was Pope. The other Cardinals
seeing things so well disposed in favor of Medici, and all ways of excluding
him stopped, they went into the Hall where Medici was, kissing his hand, and
congratulating his happy Election. On Friday morning, on the eleventh of March,
all the Cardinals went into Medici's Chamber, conducting him to the Chapel of
Saint Nicholas with great applause, where the Scrutiny was made, and all the
votes, but two, were for him, and one of them, as is supposed, was his own.

He was afterward saluted Pope with the usual formalities, and then published
to the people with the name of Leo the 10th. In the time of his being Pope,
Martin Luther began his Schism in Germany, with so much prejudice to the Church
of Rome, that it may be said, that little Friar, debauched more Provinces and
Kingdoms from the Catholic Church, than all the Popes put together could ever
acquire.

He died the 9th. year of his Popedom on the 1st. of December. 1521. of a
violent death; for being at Supper, and having the news brought him that the
French were beaten out of Italy, in great joy he cried out, God has been so
merciful to me as to let me see three things, which I desired from the bottom
of my heart.

The first, was to return with honor into Florence, from whence I was banished
with shame; the second, to have merit enough to advance me to the Papacy; and
the third, to see the French beaten o^t of Italy; in pronouncing of which last
words, he fell down dead with the glass in his hand.

All convenient Orders being given for the good Government of Rome, and the
Obsequies celebrated, the Cardinals 39 in number, entered the Conclave the
17th. of December, on which day it was discoursed the Ambassadors of the
Princes were to have Audience.

The discords amongst the Cardinals was the cause that they procrastinated the
Scrutiny from day to day, and spent their whole time in plottings and disputes,
not being able to come to the first Scrutiny till the 30th. of that month, and
14 days after their entrance into the Conclave; but that Scrutiny came to
nothing, the votes being divided, 10 for Grimano, 9 for Cardinal d'Ostia, seven
for Farnese, and some others here and there. The first of January they had a
second Scrutiny, in which there was a Schedule put in, which named 13
Cardinals; which gave all of them so great a disgust, that some of them cried
out it should be opened, to discover the hand; but having considered of that
better, they let it alone

On the second, they had their third Scrutiny, in which Santi quattro advanced
his votes to 14. which made the rest of the Pretenders look about them, and
endeavor to countermine him with contrary designs, and indeed they did it so
effectually, that in the 4th. Scrutiny he was brought down again to four,
Orsino ^ad five, Fiesco nine, and Campeggio, and Medici, some others. On the
5th. the fi^^^ Scrutiny was made, and Fiesco had his nine votes still, d'Ostia
seven, Santi quattro four, and Valenza, and Bologna, some few.

All this while Cardinal Medici, Cousin to Leo, was laboring very hard for to
get himself exalted, or at least some person that depended on him; and he did
not labor in vain, for he got the promise of 17 of the younger of the
Cardinals created a little before by Leo, that they should not any of them give
their votes but for him alone, or such as he should recommend. And being
fortified in this manner, he did what he was able to make himself Pope; but
understanding the antienter Cardinals his Competitors, were laboring as much
to the contrary, lest any of them should be too hard for him, he suggested to
his Cardinals, that they should give their votes for Cardinal Adriano, called
Dertusensis, a creature of Leo's, who was then chief Minister in Spain, as
having been Tutor to Charles the 5th. The 9th. Scrutiny being come, and the old
Cardinals having notice of the young Cardinals resolutions, to prevent their
designs, they also gave their words to one another, to give the Cardinal
d'Ostia their votes. Insomuch that at the opening of the Scrutiny, there were
15 votes in favor of Adrian, and 14 for Ostia, all of them sticking very close
to their parties.

Then Cardinal Medici began to propose an Access, and Cardinal San Sisto rising
up, said, he could not but side with Adrian in the Access, because he knew him
to be a person of virtue, and worth.

The Cardinals, Colonna, Monti, Anconitanus, Piccolomini, Jaconacci, Como,
Frani, Armellino, and others, followed his example; only Cardinal Farnese
continued refractory with five or six of his party. Cardinal Santa Croce
interposed, and exhorted him to master his passions, and submit in a business
already determined, to which Farnese replied, he would not do it, because he
knew not the person, he having never been at Rome. Medici told Santa Croce,
that there was no need of desiring an Access, seeing the greatest part were
already agreed. And thus Adrian was Elected, and being absent, published to the
people by his own proper name, which he would not change, after he had notice
of what was done; but made himself be called Adrian the 6th.

After this, Ambassadors were dispatched to him, to give him advice of his
creation, and to exhort him to hasten his return. In the mean time, it was
decreed, that three Cardinals, exchanging from month to month, according to the
Order of Preceedence, should take the Government upon them, and reside in the
Vatican. And thus the Election of Adrian was concluded, after a suspense of two
months and certain days from the vacancy of the Sea, by the great differences
amongst the Cardinals.

The Life of this Pope was but short, having enjoyed the Papacy but a year and
a half, he dying in the Vatican the 14th. of September 1523. with little
disquiet to the people, or the old Courtiers, who hated him exceedingly for the
sowerness of his humor, and to speak truth, there fell out several things in
his Papacy, so much against the benefit of the Public, that they went about
the Streets crying out as loud as they could Semper de Sextis Roma diruta fuit:
for all that they gave him a most noble Funeral, after which the Cardinals
entered the Conclave the 26 of September, to the number of 30.

There were two which aspired principally at the Popedom Julius di Medici, and
Pompeius Colonna, who had almost all the votes shared betwixt them. The other
pretenders, were Alexander Farnese, Francisco Orsino, Ostia, Paceto, and some
others, but their hopes was only in case, that if they could not agree (without
which it was impossible to create a Pope) they would be constrained to make
choice of a third, and then each of them hoped to be the man. These two
Cardinals Medici, and Colonna, were the most potent pretenders, and perhaps
made the strongest Competition for the Papacy, that was ever made in the
Conclave.

Medici, in respect of the great number of Cardinals, his Clyents, and
partakers, and in regard of the freshness of the memory of Pope Leo his Cousin,
was thought to be something the more potent of the two; however Colonna
balanced him by the interest he had in Charles the 5th. But in their nobility,
faculties, dignities, and reputations, there was no great difference. By reason
of these differences therefore betwixt these two, the creation was prolonged
two months, and four days to the great prejudice of the Public.

All the old Cardinals were favorers of Colonna, and all the young, of Medici:
it was certainly believed, that Colonna would have been first forced to lay
down his pretensions, by reason that Medici was looked upon as the stronger,
had not the old pretenders, stuck close to the exclusion of Medici, and all,
that the Papacy might fall into the hands of a third person, and they have
their share; very good charity indeed.

There were in this time above 25 Scrutinies to no purpose, their Votes being
divided, sometimes three, sometimes four, and many times those Cardinals who
thought of it the least, had ten, however they went on still, multiplying their
Scrutinies, so that Cardinal Orsino being called one day to a Scrutiny, To what
purpose (said he) do we continue our Scrutinies? we are the same yesterday and
to day; there is no new thing set on foot; Colonna is firm in his resolutions,
not to give place to Medici; Medici is as obstinate, not to give that cordial
to Colonna, and we do but lose time to go up and down making of Scrutinies.

During these controversies, there were many little practices contrived by the
Cardinal Farnese, and as many by Cardinal Santi quattro, but in point of the
Keys, all were frustrated; for no sooner was any person propounded by Medici,
but Colonna was ready to excuse him; and on the contrary, no sooner did Colonna
recommend, but they were as well prepared to obstruct it.

The people suffering many inconveniences in the mean time, cried out from
without, that they should make an end of the Election; and the more zealous of
the Cardinals declared in a full Congregation, that it was high time to get out
of that prison; to which Medici replied, he was ready, and Colonna said the
same; after which there was no body replied: At length Cardinal Medici seeing
himself opposed by Colonna with all his power, and to be out of all hope almost
of gaining his design, he thought to do something that might push for it, and
indeed it was his Masterpiece.

He proposed Cardinal Orsino, a capital Enemy of Colonna's, and who had also
some friends amongst the Creatures of Colonna; however Medici's design was not
to make Orsino Pope, but to fright Colonna into an agreement with himself.

To this end he caused it to be spread abroad, that Orsino had several
practices on foot, and accordingly all the Cardinals of his party being
together one morning, he pretended to go along with them toward the great
Hall; and being asked by the way by Cardinal Monti, in these words, Whither are
we going? he replied, To make Ursin Pope: This being reported to Colonna, and
he fearing such a design, believing certainly they would make Vrsin (his
professed Enemy) Pope, he called all the Cardinals his friends together, and
desired them to give their Votes for Medici; and having done that, he went out
immediately to find him, who was passing away the time in the Gallery, in
expectation perhaps of what happened; as soon as he saw him, he said, Your most
illustrious Lordship is making Ursin Pope, and I am come to make you Pope; and
embracing him he cried out with a loud voice, Long live Cardinal Medici the New
Pope, which was followed by the common acclamation ^f he rest of the Cardinals:
and from thence passing into the Chapel, they made their Election immediately;
after the Ceremony of Adoration, he declared he would be called Clement the
7th. and accordingly with that name he was published to the people, the 19th.
of November 1523.

In the time of this Pope, Rome was sacked by the Army of the Duke of Borbon,
in the year 1527. the 14th. of May, and he made a Prisoner for several months
in the College of the Spaniards, although some will have it, that he was
besieged only, and not imprisoned. His Pontificate was sometimes with good
fortune, and sometimes with bad; he governed ten years, and died in the year
1534. the 25th. of September.

Some few days before his death, finding his end approach, he called all the
Cardinals then in Rome together, and with a Paternal affection, recommended to
them the brevity of the Conclave, protesting that if the Papacy had been
hereditary, he would not have left it to any body but Alexander Farnese,
because he did not see a Cardinal more fit than he, to govern the Christian
Commonwealth, or to defend and conserve the Pontifical dignity, and therefore
he entreated Cardinal Medici particularly, to employ all his interest in his
behalf.

Clement being dead, and the Cardinals excited, partly by the persuasions of
the dying Pope, and partly informed of the excellent qualities, experience,
prudence, and learning of the said Alexander, they resolved to choose him Pope
after a new way, before they began the o^ sequies of Clement, and without
entering into the Conclave at all; but this resolution was constantly impugned
by Alexander, he begging of the Cardinals, that they would not transgress and
invert the Orders observed in the Elections of the former Popes.

By this means it was concluded, the Exequies should be celebrated first, for
the space of the usual days; Farnese in the interim keeping close in his
house, to avoid the applause of the people as he went up and down the City,
every body looking on him as already created. The 11th. of October the Exequies
being over, 35. Cardinals went into the Conclave, being come from several
Neighboring Provinces, to be present at the Election of the New Pope: There
was not much time lost in the Visits of the Ambassadors, every one knowing
already who was designed to be Pope.

The same night Cardinal Medici remembering the instructions of Clement, ^ell
into discourse (but more for form, than any thing else) with the Cardinal of
Lorrain, who was in great esteem in the Sacred College, and with the Cardinal
Triv^l^^, who had then ^he Government of the French faction: In this manner
these three, followed by all the Cardinals their friends, went about two a
clock in the night to the Chamber of Farnese, who was then at rest* and putting
themselves upon their knees, they saluted him Pope, and adored him, before his
Election; which likewise was performed the next morning betimes, by a general
concurrence of Votes, and being asked his name, he desired to be called Paul,
and accordingly he was proclaimed to the people by the name of Paul the 3d.

In short, there has not been any Pope created, either before or after him,
with a more sincere, frank, unanimous Election than this, not protracted by
envy, not corrupted by ambition, not precipitated by fear; and that which is
more considerable, in this Scrutiny, all the Cardinal; put in their Polizys
open, so as every one might easily read what his Companion did write. There was
one Cardinal only, and he of no mean authority, who being envious of Farnese,
said some petty designs against him, but they were all to no purpose; Farnese
having notice of it, went to him, not to desire his Vote, but sharply to
reprehend him, for speaking so bitterly against him; the Cardinal being
affrighted, humbled himself to Farnese, and with much ado reconciled himself,
that he might not remain his Enemy perpetually.

But all that I have said yet of the of the Election of the Pope, has been
nothing but a mere superficies of the policies of the Court: the greatest
differences among the Cardinals being introduced into the Conclave, after the
death of Paul the third, by reason of the introduction of the factions of the
Crowns, and the Nephews. The Princes would not have been so busy with the
interest of the Conclaves, if the Popes had been contented to have been Christ's
Vicar, in the Government of Souls only; but seeing they thought good to join
the Sword to the Cross, the Princes moved by the interest of the Sword, have
interested themselves in the interest of the Cross; so that as the Popes have
rendered themselves considerable, and great in Temporals, and the command of
the people; so the Kings, to whom God has given the Government of the Earth,
have been obliged to have an eye over that Temporal State which is taken from
them by the Spirituals. In the time when the Popes were poor, and had nothing
in their hands but the Keys of Saint Peter, which I call the Spirituals; the
Princes meddled in the affairs of the Papacy, either as Friends who were zealous
of the Service of God, or as perverse Adversaries to the Divine Worship. But
since the Popes became rich, and ina^ch'd up the Sword of Saint Paul into their
hands, the Princes are concerned to see that this Sword be not unsheathed to
the prejudice of their States, not to say of their persons, though the Popes do
too often offend against them.

In short, the love of God, and the interest of his Holy Church, for a long
time elected the Popes, by the Votes of the Cardinals; now adays, the interest
of Crowns, and Princes, the policies of the World, and the reasons of State, if
they do not choose them absolutely, at least they precede the interests of God,
and his Church; and this I am sure, but few Cardinals with a good Conscience
can deny. This way of proceeding so blindly in the Elections of the Pope, has
prevailed for above three hundred years; but for an Age past, it is so usual
and rooted, that it seems a necessary virtue. Now the Cardinals who are engaged
both to the Princes and the Church, do in the Elections of the Popes, stand as
it were in a Precipice, and are in danger of running themselves upon Scylla, to
avoid Charibdis, or upon Charibdis, to avoid Scylla, and this is it that
obliges the Cardinals many times to endure imprisonment in the Conclave several
days together.

And to render the Election of the Pope more tedious, and pernicious, that is,
more adhaesive to the world, there is another thing introduced likewise into
the Conclave, within this last Age, and that is the faction of the Nephews,
which prevails daily, and overgrows both the factions of Spain, of France, and
all the Princes in Christendom.

The faction of the Nephews was the cause (as we shall show in its proper
place) that after the death of Urban, and Innocent, the Cardinals remained
several weeks and months shut up in the Conclave, without being able to agree,
the interest of the Nephews overpowring the intreest of the Crowns, which ought
to have been the greater of the two.

And now behold the liberty of the Cardinals enslaved to the Tyranny of the
Nephews; the Ambition of the Nephews, Lording it over the Privileges of the
Church. Is it necessary then that young men be preferred before old? that
Ganimed be adored before Jupiter? Is it reasonable to exclude those who can
say, and speak truth, Quadraginta annis proximus fui generationi huic, and to
admit them who but begin to say the Introibo in domum tuum Domine? Must it be
then, that if in the Sacred College there be found one Cardinal worthy of the
Papacy, must it be (I say) that he must stand deprived, and incapable, because
he was not created by the last Pope? In this manner things are now carried,
because they will have it so; but doubtless it ought to be otherwise.

At present (and for a hundred years past) the vote of the Cardinals is not
free; the last takes place of the first, and the first are forced to give place
to the last. The Heretics laugh, and the Catholics laugh, and some of those
Romans who are neither Catholics nor Heretics, make Pasquins upon the
subject; a subject indeed too scandalous and reproachful to the whole
College, but especially to those Cardinals, who laying aside their own
liberties, and the liberty of the Church, adhere so close to the interest of
the Nephews: manifesting thereby, that it was not their merit advanced them to
the Cardinalitial Dignity, but their Devotion to the Nephews, and pronouncing
themselves Cardinals of the Nipotisme, rather than of the Holy Church, seeing
they do not serve the Church, but the Nipotisme.

Some few days past, I had an accidental occasion of discoursing with a
certain Prelate, or Abbot of Rome, who amongst variety of other things,
relating to the interests of the Court of Rome, happened in the process of his
discourse to declare, that he had been Conclavist to a Cardinal in the last
Conclave of Chigi. I, out of my natural curiosity, and in order to my History,
which I was then a compiling, giving thanks to Heaven for so propitious an
opportunity, beseech'd the Abbot very earnestly, that he would inform me of
some particulars touching the interests of the Princes in the Election of the
Popes. The Abbot fetched a sigh at my request, and gave me this answer.

Sir, in the Election of the Pope, the least thing that prevails, is the
interest of the Princes, and especially of the Crowns; if you knew at what rate
things are carried in the Conclave, you would bless your self. There is not a word
of any thing but the Nephews; and the interests of the Crowns, are used but as
a mere shadow, to the interest of the Nipotisme; for my part I believe the
Princes, weary to see the interests of the Nephews preferred to theirs, in a
matter of that consequence, will leave Rome to the Cardinals; and the Cardinals
in Rome; who finding themselves deprived of the riches the Princes give them to
defend their interest, will every one cry out without doubt, Quid faciam miser,
quia Dominus meus aufert a me villicationem? And this I am sure of, that if
ever the Princes shall resolve to take that course, their interests in the
Conclave will be greater than they are now, which (if not nothing at all) are
at least so little, they know not where to find them themselves.

Certainly if things be considered impartially, it will be found that the
Papacy is not Elective, as it seems in appearance, but Hereditary to the
Nephews, for as much as the Nephews of the deceased Pope, are they which govern
all in the Conclave, and will have it, one way or other, in spite of all those
who endeavor to oppose them. But because a business of such importance desires
better proofs, I shall proceed according to the order of Elections, and by
experience of the successes of the Conclaves since Paul the third, render the
Reader so well satisfied and informed, that he may himself confess, the Papacy
is now become Hereditary to the Nipotism of Rome.

Paul the third passed from this, to a better life, on the 10th. of November
1549. and his ob^equies being performed, the Lord Cardinals to the number of
47. entered into the Conclave; they were divided into three factions, the first
for France* governed by the Cardinal Guise; the second for the Emperor, managed
by the Cardinal of Trent; and the third of the Creatures of Paul, conducted by
Cardinal Farnese, a young man, but as well versed and experienced in Politic
affairs, as was to be expected from his age, and something better.

Amongst the Cardinals of the faction of Farnese, there were certain others,
promoted in the time of Paul, and which is more considerable, they were able
men, and mature both in judgment and age; by which means this faction being
the greatest of the three, was courted and caressed by both the other.

At the beginning of the Conclave, the reputation of the Cardinal Farnese,
began to be very great, all people acknowledging it impossible to put an end to
the Conclave, without his concurrence; so that each of the two factions took
what pains they could to draw him to their side; but because (to oblige his
Creatures the more to him) he had declared to do nothing but by the
deliberation and consent of all his aforesaid Creatures together, Farnese,
being weary of the importunities of the Imperialists, and the French, re^olv'd
before he engaged himself, to consuit certain of his Creatures, more judicious
than the rest, who failed not to advise him, with great reason and solidity.

Some of them declared, that in case he would join with either of the factions,
it ought not to be with the Emperors, for his reputation sake, because every
body knew that Caesar was consenting to the death of Lewis Farnese, and for
that reason he ought to incline to the French; but privately, and handsomely,
lest the Emperor being provoked, should attempt something in his passion, to
the prejudice of him and his Family.

Others advised him to declare openly for the French faction, and that to
frighten the Emperor, who would not probably be provoked to any violence,
seeing him protected by the King of France, who would not fail to recover the
States of Parma, and Placenza, for Octavio Farnese, which were in the
possession of the Emperor, and by him illegally usurped from the said Octavio,
who was the true Proprietor.

To this others replied, that the Emperor was by no means to be abandoned, for
the French; that the Emperor, who was at that time very successful, would be
able to ruin the whole Family of the Farnese, before any remedy could be
brought, yea though the Pope himself was of his side; that the nature of the
Emperor was such, that the more opposition he saw, and the stronger the Princes
were confederate, the more was his indignation and magnanimity excited; it
having been found by experience, that neither (...) Pope, nor the King of
France, have been ever able to give him the least apprehension. They added,
that no notice was to be taken of the death of Duke Lewis, for the Emperor ha^
^^s^iciently expiated that, by giving Margaret his natural Daughter, to Octavio
Farn^^^ in Marriage.

But the greatest part were of opinion, that seeing their faction was potent of
it self, and stronger than both the other, there was no reason to join with
either of them, but that they should proceed to the Election of their Pope out
of their own number, for the glory of Paul, his Uncle, and the increase of his
own reputation; whereby he would (...) a point, the Nephews of other Popes have
not been able, or have not known how to obtain.

Farnese hearing all these arguments, and many more like them, resolved to
stand neuter, and to make a Pope in spite of all opposition, after his own
mind, that is, out of his own Creatures.

The Imperialists, who did not willingly consent to make any of the Cardinals
Pope, who were created by Paul, being desperate of success by the old men,
began to promote the interest of Cardinal Poole, a Creature of Paul's it is true,
but very well affected to the Emperor, and because the said Poole had many
friends in the faction of Farnese, they looked upon the business as done. The
Cardinals Sforza, and Maffei, great friends to Poole both of them, but one an
Imperialist, and the other a Farnesian, were of opinion, that they ought not
put in their designs so suddenly for Poole; but that it was better to let the
fury French spend it self in the Conclave, to the end that his enemies might
tire themselves out in the Exclusion of other persons. This way would have
doubtless been the best, and the Imperialists confessed it, when it was too
late, for they making no account of the Frenches excluding of Poole, would
needs have it brought to a Scrutiny: and to make the business yet worse, the
same day they entered into the Conclave, there arrived two French Cardinals
more, who were not there when the rest entered. In short, the French opposed
him might and main, charging him with Heresy, and so incapable of the
Popedom. But Pooles friends knew well enough how to clear him of that, so they
came to a Scrutiny, in which (with the Access) there were found 26 votes in
favor of Poole, who ought to have had 33 of the 49 Cardinals: and thus all
Poole's hopes vanished though the Emperors Faction attempted it again.

The Exclusion of this person proceeded not so much from the opposition of the
French, as from the envy of the antienter Cardinals, who could not endure to
see themselves excluded from a concurrence in that dignity; esteeming it a
great injury to give their consents to Poole, and be themselves past by, and
rejected: they opposed him therefore very vigorously, making great practices
against him, drawing away from their side certain of the younger, most furious
Cardinals, and most desirous of Novelties, which were they that made the
greatest noise.

In this manner they went up and down, contriving new designs, now for this
Cardinal, anon for another, every one endeavoring to try his fortune under the
protection of his friends; amongst the rest, Cardinal Salviati, upon the
exclusion of Poole, conceived some hopes, but it was not long before he met
opposition, Cardinal Farnese not enduring him, as he was an enemy to the
Emperor; the said Salviati having amongst all the Imperialists, only Sforza of
his side. The Cardinals Sfondrato, of Lorrain, of Ferrara, San Macello,
Ridolfi, and even the young Fry, put themselves forward one after another, but
they were all excluded, some for one reason, some for another.

The Election being so tedious, the chief of the three Factions met to consider
of some way of finishing the Conclave, and the rather, because the people
suffered much by so long a Vacancy of the Sea. They made an agreement therefore
amongst themselves, that nine Cardinals should be named, of each Faction three,
but that the nomination should be made by two only of the Faction of France,
and that afterward it should be lawful for the Imperialists to take one of
the said nine at their pleasure, and that the rest should be obliged to concur.

Of the French Faction accordingly were named, the Cardinals of Lorrain,
Tornone, and Bellai. Of the Imperial Faction, Theatino, Monti, and San
Marcello, and three others of the other Faction, Salviati, Ridolfi, and Trani;
and so the said nomination was published to the Imperialists by Cardinal
Sforza; who would not only not except of any of the nine, but finding they
could not succeed in the person of Cardinal Poole, they began to have new
designs in the behalf of Cardinal Sfondrato, but they were as ineffectual as
Pooles, or the French designs for the Cardinal of Lorrain.

The Imperialists refusal of the nine persons which were named, gave great
offense to the two other Factions, insomuch that it was proposed by the French
to the Farnesians, to unite amongst themselves, and to choose a Pope in spite
of the Imperialists; but they could not agree in the choice of their persons,
because there were several Cardinals amongst the Farnesians who were obliged to
the Emperor, and much afraid of his displeasure.

In the mean while, several Cardinals joined with Cardinal Sforza, and
endeavored what they could possibly in favor of Salviati, a creature of Leo
the tenths; and after many turnings and windings, to affright Cardinal Farnese,
who was resolute in his adhaerance to his own creatures, they spread abroad a
report one night in the Conclave, that Salviati the next morning should be made
Pope, on whose side they had voices enough. Farnese took the alarm, and was
really afraid it was true, insomuch that he went away immediately, half
undressed, to the Chambers of his Confidents, imparting his apprehension, but
was advised by them all to stand firm; and not to fear those rumors at all,
because they were nothing but juglings and artifices to discover the intrigue;
and amongst the rest, Cardinal Maffei, and Cornelio, assured him there should
no Pope be chosen in that College without his approbation; and that therefore
he should forbear speaking in that manner with every body, and declare to all
people, that he would not condescend to any, who was not one of his own
well-deserving creatures.

Forasmuch as the designs on all hands were grown desperate, every one having
tried his fortune in vain, Cardinal Sforza went to Farnese, and told him, that
several Cardinals, weary of the tediousness of the Conclave, were resolved to
create a Pope against the consent of the Cardinals of the Factions, if within
two days time the said Cardinal Farnese was not resolved to conclude upon some
body; and proposed Cardinal San Marcello, a man of an exemplary life, no small
wisdom, and one who had many friends in all the Factions.

At length Farnese being resolved to finish the Conclave, he bent his whole
mind upon Cardinal Di Monti of the County of Arezzo, and the rather, because
the Imperialists dispairing to obtain their designs for a person more
affectionate to them, were resolved to join in the person of Monti; and the
Cardinal Ferrara, not only gave his own vote for Monti, but promised to procure
him several more.

At this time, the minds of the greatest part of the Cardinals, appeared to be
inclined to the promotion of Monti, and he should have been saluted Pope in his
Chamber one night, if the Cardinal Guise had not withdrawn several of the
Cardinals, who being an enemy to Monti, made several bold attempts against him,
and amongst the rest, he went to Cardinal Sforza, and obliged himself to bring
several of his friends and adherents to Cardinal Salviati (his Kinsmans) side,
if he would be content but to own the design; but Sforza told him, it was not
time now (he having engaged himself to Farnese) to give his vote for Monti,
which was almost concluded, and he could not fail to be Pope, by any means
whatsoever.

Cardinal Guise being astonished at his answer, entreated Cardinal Sforza, that
he would be a means to reconcile him to Monti; Sforza conducted him to Farneses
Chamber, and went along with them both to find out the Cardinal Monti,
reconciling them so effectually, that of an enemy, Guise became of his party,
and brought all the voices he could get to it. And thus, after a tedious
discussion of the Cardinals, i^ the space of three months, during the vacency
of the Sea, Gio Maria del Monti was created Pope, the 13th. of Frebruary 1550.
about three a clock in the night, by the name of Julius the 3d. And in this
mauner, the Faction of the Nipotisme was introduced into the Conclave, having
overpowered the Factions of the Emperor, and King of France, with no small
reputation and glory.

On the 23 of March 1555. Julius the 3d. dyed, after he had Reigned five years,
and some days; after which, the Cardinals to the number of 37. entered into
the Conclave the 4th. of April, divided into two Factions; one of them
Imperialists, supported by Cardinal Santo Fiore, Mantua, and Trento; the other
French, and managed for the greatest part by Cardinal Ferrara; but there were
several Cardinals likewise, which stood neuters, and complied some time with
one, and sometimes with another. Julius his Faction was not considerable at
all, there being but few Cardinals created by him, and which is worse, they
were divided here and there, and not actuated by any one, so that there was no
mention of that Faction.

The Cardinal Ferrara, endeavored the exclusion of every body, in hopes to
obtain it for himself; and Cardinal Mantua, and Trento, followed the same
steps, thinking of nothing but their particular interests, having past their
words one to the other, to give one another their utmost assistance, and the
rather, because the Emperor had recommended them both, with equal affection;
if they failed, he proposed Cardinal Santo Fiore, who was principal of the
Imperial Faction, but thought little of being Pope, seeing things were so ill
disposed for his interest.

On the seventh they had the first Scrutiny, not that their minds were bent
upon any body, but in pursuance of the Pontifical decrees, which required
frequent Scrutinies, as likewise in honor to the pretending Cardinals, as
indeed it happened, some of them having more votes, some fewer, Ferrara amongst
the rest, having ten.

Cardinal Farnese (who had the Title of Saint Angelo) considering in the mean
time, and observing the many apparent difficulties, and obstructions by the
creatures of Julius, and that by consequence the Popedom must needs fall among
some of his creatures; he thought it but fit for him also to do his part, that
some of his Confidents might gain it; and accordingly fixing his eye upon
Cardinal Marcello Cervino de Montepulciano: who carried the Title of Santa
Croce, and was advanced by Paul his Uncle, he imparted his design to his
friends, and they contrived the way to exalt him. Cardinal Sforza had already
set his brains a working for Santa Croce; but when he understood that Saint
Angelo agreed with him in his desire to make him Pope, he rejoiced very much,
and was encouraged the more because he knew Farneses authority in the Conclave
was not small. In this manner therefore, Farnese on the one side, and Sforza*
on the other, began to manage their contrivances more strictly, and that with
so much order and secrecy, that they were agreed before the Adversary knew any
thing of it; and the way was thus.

They understood very well the prejudice the Emperor had to Santa Croce, and
they had discovered the Imperialists a version to a person so odious to the
Emperor. Besides, Cardinal Ferrara being requested by them, as chief of the
French Faction, that he would join in the creation o^ Santa Croce, he gave them
this answer, That he had many things to think of before he would give his
consent for Santa Croce. They seeing themselves refused by the heads of both
the Factions, and knowing that in this last, Cardinal Cervino had many secret
friends, they contrived to hit the mark, without communicating with the said
heads, who failed not in the mean time to do what they could to prevent their
design.

They sent therefore Cardinal Lottino to Santa Croce, to understand which
Cardinals he had most confidence would assist him; Santa Croce replied, it was
a hard matter to make a judgment of that in a Conclave, where oftentimes
friends pretended to be enemies, and enemies friends; nevertheless considering
the offers many had spontaniously made him, and the course he had taken to gain
the favor of others, he did believe he had twice as many Cardinals as would
serve to make him Pope; and to that purpose he writ down with his own hand the
names of the Cardinals, in which the thought he might confide; but he had not
time to finish it, Cardinal Cesenna a great friend of Ferrara's, coming in* and
he being cautious of giving him any cause of sufpition, he took the note, and
gave it to Lottino, with these words, Take it, take it, these are sufficient.

The note being received, the Cardinal Saint Angelo, and the Cardinal
Chamberlain, began to consider, of so great a number, what was sufficient to
make him Pope; and having found it with ease, they selected eight of the
greatest authority, most powerful to persuade, and most aff^ctionate to Santa
Croce: the rest of those who were written in the Note, they distributed to the
said eight, to this two, to that three, to another four, as they knew they were
friends, either to the one, or the other (a most remarkable policy) with
express charge, never to forsake them, but to conduct them fairly into the
Chapel, where the scrutiny was to be made, and then to speak to their heads,
and letting them know their design, to entreat them that they would comport
themselves with prudence and peace: and indeed every one of ehe eight executed
their charges with that order and decorum, there was not one of the contrary
party understood it, but the Cardinal of Cesena, who meeting Lottino in the
Gallery, whispered him in the Ear, and told him, I know your design, and am
pleased with it, tell the Cardinal Chamberlain from me, if you please, that I
also will be for Santa Croce.

They sent Lottino to confer with Cardinal Trento likewise, who had many times
declared, that he would sooner give his vote to Ferrara, the head of the French
Faction, than to Santa Croce, who was a Creature of Paul's: nevertheless
Lottino persuaded so with him, that he consented at last, abandoning all his
private resentments. Trento consulted with certain Imperialists, who were all
of opinion, that though they did condescend to the Election of Santa Croce, the
Emperor could have no cause of apprehension, seeing he was a person of
inferior condition, and by consequence without hope of assistance, but from
the State Ecclesiastic, which was weak and unable, by reason of the
impositions of the last Popes. Trento being satisfied with this answer,
returned this answer to Lottino, that he also did concur with the Cardinal
Chamberlain, to make Santa Croce Pope.

All these things being related to Ferrara, who endeavored his exclusion as
much as possible, being to that purpose retired into the Chapel of San S^xtus,
full of fear and anxiety to see a Pope created in his presence, in despite of
him. He went with Lottino, who was come to speak with him, into the Chapel of
Paulina, where the others were, and declared himself willing to concur with
Santa Croce, to the great satisfaction of them all.

The conclusion being ascertained in this manner, the Cardinals Farnese, and
Sforza, would needs have Cardinal Santa Croce, taken from his Chamber, and
conducted to the Chapel by the Cardinals of Trent, and of Mantua; which gave
some little jealousy to Ferrara, which he was forced to swallow, as time
required. In the Scrutiny there were but three contrary votes, which were not
so refractory, but they came with great cheerfulness to the Adoration.

And in this manner it was Marcellus Cervinus was created Pope after the Sea
had been vacant 17 days, which Election fell out the 9th of April, he being
unwilling to alter his name, was published by the name of Marcellus the second.
And thus you have the Papacy hereditary to the Faction of Paul, the second
time; behold now the Farnesian Nipotisme making a Pope again, at their own
pleasures.

The days of Marcellus were very short, for he died the first of May, which
was 21 days after his creation. The shortness of his life was the occasion
that the same Cardinals were present, who had been in Julius his Conclave, and
with the same conduct of Factions; unless in what I am about to say.

There entered 45 Cardinals into the Conclave; a greater number than was in
Julius his, because many were come a far off to be present at Marcellus his
Election, and thought good to continue where they were till the creation of a
new Pope. The 15th. of May at night they entered into the Conclave, in which
day, they did nothing but give Audience to the Princes Ambassadors, and
distribute such Orders as were necessary.

The Cardinal Julius della Corgna, Bishop of Perugia, and Nephew to Julius the
3d. who had not regarded the forming of Factions in the preceding Conclave,
being advised by some of his friends, he resolved to make himself head of those
Cardinals which were created by his Uncle, and he found so many of them as
were sufficient for an exclusion, who were called by the rest Julianists.

Farnese on the other side, being desirous to conserve the reputation he had
had in two Conclaves before, entreated the Cardinals which were the creatures
of Paul his Grandfather, not to desert him, but to follow him unanimously in
fixing the Election upon one of his creatures, his eyes being still upon
Cardinal P^ole, for whom he had always an affection, and taken much pains in
his behalf in the Conclave of Paul. And forasmuch as the Cardinal of Corgna, to
make himself more strong, had joined with the chief of the Imperialists,
promising to concur with them in what ever should be for their satisfaction, if
they would oblige him by choosing one of the creatures of his Uncle Julius;
Farnese combined on the other hand, with the chief of the French, to fortify
his own Faction thereby, and make the Julianists the weaker.

The first point Farnese endeavored to weather, was to make Cardinal Poole
Pope, but he found two great oppositions; the first was, that amongst the
French Cardinals, there were some of them so averse to Poole, that they openly
declared they would sooner lay down their Caps, than give their voices for him;
the second was, that even those Cardinals who were friends to Poole, were
scrupulous of consenting, because he was then in England, whence he could
neither come, nor go, without prejudice to the Church, and infinite
inconvenience to such as should be deputed to conduct him to Rome; to which
(...)sons he was forced to submit.

The Cardinal of Perugia in the mean time managed his designs with the same
vigor* to make one of the Julianists Pope, and that out of an animosity he had
against Cardinal Farnese, who being used to give Laws to the Conclave,
disdained any others creature but his own. He proposed therefore to the
Imperialists, Cardinal Giacomo Pir^^ d^ Nizza, a person deserving in some
measure from the Emperor, and a great friend to all the chief of the French,
and the business went so far, that many went toward the Chapel to make a
Scrutiny, there being votes enough.

Farnese could not easily brook to see a Pope made by any hands but his own,
and therefore though it was told him that Nizza was created already, he
resolved immediately without the least diminution in his courage, to hinder the
Election, by diverting it upon some person amongst the Imperialists themselves,
and he proposed Fano at first; but he refused to serve for a trial in that
Conjuncture, not being willing to engage himself, when he was sure to meet with
infinite obstructions.

The envy of Farnese increasing hourly, he thought he might overcome that
difficulty, by proposing of Caraffa, by an excess of malice, doing violence to
himself, for he was always averse to Caraffa's exaltation; and it is most
certain, that his friendship and correspondence was greater with Nizza, than
with Caraffa: yet to show himself a man of authority, and not seem to be
overpowered by Julius della Corgna, he was contented to take the Papacy out of
the hands of his friend, and to bestow it upon his enemy; but in this the
mysteries of the Conclave were known.

Caraffa being a Neapolitan, was subject to the Emperor, however, he held
great correspondence with the French Faction, who no sooner understood the
proposition of Farnese; but suspending the Election of Nizza, which was already
preparing in the Chapel, without diving into the bottom of the business, 25
Cardinals ran presently to Caraffa's Chamber, by whom he suffered himself to be
brought immediately to the Chapel, without any security of his Election. But
God, who had ordained an end different from that, which even they that
conducted him had imagined, in this sudden and extempore Election, caused all
those propitious accidents to fall out, which contributed to the good fortune
of Caraffa.

Many of the Cardinals were astonished at the suddenness of the rumor, and
went toward the Chapel, imagining Poole had been chosen; but finding the face
of things clear otherwise, there wonder was increased: amongst the rest,
Cardinal Morone perceiving the business, cried out with a loud voice, What
extravagance is this? Farnese will have one of his enemies to be made Pope, the
Imperialists, one excluded by the Emperor, as being too much a friend to the
French, and the French, a Subject of the Emperors, who may upon consideration
of his family, desert the interest of the French: if it be so, it is Gods
pleasure Caraffa be Pope, and therefore I Will not be against it.

The Imperial Cardinals who joined with Farnese, deserted their heads, who
refused to concur, and used their utmost power to impede the Election; but God
Almighty who had decreed in the secrets of his Providence, that the Papacy
should fall upon Caraffa, took away all means to prevent it. But those poor
Cardinals who were the first that put it forwards, had no reason to triumph,
for the Emperor being incensed, he punished their Purses, took away several of
their Abbeys, and Benefices, and some of them escaped not without Personal
affronts; but be that as it will, the good Caraffa obtained the Popedom, when
he did not expect it, calling himself Paul the fourth, as the first fruits of
his gratitude to Farnese, who went up and down the Conclave triumphing, that
the Pontifical dignity was the third time hereditary to the Farnesian
Nipotismne, inspight of all the politic reasons of the Cardinals.

The Exaltation of this Pope happened upon Ascension day, the 23 of May, after
seven days Conclave, and 22 days vacancy of the Sea, and after fierce, though
no long disputes; for Farneses resolution was taken, the whole contrivance
laid, and executed, and the Scrutiny performed, in seven hours time at the most.

Paul lived four years and three months, his Papacy unhappy for the Church, and
unfortunate for the people; he dyed the 18th. of August 1559. his house having
received no small injury by the fury of the people, who cut off the head of the
Statue of the said Paul, and drew the body about the Streets of Rome, with
great shame to the Pontifical Majesty.

About the beginning of September, 42 Cardinals entered the Conclave, no other
person being before them, but only the Cardinal Queva a Spaniard, who being
assured of the Imperialists, sent (by means of his Conclavist) to entreat
several other Cardinals to give him their votes, and indeed he found enough of
them willing to have made him Pope; whilst others, looking upon him as secure,
went and offered it themselves, so that the next day after their entrance, they
came to a Scrutiny, with confidence he was to be created Pope.

Whilst the Cardinals were writing their Schedules, the Cardinal Capo di ferro
an Imperialist, turning to those who were next him, (who were Frenchmen)
demanded, for whom they gave their Votes; and being answered, for the Cardinal
della Queva, he began to apprehend whether it was in earnest or not, believing
in truth, that all was but words, and that their promises made to Queva, were
only to cajole him, and not to make him Pope; whereupon standing up, he
demanded the same of the rest of the Cardinals, who all gave him the same
answer, that they were for Quiva.

Being fortified therefore in his former persuasion, he admonished them one by
one of the Error they were falling into, by reason of their inadvertency,
declaring to them the incapacity of the person. Whereupon most of them tore the
Schedules in pieces, which they had writ in favor of Queva, and writ others,
every one according to his inclinations, several Cardinals being honored, some
with more, some with fewer Votes; but Queva who had been concluded Pope by them
all, had but nine, he attributing the memory of so great an affront, to
Cardinal Capo di ferro, who was without doubt the only instrument that
prevented his being Pope.

Queva being thus defeated in his hopes, Cardinal Cornaro began to set up for
himself; he had the Cardinal Pisani in the French faction for his Uncle, and he
was himself one of the Imperial, imagining by that means to gain both parties,
and indeed there was great probability, many of the Imperialists having passed
their paroles to Cornaro, and almost all the French to Pisani; but when it came
to the point, all their designs came to nothing, for the Imperialists would not
trust Cornaro, seeing the concurrence of the French procured by his Uncle, nor
were the French satisfied to see him an Imperialist.

After this the French thought to pitch upon the person of Cardinal Turnone, a
man certainly the most worthy of the whole Conclave, and being so, the French
imagined that in the Scrutiny, even Conscience would prevail with many of the
Cardinals, and they would give him their Vote, as the most meritorious; and so
having joined 24. certain Votes, they went one day toward the Chapel, secure,
as they thought, he would be chosen Pope; and the rather, because many of the
Imperialists knowing his deserts, durst not commence any practices against him:
But the Italian Cardinals retaining their old fear, of having the Court again
transferred to Avignon, opposed themselves against it: so that in two
Scrutinies he had not above half the Votes which were necessary, and to the
accession there was not one Italian would go, though the French with their
wonted fury obtained one; and so Turnone was excluded with the rest.

But all these projects and practices, though they were kept on foot for
several days, were not so considerable, or troublesome to the Conclave, as the
designs of Cardinal Carpi, who having only the favor of Paul the third, had
such opportunity of making many of the Cardinals his friends, by procuring
graces sometimes for this, and sometimes for that, that it came into his head,
that he also might run for the prize, with some assurance of success.

The first thing he endeavored, or at least his friends for him, was to gain
the faction of King Philip, which was managed by Cardinal Sforza the
Chamberlain, and that he obtained without much difficulty, as well because he
knew how little he was inclined to the Crown of France, as in respect of a
Marriage which was in Treaty, and promised faithfully to be concluded, betwixt
a Sister of the said Carpi, and il Signor Paolo Brother to Sforza, which was
that which gave the greatest encouragement to Sforza, to procure his creation*

Two things there were which promoted the Exclusion of this person; the first
was, that Farnese, and Trent, Cardinals of the greatest authority, and
Principals in the College, being disgusted that Sforza should have the honor
to make a Pope, with the faction of King Philip, they began to think it not
convenient to consent to such an Election, and therefore they conspired against
it; which when Sforza had notice of, he declared that he did it not with the
concurrence of any of the Imperialists; confronting one another in this manner
with their particular interests, to the great prejudice of the Public.

The other opposition proceeded from the enmity Cardinal Ferrara professed, who
being out of favor with Paul, kept himself out of Rome all the time of his
Pontificate, out of an opinion, that Carpi contributed thereto; and from hence
being jealous of the greatness of the said Carpi, and adding thereto a
suspicion he had, that Carpi had but small affection for the King of France,
whose faction he managed with principal authority, he set himself against his
creation from the very first: But being pressed by the instances of the Grand
Duke, who ordered Lottino to negotiate the exaltation of Carpi, in his behalf;
he excused himself, by saying, that he would not oblige himself by any promise,
in a matter of such importance to the most Christian King, without
communicating with the Cardinal of Turnone, who was not far off of Rome, and
expected from day to day: Turnone being arrived, and Ferrara importuned by
Lottino to go over to Carpi, he replied, that the Cardinal Turnone thought ^it
he should attend the coming of Cardinal Guise, who came with particular
instructions from his Majesty.

At length, after a months expectation, Guise being arrived, and pressed for a
resolution, things not being able to stand any longer without a Pope; and
understanding there were great clamours and exclamations without, Cardinal
Ferrara, obliged as it were by the faith of a promise, declared that he would
not concur with Carpi, but with the Cardinal of Mantua; a thing which succeeded
beyond the expectation and opinion of Sforza, who had attended so long in
expectation of Turnone and Guise, and filled the Conclave with confusion and
controversy, Ferrara receiving no small curses from Carpi's friends.

At last Farnese resolved courageously to put an end to the Conclave, and
without giving time to Mantua's friends to corroborate themselves in this
noise, and distraction, he gave himself over, with the help of his confidents,
to set up the Cardinal Medici, who immediately upon his assistance was created
Pope, after 4 months and some days vacancy of the Sea, with the votes of 44
Cardinals, at 7 a clock at night, on the 24 of December; and having made choice
of the name of Pius the 4th. he was the next morning betimes published, with
great joy to the people; But above all to Cardinal Farnese, who triumphed to
see the Papacy the fourth time at his beck, and the Farnesian Nipotisme,
Conquerours in four several Conclaves.

Pope Pius the 4th: Governed six years, and died the 10th. of December 1565.
and on the 2d. of January the Cardinals entered into the Conclave, to the number
of 49. a number greater than had been formerly seen, which gave many occasion
to believe, that amongst such a multitude, there must needs be great difference
of opinions, the Election by consequence long, and the disturbances in the
Conclave infinite.

But experience proved, they were all mistaken, and because they did not
conside^, that it is the heads of the factions which make the Pope, and not the
number of Cardinals, who follow the heads commonly, and (with respect be it
spoken) it is upon their resolutions the tediousness or expedition of the
Conclave depends.

And truly they who understood the mysteries and affairs of the Conclave,
concluded this would be short, and without much contect, by reason of the
fewness of the factions therein, for neither the Emperor nor the King of
France, had any at all there. The Emperor had none, because he was immediately
upon his assumption to the Empire, environed with so many difficulties, he had
no time to think of the interests of Rome, the King of France had none, because
he was very young, his Kingdom harrassed with civil and intestine Wars, and his
Mother a Stranger; King Philip, though free and at leisure, and the example of
Charles the 5th. fresh in his memory, who took more care to watch over the
proceedings at Rome, then of all the rest, cared not to give himself any
trouble, but left that whole business to the Cardinals.

In this manner the Conclave was divided into two Factions of the Nephews only,
the one of the Creatures, and other friends of Paul the 3d. which was guided by
the Cardinal Alexander Farnese; the other of the Creatures of Pius the 5th.
managed by Cardinal Charl^ Borromeo, Nephew to the said Pope, each of them
resolved not to let the Papacy slip out of the hands of their own Creatures:
The Cardinal Ferrara, by reason of his infirmities, which confined him to his
Bed, was not able to manage, or form, any faction, though Cardinal d'Este his
Nephew attempted to have done it.

Of these two Cardinals the heads of factions, Borrom^^ had the greater number,
and it is certain, never any Popes Nephew entered the Conclave with a greater
party than Borromeo, nor did the Cardinals ever show themselves more
affectionate, than they did in this.

Cardinal Farnese, though he came short in the number of his Cardinals, yet he
was before Borromeo in the Excellence of his judgment, and in the conduct of
his designs; as being by a long experience become a perfect Master of the
Conclave, whereas Borromeo was beginning only to be a disciple.

The first attempts in this Conclave, were made by the Cardinals M^rone,
Amulio, Buoncompagno, which being excluded for sundry reasons, Pisa,
Montepulciano, and Ara-Celi were proposed; but they met with as many
difficulties as the other, and such indeed as were sufficient to put them out
of all hopes.

Borromeo who pretended to nothing more than to expedite the Conclave, pitched
his eye upon Cardinal Alexandrino, of whom he had not thought in the beginning,
concluding he might make him Pope, because the whole College loved him, for
his goodness and worth, and by consequence knew him fit for so high a degree;
having imparted his mind to Cardinal Altemps, who was a great friend of
Alexandrino's, he demonstrated to him, that he could not employ his interest
better, than in the behalf of a person of his bounty and merit, and of great
affection to Borromeo: and in this manner the judgments of Borromeo and
Altemps, being discovered to Cardinal Farnese, he concurred without much
difficulty, as well because, he found it impossible to make any of his own
Creatures, as for the love he professed to the said Alexandrino, with whom he
had had some discourse, about his Election, advising to put himself into the
number of Competitors, offering him his service, which was not penetrated by
Borromeo.

Things being in this posture, there was nothing wanting, but the publication
of the state of affairs, in which Borromeo proceeded but slowly, out of a
reverence he bore to Cardinal Morone, whom he durst not exclude openly from the
Papacy, having promised to stand firm always for him: but at length by the
mediation of Cardinal Altemps, he let him understand it; wherefore Morone who
was going on warily in his designs, seeing things impossible to be altered,
commended the Election of Alexandrino, perhaps stimulated by his Conscience,
for he could not deny but it passed to a person who was repleat with all
necessary virtues.

The conclusion therefore being discovered, with no small admiration, to such
as had not yet penetrated into any thing of the transaction, every body ran
with emulation, to the adoration of Alexandrino, though many wondering much at
the suddenness of the affair, could scarce believe it was true which they saw:
and thus Michael Ghisilieri of the City of Bosco, six miles from the City of
Alexandria della Paglia, was created Pope, and called from thence Alexandrino:
which Election, and adoration followed the 7th. of January 1566. with the Votes
of 52. Cardinals, three being arrived after the rest were entered the Conclave.

He would be called Pius the 5th. as a token of his gratitude to Borromeo, by
renewing the memory of his Uncle, besides the esteem he had really for him; nor
was he less unthankful to Farnese. In this Conclave, the authority of the
Nephews of Paul the 3d. and of Pius the 4th. was so absolute, it may be said
they were but one interest, seeing two such potent factions agreed in so short
a time, for the vacancy of the Sea was but 26. days.

Seven years Pius the 5th. lived, and then passed into a better life, the first
of May 1572. and on the 10th. after the usual celebration of his Funeral, 52.
Cardinals entered the Conclave, and began their practices in manner following.

The friends of Morone having tried the first day of their ingress, to make him
Pope, and finding all their labor in vain, they betook themselves to other
designs. The Cardinal Granvela at that time joined himself to Farnese, who had
the most followers of them all; they had long discourse together about the
Election of a new Pope, and at last came to an agreement, that Fa^nese should
name three persons at his pleasure, and Granvela obliged himself to choose one
of the three.

Farnese was contented, and named Cardinal Montepulciano, Buon compagno, and
^^rreggio: The nomination being accepted by Granvela, he went immediately to
find out Cardinal Alexandrino, the Nephew of Pius the 5th. who seeing the
Cardinals resolved not to choose any one Pope, who had received his Purple but
lately, as all the Cardinals created by his Uncle had done; having consulted
with his faction likewise, and received this answer, that he should take what
resolution he thought best; he told Granvela, that of the three named by
Farnese, he was for Buon compagno; and so this was communicated to Borromeo,
and Altemps, who passionately desired that Election; and moreover it being
known that Ferdinando di Medici his Kinsman, was well affected to i^ too, the
business was concluded, and published through the Conclave, the Cardinals
meeting in the Gallery, to go together and adore him in his Chamber.

There were eight Cardinals only who knew nothing of this business, to whom a
Conclavist was sent to give them advertisement; the Cardinal Vercelli ran first
into the Chamber of Buon compagno, and taking him by the hand said, Will your
illustrious Lordship come to receive the Pontificate: To which he answered, My
Lords, have you Votes enough? and Vercelli replying Yes, he rise up, and took
certain Writings along with him, that they might not fall into the hands of
others, who are wont to plunder that Cardinals Chamber who is made Pope, of
whatsoever is found in the Conclave.

In the mean time there arrived above 40. Cardinals, all of them conducting him
in great triumph to the Chapel, where they held the Scrutiny, and he had every
Vote that was there; being desired his name, he chose to be called Gregory the
13th. as well for the devotion he professed to that Saint, as because he was
created Cardinal by Pius the 4th. upon Saint Gregory's day, the 12th. of March
1565. and in this manner Gregory the 13th. was made Pope, after the Sea had
been vacant 13. days, and the Conclave 3. and no more; he was published to the
people the 13th. of May; a strange thing to see the three factions, of three
Popes, agreed with so good order.

Gregory dyed the 10th. of April 1585. after he had held the Papacy 13. years;
he dyed a while after the arrival of the Japan Ambassadors, who were received
with great magnificence in Rome. The 21. after, the Cardinals entered the
Conclave, to the number of 39. there being no more at that time present at
Court, and it was Easter Day in the Evening when they entered; a while after,
there arrived three more, viz. Madrucci, Austria, and Vercelli; before Austria
could be admitted to come in, there were many difficulties raised, but they
being appeased, he was received, with the general satisfaction of the whole
Conclave.

The Cardinals were divided into six factions, Farnese was chief of one, d'Este
of another, Alexandrino of a third, Medici of the fourth, Altemps of the fifth,
and Cardinal San Sextus, Nephew to Gregory, of the sixth, which was the
greatest of all.

Those who were judged most worthy, and most likely to be Popes, were 14.
Farnese and Savello, created by Paul the 3d. Sirletto, San Gregorio, Paleotto,
Santa Croce, and Como, created by Pius the 4th. Mo^alto, Cesis, Albano, and
Santa Severina, created by Pius the 5th. Torres, Mondovi, Santi Quattro, and
Castagna, created by Gregory the 13th.

The same day the Cardinals entered into the Conclave, they swore to the
observation of certain decrees, resolved by them in the Congregation; and a
while after, the friends of Cardinal Cesis began their practices, with more
fury than fruit, Cardinal San Sisto opposing them publicly. After that there
were some endeavors for Sirletto, Cardinal Medici and Altemps using all their
art in his behalf, but 'twas impossible; he was presently excluded, Farnese,
Este, and Sforza declaring against him.

Sirletto being excluded as a person improper for the management of affairs,
though otherwise of great learning; San Sisto attempted for Cardinal Castagna,
his Creature, and a person certainly of very great worth; but all the ancient
Cardinals were against him, as being one of the last Cardinals that were
created: Farnese also, and Savelli were mentioned, but in vain, they finding
great obstacles too, but especially Savelli, who was reputed a person of too
Majestic a nature, and rigid to excess.

In the mean time Cardinal Este, Medici, and Alexandrino, being agreed
privately, concluded to make Montalto Pope, who being looked upon by all
people, as a person affectionate, bountiful, learned, quiet, and one zealous in
the service of God, they thought he would meet with little opposition,
especially there being none that gave the Cardinals so much honor as he,
reputing himself inferior to them all, and that so much, that he oftentimes
suffered himself to be called Asino della Marca, by pretending either not to
understand, or not to regard; and this happened in the Congregations, by reason
he never contended with any one, to establish his own opinion, but always
commended the opinions of other people.

Este, Medici, and Alexandrino went one night to Montalto's Chamber, where they
found him a bed, pretending himself as careless and indifferent, as if there
were not another person with him in the Conclave: being entered, they told him
they came to give him notice of their resolution to make him Pope the next
morning betimes. Montalto replied, Me Pope, a poor old man, full of
infirmities, how can I think of the Papacy, who have scarce time to consider of
my death; so short do I look upon my days, and so grievons my distempers.

The three Cardinals, as it were by consent, told him, that God would give him
life and strength for the well Government of the Church. To which Montalto
replied, with a sickly and weak voice, That he would never have accepted so
great a charge as the Papacy was, if their most illustrious Lordships did not
first promise to assist him, with their virtue and experience, confessing his
own faculties very unable for the government of the Church, without their help
and assistance.

These words inflamed the desires of these Cardinals, to hasten the exa^tation
of Montalto, concluding they should at their pleasure command both Church and
Court 100, as soon as he was received to the Papacy; and they were the more
confident, because they knew he had but two Nephews, sons to a Sister of his
called Camilla, w^o were young, and inexperient in all kind of Politics, and
learning.

San Sisto understanding the practice of Montalto, and knowing the animos^ty he
had born toward Gregory his Uncle, he had thoughts of opposing him, but he was
overcome by the persuasions of the three Cardinals aforesaid, and concurred with
them: So that on Wednesday the 24th. of April, after thirteen days vacancy of
the Sea, by common consent they chose him Pope, who called himself Sisto, in
complacency to Cardinal San Sisto, as some suppose; but the truth is, it was to
renew the memory of Sista the 4th. who was a Friar of the same Conventual Order
of Francisc^ns, which he was of. The Cardinals Este, Medici, and Alexandrino
were ready to bi^e their thumbs, repenting very much that they had made a Pope,
who declared as soon as he was as^^m'd, that he had no need of Companions in
the Government, and drove them all three out of Rome.

Five years and four months Sextus reigned in an absolute Monarchical way, and
with a Majesty much contrary to the humility he pretended when he was a
Cardinal, and with a manner so austere, he was a terror to the remotest of his
Enemies: he died of a Malignant Fever the 27 of August at night, in the year
1590. His Ex(...)ies of nine days being over, and the usual solemnities
performed; on Friday the 7th. o^ September, 54 Cardinals entered the Conclave,
divided into several factions, but particularly under these three heads,
Montalto who commanded the Creatures of Sextus, his Uncle; Sforza who conducted
Gregory the 13th's Creatures; and the Cardinal Ascanio Colonna who had twelve
Cardinals of several places at his devotion.

For six days together Montalto, and Ascanio Colonna used all their art to make
Marco Antonio Colonna Pope, who was a Cardinal of great worth, and signal
ver^^e, against whom Sforza and Borromeo opposed themselves with such violence,
that all the friends of Colonna despaired of his success.

However Montalto being encouraged by his Creatures, resolved to persist, and
tire out the Cardinals with the tediousness of the Conclave, rather than recede
one step from his resolution, although the Spaniards declared themselves
averse, who exhorting him to name some other person, could get no answer but
this, that when he should see the interests of Colonna desperate, he would
throw himself upon his knees before the Image of the Holy Ghost, and would draw
lots as it were for a Cardinal to name.

These passages being related to Cardinal Marco Antonio Colonna, he went to
Montalto, and told him, that it was not suitable to the mind of a Christian, to
let the Church continue in her Widdowhood for his sake, or that he should go
about to obtrude a Pastor upon the Flock of Christ: adding other reasons also,
which so wrought upon Montalto, that he became inclinable to favor the
interest of San Marcello, a Cardinal of Genoa, called Gio. Battisto Castagna,
which designs were laid by Cardinal Sforza, and the other Genoese Cardinals,
who had got 25 votes, to whom Montalto being joined, they published all night
long San Marcello to be Pope; and on the next morning the 15 of Sept. being
Sunday, the Scrutiny was made, in which all the votes were in his favor, he
being made Pope 18 days after the vacancy of the Sea, and interrogated about
his name, declared he would be called Urban the 7th.

But here we must not omit the opinion Sextus the 5th. had always, that the
Cardinal Castagna was to succeed him in the Papacy, and many times he gave him
a hint thereof; amongst the rest, going with the said Cardinal to see a Street
which he had ordered to be made from Santa Maria Maggiore, to Trinita de Monti,
and I know not how much beyond; turning to San Marcello, he told him in the
presence of several Prelates, This way is begun by us, but will be finish^d by
you.

Another time, not long before his death being at Dinner, toward the latter
end they brought in (Peri) Pears, he cut one in the midst and found it rotten,
he cut another and found it so too, whereupon holding the Pear in his hand, he
said, Li Romagni son satii de Peri, e cercano Castagne. The Romans are weary of
Pears, and had rather have Chestnuts, by Pere, meaning himself who was of the
Family of the Peretti, and by Castagne, the Cardinal Marcello of the Family of
Castagna.

Thirteen days Urban was Pope, and died on the 27th. of Sept. in the morning;
the 8th, of October the Cardinals entered into the Conclave to the number of
52. and two that went in afterward, viz. Austria, and Gaetano, who arrived to
complete the number of 54. which were divided into 7 Factions, and was the
principal occasion of the protraction of that Conclave.

The first practices were for the Cardinal Colonna, and they so brisk, that it
was published abroad that he was created Pope; but when it came to a Scrutiny,
his votes were two few, though many had offered themselves before they gave
their votes.

Colonna being out of hopes, Sforza, and Montalto began to set up Mondovi, and
were confident of effecting it, because he was a Cardinal very well worthy of
that dignity; but for all that, neither his virtues, nor their persuasions,
could do any good, for the friends of Aldobrandino undertook it in his favor,
preferring his virtues before any bodies; but the Cardinals took little notice
of that, their private interest only being their aim, they excluded this person
for this reason, and the other for another, inspight, of all the abundance of
their virtue.

Albano as soon as Aldobrandino was excluded, came next upon the Stage, and
things seemed so well disposed toward him, that every one concluded him Pope;
but to that concord of opinions, there appeared a proportionable share of
difficulties, every one believing him incapable of the Papacy, notwithstanding
his great worth; and indeed though he was but 54 years of age, his infirmities
were such, as obliged him to keep his Bed almost continually, a thing that made
his Election a kind of scruple of Conscience.

Seven weeks were already past in the Conclave without any thing but proposing,
and excluding, the Spaniards, and the Florentines, not so much as mentioning
Santa Severina, who was so much in their minds, judging it best to let the
Cardinals tire themselves out, and to put difficulties upon others designs,
thereby at last to facilitate their own; but when they came to the stress of
their business, they found more difficulty than they imagined: Cardinal Revere
was put into the balance against him, a man of great learning, and integrity
of life, besides good experience in matters of policy; but his hopes lasted not
long neither, he was forced also to lay down, as well as his Neighbors, who
were in a better predicament.

To take away this great discrepancy of opinions, it was thought fit to select
seven persons, one out of every Faction, but such as should not be suspected by
any one, and these were San Gregorio, Sans, Rusticucci, Aragoga, Sarnano,
Lancelotti, and Alano; but for all this, that design came to nothing, they
being not able to agree of a single person.

The Spaniards had several times attempted with great Artifice, to make
Paleotto Pope, a Cardinal full of all requisite qualities to make an excellent
Pope, and though he had many Cardinals against him, he mist very narrowly one
morning of being created, some running for friendships sake, others that they
might not appear his professed enemies, insomuch that there were a greater
number of Cardinals in the Chapel, than was necessary to make him Pope; the
chief of his Domestics imprudently upon this, without expecting the Scrutiny,
published it abruptly that he was already created, so that several Couriers
were sent to know the news, and all the people were got into Saint Peter's.

But when they came to the Scrutiny, poor Paleotto had but 17 votes, and in the
Access (which was the first time it began to be given) he could come but to 14.
receiving his exclusion, with such circumstances of disdain, as perhaps have
not been heard of before, and with no little mortification to the Spaniards.

After this, Cardinal Santi Quattro was recommended, a great Divine, a great
Politician, and well practiced in affairs of the Court, where he had been for
above 52 years in continual employment in the Congregations; but God Almighty
(who had reserved that greatness for another time) took away the necessary
means of his Election in this Conclave.

Cardinal Montalto last of all, (who had the greatest party, being followed by
26 Cardinals) resolved to put an end to these discords, by promoting the
Cardinal of Cremona, in whose person the Spaniards, and Sforza, had declared
they would concur. On the 4th of December at night, he went himself to carry
the news of his resolution, going up and down all night long, distributing such
things as were necessary; and calling his votes together as much as he could
possibly. In the morning betimes, in the company of Cardinal Sforza, he with
many others, went to his Chamber, and conducted him to the Chapel where the
Scrutiny was made with open votes; he received the suffrages of all of them in
this manner, but gave his own for Cardinal Cecano. The Adoration was Published
to the people in the usual Balcony, with the name of Gregory the 14th. which
laying aside his own name Nicholas, he took upon him as soon as the Scrutiny
was over. And thus Gregory the 14th. was chosen, after two months and nine
days vacancy of the Sea, and two whole months reclusion of the Conclave.

After a tedious sickness of many days, and after he had been many times
thought dead, Gregory dyed at last on Tuesday the 15th. of October 1591. having
Reigned ten months and ten days. There were 65 Cardinals in the Sacred
College, but there entered into the Conclave (which began the 25th. of
October) but 56. nine of them being absent by reason of their distance, viz.
three in France, three in Spain, one in Poland, one in Malta, and the other in
Lorain: before they entered into the Conclave, it was the common opinion, not
of the Cardinals only, but of the people in general, that Cardinal Facchinetti
would certainly be Pope, and their opinion was much confirmed, when in the
distribution of the Chambers, which is done by lots, Facchinetti's Chamber
happened to fall exactly in the same place where the Popes Chair used to stand
(...) the Consistory days; besides which there was also another good Omen,
which was, that whilst they were busy in the Church of Saint Peter about the
Adoration of Gregory the 14th. his Miter fell off, by I know not what accident,
and happened to rest upon the head of Facchinetti, whereupon the Pope himself
said to him, You shall be our Successor.

There were two Factions the most prevalent in the Conclave, that of the
Spaniards managed by Cardinal Mendozza, and that of Montalto which consisted of
twenty. The Spaniards had no great difficulty to exclude all the Competitors
which they did not affect, and to include one of their own followers, Montalto
being obliged in several respects, to gratify that Crown, from which he had
received many Advantages, and enjoyed many privileges in the Kingdoms the
Spaniards were possessed of; besides which, his Brother Don Michael had bought
the Principality of Celano in the Catholic State; all which put together,
engaged him not to relinquish his affection to Spain.

The Spaniards being secure in all this, and knowing according to the subtilty
of their principles, that they were able without controversy to govern the
Conclave, and make a Pope at their pleasure; they signified to Montalto his
Catholic Majesty's intention to make Antonio Facchinetti (who was Cardinal di
Santiquattro) Pope, and therefore they desired his most Illustrious Lordship to
concur with them in the Election of a person so exquisitely worthy, and proper
for the Government of the Church in such times as those.

Montalto immediately consented, without making any trial of his creatures, or
attempting to try the fortune of his friends, so that his answer being
returned, and favorable to their designs, the Spaniards, Mendozza, Sforza,
Borromeo, Gaetano, the two Colonna's, Ascanio, and Marco, Antonio, Mattei,
Lancelotto, and others went to the Chamber of Montalto, and taking him out,
with the greatest part of the followers (who were already come together at the
congratulations of the others) into the Chamber of Facchinetti, where several
others were met before, and particularly Sfondrato and his Adherents, the 29th.
of October in the morning.

Medozza, and Sforza, took Santi Quattro under the arm, and conducted him to
Paulina's Chapel, whether even those who had the Gout, and kept their beds,
made themselves be carried, to have the honor to give him their votes, which
votes were given open, and he afterward published to the people by the name of
Innocent the 9th.

This Conclave may be said to be the best, and most peaceable, that ever was
seen, many things concurring to make it wonderful; the first was the shortness
of time, the Sea being vacant but 13 days, and the Conclave continued but
three; the second, the quality of the person, as being most worthy of so
honorable a dignity; the third, that though there were seventeen Cardinals
pretenders, and of great reputation in the College, yet there was but one as
it were spoken of; and last of all, that all Factions should comply with the
Spaniards, and make a Pope according to their directions.

Innocent lived but two months, and died the 29th. of December; and the usual
days of solemnizing his obsequies being past, 52 Cardinals entered the
Conclave on the 10th. of January, all of them divided in their inclination, so
that many believed it was impossible but the Election of this Pope must be with
great difficulties, and disturbances, seeing things in so ill a way. Yet the
Spaniards made no doubt to finish it in three days, as they had done the
Conclave before, having gained the Venetians already, and looking upon Montalto
as their own, who as they presumed could do no less than follow the
inclinations of their King, seeing that he enjoyed an annual Rent of above
50000. Crowns in his Dominions.

The first day therefore the Spaniards began their practices very eagerly for
Santa Severina, having gained Montalto also, who promised to employ all his
interest with his party in favor of the said Santa Severina. There were 32
Cardinals in the Conclave for the Election of that person, and twenty for his
Exclusion; but they so united and firm for his Exclusion, that there was never
seen in a Conclave, so invincible a combination.

The Spaniards tried all ways, promises, offers, threats, stratagems, and at
last with Montalto they left no stone unturned, that might mollify the
excluders, and prevail with them to give their votes for Montalto; but all was
to no purpose, and therefore seeing things desperate, they took up another
expedient, but with no small displeasure to Santa Severina who was already by
several saluted Pope.

But before they came to any other resolution, having gained three Cardinals
more to their 32. and made them up 35. which was exactly two thirds, which were
necessary to the Creation of a Pope, they pitched upon a day when the excluders
were careless and dispersed, and without much noise shut themselves into the
Chapel, with intention to make Santa Severina Pope, with open votes; but it
being understood by Sforza, Sfondrato, Aquaviva, Borromeo, and Altemps, who
were the chief of the Excluders, they flew immediately to the Chapel, beating
impetuously at the doors, and protesting a Nullity so fiercely, that they which
were within, to prevent the inconvenience which might follow, opened the doors;
where when they were entered, they doubled the cries of their protestation of
Nullity.

Santa Severina full of humility and moderation said, If I be the occasion of
all these rumors, open the door of the Conclave, for I will go out with all my
heart, if that may quiet this storm. Cardinal Sforza's coming into the Chapel,
turned some of their votes, insomuch that the favourors of Santa Severina,
persisting still to come to a Scrutiny, of 35 which they thought they had, they
had but 28 only that stuck to him.

Santa Severina by this means being perfectly out of hopes, Madruccio was
proposed, but without any success; after him Como, and Peleotto, were in
nomination, but with as little fortune as the other, in sundry respects, after
which it was negotiated for Colonna, Salviati, Mondovi, and Rusticucci, but to
no more purpose than the rest.

The excluders of Santa Severina, to free themselves from a continual jealousy
wherewith they were agitated, resolved to send to Montalto, and to let him know
then when he resolved to create a Pope out of his own creatures, that they
would condescend with all their hearts, and he should have all their votes;
which message was carried to Montalto by Cardinal Borromeo, and received with
great satisfaction.

Montalto had already placed his thoughts upon Cardinal Aldobrandi^o, for the
worthiness of his qualities, and for the great esteem the Sacred College had
of his person; he made choice of him, and proposed him to them from the bottom
of his heart: his inclinations being known, all those Cardinals who sent first
to him, and made him that proposition, embracing the tidings with great joy,
desired him to proceed in the design with all possible expedition.

Montalto began immediately to set his Engines a work, and to communicate his
resolutions to his creatures, which he found all most readily disposed;
afterward he went to Madruccio, who had a great party, in the Conclave but had
no good correspondence with Albrandino; yet considering the merit of the
person, and waving his particular passions, he declared himself in favor of
Aldobrandino, and went to him to his Chamber, where he found him full of so
much modesty, that though he saw himself as good as Pope already, yet he showed
not the least token of ambition or joy; but on the contrary, he seemed more
desirous to avoid, than acquire the Papacy.

Montalto publishing thorough the Conclave, the common resolution of making
Aldobrandino Pope, the Cardinals went unanimously to his Chamber the 30th. of
Jannary at night, in the year 1592. and taking him out with incredible
applause, they conducted him to the Chapel of Paulina, where by a public
Scrutiny he was Elected Pope by the votes of all the Cardinals, with
unimaginable concord, after the Sea had been vacant a month, and the Conclave
shut up 20 days.

The Election being made, he fell down upon his knees before the Altar of the
Chapel; and the Masters of the Ceremonies, asking him according to the usual
manner, whether he accepted the Election; he gave them no answer, but with his
tears, which the Cardinals beholding, answered for him, Yes, Yes, he accepts
it. But the Masters of the Ceremonies insisted, that it was necessary he should
confirm it with his own mouth; after a thousand protestations to Heaven he
confirmed it, and being asked his name, he said he would be called Clement the
8th. he was published with incredible acclamations of the people, and it may be
said that he was the third Pope made by Cardinal Montalto, which added no small
reputation to the Nipotisme of Sixtus.

Clement lived 13 years and a month, and died to the great regret of all
Christendom, in the year 1605, the 3d. of March, his Funeral was celebrated
most sumptuously with universal tears and lamentation, after which in the
evening the 14th. of the said May, 60 Cardinals went into the Conclave, in
order to the Election of a new Pope, one of Pius the 4th. which was Como the
Dean, four of Gregory the 13th. eleven of Sixtus, five of Gregory the 14th. one
of Innocent the 9th. which was his Nephew Santi Quattro, and eight and thirty
of Clements, of whom there were 25 who followed Aldobrandino with great
affection, as the chief of the Clementines.

The greatest practices were for Baronius and Bellermine; but Baronius being
supported by Aldobrandino, who was followed by a great number of Cardinals; in
the Scrutinies which were made, he had always more votes than all the rest of
the Competitors, having had 30 at one time, 31 at another, and 32 at a third;
but in four Scrutinies which they had, he could never arrive at two thirds, by
reason of the brisk opposition made by the Spaniards, Montalto; and others.

The Cardinal de Joyense, who had no other design but to make a Pope to the
satisfaction of his King, despairing of Baronius, began his practices for
Fiorenza, and he knew how to manage them so well, that all difficulties
overcome, he prevailed, that on the first of April, after 29 days vacancy of
the Sea, all the Cardnals went to the Chamber of Fiorenza, and saluting him
Pope, conducted him to the Chapel, where they gave their open votes; and thus
Alexander di Medici was made Pope by the name of Leo the 11th. and published to
the people who had understood his Election the Evening before.

The joy of the Friends and Relations of Leo, lasted not long, for he died 25
days after his creation: the suddenness of his death, made many believe, that
the same Cardinals being still in Rome, divided into their old factions, and
full of the obstinacy of the last Conclave; that for these reasons the Election
of the next Pope would be difficult and long, and not without clamor and
disorder.

But for all these conjectures, humane imagination was oversway'd by Celestial
influence, for the Cardinals entering the Conclave the 10th. of May, to the
number of 50. Madruzzo, and Marcello being sick without: they discharged
themselves from their old combinations, the Spaniards constituting a particular
body, dividing themselves from their Colleagues the first of all. Then the
French thought good to withdraw themselves from their alliance which they had
made with Aldobrandino in the last Conclave, and stand upon their own legs,
Montalto, Farnese, Sforza, Este. Santi Quattro, Sfondrato, and Visconti, united
themselves, and their dependants, and made up a body of 21 votes: Aldobrandino
continued in his usual Monarchy with 26 votes at his devotion.

The design and object of all these Factions, was the same with the design of
the last Conclave, that is, to procure advantages every one to himself, to keep
their Enemies as far from the Papacy as they could, and to advance their
friends as much as was possible; but with this difference, that in the other
conclave, the aim of the Colleagues, was (I mean the Colleagues against
Aldobrandino) to exclude all the creatures of Aldobrandino, though they were
their friends, whereas in this, they were only for choosing out a friend, let
him be of whose Faction he would.

The Papal Cardinals were many, five, creatures of Montalto, viz. Pinello,
Ascoli, Saoli, Camerino, and Montalpano; ten of Aldobrandino's, Baronlus,
Bianchetto, Arigone, Panfilio, Bellarmine, Ginnasio, San Marcello, Tosco,
Borghese, and Saint Clement; and Como, and Virona, who were neuters, and would
not enter into any Faction. Of these, some were excluded by the Spaniard for
their interest, some by the French for theirs, others by Aldobrandino for his,
and others by the Colleagues for private reasons, and perhaps more capriccious
than prudent.

The greatest practices were begun by Aldobrandino in Tosco's behalf, and
perhaps with greater ardour than was ever seen before in the Conclave; and
because the Spaniards, and French, he discerned, were favorable enough, he
made after a great deal of clamor and, dispute, all his creatures meet one day
in the Fountain Gallery, and then discovered his resolution to carry Tosco to
the Chapel, and create him Pope.

But this advice was not approved by Sforza, persuading him to use the utmost
of his power to gain Montalto, without whose concurrence, there would be
nothing done. Aldobrandino was persuaded for the present, but it lasted not
long, for in the morning betimes being assured of 35 votes, certain, and
professed, besides others who had promised to concur upon a necessity of two or
three votes; he went into the Chapel with the Cardinals, resolving firmly to
come to a Scrutiny, and leave out all the excluders of Tosco; who having news
of all this, they took up Baronius by the way, and carrying him into another
corner of the Chapel, they cried out, Here is the Pope; Aldobrandino's party
showing of Tosco about, and crying out, He is here.

This days insolence was very great, both on the one side and the other, every
one endeavoring to draw the Cardinals from their parties, not only with
persuasions, but with juglings, and the strength of their hands; so that in the
controversy, Serafino was hurt in the arm, and Visconti tumbled upon the
ground, who being angry, got up and cried, I would not make a Pope at this
rate, though 'twere Saint Peter himself, and went out immediately; but the two
parties continuing obstinate, had given order to have meat brought them into
the Chapel, and several Tables were preparing, when Montalto fearing Tosco
would be chosen at last, he went to Aldobrandino and told him, That for his
part he would join with him for any other of his creatures but Tosco, yea
though the promotion of San Clement should be re-assum'd, who was excluded by
him before; and so they fell upon the said practice.

To be short, this I shall say, that that day several were very near the
Papacy; Tosco was excluded by the favorers of Baronius; Baronius by the
Adherents of Tosco. San Clement was looked upon as certain to be Pope, and
perhaps was nearer it than either of the other, had not Cardinal Farneses
persuasions prevented his Election. The French, who with more prudence than all
of them, stood neuter in all this clutter, were advised to make Serafino Pope,
and to go forth of the Conclave with the reputation of having made a French
Pope; but they would not venture, though the common opinion, as was afterward
reported, was, that if they had tried, they had certainly carried it.

At last Aldobrandino being inspired, as we ought to believe, by the Holy
Ghost, resolved to put an end to these scandals, and the rather, because a
report ran about the City, that the Cardinals were together by the ears, and
had beaten and battered one another bravely; for this reason, he proposed to
Montalto, and the rest of the Excluders of his creatures, the Cardinal
Borghese, a person looked upon by him as the most affectionate of all his
creatures; which proposition was acceptable both to Montalto, the Spaniards,
and the French, who went all to him, conducted him from his Chamber to the
Chapel, (some little difficulties being first removed) and so on the
seventeenth of May, after 19 days vacancy of the Sea, Camillo Borghese was
saluted and elected Pope, by a general vote, in the 53d* year of his age, he
being the youngest of all the Cardinals which stood for the Papacy, and being
asked his name, he told them he would be called Paul the 5th. and with that
name he was published to the people.

Paul being dead the 28th. of January 1621. after he had been 16 years in the
Pontifical Chair. The usual obsequies being over, on the 8th. of February 52
Cardinals divided into 5 Factions, entered the Conclave; the first was
Montalto's, who was followed by five which were his creatures; the second was
Aldobrandino's, who had nine; the third Borghese, who had twenty seven; the
fourth of the Spaniards which consisted but of three; and the 5th. of the
French, who had but one Cardinal only: besides which there were the Cardinals
Medici, Farnese, Sforza, and Este, who every one made a Faction for himself.

Being entered into the Conclave, all these Factions reduced themselves to two;
the first and greatest was Borghese's, who was followed by the Spaniards,
Montalto, Medici, Este, and Farnese; the other was Aldobrandino's, who had on
his side the French, Vbaldino, Orsino, and two or three Cardinals, segregate
from the other Factions.

Borghese began the promotion of Cardinal Campora, with great impetuosity, and
because it was so violent, it lasted but a day, Aldobrandino, Orsino, and
Vbaldino, appearing as fierce for his exclusion: in short, there were above
twenty excluders, and the rather, because Campora being a professed enemy to
the Republique of Venice, the Senate had writ to three of their Cardinals, that
they should by no means concur with such a person, unless they had a mind to be
declared Rebels, and all their Families.

Borghese in the mean time found out an occasion of discoursing with Cardinal
Vbaldino who made the greatest noise against Campora of them all; he
endeavored to persuade him to change his thoughts, and to remember his
obligations to Paul the 5th. his Uncle, from whose hands he received his Cap:
urging that he ought not to show himself his professed enemy, by denying to
concur with him in the Election of one of his creatures. True it is, replied
Vbaldino, I have, and will still do my utmost against Campora: not that I deny
to second your Eminence in any of your creatures, but because I know the person
unworthy of such a degree; and if you will make experiment of my fidelity, and
that I am not otherwise ungrateful to his memory who gave me my Cap, change
your person, and choose another amongst so many of your creatures, as are
worthy of that honor; adding some other words, more particular and express,
and naming of his creatures, Millino, Lanti, Crescentius, and Araceli, and at
last he told him if he resolved to name Ludovisio, he would oblige himself, not
only to assist him with his own vote, but he would draw off all the opposers of
Campora, to Ludovisio's side.

To this Borghese replied, that he would not name one out of the Conclave,
seeing he was then in his Bishopric of Bologna; but that which was most
strange, was, whilst Borghese was speaking these very words, news was brought
in, that Ludovisio was then at the door of the Conclave, whether his friends
were running to receive him: from whence Vbaldino took the courage to say, and
now your Eminence cannot but name him.

Borgheses heart was on fire, to see the Excluders so violent against him; so
that he went to the chief of the Spaniards, and concluded with them; that all
the Cardinals who had any affection to Campora, were to be called, and to
resolve upon the last course that was to be taken, and if by accident they
should have votes enough, they should make the Election, both with suffrages,
and access.

The Excluders having notice of all this, they met in the Chamber of Cardinal
Bevilacqua; particularly Orsino, Sforza, Vbaldino, Fonti, and Pio, who were
they which instigated the rest: Now whilst Aldobrandino and his party were
studying the exaltation of Campora, and what way they were to compass his
Election; the other Lords were considering what allegation they were to use,
even in the Chapel, for the Exclusion of the said Campora: Amongst other
contrivances, it was resolved they should cry out with a loud voice, that he
was altogether unworthy of the Popedom, in respect of the great offenses of his
youth, his Homicides, his Simonies, and other things; of which they produced
the Processes in the Conclave, to make his guilt evident to all the Cardinals:
To which it was added, that Campora being a professed Enemy to France, and the
State of Venice, to make him Pope, would be no less than to put the public
peace of Italy in danger, and be perhaps the destruction both of Christendom
and the Church.

But these things were not published, as was resolved, in the public Chapel,
only the Cardinal Excluders were there, went up and down, and made long
harangues about the Conclave; However the heads of the Faction resolved upon a
Scrutiny, in which Bellarmine had the greatest number of Votes, and which is
most wonderful, there were not above three for Campora: In so much that
Pignatelli, a great friend of Borgheses said to him, This is their
Masterpiece, let us think of another: and Orsino being very well pleased, went
out of the Chapel, discoursing with Vbaldino of a business they themselves
could not have expected.

The promotion of Campora being found so difficult, Montalto, Vrsino and
Vbaldino went together to Borghese, entreating him to name another person, and
not to think any longer of one, who was beloved but by very few, and those only
in order to Borgheses service. Borghese was already resolved to make Ludovisio
Pope, and therefore gave them only this answer, That the Pope was made, and
that was Ludovisio; which rejoiced them all so much, that they went immediately
to his Chamber, and forcing him with their congratulations to the Chapel, the
Election was made, and all the votes on his side, Alexander Ludovisio remaining
Pope, after so great, but short a contention, for the Sea was vacant but 14
days. He would needs be called Gregory, though Borghese desired him to suffer
himself to be called Alexander.

Two years and three months Gregory lived, and dyed the 8th. of July 1624. his
exequies being performed, the Cardinals entered 52 into the Conclave, the 19th.
of the said July, and the next day there came in two or three more.

The Factions of Cardinals were five, one of the French, one of the Spaniards,
one of the Neutral or Independent Cardinals, another of the creatures of Paul
the 5th. and the last of the creatures of Gregory the 15th. but these two last
were the greatest, and had most followers, and were managed, the one by
Cardinal Borghese, the other by Cardinal Ludovisi, it being in the power of
either of them, to choose, or exclude, who they pleased.

The pretending Cardinals were many, three of Sixtus the 5th's creation, Sauli,
Monti, and Borromeo; three others of Clement the 8th's, Bandino, Ginnasio, and
Madrozzi; eleven of Paul the 5th. Mellino, Caraffa, Barbarino, Lanti, Verallo,
Ascoli, Araceli, Campora, Santa Susanna, Cennino, and Scaglia; and three of
Gregory the last, which were Gaetano, Sagrato, and Sant Severino.

Cardinal Borghese finding himself backed by so many Pretenders, and with so
numerous a party, he resolved not only to be pertinacious in the Election of
one of his own Creatures, but not so much as to consent to the nommation of
any, unless of his particular Friends: Ludovisio's designs were clear
otherwise, for seeing his three Papable Creatures not like to succeed at that
time, and himself at the head of a Faction of Cardinals, though numerous, yet
drawn together from this place, and from the other; he pretended only to elect
some w^rthy person, but above all, one that was an Enemy to Borghese, who was
his Enemy; or at least, if that could not be obtained, to endeavor to place it
upon some body, in whom for the universality of affection, and his indifference
to all parties, there could be no occasion of jealousy either to the one side
or the other.

But to lay aside all the reasons of either side, for the Inclusion or
Exclusion of the Papable Creatures; I shall say, that there was not one person
ignorant, that in Barbarino all the qualities were resplendent which are
necessary in a good Pope, viz. goodness of life, variety of learning, and
prudence, experienced in all manner of business, all which virtues were so
equally conspicuous in him, it was not known to which of them the pre-eminence
was to be given.

However many people thought it difficult to overcome so many impediments, as
they must meet withal, who should endeavor to take away the Papacy out of his
hands, whose virtues deserved it so well. The greatest obstruction against him
was, the diffidence the Spaniards had of him, by reason of his inclination to
the French, amongst whom he had twice been Nuntio, once in Ordinary, and
another time in Extraordinary. The suspicion the Great Duke had of all the
Families of the Noble Florentines in general, but of the Barbarino's more
particularly, who in the time when it was a Republic, did not hold a due
correspondence with the House of Medici. The little inclination Cardinal
Borghese had always shown to him, founded upon some false informations of the
severity and rigor of his nature, (which was indeed always sincere in matters
of Justice) when he refused to gratify the recommendations of Borghese in the
Signature, excusing himself and declaring, that in such a Court as that, there
ought to be no place, but for the recommendations of Justice.

The open Enmities which had passed betwixt him and the Duke di Bracciano,
Paulo Orsino, and Cardinal Montalto, by which means he became an Enemy to two
Cardinals more, Orsino and Peretti, the most considerable in the Conclave.

All these things put together, made a kind of Medley of Contradictions amongst
the Cardinals, when they discoursed of Barbarino, and the rather, because the
rest of the Pretenders excluded him, to promote themselves: But at last
instructed by the Counsel of the Divine providence, the Cardinals resolved to
change their opinions, on the same day our Savior was transfigur'd, which was
on the 6th. of August, and being assembled on that day, they put an end to the
vacancy of the Sea, which had lasted 28. days, the 17. in which they were shut
up in the Conclave being included, creating Maffeo Barbarino Pope, whom they
judged the most worthy of all, to sustain the Charge of the Universal Empire.

There were present at the Scrutiny 52. Cardinals, with the Votes which they
took of the Cardinal heads, in the Chamber del Infirmi; but in numbering the
Suffrages they found they wanted one, without knowing how it came to pass: Some
said it was of no importance, but the major part affirmed that it was necessary
to give the due perfection to the Election: So as the Lottery was renewed, and
not one receded from his former Vote; there were fifty of them, naming
Barbarino almost in the same words, there being but one Negative, given to
Cardinal Mellino, and his own which he gave to the Cardinal Deacon. In this
manner Maffeo was received to the Pontificate in the 55th. year of his age, and
which is more, he was of a lusty and robust complexion.

This Election, to speak the truth, was held one of the most considerable which
was ever seen, in many respects, but particularly for the number of Cardinals,
ancient and Papable, who seeing so young a person created, lost all hopes of
ever seeing another Conclave, and obtaining at another time, what they could
not get at this; nor were they mistaken, for Barbarino being Pope, thought the
least of dying, of any thing; and it was strange, for he lived so long, till
all the rest of the Competitors in his Conclave, were gone into the other
world, except Caraffa only.

Barbarino having received the Papacy, and which is considerable, without being
twice demanded, as Clement the 8th. had been; he fell down before the Altar to
give God thanks for the great blessing he had received; but being told by the
Cardinal Dean, that it was convenient before all things that he should choose
his name, which having done already in his heart, he told him he would be
called by the name of Urban the eighth.

In the year 1644. the 29th. of July Urban dyed, after he had reigned 21 years
and some months; his Obsequies past, the Cardinals entered into the Conclave
the 9th. of August, to the number of 66. divided into four Factions, one of
French, another of Spaniards, a third of Neutrals, and a fourth of Barbarini,
which consisted of more than 30 Cardinals, and it is certain there was never
any Faction so numerous. In the shutting up of this Conclave, there was a great
breach betwixt the Barbarini, and the Duke Savelli, Marshal of that Conclave,
they pretending it belonged to Don Tadeo, to keep the Keys of the Conclave, as
he was Prefect of Rome, a thing they could not determine; but the College
ordered they should remain for this time in the hands of Savelli, till the new
Pope should publish his particular decree in the case.

The next day which was the tenth, the first Scrutiny was not made according to
the Order in the Bull, by reason the dispute about the Keys protracted the
clausure, insomuch that they were forced to begin it late at night; in which,
Cardinal Arbenoz, head of the Spanish Faction, consisting of 24 Cardinals,
played his part so, that he brake the designs of the Barbarini, who were
confident the same day to have gone out of the Conclave with a Pope of their
own, whom they believed would have been Sacchetti, in whose behalf, all their
designs were intended.

The Spanish Faction thought it expedient to give their votes always to the
Cardinals of the old College, which were Lanti, Cennino, Crescenzio, Cappori,
Bentivoglio, and Roma; so that in many Scrutinies, these Cardinals were
honored, some time this, sometimes that, with several votes. It is not to be
imag^n'd what ways were used by the Barbarini to make Sacchetti Pope, and what
the Spaniards found to exclude him; it is sufficient, that after many days
being in the Conclave, and after innumerable projects and designs, the
Barbarini seeing they could not compass the creation of Sacchetti, they
endeavored to make Fiorenza Pope, who was a creature of theirs, which had
deserved well of their Family; but he having no reputation in the Conclave, nor
credit amongst the Papable Cardinals, they desisted from that enterprise
likewise, and the rather because the French Faction would not admit him, as a
person not at all acceptable to Cardinal Mazarine; besides which, he was
excluded publicly by Montalto, with particular disgust to Albernoz, not that
he loved him, but that being head of the Spanish Faction, he would not have had
the Exclusion past but by his participation; of which Faction Montalto was one
of the Principal Members. This business occasioned some words betwixt Montalto,
and Albenoz.

Afterward the Cardinals Altieri, Monti, and Filomarino, were proposed, but
without any foundation; from whence many people Collected, that it was done
more to procrastinate, and spin out the Conclave, than out of any real desire
they had to have any of them chosen; and that the rather, because they observed
no great zeal either in the Excluders, or Includers, but a certain coolness and
indifference, as if they pretended to play, and did not play at all.

Cardinal Cennino, created by Paul the 5th. being Procurator of the Order of
the Conventual Fathers, was nearest the Papacy of any of them, except
Sacchetti; but the oppositions of the Barbarini alone, did not so much prevail
against him, as the doubt which tormented several Cardinals who recommended
him. They had the memory of Sixtus the 5th. who had been of the same Order, and
was called Fra. Felice, too fresh in their minds: Not but that the said Sixtus
was a good Pope for the Church, and perhaps one of the best have been seen in
the Vatican; but because he was not a good Pope for the Cardinals, his humor
being to Govern alone, without any Companions; wherefore the College were
afraid of falling into that precipice again, and remain excluded from the
Dominion.

At length Cardinal Pamphilio being named by Cardinal Barbarino, and his
practices begun on all hands in his behalf, he refused with great moderation to
be proposed, if Cardinal Anthonio did not name him, who for some particular
interests of his own, had procured his Exclusion by the French. Anthonio denied
it, and declaimed bitterly against his Brother Francisco; but at last laying
aside all pretense of distaste, or else seeing he could not secure his
Exclusion, he consented to name Pamphilio, after an infinite number of
persuasions and promises, both from Francisco his Brother, and Cardinal
Panzirolo his Friend; and the better to recover the favor of Pamphilio, he
brought over the Marquess di San Simon, the King of France's Ambassador, to
approve his resolutions, by the mediation of Cardinal Teodoli, and the Marquess
of San Vito his Brother; but the truth is, there were some treaties and
promises in the case, which savored a little of Simony.

The 15th. of September, though Bichi and Lione labored his Exclusion, as much
as was possible, there were 50. Cardinals went to the Chamber of Pamphilio, to
congratulate his Papacy, as if he were chosen already; which so altered the
minds of Bichi and Lione, and all the rest of the Excluders, that they all
resolved to submit, and humble themselves to the fortune of Pamphilio, and went
therefore to join themselves to that Troop of Cardinals which was rejoicing in
Pamphilio's Chamber, from whence they conducted him to the Chapel in triumph,
to give a prosperous consummation by the Scrutiny, in which there were 48.
Votes in his favor; and thus Gio. Battista Pamphilio, a Noble Roman, was
proclaimed Pope, after the Sea had been vacant 45. days, including the 35.
from the clausure of the Conclave: He assumed the name of Innocent the 10th. in
memory as he professed of Innocent the 8th. a Genoese, of the House of Cibo, a
Kinsman and Benefactor to the Family of the Pamphilii.

This Election was not at all displeasing to the French, though they were not a
little displeased, that Cardinal Anthonio, who for his own private interest had
by his reiterated instances, persuaded that Crown to the Exclusion of
Pamphilio, and afterward consented to it, contrary to the Kings order, and
without expecting the return of a Courier, which was dispatched to that Court,
that they might consult upon the business. For which his most Christian Majesty
thought good to degrade Cardinal Anthonio from the Honor he possessed of being
Protector of France, and to take away his Royal favor from Teodoli, and the
Marquess of San Vito his Brother, and to recall his Ambassador San Simon into
France, to render an account of his proceedings; yet in the mean time, his most
Christian Majesty failed not with all actions of goodness and generosity, to
endeavor a correspondence with the Person and House of the New Pope, giving
him to understand, that the chastisement of the aforesaid persons, proceeded
from the aversion they had to his Election, or at least for that they had
persuaded that Crown to his Exclusion, with arguments much contrary to the
truth.

Innocent being dead on the 7th. of January 1655. after he had reigned ten
years and three months, the Cardinals according to their usual rights entered
the Conclave the 18th. of the same month, to the number of 62. Cardinals, who
were at that time present in Rome; which number in few days was increased by
the accession of 4. more, from their Residencies and Provinces, after the
clausure of the Conclave. I will not describe many particulars of this
Conclave, because that it is fresh in every ones memory, and many pens have
already wearied themselves with the relations of it, though amongst those there
is nothing to be found but ambiguity of words.

I shall only relate, that the most curious thing in that Conclave, was the
faction of the Squadron di `Dio, or the Factione volante, as they called them,
which was so numerous, it was sufficient to have given Exclusion to all the
rest; and which was of more importance, all of them resolved vigorously to
maintain the Privileges of the Electors, and to employ themselves unanimously
for the Exaltation of a person, in whom all the qualifications necessary for a
good Pope, might concur.

These Cardinals were creatures of Innocent, who seeing the Prince Pamphilio
was not a Cardinal Nephew, and therefore could not be made head of the said
Creatures, desired the said Cardinals, that they would unite themselves under
such a head as he (who was Nephew to the Pope which gave all of them their
Caps) should name, and accordingly he proposed Gio. Carlo di Medici, the first
Cardinal created by Innocent; but they replied, they had heads and feet already
to manage themselves withal: However for all this they did not forbear
corresponding both with the said Prince, and Donna Olimpia, who had as great an
interest and authority, as if she had been in the Conclave, and understood how
to comport her self so well, that her very interests were those which prolonged
the Conclave.

But passing by the particulars of the 22. Cardinals, which were Candidates and
Competitors for the Popedom, and the subtilties and stratagems used for the
Inclusion of this person, and the Exclusion of that; I shall only say, that
amongst all the Cardinals which were in the greatest and most general favor
with the College, Cardinal Chigi was the man; upon whom all the designs and
desires of Prince Pamphilio, Innocent's Nephew, were placed, not only for the
reputation he had every where, for the exemplariness of his life, and his
intelligence in Politic (especially Foreign) affairs, but because he seemed
likewise to conform himself to the good intentions which his Uncle always had
had, who (as is reported) discoursing one day with Chigi, and Cardinal
Azzolini, (both of them Secretaries of State) about the Election of his
Successor; Innocent stood still, and looking steadfastly upon Chigi's face,
smiling as it were, he said, Let us talk no more of that, God will provide for
his Church; and it is certain, he co^^gn'd to Chigi before his death, certain
Breviats concerning the establishment of the affairs of his Family,
recommending it to his care, as if he presaged his succession to the Papacy.

The difficulties which were met with in the promotion of this person, were
many notwithstanding, and such as begot no small discords and delays: The
Cardinal di Medici head of the Spanish Faction, had no inclination to Chigi;
Cardinal Barbarino's Faction kept a loof likewise for several respects, and
Grimalai had engaged the French Faction to his Exclusion, upon I know not what
little trifling jealousies which had got into Mazarme's brain.

But God Almighty, who walks in ways impenetrable to the abject apprehension
of man, after eighty days continuance in the Conclave, by an unexpected union,
reconc^^d the minds of the dissenters, so that all differences being composed,
they met by common consent to create Chigi Pope: Upon which a Cardinal of good
judgment, being surpised to see them run with that zeal and impatience to his
Chamber, to make him Gods Vicegerent, said to his companion, What extravagances
are these? the Spaniards will have a Pope with no interest; the French will
have one whom they have excluded before; the young Cardinals will have an
honest man, and the old ones a young man; the Medici will have a Stnese, and
the Barbarini one that is not their Creature. To which the other replied, These
are the mysteries of the Holy Ghost.

On the sixth of April at night, almost all the Cardinals went to congratulate
with Chigi, at first he seemed to weep and bewail, and hold his eyes with both
his hands; but having taken a little courage, he gave them thanks for their
affection, with the kindest demonstrations imaginable. The night seemed very
tedious to every body, by reason of the impatience they had to see the Conclave
concluded by so sacred an Election.

For all this Cardinal Rosetti, a capital enemy of Chigi's, forbore not to run
up and down all night long, as if he would have resisted, even heaven it self;
but he gained nothing but the imputation of imprudence, to contend alone,
against the common agreement of all the rest. Some of them took great pleasure
to see him run from Chamber to Chamber, and especially to see more than four
Cardinals deny him audience, by telling him, they should be seen to morrow in
the Chapel, and there was one told him aloud, I know what your Eminence would
have, and therefore you need say no more, I shall see your Eminence in the
morning.

On the 7th. in the morning, the most zealous of the Cardinals went to take
Chigi out of his bed, as well as out of his Chamber, and conducted him to the
Chapel, where the Scrut^ny was begun; in which, together with the access, there
were as many votes for Chigi, as there were Cardinals, there being not one
against him, which was an unusual thing at the Elections of other Popes. It Is
believed Rosetti himself gave him his vote, and it may be argued from what
Rosetti said to one of his Confidents, that he little thought to have given his
vote for Chigi.

As soon as the Scrutiny was published, he fell upon his knees before the
Altar, prayed, and wept a while, and being asked by the Masters of the
Ceremonies if he consented to the Election, he answered, yes, (accompanying his
answer with a most profound sigh) he would be called Alexander, in memory of
Alexander the 3d. his fellow Citizen; and so the adoration being performed in
the Chapel, he was published to the people, who rejoiced not a little to see so
worthy an Election, after three months vacancy of the Sea.

But before we proceed to the Election of Clement the 9th. (which being a thing
not written before, will require a longer reflection) it will not be amiss to
give a general description of the Election of Popes, for the greater clearness
and illustration of the Reader, which cannot but be grateful to the curious,
especially Foreigners, who for the most part are desirous of as much light as
may be, for the better observation of what they read.

I shall say therefore that the Election of the Pope is usually in three
manners, the first first by Scrutiny, the second by Access, and the third by
Adoration; true it is, there is another way mentioned in the Chapter of
Elections, and it is when the dissentions are so great amongst the Cardinals
(as it happens too often) that they cannot by any means agree; in that case by
common consent, they engage themselves to two or three Cardinals, and s^metimes
to one, that what person soever they choose out of such a number as shall be
proposed by them, he shall be their lawful Pope; but this is not now used; in
case of any difference they betake themselves to one of the three ways
aforesaid: and therefore I think it not pertinent to make the Reader to lose
his time, about a thing that is out of use, it being sufficient to have given
him this hint.

As to the Scrutiny, which is the principal, and most usual way in the
Conclave, it is made in this manner. Each of the Cardinals orders his
Conclavist to bring him a Polizy, or Ticket of the vote he desires to give in
the morning, which is done thus: they take a leaf of paper, and fold it in the
middle long-ways, then they cut that fold in the midst again, taking one of the
pieces and folding it long-ways, about the length of a finger, upon which they
make five folds, and cut it off at the fifth; after this the Cardinal writes
with his own hand, in the outermost fold, his own name; as for example, Flavius
Cardinalis Chisius, having written his name, he folds up the Paper again, so as
his name is concealed in the innermost plate.

After this, there is laid upon the other side of the third fold, a piece of
red Wax, or a Wafer, which is sealed on both sides with two little seals, which
every one of the Cardinals bring along with them into the Conclave on purpose;
and the two uppermost folds being empty, the Conclavist writes the name of the
Cardinal to whom he is pleased to give his vote in this manner, Ego Elig^ in
summum Pontificem, Eminentissimum Dominum meum Cardinalem; N. The Cardinal uses
not to write this vote with his own hand, least it should be observed and
known, and that vote which should be secret, become public, and give occasion
of hatred or distrust* this being done, the vote is folded up, and on the
outside there is always of necessity some word written at the Election of the
Cardinal; to the end, that if it should fall out an Access should be made,
(which they cannot do to the same Cardinal, to whom the vote is given) it may
without difficulty be known by finding out the extrinsick word of the Cardinals
vote who accedes, otherwise they must open them all, which would be a prejudice
to the secrecy required in a case of that importance; and therefore the
Cardinal who has a mind to accede, is wont to say, Accedo ad Cardinalem, and
possum accedere, ut patet ex voto me suscripto sic.

In the morning in which this Scrutiny is made, these votes are put by the
Cardinals into a Chalice of Gold which stands upon the Altar of the Chapel, in
which they ordinarily meet to make the Scrutiny; and first the Cardinals who
are the heads of the Orders, go to the Chambers of the Cardinals that are sick,
to take their votes, and having put the votes of the sick Cardinals, with the
votes of those who are personally present, altogether, they pour out the votes
out of the Chalice upon a Table placed on purpose before the Altar; they are
read, and marked by every Cardinal in his proper seat, where the names of all
the Cardinals are stamped by order, and under the names, a line being drawn,
the Cardinal by reiterated marks, or by Arithmatick, casts up how many votes
every one in the Scrutiny may have had; and if it happens, that of three parts
of the Cardinals then present in the Conclave, two have agreed in one person,
that person without more ado, is to be Pope by the Scrutiny: and in such case
the votes are to be opened in the lower parts, and the names of every Cardinal
that is for him, communicated; but this happens but seldom or never, it was
done once in the Election of Adrian, but not having happened since, it is looked
upon as a miracle.

There is another way of Electing the Pope, which was introduced above two ages
since, and it is called by Access; being much like the ancient custom among the
Romans, which was, that those Senators who adhered to the opinion of any of the
said Senators, in the public affairs that were transacted in the Senate, they
rose from their seats, and going toward the place where the said Senator sat,
they approved his judgment in express terms, or else said accedo ad talem, as
they do now in the Conclave; so that often amongst the Latins this way of going
is read, ire in sententiam.

The third way of creating Popes, is by Adoration, which is performed in this
manner; That Cardinal, who out of friendship, or Conscience, or any particular
interest, desires to favor any other Cardinal, he puts himself before him in
the Chapel, and makes him a low Reverence; and when it falls out that two
thirds of the Cardinals do the same, the Pope is then understood to be created;
but if there wants but one person of that number, the creation is void. And
sometimes it has been seen that some persons were adored, which never came to
the Papacy, because they wanted a sufficient number of Cardinals to complete
their Adoration; and this way is usually tried by any considerable number of
Cardinals, obstinate in the promotion of some person, propounded by themselves,
for fear lest some of them may be wanting in the private Scrutiny, who had
passed their words firmly to them; which has happened a thousand times, whereas
in the Adoration which is public, he to whom the promise is given cannot be
cousen'd. But here it is to be noted, that both the Access and Adoration, are
ordinarily confirmed with the Scrutiny, which is done without any prejudice to
whatever has been done, either in the Adoration or Access; and the parties
concerned, when any such thing happens, make protestation, not only in words,
but in writing also, ordering a Copy of their Protestation to be taken under
the hand of the Notary.

But here may arise a question in the mind of the Reader, which he may propose
in this manner; If by accident a Pope be created by way of Adoration, with so
many votes, or more than amount to the two thirds, if afterward in the private
Scrutiny, the Cardinals change their minds, and give their votes to another
person, so that the number necessary to make up the two thirds be defective, to
him that had before suffrages enough in the Access or Adoration; shall he
remain Pope? and may it be resolved in favor of (...) Pope created by
Adoration, and excluded by the Scrutiny?

(...) I answer in few words, that this case having never happened in any
Conclave, there has been by consequence no occasion to decide it; for it is not
usual to determine of cas^s, before they fall out: for my part I am of opinion
if such a thing should be, the Lords Cardinals would either create some Schism
amongst themselves, or to prevent that Schism, would agree in favor of him
who was elected by Adoration or Access; seeing that both those ways, are
decreed by several Popes sufficient, and valid. But yet this case cannot
happen, because the Adoration or Access being made, all is confirmed by giving
open votes in the Scrutiny; and perhaps that method is observed, on purpose to
avoid any sort of Schism which might proceed from the contrary.

Another question was asked me not long since, by a German Gentleman at Rome,
who was present in the Solemn Cavalcade on the Coronation of Clement the 9th.
and all the particulars of that Solemnity; it being an ancient custom for the
Popes after they are created, to be Crowned in Saints Peter's Church by the
hands of the Cardinal Deacon: on which day also the ceremony of the Flax is
observed, which is thus, they put a quantity of the finest Flax upon the end of
a stick, which is burnt in the presence of the Pope, whilst one of the
Assistants pronounces to him these words, Sic transit gloria mundi, Sanctissime
Pater. But this ceremony is modern, and was thought convenient, after the Popes
began to degenerate from what they observed in the Primitive times. Then the
Pontificate was a trouble and an affliction to the Popes, and an honor and
reputation to Christianity; whereas in these times, it is an honor to the
Popes, and a grievance to Christendom. In short, heretofore the Popedom was a
Glory to the Church, and a Martyrdom to the Pope; but now it is a Martyrdom to
the Church, and a Glory to the Pope. And this ceremony imports no more, than
that if their Glory be past in this world, they will go into another to receive
the affliction prepared for them there, for glorifying themselves so much in
this.

But to return to the German, he asked me, if a Pope might exercise the
authority which is given him by the Papacy, before the ceremony of his
Coronation; and whether if it should happen that he died before his Coronation,
he is to be understood a Legal Pope? To which I made no great difficulty to
answer, yes; for it is clear, the defect of a ceremony cannot abrogate a Law; as
those are exactly which create Popes by way of Scrutiny, nay Adoration or
Access. The Creation of a Pope being a formal Law, and the Coronation an
external Ceremony only.

Urban the 7th. who lived as many days as there are Letters in these two
words, VRBANO SETTIMO, died before he was Crowned; and yet in the space of the
thirteen days of his Papacy, he established certain Ordinances, which have
been punctually observed. This Urban having remitted to Cardinal Albano the sum
of 3500 Roman Crowns, which he was indebted to the Chamber for so much lent him
by Sixtus the 5th. there were some of the Cardinals, no great friends to the
said Albano, did propo^e that he ought to be constrained to pay the money,
because as they pretended, the Pope not being Crowned, had no capacity to
release it. But the soberer of the Cardinals overrul'd it in favor of Albano;
and the succeeding Pope would have all observed, which was ordained by the said
Urban: and certainly it is not to be maintained, that if the Pope dies before
he be Crowned, he is no true Pope, for he is a Legal Pope as soon as he is
chosen in the Conclave, and may act with as much freedom and authority, as if
he were Crowned; and to confirm this, there are several Pontifical Bulls
extant, and one amongst the rest, in which these words are to be found, Vt is
qui electus est in Apostolatum, si juxta consuetudinem intronizare non valeat,
electus tamen sicut verus Papa ohtinet auctoritatem regendi R. Eccl. and
disponendi omnes facultates illius, quod B. Gregorium ante suam Coronationem
cognovimus fecisse, etc. Besides Clement 5. excommunicated all those who dare
affirm that the Pope before his Coronation cannot do what he may do after it.

And although, as some Lawyers will have it, the Emperor before his Coronation
by the Pope, may administer, and do, whatever a true and lawful Emperor may
do; yet before his Coronation by the Pope, he is not said to be absolutely
Emperor, but Emperor Elect; whereas the Pope is called absolutely Pope, and
never Pope Elect, though he be not Crowned, which is obvious in the words of
Clement the 5th. in one of the Extravagants, in which the Case is discussed,
and the difference made clear, why one should be called Emperor elect, before
his Coronation, and the other absolutely Pope, before his. Some believe it
arises from this reason, because the Pope owns not any Superior upon Earth,
but God in Heaven: whereas the Emperor must acknowledge the Pope to be
superior to him; but this is nothing but the flattery of the Ecclesiastics;
because the Popes have been many times declared inferior* to Councels, and
Councels have many times deposed them; and they that depose, are certainly
above them that are dep^^ed. The Emperor it is true confesses the Pope head of
the Church, of which he is but a Member; but that does not conclude he is
subject to him; for the Pope cannot command him (nor any other King) in any
thing, but in certain general Cases, as he does to the whole body of Christians.

But I shall pass now to other particularities of the Conclave.

In the Chapel of Sixtus the 1st. and likewise in the Hall of the Consistory,
and if need be, in the Royal Hall, there are as many little Chambers, built of
little Beams of Wood, nailed together, and laid a thwart, as there are
Cardinals alive; every one of them 20 foot wide, and 22 foot long, about one
foot distance from one another, and no more, having nothing but a small vacuity
to part them; these pieces of timber aloft are raised in a four square form,
like a Canopy, supported at the four Corners by certain larger pieces of Timber.

Over every Chamber there is a letter of the Alphabet, in order; and because
the Cardinals are many, and more than the Lettess, they are doubled once or
twice, as occasion requires.

Now whereas nine days together after the death of the Pope, the Cardinals
perform the Obsequies, in Saint Peter's Church; on the tenth, the Chamberlain,
in the presence of several Prelates, puts the names of all the Cardinals,
written in little Billets, into a Vaze, and in another. he has as many
Chartels put, signed with the Alphabetical Letters, fastened (as I have said)
upon the Chambers, and drawing, a^ a venture, the the names of the Cardinals
one by one, he draws likewise the letters for every one, and then distributes
them according to their Lots; and the Letter of the Cardinal to whose share it
falls, is fixed upon the Chamber. At this Lottery there are always present some
of the Cardinals servants, who immediately furnish and hang the same for their
Masters with Cloth, so as they resemble a plain Tent. They furnish them with
Beds and a Table, carrying in several Utensils for the Table, and other
necessaries; The Rafters are covered with Linen, or the fairest Wollen-cloath,
with Curtains of the same hanging down the sides, of what color they please;
so that the Cardinals created by the last Pope have Green, and the rest Purple;
but they have changed the colors sometimes, and used red, and white.

During the said nine days, the Cardinals do constantly meet, either at the
Chamberlains house, or in the Palace, to deliberate on such provisions as are
necessary for the good government of the State Ecclesiastic; They write
Letters to the Presidents of Provinces, and to the absolute Governors, using
the same titles of Son and Brother, as the Pope does. They do confirm and order
the guard of the first gate of the Palace to their Swisses; the second, which
is the gate of the Inner Court, to the Caporioni, or Conservators of Rome,
which are indeed the chief of the Wards of the City: The third guards consist
of the Ambassadors of Princes, and other persons of great worth, but they must
not be Ecclesiastics. At the fourth gate, which is the nearest to the
Conclave, there are eight or ten Prelates, of the highest condition and
quality. These guards do not attend (unless it be the Swisses) but when the
Cardinals are entered into the Conclave. Alms are given for the soul of the
Pope, choice is made of the Conclavists which are to enter with them; after
that every Cardinal proposes him which he desires to have with him, and then
the Chamberlain proposes such others as are usually wont to be there, which are
chosen by private votes by the whole College, except the Vestry-keeper, and
the Master of the Ceremonies; and then in one of the ten days the Chamberlain
gives an Oath of fidelity to all that are so Elected, in the presence of the
College. There are three Cardinals deputed every day to superintend all the
Expenses that are made, as wellin the conclave, and funeral, as in other
things, which is placed upon the account of the Apostolick-chamber, but with
observation of the Bull of Pius the 4th which prohibites the expense in Rome,
to exceed ten thousand crowns: And lastly to appoint when they must enter into
the Conclave; that is, whether in the Morning, or after Vespers, on the
eleventh day.

The eleventh day after the death of the Pope, in the morning, every Cardinal
exhorts his Family to live piously, and serve God: Those which can, do say
Mass, and then all of them at the hour appointed repair to Saint Peter's Church,
where, upon which Altar the Dean pleases, he sings the Mass of the Holy Ghost;
and those Cardinals who have not celebrated already, do communicate there. Mass
being ended, a Prelate is appointed by the Chamberlain, in an Oration, to
admonish the Fathers of their duties, and the importance of the affair they are
going about.

After this is over, according to the time appointed for going into the
Conclave, Mass being said, the Master of the Ceremonies to the Pope, taking the
Papal Cross in his hand, he goes toward the Conclave; The Cardinals servants
go before, after them the singing men, singing the Hymn, Veni Creator Spiritus,
etc. in the last place, are the President Cardinals, and the Cardinal Bishops,
in the second place the Priests, in the third the Deacons, all habited in
Purple, and after them the other Prelates, and Clergy of the Court.

As soon as they are entered the Conclave, the Dean of the College, before the
Altar in the Chapel of Saint Nicholas, says the Prayer, Deus qui Corda,
invocating the Holy Ghost: But if their entrance be i^ Vespers time, they meet
in Saint Peter's, and go in Procession (as is said) moving according to the
command of the Chamberlain.

The Dean having done his Prayer, the Chamberlain in the presence of all
people, and at the request of the Notary, before the said Altar, gives an Oath
upon the Holy Evangelist to every one of the Deputies, at the second and third
gates, that is to the Roman Barons, and the Ambassadors of Princes, obliging
them to be diligent, and faithful to the Apostolic Palace, and the sacred
Conclave, and that they shall not permit the Cardinals to be aggrieved by any
body, contrary to the Pontifical Bulls: The Deputies at the fourth Gate of the
Sacred Conclave, do swear the same and more, viz. that they shall not suffer
any body to come near the said Gate, nor to speak with any one within, nor to
write or receive Letters without express leave from the College; that they
shall search with all diligence what meat and provision is carried in, that
there be no Letters or advice, conveyed therein, that they shall take care
their Wine, and their Water be given in Glasses, to prevent any juggling that
way.

Every one shall depart the Conclave, but the Cardinals, and such as shall be
chosen, which are as follow. The Vestry-keeper to the Pope, with a Coadjutor,
two Masters of the Ceremonies, a religious Regular for Confessor, a Chyrurgeon,
two Physicians, and an Apothecary, with two Servants, eight or nine persons for
the service of the whole Conclave, and none of them to be of the Family of any
of the Cardinals: Every Cardinal may have two Servants of his own, and if sick,
three, provided it be with the approbation of the College, but they ought to
have been with each Cardinal one year: they must be no Merchants, no Ministers
of Princes, none of their own Brothers or Nephews, neither are they to have any
temporal Jurisdiction. There shall be a Governor of the Conclave, a Prelate of
worth, and of parts, who shall take care that things be carried within as they
ought to be, and that the Cardinaals want nothing that is convenient; and all
these particulars were ordained by Pius the 4th.

All those being departed, which are not allowed to remain in the Conclave, the
persons deputed shall be placed at the second and third Gates, and the fourth
which belongs properly to the Conclave, shall be locked with four Keys, and so
remain fortified with four locks, having in the middle, a little VVindow, or a
Wheel, as the Chamberlain pleases.

Two of the Keys are kept without, one for the Gate, another for the Window;
and the other two within, for the same; those within are in the keeping of the
Master of the Ceremonies, those without in the custody of two principal
Prelates; so that neither these, nor the other, can open either gate, or
window, unless they come all four together, and when they are opened, there is
a cloth drawn at some distance from the gate, that they which are without can
see nothing within.

The Captain of the first Guard, is to have a care, there be no insult or
attempt made upon the Palace, and he sends Petrols of Soldiers constantly
about to secure every place: The Barons of the second guard, suffer not any
body to enter, but at feeding times; and then they are very curious that no
intelligence be conveyed in: The third are to obviate, and oppose any outrage
that may be made; and the Prelates and those of the fourth Guard, do see that
there be nothing wanting which is necessary, that no Letters, nor Notes, be
sent in or out, and examine the meat* and the drink.

As soon as the Cardinals are shut up, the Chamberlain with two Cardinals which
he pleases to choose, having lighted their Torches, shall make diligent search
through all places in the Conclave, whether there be any remaining in the
Conclave, who are not deputed or allowed.

No person can enter into the Conclave, upon the most urgent occasion
whatsoever, without license from the College; nor can a Cardinal that goes
out, come back again: No body can go out as he pleases; a Cardinal may be
constrained by the College not to go forth, and if he does go without leave,
he must not be received again, if he be not admitted de novo by the whole
College: If a Cardinal arrives, when the rest are entered, he puts himself in
the same condition, in which he finds the Conclave, and his Servants are to be
sworn by the Chamberlain, as the Servants of the other Cardinals were.

And last of all, every body withdrawing, this first day of the Conclave, which
is the 11th. after the death of the Pope, in the Chapel of Saint Nicholas,
which is at the upper end of the Royal Hall as aforesaid, on the left hand
toward the entrance; the Chairs being placed, and all people put at a distance
by the Governor of the Conclave, the Dean makes an Exhortation to these Lords,
and afterward reads the Bulls of Julius the 2d. and Pius the 4th. which treat
of this Election, prescribe the order thereof, and prohibit all Simoniacal and
undue practices; as also the Bull of Pius the 5th. that the Goods of the Church
cannot be alienated; and which every Cardinal swears, that if it happens he
shall be created Pope, he will observe strictly and confirm, as soon as he is
Crowned. There are other Orders made as they please; they swear to keep secret
the transactions and argumentations, they promise their Conclavists their
Privileges, they enter into discourses about the person they think proper for
a Charge, that makes even the Angels tremble at the weight of it: And almost
always the first day of the Conclave is spent in these kind of things, without
coming to an Election, which is performed afterward with more leisure and
opportunity, for the most part by Scrutiny, or Adoration.

There are many other Ceremonies and particularities, partly hinted, and partly
omitted by me, as well because they have been described by several Authors
already, as also to avoid being tedious to the Reader, in obvious things, and
such as are common to every body that make profession to enquire into the
interests of the Court of Rome. It is sufficient that I have selected the most
curious matters; seeing that many are moved by their mere curiosity, in that
which regards their information of the affairs of Rome, and particularly of the
interests of the Conclaves in general, and of this Conclave in particular.

Il CARDINALISMO di Santa Chiesa, OR THE HISTORY OF CARDINALS. In III. Parts.
PART III.
BOOK III.
The Contents.
In which is discoursed, of the difference betwixt the Election of the Pope,
and of the Emperor. Of some particulars which render the Election of the Pope
difficult in the Conclave. Of the time the Papable Cardinals had to negotiate
their interests, in the long languishing of Alexander the 7th. Of the great
fear some Cardinals were in, of not arriving time enough in Rome for the
Election of a new Pope. Of Cardinal Rosetti's distrusting the infirmities of
Alexander the 7th. and the cause. Of an answer which Alexander gave to Cardinal
Barbarino, after his recovery from his infirmity. Of the Reasons that moved the
French Cardinals to mend their paces, to come in time to the Conclave. Of the
arrival of the Marquess di San Romano, the Catholic Kings Ambassador. Of the
diligence used by the French in sifting and investigating the transactions of
the Spaniards. Of the arrival of Cardinal Grimaldi in Rome. Of the great broyls
and contests amongst the Cardinals about obtaining the Papacy, whilst the Pope
was yet alive. Of the Spies the Spanish Ambassador kept. Of the apprehension
Chigi had, that his Creatures would be perverted by the French, and Spaniard.
Of a Letter writ by Chigi to the Cardinal Gabriele. Of the great fault the
Court found with Chigi for alienating Cardinal Nini from his devotion. Of the
reconciliation of these two persons, by the mediation of Cardinal Rasponi, and
Corsini. Of the Assembly that was in the House of Cardinal Albici, to treat of
the Papacy. Of the great train of Followers, that was most eminently visible in
the Houses of Cardinal Rospigliosi, and Farnese, as persons which were esteemed
nearest to the Papacy. Of the practices which Cardinal Imperiale began, in the
behalf of Bonelli his Kinsman. Of the death and funeral of Pope Alexander. Of
the passage of the Chamberlain to the Apostolical Palace. Of certain villainies
committed at the windows and doors of Chigi's Palace. Of the great number of
Gabels imposed by Alexander. Of the Obsequies performed for the said Pope. Of
the difference betwixt certain Cardinals for place. Of the Conclave. Of the
number of Lodgings in the Palace of the Vatican. Of the great silence, and
taciturnity, which was observed in Cardinal Chigi. Of an Oration made in a
Congregation, by the French Ambassadors and the Venetian. Of the alienation
showed by Alexander from the French interest, toward his latter days. Of
several persons which believed that Cardinal Chigi, to gain the favor of the
King of France, would condescend to the Election of a French Pope. Of the
number of Cardinals entered into the Conclave. Of those Cardinals who remained
without. Of the qualities, merits, and adherences of the Papable Cardinals. Of
the answer one Cardinal gave to another, who asked him his judgment about the
Election of a new Pope. Of the facilities and contradictions in the Election of
Rospigliosi. Of the division of the Cardinals in the Conclave. Of the great
Faction the Barbarini had, after the death of Urban the 8th. Of the weakness of
the Faction of the Barbarini. Of the number of Urban's Creatures which were
present in the Conclave. Of the differences betwixt the Factions. The
description of a Muster of Soldiers. The application an Abbot made of that
Muster to the Conclave. Of the Faction of Chigi, and how numerous. Of the
industry used by the French, to oblige the Chigi. Of a notable saying of a
Cardinal, upon Chigi's obstinacy, not to forsake his own Creatures. Of the
Faction of the Flying Squadron. Of the disorder in the French, to see this
Squadrone volante managed by Cardinal Imperiale. Of the first Scrutiny, which
proved vain. Of the Cardinals which received Votes in the Scrutiny. Of the open
practices of the French in favor of Farnese. Of the promise made by Imperiale
when he went into France, that he would concur to the Election of a French
Pope, and how he brake it. Of an idle report spread about the City, that
Cardinal Rospigliosi was created Pope in the beginning of the Conclave, and
from whence it proceeded. Of the practices for Rospigliosi recommended to
Azolino, by the Cardinals Barbarino and Chigi. Of the entrance of Cardinal
Donghi into the Conclave. Of Cardinal Ginetti, who presented himself to
Barbarino, and the answer Barbarino gave him. Of the creation of Rospigliosi,
and the Politic Aphorisms of Azolini.

AMongst all the conferences and politic actions, amongst all the managements
and public negotiations transacted by the Cardinals, it is certain the action
of the Conclave is most worthy to be inquired into, by all such as have the
management of public affairs.

The Election of the Emperor, carries a Magnificence along with it, for being
in the power of six or seven Princes, partly Temporal, partly Spiritual, of
which number four being obtained, the Empire is gained. But the Election of the
Pope is after another manner, there being many more Princes considerable in
this, than in the Election of the Emperor himself, and that because the
Pontificate is of both Spiritual and Temporal consequence.

The Conclave is not managed by six or seven voices, but by sixty, amongst
which there are some who are neither for God, nor the Devil, others devoted to
their own interest only, others obliged to follow the resolutions of the
Nipotisme, others of the French, others of the Spaniard; some promise fairly
with their tongues to one, and with their hearts to another; and there are some
also to be found, who take delight in excluding all parties, to give a longer
impediment to affairs.

The learnedest of the Cardinals, are those which prevail least; the most
politic, are followed the worst; the most ignorant, are the most obstinate; in
brief things are managed in that manner, that those very men who have the
chiefest share in the whole transactions, can scarce give an account of what
they have done; the affairs of the Conclave to some persons seem easy, and
easily to be penetrated, and for that reason they desire to be prying; but as
to the point of the Keys, there are so many intricacies and Meanders, they can
hardly find the way through.

So many Conclavists as there are in the Conclave, so many Conclaves are
represented to the ears of the Court; people imagine things according to their
representations and figures, but the business is, the figures of the Conclave
have feet and walk not, have eyes and see not, have ears and hear not, and
tongues and speak not.

The French make many Popes, to amuse the Spaniards with jealousies of such
plots, as they never think of themselves. The transactions of the Conclave are
of two sorts, public, and private; the private are managed by the Cardinals in
secret, where the sound of their voices can scarce penetrate the air, much less
the ears of any body, and these are good; but those which are in public, are
full of hypocrisy and dissimulation, to lull and illude one another, and
therefore not to be commended.

They who at the opening of the Conclave, do make relation of the managements
and transactions in the Election, can speak no more than they know, which
commonly is nothing but what is common, because the most politic, and most
occult affairs, are kept close in the minds of the Cardinals, who either will
not, or care not, to communicate them to any body. For this cause, the
Conclavists themselves are oftentimes confounded in their relations; and I have
heard two of them contending about the Conclave of Innocent, with great heat,
one pressing and persisting in what the other did deny, and perhaps both of
them disputing upon that, which was never so much as mentioned in the Conclave.

But I believe there was never (to this day) seen a Conclave more imbroyl'd,
without broyls, more confounded, without confusions, than the last, in which
Clement the 9th. was created: a Pope certainly very worthy of the charge, as we
shall demonstrate in its place. Imbroyl'd in sundry respects, because France is
in its achme of Grandeur, and upon the brink of a rupture with Spain, which has
neither King to govern the Helm, nor Cardinal to manage its Faction; because
the number of Cardinals was so great, and many worthy pretenders amongst them;
because the Faction of Chigi was resolved to have no other Pope whatsoever, but
one of the creatures of Alexander; and for several other reasons sufficient to
render the Conclave tedious, and yet all succeeded without any trouble at all.

Certainly the facility of concluding this Conclave so soon, is commendable and
worthy to quicken the curiosity of all people, to inquire into the reasons of
it. If the time of fifteen days be considered, it seems to be long, being in
Summer time, and in the City of Rome; but if it be compared with the time of
other Conclaves preceding, and the variety of interests, crossing and
thwarting one another, it will be thought but short. But to speak the truth,
the Conclave of Clement was much longer than it seems in appearance, because
the transactions were more without than within, and things were resolved before
they entered the Conclave.

Two months together Alexander continued dangerously ill, whilst Posts were
sent every where up and down, not only with the news of his languishing
condition, and the impossibility of his living above two or three days; but
with the certain tidings of his death; and twice it was believed in the very
City of Rome.

In this tedious agony of Alexanders, every one had time to adjust his own
business, and to bring his affairs to such a pass; that his deplorable death
could produce no great novelty in the Court, nor more pretenders to the Papacy.

It may be said therefore, and with reason, that the Conclave of Clement lasted
little less than three months, that is, two before the death of Alexander, and
the rest afterward. The Cardinals seemed to precipitate, running toward Rome
as it were with wings on their feet, which have was occasioned by the news,
that the Conclave would be much imbroyl'd, and their celerity was so great,
some of them were arrived before the Pope was expired; and particularly the
French Cardinals, who were there at the due time, but as I have said with wings
on their feet.

There was never in times past so great a fear observed in the Cardinals of not
arriving at Rome in time, nor so impatient a desire of being in the Conclave,
as at this time; from whence it is imagined, they had some strict orders and
instructions from their several Crowns.

Cardinal Rossetti was the only person which kept to his residence in his
Bishopric, and though he was informed of the arrival of almost all the
Cardinals in Rome, and of the condition of the Pope, continuing firm to his
resolution, not to depart so soon, he sent this answer to his Agent in Rome,
that he would not stir a step, before he saw from good hands an account of the
Funeral of the Pope; as remembering that when they were Nuntio's together in
Colen, his Holiness being to comply in some great resolutions, he counterfeited
a fit of sickness for two months together, for which he received the Sacrament
three times as a Viaticum, and had the Psalms for the recommendation of his
Soul recited four times.

The reports of things being in this hurry, and of the arrival of the
Ambassadors in such have, being told to the departing Pope, and withal, that
the transactions, and practices for a new Election was already begun: His
Holiness began to look about him, and force that little remainder of his
breath, to prevent their troubles, if it were possible: counterfeiting himself
therefore to be on the mending hand, and his Eminence Cardinal Barbarino
entering one day to make him a visit, he asked him how he did; the good Pope
replied, I am like those who play at Goose, implying, that as at the game of
Goose there is the house of death, into which whosoever falls, he must begin
again, and return to the first hole of the game, so he having been near death,
began as it were to live again; and this he said to perplex and mortify
Barbarino, whom he knew very well to be one of those, that being pretenders to
the Papacy, had rather see him in his Tomb, than in his Bed: But Barbarino who
saw his condition, ceast not to drive on his interests, by striking in one
place, and guarding in another, but very privately.

One reason that spurred on the French Cardinals to mend their pace in their
journey to Rome was, the great have they were informed the Marquess di san
Romano the Spanish Ambassador made; who having news of the ill condition his
Holiness was in, made all have imaginable; Of which the French on the other
side being jealous, as doubting the arrival of so fresh a Minister, might
render the Spanish Faction too potent, they began likewise to put on, that they
might be there time enough to frustrate his designs.

His Excellence the Marquis entered into Rome the 25 of April, attended by a
great number of Coaches, and amongst the rest Cardinal Chigi, to whom the
Spanish Ambassador had promised the protection of Spain; but in a short time
'twas discovered to be only a subtlety, to oblige him to concur with his
Creatures, in the Election of a Pope depending cordially upon the Catholic
Crown.

The same night he made his Entry, his Excellency went immediately to Cardinal
Chigi, and Cardinal Sforza, in which audience though it was but short, they
desired many things should be agreed of, relating to the new Pope: The
Ambassador continued his visits every day without intermission, though it
rained very much, to whom it is not to be believed what noble treats the
Papable Cardinals gave; but above all Farnese, who was imbarqu'd in the
business more than all of them, as if the concurrences of the Crowns were to be
drawn on by the throat.

The French carried their affairs very cunningly, prying into the actions of
the Spaniards perpetually: and these were not much behind in discovering the
designs of the French, whose party they looked upon to be very strong, there
being some of the Cardinals obliged to follow it for love, and others for fear;
and it was looked upon as the more potent, by reason of the weakness of the
Spanish Faction, there having none declared openly for the same but Langravio
Sforza and Raggi, of whom also there was no certainty; in regard of the injury
he received daily from them.

In the mean time the greatest of the Prelates did not forbear endeavoring to
conciliate the minds and affections of them both; though not to villifie their
opinions of their own merits, whether real, or pretended, they did visibly
desire se longius ire, a thing which seems natural to the Clergy of his age.

About this time Cardinal Grimaldi arrived in Rome, and sent away immediately
to Cardinal Barbarino, Dean of the sacred College, to let him know he would
come and visit him; but he suspending his answer till his Coach was got ready,
would needs prevent his Eminence (which had he not pretended to the Popedom,
he would never have done) with whom he held long discourse, about the Emergent
affairs, and afterward according to the Deans example, all the rest of the
Cardinals came to visit him; and particularly those who stood for the Papacy,
were none of the last. Indeed when the Spanish Ambassador arrived, the Spanish
faction seemed for some days to be made stronger, and the French weakened; but
on the contrary; as soon as Grimaldi was arrived, the Spaniard grew weak, and
the French faction strong.

It is not to be imagined, what passages, what messages, what visits were made
by night and by day, in order to the acquisition of the Papacy, whilst the Pope
was alive; The Spanish Ambassador had his Spies in all places, to observe the
motions of his adversaries, he failed not with his promises to allure all
people to his party, particularly he^ offered very largely to Cardinal Caraffa
a Neopolitan, and by consequence a subject of Spain: but as the Spaniards were
jealous of him, so he was diffident of their promises, and resolved to stand
neuter.

The Cardinal Chigi, though obliged to the assistance of his Uncle, and the
care of the Church; yet he managed the new Election with great order, and had
his eyes open over his own Creatures, as being fearful they might be debauched
away, either to the French faction, or the Spanish; for which reason he gave
the care of that to Caraffa, whom he ordained his director in all his affairs,
and was not ill served by him.

Cardinal Chigi writ a very courteous letter to Cardinal Gabriele in Ascoli, a
creature of Urban the eights: which said letter gave great occasion of
jealousy to the rest of the Pretenders, but most of all to his own creatures;
in so much that several well affected to the Pretendants, did very much lament
it; however Chigi, by the Council of Caraffa knew well enough how to satisfy
all parties, and take away all manner of suspicion.

The greatest thing that was blamed in Chigi was, for having in that
conjuncture, alienated Cardinal Nini, which was attributed to several causes,
but particularly it was said, his Eminence was dis-oblig'd, because Nini had
declared, that he would concur in the Exaltation of no body but Farnese and
Rospigliosi, two persons not at all desired by Chigi, unless in case he could
not carry it for Bonvisi, or Celsi, for both which he had a kindness, and kept
them in the first place of his memory.

The Cardinals Rasponi, and Corsini, not liking to have such a person
dis-oblig'd from the faction of Chigi, they undertook to reconcile them, and
performed it to the satisfaction of both parties.

The same Chigi went to visit Cardinal Bonvisi, designing by that subtlety, as
some people imagine, to sweeten the disgust which Francisco Bonvisi, (the said
Cardinals Brother, and Maestro di Camera to Chigi) had taken, for some ill
usage he had received, and not without his fault.

In the house of Cardinal d'Albici, it seemed the place for the Conclave was
appointed; whilst they assembled by night many times, and many times by day,
(but the greatest part French) to treat about the new Election: he negotiating
in the mean time wi^h the Spaniards also, insomuch as he was reckoned a good
Swiss after that, which is as much as to say, one who would willingly give
himself to him that would give most for him.

Yet the greatest train of the Prelacy, and others, was observed to frequent
the houses of Farnese, and Rospigliosi, from whence the common opinion of the
Court was (and indeed it fell so afterward) the Pope was to proceed; although
Cardinal Barbarino used all the industry was possible to acquire a reputation,
by multiplying his good works, and redoubling his actions of Charity, which he
before did exercise to the people.

In the huddle of practices which the Cardinals tumultuously carried on, it was
Imperiale's good fortune to advance so much under hand the interest of his
Kinsman Bonelli, that there was nothing more left for him to desire; but the
Mine being discovered, it was immediately blown up by the French, by declaring
openly, that that Crown was for his exclusion.

It is believed nevertheless, that if the French had not excluded him, he would
never have succeeded, because the Spaniards had only put him in hopes, never
intending it in earnest; and the Squadrone Volante (of which Imperiale was
head) did not approve of a person of whom the Crown of France had a diffidence,
least they should draw some ill consequence upon their backs.

About this time the Pope died the 22th. of May, being Sunday, betwixt one and
two a Clock in the morning, and immediately the Piscatory Ring was broken by
Cardinal Barbarino, though he was then in a Fever; as he came out of the
Apostolical Palace, attended by the Pontifical Guards, thousands of the people
cried out with a loud voice, Viva il Cardinal Anthonio, using many other
injurious words against the Chigi, and calling them Tyrants.

The body of the Pope being opened, and embalmed the same night, they found his
Reins to be wasted, and two Callous Glandules (which the Physicians call
Turberculi) obstructing the passage of his Urine; and hence came his excessive
pains, his long watchings, and his want of appetite, which made his Holiness
endure a tedious agony of two months long, during which time, he was sustained
continually with exquisite Restoratives, and Cullises of great price made of
Gold, and of Pearl. It was afterward affirmed by several Physicians, that the
two much nourishment of those restoritives, exceeding his natural heat and
power to digest them, had done him hurt, and shortened his days, his nature
(in regard of his age, and the quality of his disease) requiring meat of
nourishment; nor was it less disapproved by the Physicians, that the Pope for
several years could scarce ever satisfy himself with the most violent cold
imaginable, in his Wine, Water, and Fruits; causing them to be set in Snow for
several hours, and never thinking them fresh or cold enough, of which his
Domestics complained very often.

About midnight the Corpse was conveyed from the Quirinal where he dyed, to the
Cathedral of Saint Peter, with usual Solemnities by the Guards, and two pieces
of Canon. It was afterward exposed in the Chapel of the said Cathedral,
infinite numbers of people running thither to kiss his foot, not out of
Devotion so much, as Curiosity.

On Tuesday at night, in the presence of 23 Cardinals of his creation, the body
was put into a Cypress Coffin, which was put into another of Lead, lyn'd with
the richest Cloth of Gold, of excellent work and colors, and covered again
with a sumptuous Pawl, embroidered with Gold and Silver; and with it, a rich
Purse emboyder'd likewise, and full of a great quantity of Medals of Gold and
Silver, with the Effigies of the Pope: which Purse was put there by Cardinal
Chigi, as a perpetual memorial, that it might be known after several ages to be
the body of Alexander the 7th. The putting in Medals is usual to other Popes,
but not (as they say) with that innovation of lining the Chest with cloth of
Gold, and covering it with so rich a Pawl as that was: a thing which made the
people murmr the more against the Chigi, as those who buried other peoples
wealth under ground, and not their own.

On Monday at break of day, there were seen two or three windows all black'd
over with Ink, and daubed over with dung, in the noble Palace of the Chigi,
whether the Cardinal was retired (that they might be all together) till another
most noble Palace (which will be the Cardinals own propriety) was finished; a
high affront doubtless, and such as is used by the Rascality of the people, to
the gates and windows of public Bawds only: and because there were infinite
Pasquins and Satyrs against the said Chigi, he attributed the reason to the new
Gabels, imposed upon Grist, Wine, Wax, Paper, Hay, Straw, Soap, Aqua-vitae,
Tobacco, and other things, to the number of fifteen or sixteen; though the
people were already oppressed with 46 other Gabels imposed by Urban the 8th.
whereupon Pope Innocent forbore the laying of any new Gabels, though he used
such other ways, that he left his Nephews many and many millions.

But the greatest offense the people took at the Government of Chigi, was to
find a new way of engrossing of Corn introduced, which hindered the free Trade
of their Merchandising, by which he gathered a great quantity of Grain
together, to the great grievance of the people, who were not able to apply
themselves to sow their Land, because they could not have liberty to dispose
freely of what they reaped: all which they attributed to the rapacity of Don
Mario, who finding himself affronted so highly, as to see some of his Servants
bastinadoed by the people before his face, he began to excuse himself, and say,
he could not imagine the reason why he should be so odious to the people, it
never having been in his power to relieve them in the least; that the Papacy of
his Brother, was an unhappy Papacy, infested successively with the Plague,
Famine, Inundations, Wars, and the disbursement of great sums of Moneys in
assistance of the Emperor and Venetian, against the Turk, which had totally
exhausted the Apostolical Treasury.

On the 23th. the Sacred College met in the Cathedral of Saint Peter, to
celebrate the first Obsequies of the deceased Pope; after this, in the Vestry
of the said Church, they held the first Congregation of State, for the well
governing of the Ecclesiastic Republique, in which all Offices were renounced,
and afterward confirmed; as particularly, the charge of General of the Holy
Church, to Don Mario, to prevent dissentions and tumults of the people, during
the vacancy of the Sea. Monsignor Borromei was confirmed Governor of Rome
likewise, and with much more satisfaction to the people, in respect of the
prudence and justice wherewith he has always executed his Office, as a
Gentleman, and as a Prelate of great merit and judgment.

And because it was reported the Conclave should be held not in the Palace of
the Vatican, by the Cathedral of Saint Peter, but in the Palace Quirinal, in
the middle of Rome, where his Holiness dyed, (though not for that
consideration, but in regard the Vatican was supposed to have an ill air, and
the dust was great by reason of the continual building of the Portico's;) this
point being proposed in the said first Congregation, and the Scrutiny being
made, there were only 14. Votes for the Vatican, and all the other (about 40.
there being above 50. present) for the Quirinal. But Cardinal Barbarino having
made a courageous Speech, as he was Dean; remonstrating in several heads, the
convenience of holding the Conclave in the Vatican; for its vicinity to the
Church of Saint Peter; for its immence capacity, as containing no less than
5500 several Rooms, great and small, with 13000 Doors and Windows, with large
and pleasant Courts, Gardens, and Fountains; his opinion prevailed to have a
new Scrutiny, upon which, three Cardinals were deputed, to take some Architects
along with them, and survey the streightness and incommodities of the Quirinal:
which order was immediately observed, the Architects reporting, that besides
the insufferable streightness of the Quirinal, it would cost 5000 Crowns more
to be there, than in the Vatican: by which means they discredited a Pamphlet
written, and prepared during the distemper of the Pope by Cardinal Pallavicino,
and published after his death, to induce the Cardinals to hold the Conclave in
the Quirinal Palace, and not in the Vatican.

In the Congregations which followed daily in the aforesaid Vestry, there was
notice taken of a great silence, and modesty in Cardinal Chigi, to the
admiration of such as did not know he was advised to it, by reason that he was
of a nature to be easily perplexed; yet for all this he gave them boldly to
understand, that he and his faction would never be persuaded from their own
creatures.

The Ambassadors of France and Venice,, in the second Congregation made their
usual Orations as formularies, in the names of that King, and Republique,
entreating the most eminent Cardinals, to create some most worthy person, for
the universal benefit of the Church, offering any aid, or assistance, for the
security of the College in the mean time: The like Office was performed the
Thursday following by the Catholic Ambassador, who appeared likewise with a
considerable train.

In one of the said Congregations Monsignor Casanate was chosen Governor of
the Conclave, who was Secretary to the Congregation de propaganda fide: It was
decreed likewise, that no Cardinal for the future, do admit any person to sit
by his side in the Coach, though honored with the Prelacy, or any other
charge: as also that no Cardinal shall stop his Coach to any body, Except the
Ambassadors of Crowns only.

During the 9 days devoted to the Obsequies, the Cardinais visited one another
incessantly, after dinner (for in the morning they were hindered by the
Congregations) but he Ambassadors of France and Spain visited them much more,
to confirm the several practices which were agreed upon whilst the Pope was
alive, and to encourage the Cardinals to stand firm to their promises. About
this time there were several discourses, and Pamphlets published, concerning
the Papable persons, written according to the passion, or affection of the
Author, with obloquy, or commendation of the same persons, who are prostituted,
as a man may say, to the liberty of so many tongues.

By reason of the alienation showed by the Pope from the French, to the very
end of his days, upon occasion of the Extravagance of the Corsi Soldiers
(which happened with so much scandal to Christendom, and so much disturbance to
Rome) in the time of his Papacy, toward the Duke of Crequy, Ambassador from
the Crown of France; the memory of the revenge, or satisfaction of his most
Christian Majesty remaining too fresh in the Pyramede erected in Rome, in the
very Quarter of the Corsi Soldiers. It was supposed that Cardinal Chigi, to
pacify in some measure, and appease the King of France, and to take away all
umbrage of malevolence out of his mind, would have been ready to endeavor by
all fair means, to promote the satisfaction of the said King, by concurring
with his Creatures in some such person as his Majesty should approve.

For several days, reflection was made upon this point, and no small hopes,
(though ambiguous) given to the French, who believed themselves sure, because
Farnese was the man they pitched upon; who being a Creature of Chigi's, it
seemed natural for him to agree to a Creature of his own, and at the same time
to gratify France, who would not be wanting in testimonies of affection to
them: and this was one of the inducements that prevailed with Farnese to
imbarque himself in the business, and to court several of the Spanish
Cardinals, and of the Squadrone volante, to make up his complete number of
Votes: and indeed he reckoned upon more than 20 of Chigi's Creatures, of his
side, for the reasons abovesaid, about eight or ten of the French, about 14
others of his friends of the Spanish Faction; and a party in the flying
Squadron which promised to serve him; in so much that being confident in all
these, he thought the Papacy as certainly in his house, as I believe the Pen is
in my Hand, and perhaps he tried in his Chamber to make Papal Crosses of
benediction.

In the mean time Cardinal Chigi having considered of his affairs better, he
believed it would be an occasion of an eternal prejudice, and disgust to the
Spaniard, and therefore he thought best to tack about as nimbly as he could,
least he should disturb or interrupt his hopes of being made Protector of the
Crown of Spain, which he thought as surely in his hands, as Farnese did the
Papacy; but they at last understood better the subtlety of the Courts both in
Spain and Rome.

Chigi believed that the Pope his Uncle had recommended him to the King of
Spain by the mediation of his Ambassador, to whom he gave audience eight days
before his death, upon which he resolved to adhere to the Spanish Faction, as
hoping thereby to obtain the Protection of the Church of Spain, which was then
vacant by the death of Cardinal di Medici, it being a Protection of great
honor and advantage. But the general opinion was, that it was to be reserved
for a new Cardinal of the house of Medici, which would be promoted by the next
Pope: upon which score it was concluded by every body, that Cardinal Chigi,
being in fear of the French, and in hopes of the Spaniard, was to temporize so,
that upon what person soever the Papacy fell, he was to remain in the favor
and protection of one of the two Crowns.

After the usual Exsequies were performed by the Cardinals, and a Funeral
Oration recited, on Thursday morning the second of June, the Cardinals being
assembled in the Church of Saint Peter, having sung the Mass of the Holy Ghost,
and recited an exhortatory Prayer for the Election of a Religious Pope, they
marched in Procession toward the Conclave (the singing men before them,
singing veni Creator Spiritus) which was much more enlarged than formerly, not
only because they made use of the Lodge of Benediction, but because they had
furnished some of their Cells very neatly with Silk, leaving the top open to
the Sky, which they could open and shut with Cords, to receive the benefit of
the Air, as the Season required. The whole day long, free entrance was allowed
to every body, especially to the Ambassadors of Crowns, who visited all the
Cardinals one by one, all the Princes and Prelates of the Court, and an infinite
number of others performing the same Complements, each of them as his affection
inclined him. Farnese and Rospigliosi* were the most regarded by the people,
and by the generality of the Prelates, many of which began to acknowledge them
as Popes.

Never was there so great a number of Cardinals seen in any Conclave before,
above seventy entering in at the same time, viz. Francisco Barbarino, Ginetti,
Harrach, Anthonio Barbarino, Pallotta, Brancaccio, Carpegna, Durazzo,
Gabrielli, Orsini, Este, Facchinetti, Grimaldi, Rossetti, Romanini, all of them
creatures of Urban the 8th. Cibo, Sforza, Odescalco, Raggi, Maldachini, Gondi,
Homodei, Ottoboni, Imperiale, Borromei, Hassia, Carlo Barbarino, Spada, Albici,
Aquaviva: Pio, Gualtieri, Azzolini, creatures of Innocent the 10th. Chigi,
Rospigliosi, Bonvisi, Elci, Farnese, Bichi, Vechiarelli, Franzoni, Vidoni,
Barbarigo, Mancini, Boncompagni, Bonelli, Piccolomini, Caraffa, Celsi, Savelli,
Litta, Corsini, Paluzzi, Rasponi, Conti, Nini, Roberti, Spinola, Caraccioli,
Delfini, Vandomo, created by Alexander the 7th.

The Cardinals, Aragon, and Moncada, were in Spain, and thought it not
convenient to undertake such a journey, when the weather was so hot; besides
Aragon could not leave that Court, being chief Minister there.

The new Cardinal Visconte, sent word likewise, that he could not come, because
there was never an Apostolical Nuntio there, and that Court would not admit his
Auditor, either as Nuntio, or Envoy; upon which the Spanish Ambassador
dispatched an express to hasten his coming, desiring the Ministers of Spain, to
adjust the difference, and to receive the Auditor as an Envoy.

Almost at the same time, the Cardinal of Salsburg, writ word he could not be
present at that Conclave neither, in regard of the Imperial Diet which he could
not possibly leave; this advice was not over welcome to the ears of the
Catholic Ambassador, who sent a Courier on purpose to solicit the Emperor
that he would be pleased to dismiss him. But all this importunity had no other
effect, than to make the French believe, the Spanish Faction were too timorous,
and by consequence, weak.

Bandinelli, and Pallavicino, were absent, and so, as never to be present
afterward, for being very sick, and infirm, they dyed within three or four
days, leaving the Conclave possessed either with a spirit of contradiction, or
folly. Pallavicino died so poor, there was not enough found in his house, to
pay the charge of his Funeral, but was forced to be beholding to the affection
of Chigi even after his death, whose Eminence sent a 1000 Crowns to effect it.

There were two other Cardinals likewise who were absent, Ludovisio, and
Donghi, both of them indisposed, and forced to stay away to perfect their Cure.
However it is sufficient, that the two thirds of the votes which were necessary
for the Election of the Pope, according to the decree of Alexander the third,
ought to be 41 at the least, and of that number only which entered the Conclave
the first day: in which, toward the Evening there happened a fray betwixt the
Soldiers of the Marshal of the Conclave, and the Halberdiers of the Governor
of the Conclave, about their Posts, the last of which had the worst of it, and
in the heat of the quarrel, some of the Marshals Soldiers, broke into certain
of the Cardinals Kitchins, and took away a good prize of Silver Plate; but they
enjoyed it not long, for they were taken a while after, and process of death
ordered to be made out against them, yet not so much for their theft, as for
the fright and confusion they occasioned in the Conclave.

Before they went out of the Conclave, the French Ambassador (having for a long
time negotiated privately with the Cardinals of his Nation) he produced a
Letter from his Master, in which he declared his indifference, either to one
person, or other; his Ambassador in a long Oration, pressing, and exaggerating,
that his most Christian Majesty desired nothing but a virtuous and uninterested
Pope; yet when it came to the point, they did what they could, to have had all
to themselves.

The Ambassador of Spain received not the satisfaction he would have done, from
the Spanish Cardinals, observing some of them tottering and uncertain, he would
not permit them therefore either to exclude, or include any body, he only
charged them to temporize and protract, till he received an answer which he
expected from Spain. But to Cardinal Sforza he declared himself more freely,
and it is believed he told him the intention of the Council of Spain, about the
Election of one of the two persons, Rospigliosi, or Farnese, who were they,
which seemed to have come Popes into the Conclave.

About 5 a Clock in the morning, all went out of the Conclave, which being
locked up immediately, the Cardinal Chamberlain, accompanied with two others,
went about visiting all places, to see if there were any body staid privately
behind, besides such as were deputed by the College; after which, the usual
Oaths were given, and the Cardinals holding a Congregation amongst themselves,
several Laws were established, every one promising to observe them if he was
elected Pope; they had very strong debates amongst themselves; the Mass of the
Holy Ghost was sung; the Cardinals received all of them the Communion; and
after that, in the accustomed Order, they began the first Scrutiny.

And here before we proceed any further, it will not be amiss to discourse of
the qualities, merits, and adherences of the Papable Cardinals of the aforesaid
Conclave, as also of their number, and of whose creation; which will give some
light to the Reader, and enable him to consider of the adherences and hopes,
both of one party and the other; but I will not omit to insert what passed
betwixt Cardinal Sforza and N. the day before they entered into the Conclave,
which will serve to give some illustration of the qualities of some of them.
Cardinal Sforza, and Cardinal N. being in discourse, Sforza demanded of N. what
his judgment was as to the new Election; the other wanted not an answer, but
replied immediately, My Lord, I believe, if the French shall make the Pope,
Cardinal Farnese will be the man; if the Spaniard, Cardinal Rospigliosi; if the
People of Rome, Cardinal Barbarino; if the Holy Ghost, Cardinal Odescalco; if
the Devil, either your Eminence or I. Then it shall be Rospigliosi replied
Sforza smiling; and so they passed to other discourse.

But to return to the Papable Cardinals, they were twenty in number, and no
more, the rest of the Cardinals being all declared Spaniards, or French, or too
young; for youth, by reason of the inexperience wherewith it is usually
accompanied, and for fear of a tedious Reign (a potent exception against any of
them all) is enough to hinder the best persons exaltation, as we see daily by
frequent examples.

Of these twenty Papable Cardinals, eight were created by Urban; Barbarino,
Ginetti, Palotta, Brancaccio, Carpegna, Gabrieli, Durazzo, and Facchinetti.
Three by Innocent, Odescalco, Albici, and Spada, called commonly Santa Susanna;
and nine by Alexander, Bonvisi, Rospigliosi, Farnese, Caraffa, Elci, Celsi,
Bonelli, Litta, and Bandinelli. But this last was mentioned without the
Conclave, not within, for he dyed at the beginning of it; so as there remained
then but nineteen, all persons of competent age, the youngest of them being
above 56.

Barbarino was in his 70th. year, which was no small advantage to him; his
creatures, and some other of Innocents, his Correspondents, as Raggi, Santa
Croce, Spada, and Pio, seemed to concur willingly in him; the Spaniards were
not against him, though they would never declare possitively for him; and it
appeared to be some advantage too, that Sforza was not head of the Faction, who
upon several scores had but very little affection for him; so that if he had
persever'd in the good management of the business which he began with Chigi,
and had obtained his concurrence, and his creatures, he had been certainly Pope
as most people believe. But one which penetrated deeper into the Machinations
of the Priests, was of opinion, Chigi could not have done it without disgusting
several of his creatures, and losing their votes for himself; and indeed being
agreed with Barbarino, he endeavored to discover the intentions of the
principal of his creatures, and to draw them to join with him for the
exaltation of the said Barbarino; but he found so great repugnancy from the
beginning, especially in Cardinal Celsi, who was upon several accounts an
implacable enemy to Barbarino, that he had much ado to appease them, by
obliging himself to speak no more of the exaltation of Barbarino. It is
reported, that in the heat of their dispute, Celsi should speak openly to Chigi
in this manner; your creatures follow you, because you have promised them all,
not to suffer the Papacy to fall, but amongst your creatures; and if it happens
to light amongst the creatures of Urban, your Eminence will be left alone in
the Conclave, and if you lose it now, you will lose it for ever. Barbarino was
advised by some persons, to open his purse, and to leave all the hopes of his
pretensions to the operation of his Coin, according to the abominable example
of Alexander the 6th. and some there were who supposed the business was
concluded; but that report proceeded only from the malice of his enemies, to
fully and obfuscate the reputation of a man, who certainly for more Papacies
than one, would not have defiled, or eclipsed the luster of the esteem which he
enjoyed amongst the people.

Ginetti's pretensions were founded only upon the benevolence of the Spaniard,
(toward whom he had always carried himself with great circumspection) and his
great age, which was 82. but in other respects there was but little appearance
for him.

Palotta was put into the number of the Candidates, not that it was believed he
could be exalted in that conjuncture, because Barbarino was his professed
enemy; and he was hated by the Spaniards for the integrity of his life, they
being always jealous of a person of worth, or parts extraordinary.

But in consideration of his merits only, true it is every one thought there
was but little hopes of his exaltation, perhaps as a judgment upon all
Christendom, as well as the people of Rome, who were not worthy of so
excellent a Prince; for this I dare affirm, that of all the Sacred College, he
only, and Farnese, are the most proper to undergo the charge of the Papacy, in
respect of their uprightness of mind, their integrity in matters of Justice,
the love of the people, and which is yet more, that they are disinterested, and
no passionate promotors of their Kindred. His being 70 years old, and having
the Gout, gave him but little assistance, because his complexion was strong,
and in other respects he was perfectly sound.

In the last Conclave but this, there was some talk of Carpegna, because the
two Medici's endeavored his promotion; but in this of Clement the 9th. he
remained in his ordinary infirmity, which is only in a desire of pretending,
and no more, there being no Medici's then to advance him: nor indeed did he put
himself much forward, as conscious perhaps, that he had nothing, but his being
a Cardinal, and a Servant to the Great Duke, to recommend him. Cardinal
Rossetti, who had the management and interest of the Great Duke, made some kind
of proffer, but he durst go no further, for he was sure never to compass his
designs; and he did well, for there was need of better heads than his, in the
Apostolic Chair.

Brancaccio was discoursed of, as an excellent Lord, not only in respect of his
birth, being a Gentleman of one of the best Families in Naples, but in
consideration of several good qualities that were in him; but there were two
things, and very important, which hindered his friends from entering into treaty
for him: the first was, that they saw Chigi's Faction resolved to have no other
Pope, but a creature of Alexanders, and there was but small hopes to see the
Papacy amongst Vrbans, seeing Barbarino had tried the impediment: the second,
because the Spaniards had no great kindness for him, and although they
pretended to be reconciled, yet the quarrel continued at the heart still, and
it is most certain they would never have concurred in this man, whilst there was
any body else to create: and a third reason was, the great fondness Brancaccio
expressed always to his Kindred, it being confidently believed he would have
run a great hazard of being misled, by his love to them, who were numerous; the
Family of the Brancaccio being divided into several houses in that Kingdom,
would have afforded persons enough to have filled up, not only the Governments,
but all the Offices and Benefices belonging to the Apostolic See: so that
these obstructions were sufficient to keep him still in his Cardinalship.

Durazzo, had nothing to speak for him but his age, being 75. his infirmities,
and decrepitancy, which many times are sufficient alone to open a door to the
Pontificate; for the Cardinal Pretenders, when they find they cannot reach it
themselves, they endeavor to create some old and decrepid man, that they may
have another vacancy quickly, and their old hopes be renewed. It was reported
there was a Kinsman of Durazzo's come to Rome with 50000 dubles, to work upon
the minds of some of the poorer Cardinals, but this story was known to be a
lie, and only the invention of his Enemies, to disgrace him; for he was
generally taken for a man of a most irreprehensible life, though illiterate,
and of no great parts; but the worst thing in him of all was, that he was of
Genoa, which is no small impediment.

During the weakness of the Pope, which in effect served for a Conclave, there
were many so confident Gabrielle was made Pope, that they laid wagers on it.
And the grounds of that opinion were, that they saw the Spaniards inclined to
him, and doubtless had they sound things better disposed toward him, they
would not have failed to have favored him, he having expressed himself always
very well toward that Crown; to this they joined the affinity and alliance he
had with the new Cardinal Vandome, who they thought would prevail with the
French Faction to concur; and indeed he attempted it, but rather to satisfy
him, as it is supposed, than out of any desire he had to it in earnest. Besides
this, the Letter which was writ to him with so much affection by Cardinal
Chigi, made them believe he would join with him, with all his creatures; and
all these reasons being put together, his friends would needs fancy him Pope.

But they found themselves out in their confidence, not being able to dive into
the most profound and recluse mysteries of State. First, because the French
would never have concurred (at the importunity of a new made Cardinal, though
of never so great quality) in a person, who upon diverse occasions had shown
himself too partial to the Spaniard; besides this, the Spaniards themselves who
protected him, and pretended to advance him, would not have had him Pope, as
not knowing his humor; for their policy consists in preferring such persons to
the Papacy, as they know very well, and are acquainted with the very bottom of
their qualities, lest they should run upon such rocks as they have formerly
done, and particularly in the Papacy of Paul the 4th. and Sixtus the 5th.
Barbarino had promised him his assistance, but it was when he saw his own hopes
desperate; so Gabrielle's hopes, and his, vanished together. His age was 73
years, but it did him no good, his complexion was so healthful and strong.

Facchinetti knowing his years too few, had not courage to venture in a
Conclave, in which he saw so many other persons of greater maturity and merits
than himself; and yet he is an excellent person, indifferently well learned, of
a good judgment, and solid, but something too resolute. He was considered as
Innocent the ninths Nephews Son, and one that has kept a good correspondence
with the Baloncse, Gentlemen his Countrymen. In his Nuntiature into Spain, he
gave great satisfaction to that Court, nor was he ungrateful when he was come
back again to Rome, insomuch that the Spaniards held him as a Confident. He
recommended himself to them with great modesty, declaring he had not much to
pretend in a Conclave so rich in other persons of merit; yet if there should
happen such contests and competitions, as there usually do, he desired the
Spaniards, as his friends, would be mindful of him; but no great controversy
arriving, his friends had no occasion to concern themselves in his behalf.

Odescalco's hopes consisted in the good opinion the whole College had of him,
as a person of Integrity, Generosity, and Charity, and one that was well
affected by the Spaniards, as one of the Subjects of that Crown; but there were
many more potent obstacles to obstruct them: The first was in his age which was
but 56 years, as strong and as lusty as was possible, an obstacle so great,
that as often as he was mentioned the 22 years Papacy of Urban, was immediately
remembered, and by consequence took away the good inclinations the Cardinals had
to his person, and to his advancement: the Cardinals being resolved they would
never again see the Keys of St. Peter grow rusty in the hands of one man.

The second was, that Sforza had lost the management of the Spanish Faction,
who was his very great friend, and would not have failed doubtless to have used
his utmost endeavor, to have drawn the Spaniards to a concurrence: I say his
utmost endeavors, because though the Spaniard may love Odescalco very well, as
a subject, and well deserving person of that Crown; yet it is most certain, at
their hearts, they had rather he should remain a Cardinal, than be made Pope;
and the reason is, because they look upon him as an obstinate person, too
rigid, and severe to his first impressions, which agrees not with the Spanish
Policy, that requires an honest down right Pope, easy to be commanded, and not
refractory to command. The other obstacle was the aversion of the French, who
would never have consented to the Election of a Milanese, at a time when there
was a breach betwixt the two Crowns; and indeed when any friend of Odescalcoes
proposed him to any Cardinal of the French, they answered him according to the
modesty of the French, He is a worthy person, but let us talk of some body
else. Yet there was no body declared himself his Enemy, but Cardinal Imperiale,
and that upon an accident which happened in Rome the 20th. of August 1662. at
which time Odescalco, either that he believed in his Conscience things ought to
be so, or that he had a mind to oblige the French, and take away the suspicion
that Crown had of him, as he was a Spaniard, that he might not have their
Negative in the Conclave, or for any thing else, it is enough he was one of
those which decreed his banishment: and so much the more reason had Imperiale
to be angry, by how much he was informed Odescalco was the promoter of the
business: and all these things considered together, at the very first put all
Odescalcoes pretensions out of his head.

Albici had little or no thoughts of demanding the Papacy, not that he disliked
the morsel, but because he knew very well the Cardinals would not choose him,
as knowing him to be of a turbulent head, and a pungent, if not virulent tongue.

In short, though in all the rest there were some visible hopes of Exaltation
to be found, yet in this Cardinal there was not the least spark, or inclination
to be discovered; first because he was abominated by the Spaniards, as a person
of too deep a reach; for it is a maxim amongst them, to have a care of such
persons as by the greatness of their parts, or designs, may disturb the present
quiet of Italy, during the minority of their King: Some people believe, that
for the same reasons for which the Spaniards hated him, the French loved him,
but yet with very good Policy, he was but little or not at all mentioned in the
Conclave.

The other impediment was a pique Chigi had taken against him, Albici having
been always an enemy to his Government, murmuring continually against it, as
well in public as in private; Cardinal Chigi for all that dissembled it very
well, yet he could not contain from saying one day to a friend of Albici's, who
recommended him to him, for a Pope (but he spoke as by the by) That when he
gave his voice for Albici, there should not be another Cardinal in the College.

These following Memoires of this Cardinal, came too late to my hands to put
them into my second Part, which indeed was their proper place; but coming from
a good hand, I have chosen rather to insert them here, than to suffer them to
be lost: I desire the Reader therefore would compare what is written of this
Cardinal in the second Part, with what follows.

Francesco Cardinal of Albici was born in Cesenna the 25th. of October 1593. he
is descended of Albici's in Florence, a person of great learning in all kinds
of Sciences, but in the Law, and Ecclesiastical History, he has but few equals
in this age. He is so great a lover of Justice, that when he was young, and
exercising his Advocateship in Cesenna, because he would not do that which was
unjust, he was forced to fly, to avoid the mischief which was threatened to him,
by the person which desired to have had sentence in his favor contrary to Law
and Justice. Upon this occasion he came to Rome, where he exercised his
profession with great applause; Monsignour Monti a Milanese being declared
Nuntio of Naples by Urban the eight, the advocate Albici was proposed to
Cardinal Francisco Barbarino, to be Auditor of the said Nuntiature. Monsignour
Meltio Lieutenant to A. C. who was a Cardinal afterward, was desired to give
his Character of him, which he did so much to his advantage, that he was sent
to Naples, and afterward into Spain with the said Monti, where he carried
himself with great commendation; after three years he was called back again to
Rome by Urban, made Assessor of the S. Office, and sent with Monsignour
Macchiavelli Assistant into Germany to Cardinal Ginetti, who went Legate a
Latere from Urban the eighth. There was some unkindness betwixt the said Legate
and Albici, by reason of the sordidness wherewith the Legate used all his
attendants in his Legation. Whilst he was in Germany, the charge of Assessor
d^l S. Officio, was kept void, and restored to him at his return to Rome. Urban
at the request of D. Anna Colonna, gave him the Canonship of Saint Peter; and
amongst the rest of the favors which he did him, he declared himself his
Kinsman upon occasion of a Marriage betwixt one of the house of Barbarino, and
a Lady of the Albici's. He had thoughts of making him a Cardinal, if death had
not prevented his making another promotion. He was afterward made a Cardinal
by Innocent the tenth, for the pains he took in the cause of Jansenius;
condemned by Innocent, although his Emulators whispered about the Court, that
he was created, only to obstruct the Assumption of Cardinal Fiorenzuola to the
Papacy.

But that report could not continue long, it being well known, what joy the
whole Court, and all the Princes had at his Promotion, and amongst the rest,
there was a Prince who congratulated with his Eminence, that by his bare
merits, without Bribery, or Subornation, he had attained to the dignity of the
Purple. At that time he was the only Instrument that made Alexander the 7th.
Secretary of State at Colonia, as appears in a book Printed by the said Pope,
before his Ascension to the Papacy; in which he has inserted one of the many
secrets which were writ to him by Albici: and after the said Chigi was made a
Cardinal, he omitted not any thing that might contribute to the assumption of
his friend to the Papacy, gratitude and friendship being one of his most
singular virtues; and amongst other of his policies, he expressed more than
ordinary civilities to a Kinsman of Alexander, who did not return that
gratitude, which such a friend did deserve; only in the latter part of his
Pontificate, upon the instance of Cardinal Chigi his Nephew, who knew very well
the affection of such a friend deserved a greater recompense than this, he made
one of his Nephews resign the Title of an Abbey to him; and this obligation he
owed not to the Pope, but to his Nephew. The Cardinal is of a good complexion,
and lusty, though he be in the 75th. year of his age. He is courteous in his
Speech, a lover of Poverty, indifferent as to the Princes, for being asked one
day by Cardinal Aragon, whether he was French or Spaniard, he replied, That
where Justice was, thore were his inclinations. He is beloved of the Cardinals,
but it is for fear; he is resolute and studious enough. At present he has four
Nephews, Sons of his Son, first the Abbot Rinaldo; then Nicolo a Layman,
married to a Daughter of the Marquess Calcagnini of Ferrara; the next is Lutio
Arroni, a youth of many good qualities; and lastly Logo an Abbot. He uses his
Pen very willingly in defense of such as are accused, as he did in the Papacy
of Innocent the 10th. in behalf of Horatio Falconieri; for which, being
reprehended by a Prelate who was his friend, he replied, That it was Justice
that he defended; That he could not abandon his friend in his distress; That
such was his practice formerly, and such it should be for the time to come. In
the Pontificate of Alexander, he made several Sermons, which by several were
interpreted, as intended against the Government of Alexander; and being rebuked
for it by some of his Relations, he gave one of them this answer, That Pulpits
were invented for the reprehension, not for the encouragement of Vice. He is a
person of a quick resolution and (...). Upon an occasion in the time of
Alexander the 7th. who framed a Congrega(...) for adj^s^ing the matters of
Ceremony betwixt the Cardinals and Roman Barons, by (...) (...)ey were grown
but little considered, this Cardinal said, If I were to advise his Holiness, I
would tell him, that he ought first to set a value upon the Cardinals, and when
they desire any favor for the Barons, his Holiness should grant it at their
Suit; By which means, the Sacred College will become more estimable to every
body; but if the Pope villifies them, all the world contemns them: which was
very wise Council. All the pleasant and facetious things that are said in the
Court, are fathered upon this person, of which he never so much as thought: and
this proceeds from the liberty he takes in his discourse, having lived always
with that freedom. He is a man that perplexes his enemies, by the multitude of
his civilities, and has never ceased to assist them, who were the cause of his
coming to Rome, although since he was a Cardinal, it was in his power to have
mischiev'd them; but he confesses himself beholding to them, and that if it had
not been for their threats, he had never come from Cesenna. A rare virtue to
draw good out of evil. But to return.

Spada was talked of, both without the Conclave, and within, for some certain
days, and had it not been for the obstinacy in the creatures of Chigi, to have
no other Pope but a creature of Alexanders, he would doubtless have put fairer
for the Papacy, than Barbarino himself, or any other creature either of Vrbans
or Innocents. Barbarino had a great affection for him, and finding he could not
compass it himself, he set his interest on foot, and endeavored to bend and
incline the minds of some people to him, by crying him up for one of the
greatest Politicians in the world, affirming the Church had need of such a Pope
in such times as these. But all this was only in satisfaction to the said
Spada, he knew very well he was not likely to succeed; besides Cardinal
Rospigliosi, driving at the same thing with more zeal, and better means, and
being obliged to Barbarino, more than if he had been his creature, Barbarino
would never have proposed it to Spada, lest he should take away the Papacy from
the creatures of Chigi, or give an occasion of jealousy to the Grand Duke, by
hindering the Exaltation of a common friend, and creating one of his own only.

Two reasons obliged the Grand Duke to deny his assistance to Santa Susanna,
who is vulgarly called Spada. The first was his being a Luccaese, that is a
worthy Citizen of a Republique, upon which the Great Duke looks with an eye of
compassion, and would rather have it in his own hands, than in the midst of his
State. But if the interests of his Country had not been of importance, his
immoderate affection, and dependence upon the will of Barbarino, would have
made him resolve upon his Exclusion.

The Spaniards look upon him as their friend, and would not have failed to have
assisted him effectually, both for the confidence they had in him, and the
opinion that he was a quiet and peaceable man, which is the thing the Spaniards
do principally regard; but either by the natural iniquity of that Nation, or
the want of fidelity in the Ministers of that Crown, it appears that it is
enough to exclude any one from the Papacy, to be proposed and recommended by
the Spaniard, as Innocent said very plesantly. At first they believed they
might obtain their design, and so much the more zealous were they for his
promotion, by how much they were informed of the King of France's resolution to
fall into Flanders with his Army; judging it convenient for the quiet of Italy,
to put a Pope into the Vatican inclinable to peace, and affectionate to Spain.
The French pretended very fairly they would exclude nobody, and his Majesty had
given them such order; but underhand they labored the contrary, endeavoring
to turn away that water from the Mill, which the Spaniard supplied.

There were certain Satirical Libels published against Santa Susanna, supposed
to have come out of the Family of Cardinal Farnese, who being farther engaged
for the Papacy than any of the rest, he had a mind to dismount every body else,
and remain on horseback himself. The Court would have desired his exaltation,
because he was generally beloved; but his having so few Adherents, especially
of the Cap, except Barbarino, was no small prejudice to his affairs. It was
believed it was a great advantage to him, that there was never a Cardinal of
the house of Medici, and that the interests of the Great Duke were managed by
Cardinal Rosetti, who is a good Cardinal, though unfortunate in his
Negotiations; and indeed it had not been ill for him, had the Spaniards had
Cardinals of Authority to have managed their Factions; for it is the head which
gives vigor to all the rest of the Members.

And now I shall pass to the person of Cardinal Farnese, a true Roman, and of
whom they discoursed as if he were created already; there were certain
Parasites and Flatterers which failed not to assure him of the Papacy, but he
refused with great prudence to put his Nose to that incense. And to the end the
Reader may be better informed of all passages, I will set down the reasons upon
which they believed him Pope, and which gave him so great probability; and
afterward give an account of the impediments which obstructed him: and the
first thing that enabled him to contend for the Papacy with any of the rest,
was his age, he being above 70. years old, of a weakly complexion, and of a
very extravagant course of life, going to dinner when others went to bed, and
to supper when others rose: another was the many and principal charges which he
exercised in Rome after his return from his Nuntiature in Switzerland: another,
his great zeal and incorruption in matters of Justice, which he exercised with
that excess as one may say, that he became very terrible to the wicked, and
very grateful to the good, for his uprightness, and diligence in business:
another reason was, that he was the last of his Family, having only two Nephews
by his Sister, one in Bolonia, and the other in Rome; This latter was a Prelate
of a competent age, but both of them hated by their Uncle, who by natural
instinct, bears a kind of natural aversion to his own Kindred, and servants.
Which humor made the Cardinals open their Eyes, and judge him worthy of the
Papacy, in these times, when the Church was so lacerated and perplexed by the
Heretics, and so ruined and destroyed by the Nephews of the Popes.

The French and the Spaniard were inclined to concur with him, either in
appearance, or in earnest, for one and the same reason, he being descended from
the same house with the Dukes of Parma, and by consequence not in any suspicion
with the Spaniard, there being at present a Brother of the said Duke of Parma's
in the King of Spains service against Portugal; besides the honorable memory
of the tryumphs of Alexander Farnese in Flanders, in the service of the said
Crown: So that the Spaniard could not desire greater security, than to have a
Prince of the Farneses as it were a hostage in the middle of Spain, which said
Prince is reported to have recommended the interests of the said Cardinal
Farnese, his Kinsman, to the Spaniards.

And this very consideration was thought sufficient to prevail with the French
King to concur likewise; he having undertaken the Protection of the Duke of
Parma, as to the restitution of the Duchy of Castro, according to the
agreement with the Apostolic Chamber under Alexander the 7th. in the Treaty of
Pisa, but without effect, they being forced to attend the conclusion of that
Treaty, from the new Pope, but that is not done neither; So that in respect to
that Protection, his most Christian Majesty could not, as many believed, refuse
his assistance to the said Farnese, the Dukes Kinsman; but they which looked
further into the secrets of their intrigues, have discerned that to be obstacle
clearly, and a reason to destroy, as well as to obstruct that machination, and
therefore they never esteemed their mediations for his promotion to the Papacy,
to be real.

For first it facilitated to the house of Chigi, the acquisition of the Lands
of Farnese, which were his jurisdiction, by which means at present Don
Augustino is Prince of them; and suggested a way to Pope Alexander to exclude
the Duke of Parma, who in default of this branch of Farnese, was to succeed;
Whereupon the Duke was not a little disgusted with the said Cardinal, who kept
little or no correspondence with him all along, especially when he was Legate
of Bolonia; and therefore it was not to be believed the Duke would desire the
exaltation of a person, who upon the score of the interests of his family, has
for a long time had so little intelligence with him: though for some years
since, upon his particular advantage, the Cardinal procured a reconciliation,
in appearance rather than in sincerity, and so perhaps the Duke did believe,
who was wise enough to understand the drift of that reconciliation; and
therefore appearances, not being able to remove what is fixed and impressed in
the hearts of Princes, it is to be believed the Papacy could not fall into the
hands of this Cardinal, by means of the Dukes recommendation.

Moreover he had many other impediments besides, but the greatest was the real,
and verbal aversion of the Spaniard, Farnese having rendered himself suspicious
to that Crown, by his excellent qualities, and the opinion they had of the
headiness and turbulence of nature, which as I have often said before, is an
occasion that such persons are never desired by the Catholic Crown; and
perhaps they would obstruct the creation of such a Cardinal if they could,
though he was born in the very Court at Madrid.

In short, though the Duke of Parma, should have recommended him as his
Kinsman, yet could not Farnese expect to be Pope, because the Spaniards have an
eye at present upon the house of Parma, as being obliged to France in several
particulars; so that in such a conjuncture, they would not have consented to
the exaltation of a Kinsman of the Dukes; nay I will go further, and say, that
if the Duke as his Kinsman had undertaken his assistance, the College would
have opposed it, at least those Cardinals which are promoters of the Grandeur
of the Ecclesiastic State, if for no other reasons but the interests of
Castro, which are so considerable.

The French on the other side could not be sincere in his Election, not only
upon the score of the affronts offered the 25th. of November 1650 to the
Ambassador, the crime of the offenders, being by a policy of Innocents; thrown
upon the back of his Minister, which was Farnese, and by the French (who could
do no other) acknowledged to be such, but because they knew also they could not
have any entire confidence in him. To all this there was added a private
disgust betwixt him, or to speak more properly, his Confidents, and some other
Competitors for the Papacy, as particularly Celsi, and Santa Susanna; whose
infirmities and defects were published in writing, but little comporting with
the decorum or honor of the Church: which upon good grounds were supposed to
have proceeded from his Family; so as they were obliged to pay them in their
own Coin.

A loss that cannot be counterpoys'd by his private league with* Pallotta,
Albici, and Pallavicino, which league, by the death of the last, came to
nothing: and now all these things being presupposed, and considered together,
Farnese's exaltation could not be expected; yet the French did not fail to
assist him, whether it was that they knew him to be a proper person to
interrupt and disturb the repose of the Spaniards, or for any thing else, I
know not; it is sufficient, that (either to please, or oblige him, or for some
other reasons) they did assist him.

Some there were who pried more narrowly into the policies of the French, and
found, that the exaltation which they endeavored for Farnese, was but to bring
him into disgrace with the Spaniard, and draw him over wholly to their party,
the French being assured, that the more they solicited his creation, the more
jealous would the Spaniards be of him, and by consequence more zealous for his
exclusion; and he finding himself afterward without hopes, would not fail to
resent, and revenge it upon the Spaniards; but they being more practiced, and
prying into the intrigues both of Rome, and of France, knew how to save both
their Goat and their Cabbadge.

Bonvisi was the only person and object that Chigi aimed at amongst all his
creatures, believing for certain to make him Pope, being his creature so well
deserving, and the Spaniards concurring out of a desire they had to a young
Pope, that they might not be liable to continual mutations and changes, there
being less exception against this person also, than against any of the rest of
the creatures of Chigi; and the more, because, as a dextrous and discreet man,
Bonvisi shunned all occasions of showing himself violent for any of the Crowns,
and therefore could not be formally excluded by them. Cardinal Anthonio
likewise acknowledging Bonvisi for his greatest Confident from the time of
Urban his Uncle, and of whom he made use, as his most faithful Minister, at
the breaking out of the Wars; endeavored his exaltation likewise, and failed
not to invite all the French party to his side.

But he also was found to have his share of exceptions, and that so large, as
was sufficient to put his designs upon the Papacy out of his head. The first
objection was against his age, being but 62. and no more, and which is
considerable, strong and sound, and likely to live twenty years longer; and the
rather, because he was a man that loved his recreations, and did not apply
himself too fiercely to business. So that the rest of the Cardinals who desired
to have their share in other Conclaves besides this, thought of nothing less
than giving the Keys to one that would open a door to them all into another
world. Nor was his Country a small impediment, being of a Republique adjacent
to the Territories of the Great Duke.

Another obstacle was, Francisco Bonvisi his Nephew, who is Maestro di Camera
to Cardinal Chigi; he is a person so proud, fierce, cruel, and vindicative in
his nature, and tainted with principals so pernicious to the Government, that
the Cardinals could not resolve to give the Papacy to one who had such a
Nephew, as with his ill qualities, obscured all the virtue and luster in his
Uncle, and one that in my fancy may hinder his exaltation in another Conclave.

Chigi had a mind to have endeavored the exaltation of Cardinal Elci, not only
a Sienese, and joined in the same interests with the house of Chigi, but a
person depending wholly upon it: however being confident he could never
succeed, he desisted, and spoke no more of him, reserving that design, till the
differences and contests of the several parties, should spin out the Conclave a
little longer. His qualities certainly rendered him worthy of the Papacy, and
there was none could have excluded him, as defective in parts; but if he had
been but mentioned, the Cardinals would have opposed themselves, who were weary
already of seeing the Dominion remain so long in that Family, which had made it
self the object of the common Odium by his ill administration, and besides the
French would have been against him, having never to have been brought to
condescend to the election of a person so firm to the house of Chigi, from whom
they have received so little satisfaction.

Litta was looked upon as a very deserving Lord, advanced to the Cardinalship,
merely for his merits, adorned with many good qualities, and worthy of any
Government, Ecclesiastical or Politic. Yet there was no occasion to talk of
him, unless it were that some of his Friends affirmed, and with good reason,
that there was none would serve, and govern the Church beter than he, as being
an approved person, well skilled in Government, and very assiduous in business.
But there being persons of greater, years, of greater interests, and greater
merits, there was but little notice taken of what they said, every one replying
that he would succeed better in another Conclave, than in this; and so much the
rather, because as he was Archbishop of Milan, there being a necessity of
interfering with the Spanish Ministers, he had gained so much the ill will of
that Nation, and in particular of Don Lewis Ponte du Leon, the Governor of
Milan, that they are his implacable Enemies; and Don Lewis declared, that if he
should see things disposed in his favor, he would ride Post to Rome to
frustrate and exclude him.

Caraffa seeing he could not compass it for himself, though he wanted no good
will, he negotiated the interest of Chigi, who had given him directions in
every thing, and made him the Secretary of his heart: but some believed that he
served him not faithfully in the business of Bonvisi, endeavoring his
exclusion underhand, to make an elder man Pope, to the end that he might see a
new Conclave once again, and set his own interest once more on foot, as fearing
the long life of Bonvisi. But to me these reasons seem as frivolous, as his
pretensions; for if he be a Politician, as he is reputed, he may very well
judge, that the memory of Paul the 4th. a Pope, not at all propitious to the
Spaniard, lies upon him like Original Sin; which obstacle is so great, that I
may say it is impossible to be removed, being already so radicated in the
Conclave, that the Spaniards have upon that very score, excluded several other
Cardinals of the house of Caraffa. Had it not been for this, he might have past
in some Conclave or other, his qualities being proper enough for the Papacy,
saving that he is a little too severe in his administration of Justice, and yet
a great preserver of the immunities of the Church. He has very good alliance in
Rome, which another time may give him assistance; but in this Conclave, they
will not so much as attempt his exaltation, for several respects, particularly
because they are sure the design will not take, by reason of his youth.

Bonelli likewise embarked without Biscott, and Cardinal Imperiale would have
done better, to have expected till another Conclave, because those oppositions
which are discovered to him now, may perhaps be sufficient to obstruct him
hereafter. He is (according to his name) but little in goodness, in parts, in
learning, and in Stature. He was preferred in the Papacy of Alexander to
considerable charges, viz. of Governor, and Nuntio into Spain; but more by the
powerful intercession of Imperiale (whose authority with Chigi was suitable to
his name, commanding him in every thing like an Emperor indeed) than by any
merits of his own; In the Exercizes of his Offices, and particularly in his
Nuntiature, he has neither lessened nor increased his esteem amongst those that
knew him. Of himself he would never have launched forward, seeing the wind in
his teeth, and too much disposed to beat him back again. But Cardinal
Imperiale, who was always most propitious to his hopes, would have it so, and
he accordingly permitted it; but neither the one nor the other did any thing,
but run themselves into greater animosities with the French, and with other
Cardinals also. Imperiale had promised Barbarino to do his utmost for his
Exaltation, upon condition that if things succeeded not in his favor; that he
should then assist him afterward in the Election of Bonelli, and so by a
politic fetch, pretending with the remainder of his Squadron to labor with
might and main in the behalf of Barbarino; at the same time, he fixed his Eye
upon, and drove on the interest of his Nephew Bonelli.

He cried up the virtues of Barbarino to the highest Region of the Air; but
Bonelli's to the first Quire of the Angels, and that not only with his tongue,
but with all the Rhetoric of his heart: In so much that a Cardinal of his
acquaintance seeing him one day in a little confusion, betwixt his
commendations of Barbarino, and Bonelli, he said to him, Nemo potest duobus
Dominis servire. In short, two days before they entered into the Conclave,
Imperiale according to the finess and subtlety of his transactions, deprest the
practices of Barbarino, and advanced Bonelli's so, that he endeavored to
procure him the applause of the Prelates, and of the whole Court.

Accordingly he made it be reported round about Rome, that he had 40 Votes
sure, and that he doubted not to make Bonelli Pope; using that as a Stratagem,
to no other end but to stop the mouths of the adversaries, believing most
certainly, that by spreading abroad such a report, they would forbear to make
any opposition, and endeavor a reconciliation, that they might not have the
Pope to their Enemy: But those who understood the state of affairs, and how the
Cardinals were divided this way, and that, did but laugh at all this. The
French Ambassador in very good earnest made his complaint to the same Cardinal
Imperiale, telling him that these endeavors ought to be reserved till another
Conclave: And in that thing the said Ambassador was to be commended for his
modesty, being not willing to publish any of his defects, nor to urge any other
reason for his Exclusion, but his Youth.

For all this Imperiale desisted not from promoting the Election of Bonelli
with all imaginable contrivance. And on the other side Albici, Odescalchi, and
Palotta, having openly declared against him, they conspired all ways of
excluding him, and not without some reflection upon the incapacity of the
person.

The Spaniards recommended him, and would have been glad of him with all their
hearts; but finding things going clear another way than what Imperiale
proposed, they dis-intangled themselves, as nimbly as they could, and left the
greatest part of the care upon Imperiale himself. The French who had declared
that they had no order for the Exclusion of any body, temporiz'd, and delayed,
to profess themselves Enemies, yet they forbore not to cast rubs in his way.
But if they had once seen things growing hotter in favor of Bonelli, I am
satisfied they would have appeared publicly for his Exclusion, not only
because he was Nephew to Imperiale, who was not much affected to France; but
because he was a Spariard both in interest, and profession; and it would not be
convenient for the French, at a time when the two Crowns were so near a
rupture, to have a Pope in Italy too much addicted to the Spaniard.

At the beginning, when it came first into the head of Imperiale to advance
Bonelli, his friends advised him to desist from that enterprise, foreseeing the
difficulties which discovered themselves afterward; exhorting him to leave
that dignity to the pretensions of several other persons of greater desert, as
well for their experience in Government, and integrity of their lives, as for
their plurality of years: But he thought Bonelli above them all, and did but
laugh at their discourse, and perhaps on purpose that they might do as much for
him afterward: And indeed he would have done much better, to have suffered his
Nephew to have got some more years upon his back (seeing he is the youngest of
all the Competitors) and to have attended some other time more proportionable
to his designs, which would not have redounded so much to the prejudice of
Bonelli, who is become totally suspected by the French; and he will not only
have a great trouble to bring them to his side, the next Conclave, but run a
great hazard of having them conspire his Exclusion.

Celsi was excluded upon four sorts of accounts (and which is most strange,
they began to talk first of his Exclusion, and of his Exaltation afterward)
The first was the great Enmity which Barbarino professed to him, which he has
publicly declared, not only since he was made a Cardinal, but even in the time
of his Prelacy: In so much as when he was recommended to him by some persons,
pretending great modesty, he replied, That he would not give any impediment to
his Papacy, provided he would not hinder him for going out of Rome. Those who
recommended him knew what he meant very well, which was never to concur at all.

But these reports are false, for there are some persons that affirm that Celsi
had declared, That he would have renounced Paradise, as well as the Papacy, if
he had thought to receive it from the recommendation of Barbarino. But be it as
it will, Barbarino took away a great part of the inclinations of the College
from him. Cardinal Pallavicino discovered him to be his Enemy likewise, but
upon other occasions; However though he looked upon the first as a powerful
enemy, especially in that juncture of time, yet he little regarded the
animosity of the other, by reason of his debility, and the small reputation he
had in the College: Death took away this obstacle from him, but he would much
willinger, he had taken Barbarino in his room.

The second reason of his Exclusion was the friendship of Ravizza, which
Prelate, (either because some malignant Star that persecuted him would have it
so, or that he was really guilty of several actions that were blame worthy) by
his Conversation rendered himself abominable to the whole College; except
Cardinal Chigi, who held him for an Oracle, and it may be said of these three
persons, Funiculus triplex difficile rumpitur.

Chigi did his utmost, to bring the said Ravizza into the Conclave, as his
Conclavist; and because he saw several difficulties that were likely to arise,
he procured a particular Brief from his Uncle before the time; But the
Cardinals suspecting it was done with design to put the whole College into a
distraction, they refused openly to receive him; and though Cardinal Celsi went
about entreating this man, and the other; yet Chigi was forced to be patient,
and get another; and so much did the College look askew upon Ravizza, that
they could not resolve to concur with Celsi, for the great confidence and
familiarity was betwixt them, being satisfied he would not only have advanced
him to the Cardinalship, but to the highest charges about the Court.

The third Cause of his exclusion, was his too much rigor, being indeed of so
severe a nature, that he many times adhered to Justice more than he ought, and
would willingly punish that offense with the Gallows, that was scarce worthy of
the Whip; in some Congregations, his judgments resembled the Sentence of
Phalaris, written in Characters of blood, they were so severe, which made the
Cardinals apprehend, as they always will, that to exalt this person, was but
to make the whole College tremble, and to be treated with greater rigor than
in the days of Paul the fourth, and Sixtus the fifth.

For this reason the Spaniard excluded him with their heart, though not with
their tongue, they promised to run over Mountains, and Seas, to do him service;
but they were very tedious in setting out, and could not find in their hearts
to begin their journey. For all this, he ceased not to negotiate with them
still, and to offer them the utmost of his affection, but in vain, for they
were resolved not to have a Pope so severe, and so singular in his authority.

Furthermore his Enemies praised him, and pricked him in his exclusion, making
use both of the honey and the sting. They said he was indeed a great
headpiece, a man of great learning, politic, dexterous in business, and in
short, a person of no ordinary Talent; but to these gifts, the integrity of his
life, and the goodness of his manners, (wherewith a Pope ought to be endued)
did not correspond: and this I dare affirm, that if to the Politics, which are
so resplendent in the Cardinal, the moral virtues of life and conversation were
conjoined, there would not be a person more deserving than he in the whole
College. Farnese was no Enemy to Celsi, but doubting this person more than any
of the rest, to be most likely to take the Papacy from him, which he thought he
had sure in his hands; he procured his exclusion as I have said before, by the
help of certain Libels which are supposed to have proceeded out of his Family,
with which Celsi is not a little offended, and in time will show greater
revenge, than what he has shown as yet.

In this manner therefore, much being said for all the Competitors, Rospigliosi
remained alone, exempt from the usual Torrent of contradiction. He was
generally esteemed by the whole College, and from the very beginning the
reasons were plain why the Papacy must needs fall into his hands. To see in him
all the virtues that can be desired in an excellent Prince, with the reputation
of having carried himself honorably in all his charges, having executed them
all, with splendor, impartiality, and honor, and particularly in his
Nuntiature into Spain, from whence he returned poorer, in a manner, than he
went. The opinion that he was a person of a most sincere judgment, free from
all Interests and Faction, not fond of his own opinion, but endued with a
thousand other good qualities, made him be thought worthyest of the Popedom;
and the rather, because the Spaniards recommended him in the first place, and
the Emperor desired him, because he Christened the Empress in the year 1650.
when he was Nuntio in Spain; the French were not diffident of him; Barbarino
loy'd him for having opened the way to his preferments in the Pontificate of
his Uncle; and last of, all Chigi could not but concur as he was his creature:
and all these reasons being put together, he could not fail of the Papacy.

And yet he himself was not without his impediments, one new one or other
springing up every day. The first was, the Lords Cardinals judged him improper
(by reason of his infirmities, and particularly an Apoplexy had befallen him
lately) for so considerable a Government, they being very unwilling to choose a
Pope, that should be bedridden all his life, and commit the Government to the
discretion of they knew not who.

The multitude of Kindred which Rospigliosi had in Pistoia, and particularly
five Nephews by his Brother, appeared a necessary obstruction in these times,
in which the desire of enriching their Relations, seems a disease hereditary to
the Popes, of which examples the memory is too fresh in Rome, with no small
detriment to the Church.

Chigi's declaration to some of his friends, that he could not concur in him,
but in case he saw his designs for Bonvisi desperate.

The affection shown to the exaltation of Farnese by the French, who were
instrumental in making of difficulties, and inventing obstructions to hinder
Rospigliosi from the Papacy; but the Divine Providence having chosen him to be
the Conductor and Shepherd of his Flock, by the fiery Pillar as it were of his
Protection, show those Israelites the true way (which followed him) to the end,
that the mists of difficulties being dispelled, the affairs of Rospigliosi
might be brought safe into the Harbor, to the shame and confusion of all that
opposed them.

And thus behold the Conclav is finished, before the Reader is aware, the work
is at an end, in the very beginning of the work; behold them gone out of the
Conclave, at the very time we believed them but entering. In earnest, speaking
of particulars, we seem to* have forgot the universal, and whilst we insist
upon the Competitors of the Papacy, to have omitted the most profound and
occult maxims of the Conclave.

So it would be if the Conclave made the Pretenders, and not the Pretenders the
Conclave: so many Cardinals as we have hitherto described, so many Conclaves
have we made. Maxims, Treaties, Managements, Negotiations, Oppositions,
Exclusions, Inclusions, Subtleties, Animosities, Threatenings, and
Supplications, are the things which constitute Conclaves; and of all these
materials, we find something in the particular description of every Cardinal.

I have read several Conclaves of several Popes, and amongst the rest, five of
Innocent the 10th. alone, it being true that every Conclavist makes his own
Conclave; but to speak truth, without offense to any one, I have found so much
confusion by the redundancy of matter which presented it self to the Pens of
those Authors, who have described those Conclaves; that to avoid that confusion
my self, and make things more easy for the memory of the Reader, I have
separated them as much as possible, and made a particular Conclave for every
Cardinal Pretendant: and though in my judgment it ought to be sufficient, yet
for the complete satisfaction of the curious, I will omit not to say something
of the General likewise.

The Lord Cardinals were divided in the Conclave into these three Factions,
viz. one of the Creatures of Chigi, another of the Squadrone volante, or flying
Squadrone, and the third of a few of the Creatures of Barbarino: But all of
them so weak of themselves, that one without the other would not have had votes
enough to have made an Election, though they had enough to obstruct any person
proposed: Before the Decree for the two thirds was made, and whilst one half
was sufficient, the Factions were so numerous, they chose Popes as they
pleased; but since they were restrained to two thirds, there has never Faction
been so great, as to prevail for any thing more than an Exclusion.

After the death of Urban, the Faction of Barbarino consisted of above 40
Cardinals, Creatures of the said Urban; so that in appearance the Election
would happen to the satisfaction of Barbarini, and yet they had the least share
in it; For not being able to hit upon a Pope, as they desired, they consented
to chose Innocent (at least Francisco did, for indeed Anthonio was always
against it) because they could prevail for no other.

The reason of all this is, because there are several among the Factions, which
being Subjects, and dependants upon the Crowns, cannot oblige themselves to
their heads, any further, than as the Election of the person be agreeable to
the Crowns they depend on; and indeed though there be so much talk of the
Factions of Spain, and of France (which is nothing but their Cardinals) they
are subject to a head, which they depute over them; yet in policy they do
suffer them, to divide themselves here and there, as they think good; it being
all one to them if their business be done; and indeed they are served better,
by having their Cardinals under the heads of other Factions, than to make
Factions of their own; so that the Cardinals of the Crowns ought rather to be
called Nationists than Factionists: the French having their particular
assemblies, to endeavor the advantages of the French Nation, and the
Spaniards, to negotiate the interests of Spain.

The Faction of Barbarino, in respect of his own number of Cardinals, was the
weakest of all, and it was held impossible for him to Exclude another, although
there were 15 Cardinals of Vrban's Creation in the Conclave; yet nevertheless
amongst those there were Vrsin, Este, and Grimaldi, who were indifferent which
way Barbarino steered; it was enough for them if they followed their
instructions from France; there were amongst them Harach and Donghi, likewise
both of them Spaniards, and Rosetti for the Great Duke, who were all Creatures
of Barbarino, and followed him rather to give him counsel, than to receive any
from him; every one of them endeavoring the advantages of their particular
Princes, without any design at all to favor the interest of Barbarino, who
recommended himself to them: So that there were at the absolute disposal of
Barbarino, but 7 Votes, with which number he would not have been able to have
done any thing, either Pro or Con; and yet he was able, because amongst the
other two Factions there were certain Cardinals who denied to concur in the
persons proposed to them by their heads: to exclude them therefore, they joined
with Barbarino's party, who were resolved upon their Exclusion likewise. And by
^^is means the Faction of Barbarino became stronger, and able at least to
prevail for the Exclusion of any one.

And this that is spoken of one of the Factions, is intended of them all: for
my part, I esteem little the uniformity of so many Factions, as having nothing
but Title, and some little appearance; for in one and the same Faction, there
are oftentimes four or five several opinions, and every opinion attended with
two or three Cardinals, which is the true reason of the difficulty in
Elections; If it were otherwise, and the Factionists followed the directions of
their Heads, the Pope would be made in a moment, because it would be sufficient
to accommodate two persons only, which are the Heads; but things are carried
after another manner, there being for the most part in every Conclave, as many
Factions as Cardinals; a many Heads, as Factions; and as many Popes as Heads;
confounding themselves by their conjunctions and divisions, and doing too much,
they do nothing at all.

And here I will beg leave of the Reader for one moment, to insert an example
very worthy in my judgment to be added to this Treatise. It is not two years
since, there was a Muster of the horse, in a City where I was then present in
the Company of a Roman Abbot, who had the curiosity to see the said Muster. The
Captains had never been in the Wars, and perhaps not so much as on Horseback;
the Soldiers were all of them, either Porters, or Shooemakers, or Tailors, or
Bargemen, and therefore better skilled in any thing, than fighting; insomuch
that I think it impossible to see any thing more pleasant, than the disorders
of that Muster.

The Captains commanded, as if they were to obey; and the Soldiers obeyed as
they were to command: some of them ran, whether they were never called; and
others refused to go to that post to which they were commanded. That Captain
called two or three Soldiers out of his own Company, and there came five or
six out of another. When they were to double their files, there was neither
head nor foot to be found; they which were before, instead of standing firm
where they were, ran tumbling upon one another to the Rear; and those which
were in the Rear, thrust themselves so forward, they left no body near them.
The Captains swagger'd, that they were not obeyed by their Soldiers; and the
Soldiers cursed, that their Captains knew not how to command them.

The Abbot looked upon them with great satisfaction, smiling, and seeming to
laugh, though he did not. I who observed him, desiring to know what it was,
asked his opinion of their Exercising; to which he answered, that it seemed to
him not much unlike to the Conclave of Cardinals: and so returning to his
house, he told me, that he was present in Innocent the tenth's Conclave, in
which Pope Alexander was created, where he had found no better Order in the
disposition and management of the Cardinals, than he had seen in the training
of those Soldiers.

I being curious to know something more particularly, entreated him that he
would give me a more particular account; but he finding he had said enough
already, added no more, but that the Cardinals in the Conclave, observed the
same Orders the Captains and Soldiers had done in their Muster. And indeed,
when afterward I had occasion to see with mine own eyes their Discipline in
the Conclave, as I did in this of Clement, that Muster came into my mind, and I
thought a hundred times of what the Abbot had told me, finding by experience
the application to be very proper and good.

It is not to be imagined the way the Cardinals take to accomplish their
designs. The Heads of the Factions, are they which prevail the least, and do
many times negotiate, what their Creatures will never confirm; and for the most
part, the Creatures do oblige their Heads to follow them: one word is enough to
make three or four Factions; and one thing mis-understood, does frustrate
sometimes the designs of the whole. The Heads do unite to endeavor the union
of their Creatures, and the Creatures divide, that they might not see the union
of their Heads. Some of them run thither, from whence others run away, and
neither can give a reason for what either of them do. Every one pretends to
obey them, who have the Government of them; and yet every one obeys, and no
body commands. Sometimes it is believed one man has got the votes of them all,
and sometimes all together, cannot get the vote of one man. In short, the
Cardinals in the Conclave, are like an Eele in ones hand, that slips out when
one thinks to hold it the fastest. And this is the Muster which is made in the
Conclave.

Let us return now to our three Factions in our particular Conclave, and if we
have said any thing of the Faction of Barbarino, let us say something
particularly of the Faction of Chigi, which consisted of certain Cardinals
created by his Uncle. At first this Faction seemed to be numerous, of 24
Cardinals at least, though his Uncle created but about 30 in all. But in
strictness it was not so numerous as it ought to have been; not only because
there was none, either of the Spanish, nor French, who were obliged to adhere
to what orders they received from their Crowns, as two of the Venetians were to
the Orders of that Commonwealth; but others being unsatisfied with the ill
conduct of Chigi, turned tail, and forsook him, yet he had enough remaining to
serve for an exclusion.

The French by themselves, and by the mediation of others, endeavored to
persuade him to concur in Farnese. The Spaniards (in whom his confidence was
greatest) left him to his choice of several persons, suspending, and forbearing
(by a concealed policy) the nomination of any body, as if they would depend
wholly upon him; and all this to gain him to follow their designs.

For all this, according as Caraffa advised him, he would not declare his
intentions, either to the French Ambassador, or to the Spanish, although they
both pressed it very earnestly in their last visits; but he excused himself, by
affirming that he desired nothing, but what was usually desired by the Nephews
of other Popes, that one of the Cardinals created by his Uncle might be
chosen; declaring himself indifferent as to them, and that he would not show
more affection to one, than to another; but he was not so good as his word, for
he afterward expressed too great propensity to his peculiar friends.

And the same song he sung to the greatest part of the Cardinals, protesting he
would never have it go from amongst his own creatures. Which Albici
understanding, before a sufficient number of the Cardinals, he said, Most
Eminent Lords, we endeavor to make a Pope, and the Pope is made to our hands,
for Alexander has left it as an Inheritance to his own creatures. Only he gave
some hopes to Cardinal Barbarino, that he would concur with him, in case the
design he had for some of his particular friends, did not prosper; but all was
to no purpose.

The third Faction was the Squadrone Volante, which were enough for an
exclusion, the most of them creatures of Innocent the 10th. and for the most
part unanimous in their designs.

In the last Conclave before, there was a flying Squadone of Cardinals, but
without ever a head, which Prince Pamphilio observing, desired they would unite
themselves under some such head, as by his Birth and Prerogative should be
worthy of such direction; and to that purpose proposed Cardinal Medici to them;
but the good Cardinals of the Squadrone deriding his Council, made answer, they
had need of no more heads; every one of them had both a head, and hands, and
feet too, and so they continued without.

But in this Conclave they were of another opinion, and without any
solicitation, chose Cardinal Imperiale Head of their Squadron; a person very
proper for the employment, as one that quickly discerns where the malady lies,
and has judgment enough to apply a remedy immediately, and stands firm to his
resolutions, when he has reason of his side; yet in the exaltation of Bonelli,
he showed less cunning than was expected in him.

The French were something averse to the erection of this flying Squadron, and
the rather, because they saw it managed it by a Cardinal who had no great
affection for them; but they thought it best to let that pass, which they could
not stop; and indeed the very name of the Squadrone Volante, was odious to the
Crowns in the last Conclave, but in this much more; because the Cardinals of
the Squadron were able to exclude any body, and were agreed amongst themselves,
never to concur (upon what instance soever) but in some person that pleased
them; and as they said, no body should please them, but the most deserving.

And to speak truth, this union did not only displease the Crowns, as I have
said, but was ungrateful even to those Politicians and Ecclesiastics, who
made any reflection upon it; for although they protested, with their hands upon
their hearts, and their eyes turned up to Heaven, that they would consent to no
body but him that deserved best; yet they became odious, and suspected, not
only to the Competitors, but to others also, by this union, and refusal of the
recommendations of the rest; declaring themselves as it were Arbitrators of the
Election, it being sufficient for every Cardinal, to satisfy his own
Conscience, without publishing by this outward Conjunction, that they would
concur in whom they would have them, only upon pretense that he be deserving,
every one being obliged to desire and prefer the best, as most worthy,
according as he esteems him in his Conscience, and not to declare and prefer
one man only by this agreement, and inseparable union of votes, it being
visible by the effects, and experimented daily, that as men, they must err,
seeing they are not Angels; and that the fulfilling of the Bull, de Eligendo
Pontifice, consists wholly in every man's giving his own vote to him, who
according to his Conscience, and secundum Deum, (as the Bull says) he thinks
worthy of it; and that without forming of Squadrons, or Factions, (yet not
without the propensity of affection) they declare altogether to concur in whom
they please, though another person be as worthy and deserving.

The Crowns quickly found out this scandalous proceeding in the Conclave, so
that after the Election of the late Pope Alexander, the first Spanish
Ambassador which was sent to Rome, brought not the usual Credentials from his
Master, to the Cardinals his Subjects, as being born in the Dominions of the
King of Spain, and the reason was, because they had been of the Squadrone
Volante; the Ambassador by word of mouth represented to the said Cardinals, the
displeasure his Catholic Majesty had received, that they, contrary to their
duties, and in contempt of the instances from him, had followed that Squadron,
yet the Cardinals of his Catholic Majesty forbore not even this time, to make
themselves of the Squadron.

Every one of these three Factions endeavored to gain the other, but with such
strange and unimaginable ways, as were never seen in any Conclave before.
Barbarino being weak, by the debility of his Faction, and certain that he could
not set up his own interest, by reason of Chigi's resolution to concur in none
but his own creatures, or thorough the little confidence he had in the private
promises of Imperiale, he began to think of turning the water from the Mill,
and finding out a way of bringing discord and confusion amongst the creatures
of Chigi; which seemed not difficult to perform, because those creatures
themselves, understood very well that Chigi's intentions were fixed upon making
a Pope after another way than his creatures did intend; amongst which, some
negotiated and stood firm for Bonelli, the greatest part for Rospigliosi, and
the rest for Farnese, and Chigi on the other side contriving the exaltation of
Elci his Kinsman; in the first place, he went about spinning of delays, and
protracting, in hopes by that means to hit the mark in time. Insomuch that many
times he found himself so imbroyl'd, he knew not which way to turn him, because
his creatures were obliged to follow him only, in respect that he had declared
he would be indifferent, and not obtrude any particular of his creatures upon
them; but when they found him partial to one man, more than to another, they
began to follow him but lamely, and to shift off his interest as much as they
could.

In the first Scrutiny, which was celebrated on the 3d. day, there did not
concur that number of votes which was desired, and which was for certain
believed could not concur; for besides 36 votes which siguify'd nothing, that
is, which nominated nobody, the rest were sufficiently divided, viz. Durazzo
had 11, Palotta 17, Barbarino 12, from whence the Factions of Farnese, and
Rospigliofi, took courage, and conceived great hopes of compassing their
designs, it being ordinary in the Conclaves for them to lose all, who are found
to have most likelihood at the beginning.

And this fortified the opinion of them, who judged the progress of the
Conclave very long, founding their fancy, upon the dispatch of a Courier into
France, from the French Ambassador, after he had had a long conference with the
Ambassador of Spain; inferring from hence the great difficulty of pitching a
person of equal satisfaction and merit, the Ministers and Cardinals of Crown,
declaring always publicly, that they would exclude none of the meritorious in
general; but when afterward they began to talk of coming to a strict Scrutiny,
then they began to discover their particular propensions to the persons
proposed, every one endeavoring underhand to favor them, who they themselves
believed most deserving.

It may be said, and said truly, that Rospigliosi entered Pope into the
Conclave, because almost all the pretendants came into the Conclave with an
absolute intention to advance every one his own proper interest, and in case
they failed there, not to desert the person of the said Rospigliosi.

Barbarino would have joined with Rospigliosi the first day, had he not been
confident of bringing his own affairs to a good issue; and indeed there were
many that persuaded him to it, in respect of the great confidence the Spaniards
had in him, which confidence, had its true foundation in the time when the said
Barbarino bought certain lands in the Kingdom of Naples for the Prince his
Nephew; which Prince, as head of the house of the Barbarini, would have always
held his Kindred obliged to the affection of the Catholic King. Besides he
could not be jealous of the King of France, the dependence of Cardinal Antonio
Barbarino being so notorious upon that Crown, where likewise all the Family of
the Barbarini was received, at the time of its persecution by Innocent; yet for
all this* the Rhetoric of Cardinal Anthonio, nor the subtlety and insinuations
of all the friends of Cardinal Francisco, had no power upon the Spirits of the
French, who excluded him (but as secretly as was possible) in consideration of
the Lands that were bought already in Naples, and for the inclination the said
Barbarino had always shown, and professed to the Crown of Spain.

The French therefore began publicly to favor Farnese, which gave the
Spaniards some occasion of jealousy, though they had promised to concur,
because they would have had Farnese relied more upon them, than upon the
French; insomuch that they endeavored to exclude him* which was easy enough,
by reason the Cardinals were generally against him, in respect of their
particular interests, so that for eight days together there was no discourse,
but of the exclusion both of the one, and the other; the Scrutinies serving
only to fulfill the Bull, which appoints the same to be made every day, with
the same Oath, and in the best form; and so their votes were given to several
persons, but in small numbers, expecting still when two thirds should agree,
which would have been 42. at the least.

Whilst the French were juggling (I know not whether in earnest, or that it
might be thought so) for Farnese, Cardinal Imperiale, and Azolino, did what
they could to exclude him, though Farnese endeavored to take them off by very
considerable offers; and Cardinal Este, who was most troubled at the designs of
Farnese, found a convenient opportunity to speak to him as he did.

At first the Crown of France would not be interested at all, speaking in a
way, that seemed to proceed from its own proper motion, insisting upon the
necessity the Church had to have such a person in the Vatican, making him
believe with good arguments, that a Pope being to be made for the benefit of
the Church, they need go no farther than his particulars.

Imperiale, and Azolini, abominated the affectionate Councels of this Prince,
declaring publicly, that they would upon no account whatever, concur with
Farnese; whereupon d'Este was obliged to tell them, that the French would have
endeavored to have assisted him with other votes, upon which Imperiale seemed
not to make so much esteem of them, as he ought to have done, remaining firm in
his resolution to the contrary, and reiterating his protestations, never to
concur in Farnese; whereupon d'Este was obliged to reply upon Imperiale, that
he had promised the King of France to concur in the first Conclave, in any
person which should be proposed by the French Faction, and that having broke
his promise, the King of France would show his resentment as he had
opportunity. Some will have it, that they recriminated, and grew very sharp in
their expressions to one another; but for all that Imperiale kept on in his
way, and persisted in the exclusion of Farnese; and from this rupture, the
disorders increased.

On the 9th. it was publicly talked thorough the whole City, that Cardinal
Rospigliosi would be made Pope without all doubt, and that the next morning he
would be published; and it was so confidently reported, that some who were more
easy to believe, than patient to inform themselves, laid great wagers upon it.
By many it was looked upon as noise only, and popular air; by others it was
believed to be true, supposing the Cardinals were resolved in that manner to
deposite the Papacy in the hand of that person, who not being likely to live
longer than four or five years, in respect of and the number of Pretenders, in
probability growing less in the mean time, by the death of the most ancient,
and the rest growing older, they imagined there would be less difficulty in the
next Election, and the way would be facilitated to the remaining Pretenders.

It is enough that his Election was held so certain, that the Artillery in the
Castle of Saint Angelo, were already put in order, and one of his Domestics
received public congratulations from several that went to his house. The
Governor of the Conclave, who understood well enough which way things went,
had sent Soldiers to secure the Goods of that Cardinal in the Convent of the
Cruciferous Friars (whose Protector he was) and they accordingly had adorned
the Church to that purpose, and invited several persons to the Solemnity.

All this proceeded from the garulity of Vgo Serughi, Agent for the
Congregation de Propaganda Fide, to whom one of the Conclavists gave notice by
a Billet, that there were great contrivances for Rospigliosi, and that for
certain he would be proclaimed Pope the next morning, the Conclavist deceiving
himself perhaps upon a conference betwixt Cardinal Barbarino, and Chigi, that
they might seem to make Rospigliosi Pope; but neither the one, nor the other,
intended it in earnest, resolving upon this at the instigation of Cardinal
Azolino, who being a person of great sagacity, seemed very desirous to have
Rospigliosi exalted, because he saw things so well disposed for him; so that he
thought it best to conciliate the affection of one that could not fail of being
Pope: and it succeeded according to his designs.

The two Cardinals, Barbarino, and Chigi, committed the whole management of
their affairs to Azolino, and he managed them as well as was possible; but the
same persons who promised their votes to Azolino for Rospigliosi in public,
denied them perhaps for Azolino to Rospigliosi in secret. And thus from these
indications, and from the imprudence of the Conclavist, he conceived the
forementioned Billet in the form it was sent to Serughi, without expecting the
Scrutiny, in which, Rospigliosi by the management of Azolino, had seven voices
in the same Scrutiny, and nine in the Access, which served to give the greater
courage to the rest of the Pretenders. The policy of Chigi, or rather of
Caraffa his Councellor, and Conductor, was not so bad in the beginning, because
he had persuaded the Spaniards privately to exclude Farnese; and afterward in
the business of Rospigliosi he prevailed, that the French opposed themselves
very briskly; and indeed notwithstanding the impediment, which the promoters of
Farnese had found, it seemed their minds began to turn toward Rospigliosi,
which as soon as Chigi discerned, he immediately endeavored to interrupt their
designs; and by the means of his greatest Confidents, without any appearance
that the hint was from him, he gave the French to understand, that in true
reason of State, they ought to pay them in their own Coin, and exclude
Rospigliosi, as well as they had done Farnese, who was recommended by them; nor
were they much averse, especially when they saw the practices of Azolino were
odious to Este, by reason of the words which happened betwixt them about
Farnese some days before.

Chigi's design was not without some grounds, to endeavor the exclusion of
Farnese, by the Spaniards, and of Rospigliosi, by the French; because by
dividing the minds of the Cardinals betwixt Rospigliosi and Farnese, it might
fall out, that neither of them both should carry the victory, but that a third
person might obtain it, which third person, he was confident would be Bonvisi,
recommended with so much affection by him; and he believed he should prosper
the better, there being nothing discovered to the contrary, either by the
Spaniard, or the French, and because he had many more friends in the Squadrone
Volante, than the other pretenders had. Besides which, the Abbot Bonvisi,
negotiated very earnestly abroad with the Ambassadors of the two Crowns, the
exaltation of his Uncle; but without any other success than good words from
both parties, and promises to favor him, as soon as they saw the time
propitious, which then it was not.

On the 10th. at night, after the noise was spread abroad of the Election of
Rospigliosi, Cardinal Donghi entered the Conclave, (though very ill) was
received with the usual forms, and visited by the Spanish Cardinals in
particular. His entrance in that have made many believe, that the Spaniards and
friends to Rospigliosi, were to take new measures, and obtain a new Scrutiny:
and indeed the Spaniards did declare, and his particular friends, that had not
there been more than urgent occasion for his entrance into the Conclave, they
would have left him to have enjoyed himself abroad, thereby to have recovered
his strength the better; so that he being called into the Conclave in so much
have, many people conceived good hopes that there was some favorable
negotiation on foot for Spain; but the French concluded the Spaniards found
themselves weak, when they looked abroad for supplies.

Ginetti in the mean time, observing matters not a little imbroyl'd betwixt
Farnese, and Rospigliosi, and not over-well disposed to Barbarino, he began to
set up new designs for himself: upon this score he went to Barbarino, and
desired him to show some affection for his interest; Barbarino asked him, what
assistance he had; Ginetti replied, that all his hopes consisted in his
Eminence, and in eighty two years of age which he had upon his shoulders; but
the mischief is, replied Barbarino, there are other things requisite, for
thirty Cardinals would do you more service, than a hundred years: for my part I
shall not fail to assist you, as a well deserving creature of mine; but I fear
I shall be able to do little for you, having been unable to do any thing for my
self. The Flying Squadron will not consent; Chigi is obstinate not to have the
election, but out of his own creatures; the Spaniards are ambiguous, but
inclined to Rospigliosi, because they see him most likely to succeed; the
French are for every body, using great civility in their exclusions; several
particular persons hate you; the generality is divided here and there; Albici
is your professed enemy again; Colonna and Lomellino (the great supporters of
your interest in the last Conclave) dead; those who excluded you once, will not
include you the next time; and in short, other difficulties will not be
wanting. However be not discouraged, it is convenient to try your fortune, that
it may not be objected, that you were ignorant of what you had to do.

But Ginetti who had been discoursing with others, and found them all in the
same Song, desisted, declaring that he would not be Pope against Gods will; and
that therefore he will resolve to sit still, and expect a call, and so his
designs died in the Cradle.

Although during the whole time of the Conclave, several practices were
commenced, sometimes for this Pretender, and sometimes for another* yet the
practices of Rospigliosi were never dismissed, but held strongly together as if
they were tied with Cord. The Spaniards having placed all their designs upon
this Cardinal, Monsignour Settina, who was privy to the secrets of the
Spaniard, solicited the promotion of Rospigliosi more than all the rest, by
which means he disobliged several of the Pretenders: he went up and down prying
and observing the motions of the rest, breaking the snares which were laid
against this person, and in short, did as much as was possible.

Barbarino having at last discovered the little hopes there were for his
exaltation, and seeing as little appearance of doing any thing for his
creatures, or any body else better affected to his house than Rospigliosi was,
who was an actual Servant to Cardinal Capuccino a Brother of Urban the eights,
and Beneficed by the said Urban, who sent him Nuntio into Spain: he resolved to
put things to a push, and concur in this person, who had the inclinations of
the whole College already, with the concurrence of both Spaniard and Great
Duke, who had recommended to the Cardinals his Subjects, the exaltation of this
person in the first place.

But because the Faction of Chigi was more numerous than the rest, especially
had it concurred in some person grateful to the Spaniards, and not
unacceptable to the French: Cardinal Barbarino thought fit to go himself in
person to Cardinal Chigi, on the 18th. of June being Sunday, and to talk to him
at large; he remonstrated the danger in which all the Cardinals were, being
shut up in such a place; he urged the heat of the weather, the sufferings of
the people, in respect of the Gabels, and augmentation of the customs, and no
Pastor in being to relieve them; the hatred that multiplied daily amongst the
people against the house of Chigi, and particularly against Don Mario, who was
forced to retire, lest during the vacancy of the Sea, he should receive any new
affront from the Rascality of the people; the ill consequences that might fall
out for the Church, if by protracting the Conclave, any new rupture should
happen betwixt France and Spain; and lastly; he concluded, by telling him, that
though his Eminence should recommend a Pope out of his own creatures, who might
be grateful to the Crowns, yet the Pope would be made immediately; so that
there was nothing expected from him, but his frank declaration: otherwise it
would be determined in another way by those Cardinals who were united with a
firm resolution to go out of the Conclave the next day, with a Pope ready made;
and therefore it would be best for him to resolve, unless he had a mind to see
a Pope made out of the number of the Creatures of Alexander his Uncle, which
thing could not happen nevertheless, if he would remedy it in time.

Chigi (who had employed Caraffa to treat in the behalf of other of his
Creatures, which he loved better) finding himself surpised by this resolute
Proposition of Barbarino, was forced to answer, as he was bound in civility and
good correspondence, and (that he might not declare himself openly to be
partial to his Creatures) he professed that he had them all in an equal degree
of affection and esteem. To this Barbarino replied, that all his Faction was
resolved upon Rospigliosi, without any contradiction in their Votes, as knowing
him no less deserving than the best of the Pretenders: To which Chigi returned,
that there were some of his Creatures peremptorily against him, though he
himself had a great value for him: But the difficulty consisted not in this,
because the lesser part would have followed the greater: The business lay in
the Squadrone volante, who were for his Exclusion. If there be nothing but that
wanting, replied Barbarino, the Pope is created, for the Squadronists are all
unanimously for Rospigliosi. Chigi was convinced with that news, and forced to
say, Let us go then and make Rospigliosi (one of my Creatures) Pope; though
it is probable 'twas against his will, having a few days before discovered his
inclinations to be much more for Elci his Countryman, as I have said before:
But the Cardinals would scarce have concurred in him, both for this, and other
respects: But if he failed, Chigi intended to make Cardinal Bonvisi Pope for
him.

In the mean time Azolino (who managed Rospigliosi's affairs with the Flying
Squadron) came in, and confirmed what Barbarino had said, assuring, that there
would not be one Vote in opposition to Rospigliosi, in the whole Squadrone
volante: But the other, viz. Barbarino and Chigi, knowing very well that there
were some envious persons, who would endeavor to pervert them, they began to
reckon up what Votes they thought safe and secure; but not finding their full
number, they began to contrive which way to get the three Votes of the Venetian
Cardinals, who are always obliged to follow their Head, that is, him who has
private instructions from that Republique to concur with one person, before
another. Barbarino and Azolino, interposed with Cardinal Ottobuono, their Head,
who not only consented without difficulty, but declared, that amongst all that
were recommended by the Senate, Rospigliosi was the first: No sooner was this
declaration of the Venetians published in favor of Rospigliosi, but every one
looked upon the Pope as created, as knowing there needed no more than those
three to secure his Inclusion.

The Cardinals of the French Faction, seeing things go on so smoothly, they
began immediately to Tack, and to pretend to a concurrence with so
extraordinary readiness, that the Spaniards began to be fearful of his
inclination to the French, and thereupon desired more time to consider; but it
was no time for that, Barbarino, Chigi, Azolino, and Ottobuono, above them all,
showed themselves impatient till Rospigliosi was created, and that their
designs might not grow cold, or evaporate, (as it often happens, and perhaps
would have done then) they hastened the Scrutiny about noon, and besides the
two thirds which were certain, for his Creation, of sixty four Cardinals then
in the Conclave, all concurred for him but two only: The Scrutiny being past,
and all the Votes in his favor, it was demanded what name he would assume, and
he replied Clement the 9th: so that the first adoration being made in the
Chapel, he was carried to Saint Peter's very late that night; an Office that is
usually performed presently after dinner, but they would not put off the
Scrutiny, as I have said, least any difference should happen in the night.

The very night he was chosen Pope, he declared Cardinal Azolino Secretary of
State, an Office of great trust, and which was exercised by the said
Rospigliosi during the whole time of the last Papacy; and Ottobuono he made his
Datary, in mere gratitude as is supposed; for Azolino as one of the Squadrone
volante, had gained the Votes of the said Squadron, and Ottobuono with his two
other Venetian Cardinals, joined themselves to their Votes, as necessary to his
Creation, that their design which had proceeded so far, might not miscarry at
last; besides Ottobuono having been Auditor di Rota, was the more proper for
that Office: he confirmed Monsignor the Under-Datary likewise, for the better
management of the affairs, which will be regulated by two such Eminent persons,
both for their experience in the Law, and the integrity of their manners.

In like manner at the instance of Cardinal Antonio, the Pope accepted for his
Maestro di Camera, Monsignor Altieri, Secretary of the Congregation of Bishops
and Regulars, a Noble Roman, very rich, the last of his Family, and 76. years
of age; which made some believe, that being promoted to the Cardinalship, and
out-living his Holiness, the Barbarini had a design to exalt him to the Papacy.
He confirmed Monsignor Borromeo in his Government of Rome, and told him
moreover, that for his part he ought to make a Visit to the Lady Duchess
Borromeo his Mother, and that he would shortly conferr a greater Office upon
him; whereupon many conceive he will be Maggiordomo, or else Nuntio into Spain.

On Tuesday night he ordered the Ambassadors of the Crowns to be called to him
the next morning; the French Ambassador went to him, and was entertained by him
above two hours; it may be said this was his first Audience since he came to
Rome, for the continual indisposition of that last Pope, had given him no
opportunity. The Ambassadors of Spain and Venice went likewise to attend him,
when they were recovered of a certain indisposition that kept them in their
beds: In the mean time Cardinal Sforza went in the behalf of the Ambassador of
Spain, as the principal Confident of the Spanish Faction; after which he every
day gave long Audiences to four Cardinals one after another, according to their
Segniority; giving Audience in like manner to diverse of the Roman Princes, and
Prelates of the Court.

On Wednesday he ordered Cardinal Chigi to be called to his Audience, Don Mario
his Father, and Don Agostino, Nephew to the said Don Mario, which are the three
chief of the House of Chigi; and because they came all together, and he treated
them long, it was reported, that the Pope had proposed to them that they should
find out some Money, besides what Alexander the 7th. had left in the Castle, to
take off the Gabell upon Meal in some part, that is, to the sum of two Julii,
which amounts in the whole to eight Julii a Bushel, by the extinguishment of
which two Julii, the poor of that State would be something relieved, who were
forced to pay for the Stone likewise that grownd their Meal, the extinguishment
of the said Julii amounting to above 3000 Crowns.

This new Pope has five Nephews, the Sons of one of his Brothers, who is 62
years of age, and a Noble man of Pistoia, a City in Tuscany; four of them are
there resident at present, and the fifth is Abbot Rospigliosi, who a year since
was sent Apostolical Inter-Nuntio to Brussels; to all of them there are
Messengers sent expressly, and they are expected ere long in Rome. His Brother
is a most pious man, and very charitable, and his Nephews of good education,
and great generosity; but he that is most known in this Court, is the Abbot,
who was Cup Bearer to Cardinal Chigi when he was young, and was in Spain with
his Uncle when he was Nuntio there, by which means he studied at Salamanca, and
took the degree of a Doctor upon him: And this is the Nephew which will be the
Dominus* fac totum, for which reason he will be made Cardinal with the first
opportunity; and many suppose in the first Conclave, because the Spaniards do
press, that the said Nephew may be dispatched into France as Cardinal Legate,
to propose by way of mediation, some adjustment and accommodation of the
pretenses of the said King, in Heinault and Brabant, of which the issue will be
attended.

It is the general opinion of the Court, that this new Pope will do something
very grateful to the people, it being discoursed that he will apply some
sudden relief to their grievances; for he has already signified by the Prefect
of the Annona, to all the Bakers, that they may freely buy their Corn of the
Merchants; whereas before it was engrossed by the Brother of the last Pope, to
his great profit and advantage; for he bought all his Corn at five Scudi a
Bushel, and sold it afterward to the Bakers for nine: and that for the
extinction of so many Gabels, imposed by his Predecessor, he was resolved to
reduce the greatest part of the expense of the Pontifical Guards, and make
other great, and frugal reformations, for the ease of the Apostolical Chamber.

But being already 67 years old, and not of so perfect a health, as is
necessary for the sustaining so great a charge, many are of opinion he cannot
live long; by reason of a great swelling he has in his Leg, besides the
accidental Apoplexy which he had some months since. So that in that case, if it
should so happen, (which God forbid) it would be said of this most excellent
Pope, as it has been formerly of several like him, that good things pass away
presently, for some iniquity in the people.

He has confirmed Monsignour Nerli, in the Office of Secretary of the Briefs to
the Princes, and Monsignour Piccolomini, in his Secretaryship of the Memorials.

The Cavalier Cellese of Pistoia, (who during the whole time of the last
Papacy, served Don Mario Brother to the late Pope, in the quality of a
Gentleman only, and in all that time had no more than a Pension of ninety
Scudi) is Unckle-in-Law to the new Pope, as being his Mothers Brother-in-Law;
so that Don Mario, must hereafter give him the right hand, and preceedence,
which are frequent Metamorphosi's in the Court of Rome.

POLITIC APHORISMS For the Cardinals of the Conclave this year 1667. made by
Cardinal Azolini.

SO great is the credit and authority that this Maxim of the Lawyers has in so
many Ages acquired, Experientia est rerum Magistra, that he who will learn of
any other Master, exposes himself to a manifest danger of disparaging his
judgment in every thing else. From hence it is, that I, (putting together some
considerations for the advertisement of such as enter the Conclave, in order to
the Election of the Pope) have not thought good to present my own Councels
only, but taking the experience of such occurrences in the Conclaves as have
come to my hands, I have taken, as I conceive, the right way not to err; of
which considerations, I shall insert with as much brevity as is possible, the
most frequent, the most rational, and the most practiced.

The exceptions which do usually obstruct the making of the Pope in the
Conclave, are of two sorts: some relate to the persons, and particulars of the
College, with which very few are concerned; and in this case there can be no
general rule given, for, de singularibus non datur Scientia. The others are
such, as the generality, or the greatest part of the College, are interested
in: and of this sort there are three exceptions, which for the time past have
been always sufficient to exclude any body. For this reason, the Head of a
Faction ought to have a care of recommending a person liable to any of the
three.

The first, and most frequent, is, when the person recommended, has been
formerly exposed to a Scrutiny, and miscarried; for they who excluded him,
believing constantly the person excluded disobliged thereby, will arm
themselves against him, with greater vigor than before. For this reason, in
the Conclave of Gregory the 13th. Cardinal Marone would not venture again upon
the votes of his party, having miscarryed before in the Conclave of Pius the
4th. But the Cardinals Santa Severina, Paleotto, and Marc Antonio Colonna,
would not be guided by that rule, though they were excluded in the Conclaves of
Gregory the 14th, and Innocent the 10th. yet they adventured in others, but
always in vain.

The second obstruction is, if they be found in too strict a friendship with
such Cardinals as governed the Pope formerly, and (which is worse) with ill
satisfaction; for the College being jealous that they may continue in the same
Dominion, will never be brought to choose any of their friends to be Pope. And
this was enough to defeat Cardinal Serleto (in the Conclave of Sixtus the 5th.
though in other respects he was very well beloved) because he had too great
intimacy with Cardinal Como, who for 19 years had governed two Popes, Pius the
4th. and Pius the 5th. with little or no satisfaction: and in the Conclaves of
Innocent the 10th. Cardinal Sachetti, for no other reason, but because he was a
friend and favorite of the Barbarini, was always excluded by the Spanish
Faction.

The third exception is, their too much youth, either in their Cardinalship, or
years, how eminent soever he be otherwise for his worth, or his parts; because
his friends are disgusted, that his short service, or fidelity of a few days,
should be preferred before theirs of a long standing, and experience. And his
enemies have a fair field opened to exasperate his very Confidents against him,
so that at last there will not be one in the whole College will scruple to
give his negative, having so good a pretense, as that they will not do an
injury to so many ancient persons, and of so many years deserts, as are in the
Conclave. This exception excluded Cardinal Salviati, in the Conclave of Gregory
the 14th. Cardinal Farnese, in that of Pius the 5th. Cardinal Ferrara, in that
of Marcellus the 2d. and Cardinal Alexandrino experienced it effectually in the
Conclave of Gregory the 13th. for he having a desire to propose Cardinal
Theatino of Piacenza, who was made a Cardinal by Pius the 5th. but a few years
before: though he was a person otherwise every way to be respected, yet the
objection alone of his being a new Cardinal, was enough to prevail, that there
was not one word spoken of him more. And in the same manner, in the Conclave of
Sixtus the 5th. Cardinal Castagna was excluded for being a new Cardinal, and so
the favorers of Cardinal Santiquattro were glad to pass him over in silence in
the same Conclave, as fearing the same disappointment.

In desperate cases, it is great prudence in the Head of a Party, to pitch upon
a quiet and peaceable person, eminent for his Qualities and Virtues, especially
Munificence: for these qualifications are they, which of themselves, removing
all difficulties, do give the victory to those who carry them. And of this,
Cardinal Aldobrandino is an example, who though he entered into the Conclave of
Leo the 11th. with a Squadron of 30 Cardinals, firmly united and declared for
him, to the no small terror of the rest; yet he prevailed not nevertheless,
till he fixed his eyes upon Cardinal di Medici, a person of Meekness,
Complaisance, inexpressible Innocence, and singular Munificence, but more
particularly toward the College.

Let every Cardinal of the Conclave be cautious of discovering his own
inclinations to the Popedom, because he shall be in danger to be deceived a
thousand ways by him, that opens his mouth, but keeps his heart to himself;
and as his words and his thoughts, shall never be looked upon as sincere, so he
can never acquire his consent. Of this, Cardinal Ferrara had experience in the
Conclave of Marcellus the 2d. and Cardinal Farnese, in that of Gregory the
13th. and Sixtus the 5th.

Let not him that is Head of a Faction, ostentate too much, or triumph before
hand in the confidence of his success, because his extravagant desire of
victory, will interrupt and disturb his judgment, and keep him from a true
pondering and deliberation of his interest, which is a matter of importance.
And this happened in the Conclave of Paul the 4th. to them, who out of an
ambition to overpower the Imperialists, chose Paul the 4th. Pope, who was
their enemy. But as soon as he was chosen, and they began to open their eyes,
their desire of victory began to cool; they began to discover the Cloud of
evils that hung over their heads, and would with all their hearts have undone
it again if they could.

Let not that Head of a Faction, who has authority, and the power of exclusion
together, become too facile, or submit, for fear lest the contrary part should
acquire new votes; but let him temporize rather, and attend some other more
profitable propositions. In this point the Imperial Faction was over-seen in
the Conclave of Paul the 4th. for though it had both the advantages, of
authority, and exclusion; yet by a single apprehension, that the French would
gain more to their party, they truckled, and lost the day.

He which concurrs with a violent person, against his own Conscience, in hopes
that by that obligation he may render him his Friend, and change his nature, is
mistaken; for the benefit is forgotten as soon as received, if he has no more
need of him: But his nature will never alter. And this Cardinal Morone found
true to his cost, in the Conclave of Paul the 4th. for being under some
suspicion in the Sacred Office, he imagined by using his whole power for the
Election of Paul, he would become more propitious to his interests; but it
happened clean contrary, for such was the zeal of Paul, that he could not be
suborned, but gave him his reward in the Castle of St. Angelo, where he kept
him prisoner, with very ill usage.

It is not a good way, to declare ones self too openly against a person of
worth, because the Conclaves are managed by the Holy Ghost, who considers the
deserts, and not by men, whose eyes are fixed upon their interests only; so
that he sometimes which seems at a great distance from the Popedom, is in a
moment unexpectedly in the Chair. Thus the Imperial Faction was deceived in the
Conclave of Paul the 4th. for believing that fighting against him, as it were
with Banners displayed, they should certainly have ruined his hopes, of a
sudden the wind turned, and the Imperials finding themselves in a laborynth,
and all the Votes inclining to Paul, they were forced to tack about also, and
be for him.

When any Cardinals affairs do seem to be desperate, it is no ill policy, to
propose some new Law or Statute to the College, that thereby he may have
either the reputation of being zealous, or the hopes of assisting some other
person; whereby he may break the chain of former contrivances, or disunite
those minds, who do find themselves opposed in their designs, by the
proposition of that Law. And this was the subtilty of Cardinal Bellaio in the
Conclave of Pius the 4th. he observed the progress Caraffa made in his designs,
and therefore he proposed that the College would make a new Law, that no body
should discover his Vote which he is to give, not so much as to his Friend; by
which means several Cardinals were induced to forsake Caraffa, and his interest.

Let an Elector have a care of engaging himself too far in any thing against
his judgment, in complaisance to another person, because sometimes such
accidents may fall out, that afterward he may be necessitated to consent to
it, though it be both against his duty, desire, and interest. This happened in
the Conclave of Pius the 4th. to Cardinal Charles Caraffa, who to show his
fidelity to the King of Spain, pretended to adore Cardinal Paceco, but his
engagement by certain accidents went so far before he was aware, that he mist
but little of finishing that in earnest, which he began in jest; and he
suffered for it at last, for the French (with whom he was a Colleague before)
grew so diffident on him, that it brought him to ruin, by doing that which he
never intended, and would not have consented to, in the Election of Pius the
4th. which was afterward his death.

If the Inclusion be ripe, and secure, it is the best way to bring it
immediately to the Test, for the least time of protraction or delay, brings its
dangers along with it, especially if there be any persons on the other side
considerable, either for their party, their authority, or experience; because
these arming themselves in their despair, and the other languishing in their
zeal and industry, by reason of their confidence, time, though it be but short,
may give the victory to the former. Cardinal Borromeo's neglecting this
advertisement, in the Conclave of Pius the 5th. precipitated the Election of
Cardinal Morone, whose Election being safe at four a clock at night, he would
needs put it off till the next morning, rather than incommode Farnese who was
then in Bed; but in that little time the tide turned, and he lost all. The same
thing happened to Cardinal Colonna in the Conclave of Gregory the 14th. for he
having by the common opinion, Votes enough and to spare to secure him, at least
in the Adoration, so that the Arms and the Keys were got ready, would needs
put it off till next morning; but at midnight Ortus est Claemor, and that in
such a manner, that they took away the Chair from him for ever. Nor did it
otherwise befall Santa Severina in the Conclave of Clement; he also being
secure of the Election from the very first night, but desirous to protract,
that he might bring over the rest of the Votes to his side, as Giesvaldo
persuaded him, was mistaken in his aim, and lost all himself.

It is very convenient for the Heads of a Faction, when they have labored a
long time, and contended in vain, to propose about four or five persons, and to
reserve a sixth, which he desires more particularly; By this means those who
are proposed are obliged, and the World is persuaded, he has no private ends of
his own, no obstinacy, no pride; nor need they fear any body else will be
chosen, seeing they do mutually and interchangably impede one another; and if
weary at last, he deserts their interests which he first recommended, and
proposes the sixth, which is the person he principally intended, he loses not
the other notwithstanding, but gains them by his first proposition. This
advertisement was experimentated by the Heads of the Factions in the Conclave
of Pius the 5th. and the success answered their desires.

And here the Head of a Faction ought to make it his study, how he may secretly
gain the Votes of his Friends, without being discovered by the contrary party;
which will be easy, if he places his eye upon a person of a good nature, a
good life, and a good age, though otherwise he be none of his Confidents: For
the Electors; by the first of his qualities, his good nature, do assure
themselves they shall receive no harm, and do flatter themselves that they may
gain him one day. With the second, they satisfy their Consciences; and with
the third, their hopes of seeing a new Conclave, which is a consideration
removes most difficulties and oppositions for the contrary; by this means
Cardinal Borromeo came off very well in the Conclave of Pius the 5th. for when
he proposed Cardinal Morone, a person of a brisk humor, but suspected sometime
of Heresy, and esteemed very revengefull, he could never conceal the Votes he
reckoned upon: He betook himself to Sirleto next, and though he also was endued
with the same good qualities, he could not keep his Votes to himself, by which
means he ran himself upon very dangerous Rocks; but when afterward he turned
to Alexandrino, in whom the said virtues did as eminently concur, he persuaded
his Colleagues to keep their Votes private, till being certain of the Election,
all things should succeed prosperously: This was approved likewise by Cardinal
Alexandrino, the Nephew in the Conclave of Sixtus the 5th. for Montalto, during
the whole time of his Cardinalship, not having discovered his great and high
Spirit, was in every bodies judgment of a quiet nature, of an exemplary life,
and of a competent age; so that the designs Alexandrino had for him, he never
communicated to the adversaries, till it was too late to oppose them.

That Head of a Faction which has the reputation and authority of a Party, will
do very well, if in his transaction with the Head of the contrary party,
(provided he be not a man of extraordinary experience) he proposes a person
so, that his adversary understands it done rather out of kindness, than
necessity, and that otherwise he could carry him through all difficulties alone;
by the first, he mollifies and sweetens the heart of his adversary, and by the
other, he frightens and alarms him, especially when he considers his party, and
authority: With this stratagem Cardinal Farnese was successful in the Conclave
of Gregory the 13th. for having proposed four persons to Cardinal Alexandrino,
and amongst them Buoncompagno, with the aforesaid civility he told him, that
for this last, he could have done it without him, but he had rather have his
concurrence. This artifice made so kind an impression in Alexandrino, that he
was called to the Election of Buoncompagno, though he could have done it
without him; and it frighted him so much withal, to hear him speak with that
resolution, that without more ado, he joined in the practices for Buoncompagno,
and immediately his Election followed.

He which finds himself excluded by his Friends, but upon a rational
foundation, let him not persist, or maintain his cause against fortune; let him
give place for the present, and without taking any visible offense, keep up his
hopes, by thinking suddenly on some other plausible person. By this means he
shall evade an accident, which might be prejudicial to him for ever; he shall
continue his interest with his friends, oblige them at a more convenient time
to satisfy him in the Election of the person he proposed, and finally acquire
the reputation of a prudent man, which in time may assist him, either for his
own Election, or at least the Election of another which he pleases to
recommend. In this case Cardinal Farnese was marvailously successful, who
though many times he show a vehement ardency, and desire of the Popedom: yet
when he found himself undeceived by his friends, and that upon good grounds,
sometimes for his youth, and sometimes by Cardinal Gramvela, upon sober
considerations of the State of the Princes of Italy: he tempered himself so
well, that in five Conclaves afterward, he made what Popes he pleased, and
four of the five were his own creatures. But it fared not so well with Cardinal
Ferrara, who having given too clear indications of the commotion of his mind,
for being excluded in the Conclave of Marcellus the second, could never have
satisfaction in any thing after.

It is a wonderful advantage to the Head of a Faction to enter with
resolution, and propose whom he pleases, when he sees the adverse Electors in
any straight, or anxiety, for fear the Election should go against their desire;
because the apprehension of the evil impending, suffers them not to see or
consider the mischief that is approaching, though at a distance, and they will
embrace any thing that may bring them out of that Laborinth. By this means,
Cardinal Farnese came off happily in the Conclave of Paul the 4th. for the
Imperial party being in confusion, and out of all hopes of promoting a person
of their own Faction, as they had proposed to themselves, and the practices for
Cardinal Puteo (of the French Faction, and Nation) were at a stand: Farnese
took the opportunity, and proposed Cardinal Theatino, who though he was of the
French Faction indeed, was an Italian notwithstanding; and so the Imperialists
to free themselves from a burden, to which their present confusion subjected
them, they cared not to run themselves into greater (though more remote)
difficulties, by creating a person solemny excluded by Imperiale, for the
austerity and perverseness of his nature. With the same sagacity Cardinal
Alexandrino managed his affairs in Sixtus his Conclave; for seeing Cardinal
Medici in great perturbation, upon the likelihood of the Election of Cardinal
della Torre, who was supported by Farnese; he proposed Cardinal Montalto, a
professed and immortal enemy to his Cousin Paola Giordano Vrsino; and Medici to
free himself from the danger of the first (which was present) thought not of
securing himself against the evils of the second, which were future, and so
Montalto was chosen.

That Cardinal Head, may well be suspected of dissimulation, when at first, and
with great importunity, he proposes a person liable to several exceptions,
because to be importunate at an unseasonable time, as those beginnings are,
when every man's hopes are on fire, is but to render things difficult which are
easy, and expose one to certain ruin; because it is to be supposed no body
will rob himself so suddenly of his hopes, or lay aside his designs for an
unplausable person. Under this suspicion fell Cardinal Altemps in Sixtus his
Conclave, who at the very first, before any body else was thought of, he
undertook with great ardour, the promotion of Cardinal Sirleto, who was
otherwise an applausable man. Whereupon without any more grounds, it was
believed, he proposed him, merely to inveigh and cajole him.

It is of great importance that a Cardinal of any Spirit and magnanimity, uses
no pomp nor noise, nor lets any one know it, who can either hurt, or assist
him, but rakes them up rather under the ashes of prudence, that they may kindle
afterward in due time with greater vivacity. This is visible by the experience
of Cardinal Albano, and Cardinal Montalto; for Albano not knowing how to
contain or reserve himself in the time of his Cardinalship, as he might have
done, and as Montalto did, this prevailed with Cardinal Alexandrino, who (being
frighted by Albano, and cheated by Montalto) forsook him, and set this in the
Chair.

Let not a Cardinal Nephew be too fond, or peremptory, in promoting the
Election of any person, unless he has tried him first in several slippery
Offices, and hard to be executed, that thereby he may discover the bottom of
his humor and disposition; whereas if he does otherwise, he will be deceived,
and receive a penance equal to his repentance. And thus it fared with Cardinal
Alexandrino, who having never employed Montalto in any great affair, as he had
done Albano; he was in the dark, as to that spirit and vivacity, which
afterward, when there was no need to conceal it, he discovered in his Papacy.

The Heads of the Factions of Princes, will always have the Ministers of Kings
about them, to the end, that having signified the mind of their Princes in the
Conclave, they may go on readily and soberly, either to the Election or
Exclusion; and that they may not restrain themselves to parties, which may
offend the whole Community, or savor of too much Dominion in the Conclave.
Because the said Community being thereby provoked to be their Adversaries, they
will run themselves upon a manifest precipice. In this point the Spanish
Ambassador erred most egregiously in the Conclave of Gregory the 14th. having
hinted that his Catholic Majesty would never consent, that the Pontificate
should go out of the hands of one of these seven, Colonna, Como, Paleotto,
Santa Severina, Madruccio, Santiquattro, and Cremona; he changed the minds of
the whole Conclave so, to see themselves deprived of their own inclinations,
that for two months together, that this Election lasted, those persons named by
the Ambassador, were the only persons excluded; and upon this, the practices
and designs of the whole College were inverted.

He shows much ambition, and but little prudence, who being once or twice
excluded by a powerful Faction, ventures at it again, in the same Conclave;
because he ought to be confident, no body will dare to appear for him, who has
been excluded before, much less give their vote for him the third time, if he
was excluded the second; as knowing well, Scribit in Marmore laesus. To this
Cardinal Colonna, and Cardinal Paleotto, may speak; who doing the same by
turns, in order to their Election in the Conclave of Gregory the 14th. they
always miscarried, and at last came to so absolute ruin, they could never get
up again.

It is an excellent way to gain upon the Head of a Faction, to make him the
Author of the Election, (which is particularly intended) when the Factions are
grown weary, or mistaken in their power. In the Conclave of Marcellus the
second, the truth of this experiment was found; for the party which favored
Santa Croce (but without any success) resolving to make the Cardinal di Trento
their Head, though otherwise he was very averse to Santa Croce; yet being
overcome with the courtesy, he gave them the victory, and concluded the
Election forthwith. With the same artifice Cardinal Alexandrino overcame the
resolution of Cardinal di S. Sista in the Conclave of Sixtus, and prevailed
with him for the Election of Montalto, by making him the Author of the design.
For want of this advertisement, Cardinal Borromeo lost his designs for the
Election of Sirleto, which he looked upon as sure, and all because he would not
do that honor to Cardinal Sforza, in the Conclave of Pius the 5th.

The confusion which multitude of business carries along with it, especially if
they be of different natures, and equal authority, is a great impediment to the
good success of an Election; because for the first they cannot easily unite in
the same opinions, and for the second, they are not used to yield to one
another; every one watching diligently over his own authory, that nothing may
pass to its prejudice. This was visible in the Conclave of Marcellus the
second; it deferred the Election a long time, and ruined the Faction of
Cardinal Ferrara at last.

That which the favorers of Marcellus the second used to ascertain his
Election, was counted great sagacity and cunning. The best of his Confidents
met privately, and with paper in hand, reckoned up as many gainable persons, as
made up their number complete, that done, they chose them of greatest
authority, and most affection to Marcellus, and sent them about one by one, to
work themselves, and insinuate into such as they could best trust, by
representing the reasonableness of their hopes; and having gained them, they
suffered them not out of their sight; but having calculated the Votes de novo,
all together, they came immediately to an adoration, without further delay. An
Artifice executed with so much dexterity, that it produced its effect.

He is very much out of the way, who to gain the head of a contrary Faction
(which has neither the inclusive faculty, nor so much as hopes of it) declares
himself too much in his favor: because he extinguishes thereby his friends
hopes of recovering him, who has so deeply engaged himself to a person of
authority; by which means, he shall be left in the power of the adverse
Faction, without any fruit of his design. Thus it happened to the Cardinal of
Mantoua, in the Conclave of Marcellus the 2d. ^or he being of the Imperial
Faction, declared himself too freely in favor of Cardinal Ferrara, who was
Head of the French, hoping thereby that he would employ all his practices for
him; but he was mistaken, for he had not enough of the inclusive power.

The Heads do observe, never to let those who are likely to stagger, go out of
their sight, least they should be debauched by their adversaries: They send
therefore only such about to negotiate their designs, as do appear most
constant and secure. This way Cardinal Farnese took in the Conclave of Paul the
4th. keeping the whole body of the French in his eye, within the Chapel, for
Cardinal Theatino, whilst the most solid and grave part of them went abroad,
and made voices for him.

It is necessary to be well advised, and not to suffer ones self to be sweetened
or cajoul'd by them who desire his Votes, (not so much that they hope to obtain
the Papacy, but only in point of reputation with the World) for sometimes they
run insensibly upon Rocks, which they never thought of before. Upon this Rock
they were in great danger of running, in the Conclave of Pius the 4th. for
Cardinal della Torre having gained 32. Votes for Cardinal della Queva,
privately in the Scrutiny, (had not the juggle been discovered a little before)
he had made him certainly Pope: By the same way, and in the same Conclave,
Cardinal Pisano mist but little of being chosen, Cornaro having secured many
Votes to him amongst the Factions.

If it be true which Aristotle affirms, that Magistratus virum ostendit, he
which ambitions the Papacy, and knows himself to be of an ill nature, in
respect of his pride, or severity, or any other ill quality, let him whilst he
is Cardinal be sure to avoid all Offices, in which he cannot assure himself but
he shall discover the imperfections aforesaid; because there is no body but
argues with himself in this manner. He which cannot govern his own passions, in
small Offices, neither for hopes of the Papacy, nor for fear of his Enemies,
how shall he govern them when he is Pope, and nothing left for him either to
hope or to fear. Cardinal Savelli in the Conclave of Sixtus the 5th. having
discovered his natural infirmities in his Vicarship of Rome, and when he was
Chief Inquisitor, the whole Wood of his other good qualities were not
sufficient to balance them. And Cardinal Morone was another instance of this;
for having discovered himself (when he ruled the Pontificate of Pius the 4th.)
to be of a vindicative humor, especially against the Carafeschi, that one
thing was enough to intimidate the whole Conclave of Pius the 5th. and to bury
a person of great parts in oblivion, who had otherwise doubtless been in the
Apostolical Chair. Cardinal Cosenza had the same success, in the Conclave of
Gregory the 14th. being excluded, because in his Office of Datary, in the time
of Sixtus the 5th. he discovered himself inclinable to severity.

The Heads of Factions, are to employ all their diligence, to find out the
natural conditions and interests of the several Cardinals, that they may know
how to choose every man for his turn: The inconstant are to be kept in an
opinion, that the Pope is as good as made; that they are to come immediately to
the Election, least by leaving them opportunity of advising with others, they
may change their minds. So Cardinal Alexandrino dealt with Cardinal di S.
Sisto, a various and unconstant man; he advised him to concur in the Election
of Montalto, and make himself the Author of it, when it came to the Vote, and
the Scrutiny was made, persuading him the Election was sure; at which S. Sisto
being amazed, and having no time to make any diversion, he submitted, and the
design took effect.

If at any time a Faction be obstinate, and perverse, in recommending and
bringing to the Scrutiny a person you are diffident of; to bring them to
reason, it will be convenient in your Scrutiny to propose* (by way of
counterpoise) one of its greatest adversaries, that so fear may prevail, where
affection could not. Of this stratagem Cardinal Montalto made use, in the
Conclave of Gregory the 14th. for the Spaniards being obstinate in their Votes
for Paleotti, he proposed in opposition to them, the Cardinal of Verona, to
whom they had an implacable aversion; and he pressed it so home, that for fear
it should succeed, they turned their thoughts upon Santa Severina, and left
Paleotto in the lurch: By the same art the Spaniards circumvented Montalto,
that he gave over all thoughts of Cardinal Colonna, as was supposed, because as
it were with Banners displayed they seemed to run to the adoration of San
Severina, who was before excluded by Montalto.

It Is a good Rule for the Heads of Factions, to reserve some one which they
like best close in their minds, and not so much as to mention him in the times
of controversy and dispute, to the end that (when an opportunity serves, and
the Factions are tired with contention, and have but small hopes) he may then
be proposed on a sudden, and the Head bending all his Votes upon him, let him
go briskly and courageously to the Adoration: For the adversary being wearied
with the tediousness of contending, and finding himself surprised, and the
Enemy pressing on with so much resolution, loses both his power and his
prudence together: And this was evident by Montalto in the Conclave of Gregory
the 14th. who in two months fierce combat with the Spaniards, made not the
least discovery of Cardinal Cremona, till that the designs of both parties
being desperate, on a sudden he proposed him, and getting together his Votes,
he passed immediately to the Adoration, and created him Pope.

It is no easy matter to break an obstinate conspiracy for the Election of a
person, especially if the Party be considerable; unless their practices be
destroyed, by the Excluders proposing a person of their own adverse Faction,
which for the most part has been successful, as often as it has been tried: So it
happened in the Conclave of Clement the 8th. the Spanish party for two months
together, gave their Votes constantly in favor of San Severina, nor was their
constancy ever shaken or disturbed, till Cardinal Aldobrandino (who was a
Spaniard) was proposed by the Excluders, who promising the Head of that Faction
(which was Avila) to choose any one Pope that he should name, without
communicating first with his followers; they were disobliged in that manner,
they were all ready to run from his Colors: But to pacify them, Aldobrandino
was glad to come to an absolute rupture with Avila.

If the Head of the Including Faction, offers the Head of the Excluding Party,
to assist him at any time, in the Election of one of the Excludents, let him
always be suspicious; for his design is rather to separate, and divide the
Squadron of Excluders, than to do him any good in good earnest. This Cardinal
Montalto found to be true in the Conclave of Leo the 11th. when Aldobrandino,
to separate the Excludents, who had strictly engaged themselves with Montalto,
proposed to him to choose one of his party; but as he knew very well how to
open his eyes, and discover Aldobrandino's designs, so he knew well enough how
to shut his ears, and evade them.

Let a Cardinal in the Conclave, avoid all occasions of Rupture, as much as he
can; for if once he be declared an Enemy, immediately the Spirit of revenge
enters into his heart, which may perhaps be instrumental to the detriment of
his Enemy, but shall never be of advantage to himself: And this also
Aldobrandino found true, in the Conclave of Leo the 11th. for coming to words,
and a manifest breach with Avila, he presently fixed his thoughts upon a person
he had otherwise never remembered, which was Cardinal Meaici; one he had no
kindness for at all, but he chose him to be revenged of Avila.

The like Aphorisms may be seen likewise for the Court, seeing that in such
cases the pens of the most curious are at work, to discover their subtilties,
for the benefit of the Public; however their pains have not met with so great
an applause: whereas these Aphorisms of Azolino were commended as soon as they
were seen, and judged very proper for the instruction of the Cardinals during
the vacancy of the Sea, especially such as have not been in any Conclave
before: Experience in such things, exceeds all manner of Learning: Yet to speak
freely, I am not displeased with the opinion of a Friend of mine, who being
well versed in the interests of the Court, discourses liberally in company, and
will oftentimes have his own judgment prevail, before any bodies else. He
affirms, that neither Experience, nor Learning, are considerable in the
Conclaves, and maintains it with more arguments than this Paper will contain.
Be it as it will, it is not known which meets with more rubs in the Conclave,
the Experienced, or the Learned Cardinals. They which by study, and revolving
of History, manage the affairs of the New Pope, will not stoop to persons of
the greatest Experience, because by actual practice they have gained some air
of reputation in the precedent Conclaves. In like manner those who have been
Experienced, do pretend to command those who are thought Learned, for having
read in some Books, or heard discourses of some Conclave or other.

But I will not condemn either Experience, or Learning; Experience is good in
the Conclaves, and Learning is better; but Prudence is more necessary than
both. A little Experience is enough for a prudent Cardinal, whereas all the
Experience in the World is in vain, if they know not how to use it with
discretion. In several Conclaves there have been several inexperienc'd
Cardinals, (I might say ignorant of the mystery of Election of Popes) yet they
have prosper'd very well, and by their prudence prevailed with those, who
doubted not to have gained them in a short time.

Experience interrupts that many times, which Prudence contrives; whereas
Prudence conjoyns that, which Experience has broken. In this last Conclave
several effects of this nature were seen, but not so many as in the two former;
in which the most Experienced lost their Chard of Navigation, because they had
not the judgment to make use of it with discretion.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by John Starkey, at the Miter betwixt the
Middle-Temple-Gate, and Temple Bar in Fleet Street.
Folio's.
THE World Surveyed; or the famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc of
Marseilles, into the East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco, Guinny,
and through all Africa, and the principal Provinces of Europe. Price bound 10
s. A Practical and Polemical Commentary, or Exposition, upon the 3d. and 4th.
Chapters of the latter Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy; by Thomas Hall, B. D.
Price bound 10 s. A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France,
upon Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in
the Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most Ingenious persons of
that Nation. Englished by G. Havers. In two Volumes. Price bound 30 s. A
Treatise of the Sybils, giving an account of the Names and Number of them, of
their Qualities, the Form and Matter of their Verses, and of their Books;
written in French by David Blundell. Englished by J. Davies. Price bound 7 s.
Bentivolio and Urania, a Religious Romance, in Six Books; written by Nathaniel
Ingelo, D. D. The second Edition. To which is added, the Interpretation of the
hard Names Imprinted in the Margin, throughout the Book. Price bound 12 s. I
Ragguagli di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus; in two Centuries: With
the Politic Touchstone; written originally in Italian, by Trajano Bocalini,
and Englished by the Earl of Monmouth. The second Edition corrected. Price
bound 8 s. An Abridgement of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
Alphabetically digested under several Titles, by Henry Rolls, Sergeant at Law;
published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all the Judges. Price
bound 40 s. The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight; in three Volumes, in
English: Allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition, carefully corrected
by the Original. Price bound 45 s. The Second Part of the Institutes of the
Laws of England; containing the Exposition of Magna Charta, and many ancient
and other Statutes: Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. The third Edition;
with an Alphabetical Table added. Price bound 14 s. The Third Part of the
Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning High Treason, and other Pleas of
the Crown, and Criminal Causes. The fourth Edition; written by the Lord Chief
Justice Coke. Price bound 6 s. The Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of
England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts: Written by the Lord Chief
Justice Coke. The fourth Edition; with an Alphabetical Table not heretofore
printed. Price bound 9 s. Brief Animadversions on, Amendments of, and
Additional Explanatory Records to, the Fourth Part of the Institutes of the
Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts. By William Prynne Esquire;
Price bound 12 s. Action upon the Case for Slander; or a Methodical Collection
of thousands of Cases in the Law, of what words are Actionable, and what not;
by William Sheppard Esquire; Price bound 6 s. Brevia Judicialia, or an Exact
Collection of approved Forms of all sorts of Judicial Writs in the
Common-Bench; together with their Retorns. By Rich Brownlow. Price bound 10 s.
Thesaurus Brevium, or a Collection of approved Forms of Original and Judicial
Writs in the Kings Bench; with their special Directions. By J. C. Price bound 6
s.
Quarto's.
The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof, containing a
Vindication of the Laws of England; together with a short History of William
the Conqueror. By Sylas Tailor. Price bound 3 s. Andronicus Comnenius, a
Tragedy. By John Wilson. Price stitched 1 s. Heraclius Emperor of the East, a
Tragedy. By Lodowick Carlel Esquire; Price stitched 1 s. A brief Account of Mr.
Valentine Greatrakes, the famous Stroker, and diverse of the strange Cures by
him lately performed. Written by himself to the Honorable Robert Boil, Price
stitched 1 s.
Octavo's.
The History of Algiers, and its Slavery; with an account of that City, and
many remarkable particularities of Africa: written by Sieur d'Aranda, sometime
a Slave there. Englished by J. Davies. Price bound 3 s. La Picara, or the
Triumphs of Female Subtilty; originally a Spanish Relation, enriched with Three
pleasant Novels. Englished by J. Davies. Price bound 3 s. An Historical and
Geographical Description of the great Country, and River of the Amazones in
America; with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of French. Price bound 1 s.
6 d. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Mountague Esquire; Price bound 1
s. 6 d. Aminta, the famous Italian Pastoral. Translated into English. Price
bound 1 s. 6 d. The Works of the famous Mr. Francis Rabelais, treating of the
Lives of Gargantua, and his Son Pantagruel; to which is newly added the Life of
the Author. Translated out of French into English, by Sir Thomas Vrchard
Knight. Price bound 5 s. An Exact Abridgement in English, of the Cases reported
by Sir Francis Moor Knight; with the Resolution of the Points of Law therein by
the Judges: By W. Hughes. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. Plowden's Queries, or a
Moot-Book of choice Cases in the Common Law, Englished, Methodized, and
Enlarged; by H. B. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. An Exact Abridgement of all the
Statutes in Force and Use, made in the 16th. 17th. and 18th. of King Charles
the First, and in the 12th. 13th. 14th. 15th. and 16th. of King Charles the
Second: By William Hughes Esquire; Price bound 2 s. 6 d. Tho. Hall, Apologia pro
Ministerio Evangelico. Lat. Price bound 2 s. -- Translation of the Second Book
of Ovid's Metamorph. Price bound 1 s. His Treatise against the Millenaries.
Price bound 1 s. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds
and Principles of the Art of Physic; with the Insufficiency of the Vulgar Way
of preparing Medicines, and the Excellency of such as are made by Chemical
Operation: By Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. Price bound 1 s.
Twelves.
The present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy; written originally
in English by J. Gailhard, Gent. Price bound 1 s. The present State of the
Republic of Venice; with a Relation of the present War in Candia: By John
Gailhard, Gent. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. A Guide for Constables, Churchwardens,
Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the Highways, Treasurers of the
County-stock, Masters of the House of Correction, Bailiffs of Manors, Toll
takers in Fairs, etc. showing the extent and power of the several Offices;
Collected by George Meriton. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

