A DISCOURSE UPON THE PASSIONS.

In Two Parts.

Written Originally in FRENCH.

Englished by R.W. Esquire

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Hen. Herringman, at the Anchor on the
Lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1661.

THE CHARACTERS Of the PASSIONS.

Written in French

BY THE Sieur de la CHAMBER, Physician to the Lord Chancellor of FRANCE.

Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for JOHN HOLDEN, at the Anchor in the
New-Exchange. 1650.

TO The Lord SEGVIER, Chancellor of FRANCE.
MY LORD,
IT is nothing strange to you, to see the effects and disorders which the
Passions cause, since the Justice you dispense is most commonly employed in
hearing and condemning of them. But it is a most unheard of thing to crave your
protection for them, that they might even be authorized by you; and that your
name should be used to make them pass in Public, and give them a general
approbation. Yet, my Lord, it is what I this day do; in dedicating this Work
unto you, I make you the protector of the excesses I therein present; even in
some sort I speak you to be the Author of them, since your commands were the
cause of their production: and, by a boldness without example, I use the
illustrious name of The Seguiers, to be the prop of Vices; and I bring them to
light with such advantages, wherewith Virtue would esteem her self highly
honored. It is true, they are not of the nature of those which corrupt
Manners, or which fear the severity of the Laws; these are but their Images and
Figures, which may be received as those of Monsters and of Tyrants, and which
ought to be no less pleasing to sight, then the pictures of conquered persons
use to be to their Conquerours. But although hereby my Temerity becomes less
odious, yet I perceive it is nothing less excusable, and that you will ever
blame me for having profaned your Name, mixing it with so many defaults; for
having exposed to your eyes things the Art of which is not much less vicious
then their Matter; and for having thought that I could have told you some new
thing on a Subject in which you are ignorant of nothing but the ill usage: yet
if your Greatness please to remember, that you are the object of all my
thoughts, that I can make nothing but it must bear the marks of your benefits,
and that even the Tempests which I here show, are the effects of the Calm and
Tranquillity you have procured me; you will then perceive that it is as well
out of Necessity as Election, that I consecrate this little Work unto you; and
that finding my self obliged to publish the resentment I have of the extreme
favors which you have heaped on me, J ought to leave in the violent Passions a
way to express that which J love to be all my life;

My Lord, Of your Greatness, The most humble, most obedient, and most faithful
servant, La Chamber.

Advertisement TO THE READER.
HAving already spoken of those Passions which respect Good. We were obliged
to examine those who have Ill for their Object. But because the Soul may two
ways consider Ill; and that it is sometimes an Enemy, which she combats, and
sometimes flies; according to those two several designs, she also forms two
Ranks of different Passions. The one of which may be called the Courageous, and
the other the Timorous. For since Courage is nothing but a Power of the Soul,
which employs the forces of the Animal to stop or overcome Evils, We need not
doubt but those Passions which serve those purposes are conducted by the same
Power; and that consequently they ought not to be otherwise called, then
Courageous. Even as Such as dare not expect the Enemy, may certainly be
concluded Timorous.

When the Soul indeed thinks her self weaker then the Ill, She endeavors to
shun the encounter, and according to the motions she makes to enstrange her
self from it, she forms Hatred, Aversion, Grief, Fear, and Despair. But when
she thinks her self sufficiently strong to overcome it, or at least to bear its
assaults, then she raises up Boldness, Anger, and Constancy; which are the
Courageous Passions, whose Nature and Characters We shall now examine. But
perhaps, Reader, the Preposition we have made and established as the Principle
of all the differences of these Passions, will beget a very reasonable doubt,
which thou would willingly have cleared before thou enterest on the Subject.
For if the Soul thinks it self stronger or weaker then the Ills, she must
compare her forces with theirs; and consequently she must Reason; forasmuch as
without reasoning we cannot compare one thing with another. So that the Soul
of Beasts which is susceptible of these Passions must be obliged to reason,
when she would make use of them; And so she would become Reasonable. And so
Reason would no longer be that difference which distinguishes Man from other
Animals.

Would thou but content thy self with Resolutions which are commonly given
in the Schools upon such like differences, I could easily resolve this, saying
that in these encounters she forms no true Reasonings, that they are only gross
and imperfect images of it, and that they are the effects of that instinct
which God has given to all Animals to enlighten them, and guide them in their
actions, But because this answer is not capable to satisfy such Minds who would
clearly discern things, and that the word Instinct seems to be in the rank of
those terms wherewith our Ignorance flatters it self, and under which she
thinks to find shelter, I thought fit to satisfy thy curiosity, and even to
give some light to those things of which I am hereafter to speak; and therefore
obliged my self more exactly to inquire what the Nature of this Instinct, which
makes such a noise, and which so few understand, was; and to observe how far
the knowledge of the sensible Soul can reach: and last of all to show thee that
there accrews no great Inconvenience in believing that Beasts reason.

And doubtless this was the place where we ought to examine these Noble and
famous questions, which contain the Principles of all the Souls motions, and
which may serve for a Preface and groundwork for all what we have to say of
those Passions, who have Ill for their object. Yet this Discourse being
somewhat overlong, and the difficulty of the subjects treated therein requiring
a great assiduity of Mind, I thought it not fit to place these thorns at the
entrance into the work, which perhaps might have disgusted thee to have
proceeded, or might have tired thee before thou were arrived in the way wherein
I would have engaged thee; I therefore leave it at this time: yet if thy
curiosity desires satisfaction in things of that Nature, The Discourse of the
Reason of Beasts is already printed, which yet for our mutual satisfaction, I
shall entreat thee not to undertake the reading of, unless thou will perform it
at once, and without interruption. Its a Discourse whose parts are so linked
together, that they cannot be divided without diminishing the force and grace
which the whole pretends to.

As for the rest, wonder not if in the Pictures of the Passions I present, thou
find some touches of virtues and vices; and if (for example) in the
description of Boldness thou encountrest actions which seem to belong to valor
and generosity. I consider Passion in its nature and in its essence; and as it
is a motion of the Soul every where, where I know this Motion to be, I also
acknowledge the Passion. So that virtue being nothing but a regulated motion,
and a Passion moderated by Reason, and since a moderated Passion is still a
Passion, Discoursing in general of the Passions, I may speak of those which are
under Virtues direction, as well as those which are directed by Vice.

The Stationer to the Reader.
THe Gentleman whose pastime it was to English these Characters, as they had
pleased him, so he judged they could not but be grateful to an ingenuous
Reader; and therefore commended them to the Press. And to show how far he was
from the new vanity of erecting his Statue in the front, he thought fit rather
to use the practice of Painters, who, how well soever they may have copied
Masterpieces, never set their names but to Originals; that as he pretends no
Praise, he may thereby frustrate Censure. Yet he is consident of his Authors
merit, and that this Work of his will move love and delight in all but those
who are possessed with malignant Passions; they indeed may quarrel with Love,
oppose Desire, vex Joy, frown on Laughter, and even put Hope out of patience:
but against such, Laughter alone will be sufficient. And for the rest, if the
English Chanel run too near the French Coast, and that some may think the
Translation over-fraught with Gallicisms; perhaps they are such as themselves
in their ordinary discourse often use with affectation. But from them the
Passions take about, and steer their course to the Ladies, acknowledging them
the only Admirals of these Seas; to whom, whether they come safe, or are
shipwrack'd, they of right belong, since none do more powerfully cause, or more
sensibly suffer them; to whose fair hands I am obliged to present them, and
from whom alone they promise themselves protection.

March 10. 1649. JOHN HOLDEN.

A Necessary Advertisement To the READER.
WHat I here present, is but a small part of a Great Design, wherein I intend
to examine the Passions, the Virtues and the Vices, the Manners and Customs of
People; the several inclinations of Men, their tempers, the features of their
faces: in a word, in which I pretend to show thee what is most excellent and
most rare in Physics, Morality, and in Politics. I know thou already think
that my undertaking is full of Temerity, that it is beyond my strength, and
that there is no likelihood I should ever accomplish a Work, the least pieces
whereof have startled the greatest men of the former times* But I entreat thee,
Reader, to consider that I am but at the beginning of it, and that I shall not
proceed without the knowledge of thy opinion and further advice therein. For if
this Essay please thee not, and if thou believe that so rich a matter
requires more expert and more cunning hands then mine, I am ready to quit the
Work, and to finish it where I commenced it: I shall at least have the
satisfaction to have endeavored to please thee, and to have found for thy
divertisement a design which may pass for the greatest and the fairest which
was ever conceived, had it been but performed. And that I may give thee a more
particular knowledge thereof, I will show thee the Platform, and make it appear
that ill Architects may have fair Capriccio's, and may sometimes form noble
Designs.

What I then proposed to my self, was, to present thee with The Art to know
Men; which contains Five general Rules. The first is founded on the Characters
of the Passions, of the Virtues and the Vices; and shows that those who
naturally have the same air which accompanies the Passions or Actions of Virtue
or Vice, are also naturally inclined to the same Passions, and to the same
Actions. The second is drawn from the resemblance Men have with other
Creatures; and teaches us, that those who have any part like to those of
beasts, have also the inclinations they have. The third is grounded on the
beauty of the Sex; and shows that men who have any thing of a feminine beauty,
are naturally effeminate; and that those women who have any touch of a manly
beauty, participate also of manly inclinations. The fourth is drawn from the
likeness which the men of one Climat have with that of another. So those who
have short noses, thick lips, curled hair, and a tawny skin, as the Moors have,
are subject to the same vices to which they are inclined. The fifth and last
may be called Syllogistick, because that without using particular signs, which
usually design the Manners of persons, it discovers them by discourse and
reasonings: which is done by two principal means: The first is the knowledge of
Tempers: for without knowing the signs of the inclination a man has to be
angry, so as we know that he is choleric, it will suffice to speak him to be
inclined to that Passion. The second is the most ingenuous, and is drawn from
the connection and concatenation which the Passions and the Habits have amongst
themselves. So when we know a man is fearful, we may assure our selves that he
is inclined to Avarice, that he is cunning and dissembling, that he usually
speaks sofily and submissively, that he is suspicious, incredulous, an ill
friend, and the like. And although we do not observe particular signs of all
these later qualities, yet we believe they are found in him, because we know
the principle whence they deduce their origin.

These are the first strokes which design the Platform of the Great Work we
intend. For as all those Rules are grounded on the relation which Men have with
other things, its impossible to apply them well, without the knowledge of those
very things. And it is bootless to say that any man is inclined to such a
Passion, because he bears the Character thereof, unless we know what the
Character thereof is. We must therefore make as many Discourses as there are
grounds for these general Rules; and divide the whole Work into seven parts.

The I shall treat of the Characters of the Passions, of Virtues and of Vices.

The II of the nature of the creatures which may be useful to this knowledge.

The III of the beauty of men and women, and of the inclinations which follow
them.

The IV of the difference of the bodies and manners of people.

The V of Tempers, and of the effects which they cause in the Mind and on the
Body.

The VI of the connection which the Passions and the Habits have amongst
themselves.

The VII shall reduce in order all the signs which shall have been drawn from
these great Springs; shall teach their use; and finally, shall show The art to
know Men.

Now, Reader, you may perceive why I have undertaken the Characters of the
Passions, and why I make it my first entry, and the Frontispice of my Work. But
because I therein observe a very particular Order, I thought it fit to acquaint
thee with the Reasons which obliged me to follow it.

I suppose then the Passions are motions of the Appetite, by which the Soul
seeks to draw near Good, and to shun Ill; and that there are two Appetites in
Man, The Sensitive, and the Intellectual, which is the Will. All the actions of
the Sensitive Appetite are called Passions, forasmuch as the Mind is agitated
by them, and that the body suffers and sensibly changes in its motions. But
all the actions of the Will, although they are Motions, bear not the name of
Passions: For there are two kinds of them; some, which are not for him who
acts, but for another; as all actions are, whether just or unjust. Others,
which are only for him who acts them; as Love, Hate, Pride, and other Motions
of the Will. The first are simply called Actions, or Operations; the other are
called Passions, by reason of the likeness they have with the motions of the
Appetite. In effect, the motions the Will makes for the good or ill which
concerns it, are altogether like those of the Appetite, if we did not consider
the alteration of the body which accompanies the later, and which is no part of
the essence of the Passion, being but the effect. For the Will loves and hates,
rejoices and grieveth, fears and hopes in the same manner as the Appetite, and
has with it its Concupiscible and Irascible part. However, Humane Passions,
whether they be raised in the Will, or whether they are formed in the Sensitive
Appetite, are of two kinds: for some are Simple, which are not to be found,
but either in the Concupiscible part, or in the Irascible: others are Mixed, and
proceed from both together.

The Simple ones which come from the Concupiscible part, respect the Good or
the Ill, without considering whether there be either a difficulty in their
pursuit, or flight from them; and are, Love, Hate, Desire, Aversion, Pleasure,
Grief.

Those which belong to the Irascible, consider the difficulties there are,
whether it be in the pursuit of good, or flight of Ill; and are, Hope, Despair,
Boldness, Fear, Anger.

The most considerable of the Mixed Passions are, Shame, Impudence, Pity,
Indignation, Envy, Emulation, Jealousy, Repentance, Astonishment. For, Shame
is a mixture of Grief and Fear, caused by Infamy: Impudence proceeds from the
Pleasure and Boldness we take in doing of dishonest things. Indignation comes
from Anger and Grief, that we see Good or Ill happen to those who are unworthy
of it. Pity proceeds from the sorrow we feel for other men's mischiefs, and the
apprehension we have of falling into the same affliction. Envy comes from
Grief, and from Despair of possessing the Good which happens to another.
Emulation springs from the regret we have not to enjoy those perfections which
we find in others, and from the hope to attain them. Jealousy is a confusion
of Love, of Hate, of Fear, and of Despair. Repentance is bred from the sorrow
we feel for having done ill, and out of a hope of pardon. Lastly, Astonishment
is mixed with Surprise, Fear, Grief, and Despair; as I shall make it appear in
the Characters of every of those Passions.

According to this Method, I shall first treat of the Simple Passions, and
afterward of the Mixed. And because that amongst the Simple Passions there are
some which tend toward Good, others which assault Ill, and others which flee
from it; I thought it more fit, in stead of ranking them, as is commonly done,
with their contraries, to examine them after this Order, because that they
naturally keep it in their production, and that those of one gender commonly
are of a company; and because their motions having a great agreement together,
make one the other the better known; and so form Idea's more perfectly of every
Passion, then if we mixed them with their contraries. You shall therefore here
have those Passions which have Good for their object, to wit, Love, Joy,
Laughter, Desire, and Hope. For I do not consider Laughter as a pure corporal
effect; but I comprehend therein the emotion of the Mind which causes it;
and, out of that respect, it may pass for a particular Passion, and for a
species of Joy. But stick not at this: It is indifferent for my design,
whether it be one, or but the effect of one. There are many things which I
examine not with the severity of the Schools. Sometimes I distinguish those
they have not separated; and I often confound those which they believe to be
different: Yet it never happens, but when I am obliged thereto by the necessity
of the Subject, which suffers me not always to enlarge my self; or for the want
in our Language, which in Dogmatical Discourses is often poor and barren: In
many places you may observe where I betray the purity and elegancy thereof in
Physickterms not yet approved, which yet I have been constrained to use.

Besides, every Passion shall be divided into four principal parts. The first
shall give you the Description thereof: The second shall show its Nature: The
third, the motion it causes in the Spirits and in the Humors: The fourth
shall discover the Causes of all these effects. There shall also be a fifth in
Love, wherein I shall enquire the nature of Beauty in general, and why it
causes Love. Perhaps in that and diverse other places, you will not find the
satisfaction you promised your self, and I may be blamed for having obscured
those things which seem most apparent, by difficulties which were before
unknown. But before you condemn me, remember that those things which we think
were best understood, are often those we least know; that the best part of our
selves is unknown to us; that we are ignorant of their nature, and of their
motions; and that it is very difficult to penetrate those depths wherein there
is to be found nothing but a very great obscurity. Yet have I thither brought
all the light I could possible; and if I am not deceived, it is great enough to
show thee all those new Observations, I believe, I have taken. If they are
right, I assure my self that thou will no less esteem them, then those new
lately discovered Stars, since our interest is greater to know our selves, then
the things which are without us. If I have not succeeded herein, yet it is very
much that I have showed the way, and marked the places which are to be
followed. It is not that I believe I am the first who have observed the want we
had of a full knowledge of the Passions. There have been so many great Spirits
who have wrought on this Subject, that it is impossible but they must have made
better discoveries then I, of what was to be added. But as they are actions
common to the Mind and to the Body, and Physic and Moral Philosophy must help
one the other to discourse exactly of them; it happened that those who have
undertaken it, could never employ them both; and that those who could have done
it, have had other designs, which have hindered them from discovering to us
the nature of these things, whose good or ill use causes all the felicity or
mischief of our lives. In effect, if they are well regulated, they form the
Virtues, and preserve Health: but if they grow to excess, they are the source
whence the disorders of the Soul and of the Body deduce their origin. And
whoever would consider the great number of Sicknesses which momentanily assault
the life of Man, and the several ways whereby she customarily loses her self,
will find but few whose first cause was not some one of the Passions of the
Mind. So that we may say, that the most profitable parts of Wisdom and Physic
have not hitherto been discovered; and that if I have endeavored to give them
any part of my cares, and of my small labor, I have not so much strayed from
my Duty and my Profession as some may imagine. To conclude, what success soever
my Undertaking have, it in my opinion deserves some approbation, or at least
excuse: and indeed, Reader, I must have both, to oblige me to pursue it. In a
word, if thy judgment be favorable, it will afford me both very much glory,
and very much pains.

ERRATA.
In the Epistle dedicatory, page ult. line 6. for leave, read learn. l. 8. for
love, read have.

In the Book, p. 7. l. 14. for ever, read even. P. 13. l. 25. for Maintica,
read Maintion. P. 32. l. 4. for other, read others. P. 48. l. 22. for enlights,
read enlightens. P. 99. l. ult. for diffent, read different. P. 103. an accent
upon Catoche. P. 133. It would be, etc. P. 149. l. 24. for thicks, read
thickens. P. 192. l. 14. for ardors, read orders. P. 226. l. 27. for graceful,
read grateful. P. 260. l. 25. for venters, read reenters P. 272. l. 2 for
general, read generous, P. 282. l. 21. for Theorictus, read Theocritus.

THE CHARACTERS OF THE PASSIONS.
CHAP. I. What the Characters of the PASSIONS are in general.
NATURE having destined Man for a civil life, thought it not sufficient to have
given him a tongue to discover his intentions; but she would also imprint on
his forehead, and in his eyes, the images of his thoughts; that if his speech
happened to belie his heart, his face should give the lie to his speech. In
effect how secret soever the motions of his soul are, what care soever he takes
to hide them, they are no sooner formed but they appear in his face; and the
disquiet they cause is sometimes so great that they may be truly called
tempests, which are more violent at Shore then out at Sea: And that he who
advised a man to consult his glass in his anger, had reason to believe that the
Passions are better known in the eyes, then in the soul it self. But that which
is more wonderful, those actions which spring from virtue and vice, discover
themselves in the same manner: And although the goodness or malignity they
have, seem to have nothing to do with the body, yet they leave with it, I know
not what kind of images: And even the soul not perceiving what it does,
disposes the parts in such a manner, that by the plight and posture which they
take, we may judge whether its actions are good or ill; Neither can the
understanding work so secretly but the senses must perceive it: If it elevate
its thoughts, if it recollect it self, the looks grow fixed, the car hears not;
in fine, there is a general suspension of sense, and motion: And whether it be
that at the same time the soul cannot intend such different functions, or that
the inferior part respects, and will not divert its Mistress, we know that this
is employed when the other operates not. Its a most certain thing that the body
changes and varies it self, when the soul is moved, and that this performs
almost no actions but it imprints the marks thereof, which we may call
Characters, since they are the effects of them, and that they bear their image
and figure.

Now, because the first Rule of Physionomy is grounded on these Characters, and
that it makes use of them to discover inclinations, assuring us, that those
who naturally have the same air, and the same countenance which accompanies
their moral actions, are inclined to the same actions; The design which we
have undertaken makes us here propose the particular Characters of all the
Passions, and after them of Virtues, and Vices: But first we must know wherein
these Characters consist and what are the causes of them.

The Characters of Passions, and of habits, being the marks of the motions,
and designs of the soul, are also its effects, as is already said; but because
there are also two sorts of effects, those which are performed in the soul, and
those which are effected in the body; there are also two kinds of Characters;
the one Moral, the other Corporal. For if you consider a man in anger, Violence
appears in all his actions; his words are full of threats and injuries; he cries
out, he runs, he strikes; reason and remonstrances offend him, and he knows no
friends but those who favor his passion. On the other side, his countenance is
inflamed, his eyes sparkle, he wrinckles his forehead, his words are fierce,
his voice is terrible, his looks are frightful, and his whole behavior is
furious. These then are two kinds of effects, and two sorts of Characters; the
one whereof consists in moral actions, and the other in the change and
alteration of the body.

Now we must see what these actions are, and what this change is; for all moral
actions cannot be used for Characters; otherwise, some would be Characters of
themselves, since Passions, and Virtues, are moral actions.

To take away this difficulty, you must observe that the essence of human
actions consists in the inward emotion which the object forms in the appetite;
and that all those things which are done in pursuance thereof, are but as
rivolets running from the same spring. So anger is nothing but a desire of
Vengeance; and in the pursuit of that emotion, the soul produces exterior
actions, which may serve to this purpose; as threatenings, blows, and other
violences, which we call Characters because they express and discover the
alteration and interior motion of the appetite.

But there is also another thing to be here considered; and it is that when we
speak of Passions, of Virtues, and of Vices, we are not to conceive them as
qualities, or simple actions; but as complete qualities and actions which are
accompanied by many others, and yet, which all tend to one principal end which
the soul proposes. For although love, (to speak properly) is but a simple
emotion of the soul, by which it unites it self to that which is lovely; Yet we
do not therein form its whole Idea; we consider it as a Passion that has
beauty for its object, and which to possess it, employs desire, hope, delight,
etc. In the same manner, Justice is a steadfast will to render to every one what
belongs to him. But to effect it, she makes use of Prudence, which makes her
consider the quality of persons, the time, the place, and all other
circumstances. She makes use of Temperance, and of strength, to moderate those
passions which often traverse her design; and although they are actions which
precisely concern her not, yet she forbears not to appropriate them, because
they conduce to her principal end. Now all these borrowed, and posterior
actions are also a part of moral Characters; because they design the passion,
or principal habit, which is the spring, and first cause whence they are
derived.

Its far more difficult, to say wherein the Corporal Characters consist, and
what intention nature has in forming them. We see, that every passion carries
I know not what air on the face; that virtue sheds into its actions a certain
grace, and an agreeable aspect, which is not to be found amongst the vicious;
but as we have always called it The I know not what, it seems that we are
thereby taught, that it could not be said what it was. For I suppose, (as it is
true) that the Characters we seek, are nothing but the air of which we have but
now spoken. Now this is found in so many different things, that its almost
impossible to observe what of common they have whereupon we may establish its
essence; for it most commonly happens in the motion of the parts, and some have
believed that this air was nothing but that motion. But its certain, there is a
sixth and natural air wherein the parts move not, and which is no effect of the
souls emotions. So that it would be more likely, that this air were nothing but
a certain relation of the parts amongst themselves; which happens from the
situation they take when they move, or when they rest: But nether is this
sufficient, since the color which that relation compriseth not, partly gives
the air to the face; and that ruddiness is one of the principal Characters of
shame, as paleness is of fear; this ever increases the difficulty, since that
in defining beauty, we say that its a just proportion of the parts accompanied
with a pleasing color, and with a grace; and that color and grace are
esteemed as two different things. For grace is nothing but a pleasing air; nay
even custom, often applies it to what it is not, when we say a man has an ill
grace; and in this case, grace is the same with air: That we may know then what
this marvelous air is, where the serenity, and the storms of the mind appear,
we are first to observe, that the air of persons is discovered in their
pictures; that the grace of a fair face is expressed by colors, and that
consequently, there must be somewhat of fixed, and which flies not away, since
there are none but stable and permanent things, which painting has power over;
and that of all visible objects, there is only motion, which subjects not it
self to the pencil. Now it is impossible to find any thing stable, common to
living things, and their pictures, besides the figure and color of the parts.
So that it seems this air is to be there placed. But because there is yet
another thing in the grace, which the art of painting cannot attain to, and
that there is a certain vivacity, which can never be fixed on the cloth; we must
with reason believe that motion serves also to this grace; its that which
renders the beauty lively and piercing; without which its sad, dead, and
without attraction. We cannot (in effect) doubt but that the motion of the
parts gives something to this vivacity, since it is a part of its perfection.
But because that after it has ceased, there is yet I know not what which
remains on the face, and that we see a certain splendour shine in the eyes,
which depends neither upon their figure, motion nor color; we must necessarily
add to all this a certain secret influence, which being sent into the eyes
disperseth it self over the parts of the face; and without doubt, after having
well enquired what it may be, we shall find it to be the spirits which the
soul continually sends into those parts, which leave there the brightness of
the natural light they have; and indeed there are faces which near seem well,
and afar off appear very ill colored, because the spirits animate it not, and
that the splendour they give is so weak that the species of it cannot reach far,
and so they leave those of the color more withered. This grace then is in the
color, in the figure, in the motion of the parts, and of the spirits. And yet
this does not say that all these things are this grace: For were they in other
subjects then man, they would not please; and green which is the most perfect
of all colors, would cause a frightful deformity, were it on a face. It must
then be, that as sounds are not pleasing of themselves, but as they are in a
certain proportion; so all these things are pleasing to the sight but only
because they have a certain relation, and a certain agreement, which pleases
the eyes, and contents the mind.

To know this concordance, you are to understand that there are two sorts of
beauties in man; The Intelligible, and the Sensible. The first is but the
interior perfection, the just connection of all faculties necessary for a man
to perform the functions whereto he is designd; and the sensible beauty
consists in the disposition which the Organs ought to have to serve these
faculties. So that what renders the figure, the color and the motion
agreeable, is the fitness which those things have with the nature of man. For
how fair soever the color be, how perfect soever the figure of the parts are,
how regular soever the motions are, if they are not conformable to his nature,
they produce neither a beauty nor a grace; on the contrary, they cause a
deformity, and render the body unseemly. Now although there be but God alone
who knows the principle of this conformity, and why the forms have more
inclination for one figure, color, or some other accident then for another:
yet there are in our soul secret seeds of this knowledge, which is the cause
she pleases herself in these objects without knowing the reason; in the same
manner as she finds them displeasing, when that conformity and proportion
which they ought to have is wanting.

Some will perhaps say, that I here confound grace with beauty, placing grace
in the proportion of the parts, and in the color, which in the ordinary
definition of beauty are separated from grace. But I believe there is no
inconvenience herein, and that its true that all that is fair is pleasing, and
that the proportion of parts being fair, must needs please the sight, and that
therefore they are graceful.

And indeed the ancients who in these things were wiser then we, made not this
difference, and always placed the graces where beauty was: For although
Aristotle says, that little ones might be called pretty and pleasing, but that
they were not to be esteemed fair; it is that he spoke of an entire and perfect
beauty, which is not to be found in little bodies, for as much as they want
that just proportion which belongs to the perfection of man.

Yet there is some ground for the difference which has been since made between
beauty and grace; for as the matter and the form enter into the composition of
man, we have placed beauty in the figure and in the color which belongs to the
matter, and grace in the motions which are effects of the soul: not that grace
is not in the color and in the figure; or that beauty is not in the motions;
but because she is more excellent in these, by reason that the soul who is the
principle thereof, is more perfect then the matter, and that action is the last
perfection of things. Beauty which ought to be the most agreeable, has been
called by the name of grace, although in effect it ought to be common to all
that is fair; and that the color, figure and motion which have all their
beauties, ought also to have every one their particular graces.

But to return to our subject; the grace is a kind of air and means; nothing
more but that conformity and proportion whereof we have spoken. For when the
air is accompanied with this proportion, its pleasing; so that this air in
general is in all those things which have a grace, and it may be defined, A
certain exterior and sensible quality which is bred from the color, figure,
and motion of the parts. And if we add that these things are proportionable,
and conformable to the perfection of man, it will be the definition of grace.

We are notwithstanding to observe that the air appears more in one of these
three things in some encounters then in the rest: For that which is fixed and
natural, is chiefly in the figure and situation of the parts. That which
accompanies the passions, depends most from the motion and the color; that of
virtuous actions is sometimes in rest, because reason hinders those motions
which would not befit the moderation and quiet she seeks: such is the grave and
modest Mine, such is the countenance of a man who meditates and thinks on great
matters: And it may be that even vices which are in excess, have an active and
turbulent air; and those which are in the defect, have quite the contrary: so a
hot and precipitate man is always in action, and the lazy is immovable:
besides the air appears sometime more in one part then in another; and although
it be more remarkable in the face then in any other place, yet there is one
which belongs to walking, another in the carriage of the arms, and another of
the whole body. The French has been more happy to express those differences
then any other language, whatsoever. Not content to say l'Air and la Grace, Air
and Grace, it adds la Mine, la Contenance, le Maintica, le Geste, and le Port,
which as near as we can render them, are, The Mine, the Presence, the
Behavior, the Carriage, and the Port. The Mine chiefly belongs to the face,
the port to the gate, the carriage and the behavior to the arms; the Air, the
Grace, and the Presence to the whole body. And as the Port, and the Gesture, or
Carriage, denote motion, so the Mine, the Behavior, and the Presence apply
themselves best to rest: but the air and the grace are common to both of them.
However it be, the air which is in Passions, and in moral actions, principally
comes from motion; but you must know what the cause of this motion is: For upon
this knowledge depends the greatest part of what we are to say; and because it
will better appear in the passions, we will therefore by them begin the enquiry.

We have already said, and we shall often be obliged to repeat, that Passions
are nothing but the emotions of the appetite, by which the soul moves toward
good, and estrangeth it self from evil; and as she has diverse organs which may
be used to that end, she also employs them, and moves according to her
intention: Now the Spirits without question are the first she makes use of,
being the most agil, and which take their birth from the same place where she
forms her designs; so that we need not wonder that they are the first to
execute them, since they seem to be the first who have the knowledge of them.

The soul then sends forth the spirits, and scatters them over all the exterior
parts, either to acquire good, or to oppose ill: But when this is too powerful,
and she is sensible that she is not strong enough to resist it, she retires
them in and brings them back to the heart. Now this flux and reflux brings two
great changes, because the humors being drawn along with them, their arrival
swells and agitates the parts, and paints them of the same color of which
themselves are: on the contrary, their flight makes them fail, look pale, and
renders them immovable.

Perhaps it would not be unprofitable to examine whether every passion has a
particular motion of the spirits; and whether anger moves them otherwise then
shame, love, joy, or the rest which carries them outwardly: Whether Fear retire
them inwardly after another manner then Hate, Aversion or Grief. For if this
were true, and that we could know these differences, we could with the more
facility discover the causes of the alterations they produce. For my part, I
believe that since in every Passion the appetite has an emotion and a
particular end, the means it uses ought also to be particular; and that the
motion of the spirits must be conformable to the intention it has, and to the
agitation it gives it self: and therefore that that is done in one passion, is
different from those which are done in others. So that its very likely that in
one they cast themselves with impetuosity, and high boylings like torrents: and
in another slide as sweetly as rivers, that some make them overflow their
banks, others restrain them in their bounds: that now their course is direct,
and presently again irregular. Lastly, That we may say love dilates them,
desire shoots them forth, Joy sheds them abroad, Hope holds them fast, boldness
drives them, and that anger throws them forth in great boiling gulps, and so of
the rest, as we shall more particularly see in the discourse of the Passions;
although to speak Truth, our spirit is not clear-sighted enough to discern
exactly all these differences, and that in this case the window of Momus were
very necessary for it. How ever it be, the soul is not content after this
manner only to agitate the spirits and the humors in the passions: she also
causes those parts to move which are capable of a voluntary motion, as being
those which are the most powerful to seek and embrace good, and to repel or
fly evil; and to speak truth, this motion of the spirits is often a succor
very useless to the soul, and which serves rather to show her precipitation and
blindness then to obtain what she proposed to her self; for when they cast
themselves into the face, she fancies to her self that it is she her self that
runs thither; and when they retire themselves to the heart, its she also who
hides her self there, although she be already at the place where she would
arrive, and that she abandons not that wheene she thinks to estrang herself;
and what benefit is it to a Creature for the spirits and the blood to go to
the encounter of an agreeable object, since neither the soul nor the body come
nearer to it, nor are any more united to it, and that the senses only are they
which ought to make this union? we may say the same of the resistance she would
make to those ills which present themselves; for what relation is there betwixt
the spirits and an injury, and what effect can they make to drive back an ill
which most commonly is only in opinion, which sometimes is no more or which
even is not yet made?

But it is not thus with voluntary motion; for indeed here the hands draw and
take what is useful, the body is carried toward what is lovely; it truly keeps
a distance from what is ill, and flies or drives away what incommodates it.

Its true that there are some of these motions where the soul deceives it self
as well as in that of the spirits: how many lost steps, ridiculous postures and
idle words are there in Passions? to what use are these several motions of the
head, those different figures which the forehead, the eyes, the nose, and the
mouth form? There may be some relation with the design which the soul proposed,
since its certain that in shame she casts down the eyes, as if she would hide
herself, that she lifts them up in Anger as if that served to repel an injury,
and that in scorn she lifts up the nose as if she would drive away what she
disdains. But its easy to perceive that herein also she deceives her self, and
that the blindness and trouble in which she is, causes her to use means which
benefit her nothing to the obtaining of what she desires.

It Is not that she is therefore to be condemned in all these motions; there are
many which happen without any design of hers; which although they are not
against her intention, yet she is not the cause of them, it is but by a certain
necessity that they follow those motions which the soul inwardly excites; for
we cannot with reason say, that she proposes in anger the hinderance of
respiration and of speech, the inflammation of the face, and the sparkling of
the eyes. But these are effects which follow the agitation of the spirits,
which impetuously cast themselves on the exterior parts as we shall say
hereafter.

By this discourse we may not only perceive what the causes of those motions
which the Passions excite are, but also which those are which make moral
Characters, and which make the corporal. For those which the soul imploys by a
clear and distinct knowledge to obtain the end she pretends in every Passion,
make the moral Characters; and those which she uses by a pure instinct, or
which happen without any intention of hers, form the corporal Characters. For
these latter are of two sorts, the one are by the command of the soul, the
other are by necessity, as you will see more particularly in the following
discourses.

CHAP. II. The Characters of Love.
LOVE is not only the Spring of all the Passions, but even of all the good and
of all the ill which happens to men; without it there would be no Sciences in
the world; Virtue would be without followers, and Civil society would be but
an imaginary good; it is that which breeds in us the desire of fair things, and
makes us possess them, and by a wonderful incantation changes and
transformeth us into them: to it we owe all the good things we possess, it may
give us those which we want, and if it drive not from us the ills which
necessarily accompany this life, at least it sweetens them, nay and even
renders them pleasing, and makes them the instruments of our felicity.

But this is it also that corrupts virtue, ruins society, and renders art
despicable. And if it has truly brought into the world these excellent
things, it seems it is only to drive them out again. That noble vigor which
incites the mind to fair actions, that divine fire wherewith they say the soul
is clothed, and which naturally raises it toward Heaven, languisheth and dys
under the weight of base and terrestrial things, upon which this Passion fixes
it. In short its this that forms all the tempests which agitate our life there
would be no grief, no fear, nor no despair; were there no love; and who ever
will nearly consider all the passions, will easily believe that they are but
several motions which it causes, and different figures which it assumes.

Now as there are but few objects which can reach the soul, which are not able
to move this passion: And whereas Riches, Honor, Pleasure, and in a word all
Goods whether false or true may raise it, we will not here disimbroile this
Chaos, and our design gives us not leave to speak of any other kind of love but
that which beauty begets in the appetite.

Neither is it a slight enterprise, notwith standing the helps those great men
of the times past have given us, and what endeavor soever we have already made
to discover its origin, yet are we constrained to confess that there is
somewhat in it which is divine, whereto our spirit cannot attain; and the same
poverty which we find as they say at its birth, happens also in our thoughts
when we would speak of it; so that were it necessary to observe all the effects
thereof, we might sooner count the waves of the sea, then the motions it
causes in the soul: neither does heat produce or corrupt more things in the
world, then love causes both good and evil actions.

In effect its the instrument of that divine Art which Nature has provided to
preserve her most exellent works; without it long since we had no more spoken
of Families, of Peoples, or of Commonwealths; and those which were esteemed the
most flourishing, had been but the Assemblys of a sort of wild and savage
beasts, had not love sweetened and civilz'd them; for its it that forms us to a
civil life, which is the true life of men, since thereby we become liberal,
courteous, and generous; it teaches us to be discreet, obedient, and faithful;
it renders us abundant, eloquent, and ingenious; and for that same cause the
wisest man among the ancients formerly, said that he was ignorant in all things
but in the art of love, forasmuch as he esteemed that love is the school of
honor and virtue, and that wheresoever it reigns it brings peace, abundance and
Felicity. And indeed had it not been altered by men, it had never produced any
othereffects but those, and we had not been obliged to have added to its
Elogies, the crimes of which it is accused, and the ills which at all times it
has done through the whole world: but as the fire how pure soever it be,
raises stinking and dangerous fumes if it take in a corrupted matter, you are
not to wonder if this divine flame being bred amongst those vices wherewith the
nature of man is infected, produces only filthy desires, forms only evil
designs, and if instead of the good things it ought to bring mankind, it cause
only troubles, anxiety and misfortunes.

We have not undertaken here to give an account of all its disorders, neither
will we stain this discourse with the blood and the infamy it has brought into
Families and States, nor with the sacriledges wherewith it has violated the
most sacred things; it will be sufficient to say, that its the most dangerous
enemy wisdom can have: For as much as of all those passions which may disturb
her, there is only love against whom she has no defense; those which enter
nimbly and impetuously into the mind, are but almost of a moments continuance,
and reason finds its excuse in their precipitation; those others which move
slowly by little and little, she perceives them coming and can either stop
their passage, or in that weak condition drive them away. But love slides in so
secretly that its impossible to observe its entry, or its progress, like a
maskt enemy it advances and seazeth on all the principal parts of the soul,
before it is discovered, when there is no means to be found to get him out;
then he triumphs, and wisdom and reason must become his slaves: and it is what
in my opinion the ancients would have said when they fained Love sometimes to
be the Father of the gods, and sometimes that he was a Demon which causes them
to descend from Heaven to Earth: Because its certain that this passion has
mastered the wisest men in the world, and that it was not without cause that
Lais once vaunted to have seen more Philosophers with her, then of any other
kind of men. But let us leave these subjects for lovers to entertain their
complaints withal, and without interessing our selves either in the praise or
dispraise of love, lets consider from the Port where we are, the storms it
raises in the soul and in the body.

The first wound that beauty gives the soul, is almost insensible, and although
the poison of love be already in her, and that its even dispersed through all
her parts, yet does she not believe herself sick, or at least thinks not her
mischief so great. For as we do not give to Bees the name they bear, but only
when they have a sting and wings: so neither is love called love but when he
has his arrows and can fly, that's to say when he is pungent and unquiet. At
first we take it for a simple likeing, or a complacency we bear to so lovely a
Person with whose presence we are pleased, of whom we delight to discourse,
whose remembrance is sweet; and the desires we have to see and entertain her,
are so calm that wisdom with all its severity cannot condemn them, even she
approves them, and passes them for civilities and necessary duties: but they
are not long at a stand, they by little and little increase, and at last by the
frequent agitatiou of the Soul, they kindle that fire which was there hid, and
cause that flame to increase which burns and devours it; then this pleasing
image which never presented it self to the mind but with sweetness and
respect, becomes insolent and imperious; it enters every moment, or more fully
to express it, it never leaves it, it mixeth with its most serious thoughts, it
troubles the most pleasing, and profanes the most sacred, it even slides into
our dreams and by an insufferable perfidiousness, it shows it self in them
severe and cruel, when there is nothing to be feared, or abuses us with a vain
hope when we ought truly to despair; then love who before was but a child,
becomes the Father of all the passions, but a cruel Father, who has no sooner
produced one, but he stiffles it to make room for an other, which he spares no
less then the former; at once he causes a hundred kinds of desires and
designs to live and dye; and to see Hope and Despair, Boldness and Fear, joy
and grief, which he causes continually to succeed one another, Despite and
Anger, which he makes to flash out every moment, and the mixture of all these
passions; its impossible but you must fancy some great tempest where the fury
of the wind raises, throws down and confounds the waves, where lightning and
thunder breaks the clouds, where light and darkness, heaven and earth, seem to
return to their first confusion.

But as there are times when storms are more violent and more common, there are
also encounters wherein this tempest of Love is stronger, and more frequent.
The chief in my opinion are, the presence, and the absence of the beloved
person, her love, and her hate, and the concurrence of a rival; and we may say,
that these are the five acts wherein all the accidents and all the intricacies
of this Passion are represented; at least if there are others, they pass behind
the curtain, and out of the spectators sight.

If it happen then that a lover be absent from his beloved object, disquiet and
fretting pursue him everywhere, he has no friends but are importunate, the
divertisements which were most pleasing to him are troublesome; in short there
is nothing in his life which displeases him not, but silence and solitude, as
if he were possessed with those strange diseases which makes us hate the light
and men; he loves nothing but darkness and deserts, there he entertaines the
woods, the brooks, the winds, and the stars, they have nothing as he fancies
but what is conformable to the humor of her he loves, and to the pains he
suffers; he calls them insensible as she is, and finds them like him in
perpetual agitation, and after having a long time tormented his spirit with
such like Chimeras, he begins to think of those happy moments when he shall
again see that desirable object that he may speak to her, and give her an
account of his sighs and of the tears he shed in her absence; sometimes he
meditates the complaints wherewith he must soften her rigor, the thanks with
which he will receive her favors, and the vows wherewith he will confirm his
servitude; sometimes he puts pen to paper, he writes, blots out, tears, and if
he have any thoughts which may securely stay on the paper, they are those only
which witness the excess of his love and fidelity; and then what artifices does
he not employ to procure the delivery of his letters? what extravagances does
he not commit when he receives any, or even when any thing that has but
touched the person he loves comes to his hands? he keeps them always joined to
his eyes or to his lips, he makes them his idols, and would not change them for
Scepters and Diadems; to conclude, we may say that absence is the true night of
lovers, not only because their Sun as they say illuminates them no more, but
also because that all their pleasures are but as in a dream, and at that time
all their ills are irritated and augmented.

But lets consider the day which follows this night, it is infallibly the
presence of the person beloved; indeed a lover calls it no other, who believes
that when he comes near it, all the beauty in the world is discovered to his
eyes; he finds a new heat dispersed through his soul, and a certain mixture of
joy and astonishment causes him so pleasant a trouble that he is ravished
therewith and as it were out of himself: then how proud, bold or eloquent
soever he be, he must humble himself, be afraid and lose his speech; it avails
him nothing to have prepared his courage and his discourse, they prove but so
many dreams and fantasies which vanish at the sight of this light; nothing but
his eyes can speak for him which witness by their looks what an excess of
pleasure and respect this meeting affords him; but what ever is said, that this
is the particular language of Love, there is yet another which is much more
proper, and which is also far stranger then this: for although there are
passions as violent as this, yet is there none which inspires like this, such
extravagant and such ridiculous words; for a lover scarce utters one probable
word, what care and what interest soever he employs to make himself believed;
all his discourses and writings are perpetual hyperboles; he burns, he
languisheth, he dies, he speaks of nothing but of prisons, of chains, and of
torments; he calls her he loves his sun, his heart, his soul, and his life; he
swears that he alone has more love then all men besides, that his passion is
infinite and shall be eternal: In brief, all his words are beyond the truth,
his designs and his promises beyond his power, and all his actions beneath his
courage; for there is no so base submission which he will not make; there is no
service so low or vile which he will not render; there is no subjection amongst
slaves so diligent, so careful and so express as his; he often adores a person
that disdains him, courts a confident that betrays him, cherishes servants
that mock him; he must use his enemies with respect, his friends with
indifferency, and all the rest of the world with scorn; he must suffer without
complaining, he must fear all, desire much, hope for little: in a word he must
love his ill, and hate himself. I omit the profuse expense he makes, the
dangers he runs through to gain only a word or a favorable look, the
transports of joy which a good reception yields him, the excess of grief and
despair which a disdain causes, and the furies which jealousy inspires when a
rival traverseth his pursuit. When we shall speak of those passions in
particular, then also will we show the rest of the extravagancies which love
causes, although indeed they cannot be all discovered. For besides that there
are no disorders in the other passions which are not to be found in this, that
its capable of all the follies which can possess a distracted mind, it has so
many faces and several countenances, that its impossible to take their picture;
sometimes its violent and impetuous, sometimes sweet and peaceable, in some
pleasant and toying, in others peevish and severe, in other bold and insolent,
in other timorous and modest; it appears ingenious and stupid, fantastical,
light, furious, and in a hundred other fashions, which in my opinion was the
cause that some fained Love to be the son of the wind, and of Iris; to show the
wonder and the variety which there was in this passion, and to teach us that
his original is as much hid as that of those two kinds of Meteors. But before
we undertake to discover it, lets see what change it causes in the face.

I do not believe that he who first painted Love with a vail before his eyes,
intended thereby to show the blindness which is in that passion, but either
through the debility or by the privilege of his art, he was obliged to hide
what he could not express: In effect, what color, nay even what words can
express all the changes which Love causes in our eyes? how can that
resplendent humidity be represented which we see shine in them? that modest
disquiet, that laughing grief, and that amorous anger which is to be perceived
in them; now you shall see them turn this way, and now that, now sweetly lift
themselves up, by little and little fall down again and pitifully turn toward
the beloved object. Sometimes they dwell on it as if they were fixed, sometimes
they turn from it as if they dazzled, sometimes their looks are quick, sometimes
sweet and languishing; now they fly out with liberty, and now they steal and
escape from between the lids; which seem as if they would shut upon them: In a
word, all the motions wherewith the eyes in other passions are agitated are to
be observed in this: you shall always find laughter or tears, which sometimes
agree and mingle together; although they are sunk and hollow, they do not
therefore dry up or lessen; on the contrary they seem bigger and more humid
then they were before, unless it be after a tedious grief or an extreme
despair, for then they become dry, dimm, cast down and set. The forehead in
this passion seldom gathers it self; on the contrary it seems as if it were
extended, and if sorrow sometimes casts it down, the wrinkels do scarce so much
as break its evenness; it is there where the redness begins to appear which Love
often raises in the face, and even then when the other parts are pale, this
always retains something of its first color; sometimes the lips are red and
moist, sometimes pale and dry, and they never almost move without forming a
pleasing smile, sometimes the undermost is seen to tremble and to whiten with a
subtle froth, sometimes the tongue passes over them, and by a light touch and
trembling which it gives, it flatters and tickles them; when it would form
words it lispes, and the humidity which the desire raises in the mouth,
stiffles and drowns them: Even the ears are of no use to a lover, he hears not
half what you say to him; if he answers it is with confusion, and his discourse
is every moment interrupted by deep and long sights, which his heart and his
lungs incessantly exhale: If he speak of his passion it is with a trembling and
softened voice which he lets fall at every stroke by those passionate accents,
which desire, grief, and admiration usually form: he grows pale, lean, and he
loses his appetite, he cannot sleep, and if sometimes grief and weariness
overtake him, his slumbers are continually interrupted by dreams, which do
often more afflict his mind then the true ills which he suffers. When the
beloved person presents herself to his eyes, when she is but named, or when any
thing awakens his remembrance of her, at the same instant his heart rises, and
is agitated, his pulse becomes unequal and irregular, and he grows so unquiet
that he cannot stay in one place, sometimes chilness seiseth him, sometimes heat
fires all his blood, sometimes he feels himself animated with an extraordinary
force and courage, sometimes he is cast down and languisheth, and even
sometimes he faints; lastly he feels himself stricken with a sickness which
laughs at the Physicians skill and which finds no remedy but in death or in
love it self. But let us no farther, let us finish this discourse with the
artifice of the Painter as it begun, let us hide what we cannot describe, and be
content to enquire the causes of those effects which we have now observed in
the essence and Nature of this Passion.

PART. 2. Of the Nature of LOVE.
ONe of the greatest wonders in Love is, that this Passion being so general and
so common, and wherewith we may say all knowing men have been touched, there
hitherto has none been found who has clearly discovered its nature and
origin; for after having seen all what has been written thereof, we may
affirm that the love of Phi^osophers was as well blind as that of Poets: and
that he who said it was I know not what, which came I know not whence, and went
away I know not how, made not one of the worst encounters: Now although I will
not examine all the definitions which are given it; the bounds which I have
prescribed being too narrow to permit so long a discourse; yet there are some
which are esteemed the most reasonable, whose defects I must observe that I may
well establish that which I mean to propose; and you may wonder that I approve
not that of Socrates, who was more knowing in Love then all the Philosophers in
Antiquity; nor that of S. Thomas who understood Morality better then any man
after him; So that I am obliged to tell you the reasons which make me dissent
from their opinions, And which make me steer another course then they have done.

For the first, who defined Love to be a desire of Beauty, he confounds two
Passions in one, nay even he destroys them both, since desire moves only
toward those things which we have not, and is quenched when we possess them:
although Love continue in its possession, and even sometimes therein renders it
self more violent; and then if love be a desire it would be no more Love, since
we cannot desire what we enjoy; and by the same reason desire would no longer
be desire. I know well you will say, that there is no possession so entire and
full where desire may not find its place, and were it but the continuation of
the good we enjoy, 'twere sufficient to employ it, and to render it inseparable
from Love: but this escape is unprofitable; for if the possession be not
entire, it supposes a part which yet we have not enjoyed; and who wishes the
continuation of a good, considers it not as present but as a thing to come; and
therefore he forms a new Idea of the good he possesses, and has a different
motive from that which its presence gives, and this is enough to cause two
several passions; otherwise we should confound Love with Hope, and even with
all the other motions of the soul, which are often found by one only object
according as we consider it several ways.

For S. Thomas, who says that Love is a complacency of the appetite in the
thing which is lovely; either he takes the word complacency for the sutableness
which the appetite finds in the object which the imagination proposes; or else
for the pleasure and the joy which the object yields it; if it be that
sutableness, it is formed before Love; if it be the pleasure, it follows it:
For its certain that when the imagination or the understanding have judged a
thing to be good, the first thing the appetite does, is to agree and consent to
the judgment which they made of it; and although this more clearly appears in
the will then in the sensitive appetite; because the will is free to consent or
refuse what is proposed to it, and that consent seems to be an act particular
to it; yet there is in the appetite a certain image of that action, and its
likely it approves what the imagination presents before it carries or moves it
self toward it; and this approbation and agreement is the complacency of which
we speak; which is nothing else but the satisfaction and the quiet the appetite
takes at sight of the objects which are conformable to it. So light rejoices
the eyes even before it move the appetite; and the pleasure they receive in
this encounter, is not a Passion nor a Motion, but a certain calm which coms
from the conformity of the object with that power: The same happens to the
appetite; when the imagination proposes any thing that is lovely, it
afterward likes and moves to possess it; so that this agreement precedes Love,
and Joy follows it, as you shall perceive by the sequel.

To form then a definition of Love without these difficulties and defects, we
are first to suppose the difference betwixt that Love which is a habit, and
that which is a Passion; for being a Motion, when that Motion cease, the
Passion also is at an end, and we may say, that there is no more Love; but the
habit forbears not to be there still, which is nothing else but the impression
of the beloved object which remains in the Mind, and which causes that at all
times when the thought proposes it to the appetite, it moves and forms the
passion of which we speak; the Passion of Love is then a Motion, and because
Motions draw their differences from the end whereto they tend, we are to
observe what its end is. Now as the appetite stirs not but to possess good and
fly from ill, we cannot doubt but the possession of good is the end of Love;
but as we cannot possess a thing without in some manner uniting our selves
thereunto; it necessarily follows that Love is a Motion of the appetite by which
the Mind unites it self to that which seems good unto it.

Its true that at first this will not seem true, because that most commonly in
Love the beloved object is absent, with whom it is not likely the soul should
unite it self; but if you consider that objects may be united to the powers by
their species and by their images, or by their true beings; and that
consequently there is a real union, and another that is not, which the schools
call intentional, and which we may name Ideal; you may observe that the union
which the appetite makes with the object which the imagination proposes, is of
the latter rank; because the true being of things enters not into the
imagination, its their Idea and their image only; and this union is that alone
which naturally belongs to the appetite, for that it can no otherwise for its
part unite it self to the good which is presented unto it; if it move toward
any other union it is not for it self that it seeks it, but for other powers
which may really unite themselves to their objects: for the the appetite is a
politic faculty which works not only for it self, but for all others which are
beneath it: and as the imagination is the Center of all the senses, the
appetite is it also of all the inclinations which are in the parts; so that the
imagination or the understanding proposing to it what is fit, it seeks it for
them, and endevors to procure them the enjoyment thereof; and then if they are
capable really to unite themselves with their objects, it covets their union;
but this hinders not but that it unites it self before with them by a union
proper to it, and which is as the principle and spring of all other unions
belonging to the soul.

Perhaps you will say that the understanding and the imagination in the same
manner unite themselves to what is fit for them, and that therefore Love may be
as well formed there as in the appetite; but the difference is great, because
that the objects come and go in the understanding and in the imagination; and
the knowledge they have of them is rather gained by rest then by motion, as
Avistotle says, quite contrary to the appetite which moves it self toward its
object and goes out as it were of it self to unite it self thereto; so that the
union which is made in the understanding and in the imagination, is purely
passive without any motion of its faculties: but that of the appetite is active
and performed with agitation, considering also that the union made by the
appetite is more perfect then that which is made by knowledge; for as much as
the mind may have an aversion from some thing which it has conceived, which
is a kind of separation, and therefore the union thereof is not so perfect as
that of the appetite, which cannot endure this division, and which consequently
is the most accomplished which can be found in the actions of life.

But if Love be a motion of the Soul to unite it self to what is lovely, it
seems as if when it is united thereunto, there then should be no more motion,
and consequently no more Love; and as this union may be made in a moment, for
that there is nothing can hinder it, it seems as if this motion also were made
in an instant; and that therefore Love should not last any longer, which would
be a very strange proposition and contrary to the truth.

To answer this objection, you must observe, that there are things which move
themselves to attain to some end separate from their motion; and that there are
others which find in the motion it self the end they seek; the first cease to
move when they have attained their end; But those who have no other end but
motion, or at least none that is separated from their motion, never pretend to
rest; and as rest is a perfection in those, so it is an imperfection in these;
now the appetite is of this latter kind, which truly moves to unite it self to
what is good, but the union it seeks cannot be effected but in motion, and when
that cease it vanishes; so that whilst the beloved object is present it
must incessantly agitate it self to obtain the end it desires, which is to
unite it self thereunto; and if it chance to rest, it proceeds from that the
object is no longer present with it, or at least that it is no more offered
unto it as good; Love then is a motion and a union of the appetite to what is
lovely whether absent or present; because its absence hinders not the
imagination from proposing the Idea thereof to the appetite, which is the only
one with which it naturally can unite; its true that working for other powers
(as we have said) it stops not at this simple union; it seeks what is fit also
for them; it desires for the seeing and hearing that their objects may be at a
reasonable distance; for touching and tasting, that theirs may be immediately
united to their organs; In fine as many ways as things can be united, the
appetite and the will wish a fit union for them; and you must confess that the
concourse of all those motions makes the Passion of Love complete and entire,
and the first of which we have spoken, although it contains all its essence and
its form, yet has it not all its extent; we may say it is the source, and that
the others are the brooks which increase it.

Lets now see what this particular agitation is, which the appetite causes to
make this union, and in what its different from that which is to be found in
Joy, in Desire, and in Hope, by which as well as by love, it seems that the soul
would unite it self to the good which is presented to it. For it is not
sufficient for the perfect knowledge of the Passions to say that they are
motions, unless you observe the differences of these motions, and unless you
make known the different impressions; and the diverss progress which the
diversity of these objects cause in the appetite.

You must then suppose there is some relation between the motions of the Soul
and those of the body, and that the differences which are found in these in
some manner happen in the others. For since the effects are like their causes,
the motions of the body which are the effects of the Soul, ought to be the
images of that agitation which it gives it self. In effect they say that the
understanding moves directly toward its object, that it reflects and redoubles
it self on it, that it reenters it self, that it wanders and confounds it self;
which are all phrases drawn from sensible motions and which ought to make us
believe that somewhat like it is done in the soul, and chiefly in its
appetitive part, because it is by it that in effect it moves and agitates it
self; neither is it to any purpose to say that they are not true motions, but
that they only are Metaphorical; for besides that you must confess that all
definitions of the Passions where the word Motion is always used, are
Metaphorical; its nevertheless certain that there may be a resemblance between
both although they are of several kinds: But I shall say farther, that to
consider exactly the corporal motions, we may say they are not such perfect and
true motions as those of the soul, and that they are but gross and imperfect
images of them; since its true that in the order of things, those which are
inferiors are more noble and more perfectly in the superiors, and that all of
them are but copyes drawn the one from the other, whose original is in the
Sovereign Idea of all beings.

How ever it be, since that in defining Passion in general the word Motion is
used, we must necessarily observe the differences of the Passions, and therein
employ the differences of Motion, and find in every of them some particular
agitation, which has an agreement and relation to some of the sensible Motions.

To discover then that which is most fit for Love, we must first know where the
image of good is; and whether it dwells in the imagination, or whether it
insinuates it self into the appetite; it being certain that if the appetite go
abroad to seek it, it ought to agitate it self in another manner then if it
comes home to it; its true it is not easy to be decided, and take which side
you will, you will find inconveniences which seem inevitable: For, if the
image of good issues not out of the imagination, the appetite which is a blind
power can never know it; and therefore ought not to move to unite it self to it
not knowing it to be there: To say also that it comes forth of the imagination
and slides into the appetite, it will be useless there by the same reason,
since it only serves to represent things and give netice of them, which the
appetite is not capable of; besides its hard to conceive how this image can run
from the imagination into another power, because besides that the accidents
cannot pass from one subject to another, its the term and formal effect of an
immanent action, which has this property never to go out of that faculty
wherein it was produced.

To avoid these entanglings, and that we may no farther engage our selves in
the doubts of the schools, we must say that the image which is in the
imagination, in effect goes not out of it for the reasons we have discoursed;
but as in the presence of luminous bodies, light is shed through the air which
environs them; so when this image is formed in the imagination, it multiplies
in all the parts of the Soul, it enlights them and excites after them those
which are capable to be moved; Its even very likely that it is in effect a
refined and purified light, since the images of corporal things which strike
our eyes are nothing else but lights as we have showen in its place; and that
there is nothing more conformable to the mind then this quality which is as the
middle, or horizon of spiritual and corporal things; however it be, we ought
not to doubt but these images are as well multiplied as those of the body,
since they are more excellent, and that we have assured proofs of them in the
effects of the memory and the forming faculty, which ought necessarily to be
imbued with these images, to form parts conformable to the design which the
imagination often proposes contrary to its ordinary conduct.

But if it be true that these Ideas are only fit to represent things, and give
you the knowledge of them, how can they be useful to those faculties which know
nothing, as those are of which we have spoken? We must answer that there are
two kinds of knowledge, the one clear and distinct which belongs to the senses,
to the imagination, and to the understanding: the other obscure and confused,
which is in the appetite and in all the other powers, which have a natural
knowledge of their objects, and of what they are to do.

Its then true, that the image of good is in the imagination, as a light which
sheds its rays into the appetite, which inlightens, and afterward excites it
to move to unite it self thereunto: For although it be multiplied, and that the
appetite be full of the splendour it casts, it contents not it self with this
influence; it seeks to unite it self at the Center, and at the spring whence it
comes; as we may see it happens to iron, which having received the magnetic
virtue moves toward the Loadstone, which is the principle and source thereof,
that it may the more strictly unite it self thereunto.

So that its very likely, that to form the Passion of Love, the appetite
carries it self strait toward the Idea of good which is in the imagination,
and that this motion is like to that of all other natural things, which move
thus toward what is conformable to them.

But this breeds great difficulties; for though you may conceive this kind of
motion in the sensitive appetite, by reason that it is placed in an organ
different from that of the imagination, and that there is a space between both,
where we may fancy that this motion is made; this cannot take place in Love
which is formed in the superior part of the Soul, where the will is not
separate from the understanding, and toward which consequently it moves not it
self, since it is always naturally united to it; moreover I say, were the
sensitive appetite only in question, it is hard to comprehend how it could move
thus; for there is no likelihood that it should go out of its place and from
its organ to join with that of the imagination, since all its motions are
immanent actions; if likewise it do not go out, how should it unite it self to
this Idea which is in the imagination?

To resolve these difficulties, and answer these seeming urgent reasons, we are
to remember that the motions of the Soul, although they have conformity with
those of the body; yet are they not altogether like them, and if they
participate somewhat of their nature, yet have they none of their defects. For
they require not that succession of time, nor that change of place which is
always found in those, and which are necessary followers of the imperfections
of the matter: they are made in one moment and in one place, at least they do
not go out of that power where they are formed: for you must not think that
the appetite in drawing toward good or from evil quits its natural bounds, and
that it passes from one place to another like animated bodies. All these
agitations are made in it self; and as water which is shut up in a gulf may
move in several manners without issuing out; so this power which is as an
abyss in the soul, may be several ways agitated within its own bounds, and by
the different transport of its parts sometimes dash against its bounds,
sometimes retire toward its Center; in a word make all the motions which are
to be observed in the Passions. It is not then necessary that the will be
separate from the understanding, and that there be a space betwixt the two, to
cause the motion of which we speak agitating it self in it self, and driveing
its parts toward the Idea of good which is represented it by the
understanding; it unites it self to it as much as it can, and so canseth the
Passion of Love; it is just so with the sensitive appetite; for although its
principal organ be far from that of the imagination, we must not believe that
these two faculties are quite shut up in these parts, they disperse themselves
through the whole body and are always joined together, as we will more at
large show in the discourse of Joy. So that the motion which is there made is
like that of the will; and in the one and the other, Love is but a motion of
the appetite, which directly carries it self toward the Idea of good and
unites it thereunto, which is not effected in the rest of the Passions: as we
will make it appear.

You have now seen what Love is in general, whence its easy to observe its
differences, by the differences of those objects which may move it: for as
there are goods of the mind, of the body, and of fortune, and as every of them
is honest, useful or delightful: its certain that although the motions whereby
we Love all these things are of the same nature, and that in general they have
the same end, which is to unite the appetite to what is good; yet are they
different between themselves, because these goods are different; so there is a
Love of Riches, Pleasures, Honors, and Virtues; in a word, as many as there
are kinds of false or true goods, so many sorts of Love there are, of which we
have here no intention to speak, because the greatest part of those kinds are
comprehended in the virtues and the vices of which we shall treat hereafter;
And because we have restrained our selves to that Love which beauty breeds in
the appetite.

This Love may be defined a Motion of the appetite, by which the soul unites it
self to what seems fair unto it: So that all the diversity that there is
betwixt this definition, and that of Love in general, consists in beauty;
wherefore we have two things to examine. First what beauty is; in the second
place, why it causes Love; but because this search is extremely high and
difficult, and that it may break the connection of this discourse, we have
remitted it to the end of this Chapter, to speak of the effects which Love
causes in the humors and in the spirits.

PART. 3. What that Motion is which Love causes in the Spirits and in the
Humors.
SInce that the motions of the spirits and of the blood are in the Passions
conformable with those which the Soul feels in it self: There is no doubt but
that Love uniting the appetite to the Idea of the good which is represented to
it, produces also in the spirits a certain motion which seconds its design,
and renders this union the more forcible: but as the senses serves us but
little to know the difference of these motions, the understanding must supply
their defect, and must by discourse show us what this motion of the spirits is
which is the most uniting, since it is that which ought to accompany this
Passion, to which end you must suppose two things to be most true: The first
that the Heart is the chief organ of the sensitive appetite; The second that
the Brain is that of the imagination: now as the Idea of good is formed in the
imagination, and the motion of the spirits begins at the Heart, the soul must
of necessity having a design to unite them to the good it has conceived,
transport them from the place where they begin to move, toward that where they
are to meet this object: And because this first birth of Love is from the
inward union of the appetite whereof we have spoken; the first motion which the
spirits also suffer must drive them to the brain, where it seems this union
ought to be; for the Idea goes not out of the Faculty which produces it, as
has been showen; and forasmuch as the spirits carry with them heat and blood,
from thence it comes that the imagination of Lovers is heated, and afterward
brings forth so many fair productions, and sometimes too extravagancies, if the
motion and heat be too violent; we may say besides that the paleness which is
so common to them, partly comes from the transport of the spirits which are
within the brain, which forsaking the face, leave it without heat or splendour:
but if the beloved object be presented to the senses, then do the greatest part
of these spirits run to the outward parts coloring them with the blood they
draw along with them, and which is the purest of the veins as we will show you
anon. Its true there are Passions which mingle with this, and often cause a
contrary motion (to that whereof we have spoken) in the humors: But we shall
consider here only the effects proper to Love, and not those he borrows from
others; so that we may conclude, that the first effect of Love upon the
spirits, is, to send them out of the heart, and to transport them to the brain
and to the exterior parts.

But this is not enough, we ought to observe, whether in this motion they move
either with liberty or with constraint; that is to say, whether they dilate or
restrain themselves. For these seem to be the two first differences of local
motion: now as there are but two encounters which may oblige the soul to
restrain the spirits in their Motion; to wit when either she repels or flies
from what is ill; because in the one she has a care of fortifying her self, and
to that end to gather and reunite the spirits; and in the other the flight is
not made without a compression which precipitates and confounds them together;
its evident that there are none of these motions in this Passion, which
considering nothing but the goodness of its object, it sees no enemy which it
would assault, or that it ought to fear; so that it agitates the spirits with
liberty, it dilates them and seems to open them, the better to receive the
pretended good, and so the more perfectly to unite it thereunto.

Let Us go on and see whether this motion be unequal, and whether it be made
with that vehemence which happens in impetuous Passions. Its certain that anger
moves the spirits and the humors with more confusion and disorder then Love, by
reason of diverse and often endeavors which the mind is forced to make to
drive out the ill; and that it is like those Torrents whose waves precipitate
themselves one upon the other, and make a stream full of boylings and foamings;
but that Love makes the spirits and the blood slide in the veins, in the same
manner as water runs in the Channels of Fountains, or in Rivers, whose beds are
large and even; for Love which dilates the spirits, proportionably enlarges
the vessels, and so gives them the more liberty, it renders their course less
turbulent and confused. But the chief reason of this equality, is, because Love
has commonly no other Passions following it, which have contrary motions, as
anger which is always accompanied with grief, and which retires the spirits
toward the heart, at the same time when it drives them forth.

For although Joy, Desire, and Hope, which are almost always with Love,
diversely move the blood, yet they do not imprint motions quite opposite, as we
shall make it appear; so that it is not subject to that tumult, nor to that
unequal agitation which the contrarities cause in fluid bodies; but with what
violence soever it be driven, all its parts flow equally and without confusion;
and there is no doubt but that secret joy which Lovers feel without thinking
even of the beloved object, proceeds from some kind of motion whose impression
remains in the humors after the cessation of the minds agitation. For as Nature
loves order and equality in all her actions, when she sees the motion of the
blood conformable to her inclination, she is sensible of a certain joy whose
image or shadow presents it self to our minds, and disposes us to mirth
without knowing the cause; and I believe for the same reason, that if the
humors were always agitated with this flux, and reflux, which the opposite
Passions use to cause, there would not be a moment in Love exempt from grief
and perplexity; and that those excesses of joy would never be felt, which so
often happen, because that the soul cannot suffer contrary motions, but that
she must at the same time suffer some pain, and some kind of grief. But what
shall we say then when these turbulent Passions, as Anger, Fear, and Despair,
mingle with Love? ought it to give them place when they enter the mind and dye
when they spring forth, seeing its motion is contrary to theirs? truly I
believe, that the habit of Love remains still, but the Passion cease when
another destroys its motion, and principally if it be violent; and indeed a man
in anger or possessed with fear thinks not on the beloved object, and at the
least the thoughts he has of it, are stiffled by those of revenge or of the
danger he would shun. Its true that as these Passions enter instantly into the
mind, they commonly go out as readily, when at the same time the first
returns, the impression of the beloved object furnishing new Idea's which
awaken the appetite, and cause therein a new commotion, which is nothing
difficult to believe, if we consider that the appetite and the spirits are
agitated more easily then the air, And that their motion is in some manner like
that of lightning, which pierces the clouds in an instant, which follows
flash after flash, and leaves no trace of the way they made: And if these
Passions are weak, they may be well enough compatible with Love, but they
diminish its ardor; because the soul dividing it self to several objects,
cannot wholly give it self to what is lovely; and because the agitation which
this causes in the humors is hindered, by the flood of those others which
oppose its course.

Now let us see what this vehemence is, which accompanies this motion of the
spirits, and whether it be as great in this Passion as it is in anger, in fear,
and in the rest. For its certain there are some which naturally are not so
violent, as Hope, and Compassion, where there never is those extreme transports
which are to be observed in the rest. Now you must not think that Love is as
the two latter, and that it has the moderation they have; the sallies it
makes, and the tempests it raises are sometimes so great that it wracks the
mind; and the alteration which all the body suffers in those encounters is an
evident witness that the humors are moved with a great impetuosity; the
beginnings truly are sweet, and we may say they are like to those peaceable
winds which a weak heat raises, and which afterward change into whirlwindes
when it grows stronger; for as at the birth of this Passion the Idea of the
beloved object makes no great impression in the mind, being if we may so
speak, but lightly and superficially printed, so it also causes in the
appetite but a light emotion; but when it has insinuated it self into the
bottom of the mind, and has rendered it self master of the imagination, then
it puissantly raises all the moving faculties, and causes those great storms
which often make us lose both our reason and our health.

Yet will I not say when the soul is come to this excess, but that the appetite
and the spirits are continually agitated with this violence; I confess the
tempest is not always alike, that it often abates and even dissipates it self;
whether it be that the diverse designs this Passion inspires, divert the Soul
from its first and principal thoughts, or that all things which are in nature
cannot always last in one violent estate, and that the mind is weary to be
long stretched toward one object; whence it happens that the strongest
Passions at last become languishing and quiet themselves; and indeed those
great transports of which we speak, are never but when the beloved object
presents it self to the imagination with some powerful charms, as it happens
in the first thoughts it has of it, or when unawares it presents it self to
the sense, or when the mind figures new perfections in it, and forms new
designs to compass the possession thereof; for then the Soul being surprised
with this lovely Novelty is shaken all at once, and drives the Spirits like a
great billow which ought to transport it to its offered good.

But what if Love moves the spirits thus, it must needs produce the same
effects as joy does; and that its violence must quench the heat of the entrails
and cause fainting and syncopes as this does; it seems that even necessarily
these accidents must be in it, since these two passions have the same object,
that they are but little separate and that they have a growth alike; for where
Love is, extreme joy ought also to be so: and yet none of those symptoms
whereof we have spoken have been observed to be in Love: at least if any such
like thing has happened to Lovers, the excess of those two Passions never was
the cause; but it must have been Grief, Despair, and the like; how comes it to
pass then that the Love of beauty produces not the same effects as Joy does,
or that Joy causes not the same accidents in this Passion, which it often
causes alone?

To discover this secret, you must first suppose that these disorders seldom
happen, that they have been observeable only in old men and women; and that the
joy which moved them was caused either by the gain of some unhoped for victory,
or by the encounter of some very ridiculous object, or by the discovery of some
great secret in learning, which are joys which only belong to the mind: In
effect, as spiritual things have that beyond corporal, that they are more noble
and that they enter into the soul wholly without separating themselves; the
possession ought also to be more perfect and the joy the more ravishing: so
that it is likely, that the syncopes which are the effects of all violent
Passions follow those spiritual joys as the greatest and most powerful; and
that they rather happen to weak natures, then to those which are stronger and
more capable of resistance: the soul then finding herself surprised at first
sight with these objects, and agitating with precipitation to unite her self to
them; the spirits which follow those motions issue from the heart, and dart
themselves with so much violence to the superior parts, that they lose the
union they had with their principle in the same manner as water divides it
self, being driven with too much impetuosity; and because the heat ought
continually to inspire the parts with its virtue; and that the spirits only can
communicate it when they come to disunite themselves from it; these influences
must then stop, and the sensitive and vital actions which depend upon them,
must also cease till their reunion: And because the soul is then quite ravished
in the enjoyment of that good which she esteems so excellent, she cannot mind
to remedy that interruption which is made in the spirits, nor to bring back
those which are scattered, or to send others to fill those empty places they
left. So that these faintings often last long, and sometimes cause death; heat
being quite perished, and nature not having strength enough to repair its loss,
nor to recover its first estate.

But this disorder cannot happen in the Love whereof we speak; for that
corporal beauty is never wholly possessed, and that there is still somewhat which
entertaines Desire, Hope, and Fear: So that the soul dividing it self to
several designs, and suffering it self not to be so powerfully transported as
she does in the enjoyment of spiritual goods, the spirits throw themselves not
with so much precipitation nor impetuosity, and are not so subject to the
division which they sometimes suffer in Joy; and which is the cause of those
syncopes of which we have spoken. We shall touch upon this matter again in
other places; let us now consider what heat it is which this Passion raises,
and what humors it particularly moves: Its certain that Love, Joy, and Desire,
disperse through all the body a moist and pleasing heat, for as much as the
spirits in those Passions stir the most temperate humors whose vapors are sweet
and humid; but these humors are sooner moved then others; because that the
spirits which have a great likeness with the purest and most subtle parts of
the blood, as being those whence they draw their origin, ought to mingle and
unite with them more easily then with those which are grosser and farther from
its nature; and therefore we must not doubt but when they are agitated they
first of al draw along with them those parts of the blood whereto they are more
strongly tied, and which being the most subtle, are also the more easy to be
moved: Besides that the soul to whom the humors serve as instruments to arrive
at the end she proposes, employs both the one and the other according as they
have qualities sit to execute what she wills; whence it is that amongst
venomous beasts it moves the venom in anger, and in all the rest it moves
phlegm and melancholy, because they are the malignant humors which may destroy
the ill she assaults: so that there being no enemies to combat in the Passion
of which we speak, it ought not to move any other humors but those which are
conformable to the good she would enjoy; So that there is only the sweetest and
purest blood which commonly moves in Love, and causes that sweet and vaporous
heat which disperseth it self through the whole body.

PART. 4. What the causes are of the Characters of LOVE.
BUt its time to come to the point we proposed; from these principles we have
established, we must draw the causes of the Characters of this Passion; let us
first therefore examine moral actions.

There being no Passion which produces so many different actions, or causes
so many extravagancies as this, it would prove a troublesome thing to enquire
into them all, and besides unprofitable, since the greatest part of them
proceed from other Passions which accompany it, of which we are particularly to
speak; for which cause we will only touch here the principal; which in my
opinion are, The continual thought a Lover has of the beloved Object, The high
esteem he values it at, The means he imploys to possess it, And the
extravagancy of the words he makes use of to discover his passion; for there
are few actions in Love which may not be reduced to some of these four.

For the first, although it be a thing common to all the Passions powerfully to
possess the mind, and to keep it fixed on the object which entertains them;
yet there are none who do it more powerfully or longer then Love. For either
they are impetuous or turbulent, or else they are pliable and docile; the first
are presently dissipated, and the others are to be appeased or diverted by the
power of discourse, nay even by other Passions. So the angry ones sweeten
themselves by pleasure, and the delightful diminish by affliction; and all of
them may change into others more strong, if more powerful objects then those
which have raised them present themselves; for a great grief makes us forget a
less, and an excess of joy takes away a mean one: But with Love it is nothing
so; it has the propriety to be vehement and long lasting, not to hearken to
reason, and can seldom be changed or diminished by the force of what Passion
soever; forasmuch as the imagination is so wounded, that it fancies there is no
greater good to be possessed, and which can afford it more contentment then its
beloved object; so that there is no other, how excellent so ever it be, that
can divert its inclination and draw it to it, because the soul never leaves a
greater good to seek a less; it is in the same manner with displeasure; for if
we are beloved, there is no pain nor grief which vanishes not by the
contentment which we receive thereby; and if we are not, as the soul knows no
greater ill then that, all others are too weak to dispossess that thought; for
which cause it continually considers the good whereof its deprived, it
uncessantly desires it, and seeks in the possession thereof the only remedy
which may cure all its displeasures. But the first origin of all its effects
is the powerful impression which beauty makes in the mind; so that in making
it appear how the objects of other Passions cannot make it so strong and deep,
it will also be manifest why its of a longer continuance, and why it keeps the
mind more intent then any of the rest.

Its a certain truth that there is a secret knowledge in us of those things
which serve for our preservation; and its likely that this knowledge is gotten
by means of some Idea's which nature has imprinted in the bottom of the Soul,
which being as it were hid and buried in its abysses, excite and stir up
themselves at the coming of those which the senses present, and so beget in the
appetite Love, or Hate, Desire or Aversion. Now as there are but two things
which serve to preserve us, the seeking of good, and the flying from evil; its
evident nature inclines rather to seek good then to shun ill; and as there are
also goods, which are more excellent and profitable then others, she has a
greater care of those of higher, then of these of a lower value; and she forms
a more exact Idea, and makes a stronger and more profoud impression of them;
which being granted, you cannot doubt the preservation of the species being a
more general and more excellent good then all others which respect only a
particular good, but that it has obliged nature to give the soul a more
efficacious knowledge, and a more ardent desire of that then of any other thing
whatsoever; and but that consequently she has powerfully imprinted the Idea of
beauty, since its the mark which makes that good known, and that charm which
excites the soul to its possession: so that exterior beauty entering the
imagination, and meeting that general Idea which nature has graven therein,
unites it self, therewith awakens and excites that secret and powerful desire
which accompanies it, and applies it to the object it represents unto it;
thence is that strong attention which fixes a Lovers mind on the person of
the beloved, and which causes in him after the Love of silence and solitude
the disgust of all other divertisements which were most delightful to him, and
all those visions which a solitary life inspires in a soul agitated with Hope
and Fear; in a word, wounded by the cruellest of all the Passions.

We are now to enquire the source of that high esteem which we make of the
beloved object; for from thence issue all the respects, the submissions, the
services, and the greatest part of the dialect which Lovers use: and truly its
a strange thing and almost incredible, were it not daily observed, to see Kings
submit their crowns and their power to the beauty of a slave; the wisest men to
adore a vicious person, and the most courageous to subject themselves to base
and feeble minds worthy of nothing but contempt; whence can that powerful
spell proceed which makes us lose the knowledge of what we are, and of what we
love, and makes us have so ill an opinion of our selves, and so advantageous a
thought of what we love? we need not doubt but the imagination is the chief
cause of this error: As it has the power to enlarge the images it receives,
and to cloth them in the new fantasmes which disguise the things and make them
appear quite otherwise then they are; it sets on the image of that beauty which
is represented unto it, what it uses to do in dreams, or on a light Idea which
it has from the humor which is agitated, it forms a hundred several
Chimaera's, which have a conformity with that humor; for the imagination
receiving the image of the beloved object, forms it self on the model of that
general Idea of beauty which nature has imprinted in it, adorning it with the
same graces she confounds it therewith, and so makes the beloved person appear
more perfect then in effect it is; and we may further say, that herein it
happens as in the sickness of the mind, where the particular error which
disorders it changes and corrupts all the thoughts which have any relation to
it, those who are at distance from it remaining still enough reasonable;
forasmuch as a Lover may preserve his judgment free in those things which do
not concern the person beloved; but as soon as that is interested he becomes a
slave to his passion, and judges of things according to that pleasing error
which it has inspired into him; in effect, its a wonder that a deformed face,
and which we should have judged such, should presently appear full of
attractives, as if the imagination had painted it, or at least had blotted out
all its defects: But the paint or the perfection it gives comes from that Idea
wherewith its filled, and which nature has affoorded to oblige it to enquire
the greatest good which can happen to it.

However it be, the soul being abused in the judgment it made of beauty, and
taking it for a most excellent good, whose possession ought to render it more
perfect, wholly submits to it, and considers it no otherwise then as a Queen
who is to command it. For good has that property that it communicates it self
with Empire, and renders it self master of those that receive it; forasmuch as
it is a perfection which is in stead of act and form, as the thing which
receives it is in stead of power and matter. Now its a certain maxim that the
form renders it self master of the matter, otherwise it could not receive
perfection.

And consequently beauty must have that predominant quality that the soul which
is touched with it must subject herself to its Empire; thence follows all
those submissions and respects, all those terms of servitude and of captivity
which are so common with Lovers; whence its easy to draw the reasons of the
principle we have established; let us now examine the means Love has invented
to possess the good it tends to.

Although Love may subsist in the only union which the appetite makes with the
Idea of the beloved object; we may further say, that this union and this Love
are not perfect; Love stays not there, but always seeks really to unite it
self, but by the communication of thoughts, and by the actual presence which
the senses require, the soul in a manner going out of her self by speech, and
the senses serving for channels by which the objects flow into the imagination;
so that the soul believes that by means of discourse she strongly unites her
self to the beloved person, and that it unites it self to the soul by means of
the senses: Whence it comes that Lovers wish they may continually see, hear,
and entertain those they love; even the kiss wherein they place their highest
felicities, has no other end but to unite their soul to the beloved object.

So that only those parts by which it seems most to communicate it self, give
and receive it; as the mouth because its the door of the thoughts, the eyes
because they are the channels through which the Passions issue out, and the
hands because they are the principal organs of its actions: But amongst all the
means which nature has taught us to attain to this perfect union, there is
none more considerable then reciprocal Love; because union supposing two
things, the Lover, and the Object, to render it accomplished, both the one and
the other must really unite. Now if the beloved object is capable of loving, it
can no otherways unite it self but by Love, forasmuch as the soul unites it
self with things which are without it, only by that Passion: wherefore the
first care of a Lover, is to make himself beloved, and to that end to render
himself grateful; whence it happens consequently that he accommodates himself
to the inclinations of the person beloved, that he changes his humor, his
manner of living, that he grows liberal, courteous, neat, and in a word that he
does all what he thinks may make him be beloved.

We are now to enquire the cause of that extravagant manner of speaking which
is so particular to Lovers: In general we may say, that the soul in that
Passion carrying it self out of its self, carries also other things beyond what
they are, and forms thoughts of them beyond the natural expression they should
have; whence it is that the good and ill it conceives is always in excess; and
if the nature of the thing cannot suffer it, it burdens it with some strange
Idea to increase the meaning thereof, and so builds those bold Metaphors which
give to the beloved object the title of the fairest and the noblest things in
the world, which of a gentle heat cause a burning fire, of a mean disquiet a
torment and a punishment, of a little submission which beauty requires a
captivity, prisons, and chains, and so of the rest; whereunto the error of the
imagination contributes very much, which being wholly filled with that violent
instinct which it has from beauty, believes that there is no greater good, nor
heavier ill then it expects from Love; so that it always represents them in
extremes, and consequently uses more extravagant terms then in any other
Passion, considering also that Lovers who commonly employ in their
entertainments but very few thoughts, and who are never weary to repeat them,
are obliged to diversify the terms that they may be the less tedious; which
they cannot do but by many Metaphors, which at last become extravagant, being
to seek to find out reasonable ones enough, for the variety they endeavor.

Besides these general reasons, there are yet particular ones for some words,
which are always in the mouths of those that love; and when they call the
beloved person Their Heart, Their Soul, and Their Life; when they call them
Ungrateful, Homicides, and Cruel, and when they so often say, They dye for
Love: for although all these kinds of expressions seem extravagant, yet they
come from a principle which in some sort renders them true; forasumch as Love
keeping the Soul always stretched toward the beloved object, and transporting
it out of it self to unite it thereto, separates it also morally from the
subject it animates, and in effect takes away from it the remembrance and the
cause of all that belongs to it: So that in that respect we may say, that it
lives no more in him nor for him, being wholly in the beloved person; that a
Lover has reason to call her his Heart, and his Soul, since his desires and
thoughts which are the noblest parts of his life, are alone in her, and that
its true that he dies, nay even that he is dead, since that he no longer lives
in himself. Now as there is but reciprocal Love only which can make them live
again; forasmuch as then the beloved person transforms herself in him, and
communicates to him both soul and life; if he be unhappy to so high a degree
that he cannot be loved, it seems that he has cause to call her Ungrateful,
Cruel, and Murtheress; since giving himself wholly to her alone, she is obliged
to acknowledge so high a liberality, and in separating his soul from him she
kills him; and it is a cruelty to let him dye whose life she may save. Its
true, that to speak really, we may say that there is but a very light shadow of
truth in all these words, that the soul operates here as in a dream, and that
Platonic Philosophy which approved these visions kept intelligence with this
Passion, or would consolate Lovers in the miseries they suffered; let us leave
her employed on so fair a design, and seek the causes of the corporal
Characters which we have described.

But we will not here examine whence that great diversity comes which appears
in this Passion, which makes it in some either sportful or pensive, in others
peaceable or turbulent; and in a word, perhaps two persons have never been
found, in whom it has bin altogether alike; for its evident that it comes from
the diverse inclinations which the temperature or custom has introduced into
the soul, which draw the Passions to the bend they take, and makes them follow
the same course which they are accustomed to; the mixture of other Passions
also contribute thereunto, it being impossible that Love should be frolic when
its accompanied with Grief or Anger, or that it should be severe when Hope or
Joy are of the party: But all these diversities are easy to be comprehended;
let us now to our principal design.

To follow the Method we have established, we are here to place two kinds of
these Characters; some of which are done for some certain end, others which
happen by a pure necessity; the first are made by the souls command, who
judges them fit to execute her passion, although they are often unprofitable
as we have said, the other are purely natural, and are made without design
being only effects which by a necessary consequence come from the trouble and
the agitation which is inwardly made.

Those of the first rank, are the motions of the eyes and forehead, the
faultring of the tongue, the sweetning and several falls of the voice,
laughter, and the behavior of the body; All the rest are purely natural; as
for the Motion of the eyes there are so many several kinds of it, that its
almost impossible to observe them: For as all the Passions may spring from
Love, and suffer also with it, and every of them causing the eyes to move
diversely; It also happens that all their motions meet there: So that pleasure
makes them sparkle, Desire advances them forward, Grief casts them down, Fear
renders them unquiet, Respect inclines them, Despite kindles them, and so of
the rest; whose causes we will deduce in the discourse of every Passion; all
what we can herein do, is to enquire which are the Amorous eyes and looks, and
what obliges the Soul to use them by reason of the great difficulty there is
both in the one and the other.

For the first, there are some who believe that amorous eyes are those whose
looks are quick and nimble, and which in a moment are cast about on every side;
forasmuch as Aristotle speaking of lascivious eyes which he calls (...), some
Translators have rendered Insanos, which are properly those wild eyes which are
in perpetual motion; But besides that they have not met with the sense of
Aristotle, and that he would have intimated those which he calls Devorantes, of
which we are going to speak; its certain that those wild eyes do not become
Love, and are more proper for Anger, Disquiet, and the Lightness of the mind
then for this Passion; Others think them to be those whose balls lift up
themselves up on high, and half hide themselves under their lids, which are the
dying eyes, because those who die commonly have them so, as Aristotle has
observed in his Problems, where he adds, that it also happens in some actions
of Love: But at that time the soul has no design to cause that motion and
it is purely a natural effect which follows the excess of pleasure, as we will
say in its due place; for otherwise those kind of looks are marks of Grief and
Langour; we might even also say, that they are those urgent looks by which the
eyes seem to throw themselves on their objects, and as if they would as they
say devour them, which the Latins so happily name Instantes, Procaces,
Devorantes, but we have already said that they were bred from desire, and not
from Love.

For my part, I believe that the eyes in question, are those which the Latins
call Paetos, and which for the same reason they have given to Venus; for they
are smiling, and send forth their looks as it were by stealth, the lids sweetly
inclining and half shutting themselves. In effect, there are none which have so
much correspondency with the nature of Love as these have; forasmuch as in one
look they make known all the principal motions which are to be found in this
Passion: for we have made it appear, that Love chiefly consisted in the
interior union of the appetite with the beloved object; That pleasure always
accompanied it, That Beauty inspired submission and respect; That to Love was
nothing but to dye, and that if a Lover possess not the beloved person, Desire
incessantly solicited him: Now the look whereof we have spoken makes all these
motions appear; for laughter is an effect of joy; respect and submission
inclines the lids; the ball which sweetly turns toward the beloved object is a
sign of that amorous languor whereof the soul is sensible; and the looks it
darts on it, witness the Desire which provokes it: In fine although the eyes
half shut themselves, laughter contracting the muscles of the lids, yet we may
say, that they shut themselves so, as if the soul would retain the image it
newly received the more attentively to consider it and even that it would quite
shut them up, had it not a new one which every moment presented it self, and
which it would not lose, but which obliges it so to divide its cares, as it
often does, between Fear and Anger, where it seems as if at the same time it
would see and not see the ill, which it either flees or disdains.

The Forehead in love is always clear and laughing, and seems as if it opened
and extended it self, which is a mark of Flattery: so that the Dog, which is a
flattering creature, has his always so, when he caresseth any one, as
Aristotle will have it. Now the word Flattery signifies nothing else here, but
complacencie and dearness, and not that vice which is the pest of the Court,
and of Friendship. You need not then wonder if Love, being complacent and
flattering, disposes thus the forehead. But the first cause of this effect, is
the Joy which accompanies all these Passions; whose property it is, to render
the countenance open, calm, and smiling, as in its place we will declare.

Let us pass to another effect, the cause whereof is extremely hid; 't is the
Motion of the Tongue, which often trembles between the lips, and seems even to
tickle them. Now this happens in a great excess of Love; whether it be, that
the ardor which this Passion kindles, dries the lips, and obliges the Soul to
moisten them; or that the Spirits, which sparkle everywhere, cause the same
agitation in that part, which appears in all the rest of those which are very
moveable: or, lastly, whether it comes from the vehemence of the Desire: for
the same effect often happens to those who see another eat what they ardently
desire: And it seems also more befitting the appetite for meat, then any other
desire whatsoever, as well as that humidity which comes in ones mouth, as shall
be said; because the motion of the tongue, and the humor in which it moistens
it self, serves to raste the aliments, and to convey them into the stomach. But
as the Soul has no distinct knowledge of what it does, and the violence of
Passion troubles and distracts it, it also happens that it employs the means
necessary for one design, in another where they are useless; and so does in
the desire of Beauty, what it ought only to do in that of Aliments.

The sweetning of the voice signifies the respect and submission of a Lover:
and although it be a necessary effect of Fear, which, straitning the passages,
and rendering the motion of the Lungs more loose, makes the voice soft, sweet,
and languishing, even very often without any such necessity; the soul has a
design to form it so, to witness its modesty and respect; knowing, that a
strong and vehement voice is an effect of Boldness; and that that which is rude
and sharp, follows a harsh humor; which are qualities incompatible with Love,
and which a Lover must hide, if Nature or Custom have given him them.

As for what concerns all the inflexions of the voice, they proceed from the
several motions which agitate the Soul; whether it be that admiration ravish
it, or grief oppress it; whether desire transport it, or that some difficulties
oppose its contentment: forasmuch as in all these encounters it burdens the
voice with particular accents, sometimes raising it with exclamations,
sometimes letting it fall with languishings; sometimes cutting it short, and
sometimes drawing it out, according to the nature of the Passions it suffers.

Laughter, being an effect of Joy, is to be examined in that Passion, where we
will at large speak of its nature, and of its causes. So that we have nothing
but the Gesture and the Behavior which seem to detain us. But, if you observe
it, there is none particular to love; and that which is there observable, and
is so changeable, follows the several Passions which accompany this: for,
sometimes Respect renders him modest, Joy and Fear disquiet him, and Sorrow
casts him down, and makes him languish; sometimes a Lover is in the posture of
a suppliant, or a contented, or of a desperate man; sometimes he walks fast,
slow, or stands still, according as Desire, Astonishment or Grief possess him.
So that all his motions going with the spring of other Passions, we are not
here obliged to their examen; but we must remit it to the discourse we will
make of every one in particular. Now let us to that of those Characters which
are purely natural and necessary, and wherein it seems the Soul has no share.

The eyes are sparkling in Love, by reason of the quantity of spirits which
fly thither: for it is not to be doubted, but that from them it is, that that
resplendent vivacity comes, which is so visible in them, since they lose it
when they retire or disperse themselves; as it happens to those who are possessed
with fear, or who die. But what adds to augment this luster weh appears in the
eyes, it is, that the Membrane which in virons them, being swelled and extended
by the confluence of those vapors and spirits, becomes more smoothe, and
consequently more shining; and that there is still over it a certain humidity,
where light resplends and sparkles.

But whence proceeds this Humidity? Is it not that the heat and agitation which
the spirits cause in the brain, liquifies and makes the humors flow over the
eyes? for even Tears are so caused in Joy: Or rather, that those subtle vapors
of blood, which the Soul drives with impetuosity, fly out, and presently
thicken, by reason of the coldness of the air, and of the Membranes. And
indeed, here the eyes are hollow and sunk, though they still seem great and
humid; which would not be, if this humidity came from the humors which fall
from the brain; for they would fill the parts which are all about the eye, and
would keep it lifted up: And therefore this humidity must come from within, and
the muscles and fleshie parts which inviron it must shrink: for as their
substance is soft, and is made of a very subtle blood, it falls and dissolves
presently; whence it happens, that the eye sinks: but its body remains still
full, moist, and sparkling, by reason of the vapors and spirits which
incessantly gather there: Unless it be at last, when the long continuance of
the Malady, Grief, and Despair, have quenched the natural heat, which makes the
eyes lose their splendour and vivacity, and become obscure, dry, and set; as we
will show in the Chapter of Grief, where we will also give a reason for Tears
which are so common to Lovers.

The redness which love so often makes appear on the forehead, has a cause to
be discovered, of no small difficulty: For although it be easy to say, that
the blood rises into the face in all those Passions wherein the soul drives
out the spirits, yet there are those which carry it rather to one place then to
another: The redness which Choler excites, begins by the eyes; that of Shame,
by the extremities of the cheeks and ears; and that of Love, by the forehead.
And it is from this diversity, that the cause of this effect is most difficult
to be found out. Yet I think that we may say, for what concerns Anger, that the
eyes being the first wherein the Passions appear, are also the first sensible
of the motions of the Spirits. Now as the blood boils in Anger, and as the
Tempest which agitates it drives it with disorder and confusion to the
exterior parts, thence it comes that the spirits which run to the eyes draw
along with it the waves of this agitated blood, which swells their veins, and
makes them appear red, in stead that in other Passions they carry with them the
purest and most subtle parts of the blood, which cannot cause this effect. And
it is therefore true, that Anger causes redness to arise in the face sooner
then any other Passion, and that it begins to discover it in the eyes, because
the blood follows the spirits, which gather in that place rather then in any
other. As for Shame, you must know, that the Soul, which is moved therewith, at
the same time forms a design both to resist and flee the ill; and we may say,
that, fleeing, she assaults it; for which cause, it forces the blood to the
face to drive it away; but Fear at the same time makes it retire back; whence
it happens, that the extremities of the cheeks and ears grow red, as in its
place shall be more amply discoursed. Let us now examine the redness which Love
brings into the Forehead. Should it not proceed from Joy, wherein the spirits,
after having united themselves to the good which the soul conceives, overflow
the neighboring parts? For, if it be so, the forehead must first resent it. Or
else the Imagination being placed in the forepart of the brain, that part is
heated by the continual agitation of the spirits, and, after its alteration,
communicates it to the forehead, wherewith, as Physic teaches, it has a
great sympathy. And indeed, since paleness which appears in the rest of the
face, happens often from the transport of spirits into the brain, its very
likely, either that there is a reflux made on the nearest parts, or that they
are sensible of the heat which they there cause: whence it happens, that they
are less pale and wan then the rest. Now although this redness be particular to
Love, that of other Passions forbears not to encounter therewith; and it may
happen, that a Lover may blush for Shame, for Anger, for Joy, or Desire,
according as those Passions mix themselves with this; but this is no place to
speak of them.

The lips are often red and moist by the arrival of the vaporous blood which
sheds it self in the face, and which so easily colors those parts, by reason
of their softness and the delicacy of their skin; and this chiefly happens at
the beginning of those motions which are so frequent in this passion; for at
last those parts grow dry and pale, whether the heat consume the sweetest and
most subtle parts of the blood, or that the spirits in their retreat carry them
back again inwardly, and so leave paleness and dryness on the lips.

But whence chances it that the under lip sometimes trembles; you must not
believe it an effect of Fear or of Anger, since it happens in the highest heat
of Love; its then very likely that the spirits which the Desire drives in a
crowd, sparkle in those places, and cause that part which is very moveable, and
without that support which the rest have, to shake, and it is in that encounter
that it sometimes grows white with a subtle foam, the humidity which rises in
the mouth, and which sheds it self on the lips being agitated by these spirits.

The tongue faulters, because that the soul which is distracted with Passion
thinks not upon the words it is to form, and retires the spirits which should
serve for that action to those places where she is employed; whence it happens
that the tongue stops or loosly moves it self, and that infirmity loses the
speech, or if we do speak, it is with pain and stammering, whereto the quantity
of humors also contributes, which through Desire fill the mouth; for it hinders
that the tongue cannot so easily turn it self, and that it strikes not the
voice clearly; Besides the distraction we now speak of, is also a cause that
Lovers hear not half what others say, and that their discourse is commonly
confused and extravagant: Even the sighs whch every moment cut one another, owe
their first original to that great attention of spirit which diverts the soul,
and makes it lose the remembrance of the most necessary actions of life; for
sending not spirits enough to cause respiration, the lungs beat but slowly, and
the heart draws not that help which is expected from their service; forasmuch
as they furnish not it sufficiently with air to temper that fire which this
Passion kindles, and that they discharge it not often enough of those fumes and
vapors which the agitation of the humors raises there: Now after this disorder
has continued some time, and that at last it might ruin all the natural
ceonomy, the soul being urged by necessity awakes again, and seeks to supply
its defect by these great and extraordinary respirations; and indeed sighs are
principally begot at the issue out of some thought which has forcibly detained
the mind, and not whilst it was employed therein.

The face grows pale, whether it be that the spirits retire within the brain as
we have already said, or because that in the progress of this Passion the
stomach grows weak and the blood changes; for since that the diversion of the
spirits diverts also the heat and virtue which ought to pass into the stomach
to cause digestion, you must not wonder if it become languishing, if the
aliments change into crudities, and if the blood it makes be impure, since that
the last concoction corrects not the defects of the former.

But what helps forward this disorder, is the continual ardor which this
Passion kindles in the blood, and the several agitations which Fear, Grief, and
Anger, at every moment excite; for that dissipates the spirits and makes the
faculties become languishing, and the humors inflame and corrupt themselves,
which at last grows to that Erotick sickness which the Physicians place in the
rank of folly and fury. The blood being then in this condition retains no more
nether its virtue nor its natural color; It becomes useless to the nourishment
of the parts and no longer communicates that pleasing vermillion which formerly
it bestowed upon them, and so they must needs become pale, lean, and withered.

By the same reason the appetite is lost, because that the beloved object
occupying all the thoughts of the Soul, takes away its care of all the
functions of Life; the spirits being also diverted no longer bear into the
stomach that sentiment which causes the appetite: In fine, the disorder which
is in the humors, and in all the natural parts, hinders this from performing
its function.

Sleep being the rest of common sense, and of the spirits, seldom happens in
violent Passions, detaining the Soul and the body in a continual agitation; but
Love endures it less then the rest, because that besides the tempest it
raises, it at last corrupts the blood, whose vapors are sharp, and which
consequently want that sweet humidity which Iulleth the Senses.

Its true, that langour and weariness sometimes procure it, because the soul
knows that life cannot subsist without it, and that after so great a
dissipation of spirits its necessary to repair them, to which end it gathers
them together and stays them; For although this moist vapor which commonly
provokes sleep happen not here, as we said but now, yet must we not believe
that sleep can come by no other means; it has two ordinary and natural causes;
the vapor which stops the passage of the spirits, and the soul which binds and
stays them; now here being no vapor to produce this effect, necessity obliges
the soul to labor it alone of her self.

But this sleep is interrupted with dreams which continually agitate the mind;
forasmuch as the imagination which in that condition loses not the liberty of
working, and being full of those images which Passion suggests, turns over
continually, confounds and augments them, so that they always present to it
things greater then in effect they are, and afterward form in the appetite
more powerful motions then the true objects would do.

The remembrance or the unexpected arrival of the beloved party swells the heart
and the pulse, because the soul dilates the organs to receive the good, and to
send forth spirits to its encounter; a great difficulty upon this occasion is
proposed, to wit, whether Love have a kind of pulse proper to it alone? for
that some have vaunted the discovery of this Passion by the beating of the
arteries: But without stopping at the contests which are formed hereupon, we
will boldly say that there is no more reason to give one which is proper to
Anger, and to Grief, then to Love. That the heart can no less resent the motion
which this Passion causes in the appetite then it can that which the others
excite; and that the organs moving conformably to the intention of the mind,
this part must be otherwise agitated in Love then in other passions, since it
has a diffent design from what the others have. Its true, its hard exactly to
discover this difference, because men have made no just observation thereof,
and perhaps it is impossible to make it; for that the heart is shut up in the
Center of the Body, and that it suffers motions, which it communicates not with
the arteries; yet amongst such kinds of pulses as have been observed, we may
yet find some one which particularly belongs to Love. To understand this, you
must know that the heart has many motions which are common to several
Passions; for it dilates it self in Joy, in Hope, and in Anger; and contracts
it self in Grief, and in Fear, and in Despair; in some it goes quick and with
violence, in others slow and languishing, and its certain these general
differences cannot all alone mark those which are proper to every Passion; but
as Physic teaches us that there are twenty kinds of simple pulses, and that
they may diversely mix the one with the other, every Passion may find in this
great variety, that kind which is proper to it: thus the pulse of Anger is not
only great and lifted up, or quick, or frequent, or vehement, but it is
composed of all these differences: That of Fear is quick, hard, unequal, and
irregular; That of Joy is great, rare and slow; That of Grief is weak little
slow and rare; and as they say, these are the kinds of pulses which are proper
to these Passions, we may also observe in the same manner one proper to Love;
and indeed therein the beating of the arteries is great, large, unequal, and
irregular; it is great and large, because the heart opens to receive the good
which presents it self as was before said; it is unequal and irregular, by
reason of the several Passions with which this is continually traversed; for as
we do not here speak of that simple and imperfect Love which is yet but in the
soul; but of that which is complete and finished and which has already made
impressions on the body; it is impossible but Desire, and Fear, Joy, and Grief,
should at every moment confound themselves with it, whence consequently happens
the unequal motion of the heart and of the arteries; and this is chiefly to be
observed at the remembrance or unexpected arrival of the beloved person.

For after this first elevation which is made at this encounter, it changes a
hundred ways; it appears little and languishing, and immediately returns to
its first vehemence; from swift and light, it becomes slow and heavy, and all
at once it reassumes its first quickness, which it loses again in an instant,
and passes thus from one difference to another, without order and without
proportion.

There are but very few Characters which remain to be examined, whose causes
are not very evident; For the disquiet comes from the diverse agitations which
the soul feels; the shiverings and the ardors follow the flowing and ebbing of
the Spirits; forasmuch as Fear and Grief, which retire them within, take away
from the exterior parts the heat they had, even as Joy and Hope restore and
augment it, and as Boldness and Anger gather the spirits together, strength
also increases, as it diminishes when Joy dissipates, or Grief stiffles them:
There remains no more difficulties to be found but in the Syncopes and
Ecstasies which sometimes happen to Lovers; but we have already showed that Love
could not alone cause Syncopes nor faintings, but that it must be Grief,
Despair, or Joy.

For the Ecstasy its true it may proceed from Love, yet we must observe that
the word has diverse significations; the Physicians often take it for an
extreme alienation of the spirit, such as those have who are frantic or mad;
sometimes for that strange disease which they call Catoche, which all at once
takes away the use of sense and motion, and keeps the body stiff in the same
posture in which it surprised it; there are some who believe that the true
Ecstasy is made when the soul does no action in the body, whether it dwell
there, or that indeed it issue forth for a time; as it happens in those which
are possessed, and in those who are ravished by the spirit of God; but that
whereof we speak is nothing else but a certain ravishment of the soul, which
takes from the body the use of exterior sense and motion, the imagination and
the understanding not forbearing to operate, which happens by a strong
attention which binds the soul to the beloved object, which makes it lose the
care of all animal functions, and which employing all the spirits in that
thought, hinders them from flowing to the organs of sense and motion; and this
ravishment may sometimes Pass to such an excess that the vital faculties may
receive no more influence from the soul, so that respiration will cease, and
that there will be onley natural virtue to sustain life.

PART. 5. Of the nature of Beauty in general; and why it begets LOVE.
ALthough the Senses were given to the Mind, to help it to know things, yet it
seems that those things which are the most sensible, are the least known: And I
know not whether it be a grace, or an artifice of Nature, to bring those things
nearest our Senses, which ought to be furthest from our Minds; and, by that
exterior knowledge, to recompense the little progress we might make in that
which was true and essential. However it be, its most evident, that we are
sensible of nothing in the world more then of Beauty, nor nothing is more
difficult to be known: the greatest men, who have been most sensible of its
effects, were ignorant of the Causes thereof; and we may say, that it has made
them lose their Reason, when they were but touched with it, and would have
discoursed of it: For, some have said that it was a just proportion of the
parts; others, that it was the form of things; in fine, that it was the
splendour and glittering of Goodness it self: But this last definition is
equivocal, and metaphorical; and the other cannot be applied but to the Divine
beauty, which is the source and model of all Beauties; forasmuch as in the
Unity and infinite Simplicity of God, there can be no proportion or form.

That we may therefore steer a more certain course then what hitherto has been
followed, and that we may not wander in so vast and difficult a matter; we must
consider, that things are not esteemed fair, but as they fall under a very
distinct and exact knowledge: So that there are only the objects of the
Understanding, and of Seeing, and of Hearing, to which we allow Beauty; because
that all the Knowing faculties are those which most perfectly judge of their
objects, and are the least mistaken in them: And these same objects which we
judge Fair, are also esteemed Good: for we do not only say, A fair mind, a
fair speech, or a fair color, but they may be also called good. But the
objects of the other Senses, and all the other powers, may only be styled
Good, and can never deserve the title of Fair: for, it were a ridiculous thing
to say, that heat or humidity, sweetness or bitterness were fair: Whence we
must necessarily conclude, that all what is Good, is not Fair; but all that is
Fair, is good; and therefore, that Fair is a species of Good. Now as Good is
not good, but as it is agreeable; the Fair, since it is good, must be agreeable
to something; and therefore if what is fair serve but for an object only to
the knowing faculties, we must necessarily conclude, that Fair is that which is
agreeable to the intelligent faculties, as good is agreeable to what ever it
be. Now because Knowledge has no other object, but the essence and the truth
of things, Beauty must needs be of that kind; and the objects must be the
fairer, where the essence and the truth are best expressed: for which cause,
Souls are fairer then Bodies; and the Understanding, which knows interior
things, is more capable to judge of Beauty then the Senses, which know only
the exterior. Whence it also happens, that Beasts are seldom moved by Beauty,
because Sense only works in them; in stead that in Man the Understanding
concurs to his action, and penetrates further into the Nature and Essence of
its objects. And we experiment in our selves, that those things which we do not
greatly heed, and whose nature we do not well know, seem less fair unto us; and
that its only for Masters in an Art to judge of the beauty of a work, because
they alone have the true knowledge thereof.

We do not therefore say, that Beauty consists in Knowledge only: for it would
then follow, that things would not be fair until they are known; although it be
most true, that God would not cease to be infinitely fair, although he were not
known. And there are things whose knowledge is equally clear and certain, which
are not equally fair: for, the Understanding distinguishes the Natures as more
or less perfect, in the same manner as the eyes and ears judge that there are
Colors and Harmonies the one fairer then the other. Now as things are
sensible, not by reason of our sensibleness, but because they can make
themselves sensible; and as the essence is not good, in that it communicates it
self, but in that it can communicate it self: so Goodness is not fair because
it is known, but because it may be known. So that Beauty is nothing but
Goodness in that order and essential relation it has to Knowledge; that is to
say, that it can communicate it self to the intelligent faculties. And, in my
judgment, we are so to understand Plato, when he says, that Beauty is a
glittering and splendour of Goodness: for as the brightness of light is that
which renders it visible; the brightness of goodness is that also which makes
it known; and this brightness is no other but the act whereby goodness
resplends, enlightens, and communicates it self to the knowing faculties. Now
because there are two kinds of faculties, the Intellectual and the Sensitive,
there must also be two kinds of Beauty, the one intelligible, the other
sensible: And because that in either kind there are subjects which are fairer
and more excellent some then other some, we must, on the foundation we have
established, observe the cause of this difference. It is true, it requires a
higher meditation and a longer discourse then our design will permit: but we
will only touch on the principal, and on what is necessary to understand what
we shall say in consequence of Humane Beauty.

Suppose then that Beauty is but an effect of Goodness, so far as it has a
relation to the knowing faculties; and that Goodness is nothing, also, but the
being and perfection of things, so far as it can communicate it self, as the
School teaches: those things which have more of being and of essence, must be
better, fairer, and more perfect: And we know they have more of being, when
they have more unity; and, in that unity, they have more power and different
virtues. So God has an infinite perfection, because that in a most perfect and
most simple unity, he has a power to do all things. The intelligences, which
are the most simple and the most active of all creatures, are also the most
excellent. Even amongst Bodies, the mixed are more perfect then the simple
whereof they are composed: the Animate more then the Natural; and those which
have a Reasonable soul, more then those which are only Sensitive; Because that
in comparison of those, they have more different virtues, and more actions, and
therefore diverse degrees more of essence. Thus much for what concerns
Intelligible Beauty. But in Sensible objects, the perfection is not absolutely
considered, as in that: it must depend not only from the being they have, but
also from the organs of the Senses which receives them, and from the fitness
they ought to have with the bodies where they appear. So the Light, which is
most resplendent, is more perfect then all Colors; but, in respect of the
eyes, Green is more, although even that color is displeasing in some subjects.
Now the cause of this diversity first of all comes, for that the Senses having
been given to creatures for their preservation, they must not destroy them. And
as their action is performed by the impression which the objects make on their
organs, if this impression is not proportionable to them, their action will be
imperfect: So that it ought to be strong enough to give knowledge of the thing,
but not so violent as to corrupt the organs. Whence it is, that the Senses
cannot judge well of their objects in their extremity; as the eyes of too great
a light, or of darkness; the ears of a too violent sound, or of silence: And
Aristotle says, that neither of them are sensible, because that this makes no
true impression, and that the other destroys the organ. So that there are only
those objects which are between both extremities, which can make a just
impression proportionable to what the Senses require. It is not therefore that
all the objects equally touch the Senses; there are some amongst them which are
more perfect, and more agreeable then the rest: Green is fairer then Gray or
Black; the Eighth in Harmony is sweeter then the Fourth: But the cause of this
difference is extremely obscure; yet if you observe what we have said of the
perfection of Intelligible things, you will find that it depends from the same
principle.

For it is certain, that Colors and Harmonies have their beauty from the
proportion they have; and those which have it the most perfect, are also the
most agreeable. Now proportions have the more perfection, the nearer they are
to unity, and the more they are in that unity composed. So the Diapason, which
is the most pleasing of all simple harmonies, is made in a double proportion,
to wit, of two to one, which is the most perfect of all simple proportions,
because it is nearest the unity, nothing being nearer unity then the number of
Two; and is the most composed: for, what is twice as much more, is more
composed then that which is but once and a half, or once and a third part, as
the other proportions, which are the Diapente and the Diatessaron. It is the
same with Colors: for, the proportions which make perfect harmonies, make
also, as Aristotle says, fair colors. For which cause, Green, which is the
most agreeable of all others, is to be in the same proportion with the
Diapason; and that of Blue and Purple with that of Diapente and Diatessaron.
But seeing we have examined these things in their place, it suffices to show,
that Beauty, and the perfection of Sensible things, is deduced from the same
principle as that of Intelligible things, to wit, in that they have more unity,
and that in this unity they have more powers; in a word, from that they have
more of a sensible being.

It is easy, by this Discourse, to perceive, that Light, considered as in it
self, is the fairest thing which can be presented to our sight; but that Green,
in respect of the organs, is yet more pleasing then it. It remains only to
discover why this color renders not all those Bodies fair wherein it is. To
this end, you must remember that things work not but according to the powers
they have, and that these powers follow only the degrees of their being. Now
as there are things which cannot work without matter, it is evident this matter
ought to be fitted and proportioned to their actions and their powers; and this
proportion makes corporal Beauty, which is nothing but a just joining together
of all the dispositions which are necessary for bodies to perform those
functions whereto they are ordained: So that all the material qualities, how
excellent soever they be, will render the subjects wherein they are, deformed,
if they are not proportionable to the essence, and to the interior virtue
which they have. So the Round figure, which is the most perfect of all, because
it is the simplest, and comprehends all the rest, cannot accommodate it self
with the actions of all the parts of the humane body, which would be monstrous
and horrible, had it only that figure. It is the same of the fairest Colors,
which have no conformity with the temperature of Man, and which would make an
extreme change appear in the humors, if they were visible in the face. The
tone even of the voice, which in men ought to be stronger and more resounding,
were a defect in a woman, because it is not conformable to her temper, which
ought to be proportionable to the natural power of her sex. This is then the
reason which shows, that the beauty of Sensible objects is drawn, not only
from their absolute being, and from the relation which they have with the
organs, but also the connection which they ought to have with their subjects.

I speak not now of the particular sentiments we may have of Beauty, nor why
Red is more esteemed then Green, the Brown hue more then the Vermillion, and
Blue eyes more then Black: We have no room here for the examination of these
things; we do but touch on generals; and we think we have satisfied our
design, when we have said somewhat more of Humane Beauty, because it is that
which causes the Love whereof we speak.

There are several sorts or diverse degrees of Beauty in Man: For first, there
is the Intelligible, which is essential, or accidental: the Essential is
considered in the Species, or in the Sex; the Accidental in the Habit, and in
the Actions. Lastly, there is a Sensible and Corporal Beauty.

The reason of this is, because the species of every animal has its beauty in
it, which is nothing but its being and its essence, wherein are comprised all
the powers and virtues due unto it. But because that amongst these powers there
are some which are destined for the entertainment of the Species, which would
be lost with the life of the creatures, had not God given them the virtue to
engender their like; and that generation cannot be, unless there also be an
active and a passive power: it was necessary that there should be two Sexes,
between which these two powers should be divided. And forasmuch as Sensible
beauty is nothing but an assembling together of all corporal dispositions
necessary for the powers to perform their functions, every Sex must also
necessarily have different dispositions, since they have different powers: And
thence is the source whence the difference comes of Male and Femalebeauty,
which is not only to be found in some parts, but in the whole body: Because
the first qualities being the principal dispositions of these two powers; and
heat and dryness, which amongst them are the most working, being obliged to
accompany the active power, as cold and humidity the passive power: it must
needs be, that all the mass of humors must taste of these qualities: So that
the temperature of the Male being hot and dry, and that of the Female cold and
moist, it follows that all the parts of either Sex ought to have different
dispositions and beauties.

But forasmuch as Man has Understanding and Reason beyond all other creatures,
and that that faculty, being naturally capable of all things, cannot have its
perfection, but by possessing them, it must acquire dispositions necessary to
attain this perfection; and these are the Intellectual and Moral habits, which
cause that accidental and acquired Beauty of which we have spoken, and which
receive their last accomplishment in the actions they ought to produce: for,
the end is the last perfection, there being nothing absolutely perfect without
an end; and Action being the end of all things.

This is what we can say in general of the Name of Beauty, and must be known,
before we seek the cause which obliges us to the love thereof: For although
some have said, we should not ask, why Beauty pleases, and that it was as much
as if we would know why Fire warms, That it is its Nature, and the essential
property it has, whereof there is no reason to be given; yet all have not
been of this opinion: Plato did not believe that this enquiry was unworthy of
his Socrates: And there is no body who does not freely confess, that if the
knowledge may be attained, it must needs be very rare and excellent. Now
although I do not altogether disapprove this thought of Plato, who says that
the beauty of created things ravisheth us, because it is a ray and an image of
the Divine beauty, which, being Soveraignly good, necessarily inspires love,
when it makes it self known: yet, as there are several things to be supposed in
this opinion which the School of Aristotle will not admit, and that at last we
must always come to that, To know wherefore the Sovereign Goodness is amiable;
we are obliged to take another way, which may lead us to these Supreme truths.

We must then say, that what is good and convenient to a thing, perfects it;
for it adds what it wanted, and in some manner also augments its being, giving
it what it had not, and uniting what was divided. And this is the foundation of
all the inclinations which are to be found in Nature, and of the love we have
for all that is truly and apparently good.

Now as in the Knowing faculties there is nothing at all of what they ought to
know, the Understanding and the Senses being to their Objects what the Matter
is to the Form; when these Objects unite themselves to these Faculties, they
give them a perfection which they had not, and of which they were capable: And
the knowledge they have of this perfection, is the cause of the agreement they
find therein, which is afterward followed by that Love and Pleasure which the
Appetite forms, when the Understanding and the Imagination have proposed it as
a thing good and convenient for them.

But forasmuch as there are Objects which cause more love and pleasure then
others, they must necessarily much more perfect the knowing faculties, and it
is those infallibly which are the most perfect, to wit, those who have the most
of being and of essence as we have said; because they do much more fill the
natural capacity which these faculties have to know the extent of that being
which serves for their object. So it is only God who can fill the
understanding and give a perfect Love and Joy to the Will, because it is he
alone that possesses all being; and consequently those things which have the
most of it, perfect them proportionably, and cause also by their knowledge a
greater satisfaction and a greater pleasure: It is not but that often less
perfect things do more content the Senses and the Understanding; but this
proceeds from the error which their ill inclinations give them, which commonly
come from the temper, from custom, and from weakness of spirit.

Now forasmuch as knowledge is a good which respects not only the faculties
which exercise it, but also all others to which it may be profitable, because
that the Senses were not given to the creature for themselves, but for the
preservation thereof, and that reason is a light which lights not it self
alone, but also all the other virtues which are in man; hence it is that the
knowledge which the Senses and the understanding have of things, which in some
manner are useful to the creature, perfects these faculties; because that being
destined to its service they at last attain the end whether they tend, when
they operate for it, and in that respect they acquire a perfection which in
some sort is more excellent then that which respects them only being their
last end, and the mark nature proposed for them; even thence it is that the
eyes esteem fair, all which makes the goodness of asiments known; and the
color of the wine or even of the water is for the same reason more pleasing
for a thirsty man to behold, then the fairest green of the fields; In a word,
all what the understanding and the imagination know of seeing and hearing,
being the observers of what is profitable or agreeable, is esteemed fair, and
perfects these faculties; forasmuch as their perfection consists to know what
is for our use; it is thus that corporal beauty ravisheth the soul and the
Senses; because it is the mark of that interior power which ought to render us
more perfect; and its principally in this sense that we may truly say, that
beauty is the flower and splendour of goodness. But before we show how this
power ought to render us more perfect, we must observe what we have already
said of these powers; for there are those which respect the nature of man in
general, and others which are proper to the sexes.

These have their particular dispositions which make the male and female
beauty, and which being nothing but the instruments which they are to use in
the performance of their functions, are also the marks which make known whether
they may be well or ill done; for certainly a male beauty is nothing else to
our Senses, but the mark of a good constitution of the active power in
generation, in the same manner as a female beauty is the sign of a passive
power to all that is necessary for the performance of that function. Now as
generation is the most natural and most excellent of all the operations, which
are common to creatures, for that it in some manner renders them eternal, it in
some sort also approaches the Divine perfection and renders them like their
cause and principle; we cannot doubt but nature has imprinted in them a most
powerful desire, and also endued them with a knowledge which may serve to this
inclination; its true, that this knowledge is obscure and hid, and that it is
to be found in our selves without the help of discourse, and even without our
thinking of it; and indeed it is in the same rank with that which nature has
inspired in all the things of the world who know without understanding what is
useful for them; for even in the actions of the Senses and the Understanding we
perceive that there are objects, which are more pleasing to us then others, the
reason whereof is unknown to us, and we have nothing to say, but that there is
in our souls a certain spring of Understanding, or rather that it is the Spirit
of God which hides it self in his works, and drives things to that end which is
fit for them. For as an Artist manageth the action of natural things to the end
he pretends, and as we must ascribe all that order which appears in the
artifice to his knowledge, and not to the things he uses, which are incapable
of that knowledge; so in all the things of nature, where we perceive so many
marks of admirable wisdom, we must not believe that it is from them that it
proceeds, but that it is the Spirit of God which flows in their effects, which
gives the order and the motion, and which guids them to the end which he has
prescribed for them.

However it be, it is by this obscure and hid knowledge, that corporal beauty
presenting it self to our Senses, the soul knows it for the mark of the natural
power of that Sex wherein it is; and at the same time that secret and powerful
desire which it has to perpetuate its species, awakens and forms in it that
Love which afterward agitates it with so much violence.

Yet do I know very well, that an illfavoured person, may cause the same motion
in the soul; and that it is not always true that beauty is the certain mark of
the perfect disposition of the powers which serve for generation; and to
conclude, that it may affect those who are of the same sex to whom this motive
is useless.

But as for unhansomeness, we have showed in the Treatise of the Love out of
inclination, that although that this Passion seems not to draw its origin from
Beauty, yet there is in the soul a certain Idea of perfection contrary to that
which the Senses represented, which causes this admirable charm. For the two
other Objections which remain, we must confess, that Nature suffers defects in
particulars, because she does not always find the matter obedient; whence it
happens, that there are parts which remain imperfect: and because we often
abuse the gifts she bestows, employing them in things contrary to the end which
she proposed her self.

There is amongst men another kind of Love, which corporal beauty also may
move, but whose motive is different from that whereof we speak; for it respects
not the sex, but all the species; which being to have its virtues and its
powers, ought also to have those corporal dispositions which are to serve it.

Now these dispositions are natural, or acquired: The natural are those which
come from our births, and which render men capable of the functions of the
Understanding: for, as all what is in Man is destined for the service of that
faculty which is mistress of all the rest, since it cannot know things but by
the intermission of the Senses, and the Senses cannot operate if their organs
are not well disposed; of necessity the parts of the body must have some
proportion and agreement with the Understanding: and then the Soul, which sees
by this secret sentiment, of which we have spoken, that it is the mark of
humane perfection, pleases it self in this object, and forms that love which
unites it to the good it knows. It Is thus, that well-form'd men are delightful
to the sight, because that the corporal beauty which they have, is a sign that
they are naturally fit for the most perfect actions of the Mind; and the
knowledge which we thus have of their virtues, makes us love them as an
excellent good, which ought to render us the more perfect: For there is no
virtue without doing good, either by giving us example, and obliging us to its
imitation, or by the good things which its effects bring to every one of us in
particular, and to all that society for which Man is born, and to which all
virtues, as well Intellectual as Moral, are as a foundation. As for those
dispositions which are acquired, they also mark the acquired virtues and
powers, such as those habits are which are known by the Characters we here
discourse of; that is to say, by their actions, as well Intellectual as Moral,
and by the air, by the carriage and behavior of the body, which makes one part
of the corporal beauty: for, as there is a certain grace which accompanies
virtuous actions, when it appears to our eyes it makes us believe the virtues
are there, and so forms that love which we have naturally for them.

It is not but that these marks are often deceitful, and that they often make
us love subjects which we ought to hate; But it is from that the Knowledge,
which causes this love, is as we have said, obscure and confused; it carries
away the Appetite before discourse can examine it, and so makes us love an
imaginary good. Yet whatever the error be, the Imagination and the
Understanding always find their perfection in the knowledge which the Senses
afford them, because they do not believe they are deceived; and they think to
discover, by that sensible beauty, that good which ought to accompany it, and
whose possession might render us more perfect: wherefore they find it
agreeable, and propose it to the appetite as an object worthy of love, and
affording pleasure.

These are the principles which may give to us the knowledge of the name and
effects of Beauty: For, to examine all what could be said in particular, we
should need whole Volumes; and these Subjects being too elevated, would tire
the spirit with the length of the Discourse, and would cause us to disgust a
thing which ought never to be distastful. There is but one difficulty in this
subject, which we dare not leave without examination; and the resolution
whereof is nothing easy to find: For, those who are esteemed fair in one
Climate, are not so in another; and, even where ever it be, a face which may
seem fair to some, will appear ugly to diverse: Whence some have believed, that
Beauty is neither a true nor real quality, and that it is but in opinion only:
but no man can disavow, but that the proportion of the parts, and those other
things which make beauty, are true and real, and are qualities which ennoble
the subject where they are, and satisfy the mind and the sight. Now since
Nature proposes always to it self perfection, and that there is but only one
true perfection in the order of all things; it must needs be, that she designed
a particular beauty to every species, which ought to be the Model of all those
which particulars may have: And as the Humane body is the best tempered of all
others which are in Nature, it is probable that this perfect being ought to be
in the most temperate Climate. But whence comes it then, that it is not
acknowledged in other Climates; but on the contrary, there that is esteemed
fair, which in this is esteemed ugly? For, the blackest amongst the Moors are
esteemed the fairest, the most short-nos'd amongst the Chinois; and so of the
rest.

For my part, I belive we must say that the Climate gives a certain disposition
to the body, and makes it change in temperature; and that such a temper gives
such an inclination and such a power to the Mind. Now because the bodies ought
to be proportionable to the powers, it is a necessary consequence, that the
bodies in those Climates must have the marks of these inclinations. So that
Beauty consisting in the proportion which the bodies have with their virtues
and powers; and Men having such powers in certain Climates, they must esteem
those fair which have those marks, because that these inclinations are as it
were natural and common to them: so that they judge of Beauty according to
their natural inclination, in the same manner as in temperate Countries there
are those found who judge diversely of Beauty, by reason of the particular
temper they have, which carries their judgments to prize what is conformable
to them.

CHAP. III. The Characters of Joy.
ALthough Nature seem avaritious of Pleasure and of Delight, and that mingling
it always with Grief, she makes us believe that she affords it us but with
regret and restraint; yet must we confess that there is nothing in the world,
wherein her liberality and magnificence appear more; and we may say, that all
her other presents are debts which she pays, but that this is purely a grace
and favor of hers; for although she gives a being to every thing, that she
has a care of its preservation, and brings it to its end, she is obliged
thereunto; and there is nothing in the Universe, which may not with justice ask
her what is necessary for the perfection of its being; but as action is the end
and perfection of all things, when they are arrived there they can exact
nothing from nature, who has acquitted herself of all she owed them, and if
she contributes any thing, it is by favor and not by obligation; so that
causing always delight to flow on those actions which are conformable to it,
and in a manner crowning them with it, we ought not to doubt that it is a
singular effect of her munisicence, or the better to express it, the sum fo all
the graces she could bestow.

Knowing also how precious it was, she has only communicated it to the most
noble and the most excellent things; she esteemed those without knowledge
unworthy of it, and that Sense and Reason only could deserve it; even as if it
were a good which ought not to be possessed but in heaven, she would not permit
it to be pure and perfect here below; she has mingled it with cares and with
pains, she has brewed it with tears and has caused it to begin or to finish
always with grief.

But as the Sun cease not to be the fairest and most profitable thing in the
world, although it has blemishes and suffer eclipses: So how imperfect soever
pleasure be, by what mixture soever it has been weakened, yet ought it not to
hinder us from prizing it as the most excellent and most desirable thing which
could ever happen to mankind; and we may truly say, that it is the light of
all other good things, and that were it taken away from our lives, it would
nothing but horror and confusion; our life it would indeed rather be a
continual flood of ills then of years; the Senses would rather serve for gates
of grief then of knowledge; knowledge it self would pass for an affliction of
spirit, and virtue for a grievous servitude. Its pleasure only which sets a
price on all things, and which renders them delightful; at least they appear
not good, but by so much as it is found mingled with them; and did not the soul
hope to encounter it in all it acts, it would remain languishing and
immovable, it would be without action and without vigor, and we must speak no
more of life, of happiness or of felicity.

Certainly, to see the effect, it causes, as mistress and despencer of all good
things, calling back those which are past, making us sensible of those which
are not yet, rendering even melancholy, tears and dangers pleasing; we must
confess that with reason Nature is called the great Magician, and that pleasure
is the most powerful charm she uses to produce her miracles; In effect, its a
charm which makes all the ills which assault us vanish, which lifts us up
beyond our selves, which changes us into other men, and from men transforms us
into Demy-Gods; but we often use it as a poison, which quenches all that is
Divine in our Souls, which renders our minds brutish, and makes us like, even
inferior to beasts.

For although the pleasures of the body are of themselves innocent, and that
they were given us for inticements to the most necessary and most noble actions
of life; yet when we pervert their use, and when we do not render them obedient
to reason, they rebel against it, pull it out of its throne, precipitate it in
dirt and mire, and stifle all the seeds of virtue and understanding which are
born with it.

Neither is there any thing wherein wisdom has more been employed, then to
seek the means whereby to shun so dangerous an enemy, who flatters at its
admittance, and afterward causes every where trouble and confusion, which
fills the Soul with blood and flames, the Body with grief and infirmity, and
leaves nothing behind it but repentance.

We will not propose the counsels and advice she has given on this subject; we
should bring hither all those laws, which Physic, Morality, and Religion have
prescribed; at least there are but few which were not made either to prevent or
correct the disorders which sensuality may cause; yet we think to second its
design, by showing the deformity which the excess of this Passion produces in
the Soul and in the Body.

The Picture of voluptuousness cannot be made without representing many
figures, besides that there are joys which have no commerce with the body, and
which are to be found in the highest part of the soul: those of the Sense are
so different amongst themselves, that as many pleasing objects as there are
which may move them, we may say that there are also as many several sorts of
Pleasures: And truly, whoever would design the portraicture we undertake
according to the order of the Senses, and describe the pleasure which every of
them may be sensible of, the invention and the composure could not be ill; but
we may not use it without prejudice to other designs, wherein we are to employ
the same touches, and the same colors which this requires; for if we stayed to
express the Characters of Pleasure, which is in tasting and touching; we must
necessarily also describe those of Gluttony, Drunkenness, Impudency, and so of
the rest, whereof we should make particular Tables; wherefore without
parcelling these things, we will choose what is common to all Pleasures,
dividing this discourse into two parts; the one of which shall treat of a
serious Joy, where laughter is not to be found, and the other of a laughing
puffed up Joy, which is nothing but the Passion of Laughter.

Joy is not amongst those Passions whose beginning is weak, and whose progress
is vehement; it has all its force and greatness from its birth, and time
serves for nothing but to weaken or diminish it; as soon as it enters the Soul
it transports it and carries it out of it self, and the ravishment it causes
is sometimes so violent that it takes away the use of the Senses, makes it
forsake the cares of life and often lose it; but although it come not to this
excess, yet it is always known by that puffed up impatience, which appears in
all its actions, that it hardly can contain it self within its bounds, that it
makes escapes and endeavors to go out.

For the thoughts and words of a contented man are not to be stopped; he dreams
only of his good fortune, he speaks continually of it, and if he be not
interrupted he has nothing in his heart which he carries not on his tongue; he
discovers his most secret designs, and so makes his joy an enemy to his rest
and to his contentment.

If he is silent, you must entertain him with discourses only which favor his
Passion; how divertising soever others are, to him they are importunate; he
breaks them at every moment, and it brings in always somewhat of his
transport: (...) or at least his little minding of them, seems a sign of his
scorning them, or a reproaching that they interrupt his Pleasure.

But if you speak of the subject which begot them, if you admire his happiness,
if you witness a fellow-feeling with him; then, how angry or severe soever he
be, he becomes complacent, he caresseth, embraces, and often, by ridiculous
civilities and favors, he forgeteth the respect he owes, or loses that which
is due to him.

The first that comes to him, is made his friend and his confident; he takes
counsel of him, he follows his advice; and it often happens to be a child, a
servant, or an enemy whom he trusts with his secret, and with its conduct. In
this blindness, he approves all what is proposed to him to the advantage of his
Passion: Whatever vanities he nourishes, whatever successes he flatters
himself withal, there is nothing in his opinion which he ought not to believe,
and may not hope; as if all things were to respect his pleasures: He believes
that there are none which dare traverse them; he sees the dangers which every
way inviron them, without startling at it; and with a blind confidence he
believes himself secure, when his loss is often most assured: So that we may
say, that there is no man so credulous with so little appearance, so bold with
so much weakness, nor so unhappie with so much good hap.

He would make us believe he were content, he persuades it himself, and in the
mean time his desires betray his design and his contentment: for they are
irritated by the enjoyment; and carrying themselves only toward those goods
which he has not, they render those useless which he possesses, and even of
his joy cause the subject of his disquiet. Pleasure has that property, that
although we enjoy it, it forbears not to make it self desirable; so that it is
never content, and that it is rather weary of the good which entertains it,
then fully satisfied therewith. But we have spoken enough of the trouble it
moves in the Mind: let us see what it causes in the Face.

There are some pleasures of which we may say the Soul is jealous, which it
seems she would possess in secret, and which she dares not communicate to the
Senses: But what care soever she takes to hide them, she cannot do it so well,
but she must discover something; her retreat renders her suspected; and when
she would hide, it is then she the more discovers her self: For, the looks
become fixed and staid; all the body is immovable; the Senses forget their
functions; in fine, there is a general suspension made of all the animal
virtues. And although at first we might doubt whether it proceeds from
astonishment or grief, which often produce the same effects, it is afterward
discovered by a certain gloss which remains on the face, and by I know not what
sweetness which it leaves in the eyes, and by a light image of smiling which
appears on the lips, that these troublesome Passions have no share in this
transport, and that it comes from that inward joy, which ravisheth, and as it
were inebriates the soul.

But when Pleasure has the liberty to disperse it self abroad, and that the
Senses bear a part, and that the Mind and the Body seem to enter again into
commerce and intelligence; then it is easy to know the agitation which is made
in the soul, by what appears in the exterior parts: You see on the face a
certain vivacity, a pleasing disquiet, and a laughing boldness. Pleasure
sparkles in the eyes, sweetness accompanies all their motions; and when they
happen to weep, or to cast forth some dying looks, you would say, Laughter
confounded it self with Tears, and that Jollity mixed it self with
Languishings: The Forehead is in this calm and serene, the eyebrows are not
lifted up with wrinkles nor with clouds; and it seems as if it opened, and
every way extended it self. The Lips are red and moist, and are never forsaken
by smiles; and that light trembling which sometimes happens to them, would make
one think they danced for joy: The Voice becomes greater then ordinary;
sometimes it is resounding; and it never goes out but with earnestness: for
there is no Passion so talkative as Joy; how barren soever the Mind be, what
heaviness soever there be on the tongue, it makes one speak continually: and
nothing but its own violence sometimes stops the mouth, and at once cuts short
the speech. To conclude, all the face takes an extraordinary good plight; and
from pale melancholy and severe, which it was before, it becomes ruddy,
affable, and pleased.

The rest of the body is also sensible of this alteration: A sweet heat and
vapor sheds it self through all its parts; which swells, and gives them a lively
color: even they become stronger, and do their actions more perfectly then
they did before. In effect, of all the motions of the Mind, there is none more
a friend to Health then this, so as it be not extreme. It drives away sickness,
it purifies the blood and the spirits, and renders, as the Wise man says, our
years flourishing. As soon as it enters the heart, it swells it with great
beatings; it lifts up the heart by long respirations. In the Arteries it
causes a large and extended pulse. And yet although all these motions are made
slowly, and without vehemence, those of the other parts are made with
precipitation and vigor. The head and the eyes are in a continual agitation:
the hands move without ceasing: we go, we come, we leap; we cannot stay in one
place. But it sometimes also happens, that the violence of this Passion takes
quite away the use of Sense and Motion; it quenches natural heat, it causes
syncopes, and in a moment bereaves one of life. Let us then examine how it can
produce so many effects so contrary and so wonderful.

PART. 2. Of the Nature of JOY.
SOme perhapes may think it strange, that Joy which speaks so much of it self,
has not as yet told what it was; but you may much more wonder that Philosophy,
which promises us the knowledge of all things, falls short in this; although
there be nothing which endeavors more to make it self known then Pleasure; It
penetrates to the bottom of our soul, it environs it on all sides, it
sollicites it by all the ways of its knowledge; it is the end of all its
desires, the crown of all its actions, and yet for all that its nature is
unknown to it, and the greatest understandings which have enquired it, are not
agreed under what kind it ought to be placed.

For some have said that Pleasure was nothing but the rest and tranquillity of
the mind; others that it was a Passion in which the Soul operated not; and
amongst those who have ranked it amongst actions, some did believe it proceeded
not from appetite but from knowledge. In fine, there having been some who not
daring to put it in the rank of other Passions, have said it was the principle
of them, others that it was their gender, or their first species.

Had we not banished from our design the wrangling and the Criticisms of the
Schools, we should be obliged to examine all these opinions, and to seek in
their ruins foundations whereon we should build the definition and Idea of
Pleasure: But since we have not that liberty, and that we should render delight
importunate and unpleasing by the length of the discourses we should use,
without advising with any we will consult the thing it self, and see whether it
will discover it self to us after having hid it self to so many excellent
spirits.

We say then that we need not doubt, but that Pleasure is a motion of the mind,
and that its impossible to conceive a calm and rest in the tempest which it
raises in our thoughts, in our spirits, and in our humors; as those things do
not move of themselves, it must be the mind which agitates them, and she gives
her self the same shake which she imprints in them; For it is evident that
effects being like their causes, the motions of the body which are the effects
of the mind, ought also to be the images of the agitation she gives her self;
I know well that the Schools will not call these agitations true motions; but
that stops us not, it will suffice that they are such as the soul can have, and
that pleasure is one of that order.

But yet as she has two parts which may be moved, we might doubt to which of
the two Pleasure belongs; for although all the world confess it is a Passion,
and consequently a motion of the appetite, yet it seems that there are some
which are proper to knowledge, since the Senses and the understanding find a
complacency in the objects which are conformable to them, even before that the
appetite is moved; but also as we have already showed in our discourse of Love,
that this complacency is no true pleasure; and that the Demons which are
capable of that acceptableness, cannot be touched with Joy, which yet they
ought most perfectly to have; if it come from knowledge alone, we must then
stick to the common opinion, and with it say, that Pleasure is a motion of the
appetite, since its good which moves that part of the mind, and that pleasure
has no other object but the same good.

Yet this raises another difficulty; for if it be true that the soul cease
to move, when it arives at the end whereto it tended moving to possess a good,
the possession ought to be the end and term of its motion: So that the pleasure
which comes always after the possession is rather a rest then a motion of the
appetite; and yet if we were agreed that possession is the aim and end of the
motions of the mind, we would say that that only ought to be understood of
those which it employs to arrive thereunto; for although it bear it self not
toward the good it possesses, it hinders it not from agitating to taste it
again, and from being ravished in the enjoyment it has had; but to speak more
exactly, possession is not the last end which the soul proposes; it is the
enjoyment which is the perfection and accomplishment of the possession. For it
is certain we possess things which we enjoy not, and we may say that the good
renders it self master of the Soul when it presents and unites it self unto it,
but that she becomes mistress of it when she enjoys it: After all this we can
never say that rest is the end which the soul proposes to it self, since the
end is the perfection of things, and that there are some which must be always
in action to be perfect: Now the soul is of this kind, she never tends to rest
unless out of weakness, and it is therefore necessary that Joy and Enjoyment be
in motion; let us then see what an one it is.

To discover it, we must observe that Pleasure and Joy are never formed in the
soul, till after the good has inspired Love therein; for as the first motion
of the appetite toward good is to unite it self thereunto, and Love consists
in this union; it is impossible that any man should fancy any other motion
which could be posterior to that; and therefore if Pleasure be a motion of the
soul toward good, it ought to presuppose love, and always come after it.

Now as this Love always precedes, it follows not that it must always accompany
it; there may be obstacles which may hinder the appetite from moving to form
this Passion, and grief perhaps may be so great that it may employ the whole
soul, that it will not admit the least ray of Joy; but its also certain, that
if there be nothing which retains the appetite, it always goes from Love to
Pleasure, because the soul unites it self to good, but to enjoy it, and it is
impossible it should enjoy it but by Pleasure; and to speak truth, enjoyment is
nothing but pleasure which we find in the possession of good; and according as
enjoyment is more perfect, it is also the greater and the more excellent. What
motion can the appetite then suffer in pleasure and enjoyment beyond that of
Love, whereby it unites it self to what is good? certainly it is a thing very
difficult to conceive, how these actions should pass into a power which is
quite blind and hid in the bottom of the soul; they must be extremely
obscure, and what light soever the mind can bring, they suffer themselves to
be seen not without a great deal of trouble; yet since we have engaged our
selves to show the difference of the Passions, by the difference of corporal
motions, we must necessarily, to know what Joy is, find in sensible things a
kind of motion which may resemble the agitation which the Mind suffers in
this encounter. As it happens then in the Passion of Love, that the Appetite
carries it self toward the beloved object, that it runs thither, and unites it
self thereunto; we may say, that this motion is like to that of fluid bodies,
which run toward their center, and think to find their rest there: but because
when they are there, they for all that stop not, they return, and scatter
themselves on themselves; they swell, and consequently overflow. So, after
that the Appetite is united to its good, its motion ends not there; it returns
the same way, scatters it self on it self, and over-flows those powers which
are nearest to it. By this effusion, the soul doubles on the image of the good
it has received, mixeth and confounds it self with it, and so thinks to
possess it the more by doubly uniting it self thereunto. Nay, even as the
Appetite swells, and thicks by this reflux; it cannot contain it self within
its bounds, and is constrained to distill it self into that faculty which
acquainted it with the knowledge of the object; sharing with it the good it
has received, and by that means making all the parts of the soul concur to the
possession thereof, wherein perfect enjoyment consists: For, since the soul
has no other end, but perfectly to possess the good, and that, perfectly to
possess it, it must have the knowledge of that possession; the Appetite having
no knowledge, cannot alone make it enjoy what it loves; the Imagination and the
Understanding must contribute: and then, after they have proposed the good to
the Appetite, and that the Appetite is united thereunto, it returns to the one
and to the other, and gives them an account of what it has done, to the end
that by uniting their functions, the soul may unite it self to its good in all
its parts, and that it may make for it that circular motion which is natural to
it, and wherein the accomplishment and perfection of its operations consists,
as the Platonic Philosophy teaches. After all, if it be true that the Soul
and the Spirits work in the same manner in the Passions, we may not doubt but
that the motion which the soul suffers in Joy, is such as we have said, since
that of the spirits is altogether like it: For, after Love has carried them to
good, they scatter and overflow themselves on the organs of the Senses, as we
are about to make known: So that we cannot miss in saying, That Joy is an
effusion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul spreads it self on what is good, to
possess it the more perfectly.

I know that the definition of Aristotle is quite different from this: for he
says that it is a motion of the Soul which suddenly and sensibly puts it in a
state agreeable to Nature. But the place where he proposes it, shows
sufficiently that he had no intention to render it very exact, treating in that
place but with Orators, and not with Philosophers. And truly, whoever will
nearly examine it, will find nothing less then the essence of that Passion.
How many of those motions will there be found, such as he has observed,
wherein Pleasure will never be? All natural actions, do they not put the soul
in a state agreeable to its nature? and may they not be suddenly and sensibly
performed without being for all that delightful? The Passion of Love, is it not
so formed, and is it not an estate agreeable to Nature, to unite it self to
good, and to possess it; and yet Pleasure need not always accompany it? And may
we not then say, that it is not Joy which makes this condition agreeable to
Nature; but rather, that it is that which breeds Joy?

Besides, what need we say it is a sudden motion, seeing the Appetite has none
that are other? For, if it happens that the soul moves not so readily in some
Passions, that Iaziness comes not from the Appetite, but from the faculty which
proposes that good with too much difficulty, and too loosely commands the
pursuit thereof: Being a blind power, it goes but as it is led; and as soon as
the command is given, it obeys, and moves in an instant.

It is true, there may be obstacles on that side, which may hinder it from so
readily obeying; as, when there are contrary Passions to those which the object
ought to inspire; for an extreme grief will never suffer Joy to form it self in
the Appetite: But also, when the hinderance is away, it quickly moves, and
always in a moment produces the Passion as perfect as the knowledge and motive
was which it proposed: For, if Love has weak-beginnings, it is because the good
is weakly represented, and the progresses it makes, are new motions of the
Appetite, caused by the representation of new Ideas and new perfections.

In effect, we may say of all the consequences, and of all the increase of
Passions, that they are as the flame and the light, which entertain and augment
one the other every moment, by an infinite many reiterated productions; that
which appears, being not that which was before, and which even presently will
be followed by a new: for, all of them succeeding thus one the other without
interruption, seem to be but the self-same thing which has preserved and
entertained it self.

So it is in Joy, and in all other Passions; they form themselves all at once,
and pass in an instant: they are also renewed every moment, causing thus a
continual flux of diverse perfect motions, which last as long as the knowledge
sollicites the Appetite to move.

It is then true, that the Appetite has no motions which are not sudden; That
nevertheless it begins to move it self rather at one time then another, by how
much the faculty which commands is diligent or lazy, or because there is some
contrary motion which retains it: And that is easy to be conceived, by the
example of the Eyes, which see things in an instant, although to see them they
sometimes open quicker or slower; and even after being open, they may have some
indisposition which may hinder them to act.

I know that the Physicians seem to use the same definition with Aristotle,
when they say that Pleasure is a quick and sensible motion which puts Nature in
an estate which is agreeable to it; and that if the objects make not a quick
and sensible impression on the Senses, or if they do not make it proportionable
to Nature, they can never cause Pleasure. But it is easy to perceive, that the
Motion whereof they speak, is not that of the Appetite, where Pleasure
consists, and that it is but the cause thereof: for, before that the Appetite
moves, the objects must make such an impression as we have said; and then the
Soul, which feels it, and which sees what is its good, sheds it self on it, to
possess it the more perfectly, and so forms that pleasure, which is augmented
by the effusion of spirits, as we will anon declare. I stay not to examine how
grief sometimes happens in this quick motion which moves Nature to an estate
convenient for it; as when we put our hands to the fire when they are extremely
cold; that concerns the Passion of Grief: It will suffice here to observe, that
those objects which make not this ready impression, do not cause Pleasure;
because that insinuating themselves by little and little, Nature accustoms her
self unto them, and feels not the change which happens to her; wherefore, not
knowing the good which she receives, the Imagination proposes it not to the
Appetite, which consequently is not moved thereby. We are even thus tired with
the most agreeable things, after having too long tasted them. But of this more
amply at the end of this Discourse.

Let us continue again the thread of that Discourse which we have left, and say,
that although all the motions of the Appetite are made suddenly, yet it is
true, that of all the objects which move Passion, there are none whose arrival
so quickly and so easily moves the Appetite, as Joy. And this comes in my
conceit, from that the object of Pleasure is the good, so far as it is already
loved: for we have already showed, that Love always precedes Joy; so that being
already united to the Appetite by the means of Love, there is nothing in that
respect which hinders the motion which that power ought to employ to relish it.
But it is not so in the rest of the Passions, whose objects are to be examined
by the Knowledge, before they are proposed to the Appetite. And as there are
but few Goods or Evils which are pure, so there are always found many things
which diminish their goodness or their ill, and suspend the judgment we ought
to make of them. But to move Joy, this examen is useless: the Appetite already
possessing the Good, all its counsels are taken, all its doubts are razed; and
of necessity it ought to move at the same instant when it united it self to its
enjoyment, wherein Joy and Pleasure consist.

But it is to penetrate too far into the secrets of the Soul, and to stay too
long on things which have no stay. Let us leave these imperceptible motions,
and see whether those which are made in the humors and in the spirits, are
more easy to be discerned.

Yet before we begin this enquiry, we shall do well to say somewhat of the
Object which moves this Passion. For although we have already said it was Good,
we must examine out of what consideration it merits that quality, being assured
that out of diverse respects it causes diverse motions in the soul.

As then good, forasmuch as it is amiable, is the object of Love; so forasmuch
as it is delightful it is that of Joy: neither is it powerfully delightful, but
when it is loved, for that Pleasure presupposes Love; so that good forasmuch
as it is loved, ought to be the true object of Joy; perhaps you will say, that
desire also presupposes Love, and that good must be loved to be desired; it is
true, but desire demands another condition, to wit, absence which never happens
in Joy, where the good must be always present; for when past things, or those
which are to come delight us, it is an effect of the imagination, which renders
them present, and makes them pass for such as they are in the thoughts.

For the rest, by the word Good, we must not only conceive what is truly and
apparently good, but even also the ills which we have eschewed: It is thus,
that the memory of the pains we have suffered, and of the dangers we have
escaped is pleasing, forasmuch as it is good to have been delivered from them;
it is thus that vengeance is so sweet; because that by overcoming the ill, we
no more fear the assaults thereof; it is thus, that tears are sometimes
delightful, because they discharge nature of an unprofitable burden, and that
it even seems as if the grief which excited them, runs and slides away with
them.

You must besides observe, that good being a thing agreeable to nature, this is
as well to be understood of depraved nature, as of that which is perfect; for a
sick man takes pleasure in things which are contrary to him, and a vicious man
finds contentment in his debauches, because they are conformable to his
corrupted and irregular nature.

Now after this to examine by retail all what may cause pleasure, besides that
it would wrong both our design, and the Reader, both which ask for brevity, we
may easily know it were but to lose time and words.

It will then suffice to say, that since good is the source of all the sweets
which this Passion causes to flow into the soul, and that it is nothing but
what is fit for our nature, and what perfects it, it must be that the good
which makes us the more perfect, raises also the greater and the more solid
pleasures: Now as we are composed of two parts, of soul and body, and as that
is incomparably more excellent; and therefore it follows that the perfection
which it acquireth is also more excellent, and that the goods which cause it,
are the most noble and the most delightful.

But because the goods of the body are for the preservation of the species, or
of the individuals, and that that is more considerable to nature, as being the
most common or the most general good; from thence it is that the pleasure which
accompanies it is the sweetest and most sensible of all others; and by the same
reason the objects of Tasting and feeling delight most, because they are the
Senses most necessary for life, and without which the creature cannot subsist.

It is true that the objects of Seeing and Hearing may contest the
preheminency, being more noble then those base and material qualities which
respect the inferior Senses: But if we consider that there are almost no
creatures, which delight themselves with the beauty of sounds and colors; we
may confess speaking generally, that the objects of Tasting and Touching are
the most delightful; and yet that in Man those of Seeing and Hearing have the
advantage, because that those two Senses having a great affinity with the
Understanding, and being chiefly destined to its service, their end is also
more noble and necessary then it is in beasts, where they are for no other use,
but to preserve the animal life which they have.

From all these considerations, it is easy to deduce the principal differences
of Pleasure: For it is either Intellectual or Sensible, Pure or Impure, True or
False. True Pleasures are those which are pure, to wit, which are not linked or
mixed with Grief; and they are those which are fit for Man, in the most perfect
condition that Nature could place him. Such are the pleasures which are found
in Contemplation, and in the exercise of Virtue: such are those which follow
the actions of a secure Health, and the functions of Senses perfectly disposed.

Now these Pleasures have this property, that they are long lasting, that they
never tire, that they may be relished at all times, and that Grief never
precedes nor follows them: For a man who is in a state of Natural perfection,
is never weary of Meditation, nor of performing good actions: Life is always
sweet and pleasing to him; and the Senses are always disposed to receive their
Objects with Delight.

Some may now say, that Eating and Drinking, and other natural actions, are
convenient for the perfect nature of Man, which yet cause also disgust: For
Music, and the sight of the fairest things, at last tires the ears and eyes;
and the sweetest flowers wherewith Venus was ever crowned, as Pindarus says, at
last become importunate and displeasing. It is true: But we must also remember,
that all these things being suitable to Nature, ought to have the conditions
which perfection requires: they must be moderate in quantity and quality: the
circumstance of time, place, and persons, must meet. Besides, that the greatest
part are not of themselves convenient for Nature, but only by accident; that
is to say, they are only convenient, by reason of the irregularities which
preceded them whose remedy they are. So eating and drinking cure hunger and
thirst: so rest and sleep cause labor and weariness to cease. In a word, the
greatest part of our actions afford pleasure only because Nature empties or
fills it self, and corrects the one with the other; wherefore the pleasure
which follows them is not absolutely pure nor real, but only by accident:
whence it is that it tires, that it lasts but little, and that we are not at
all times capable to taste it, as those which are absolutely pure.

But let us leave these Moral Speculations, and, without staying any longer on
things which are notorious to all the world, let us seek new ones, and see
whether the Tempest which this Passion excites in us, will not throw us into
some unknown Land, and make us know the motions of the Spirits which act as the
wandering Stars, whose courses and periods have not yet been observed.

PART 3. What the Motion of JOY is in the Spirits.
IN all kind of Motion, we must always fancy two terms: The one where it is
to begin, the other where it ought to finish. If the Spirits then move in Joy,
it seems they ought to come from the heart, since it is their source; and
thence they move themselves toward what is Good, wheresoever it presents it
self to the soul. Truly, could Joy form it self all alone, the motion of the
Spirits must be so made, and must by it be issued out of the heart to the
meeting of what is good: but because it never comes but with Love, which ought
always to precede it, it is he who ought to cause that motion, whereto Joy
contributes nothing: So that we must seek another for it, conformable with that
of the Appetite. In a word, we must discover how the Spirits in some manner
disperse themselves, even as that does in this Passion. This will not uneasily
be conceived, after having observed how Love carries them toward Good: for
when they can go no further, they must either stop, or return to their source,
or disperse themselves. They cannot stop themselves, since they follow the
then-disturbed agitation of the soul: they cannot return to the heart, since
nothing but the presence of Ill can constrain them thereunto: They must then
overflow and disperse themselves. And the Soul, which employs the same motives
for the motion of the Spirits as for her own, takes care to make them move so,
that they may be the more united to Good, as we have before said: For, by this
effusion, they dilate themselves in their organs; and, occupying more room,
they think to touch the Good in more of its parts.

But where can they disperse themselves? To understand this, you must remember,
that Good touches not the soul but by its presence, and that it is Knowledge
only which renders it present. Now this Knowledge is made by the
Understanding, and by the Imagination, or by the Senses: And as the Imagination
is seated in the brain, and the Senses in their particular organs; so Good must
be in the one or the other of them, and consequently Love must carry the
Spirits to those places, and Joy disperse them in the same precincts. For, if
Good be only in the Fancy, and that it touches not the exterior Senses, all
the Spirits arrive at the seat of the Imagination, and disperse themselves in
the brain: But if any of the Senses possess this Good, then the Spirits which
ran thither disperse themselves also on their organs, and carry thither heat,
redness, and vivacity.

This effusion augments the Pleasure of the Mind, by reason of that sweet and
temperate heat which runs through the parts, which flatters and tickles them: So
that those Pleasures which are accompanied with this corporal agitation, are
greater, and more sensible, then when they are without it. Nay, even after the
emotion of the Appetite has ceased, the agitation of the Spirits continuing,
leaves the soul in a certain confused Joy, which comes not from the object
which at first touched it, but from that tickling which the Senses made known
unto it, as a thing conformable and convenient for their nature.

And this makes me believe that all those secret Joys which we feel without
knowing a reason of them, come from the same cause, and that there must
necessarily be something which disperseth the Spirits, and which inspires
Pleasure in the soul; whether it be the knowledge it has of the tickling of
those parts, or whether that all the differences of the motions which it
employs in every Passion, being known unto her, she sees this to be fit for
Joy, and at the same time forms a delightful object, as we said it happened in
that love which is out of inclination.

You will perhaps say, that this effusion of Spirits may often be without
Pleasure; That Anger which casts them into the face, that Grief which draws
them to the diseased parts, and that the Fever which drives them everywhere
with impetuosity, afterward disperseth them, and causes the same alteration
which Joy imprints on the body; and yet that the Soul is then sensible of no
pleasure.

But we may two ways answer this: First, it is true, that the most delightful
objects are often diverted by little griefs, from making an impression in the
soul. This motion of the Spirits which is so secret, and which the Senses can
scarce discover, ought to be far less powerful against great obstacles which
cause these troublesome encounters. But supposing they did cause pleasure, it
is so weak, and so light, that it is stifled by the least sensible
inconvenience. For it is an observable thing, that although it seems that the
Sensitive Appetite at the same time cannot suffer contrary Passions, it is not
absolutely true, since we evidently know, that the tongue is pleased with
agreeable savours, whilst the heart is full of bitterness and grief. And the
reason of this is, that the Sensitive Appetite is not shut up in one part
only, as the most part of the other faculties are; it is dispersed through all
the organs of the Senses: and we may say, that its stock and root are indeed in
the heart, but that its boughs and branches are extended through all the body:
For its a general and necessary power to all the parts of the Creature, and it
must have been communicated to all, that Motion might not be far off from
knowledge, and that the Soul might not languish in expectation to possess a
good, or flee from an ill, when they were once come to her knowledge: Nature
having made for the appetite what she made for the pulse whose principal organ
is the heart, and yet which forms it self in all the arteries, where even it is
sometimes found different from that which agitates the heart.

Which being so, Pleasure may be in one place, and Grief in another, although
they are in one part incompatible: But it is also true that when Passion is
raised in the Center, and source of the appetite, that which is in the little
rivulets is very weak and seems to vanish, although the Spirits cease not to
agitate in those places where it was formed, whence these secret feelings of
Pleasure follow, which often steal themselves from the knowledge of the
understanding, nay even of the imagination.

This is the first answer which may be made to the proposed objection; now for
another which pleases us more, as being better fitted to our design; for we
will show how every Passion has a particular motion of the spirits; and that
then if the effusion be in others as well as Joy, there must be some difference
which renders it fit and particular, and which is not to be found in the rest.

We must then confess that Anger, Grief, and Terror, and diverse other exterior
things may disperse the spirits, but by violence, and as a tempest which
scatters the rain, and transports it here and there with impetuosity; in stead
whereof Joy sweetly disperseth them, and makes them distill on the parts as a
sweet dew; now this causes many different impressions on the Senses: For the
spirits which are driven with force, which precipitate themselves one on the
other cause a troublesome sentiment to nature, and rather provoke it then
flatter it; but those which disperse themselves as themselves, and sweetly
insinuate themselves into the parts, tickle and content it: Considering that in
those Passions which have ill for their object, the spirits keep themselves
united and contracted to assault or flee from it; whence it is that they are
piercing, and offend the parts they light on; but in Joy, wherein they dilate
themselves to embrace the good it must needs blunt their point, and make them
lose the impetuosity they had before; So that what effusion soever there is in
Anger and in Grief, its never accompanied with pleasure, because it is not like
that which is with Joy; to avow this, we must only consult the countenance of
a joyful man; for you will find therein I know not what kind of a more
pleasing vivacity, a clearer and purer splendour, and a sweeter heat then in all
the Passions we have made mention of; by reason that the purity of the spirits
is not changed by those sharp and darksome fumes which are raised in the rest,
and that their motion is more free, more equal, and more conformable to their
nature; it might be asked whether this effusion of spirits be only made in
those places where Good is presented to the soul; and truly its there only
necessary for it, since they only disperse themselves to possess this good,
and that good touches it nowhere but where it makes it self known; yet it is
true that it abundantly pours them into the intrails, and that when Joy is
high, there is no part which it over-flowes not; for which cause the heart and
the lungs loosen themselves as Hippocrates says, we are sensible of I know not
what pleasing emotion which moves all the interior parts, and a sweet heat and
vapor, which disperseth it self through the whole body: Now this happens
according to my opinion, from that the sensitive soul has not always a clear
and certain knowledge of its object, and being charmed by that of Joy, she
fancies that she ought everywhere to encounter it, and that she ough also to
send spirits every way to entertain it: or rather the urgency which presses
her forwards to the quick enjoyment of the presented good, is the reason she
drives them on all sides, without choice or order, or so much as discerning the
places whether they are to move.

This shall suffice for the knowledge of the Motion of the spirits in Joy; in
pursuit of the examen we have already made in the Treatise of Love. But one
difficulty remains which the former discourse has bred, and whose resolution
will give some light to the obscurity of this matter; for we have said, that
the spirits are not agitated here with violence, and that their motion is
always sweet and calm; although this seem not to agree with the transports, the
ravishments, and the excesses which are so common in this Passion, and which
cannot be conceived without a violent agitation of the spirits: And in effect,
when we compared this motion with that which is made in Love, we were not
afraid to say, that they were driven in Joy as a great wave, and that it seemed
then as if the soul would cast it self wholly and all at once before its
object: So that it being not to be done without violence, and having certified
that there was none in the effusion of the spirits, we cannot escape the
reproach to have spoken contrary to Truth, and against Our Selves.

Yet it is very easy to answer this Objection, remembering, that Joy and Love
are inseparable; and that these two Passions being for that cause often
considered as if they were but one only, these Motions were also confounded
with their effects: so that Love drawing the spirits from the heart, and
driving them out, we commonly say, that Joy also transports them. And as this
motion is made with violence, and causes troublesome accidents, the same thing
may be said of Joy: For thus we discoursed of it in the former Chapter, where
we did not absolutely compare Love with Joy, but only the love of Beauty with
the love of other things wherein Joy causes faintings and syncopes,
confounding, as commonly they do, these two Passions in one: But here, where we
make an exact Anatomy of them, we separate the motions of the one from the
other; and conclude, that the transport of the spirits toward Good, is a
particular effect of Love; and that the effusion which follows it, is that of
Joy: So that if there be violence in the first motion, it proceeds all from
Love; Pleasure has no share in it; and how impetuous soever it be, it must
break and soften it self, when the spirits begin to disperse themselves;
otherwise Joy would destroy it self, by that troublesome sensibleness which
that impetuous and turbulent motion would excite in the parts.

Yet it follows not, that because this effusion is not violent and impetuous,
it must be made slowly: for the spirits are such stirring and subtle bodies,
that they without resistance penetrate everywhere: and their motions are so
quick, that nothing in Nature could be found to compare them to, but Light: and
it is by that also that we can make appear how they disperse themselves in Joy:
For it in a moment insinuates it self in Diaphanous bodies without violence,
and without confusion runs through all their parts; without constraint dilates
and extends it self: and we might say, that had these bodies any knowledge,
they would be sensible of an extreme pleasure in that sweet, although sudden
effusion of Light. So is it with that which is made in Joy: for after the soul
has carried the spirits toward its Good, and that she believes she has
united them together, she leaves that pressing, that disquiet and precipitation
which she caused before that she might arrive there: and, thinking she can then
with security enjoy the good she possesses, she with liberty dilates her self,
without hinderance extends her self, and in an instant penetrates all the parts
of her object; causing the spirits to move in the same manner, which she finds
always obedient to her command. It is true, that in pursuit thereof there is a
great dissipation of them made, which the soul takes no care to repair, being
wholly employed in the enjoyment of the good she pursued, and being as it were
charmed and ravished with her good fortune; whence those weaknesses follow,
those faintings, and those other actions, of which we have already spoken.

PART. 4. The causes of the Characters of Joy.
YOu have seen what we had to say of the nature of this Passion, before we
enquire the causes of those Characters which make it appear. Let us then now
examine first the Moral actions, and enquire why Joy is so talkative, so vain,
and so credulous; why it confides so much in it self, why it makes it self to
be defired, even when it is present, and why it is so soon weary of the Good
which begot it: For these are the most observable effects which it produces in
the Mind, and whence it seems the rest proceed. Let us seek then the causes of
its Prattle.

There are Passions which will always speak, and others which love to be
silent. Silence commonly accompanies grief, despair, and fear: Joy, boldness
and anger, and generally, all those which move toward Good, or resist Ill, are
given to Talk; but none so much as Joy: all the rest seem to drive out their
words, and cast them forth with violence, as if they were a burden which the
soul would discharge; this dispenses them with liberty, makes them flow with
pleasure; and we may say, that it is rather abundance then constraint which
sends them forth. Indeed, Joy is full of babble, is pleased to talk, and always
finds wherewith to entertain its chat.

The reason hereof is easy enough to be discovered, if you consider, that
words being the images of the thoughts, to say many things, diverse thoughts
must form themselves in the Mind; that they must have liberty to issue; that
the organs must be disposed to express them. Now as Imagination is the source
of the thoughts, and that it is more or less fruitful, according as it is more
or less active; and that all its vivacity depends from that of the spirits
which serve it in its operations: it is necessary for great talkers, that the
spirits should be extremely active, and that the organs of the speech should be
very moveable: And therefore, since it is heat which renders the spirits
active, and that humidity renders the body supple and pliable; these two
qualities must be found in those who speak much: And besides, the Judgment
must not be so strong as the Imagination, that it may not severely examine the
thoughts, that it may not withhold them, but that they may all freely vent
themselves. This is the reason why young folks and women, the sanguine and the
phlegmatic, talk more then others; why wine, good cheer, and folly, provoke
talk so much; and why birds most commonly sing when they woo, because being
naturally provoked to get their young ones, their blood works, and becomes
fumy, their spirits increase and kindle, and afterward agitate the Imagination
and the organs of the voice.

Which being supposed, it is easy to know why these Passions which move
toward Good, or resist Ill, cause us to speak more then the others do; Because
in the design they have to go out, the Spirits must carry themselves to the
Brain, and to the exterior parts, which augments the heat, and disperseth the
humors, and in pursuit moves the Imagination, and makes the organs beoom more
moveable: So that all these dispositions meeting with the weakness of the
Judgment, which accompanies all the Passions, a great flood of words must
necessarily follow there: And chiefly in Joy, since by it the Soul dilates and
diffuseth it self, and that there is nothing whereby it can more disperse it
then by speech, which is the true flowing of the thoughts; besides that the
Imagination is freer in this Passion then in the rest, in which either the
absence of the good or the presence of the ill constrain it, and involve it in
cares which it has not in Joy, possessing its good with security and
confidence, without distraction, and without finding any obstacle to stop its
conceptions, or hinder the issue of them.

For what concerns Confidence, as it is a Passion which persuades us that ill is
far from us, and that although it should present it self, we have power enough
to overcome it; we need not doubt but those who are joyful and content, are of
the same belief, being in possession of Good: For Good has that property, that
by its presence it estrangeth ill, and fortifies the soul in the enjoyment
thereof: because that in perfecting of it, it in some manner increases it, and
makes it appear greater and more vigorous then it was: Considering that being
wholly occupied and ravished in the enjoyment of Good, and not minding those
difficulties which may traverse its designs, it trusts that it can have no ill
success: and filling it self thus with good hopes, it believes and undertakes
all, and nothing seems difficult unto it. But what foments its audacity the
more, it is the heat it stirs up in all the parts: For, as this quality is the
principle of all the vigor they have, the Soul, which perceives how she has
enlarged her self, persuades her self that her strength is also increased, and
consequently imagines that she is the more secure, having so much affistance
both to assault and resist Ill. Now because this vain Confidence is a kind of
Pride, which lifts up the Mind above it self, and flatters it with an
imaginary excellency, thence it happens that the Joy thereof is commonly
Insolent and Presumptuous, that it loves to be flattered, and easily falls into
the praises of it self, being, as it is, so babbling, and so greedy to express
it self.

Yet, this presumption hinders it not from being Complacent, Facile, and
Credulous; although pride render men opinionate and untractable; because that
entertaining it self but with the vain hopes it conceives, and justling only
those which oppose them; it willingly hears those which favor them, and is
easily persuaded by their flattery; its confidence making it fancy all things
possible; besides the possession it has of good, is that which produces and
foments it; it follows the qualities of good, which is to communicate it self;
and so consequently renders it self sociable, easy, and complacent.

But how can joy leave in the soul a desire of it self, seeing it is there
present; and that it seems it is a thing incompatible with that satiety which
we said it brought? To resolve this difficulty, we must suppose that pleasure
may be present two manner of ways, when it actually touches the soul, or when
memory calls it back to the thoughts; necessarily begetting desire; forasmuch
as its conceived as a thing which is no more, and which yet leaves in the
memory all those allurements which render it desirable: the other being
actually present cannot in that respect be wished for; for, that desire moves
only toward those things which we have not; but only then what we conceive
something which we do not yet possess: as when we desire the continuation of
it, or that the delightful object does not wholly, or all at once present it
self to our knowledge; and then what remains to be possessed, entertains and
enflames the desire.

Now the object presents it self not all at once, either by its own defect, or
by that of the power which receives it; for there are things which we cannot
enjoy but by a succession of time, and which must be several times retaken, to
get an entire and perfect possession of them. Thus an excellent discourse, a
sweet music lecture, the delight of eating and drinking, require time and
several repetitions to be thoroughly possessed: But there are others also which
depend not on time, and yet wherein the soul must employ it, to have a perfect
enjoyment of them; whether it be by reason of the difficulties it meets, as in
the enquiry of Sciences; or by reason of their excellency that they cannot all
at once be comprehended, and wherein it always finds new subjects of
admiration: Such is the knowledge which we have here below of Divine things,
which cause that torrent of delight to flow into the will, which never
quenches its drought, and always leaves it an ardent thirst, which even
Eternity it self cannot quench.

Thus see you have how Pleasure can beget desire; let us now see how it can
cause Satiety; It is evident, that things may satisfy two ways, either when
they no longer flatter the Senses with pleasure, or when they disgust them;
False Pleasures, as those of the Senses, become distastful and importunate;
because they are not absolutely convenient for nature, they surpass the natural
capacity of the powers, and their use weakens and corrupts the organs: but
those which are pure and true do never disgust, because they never exceed the
natural reach of the Soul, but they perfect it, and instead of burthening and
weaking, they ease and fortify it: It is true, they may give a little, because
the mind being a lover of novelty, and finding it no longer in an object
whereto it has long applied it self, it also finds not that satisfaction
which it took at the beginning, and seeks by change to nourish its desire and
inclination. But we have spoken enough of these things wherewith Moral
Philosophy is full; let us examine the Characters which Joy imprints on the
Body.

Of all the many Characters which Joy imprints on the body, There are the looks
only, the serenity of the forehead, Laughter, Caresses, and disquiet, which
are caused by the Souls command; all the rest happen without her thought, and
have no other cause but the agitation of the humors which necessarily produce
those effects.

For the Looks, there are three kinds common to this Passion, for it renders
them sweet, dying, and unquiet; we will say, what is the cause of these last,
when we speak of the disquiet, and impatience which appears in all its other
actions.

The Looks are sweet, either because they are modest, or because they are
laughing; and these are proper to Joy, which causes the lids to fall a little,
and contract themselves; and which fills the eyes with a certain pleasant
splendour. Now this splendour comes from the spirits which arrive in those parts;
and the motion of the lids is effected by smiling, and by the design which the
soul has to preserve the image of the desirable object, as we showed in
seeking the causes of amorous Looks; so that we have only these which are
called dying, which require a long examen.

We have already said in the discourse of Love, that they were called so,
because those which dye cast forth the like, lifting up their eyes on high, and
half hiding them under their lids. But that seems very difficult to conceive,
that Looks which accompany Languor, Grief, and Death, should be found in the
excess of Pleasure.

Yet as there are several things contrary which have common effects, because
they have common causes; it may also be that this kind of Look finds the same
cause in Grief, and in Joy, in the pangs of Death, as in the ravishment of
Pleasure. Let us then examine the reasons why they are to be found in these
troublesome Passions, that we may see whether there be any which may be
accommodated to Joy. First we need not doubt but Grief lifts up the eyes on
high, and looks up to heaven, as the place whence it expects help to drive away
the ill which afflicts it: For Nature has given that instinct and inclination
to man, to have recourse to superior powers, when he believes himself
abandoned by the rest: So that without minding it, his mouth invokes them, his
eyes turn toward them, and his arms are lifted up to crave their assistance.
It also happens that this Passion, which would flee the ill which presents it
self, gathering up within it self, draws along with it all the more moveable
parts, and so retires the eyes in, as if it thought to hide it self, by hiding
those organs whence she seems most to show her self. Or rather, it comes from
that the parts, being void of spirits, which the force of Grief dissipated or
transported elsewhere, they of themselves repossess their natural situation,
which is to be a little lifted up: For it is certain, that the situation of the
parts, when they rest, is more natural then that which they have in action,
wherein there is always some kind of constraint: And we must consequently
believe, that the eyes which take that site in sleeping, seek it as the most
calm, and most natural for them: So that it seems the looks become dying in
Grief, as they do in Sleep by the flight of the spirits which leave the eyes to
their rest. Death may also cause this effect, by the convulsion which often
accompanies it, and which makes the nerves retire to their origin; or, by
reason of weakness, cannot retain the parts in that tension which their action
requires; so that the lids fall, and the eyes are lifted up, taking again, as
we have said, their natural situation. Of all these causes, there is only the
gathering up of the Soul, and the drawing back of the Spirits, which are to be
found in Joy, and from whence these dying looks may take their birth: for they
have no assistance to implore, nor convulsion to fear. But in the transport
which the enjoyment of Good gives the Soul, it often quits the exterior parts,
gathers the spirits inwardly together, or carries them elsewhere; and so
forsaking the eyes, leaves them the liberty to regain their natural situation,
which makes them appear languishing and dying.

The Forehead is serene, when it is smoothe and without wrinkles; and this
smoothness comes from that all the muscles are extended, and equally draw it
out on every side; or from that they are all at rest, and leave it in its
ordinary situation. Now it seems that Joy causes a serenity of the forehead in
both manners: For it is certain, that as it has the property to dilate and
disperse the soul and the spirits, it seeks to do the same in all the parts of
the body: So that because the muscles cannot move but by contracting
themselves, it never intends to move those of the forehead, since it would
cause a motion contrary to its design, chiefly, their action being not
necessary in this encounter, as that of the eyes might be, and of the tongue,
and of others which it agitates in this Passion for particular reasons. The
Forehead then remains calm, and without contracting it self. On the contrary,
it seems to open, and on all sides to extend it self, by reason of the spirits
which rarifie the parts, and makes them appear the larger. Yet because that in
Laughter the forehead becomes smoothe by the stretching of the muscles, which
equally draw it upwards and downwards, it might seem that Joy which causes
Laughter, caused also that tension, and brought that serenity to the forehead
as well by moving as by slacking the muscles. But in the following Discourse we
will show, that it is not Joy which produces that effect, but the Surprise,
which is the true cause of Laughter. It Is not but that the Soul without that
Surprise may extend the forehead, by contracting the muscles; but then it is a
feigned and forced serenity, as that of Flatterers, of which Aristotle says,
that the Forehead is (...), that is to say, stretched, and not contracted, as
the Translators have explained it: for it is the Muscles which are contracted,
but the Forehead which is extended and made smoothe by their contraction.

All Caresses are not properly effects of Joy: Take but away the serenity of
the countenance, the smile, and the sweetness of the eyes, the rest proceed
from the Passion of Love, which subjects the soul to the good which it
conceives, and fills it with a desire to possess it: For the offers of service,
respectful complements and civilities, are so many marks of submission which it
renders to the perfection and excellency of the person it loves: and the
embraces, kisses, and amorous looks, are witnesses of its desire, and of the
care it takes to unite it self thereunto.

For Laughter, although it seem to be a particular effect of Joy, yet it is not
always to be found with it: And when it accompanies it, it ows not its birth to
it alone: there are other causes which contribute thereunto, and which excite
an emotion in the Soul quite different from that of Pleasure. So that we were
not afraid to call it a Passion; not considering the outward motion only which
appears on the face, but that which the soul inwardly suffers, the nature and
effects whereof we will examine in the following Chapter.

There remains now the Disquiet and Impatience only, whose causes we are to
enquire. But we must first observe, that they are not in all kind of Joy:
there are calm Pleasures, wherein the soul feels nothing of Impatience; wherein
we may say, she rests in her motion. Such are those which accompany the
exercise of Virtue, the knowledge of the Sciences, and the possession of
Supernatural good. In a word, pure and true Delights do never disquiet the
soul; they always leave a calm, and a pleasing serenity: And although they
often moves desires which agitate it, we may say, they are little winds which
purify it without causing any storms; or, that they are like those sweet
smoaks which the flame raises, which nourish it in stead of dissipating it,
and which rather entertain the equality of its motion, then disturb it. But it
is not so with false delights: As by little and little they make themselves
felt and seen as a remedy for grief, there must, until they are wholly possessed,
always remain somewhat which is displeasing in the Mind. And then you cannot
wonder if Impatience accompany the desires it has to be delivered from it, and
to see it self enjoying that perfect pleasure wherein the end of its grief
consists. But it foresees not that its contentment is to finish there also, and
that as soon as it has an entire possession of the Good it seeks, it will be
disgusted: So that being not to be satisfied, it cannot but suffer perpetual
disquiets; seeking what it cannot find, and meeting what it never sought.
Besides, all these vain hopes which Joy inspires, breed diverse designs: and as
it runs from one to another, without stopping at any, it is impossible, in this
agitation, but that all its actions must appear uuquiet, its discourse without
order, its looks inconstant, and all the body in a continual motion; whereunto
also the sparkling of the spirits contributes, which tickles the nerves and
sollicities the parts to move themselves; considering also that those Pleasures
cannot be had, but by the action of the corporal powers which at last tire
themselves, disquiet must accompany them, since its an effect of wearisomeness.

These are the Characters which Joy imprints in the body by the souls command:
Now let us see those which are caused without her ardors, and which by a
necessary consequence, proceed from the agitation which is made in the humors,
and in the spirits.

The vivacity of the eyes comes from their splendour and motion, which are the
undoubted signs of life and vigor, since death renders them obscure and fixed:
as the Spirits then disperse themselves in Joy, and as they are luminous and
active, the eyes which abundantly receive them, and which are transparent, and
easy to move, become agile and resplendent; besides that the humidity which is
spread over them, being agitated by the motion they make, the light becomes more
trembling, and causes a certain moving luster, which strikes the sight with
several rays, and presents to the imagination the motion and noise which the
sparks of fire cause at their birth whence they are said to crackle: Now this
humidity may come from two causes; either because the lids in shutting
themselves crush the humors they contain, and render the eyes moist; as we will
more particularly show in the discourse of Laughter; Or because that heat and
the spirits open their passages, and dissolve those humors, which afterward
runs on the parts and make them moist: nay even if the brain be very moist,
thence they draw rivulets of tears, which are as they say quite different from
those which Grief uses to move, not only in their cause, but even in their
quality; for they are cold in Joy, and hot in grief, although it seems as if
the contrary should happen, since Joy heats, and Grief cooles; and that has
even obliged some to say, that the tears of Joy were warm; but it is easy to
agree, and give a reason for the difference; by saying, that the tears which
Joy sheds, are truly cold in comparison of others; but that they seem colder,
because they run down a face which that Passion has heated by the effusion of
spirits: On the contrary, those of Grief are colder in effect; but as they fall
on the cheeks, which the flight of spirits has deprived of heat, they seem to
be hotter; in the same manner, as hot water affoords diverse sentiments of hot
and cold, according as the hand is hotter or colder. But of this more exactly
hereafter in the discourse you have of Tears.

For that redness, that good case, and that vaporous heat which appears through
the outward parts, they also proceed from that effusion of spirits, which draw
along with them the blood, and the sweetest vapors which raise themselves in
the veins, and swell the parts they arrive at, coloring them vermillion, and
inspiring them with a sweet and moist heat.

The trembling of the lips comes also from the Spirits, which abundantly
flowing into those parts which are soft and suspended, agitate them with the
motion they have, and make them appear trembling, as it happens to leaves which
are shaken with the wind, or with rain.

The voice grows fuller, because the muscles which serve to form it are loosned
by heat, and give it a greater and larger passage; it is true; that it
sometimes becomes sharp and shrill, but that is the effect of a vehement
laughter, which contracts the muscles, and streightens, the conduit of the
voice; or else of impatience, or some other impetuous Passions which mingle
themselves with it, and oblige the soul to drive it out with violence: it often
stops it self all at once by the souls ravishment, which causes it to forget
the most part of its ordinary functions, and leaves the organs of the voice
without motion, and without action.

In fine, it is from thence that all natural virtues draw their force and
vigor; for as they do not work but by the assistance of the spirits, when they
come and shed themselves on the organs, they must necessarily grow stronger,
and their functions must be done more perfectly: so there are no ill humors
which may corrupt the purity of the blood, seeing the virtue which concocts
them is always mistress of them, and that which expels them finds them
obedient: for the spirits melt them and send them to the surface, and open the
passages to let them out: So that it is true, there is no Passion which is so
great friend to health as Joy, so as it be moderate: for if it be excessive, it
changes all natural economy, it quenches the heat of the intrails, and at
last by Mortal Syncopes, or by incurable languors, it causes even the loss of
our lives. We have already touched the Reasons in the former Discourse, where
we showed, that Love and Joy carried the spirits abroad with precipitation; it
often happens that in the violence of that transport they lose the union which
they should have with their principle, whence follow Faintings and Syncopes.
For I do not esteem that the dissipation of the Spirits, as is commonly said,
is the principal cause of those actions, since so many watchings, so many
toils, so many sicknesses, which dissipate them more then any Passion
whatsoever, cause not these sad Symptoms; but according to my opinion it comes
from that they disunite, and separate themselves from the heart; and that the
Soul being unable to animate the separated parts, or communicate any virtue to
them, the actions which they ought to do must cease by this separation which
the vehemence of their motion caused. This is the cause why water cast on the
face, oft-times puts away those faintings, and sends back the straggling
spirits to the heart, which would not be, were they quite lost: It is not but
that here they make a great dissipation, as they abundantly disperse themselves
on all the parts, and principally on the outward; and the soul, which is wholly
occupied in the enjoyment of good, takes no care to continue the course; and to
produce new ones, it must necessarily make a great loss of them, and
consequently, natural heat must diminish; whence comes weakness, and the
languishing of the parts, the corruption of the humors, corroding diseases,
and at last death. It might be demanded, why Joy causes death rather then Love
or Anger: but we have showed this in the particular discourse of the Passions.

There remains nothing now but the Motions of the Heart, of the Arteries, and
of Respiration to be examined, which are all alike in this; that they are
great, rare, slow, and without vehemence, unless this Passion be excessive; for
then they become little, weak and frequent, and even often they quite cease to
be. The hearts motion then is rare and flow, because the heat is not vehement,
having sent it with the spirits toward the outward parts. So that having no
need of any great refreshing, it hasts not so much to move; considering that
also the soul, which is ravished in the enjoyment of good, minds not the motion
of the heart, but as it is urged by necessity; whence it comes that it moves
slowly, and with great intervalls. But to supply its negligence, it every time
very much opens, and extends it, recompencing its neglect by the greatness of
its motion. Now because there must be always some vigor, thus to open and
extend that part, when the violence of the Passion has dissipated its forces,
the motion of the heart must become weak and little, and the necessity it has
to move for the generation of spirits, renders it quick and frequent, because
it cannot supply its slowness by the greatness of the motion: So that if the
weakness be extreme, it loses also its swiftness, and so becomes slow and
rare, and at last quite cease. The same is done in the Pulse, and in
Respiration; for they have the same customs, and the same causes with the
hearts motion, as Physic teaches us.

CHAP. IV. The Characters of Laughter.
I Know not why Socrates heretofore said, that Man was a ridiculous creature:
But I know, if any reason can make it credible, we need go no further to seek
it, then in Laughter it self; since there is nothing so ridiculous, as to see
him who undertakes to control all Nature, and who believes himself to be her
Confident, to be ignorant of what is most proper and familiar to him; To laugh
at every moment, without knowing wherefore; and to know neither the subjects
nor the motions which form this Passion. For all the great men of the past
ages, which have enquired the causes thereof, have freely confessed that their
minds were incapable of that knowledge; remitting us to that Philosopher who
laughed continually; and that it was hid in the same depth wherein he had
enclosed the Truth.

Now although we do not think our selves clearer sighted then they, yet our
design having obliged us to handle this Subject, we are constrained to go
beyond them, and to undertake a thing wherein they lost their courage. But what
success soever we have, the Discourse cannot but divert and please us: for, if
it do not discover the nature of Laughter, yet it will at least augment the
number of ridiculous things.

To begin therefore according to the Order we have hitherto observed, we must
first draw the picture thereof, and then enquire the causes which produce it.

Now as it may be weak, mean, or vehement, it is certain that we are chiefly to
observe the Characters of the later, because that in all kind of things the
Greater is always to be the measure of the Lesser, because its effects are more
sensible then the others: nay, we may even say, that there are no Passions, how
violent soever, which cause such great alterations in the body as this does.

For if you consider the Face; The Forehead extends it self, the Eye brows
decline themselves, the Lids contract themselves at the corners of the eyes;
and all the skin about them becomes uneven, and wrinkles it self all over: the
Eyes extenuate and half shut themselves; they grow sparkling and humid; and
even those from which Grief could never draw a tear, are then obliged to weep:
the Nose crumples up, and grows sharp; the Lips retire, and lengthen
themselves; the Teeth discover themselves; the Cheeks lift themselves up, and
grow more firm; and sometimes the middle of them sweetly hollows it self, and
forms those delightful pits wherein the Poets lodged Laughter with the Graces:
the Mouth, which is forced to open it self, discovers the trembling and
suspended Tongue; and the Voice which issues, is nothing but a piercing and
interrupted sound, which cannot be stopped, and which ends only with the loss
of our breath: the Neck swells, and shortens it self; all the Veins are great
and extended; a certain sweet splendour disperseth it self over all the face;
and how pale or severe soever it be, it must needs grow red, and appear content.

But all this is nothing in comparison of what the other parts suffer: The
Breast is so impetuously agitated, and with such suddenly-redoubled shakes, that
we can hardly breathe, that we lose the use of speech, and that it is
impossible to swallow whatsoever it be. So pressing a pain rises in the
Flanks, that it seems as if the intrails were torn, and that they would unfold
themselves. In this violence, we see all the body bend, and wreathe, and gather
it self together. The Hands are set on the sides, and press them forcibly;
sweat gets up in the Face; the Voice is lost in hickocks, and the Breath in
stifled sighs. Sometimes this agitation gets to so high an excess, that it
produces the same effects as Medicaments do, that it puts the Bones out of
joint, that it causes syncopes, and in fine, that it gives death. The Head and
the Arms suffer the same throws with the breast and the flanks; but you may
perceive how in these motions they throw themselves here and there with
precipitation and disorder; and that after they have been cast from one side to
the other, as if they had lost all their vigor. The Hands become feeble, the
Legs cannot support themselves, and the body is constrained to fall.

These are the principal parts which usually form vehement Laughter: For, to
describe all the diversity of motions, air, mine, and the posture it puts every
one in, were as much as if one would delineate all Men at once: since there is
not one who in laughing makes not some particular face; And it is certain, that
there are as many kinds of laughter as there are different faces. Even that
interrupted sound which accompanies it, is so diverse, that two men are hardly
to be found, who shall have it every way alike.

For the Mean Laughter, it causes almost the same alteration in the face, and
agitates the breast and the flanks in the same manner as vehement Laughter; but
it is with far less violence. It also takes not away respiration nor speech; it
only renders the voice grosser. Even sometimes it causes it to pass the
nostrils, and make an interrupted bellowing. Neither does it cause grief or
languor in the parts, or any of those troublesome accidents which are in the
other.

To conclude, the Smile, which is the weakest and the least of all, causes no
alteration but in the face, and chiefly on the lips and eyes: for the lids a
little contract themselves, the eyes sweeten, and the lips lengthen out
themselves, without obliging the mouth to open, and without changing either the
voice or speech: Even often it is only observable in the lips, as when it
comes from disdain, or from dissimulation, or from some sickness.

To discover then the source of all these motions, we must first see what those
things are which move us to Laughter: for, being as the Object and the Matter,
they are also the first Causes which contribute to its birth. Yet is it not a
thing so easily determined. And it seems as if Nature would render it self
ridiculous in ridiculous things, having made them so far distant the one from
the other, and so different amongst themselves, that it is almost impossible to
find any general notion, or common reason, which may reduce them under one
kind.

For we see that Laughter comes from pleasant and facetious actions and words,
from admiration, despite, scorn, caresses, tickling, and even from some
sicknesses. And as at first it seems as if there were no relation between all
these things, we may easily believe that Laughter is an equivocal word, which
marks effects of a different nature; and that that which comes from the most
part of these Objects, is feigned and lying, and has no real form of Laughter.

In effect, all those who have spoken of it, have placed them under diverse
kinds; some more, some less, according to the several motives of that Laughter
which they fancied in ridiculous objects: (I take here the word ridiculous, for
all what moves Laughter.) Now because the resolution of this difficulty wholly
depends on the knowledge of this motive, and that it is impossible to discern
true Laughter, or those objects which are truly ridiculous, if we know not the
principle, and the reason why it moves it; we must examine the opinions which
have been on this Subject, that we may choose the most reasonable, which may
serve for a foundation to know the nature and the effects of this Passion.

But we must first observe, that Laughter which is made by the convulsion of
the muscles of the face, was never taken by any for a true Laughter, being a
thing against Nature, whereto the Will never contributed, as it does in all
other things: Such perhaps is that which succeeds the wounds of the Diaphragma,
and that which that herb of Sardinia causes, which is called Apium risus,
whence the Proverb is of the Sardinian laughter. Even they say that Saffron,
the Tarantula, and some other Potions, produce the same effect. But perhaps the
Laughter which is caused by these later, is no true convulsion, no more then
that which arrives in doatings, and in the fits of the Mother; and that it may
have the same motive as true Laughter has, as you will see hereafter.

This being supposed, we might at first suspect, that those objects which cause
Laughter, are those which are pleasing and delightful; because that Laughter
and Tears being contrary, they must have contrary causes; and therefore that
Laughter comes from Joy, since Tears proceed from Grief. In effect, it seems
that Laughter is never separate from Pleasure; and even those who force
themselves to laugh, endeavor always to appear merry and contented. Yet
because all pleasing things do not move Laughter, that even it happens not when
Joy is at the highest; and that Beasts, which are affected with that Passion,
are not capable of Laughter; we must hold it for undoubted, that that then is
not the general motive, and that the Reasons to maintain this opinion do only
prove that the objects ought only to be pleasing, but not that they are
therefore ridiculous. And if Scorn and Indignation cause a true Laughter, it is
most likely that acceptableness and pleasure are not always to be found with it.

This consideration has made some think that Admiration was the cause of
Laughter, and that when any wonderful thing presented it self to our Minds, it
at the same time formed this Passion; and that for that cause Man only
laughed, because there was none but he that admired; That facetious words and
actions were ridiculous, because they are new, and that Novelty is the source
of Admiration; That, in fine, ignorants and fools laughed more then wise men,
because they find more things to be admired then they did. But although at
first this opinion take the Mind, yet does it not satisfy it; and has its
difficulties as well as the former: For, there are diverse things wonderful, and
which we admire, which do not make us laugh: even if admiration be very great,
it hinders Laughter. And it is to no purpose to say that it ought to be mean
and light to move it, since it often happens that we laugh at those things
which we very much admire. Indeed, the address which a facetious man has to
represent the actions, the words, the gestures of another, to tell jests, to
make subtle and ingenious encounters, is no less to be admired then that of a
Painter who makes some excellent design, or of a man who seriously relates
very fine things: Why then does the admiration which that causes, excite
Laughter, and that of this hinder it? Are there not an hundred kind of things
which are new, which are admired with mediocrity, as the most part of those are
which are rare, which yet cause not Laughter? On the contrary, are there not
some which seem to have lost the grace of a novelty, and which cannot beget
admiration, which yet are ridiculous? He who tells a good tale, is often the
first that laughs at it; and yet it is neither new nor admirable, seeing he
knew it before. As there are then ridiculous things which are mavelous, and
others which are not so, we must seek the cause elsewhere then in Admiration.

Many, to shun these difficulties, have joined these two opinions together, and
said, that Joy and Admiration was the true motive of Laughter; and that if
there are wonderful things which move it not, it is because they are not
agreeable, in the same manner as the agreeable are not ridiculous unless they
are mavelous. But it is certain, that the greatest part of the inconveniences
which we have observed, are herein also to be found; and that there are diverse
things which are pleasing and wonderful, which never move Laughter. Is there
any thing so fair or so admirable as the Sun? All the diversities of flowers
and fruits which the seasons bring us, all the treasures which the earth
affords us, all those masterpieces wherewith Art furnishes us, and all those
rarities which strangers send us, Are they not delightful? do they not oblige
us to admire them? Yet was never any body seen to laugh at the sight of all
these things.

Others have imagined that all these opinions might be maintained with
modification; that it was true, to speak absolutely, Joy and Admiration did not
cause Laughter, but when they were recreative, that is to say, when they were
not serious, and that they happened in Plays; then they move it; and that
Nature requiring these divertisements to refresh the Mind and the Body, and
give them new forces, it by that exterior motion made the pleasure appear
which it there searched. But are there not Plays and divertisements which do
not cause Laughter? And should we reduce them to facetious things, how should
we find them in ticklishness, in the encounter of friends, in indignation and
in anger, and even in the admiration of serious things?

This is what the Philosophers have left us touching ridiculous things* But
since they do not satisfy us, let us see what the Poets and Orators have said
on the Subject: for the Ridiculous is the object of Comedy; and the Orator is
sometimes obliged to employ it in his Discourses. Aristotle and Cicero must be
consulted about the business. The first, treating of Comedy, defined what was
ridiculous to be A deformity without a grief. And truly it seems, that what we
call Ridiculous, is an imperfection which in appearance causes no ill to him
who has it: For, did we think it would cause any, it would not move Laughter,
but Compassion. And this deformity is observable in all what is done or said
against the custom, expectation, or opinion of the Wise.

As for Cicero, he confesses there is deformity in the ridiculous; but he will
have another condition then that which Aristotle observed: For he says, that
its Nature consists in representing ugly and deformed things with a good grace.
And if there are words and actions to be found which delightfully discover the
defects of others, they will infallibly move Laughter.

These two Opinions have without reason been followed or rejected by many
Philosophers. For those who say it comprehends not all ridiculous things, and
that there is no ugliness or deformity at the first sight in persons which are
dear unto us, in tickling, and in diverse other serious things which make us
laugh; lastly, that an impertinent performs actions and discourses with an ill
grace, which are extremely ridiculous: Those, I say, are deceived as well as
others who in general seek the nature and essence of what is Ridiculous,
binding themselves to these definitions, as if they perfectly expressed it, and
perplexing their minds to excuse the defects they meet in them: for it is
certain, that neither the one nor the other consider the Ridiculous but in
relation to the Stage or the Bar; that Cicero observes that which befits an
Orator, and that Aristotle comprehends all the ridiculous Subjects which may
serve in Comedy. So that the Objections made against them are vain and weak,
forasmuch as tickling belongs no ways to the Theater, no more then
impertinencies done with an ill grace are not admitted into the Rules of
Oratory. And indeed, to show you that Aristotle did not discourse of the
Ridiculous like a Philosopher, and that he enquired not its essential form, he
has not mentioned those deformities in those places where he examined the
causes of Laughter. And were we to suppose it, would it not be useless to know
the nature of this Passion? What reason is there that an object should move
Laughter for being deformed without grief?

I know well that there are some who have said that Laughter was composed of
Grief and Joy; that that proceeds from deformity, as Joy comes from that it is
without Grief; and that in the combat which these two Passions give the Mind,
are formed those contrary motions of the heart, of the Diaphragma, and of the
other parts, which appear in Laughter. But what likelihood is there that Sorrow
should have a share in this action? How can it cause a violent agitation, or
subsist so long with that excess of Pleasure, being so little and so light as
it is figured? What Grief can we be sensible of at the meeting of persons we
love, in the relation of good news, or in some ingenious encounter? And we must
not say that the Smile, which these objects move, is no true Laughter: for the
one differs not from the other, but in that one is greater or less; and we see
every moment, that the same object moves Laughter in some, and but Smiles in
others.

These are the most considerable opinions which have been on this Subject,
which in my opinion are all wanting, in that they suppose that there are diverse
kinds of ridiculous things and of Laughters; and that there can no general
notion be found, which can be equally common to them: for I cannot imagine that
Nature, who is so regular and so uniform in all its other actions, should
forget it self in this; that she would give several causes to one effect; and
that it being true that all kind of Laughter has somewhat that is common, the
soul should have no general motive for so common and general an action.

We must then endeavor to discover it, and if we do not succeed, use the same
excuses which the difficulty of the enquiry afforded those who made, it before
us; since perhaps, there is nothing in nature whose knowledge is more hid, then
that of this.

Whereunto that we may attain, we must first consider: that we never laugh, but
when the soul is in some manner deceived, and surprised; as may be seen in all
the ridiculous actions which Aristotle calls deformities without grief; since
they are all against the custom, against the expectation, and against the
sense of the Wise.

It is the same thing in the unexpected encounter of a pleasing thing, and in
an injury which we receive from a man we did believe ought not to offend us; in
the good, or in the ill, which happens to those who are worthy of it: For there
is therein every way somewhat, which by its novelty surpriseth the mind, which
is to be found even in tickling; whence it comes to pass, that we laugh not
when we tickle our selves, because we are not new, nor strange to our selves.

Yet this surprise must be light; for if it be violent, it astonisheth the
mind, and so powerfully averts it, that it cannot go to the outward parts to
make them move. So that objects which are very wonderful, and extremely
pleasing move us not to laughter, but to ravishment and ecstasies, as terrible
ones cause fear and astonishment; it is not that we say that the lightest
surprise is that which moves laughter the more; it is only to be understood,
in comparison of that which astonisheth or ravisheth the mind; for it is
evident that the greater, so as it do not disturb and carry away the spirit,
will cause the more vehement laughter; making not only the muscles of the face
move, but even those of the flanks and breasts, as in its place hereafter.

This surprise must also be pleasing, and those ridiculous objects must produce
some kind of Joy in the soul. It is manifestly sensible in facetious things,
and in the encounter of friends: and we never seek the occasions of laughing,
but for the pleasure we think to find therein. And although we may doubt of
that Laughter which indignation, scorn, and anger sometimes move; yet we will
show, that nevertheless there is still somewhat which affords contentment,
either true or feigned: for it is certain, there is a lying and dissembled
Laughter, wherein effectually there is no sensible pleasure, and in which we
only feign we receive some; which is very common in flattery and complacency.
Often, even although the object be pleasing, the soul will find in it more
pleasure then it is capable to yield, and so moves, and, as they say, tickles
it self into a Laughter.

But what I esteem most considerable to understand the nature of Laughter, it
is, that we seldom use it alone, and that the most part of those objects which
powerfully excite it in company, move it not at all in a solitude; so that it
seems company affords somewhat to its production, that the soul will make it
appear that she is surprised; which would be needless, were there no witness of
what she would do: so that she ought not to move Laughter when we are alone.
And if in company there happen a pleasant surprise which moves it not, it is
because she will not make it appear; as when there is somewhat that displeases
her, or when prudence or dissimulation hinder it. Yet must we not believe that
she makes use of laughter as a mark taken at pleasure, such as those are which
proceed from our choice and invention; but as a natural mark, which has a
necessary connection with the emotion she represents.

To know what this connection is, and the particular reason which obliges the
Soul to use this motion rather then another, to mark the surprise she is in;
you must suppose that in all surprises the Soul retires, and reenters her self,
the encounter of an unthought-of thing opposing it self to the liberty of her
thoughts, and forcing her to recollect her self the better to discern the
presented Object: and then if she intend to make her condition known, she must,
according to the Law which proportions the organs and the effects to their
causes, stir up in the outward parts some motion like unto that which she
suffers, and consequently cause the muscles to retire toward their origin as
she retires and recollects her self in her self.

Now because the Mind may be surprised by troublesome objects as well as by
pleasing ones, this retraction of the muscles may be as well with grief as with
joy: and indeed, you see that in Tears the lips and some other parts of the
face retire in the same manner as in Laughter. Whence it is, that there are
persons in whom it would be difficult to discern at first sight the one from
the other, so like they are to one another: which has made some think that
Nature, who begins our life with crying and tears, made an essay, and designed
these touches which were to be perfected in Laughter, which is never formed
before forty days after birth. Yet as we can never say that the retraction of
the lips, which accompanies grief, is a true Laughter; so we must thence
conclude that Laughter consists not in the simple motion of the muscles, but
that there is also a certain air which Joy sheds over the face, and which
causes the principal difference.

However it be, Laughter being principally destined for conversation, the
objects which particularly respect it, are those also which the most easily
cause Laughter: Such are the actions and facetious words which comprehend all
what is uncomely and deformed, light hurts purposely done or received out of
folly, cheats of small consequence, jeers; in a word, all deformities without
grief: for all these things move Laugher, forasmuch as they mark the defects of
those qualities which are necessary for conversation; as, of a good grace, of
decency, of advisedness, of kindness, and of the rest: the Mind finding it
self surprised, when it sees contrary actions to those virtues which are the
foundations of society and of a civil life.

All the difficulty which there is herein, is, to know why the Soul would have
the surprise it suffers in these encounters appear; for it seems as if it were
a defect, which she would do better to hide then to discover. In effect, it is
a badge of Ignorance, to suffer our selves to be surprised with a Novelty, as
it is a mark of Malice to be pleased at the defects of others: Whence it is
that Wise men laugh seldomer then others, because that they are neither
Ignorant nor Malicious; that few things are new to them, and that they easily
excuse imperfections. Yt if you consider that Man is naturally a lover of
himself, that he always pretends excellency and superiority; we will not think
it strange, if, seeing the defects of others, he seeks to testify that he is
exempt from them, and so would make you believe, by the surprise and
astonishment they give him, that he is more perfect then they are. Now if a man
laugh at his own defects, it is the same as when he is angry with himself: for,
the trouble which these Passions involve the Mind in, hinders it from
discerning the objects which move it, and make it esteem that strange, which is
its own. However it be, this reason is general for all ridiculous deformities,
and for all things which we scorn: It may even sometimes be applied to that
laughter which Anger and Indignation move, forasmuch as either of them
supposing some injustice, either in the offense received, or in the good or ill
which we see happen to those who are unworthy of it; the Soul, which testifies
the astonishment it causes, would also silently persuade, that she is not
capable of those ill actions, and that she is too just to do good or ill to
those who deserve it not. And it is evident, that in this thought she finds
her self tickled with some secret joy which accompanies this pretended
excellency; but it is small, by reason of the displeasure which goes along with
these Passions; the thought of the present ill stifling it even almost at the
same time that it is formed: whence it also happens, that this Laughter is
light, and of a short continuance.

Now if in these encounters we are sensibly touched with any pleasure, we need
not doubt but that all the objects which cause Laughter are not pleasing, as we
said at the beginning of this Discourse. All the difference which there is
therein, is, that the Pleasure which follows them has diverse principles: To
some, it comes from self love, and from that proper excellency which the soul
is glad to make appear: to others, it comes from the love of benevolence, and
respects society, which requires the communication of goods and pleasures: For
when we laugh at the sight of a friend with caresses and complacencies, we
endeavor by that natural language to persuade that the persons, the actions,
and the words are pleasing to us, and that we esteem them, either by reason of
the excellency they have, or for the pleasure or profit they afford us.

You will perhaps say, that all these conditions are not in Tickling, since
that in stead of moving Joy, it causes Sorrow; That there are few persons
which apprehend it not; and therefore that it is not likely that Laughter which
comes from it, should be accompanied with pleasure; and that the soul should
use it for a mark of that pleasant surprise which she is sensible of. But if
these Reasons were good, we must banish Pleasure from all the Passions; the
object of Love would no longer be pleasing, because that is pungent and
unquiet, and that there are but few who fear not to be found therewith. We must
even say as much of Joy, since it causes faintings, and that we fear the
excesses thereof, and that sometimes it causes death. I must confess that
Grief mixeth it self with these Passions but as a stranger, having no share in
their birth or preservation; they owe both the the one and the other to
Pleasure; and when that is no more, then they must necessarily die. Whatsoever
we will believe, we cannot doubt but there is Pleasure in Tickling, since it is
never made but by a delicate touch which flatters the Senses: For we cannot say
that that kind of Touching can hurt them; since it provokes sleep, and that by
harder pressing the parts we harm them not. On the contrary, you must allow it
for granted, that the soul is pleased with that kind of touch, and that it is
ranked amongst the caresses; since we never expect displeasure from those who
tickle us, but esteem them always as our friends: So that Laughter which
accompanies that motion, is a witness that the soul will return the pleasure it
receives, and that the person which moves it is grateful to her. Perhaps also
that that excellency whereof we have spoken contributes somewhat thereunto;
forasmuch as the sense of Feeling being the mark of the good or ill quality of
the Mind, and that accordingly as that is more perfect, men are also more
sprightly, as Physiognomy and experience teach us, Man by a natural instinct is
pleased with Tickling, and forms a Laughter to signify the perfection of his
Senses and of his Mind.

This then is the nature of this Passion, whence in my opinion it is easy to
draw the motive of ridiculous objects: for although it seems we have the same
Sense with those who have placed the ridiculous amongst new and pleasing
things; and that the same absurdities which we have observed in that opinion,
are to be met in ours: yet if you observe what we have said, you will see a
very great difference; because that we add to novelty a circumstance which they
have omitted; to wit, that the soul will witness the surprise which that
novelty gives her: so that there are new and pleasant things which do not make
us laugh; forasmuch as the soul intends not to discover the sense it has
thereof; so when we are alone, and fancy some merry matter, we usually do not
laugh at it, but only when we relate it, because then the mind designs to
witness the surprise it caused.

I know well it will hereupon be said, that we often laugh alone, and that
there are objects which are so powerful that they draw Laughter from the wisest
and most solitary men; and that it is common for Fools to laugh in the same
manner. But this Truth destroys not that which we have established; forasmuch
as all this happens from the error of the Imagination, which diverts it self
from the end Nature had prescribed it. And there are few effects in the
Passions, wherein the same disorder may not be: For Example, the Voice, which
was given to creatures to show forth the motions of their Soul, does often go
away through the violence of Grief: Even there are persons who speak and
complain when they are alone; and yet it is against the institution of Nature,
who destined the voice and speech for instruments of society, and to serve for
that communication which creatures ought to have together. Now all this
proceeds from the disturbance the soul feels, and which makes it wander from
the way it should keep.

And without doubt, the laughter which is observed in doatings, comes from the
same source; the Imagination forcing ridiculous objects, which afterward move
the Appetite to produce Laughter. For although it be difficult to comprehend
how she can figure any pleasant thing amongst the griefs those evils produce;
and that Reason, which is sometimes at liberty in these encounters, sees
nothing which contents it; that she even confesses this Laughter to be forced,
and yet that she cannot hide it: it is nevertheless very true, that there is
still a secret pleasure, either in the superior part of the soul, or in the
sensitive. For the alienation of the Mind takes away from frantic persons the
sense of ill; and gives liking to the Ridiculous Chimera's which are there
formed, to move Laughter: So that if Reason be not hurt, the Pleasure must be
hid in the Senses, and unwittingly to the Understanding it causes that
commotion there. The Imagination discerns not always exactly the Pleasure which
the objects form in the particular Senses, either because it is distracted or
surprised, or because the impression they make is secret; although still the
spirits, the humors, and the bodies agitate themselves powerfully. So the
first motions of Passions happen in the Mind unawares: and there are diverse
things which move us, which we can hardly say whether they are troublesome or
graceful: we must not then wonder if we sometimes laugh without knowing the
cause thereof; it is sufficient if the Senses have a confused and secret
knowledge to stir up afterward that motion in the Appetite: for there is so
strong a connection between these powers, that the one is no sooner touched by
the object, but the other resents it. In this precipitation, the Soul has not
time to discern what it does; and the parts are sooner touched, then she is
advised of it; and she is not then able to stop the shake which she has given
her self; the spirits and the humors having received the impression thereof,
whose impetuosity cannot be so suddenly stayed. And hence the difficulty comes
to hinder Laughter when it is vehement, although it be a voluntary action; in
the same manner as it happens in other Passions, wherein the Soul suffers the
same violence as he who runs into a precipice: for although he gave himself
that motion, it is no more in his power to stop it; he must abandon himself to
the swinge he has taken, and to that steepness whence he has precipitated
himself.

What remains of most importance, is to know why, of all creatures, Man only
laughs, since it appears that other beasts also may be surprised with Novelty:
and it is not impossible but that they may have a design to show how sensible
they are thereof, since they make other things known by their voice and by
their actions. But as there are but two motives which oblige Man to witness the
surprise which ridiculous objects cause; to wit, his own excellency, and civil
society; it is certain that the first is useless to beasts, who are never
touched with glory or with vanity. And for Society, it is so imperfect amongst
them, that it respects but the necessities of the body, to which indeed they
work in common, but yet it is but for their particular interest; so that there
is no communication of the pleasure which every one resents; considering that
the novelty of agreeable things surpriseth them not, to speak properly, no more
then they do men who are quite stupid; because they do not discern whether
things are new or no, considering them but as if they had always been present,
although, for to know them new, we must imagine they were not always so.

And it is for that reason, that children laugh not before the fourtieth day:
for the Soul, which is as it were wholly buried, and as it were drowned in the
great quantity of the humors they have, is capable of no knowledge, but
acording as humidity diminishes these lights increase, and so by degrees she
gets the power of laughing, beginning by a smile, and after being capable of
vehement Laughter. Perhaps some will say, that the excellency wherewith man
flatters himself, and the love of society, can no more reach a child at forty
days old then other creatures, being not of a condition to mind either of
them; and therefore that they then are not more capable of laughing then beasts
are, if there be no other motions but those for laugher.

But it is not necessary exactly to know those things for which we have a
natural inclination; for desires being born with us, carry us also by the pure
instinct of nature to the enquiry of those goods; and from the time that our
soul has the liberty to act, she produces actions which show the secret fence
she has of her own excellency, and of her being destined to a civil life. Now
as beasts are capable of neither of them, they have also no share in this
instinct, whose sourse is hidden in the intellectual parts of the Soul, and can
come from no inferior power: for although there are some kinds of Laughter,
which seem wholly to depend from the sensitive, as that which comes from
tickling: it is certain that without the influence of the Reasonable Faculty,
the Senses cannot produce that effect; its light insensibly disperseth it self
on all its actions, and the neighborhood they have therewith always
communicates somewhat of its perfection, which still serves to show that beasts
are not capable of laughter, because their Senses are deprived of that
brightness, and of that influence which Reason causes to flow in ours.

Before I finish this discourse, I must tell you by the way, who those are who
are most given to laughter; it is certain, that young folks laugh more
willingly then old ones, women then men, fools then wise men, sanguine then
choleric, phlegmatic then melancholy; And this comes from that laughter being
made by a pleasing surprise, which we would make known, those are more easily
surprised, and are naturally merrier then these: For the spirits which move
quick, and which consider not things are most easy to be deceived; and those
who are the most merry, are the most easily touched with pleasant objects, and
are more fit for conversation then others who are severe and serious: Yet as
there are diverse sorts of ridiculous objects, that some respect our proper
excellency, and others society; that there are some which require a great
knowledge, as quaint jeers, and others wherein a mean one is only requisite:
So there are also some persons which are more easily touched then others; the
young and choleric laugh rather at the defects of others, then the old and the
wise, being naturally insolent and proud; fools and ignorants observe not
jests, or witty encounters, women and those of a sanguine, complexion are more
fit for the laughter which caresses occasion, because they have a natural
inclination to flattery.

After having thus discovered the nature of laughter, and of ridiculous things,
we shall easily give a reason for all the effects which this Passion produces
on the body; for there are none which proceed not from the surprise, and Joy
which the Soul resents: the splendour of the eyes, the redness of the face, and
tears come chiefly from Joy; all the rest come from surprise which contracts
the muscles toward their principle; the soul using that exterior motion to
show that which it suffers interiourly; because as we have said, she retires
into her self when she is surprised; so that this contraction of the muscles is
as the spring of all the other effects of laughter: And perhaps there is no
other made by the souls command, all the rest being of necessity and without
design: For it is very unlikely that the soul should intend to form all those
plights and wrinkles which are to be at the corners of the eyes, to hold the
eyes half shut, and the mouth open to render the voice piercing and
interrupted, and so of the rest. But these are effects which by a necessary
pursuit accompany the motion of the muscles.

The better to understand this, you must remember from what we have already
said, that when the surprise is light, the muscles of the lips, forehead, and
lids only move; because the Soul intending to make the emotion it feels
appear, uses this as the most manifest and most sensible motion: But when the
Surprise is great, it moves all the muscles of the face and breast; and in fine,
if it be very vehement, there are none in the whole body which are not moved.

Now as there are but few muscles which have not their contraries, and that
there are some which lift up a part, or carry it on one side; there are also
those which bring it down, and draw it on the other side: And yet in this
contrariety of motion there are some stronger then others; the actions they are
to perform requiring more or less strength: From thence it comes, that in
Laughter you see the parts take that figure which this contrariety of motions
gives them. So the Mouth keeps half open, because the muscles which serve to
open and shut it, each moving his way, it must necessarily retain that figure;
and even it must appear more shut then open, because the muscles which serve to
shut are the strongest. So the Forehead remains smoothe and stretched, being
equally drawn upwards and downwards. The Eyes also are half shut, because the
muscles which incline the lids, are stronger then those which lift them up; and
so consequently the wrinkles are formed about the temples, the skin, which is
delicate and fleshless, being drawn by the motion of those muscles, and
constrained to grow uneven. The Nose shrinks up, and grows sharp, because the
muscles which lift it up, having no contraries, have always the liberty to lift
it up, which cannot be done, but that the skin which covers them must wrinkle,
and the extremity of the Nose appear sharp. The Lips lengthen out themselves,
because the muscles which draw them on the side, are stronger then those which
contract them; and even the upper lip stretches it self more then the under,
because its muscles are more powerful. The Tongue shortens it self a little,
and suspends it self, being equally drawn on either side. The Neck contracts
and thickens it self, because the muscles shorten when they retire themselves.
The Cheeks for the same reason lift themselves up, and grow firmer; and, in
some, a little dent is formed in the middle of them, the skin being tied in
those parts by some small veins which restrain it whilst the surrounding parts
lift themselves up.

Before we seek the causes of the breasts and flanks motions, and of that
interrupted voice which appears here; we must observe that the muscles do not
retire themselves in a vehement laughter by an uniform and continued
contraction, but by several girds and shakes; whether it be that in the design
the Mind has to witness its surprise, it moves it self, and redoubles its
struglings; or that the novelty of the object sollicites it, and by fits
represents it self unto it, as it chances to be in other Passions, wherein
every moment the soul animates and transports it self by those new Idea's which
the object forms in the Fancy.

This then is the reason why those redoubled motions appear in Laughter, and
chiefly in the flanks, by reason of the Diaphragma which is there situated, and
which is extremely moveable. And because the agitation is violent, it causes
also a pain in this part, whither the hands cast themselves, as if they ought
to ease it. For although they unwittingly do it, Nature who takes care for the
preservation of its parts, directs the hands to those places where the ill may
offend them, without being led thither by Reason or Discourse. So when a man
falls, or is ready to receive a blow, the hands by a natural instinct cast
themselves presently before the face.

As for the rest, as the Diaphragma is the chief organ of respiration, that
must necessarily be made with the same shakes which that part suffers: and
afterward the voice must be interrupted, because the air issues not equally,
and the muscles which should form it, start up as the Diaphragma does. For we
said, that all the muscles retired themselves by surprises in a vehement
laughter: Whence it happens that the head, the shoulders, and the arms shake
themselves in the same fashion as the flanks do. In fine, this general
contraction which is made in all the organs of voluntary motion, is the cause
that all the body folds up and contracts it self, that it is impossible to
swallow any thing, because the muscles which serve for that action, contract
and shut up their passages; and that Laughter sometimes causes the same
effects as Medicines do, by the compression of those parts which contain the
humors. Now forasmuch as these frequent girds of the Diaphragma hinder the
liberty of respiration, and are the cause it cannot contract and enlarge it
self as it ought; thence it comes, that at last breath and speech is lost, that
the pulse grows irregular, weakness follows, and sometimes death: For
respiration is so necessary for life, that when it is hindered, the forces are
lost, and the whole economy of Nature changed. For which cause, in this
necessity the soul struggles very much to oppose this disorder: sometimes she
makes haste to draw a great quantity of air, as if she stole that refreshment
from the violence of her passion: sometimes she makes a long breathing, to
drive away those fumes which the heat of the heart at every moment produces,
and so forms those precipitated sobs and sighs which mingle themselves with
Laughter.

I do not stay particularly to examine why the Pulse beats irregularly, nor why
weakness and syncopes happen in this encounter: It is well known that the Pulse
and Respiration follow one the other, being both destined to one end; and that
weakness and faintings come from the disorder which is made in the heart, which
cannot suffer a greater, then the hinderance of respiration.

Before we end this enquiry, it will not be amiss to rehearse the opinions
which have been hitherto held touching the motion of the muscles in Laughter;
because the absurdities in them, will the more confirm the causes we have
deduced. All who have spoken thereof, have agreed in this point, that this
motion is made out of necessity, and that the Soul is not mistress thereof: But
some have believed the Spirits were the cause; others, that it was the
agitation of the heart. The first say that Joy driving the Spirits to the
outward parts, it therewithal fills the muscles, which are thereby constrained
to shrink up and contract themselves, as it happens in convulsionfits. But if
this were true, all the Passions which carry the Spirits outwardly, must move
Laughter: Shame, Anger, and Desire would never appear without it; and a Fever
and pain would cause a man to laugh continually, seeing they fill the face with
blood and spirits. Others who believe the agitation of the heart is the source
of all these motions, say that Joy causing it to move, the Diaphragma which is
tied to it, must necessarily do so following its motion, and that after it
moves the muscles of the breast and lips, wherewith it has communication and
sympathy, as it is easy to judge by the convulsion of the lips, which always
accompanies the hurts of the Diaphragma. To confirm this, they assure us, that
beasts laugh not, because their Diaphragma is tied to the heart with looser and
weaker ligatures then it is to man's, whence it is that the heart cannot shake
it whatever commotion Joy make.

But this opinion is no less absurd then the former; for then in all the
Passions wherein the heart is extraordinarily agitated, the Diaphragma must be
shaken in the same manner, and must move Laughter; and even Laughter could
never be without the agitation of the Diaphragma, if it were true that its
contraction causes that of the lips, which are all contrary to experience: And
therefore the observation they bring of the ligaments of the Diaphragma is
inconsiderable, and serves not at all to prove what they pretend: For if that
of men is more strongly tied to the membrane that covers the heart, then to
that of beasts; that comes from that it being inclined downwards, and
altogether hanging in the humane body, by reason of its upright figure, it is
necessary it should be more strongly born up then that of beasts which has not
that situation.

As for the sympathy it has with the lips, I find it somewhat doubtful,
because besides that it communicates not to them all the dispositions it has,
we have often observed great hurts in that part, which have not excited
Laughter; and if that have sometimes happened, I believe not that it was an
effect of the convulsion; since Hippocrates says, that who so receives a wound
in that part, laughs from the first of his hurt, and feels no convulsion till
the third day after; so that it is likely it was not the convulsion, but rather
the raving whereinto he fell, which caused that Laughter after the manner
beforesaid.

It is then a most certain thing, that the motion of the muscles which forms
Laughter, is a voluntary action made by the souls command, and not by
necessity, as tears, sweat, the luster and the redness of the face are, so that
they may be hindered and restrained at first, when the humors and the spirits
are not yet much shaken; and thence it comes that oftentimes holding your mouth
shut, your breath and voice being constrained to pass through the nostrils,
cause an interrupted bellowing, which is observed in laughing.

As for the luster of the eyes, the color and blthness which appears in the
face; for the voice which becomes grosser for sweat and tears, we have already
said they come from Joy, which every way disperseth the spirits, dissolves the
humors, and opens the passages. But I would add for what concerns Tears; that
the motion of the muscles, which causes the eyes and the lids to move, is the
principal cause thereof. For when they come to close themselves, they press and
squeeze the humors and the spirits, and constrain them to issue; and indeed all
those parts are soft and moist, and the under-lid is situated so, that it
easily receives the humors which run from the neighboring parts: It seems even
that Nature destined them to that end; were it to entertain the freshness, and
natural humidity of the eye, or to discharge it from that which might
incommodate it? And there is a great appearance that the little holes which
appear on the side of that lid, when it begins to quit the corner of the eye,
was only made to void those humors, when they are in too great a quantity;
which being so, we need not doubt but when that part contracts it self, the
humor which is contained therein, must be forced to issue at that little
passage, and must render the eyes moist: And what confirms me in this opinion,
is, that tears run not in Laughter, as in Joy, and in Grief: it seems that they
are forced, and that they issue but by compulsion; and it is easy to judge
that their source comes not from so high a place as the others, and that you
need go no farther then the neighborhood to seek it; neither are they ever so
abundant as in those Passions, the eyes from whence they come being not capable
to contain so much humor as the brain; and even those whom sorrow has never
caused to weep, by reason of their natural dryness, find tears when they
laugh, because they come but from the neighboring parts, no more then those
which sore eyes sometimes cause. Let us then conclude that Joy carries the
humors, and the spirits to the outward parts, and that the agitation of the
muscles stirs them, and sends them out, whence comes tears in the eyes, and
sweat in the face, and flanks; Because that it is in that place where the
Motion is most violent, and the skin most delicate.

CHAP. V. The Characters of Desire.
IF the Soul (according to Socrates) has wings, they can only be in the
Desires; it is they which move her wherever she will go: they raise her up to
heaven, and make her descend into the abyss; and by a strange and wonderful
kind of motion, they cause her to go out of her self without dividing her, and
transport her everywhere without ever quitting the place wherein she is. And we
may say, that Nature was never so wise or ingenious in any of her works, as in
this: For, having made the Soul void and unprovided of all things, and having
placed all necessary goods without her, she was obliged to furnish her with a
virtue which might carry her toward them, and which might unite them together.
She must have afforded her, in the prison wherein she has enclosed her, the
use of that liberty which was born with her; and without breaking her chains,
she must suffer her to go through the Universe, which she has submitted to her
laws and judgments. In fine, after having been drawn from heaven, and been
banished from the place of her birth, she must needs give way, at least to her
thoughts, to return sometimes thither. And that during her exile she may have
some commerce with those Divine things wherewith she is allied, which at last
ought to crown the pains and labors of her banishment; now she has given her
Desires, to draw her to those goods she was without; to set her at liberty, and
to raise her up to heaven, which is the place of her nativity, and the source
of her felicities.

We must indeed believe that the principal objects which ought to move this
fair Passion in us, are not to be found on earth, nor amongst vile and
transitory things: our Soul being immortal, needs not corruptible things: And
if there are things which conduce to her perfection, they must be more noble
and more excellent then she: she must seek them from above. In a word, God
alone should inflame her Desires, since he alone can fill that infinite depth
and immense vastness of hers.

Neither did this wise Philosopher who fancied she had wings, think they were
for any other use but to carry her toward that primary and sovereign Idea of
Good. When he perceived her to descend, and run after corruptible things, he
then believed she had lost them; that she rather got a fall, then made a
flight; that she was then in the body, not only as in a Prison, but as in a
Tomb: For being sensible of no natural motion therein, nor seeing no agitation
of that Divine fire wherewith they say she is clothed, he had reason to believe
that she ceased to live, or that she transmigrated into the nature of those
Bruits which only look on the earth, and which according to his opinion are
rather shadows then that they have true beings. It is true, that the Senses
which are under her conduct, oblige her to seek what is fit for her; that she
must provide for the necessities of the body, which serves her in her
functions: But Reason has reduced her cares to such narrow bounds, and Nature
has rendered necessary things so common, that there is scarce a way left to
wish them: at least, if we must employ thereabouts a part of our Desires, it
ought to be the weakest, and the least.

It were indeed to offend the dignity of the Soul, and the excellency of those
Goods whereto she ought to aspire, to destine so many noble desires which she
can form, to such vile and useless things; it were even in stead of enriching
her, to render her necessitous, since it is certain, that Desire is the measure
of Poverty, and that as many things as the Soul desires, so many things does
she stand in need of: So that, in seeking more goods for the body then are
needful, she renders it so much the more necessitous, and oppresses it with
the poverty she has caused.

Lastly, the Desires being as the pawns and earnests which the Soul gives of
her subjection to those things she seeks, if they are conformable to Nature,
and her dignity, this subjection is honest and lawful; they are her first steps
toward virtue and felicity: But if she engages her self to subjects unworthy
of her, she submits her self to her enemies, and opens a door to all vices and
mischances which may befall her.

We ought to engage our selves no further in these Considerations which belong
to Moral Philosophy; we will therefore pursue our Design, and present you with
the Characters of this Passion.

It is a bold undertaking, to design the picture of Desire. It is so subtle
and so changeable a Passion, that it is almost impossible to find colors
wherewith to represent it: It is a Proteus which assumes as many figures as
there are imaginary goods: It incessantly flies like the wind, it everywhere
mixeth it self like the air: And Picture cannot have a greater trouble to form
bodies for these things, then the Mind to design the Characters of this
Passion.

It is true, there are Desires which may easily be expressed; that without
difficulty we may describe Ambition, Avarice, and Luxury; that Hunger, and
other Appetites of Sense, may easily be expressed. But to touch these
differences, is not to form a general Idea of Desire, as we have obliged our
selves to do. To follow then the Order we have proposed, we must take off this
Passion from all particular objects, and consider only the effects which are
common to all kinds. We will then begin by its Moral actions.

Although Desires, as children of Love, make the same advance and growth with
Love it self, and that at their birth they are but small sparks which by little
and little inrease, and afterward become great flames; yet it often happens
that they break out all at once, and that at first they have the same force and
vehemence which time uses to give them; you would think them those artificial
fires which kindle in an instant, and whose flame no sooner appears, but it
devours all the matter which serves for its food, which carries with it all
that stops it, and overcomes all that opposes its course. For at the same time
that they take in the Mind, they occupy all its thoughts, they take away its
reason, and hurry it toward the desired good through all obstacles and
hindrances that oppose it. At that time, she slights all counsels, and all
danger. Prohibition kindles her lusts, and difficulty provokes them: Neither
does she believe that her Desires can be noble, unless they are extreme; nor
generous, unless they be rash.

In pursuit of these dangerous Maxims, you need not wonder that he who is
moved with this Passion, becomes insolent and importunate; he speaks but of
what he wishes, he incessantly demands it, neither does a refusal give him the
check; and when his mouth is stopped, his eyes still solicit for it, and beg
more eagerly then his words did before. You may observe a certain impatient
ardor, and I know not what urging avidity which seems to pursue the desired
good. And when it is presented to them, you would say they throw themselves on
it, that they ravish it, and devour it even with their looks.

But if in this encounter his eyes are clear sighted, his judgment is blinded;
he neither considers his own nor other men's condition. In his pursuits, there
always is either an insolent liberty, or an infamous submission: and all the
excuse he has for his impudence or baseness, is, that he believes he deserves
what he desires, and that absolutely he must have it. To obtain it, what cares
and what pains he takes! He goes, he comes, he seeks; he advises with one, he
asks help of another; he threatens, he begs: in fine, he is never at rest, and
suffers no body to be so; for even when he is alone, he turns over in his mind
all those powers which may serve or travers him. He has no thoughts wherein
some of his friends or of his enemies are not interessed: and whoever could see
the designs he meditates in his heart, would say that it was there where all
the storms were formed, which were to trouble all the world. But indeed, all
these tempests commonly are nothing else but a noise; they vanish in useless
and impotent designs; and all the ill they cause, is that they drive away the
tranquillity of the Mind they move in. And truly, whoever desires, is exposed
to four Passions, which, as impetuous winds, incessantly agitate him: Audacity
and Fear, Hope and Despair, do alternatively shake him, and often so hastily
succeed one the other, that they mix and confound themselves together. He
fears, he hopes, he despairs at the same time; he wills, and he will not; and
often, through the violence of desiring, he knows not what he desires.

His irresolution and his disquiet appears even outwardly: for he cannot remain
in one place, or in one posture; he turns from the one side to the other; he
sits, he rises, he goes with long strides, and stops of a sudden. Sometimes he
so profoundly doats, that you would think him ravished in an Ecstasy; and at
that instant he awakes, sending forth, with great sighs, now a sharp, and now a
languishing voice. His words are interrupted with sobs and tears, and his
discourse is full of long exclamations and passionate accents, which commonly
accompany impatience, regret, and languor. He most commonly speaks to himself,
interrogates and answers himself: And if others entertain him, his mind is
always distracted, his answers confused and entangled, and sometimes even his
speech is cut quite off, what endeavor soever he makes to utter it. His mouth
is filled with a clear and subtle water; his tongue trembles by intervals; and
licking his lips, he moistens and whitens them with froth. His face is swelled,
and grows red; his head advances it self on the desired object; his arms
extend themselves toward it. Even his heart, as straightened and contracted as it
is, darts it self out in great throbs, and raises the breast with so much
violence, that the ribs sometimes are disjoynted. Appetite and Sleep fosake
him. Sometimes he grows Gray in a moment; all his radical moisture is consumed;
his body grows lean and dry; and nothing but Enjoyment or Death can terminate
his languor and his desires.

PART. 2. Of the Nature of Desire.
AT first, it seems as if there were no difficulty to say what desire is; as it
never forms it self, but for those things which we have not, and which we would
have, we may easily believe that the object which excites it, is an absent good
that the Soul endeavors to draw near unto it, and that the motion it makes
toward it, causes also all the essence of this Passion.

But who ever examines it carefully, will find more doubts then resolutions,
and in pursuit will confess that there are many things to be desired in the
common knowledge of the desires; for besides that we desire the good we
possess, and that ill oftentimes is wished; it is evident that this definition
confounds desire and Love, and makes no essential difference which may
distinguish them one from another; for if the good by being absent moves the
desire, we must cease to love that good when it is absent from us, or Love and
Desire must be but one Passion, although it be an unheard of thing amongst the
Philosophers, that two species should be confounded in one, and that we should
cease to love good when it is no longer present. Besides that absence seems not
to be the true Object of Desire, nor to be any part of it, as some have
thought, since there is nothing in it which is able to draw the appetite to it,
being rather an il then a good; and therefore the desire having no other object
but goodness, and seeing the motion it makes toward it ought to be like that
of Love, it must needs be (against the maxims of the most wholesome
Philosophy) that they are not two different Passions; and that Love, Desire,
and Joy it self, are but the same thing.

Now this conclusion took its original from that these Passions were defined in
too general terms, and that the difference of the motion was not specified,
which was proper to every of them: for since all their essence consists in
motion, if they are different amongst themselves, it must be by the diversity
of their motions, and their definitions must express the particular agitation
which is found in every of them.

To find that then of Desire, we must suppose that this Passion always
follows Love: because we only Desire the things we believe good; and when ill
excites our desires, it is always under the show and appearance of good: For
the death which an unhappy man seeks, seems to him the haven and end of his
miseries: danger to men of courage is the fountain of glory and honor. In
fine, all the world desires the estrangement of ill, for that it is a good to
be delivered from it.

Desire therefore has good for its object, and consequently it always follows
Love; since Love is the first motion the Soul makes after good; in effect
as soon as the appetite has received the image, and Idea of good, it moves
toward it, and at that instant unites it self to it, because it is presented
to it; and this union causes the Passion of Love, as we have said before: but
because this union gives us not always the perfect possession, whether it be
that the good presents it self not always wholly, or whether the things
besides that Ideal being which they have in their thoughts, have another true
and real one, which also requires a real union; when the Soul has acknowledged
that it has not wholly enjoyed the good which was presented to it, it is
unsatisfied with the first motion it made toward it, not to have been united
to its Idea, it seeks it out of it self, and forms this Passion which we call
Desire.

This being granted, it is easy to conceive what the motion of the appetite
is, when it is agitated in this encounter: for in Love it moves straight
forwards to the Idea of good; but in Desire it seems to quit it, and as if it
would run out of it self, it darts it self toward the absent object: So that
it is very likely these two motions are made one after the other, principally
if they are violent; for every of them wholly moving the Soul, and driving it
several ways, it seems as if they could not meet together, and that of
necessity the appetite must first unite it self to the imagined good; since it
pursues it, when it is absent, and that afterward it takes its first course
going from one to the other, after the same manner from time to time; in effect
we experiment, that the desires appear not in the Soul, but as lightnings; that
they are only throws and flashes which it gives it self, and that their
continuance depends only from the doubles and frequent reprizes they make.

So that they may be exactly defined, in saying, That they are Motions of the
Appetite, by which the Soul darts it self toward the absent good, purposely to
draw near and unite it self thereunto.

Yet must you not imagine, that the Appetite in darting it self so, goes beyond
its natural bounds, and that as animate bodies it goes from one to another, to
advance toward the absent good: all this agitation is made in it self, as we
said in the discourse of Love; and although it seems as if it would cast it
self out, it only beats against its bounds, and drives those parts as waves,
which beat on the shore without being able to go farther.

But since in effect the Soul goes not out of it self, and that consequently it
approaches not the destined good, we may enquire to what purpose the motion
serves which it makes in this encounter: we must doubtless confess that it is
often useless to it, if it penetrates not into the Faculties, which may move
the creature toward the good, and give it the possession thereof: For Nature
has given the Appetite the power to move it self thus, only to inspire the
same Motion into those Faculties which are under its direction. The agitation
it gives it self, is the Idea of that which the moving qualities ought to have
outwardly; it is like the chalk, and the design of a work which is to be
finished in the Organs; but if it rest there, they prove vain and useless
throws and sallies; they are imperfect Motions and unformed desires, which in
some manner offend Nature; for that she having destined them for action, they
destroy the order and commerce which she has established amongst the Faculties
of the Soul, when they drive them not to the end she proposes.

In effect, there is so great a relation, and so essential an order between the
Desire and the enjoyment; that we never form desires for those things which we
believe impossible; because the Soul at that time has no end nor aim to work,
and can produce no action, unless it have a motive to excite it, and which
staggers it, since that the end is the first of all causes, and that which
gives them efficacy and Motion.

I know that there are several things we unprofitably seek which can never be
acquired, what care or pains soever we take: but for that we do not consider
the impediments and obstacles, which we ought therein to encounter: And if
reason sometimes proposes them, and that contrary to its advice we continue to
wish for them; this disorder comes from the imagination, which most commonly
fancies things feasible, which easily persuade the Appetite thereunto, which
afterward causes those vain and chimerical desires, of which we have now
spoken.

It is far a greater difficulty to know how this darting forth may be effected,
when Desire mixeth it self with Fear, Grief, and other Passions where the Soul
inwardly retires it self, and venters it self sooner then it seems to have gone
out.

We may well believe that these Motions follow one another, as we said it
happens in Love, that after the presence of ill has made the Appetite retreat,
Desire sends it forth again to seek the good, which is to accrue unto it by the
absence of the ill; and that there is thus every moment a continual ebbing and
flowing of all these Passions; but I believe this happens not always so, and
that even in flying, the Soul may make the Motion which the Desire asks,
without being obliged to return the same way. As he who flees his enemy, at the
same time gets farther from him, and nearer the place of his security; so it is
likely the Appetite retiring it self, may at once shun evil and pursue good:
and that the same endeavors and the same strivings it makes to hasten its
flight, may also serve to form those desires which it has to possess the good
it fancies; and that it seeks to go out of it self in the same manner, as when
there is nothing but what is purely good which attracts it; for the Soul is so
much disturbed at the presence of ill, that it seems as if it were not enough
to flee and estrange herself from it; but that she must even hide and steal her
self away from her self, that she may by precipitating her flight go beyond her
bounds, and go out of herself, as she does in the pursuit of good. But it is an
error which the Passions easily inspire in a blind power, which is not guided
by Reason; whatsoever endeavor she makes, she remains still within her own
limits, and leaves not those places which she believes she has abandoned: it
is true that the Spirits which follow the Motions, in effect retire to the
Center of the Body, and that the Organs cause a real flight in the creature,
which is surprised with this Passion; but all this is without the Soul, and we
are to speak only of what is within.

For the full clearing of this definition we have given, there remains only to
be examined, whether the Absent Good is the true Object of Desire; for we
proposed at the beginning of this discourse two very considerable Objections
which seem to prove the contrary, since it is evident we often desire the
things we enjoy; and that Absence being an evil, is rather capable to take off
the Appetite, then to provoke it thereunto; so that in this case, the Object of
Desire cannot be different from that of Love, and so both must be but one
Passion.

For the first we have already showed in the former Discourses, that when we
desire the good we possess, we always fancy somewhat which we do not yet
enjoy, whether it be that the most part of goods not presenting themselves to
it in the whole, there must still be a part wanting, or whether this possession
being to be but of a short continuance we desire its continuation as a good
which is still to come.

To the second, we must say, although it be true that absence draws not the
Appetite, and that it is goodness only; it does not therefore follow, that
Love and Desire have the same Motives, nor that both make but one Passion; for
besides that it seems that Motion draws not always its species from the end it
tends unto; but ever from the middle through which it passes to reach thither;
as we may judge by the circular Motion, which is only different from the
direct, but for that it makes a bent line; and for that cause should these
Passions have but one Object, yet they must be of different species, by reason
of the different way they take to attain it; it is true, that in moral things
the conditions and circumstances which have no relation with the Object
diversifie the Motives of Actions, and that the absence of Good gives another
Motion to the Soul then goodness of it self alone gives; for although it always
seeks to unite it self to the good it knows, if it be not present, it must add
another design to this first inclination, and take care to draw near what is
far from it, before it can unite it self, and gain a perfect enjoyment; so that
the true Motion of Desire is the Souls drawing near, and not the union nor
enjoyment; that being the Motive of Love, and this of Pleasure, as we have it
elsewhere. Wherefore the Appetite is agitated by several Motions in all these
Passions; for in this it Parts it self, and gets out of itself; in Love it
binds it self to the Idea of Good, and in pleasure pours it self on it.

PART 3. What the Motion of the Humors and of the Spirits is in Desire.
SInce the Motion of the Spirits is conformable to that of the Appetite, we may
without much difficulty, say how they are agitated in this Passion, after we
have showed how the Appetite in some sort diverts it self from the Idea of
good, to move toward the absent Object.

For Love which always precedes Desire, having drawn them from the heart, and
carried them to the imagination, to unite them to the image of the good it
fancied; Desire follows, which retires them and casts them forth, to come
nearer the good it thinks far of: And thence it happens, that the face swells
and grows red, that the eyes advance themselves, and seem as if they would go
out of their place; the spirits which escape drawing with them the most noble
parts, and driving those which oppose their issue.

But it may be demanded, if the Appetite effectually goes not out of it self,
is it therefore so with the Spirits? is it sufficient they beat against their
bounds, and stop after that vain endeavor? certainly the greatest part pass no
farther; as they are the first Organs of the Soul, without which she can effect
no perfect action, she withholds them to her power, neither do they separate
themselves from her but with great violence; for if as it is likely, they are
animated, or if they are of those instruments which will always be united to
their principle, they cannot go far from the Soul without losing themselves;
and when that happens, it must be against their intention, since every thing
endeavors its own preservation; when therefore Desire drives them to the
surface of the Body, the Soul which is constrained to keep within its bounds,
keeps in also the Spirits; but this hinders not a part of them from escaping,
and the impetuosity of their Motion from casting them beyond their prescribed
limits. They are fluid bodies, they disperse and steal away with the least
agitation, they penetrate everywhere, and no resistance can stop them; and
although as they are Organs of the Soul, they love to be always with her; yet
as they are subtle and loose bodies, which have a great affinity with the air,
their first inclination is to deliver themselves from the prison wherein they
are, and to leave the mixture of those gross and impure things, to unite
themselves to their like.

But it is also true, that they often issue by the Souls command; which because
it cannot leave the body it animates, it sends them to execute its designs,
and causes that transport, and that influence of Spirits, of which we have
spoken in our Discourse of Love out of Inclination.

Yet we must observe that all desires drive not the Spirits into the outward
parts; there are those which move them not, as those which are formed in the
supreme part of the Soul, whose actions need no Organs. It is true those
desires cannot long stay without the Motion of the Spirits: for the Imagination
is so near the Understanding, that at last it always discovers a part of what
it does choose; and then working on the Idea's it has received, the Spirits run
to its service, and agitate the body in the most secret actions of the will; so
that in the most Spiritual Passions, which should be hid from inferior powers,
we see they bear a part, and sensibly alter the Body.

There are even of these desires, which are formed in the sensitive Appetite,
some which crave no assistance from the outward Senses: For when we desire a
good which is no more, or is far distant from us, we know that neither the
ears, nor the eyes are employed in the inquiry of it. The Soul alone operates,
and even then the Spirits it moves arrive not at these Organs: They cast
themselves only on the substance of the brain, and disperse themselves on this
and on that side, without causing a change in the outward parts.

In fine, it is an undoubted thing, that the Desire which accompanies Fear,
Aversness, and the other Passions, which flee what is harmful, carries not the
Spirits outwardly, as those which purely seek the good, or resist the ill. On
the contrary, it retires them inwardly, at least if it cause not this Motion,
it resists it not, but follows the impetuosity wherewith the Spirits are
carried away. But it is also certain, that when these cowardly Passions have
brought them back again to the heart, Desire again darts them further out, as
if they were to pass beyond it; and that presently after these former, recall
them, making thus a long combat of contrary Motions which cause this great
trouble, and violent agitation which is at that time felt in the entrails.

Now we should examine whether Desire dilate the Spirits, whether it drives
them with equality; lastly whether it stirs only the purest blood, and the
sweetest humors which are in the veins, as we have discovered was done in
Love. But since we have observed that Desire mixeth it self with all the
Passions, that it is often with Grief and with Fear, which contract the
Spirits, and often with Love and Joy, which extend them; that it always
accompanies Anger, how turbulent or impetuous soever it be, and in which the
most Malignant humors are agitated we must acknowledge that all these kinds of
Motions are indifferent to it, that it fits it self to them all; That sometimes
it dilates the Spirits, sometimes it contracts them; and at other times it
drives them with confusion and vehemence, otherwhiles with order and
moderation, according to the Nature of those Passions with which it allies it
self: Yet this takes not of the difficulty; for since Desire presupposes Love,
it seems as if all the Motions which accompany this Passion are to be found in
Desire, and that consequently the Spirits are therein agitated in the same
beforesaid manner. But besides that we have not spoken in those places of Love
in general, but only of that which Beauty inspires, it is evident that the
greatest part of the Passions are formed, and that after Love has dilated the
Spirits, others may be raised which may contract them, to which Desire may ally
it self. Otherwise as the emotion of the Soul precedes that of the Spirits, it
is often formed of those Passions in which the Spirits are not moved; because
the Appetite agitates with so much swiftness, and so nimbly passes from one
Passion to another, that they have not time to follow its Motions, and so obey
only the last and most vehement. Thus Love may mix it self with Desire,
without giving to the Spirits the Motion it would have, were it alone, or that
it longer or more forcibly possessed the Appetite.

But supposing that Love dilates them, and Desire joins it self with it, will
it not cause any change? certainly when the Soul sees the good absent, and that
in effect she possesses it not, she must bate somewhat of the design she had
to open and extend herself, to unite her to its Idea, and she gathers her self
together to pursue it the more swiftly: So that it is likely she contracts not
the Spirits in this Passion as she does in Fear; but that she reunites and
somewhat regathers them, driving them toward the absent Good. But we will
forbear these things which being too subtle, and too obscure, flee from our
sight, and tire the mind; that we may seek the causes of the Characters we
have marked.

PART. 4. The Causes of the Characters of Desire.
LOve and Desire, being the most general Passions of the mind, are also the
most fruitful in actions; but if you respect the causes which are nearest their
effects, you must confess that Desire is the most active; and that all human
actions, although they proceed from Love, as from their original source, seem
to draw their origin from Desire, as from their nearest and most sensible
cause: so that we may say that Love is as it were the seed, but that Desire is
the stock or trunk which affords life and motion to all the branches. However
it be, we have not undertaken to give an account of all the effects which this
Passion produces: it will be sufficient to examine the most general and the
most ordinary. And first of all to enquire what it is that renders it
importunate, impudent, base, and unquiet, why it is boundless, and how
difficulties provoke it.

It is true, that who ardently desires a thing renders himself easily
Importunate, because the violent Passion he has to obtain it, makes him
blindly seek it, without considering the persons, and without examining the
time or the place which might favor him in his design; he pursues it
everywhere, he craves it continually, and as if all the world ought to
contribute to his pleasure, he solicites, he urges, he tires all those whose
succor he may have, and which may make him enjoy the good he desires: besides
having no other thought but that, and his mind being continually bent on that
Object, reason finds no time to be understood, nor power to contain the
sallies of this unbridled Passion. She even suffers herself to be thereby
carried away, and so abandons the conduct of her actions to blind and rash
powers.

And even from thence, that Impudence comes which commonly accompanies Desire;
for as it is a certain boldness which makes us with pleasure undertake
dishonest things, and which makes us scorn the imfamy which they may cause; he
must necessarily be impudent who is pressing and importunate; seeing he takes a
liberty beyond good manners, and that he fears not the blame which his
shamelesness deserves.

But if desire cause boldness, how can it then render a man Base and Timorous?
It may be said it is done at several times; That sometimes we fancy the things
we desire are easily obtained, and that sometimes there are great obstacles to
be overcome; and that as these different thoughts enter the mind, they
introduce either Boldness or Fear, Hope or Despair. Now although this be true,
it is also evident, that that Boldness which breeds Impudence, is not always
incompatible with Baseness; if it apprehend not infamy, it may fear every other
thing; and we cannot doubt but those who solicit with so much urgency and
submission a person inferior to them, are possessed with a very cowardly
Boldness, and a base and servile Impudency.

Disquiet, Impatience, and Irresolution, are also inseparable from Desire; for
the mind seeing it self deprived of the good she imagined necessary for her,
can take no rest til she has obtained it. The moments which retard its
enjoyment seem years and ages, the least impediments appear great obstacles,
and all the means she finds to make her the sooner enjoy the desired good, are
in her opinion weak and unprofitable: so that forming at every moment new
designs, heaping desires upon desires, and increasing difficulties by her
irresolutions she uncessantly agitates and disquiets herself, and finds not
even in their possession the end of her troubles, as we have showed in the
discourse of Joy.

But whenee comes it that Desires do thus increase and multiply, and that like
waves they follow and drive one the other that obstacles make them increase,
and that they have no bounds which can contain them? It is true that the
greatest part of our desires are of that Nature that they cannot be bounded,
and that they become infinite; but there are others also which never pass their
just extent.

To know the reason of this difference, you must suppose that there are desires
necessary for this life, and others which are not so; those are common to all
creatures; and are inspired by Nature, these are proper to man, and proceed
from the opinion and choice he makes, not only of necessity, but also of
superfluous things. The first have their certain bounds, because Nature who
leads them is determined to a certain end, from which she never straggles, and
wherein she finds her rest when she is there arrived; but the others are
infinite; for as much as the will whence they originally come is an Universal
power, which is not to be filled but by the possession of all things; and which
being unable to be satisfied by any one, incessantly runs from one to another,
and forms as many desires as there are goods whersof she is in want; it is not
that all the desires which part from our choice are infinite; when they are
ruled by right reason, they have also their bounds, and we may also be sure
that they are as natural and as necessary as those which serve ths necessities
of life: For right reason being nothing else but what is convenient for the
Nature of man, the Desires which are regulated thereby, are as it were natural,
and by so much the more necessary, as they serve the noblest part which is in
him. But this belongs to another Discourse.

Let us now see, why Difficulty provokes Desire; it is not that by putting of
the Soul further off from the good she thought readily to enjoy, she obliges
her to use the more endeavor to draw nearer unto it, or else the impediments
inspiring new designs, give it also new subject for Desire, which uniting it
self to the former, make the Passion appear the greater; but these Passions are
not Universal; for they suppose we always wish the good, before these
impediments present themselves; and in the mean time it is true, that
difficulty and resistance do often breed a desire of certain things which we
had never sought, how desirable soever they were, had they not been forbidden
us, and difficult. We must then conclude that the first source of this effect
proceeds from the natural inclination which is in man for his liberty, and his
own proper excellency: for being a creature naturally free and glorious, he
believes that difficulties reproach him his weakness, and that prohibition
wounds his liberty; wherefore when either presents it self, he raises himself
against it, and thinks that bearing himself toward the good, against which
they contest with him, he presents those advantages which he received from
Nature. Thus far in relation to Moral actions: let us now examine the Corporal
Characters.

These are of two kinds as is beforesaid, some by the command of the mind,
others purely natural, and happen by necessity. The first are swelling eyes and
urgent looks, the trembling of the tongue, watery mouth, several inflections of
the voice, talk and silence, the agitation and motion of the Body.

The Eyes and Looks, which are proper to desires, are not only fixed and
settled on their objects; for meditation and attention of the mind may procure
that; but there is also a certain ardor and vivacity, which makes them come
outward, and seems to throw them on the thing desired; which happens not to
those who meditate, whose eyes sink and grow dim, as Aristotle teaches, and as
we shall say in its due place. These Looks then which the Latins so happily
call Instantes, Procaces, and Devorantes, that is to say, Pressing, Greedy, and
Devouring, whence even that vulgar manner of speaking comes, he feeds on him
with his eyes; that is to say, he looks on him with ardor. Those looks are the
true images of Desire, which being only a transport and a sally which the Soul
makes toward Good, imprint the same darting in the eyes, which are the most
mobile and the most obedient parts of the body, casting them out as much as she
can, and as much as they can suffer it: Besides, that the spirits which
abundantly run thither, and would go out, drive them forward to make themselves
way, and fill them with the luster and vivacity which we perceive in them.

The trembling of the tongue and a watery mouth, are effects which serve for the
appetite of Aliments: for the Soul, which has a secret knowledge of what is
useful for its designs, knowing that tasting cannot be without humidity, and
that the motion of the tongue is necessary to send aliments down into the
stomach, brings this water into the mouth, and stirs the tongue, when we see
the things we desire, or hear them spoken of; the Fancy in some manner
rendering them present, and causing the organs to do the same thing they would
do if they were really on the tongue.

But whence comes this clear und subtle water? Does it not descend from those
kirnels which are in the bottom of the mouth, whose chief use is to receive the
superfluous humors of the brain, and to disperse them on the tongue to moisten
it? It is evident it commonly proves so, and that the motion of the spirits
which the Desire brings into those parts, opens the passages, and makes these
waters run the more. But it often also happens, that they come from the
stomach, either by the means of those wandering spirits which run thither to
cause digestion, or by the contraction of its fibers which squeeze the humor
wherewith they are watered, and raise it up on high: for in Desires they
sometimes contract themselves so much, that they even overthrow the stomach;
and principally in fish, who naturally are all gluttonous, and who pursuing
their prey too ardently, cause it to run out of its place, and cast it
sometimes even into their mouths. However it be, we must believe that these
two effects belong to the desire of Aliments, and that the Soul has some
reason to employ them to that use. But when she makes them serve other desires,
as it often happens, it is an error which comes from its blindness and
precipitation, and which persuades that that which is necessary for one design
may also be so for another, although indeed it be quite useless.

The several inflexions of the voice which are observed in Desire, do not all
proceed from it: As it mixeth it self with other Passions, it borrows from them
the sounds and the accents which are familiar to them. Sometimes it lifts it up
with Boldness and Anger, sometimes it lets it fall with Fear and Languor;
sometimes it cuts it with grief and astonishment, other times it draws it out
with admiration and joy. But the change which this alone seems to give, is the
precipitation of words, and the long exclamations which commence its
discourses: For the force which follows this Passion, causes the words to go
out in a crowd; and the darting forth of the Soul causes a transport of the
voice, which is always made by the strongest vowels, which most of all open the
mouth; as if she would make a freer passage, that she might issue out the more
readily. In effect, we never find the I nor the U in the ordinary exclamations
of Desire, but only A, O, and E, which she also charge with vehement
aspirations which show the force she uses in issuing forth.

Silence, and confusion of discourse, are the effects of a great distraction of
the Mind, which is common to those who ardently desire a thing, when we speak
not to them of their Passion, or when they are with persons which cannot serve
them therein: For the Soul quitting with regret the thought of the Good she
wants, and incessantly seeking the means to possess it, flees the conversation
which might trouble her pleasure and her design; and reentring in her self, or
rather wandering in the pursuit she makes, she hears not what others say, she
silenceth her self, or makes disorderly answers. And her transport rises often
to that excess, that it takes away the use of the Senses, and even ravisheth
her into an ecstasy, as we showed in our Discourse of Love.

For what concerns the agitation of the body, it follows the disquiet or the
motion which the soul makes toward Good: for when he who is troubled with this
Passion changes every moment his posture and his place, casts about his eyes
here and there, turns now on one side, now on the other; now rises, now sits;
goes, and stops ever and anon: they are the effects of his irresolutions, and
the diverse designs which his disquiet proposes: But if he reaches out his
head, if he stretch out his arms toward the desired object, if he goes and
walks with large paces, and runs toward it; they are endeavors which the Soul
causes the parts to make to draw near the good which is distant from it. For
although they are often useless, in the error she is she still believes she
goes forward, and that casting the eyes, the head and hands toward what she
desires, it is as much ground gotten, and that at last she shall arrive at the
end she tends to.

We have nothing more here to examine, but the necessary effects of Desire. But
as the most part of them are to be found in those Passions of which we have
already spoken, we shall without difficulty enquire the reasons, and send back
the Reader to the place whence we deduced them: For sighs and ecstasies, loss of
speech, sleep and appetite, have herein no other causes but as in Love. The
face grows red and swelled by the arrival of blood and spirits which cast
themselves on the outward parts, as is already said. Tears proceed from grief
which the privation of Good too attentively considered, breeds in the Mind.

The motion of the heart and arteries is great, because the soul endeavors to
open them, to send forth a quantity of spirits; frequent, because of the
violence and haste it makes to get them out; and unequal, by the mixture of
other Passions.

The body grows lean and dry, because those parts which digest the humors, and
those which are to be nourished by them, being weakened by the flight of the
spirits, perform it not as they ought and cannot convert them into their
substance, as was said in the Discourse of Love.

There remains nothing now but an effect of Desire, which, being extraordinary,
deserves a longer examen then the former: It is, that a too ardent Desire makes
a man grow old in a day, as Theorictus; that is to say, makes the hair gray in
a short time, according to the ordinary explication of that passage. For my
part, I must confess that the observation is particular enough, and I do not
remember that I have seen it anywhere but in that Author. But since the same
thing happens in Fear and in Despair, which in a night change the hair, and
that cares and displeasures make a man grow gray before his time, it is
impossible but Desire may sometimes cause the same effect: all the difficulty
is to know how it may be done.

You must then suppose with Aristotle, that hair grows gray for want of heat
fit and natural for it; that it then suffers a kind of corruption and
rottenness, and that it happens as to all other things that in corrupting it
turns white: in effect we cannot deny but that it is the old age of the hair.
And since that of all the body happens from the diminution of natural heat, it
is likely it proceeds from the same cause; when this heat then diminishes it
produces two effects in the hair; for the aliment which ought to nourish it,
digests not but flies, into vapors, and the air fills the place of the
Spirits. Now vapors contain much air, and air is the first cause of whiteness,
as we see in scum; and experience teaches us, that to make the hair white, we
must wet and expose it to the air.

And it is true that heat growing weak, either by little and little, or
suddenly, indigestion is the chief cause of whiteness of hair, when the heat is
consumed by dely grees; but when it readily dissipates, as it happens in
sicknessess and vehement Passions, it is chiefly the air which whitens it
sliding into the pores, and taking the place of the retired spirits.

Some will say, If this be true, the hair of dead men should be always white;
natural heat being extinct, and the air environing them, might easily insinuate
it self into its pores.

To this it must be answered, that after death there remains a natural heat in
the hair, as in the bones, which are long preserved after the expiration of the
creature whose parts they were. But this heat is immovable, and incapable of
any fruition of life, being deprived of the souls influence, which gave it
efficacy and motion: So there are no more crudities made, because the aliments
rise no more thither, and the air cannot occupy the place of the spirits which
are there fixed and stopped.

Certainly, we cannot but confess that the soul inspires some virtue into those
parts, that she takes some care of them, and that she governs them as she
pleases; otherwise, what should cause that delightful and regular painting in
the plumage of Birds? what should so justly compass the eyebrows? what should
so carefully regulate the hair of the eyelids? lastly, what should cause all
that so well measured a diversity which is to be observed in the hair of beasts?
As that commonly follows the species of every creature, it must needs be, that
the soul wherein it is contained, conduces also to this work, and that she at
her pleasure disposes of those parts wherein she causes so many wonders. This
being granted, it is not hard to say how Fear, Desire and Cares may change the
hair: for, in retiring the spirits, they derive it of the influence it received
from them; they dry up that spring of life which did rise to its roots, and
draw away that vital heat which ran through its pores.

It is true, this seldom happens, and there must be a great violence and a
great disposition to produce this effect. For there are certain actions from
which it is very difficult to withdraw Nature; and what tempest soever happens
to it, she but seldom forsakes their rudder and conduct. Such are the
functions of the Vegetative soul, which are principally made by the means of
the fixed spirits; and being not subject to the power of the Imagination, or of
the Appetite, remain quiet, whilst the others err here and there, and are
agitated by the several motions which the Passions impress. But yet it
sometimes happens, that, by reason of the conjunction which there is between
the parts of the soul, the disorders of the one are communicated to the other;
and that the Natural faculty is carried away by the Sensitive, principally in
those whose spirits are more mobile, and the substance of their parts more
soft. So that those persons whose imagination is very strong, and who have the
weakest brain, more easily grow gray then other men, by the violence of those
Passions which we have spoken of.

CHAP. VI. The Characters of Hope.
HE who gave away all he had, and reserved only Hope, made not so ill a
bargain as it may be imagined: He took for himself that which is the sweetest
in life, the most durable Good which can be found therein. In a word, we may
say, that he had for his share all what he had not, and that he truly divided
for himself like a King.

Indeed, as there are no other Goods whereof we are sensible, but those which
we possess, and those which we hope for; it is certain, that possession affords
not a perfect contentment here below, for that it cloys the Mind, and takes
away the knowledge of the good it possesses, that it even corrupts the Nature
of it, and straight begets a distaste. But Hope, which awakens the Mind, and
renders it clearer-sighted, represents the Good as it is, shows it in its
purity, and gives a far more delicious taste of it then Enjoyment can: For it
is so ingenious, that it separates it self from all the Ills which are mixed
with it; it purifies it self from all the defects which accompany it: and as we
may say, that it is then the flower of Goodness which it pours into our soul;
we may also say, that the Joy it disperseth therein is the flower of Pleasure,
and the most refined sweetness of Delight. Why should we then wonder, finding
it so sweet and delightful, if we enter it into all our designs, if we mix it
with all our actions, and if it be the last thing we abandon during life? It Is
what alone sweetens the sharpness and bitterness thereof, which patiently makes
us bear the disgraces thereof; and of all the good things which may accrue
thereunto, this is the only one which is compatible with those miseries
whereunto it is subject: For, should all ills overwhelm a person, should all
mischances and calamities which we can imagine fasten on him, he yet may have
Hope, which perhaps alone may be worth more to him then all other Goods can be
without it.

Of a truth, also, it is of all the Passions the most natural to Man: he is
sensible of its growth, as he grows in perfection; and feels it weaken, when he
fails in that. He cease to live, when he cease to hope; and, to speak
soberly, there is none but he alone that hopes: for all other creatures have no
more but a shadow of Hope, as they have of Reason; the Intelligences scarce
know it: And when Man passes into their nature, although he still be capable
of Love or of Hatred, of Joy or of Grief, of Fear or of Despair, yet is he no
longer capable of Hope.

Certainly, since it is that which leads us to felicity, and which gives us the
first taste of it, it would be useless to those who are already happy, and to
those which cannot be so: And Man, who alone is in the way of felicity, ought
also to be only touched with this Passion. In the tempests wherewith his life
is continually agitated, it was necessary that Hope should be his lanthorn, and
the star to lead him to his last port; and that in the length and dangers of
his voyage, he might at least have the satisfaction to see afar off the end he
tends to, and to possess in Idea and by way of advance the happiness he aspires
to. For Nature, who never suffers things to arrive at once at their last
perfection, would have Man here below have some sensibleness of his, that he
might as it were make 'say and taste, if we may so speak, of the Sovereign
Good, before he should perfectly possess it.

But since that is the true use of Hope, we ought not otherwise to employ nor
abuse so noble an help, in pursuit of so many vain things which occupy our
Desires, and which are unworthy of the excellency of our Minds. That which is
destined to nourish and breed up Virtue, must not serve for the nourishment and
subsistence of Vice; and that which ought to lead us to Felicity, should not
estrange us from it, and precipitate us into misery. For it is certain, that if
Hope be not regulated by Reason, there are no ill designs formed, nor evil
actions performed, neither are there any ill habits which take not their
beginning and their growth from it: It is the seed of all the evil which is
committed in the world; it is the source of all the miseries which flow
thither: and in Truth, as well as in the Fable, it may pass for one of the
greatest mischiefs which befell Mankind. Whatever it be, it is most true, that
their weakness is in nothing more discovered, since, as the Wise man says, all
their hopes are but a light froth, which the tempest dissipates in a moment;
but a smoke, which the wind carries away; and but a dream, which troubles our
life with fantasms and chimaera's. But we must leave these meditations to
Divinity, and see whether we can describe the Characters of this Passion.

The Poets had reason to feign that Hope only remained in the bottom of
Pandora's box: for it is certainly hid in the very bottom of the soul: It
issues not forth as the others do; all its endeavors are secret; and the
trouble it causes may be compared to those tempests which often rise in full
sea, without troubling the shore: What violence soever it brings, what stir
soever it causes, nothing appears outwardly; and, did not other Passions mix
themselves with it, it would be very hard to discover it. Indeed, he that hopes
is always amongst the disquiets of Desire: and the ravishments of Joy,
Impatience and Satisfaction equally dividing his Mind; and the privation of
good, with the imaginary enjoyment he has thereof, cause a certain mixture of
displeasure and delight, which at once almost renders him content and
displeased. But this chiefly happens when his Hopes are uncertain: for the
difficulties which are then greater, figure unto him the success the more
doubtful; mixing Fear with his Desires, and Despair with his Fear: Then all at
once relevating his courage, and flattering his designs with a favorable
event, all his apprehensions vanish, and give way to Boldness, Joy, and
Perseverance: He no more minds those obstacles which astonished him before; at
least, after he has measured them with his strength, after he has seen them
overcome by others, and that he may be as happy as they have been; he easily
believes to compass it, and that it is sufficient to undertake a great matter,
to oblige Fortune. He remembers himself of all the graces that ever he received
from her; he in the same manner persuades himself that he deserved them, and
that he ought not to expect less; and that having now more credit and power
then ever he had, he ought not to doubt of the success he hopes for. He esteems
all those which may serve him in this occasion: some he believes are obliged to
it by duty or interest; others, by affection or honor. In fine, he promises
himself the assistance of all those which he has seen, or heard spoken of. And
weaving thus intricacies with intricacies, he imagines his designs infallible,
and that they ought to succeed according as he has projected them: as if he
were already master of the Good he seeks, he thinks he has the absolute
disposal thereof: He destines those who shall share in his good success, and
marks those who are to be excluded: and thus making whom he will happy or
unhappy, he believes himself the dispensor of the favors and disgraces of his
fortune, thence he grows presumptuous, rash, insolent; he fancies there is
nothing that can resist him, nothing he ought not to undertake: He despises
the designs of a jealous man, and the pursuits of a rival; and, as if they
ought no longer to pretend to what they hope for, he scorns their weakness, and
laughs at their despair. In this assurance he abandons the care of his affairs,
he no longer minds his own preservation; and, without taking heed of the
ambushes prepared for him, he by his negligence loses the good he assured
himself of, and often triumphs over an enemy who has already gotten the
victory over him. In fine, he becomes vain, importunate, and ridiculous; he
continually speaks of the services he has rendered, of the recompenses he has
merited, of the means he has to oblige all the world. If you will believe him,
there is none but he can procure graces and favors; they belong to him only,
and he alone also who can revenge himself if he should be refused: Hereupon,
imagining that in effect he may meet with a check, he becomes peevish, and
grows angry: To some, he reproacheth their negligence, or their ingratitude; to
others, their baseness or perfidiousness: and often, not knowing upon what to
fall, he accuses Heaven and Fortune for the mischief which perhaps will never
befall him.

Thus far Hope carries us, when it is unbridled. Yet must we not believe that
it makes this progress successively without interruption; suspicion and
mistrust traverse it every moment; Fear at every step retains it, Despair
sometimes stops it all at once; Desire and Boldness succeeding presently after,
it finds it self continually carried away, and restrained by contrary motions:
and of the calmest of all the Passions, which it is, it appears the most
unquiet and the most turbulent. But to speak truth, we ought not to accuse it
for these storms; it is the Passions which follow its train: And if there be
any thing which it can do alone, it is, that it establishes the Mind against
those difficulties which appear in the search of Good. So that it was not
without reason figured with an Anchor, which truly stays ships, but yet hinders
them not from being still agitated by waves and tempests. However, Hope has no
outward Character particular to it; and that which accompanies it, is but a
confused mixture of touches which the other motions of the Soul imprint on the
body. It may be compared to those ingenious Pictures wherein several figures
are seen to represent another which is not there painted: For although you may
therein observe the marks of Desire, of Joy and Boldness, and often those of
Fear, of Despair, and of Grief; yet all that represents nothing else but Hope.
Indeed, when it begins to be felt, it ravisheth the body, lifts up the head,
raises the brow, the voice grows firm, the looks assured: And in that air
which has somewhat of severe in it, you may perceive a moderate Joy which
sweetens the eyes, a certain serenity which sheds it self upon the face, and a
blithe vivacity which animates all its actions. But this Calm lasts not long;
from time to time impatience and disquiet disturb it: They cast their looks
here and there, sometimes send them up toward heaven; they sigh at every
moment; they cannot stay in a place: sometimes they grow peevish and doting;
they grow pale, they lose courage: Then, by little and little retaking their
first assurance, they feel their forces augment, they find themselves heated
with a new ardor; they come, they go, they leap; they are in perpetual
agitation. But, to speak home, these later sallies come not from Hope: As it is
a Passion which naturally is the most moderate of all, it never rises to these
excesses: All the motions it causes, are without violence, and without
precipitation: It renders the Pulse firm, without being vehement; the
Respiration strong, without force: It fortifies the actions of all the parts:
It awakens languishing Passions; it retains those which are impetuous. Finally,
it is the most useful of them all, for Virtue, and for Health: Let us therefore
enquire what its nature is, and how it produces all these effects.

PART 2. Of the nature of Hope.
HOpe is so fine and delicate a thing, which forms and ruins it self by such
weak means, which so subtly mixeth it self with other Passions, and which
shows it self so little, as we have said, that those who have enquired the
nature thereof, are to be excused if they have not encountered it. Indeed, the
alliance it has with Desire and Boldness is so great, that it is very hard to
separate them, and to discern the motion which is proper to every of them: For
Boldness is never without Hope, nor Hope without Desire. Besides, the action of
the Imaginative faculty glitters so much in this Passion, that that of the
Appetite scarce appears: and that is the reason some have defined it by the
expectation of good, which is a pure effect of the Imagination, as being
nothing but a belief and an opinion which we have of a good to come.

But besides that we may expect Good without hoping for it, as we will show
anon, Hope would not then be a Passion, being no motion of the Appetite. As for
those who have placed it in the rank of Passions, some have said that it was
the consummation and the perfection of Desire: Others, that it was a certain
confidence we had that the desired good would come. But the first confound it
with Desire, the others with Boldness: or at least, if Confidence be a kind of
Hope, as it is most likely, it were to define the gender by the species, and an
obscure thing by one which is less known. In a word, all the definitions are
faulty, being either too much stretched, or too much contracted; and none of
them observe the particular motion wherewith the Appetite is agitated in this
Passion; which nevertheless alone makes all its essence, and without which it
is impossible to know its nature. We must then make it our Ground, that Hope
respects but good to come, and that Desire always precedes it, forasmuch as
Desire is the first motion which the soul makes toward that kind of good, and
that we never hope for any thing, without having desired it before. But because
there are also those which we desire, which we cannot hope for, (for well may
we wish for Beauty, Knowledge, Glory, Scepters, and Diadems, which are most
commonly beyond our hopes) that makes us judge them two different Passions, and
that their objects, motives and motions ought also to be different.

Now it is not enough for the object of Hope, that the things be thought
possible, (for they have that of common with Desire, as we have said;) but
besides that, we must believe that they will effectually happen. Yet this
belief is not most certain and infallible; for we never hope for those things
which necessarily are to happen; but they must be doubtful, and we must imagine
that there are difficulties to obtain them. But where can the difficulty be?
For it is not always to be found in the things we hope for, since there are
some which move that Passion, which yet are very easy; not in the means we
employ to acquire them, being often without difficulty to be performed.

We may then say, that in the things we hope, we always imagine we can never
enjoy them but by the means of some other man, whether in effect he labor to
make us obtain them, or that he no ways hinder us: For it is certain, that if
they were wholly in our own power, and did we believe that nothing could hinder
us from the possession of them, they could never beget Hope in us; and the Soul
would be content to add to the Desire, which she would then form faith and
assurance that it would happen; which is an effect of the Judgment, and not of
the Appetite.

The difficulty then in Hope, comes always from a third, which is as the medium
betwixt him who hopes, and the thing hoped for; in whose liberty we suppose it
is, to do or not to do what we hope. For although we should often hope good
from those things which do not freely operate, even from those things which are
inanimate; as when we hope that Lands will be fertile, and that Seasons will be
pleasant; that a beast will delight us, or be serviceable to us: we fancy them
to our selves as if they had that liberty; whether it be that there is in
beasts an image of true liberty, or for that we have a natural instinct which
secretly instructs us that there is a Superior power in the world, which
disposes thereof at will, and according as it thinks fit: So that what we hope
depending from the will of others whose masters we cannot absolutely be, it is
impossible but we must esteem it difficult, and but that the success must seem
doubtful. It is not but that sometimes the difficulty may be in the thing it
self we desire, and the means we use to obtain it: but it is not considerable
in this Passion, being not essential to it. However, from what part soever it
comes, we must take it for granted that it is necessary to form Hope. Let us
now see what its design is, and what the motion is which it causes in the
Appetite.

All the difficulties presented to the Soul, either in the search of Good, or
assault and flight of Ill, appear greater or less then its forces; that is to
say, she believes she can overcome them, or that she cannot resist them: If
they are the weaker, they beget Hope, Boldness, and Anger; if they are the
greater, they cause Despair and Fear. Now it is likely that in difficulties the
Soul does in it self what we outwardly do when they present themselves to us:
For as we bend our selves against them, if we suppose we can overcome them; and
as we lose strength and courage, if they appear invincible; it must needs be,
since the motions of the body follow those of the soul, and that there is some
relation and resemblance between them, that the soul bends or slackens her self
as the body does, in the encounter of the difficulties she fancies. And indeed,
it is the only difference which can distinguish the motions of the Irascible
appetite from those of the Concupiscible: For in these the Soul has no
occasion to employ her force or courage, seeing no enemy she ought to assault,
or against whom she is obliged to defend her self. Or if she pursue Good, or
flee from Ill, it is without bending or slackning her self.

Since it is then a thing common to Hope, Boldness, and Anger, to bend the Soul
against difficulties; let us see wherein they are different; and chiefly, what
Hope has particularly therein, it being the subject of this Discourse. We must
then suppose that in Hope the Soul distinctly observes the Good, but confusedly
sees the difficulties: on the contrary, in Boldness and Anger it considers the
difficulties more then the good. For although in these the soul assaults ill,
to enjoy the good she expects by victory, she chiefly sixeth her thoughts on
the enemy she fights against, and thinks only on the good which shall thereby
accrue, but as a thing at a distance, which provokes not as the presence of ill
does. But in Hope, she nearly faceth the good which presents it self; she
attentively considers it, and sees but by the way the difficulties which
besiege her; so that they do not appear so great, and consequently do not
oblige her to use such endeavors to resist them as in other Passions.

Indeed in Boldness and Anger she rises up and assaults the ill, because she
thinks it so powerful, that she believe she cannot overcome it without assault
or combat: But in Hope it appears not so strong, as that it ought to be
assaulted; nor so weak, as to be slighted: She keeps her self in a certain mean
betwixt heat and neglect; and, without animating her self against it, she puts
herself in safety, and stands upon her guard: which she does in stiffening and
fortifying her self in her self; as it happens to the body, which, its parts
being all equally stretched, without changing place, and almost without moving,
makes a vigorous motion, which keeps it firm and extended; which for that cause
is called in the Schools, The Tonick motion; The Soul then does the same in
this Passion; without assaulting or fleeing the ill which might traverse it,
she fortifies her self, stands on her guard, and with assurance expects the
good she seeks. So that we may define it to be A motion of the Appetite, in
which the Soul, in expectation of the good it desires, strengthens and stiffens
her self in her self, to resist the difficulties she may encounter therein.

Indeed, the whole nature, the properties, and conditions required in Hope, are
contained in this definition. Desire and Expectation, which consist in the
opinion that the good will come, are marked as the necessary conditions which
always precede it; the desired good, as the object which moves it; the
appetite, as the subject where it is received; and that firm assurance, as the
difference of the emotion which is proper to it, and which distinguishes it
from all other Passions. For although Boldness and Anger stiffen the soul also,
as we have said, yet are they not content to keep it fixed in it self; they
make it rise up, and drive it against the ill, and force it to fight with it.

But this breeds a very reasonable doubt: for, did the soul keep it self stiff
and steady in Boldness and Anger, as she does in Hope, it would follow that
Hope must always accompany them: And yet it is true; a man may cast himself
into danger without hope of ever getting out; and that sometimes we desire to
be revenged of an injury whereof we know we shall never have satisfaction: yet
it hinders not but that this proposition is most certain, and but that it is
true that Boldness and Anger are ever accompanied with Hope: For it is not
always the only good which Boldness proposes, to get out of the danger which
it casts it self into; honor and glory, which spring from generous actions,
are often the Goods it aspires to, and the enjoyment of which it always hopes,
what mischance soever happens to it: although it fall under the difficulties it
assaults, it still thinks 't will be to overcome them, if they do but serve to
obtain what it pretends to; as in the Discourse of Boldness we shall more fully
show.

For Anger, we will in its place make it appear, that the satisfaction it
expects in Revenge, and the principal end Nature has assigned it, is to hinder
the thing which injures us from continuing to do so: so that what can stop the
course and continuance of the III, appeaseth Anger; and we are satisfied, when
he who has offended us repents himself of it, when he acknowledges that it
was not his design, when he flees, or when he has been hurt; for that then it
appears that he wants either power or will to mischief us, or else we suppose
we have taken them from him. This then is the satisfaction which Anger always
promises it self: and if it happen that we despair of obtaining it, as, when
the things which offend us appear so powerful to us, that they seem beyond our
strength and endeavors, and that we have no hope to be able to stop the malice
they have to injure us; we are then no longer capable of Anger, having lost our
hope to be avenged, that is to say, to beat back the ill on him who caused it,
that he may cease to do us more. If there be then a satisfaction which Revenge
is out of hope to obtain, it is not natural to the Passion; it must be a
stranger, as what comes from the custom of the Country, from the humor of the
person, from the weakness of judgment, and the like. But this shall be in its
place more carefully examined. Let us betake our selves to our former Discourse.

The Soul then stiffens it self in Hope, and in some sort suffers that Tonick
motion which (as we have shown) happens to the body. But we may say, that what
image soever this example may give of the manner wherewith the appetite is
moved, it does not fully satisfy the Mind, and leaves always in it a
difficulty to conceive how the Soul can move so: For it is not as of Bodies,
which have nerves and muscles, which stretch the parts, and keep them extended,
drawing them equally on every side: We can imagine nothing like it in the Soul,
which is wholly simple, and which would rather suffer to be compared to subtle
and fluid bodies, which this effect cannot reach, then to those who are massive
and heavy, where it is commonly performed.

Now although this be true, yet it destroys not our proposition: for it is
certain, the Soul stiffens it self as well as the Body, but that the manner is
quite different. It is not always necessary that the same motions should be
made in the same manner: and we see that creatures bend and stretch out their
bodies, although by different means. Amongst those which are perfect, the
muscles perform this effect by contracting and loosing themselves: But there
are diverse in whom these parts are wanting, as in those which are so little,
that we can scarce discern them, and in which most likely it is the spirits and
the nerves alone perform these actions without the use of other organs. There
are a thousand other examples in Nature, which clearly manifest this truth; but
were there none, the Schools teach us, that spiritual substances carry
themselves from one place to another; that they may occupy more or less room;
that they drive and draw bodies; that, in sine, they perform almost all the
motions which we observe in animate bodies, although the manner and the means
be quite contrary. Which being granted, we ought not to doubt but that the
Appetite can stiffen it self as well as living parts; it being needless it
should do it in the same manner, or by the same means as they are usually
accustomed to do.

But if it were enquired what this manner is, and what particular means the
Appetite uses in this motion; we must confess it to be a bold enquiry, to
which it seems the mind of man is not able to give satisfaction: For since its
knowsedge, how high soever it be, draws its origin from that of the Senses,
how can it have any in those things, when the Senses forsake it? How can it
discern the ways Nature takes in the motions of the Soul which are not
sensible, when it is ignorant of those it keeps in them of the body, which
touch the Senses, and are visible to our eyes? Indeed, all our Philosophy must
confess, that it touches but the extremities of motions, and that it almost
never speaks of what passes between both. And we may say, that Nature, which
so freely gives all things, seems to be jealous of the art wherewith she does
them, and is unwilling we should see the springs of her works. However it be, I
believe more cannot be assured in this matter, then that the soul stiffens it
self in exciting and quickening its vigor, and putting it, as the School says,
out of the power into act. And truly, since Angelick natures can move and even
transport bodies from one place to another, it must be granted that they give
to themselves, and to them also, a certain impetuosity, which changes the
situation and consistence they had; some particular virtue must disperse it
self wheresoever they extend, which renders them stronger and more agile: and
this virtue, according to my opinion, is nothing but their Will, which moves it
self; or else their very motion: for things get a force in motion which they
have not in rest. The same thing may proportionably be said of the Appetite,
which is the first moving power in creatures: For by exciting it self, it
agitates and corroborates it self; and being agitated with an equal and uniform
motion, which holds it so suspended, without advance or recess; it remains
stiff and steadfast, to oppose the difficulties which may present themselves.
But, without engaging our selves further in this enquiry, which exceeds the
limits of our design, it will be sufficient to take away a difficulty which
springs from what we have already said.

For if this motion of the Appetite be only an equal and uniform agitation,
whereby the soul remains fixed in it self, without advancing or receding; it
must follow, that Desire can never be with Hope, since it darts out the soul,
and drives it out of it self, and that this restrains it. We must then say,
that it is true, Desire is not always with Hope, although it always precedes
it. And indeed, when we desire any thing ardently, we perceive that Hope
slackens it self; as Desire also diminishes, when Hope increases. Certainly
they destroy one the other when they meet; Forasmuch as the Soul, in Desire,
considers the Good but as absent, and takes no other care but to draw near unto
it: but in Hope, she fancies it so near, not seeing any difficulties which it
cannot overcome, that she almost thinks it as if it were present, (whence it
happens, that Joy is greater in it then in Desire:) So that she makes not
therein those sallies and dartings she does in this, unless she be by some
other things forced to it. On the contrary, she stops to receive the Good which
seems to be produced and advanced toward her. This truth discovers it 'self in
these ordinary phrases in these Passions: For when we say that the Desire is
urgent, ardent, and violent; that it moves it self toward Good; that Hope is
fixed and assured; that it upholds those who hope; that it expects the desired
things; we unawares manifest how the Soul darts her self out in Desire, and
retains her self in Hope. So that these two motions being opposite, it is
impossible that they can be performed at the same time, and that those two
Passions should be there together, but necessarily they must form themselves
the one after the other; as we said it must happen in those of which we have
spoken in the foregoing Discourses.

Yet it is very true, that this is not always so, but that Hope mixeth it self
most commonly with Desire, Boldness, and Anger; in all which, the Soul never
fails to cast forth her self: for the stedfastness she keeps in that, is not
contrary to the darting out of her self which she makes in this; the first
being a motion of the parts amongst themselves, and the other a motion of the
whole thing. And as you see a body may keep it self stiff in it self, and move
it self from one place to another, you must conceive the same in the Appetite,
and imagine that Hope remains stable, whilst those other Passions transport it
out of it self. But, neither does it then stop, as we have said; the cause of
these sallies being stronger then that of her restraint; which, to speak truth,
is not essential to Hope, but a pure accident which never meets with it but
when it is quite alone.

Let us now observe what moves the Appetite to stiffen thus: for although it
have the virtue to move it self as it pleases, and that it bends it self to
resist difficulties; yet, being a blind power, it knows not the difficulties,
and the Fancy must necessarily propose them to it; and consequently, it must
be that which gives it the first shake, and teaches the motion which in this
encounter it ought to employ. After it has then discovered the difficulties
which might traverse its designs, and that it believes it may overcome them,
it commands the Appetite to stand upon its guard, and hold it self firm, for to
make resistance. But whence comes the belief it has to overcome them? From the
good opinion it has of its own strength. Whence it is, that those who have
many friends, much wealth and honor, those who have suffered no disgraces, and
to whom all has happily succeeded; those who are young and lusty; in fine, all
those who think themselves potent in the goods of the Body, of the Mind, and
of Fortune, easily hope, because they believe they have strength enough to
oppose all obstacles, and overcome all difficulties which can happen.

This good opinion is so necessary for Hope, that it makes almost all its
kinds and differences: as it is greater or less, it causes the strength or
weakness, the excess or defect of that Passion: It is that which produces
Presumption and Confidence, which renders Hopes either doubtful or certain,
good or ill, which augments or enfeebles them. Indeed, Presumption is nothing
but an immoderate hope, which proceeds from a too-great opinion we have of our
own strength. Confidence is an assurance we have of an expected help: It Is like
the faith we give to promises which the things seem to make in these encounters:
for we say, The season promises us fruit, That we promise our selves such and
such a success from our courage, forces, and friends. Finally, Hopes are either
doubtful or certain, great or little, good or ill, according as we conceive the
difficulties strong or weak, or as we suppose them to be more or less easy to
be overcome.

Yet I think some distinction were here necessary: for the most certain hope is
not always the greatest; and it is likely it is the greater, the more the soul
stiffens it self, since it is the particular motion which forms this Passion.
Now she stiffens herself the more, the greater the difficulties are she
encounters: But when the hindrances are light, she moves not her self so
carefully, and consequently Hope is less, although it be more certain. Our
common phrase confounds these things: for we say that we have great, strong,
and good hopes, when we would speak them assured; and that they are small, ill,
and weak, when they are doubtful. Yet for all this, we ought to observe the
distinctions we have made: for it is evident, that there are hopes which are
weak and small, not because they are uncertain, but because the success is so
sure, and the difficulties so small, that the Soul makes no motion at all for
them. And truly we can never call these hopes ill, although vulgarly great and
strong ones are esteemed good.

It may be demanded how there may be hopes which are certain, since the belief
we have of the event of the things we hope for, is always doubtful. Certainly
we must confess that the certainty which is therein to be found, is not
infallible and of necessity; it is only likely, and moral; And we call those
certain and sure hopes, which are the less doubtful, and in which there is the
least to be feared.

But what? it seems then as if Fear were always mixed with Hope, although they
are two contrary Passions. It is true, there is always some cause of Fear,
there being reason always to doubt. But it follows not that Fear therefore
forms it self and mingles it self with Hope, although even the Soul were
surprised therewith. The Passions rise not always up in sight of their objects,
whether it be that there are stronger which restrain them, and stifle them at
their birth; or whether the Mind considers not attentively enough the causes
which ought to move it. In Hope, the Soul is more attentive to the Good, then
to the difficulties which besiege her: She looks upon them but by the way, and
believes she can overcome them. Even then also, what subject soever there be of
Fear, without examination she in effect fears it not. But if she consider the
difficulties more then the good, and if she take an opinion that she is unable
to overcome them; Hope gives place to Fear, which flees in its turn, out of
other considerations; causing a flood and ebb, which is often so swift and
rapid, that it seems as if these two Passions mixed and confounded themselves
together. But we must review these things in the Discourse of Fear. Let us now
consider what the motions of the Spirits and of the Humors are in Hope.

PART 3. What the motion of the Spirits is in Hope.
SInce the Spirits move in the Passions conformable to the emotion of the Soul,
they must, when she stiffens and confirms her self in her self when she hopes,
in some manner suffer also the same agitation. All the difficulty then is, to
know how it may be done: for it is not easy to conceive how those fluid and
subtle bodies can get a quality which belongs to those only which are gross
and solid. Neither must you believe they congeal here, as they say it happens
in some diseases; or that they fix, as those Metalick spirits do whereof
Chemistry relates such miracles: for, besides that those we speak of are much
finer, and perhaps of another kind then those are, they must at that time
become immovable, and consequently, all the parts whereto they are to run,
must remain without action, since they can work only by their motion: Which
yet cannot be true: Experience and Reason show us, that the organs move freely
in this Passion; and that Desire, which often mixeth with it, as we have shown,
causes the spirits to move, without ruining the setledness and consistence
which Hope gives them. We might perhaps imagine that they contract and gather
themselves together, that, by uniting and crowding their parts together, they
become stiffer and stronger, and so put themselves in posture the better to
resist the assaults might be made against them. And certainly, there is a great
likelihood that some such thing is done in this encounter: For the Soul, which
knows that what is united is stronger then what is divided, never fails so to
fortify it self when ill appears. Now the difficulties which are always found
in Hope, are taken for evils, because they oppose themselves to the possession
of good: And it is therefore likely that the Soul contracts the Spirits, the
better to defend her self from that enemy which crosses her design. Yet as in
this Passion she is wont but by the way to consider of those difficulties which
consequently seem not so great, nor so uneasy to be overcome; we must not
doubt but that, if she contract the spirits, it is so little, that it is
neither considerable, or powerful to confirm them in the manner they ought to
be.

And indeed, the Spirits cannot much contract themselves without retiring
inwardly, and consequently making the face look pale, forasmuch as they draw
the blood along with them, and rob the complexion of the color it had before.
So that Hope having the property to maintain the countenance equal, and not to
change its color; if it renders them so firm as we have said, it must be by
some other means then by contracting or reuniting them together.

To conceive then how this is done, we must observe that the Soul can hope for
nothing but what she first loved and desired: it is necessary that the Spirits
should move conformably to these two Passions, before Hope can agitate them.
Now they dilate and open themselves in Love, to embrace the good; and in Desire
they commonly recoil a little, that they may the more easily dart themselves
toward it. Being in this state then, if Hope intervene, it changes nothing in
the situation of their parts, it retains them only in the proportion they had
together; and from free and wandering, as they were, they subject themselves to
a certain order which they keep amongst themselves as long as Hope lasts; which
is made by the souls intermission, which has an absolute command over them,
placing them as she will, stopping them as she pleases, and holding them as it
were by the hand in the rank she had placed them: And for that time, they
remain firm and stable, without confounding themselves with others, or inwardly
retreating, or advancing outwardly; which is the particular motion of the
spirits in this Passion.

Some perhaps will say, that if these parts remain firm and stable, they will
not move, and consequently, that the Spirits would have no motion in Hope. But
there are things, which, although they do not change place, forbear not to
move. Thus Elementary bodies which are not in their center, although they are
retained and seem immovable, yet they make a kind of an endeavor to return
to their natural place, which makes them seem either light or heavy. We may
say the same of the Spirits, which being retained by a strange violence, are
not truly at rest, but suffer a secret agitation which holds them in continual
suspense.

Now although the Spirits remain thus firm and stable in Hope, it hinders not
but that at the same time they may be agitated by other Passions which mix
themselves with it. So Desire and Boldness may cast them forth without mixing
their stedfastness, because it consists but in the order of their parts, which
this darting forth destroys not, as we have said, seeing we may move a thing
from one place to another, without disturbing the order and motion which those
parts may have amongst themselves.

It is also true, that as Desire grows weak when Hope is strong, if the Spirits
are very stable, their darting forth cannot be so great, because they are not
so free, nor so easy to move as they would be were they not restrained: That
if Passions rise whose motion quite destroys that of Hope, as Joy and Despair;
then we may be sure that Hope cease for a time, to give place to those
others; and that the Spirits lose their firmness, to disperse or slacken
themselves, afterward resuming their first consistence, if the Soul sees new
subjects of Hope; which sometimes happens so readiry, that it seems as if it
were done in an instant, and that these motions confound themselves the one
with the other.

I see nothing more here to stop us, but that some may chance to imagine, that
if it were true that in Hope the soul and the spirits did bend themselves to
resist difficulties, somewhat must appear on the outward parts, and they also
must bend themselves for the same purpose; since that in Laughter we see the
muscles retire as the soul does, that in Desire and in Anger they cast
themselves out as she does; that they slacken in Joy, and that all other
Passions make the same impression on the Body, as the Objects do in the
Appetite. But we must consider, that the organs of a voluntary motion move not
in the Passions, but through the strength and efficacy of the object, which
urges the soul, and obliges it to employ all the means she has to attain the
end she proposed her self, as we see it happens in all violent Passions; or
else out of a particular design she has to show outwardly what she inwardly
resents, as she does in Laughter and in Caresses. So that there being none of
those motives in Hope, she needs move none of those outward parts, and contents
her self with the agitation she gives the spirits; not considering the ill but
by the by, she esteems it not so great, as to employ all her endeavors against
it: so that she commonly agitates but the most mobile parts, as are the
spirits, the eyes, the brows, and some other parts, as it happens in all other
Passions which are weak or moderate.

PART 4. The causes of the Characters of Hope.
BUt since we have spoken sufficiently of the secret tempests, let us now see
whence those come which appear outwardly, and examine why Hope renders men
bold, presumptuous, temerous, insolent, credulous, negligent in their affairs,
and impatient in their actions; although it be the most moderate and the
calmest of all the Passions of the Mind.

It is easy to discover the cause of its moderation, after having showed how
it moves the Soul and the Spirits: for it is impossible it should keep them
stiff and stable as it does, and that it should be subject to those agitations
which are abservable in other Passions: On the contrary, those languishing and
impetuous ones which mix with it, assume a conformable mediocrity to that kind
of motion which suspends the soul between ardor and neglect, as we have already
said; wherefore it enfeebles the Desire when it is too ardent, and stirs it up
when it is remiss; it is a spur to Laziness, and a bridle to Violence; it
hinders Boldness from being rash, and takes off the transports of Joy: and if
it chance to be with Fear, and with Grief, it so moderates them, that they fail
not of their courage, and refuse not to admit of the sweetest Passions.

But whence comes it then, that it renders men rash, vain, and impatient? How
can Anger and Fury be compatible with it? And if it excite and animate the
Courage and the Desires, how does it beget Negligence and Idleness? And yet we
cannot doubt but that in some sort it is the cause of all these effects. But
they also who will consider the manner of their production, will confess, that
it is neither the nearest, nor even the true cause: For Hope indeed begets
Boldness; but afterward Boldness runs to Temerity: it excites and awakens the
Desires; but these bring Disquiet and Impatience with them: it brings Joy with
it; but aftewards Joy flees into raptures and ecstasies: it inspires the
Appetite with Revenge; which is afterward converted into Fury: Finally, it
gives Confidence, and that begets Presumption, vanity, and the scorn of all
things which may traverse our designs; whence, after, Negligence and Laziness
are bred. So that all these defects come not immediately from Hope, but from
the other Passions which accompany it. And it is clear, that when these are
raised to this excess, it quite vanishes, or becomes extremely weak: For when
we are sensible of a great Joy, at that very moment we have no sense of Hope:
it scarce appears in violent Desires, nor in the transports of Anger; the soul
suffering her self to be born away by the particular motions of those Passions:
And Presumption it self, which seems nothing but an excess of Hope, wholly
ruins it; imagining that there are no difficulties which can oppose its
designs: for, where there is no more a difficulty, there remains no Hope.

However it be, Boldness is easily joined with Hope, because the Soul having
confirmed her self by this to the resistance of difficulties, is already in
state to assault them if they appear very strong, and if she betake her self to
consider the danger wherein they may cast her, for want of fighting and
overcoming them: Besides that the good opinion she has of her strength,
heightens her Courage, and persuades her that it is not enough to maintain the
defensive part, but we must pursue and assault our enemy. If her forces are not
proportionable to this good opinion, and that she believes them greater then in
effect they are, thence arises Presumption; which, joined with Boldness,
reaches to Temerity; and thence grows Insolence: in the same manner as with
Joy she begets Vanity, Prattle, and Importunity, as in its place we shall
further show.

Impatience raigns powerfully in this Passion. Forasmuch as it commonly
accompanies Joy, Desire, and Fear, there is always somewhat of these three mixed
with Hope; and even they are often found all together. So that we must not
wonder if we are unquiet when we hope, whether it be from the apprehension we
have that we shall not soon enough possess the good we expect, or from the
urgency of pressing desires, or from the sparkling which accompanies pleasure.

There is no Passion so credulous as Hope: for others give credence only to
the Good or Ill proposed, but this equally gives in Both. Indeed, pleasing
things only persuade Joy, Love, and Desire: those which are troublesome make
no impression on them, without destroying them. On the contrary, Ill only is
resented by Grief, Fear, and Despair; Good has neither audience nor admittance
among them. But Hope hearkens to both of them, forasmuch as being in the midst
between both, it easily inclines toward those extremities: and she no sooner
believes what favors her designs, but she hearkens to what renders them
impossible.

The Corporal characters which are found in this Passion, are of two kinds, as
in all the rest: The one by the command of the Soul, the others by Necessity.
The motions of the head, brows, eyes, and voice, and of all the body, are of
the first rank: The rest are in the form of ordinary effects.

The body sets it self upright, the head is lifted up, the brows are raised,
for the same intention. For the Soul, which would obtain the good, and resist
the difficulties which oppose it, puts it self in posture to do both. Now
besides that this posture is advantageous for to see afar off what may happen,
it is so also in pursuance of Good, or in defense of Ill, if one be assaulted
by it; it is the most natural situation which bodies require for action; it is
the motion which begins all other actions of creatures; whether to pursue
pleasing things, or to flee or assault ill ones, the first thing they do is to
lift up the head and the body. The Soul now putting her self in posture of
defense, disposes thus of those organs, that she may not be surprised; and
raises them, to make them the firmer; as in Despair, and in Fear, where she
slackens her self, she bows the body, hangs the head, and casts down the eyes
and brows.

An assured countenance is made by a wide opening of the eyelids with
vivacity. A fixed and steadfast look, it is common to Anger, Impudence, Boldness,
and Hope; yet with this difference, that in Anger the eyes are too ardent; too
open in Impudence; and too rude in Boldness. But in Hope they have none of
these defaults; all is therein moderate; and it seems as if sweetness and
severity were confounded together in all its motions. The eyes then are more
open then ordinary, the better to see the good, and the difficulties which
present themselves. The stedfastness of the looks, is a sign that impediments
astonish not the Mind, and that it believes it shall overcome them. The
vivacity of the eyes comes from the Spirits which Desire has driven to these
parts, or which Joy has there dispersed. In fine, sweetness and severity are
therein mixed together, because that at the same time the soul sees the Good and
the Ill, and is touched both with the one and the other, and is not so sure to
obtain what she pretends to, but that she still has cause to doubt of it.

This Passion often also makes a man turn up his eyes, for that having need of
the help of others to acquire what he seeks, it casts his eyes toward heaven,
as to the fountain of all good things, and the common helper of all Nature; and
has recourse to superior causes, being not always assured of the assistance
it promised it self from others.

But when the looks are urgent and unquiet, they are effects of Desire and
Fear, which mix with it; in the same manner as Joy often causes its
transports, sparklings, and agitations.

To conclude, the voice and the speech are firm, that is to say, strong,
without vehemence or inequality, neither heightning nor talling, neither
trembling nor precipitated: For the Soul, which bends it self to resist
difficulties, is in no condition to fear: but because also she will not assault
them, she makes no great endeavor. Wherefore, the voice falls not, because
there is no weakness in the Mind; it rises not also, there being no violence
therein; neither is it trembling, being without fear; nor precipitate, being
without impetuosity: but strong and equal, the air being beaten strongly and
equally by the Soul, which has assured and confirmed her self against
difficulties.

There remains now only the Necessary Characters which follow the agitation of
the Humors and of the Spirits. The first, and that which seems the most proper
for Hope, is, that the color of the face changes not; the reason whereof we
touched at the beginning of this Discourse: For the Spirits, which become
stable, stop also the blood, and hinder it from retiring inwardly, or
dispersing it self outwardly. So that if sometimes we grow pale, it is an
effect of Fear, as blushing is of Love, Desire, Joy, and the rest of the
Passions which drive the blood into the outward parts.

Sighs follow Love and Desire also. It is Fear that cools and makes us lose
Courage; it is Boldness heats and re-animates it. Finally, Disquiet chiefly
comes from Desire and from Fear, which are augmented by tediousness and delays,
which retard the possession of the desired Good. But these Characters are
strangers to Hope, whose examen is not here to be made: Let us only consider
those which seem fit and natural to it.

It renders the Pulse steadfast, without being vehement: for the heart and the
arteries, which confirm themselves as well as the spirits, make the Pulse
appear somewhat harder then it was; and by the touch you may perceive a
steadiness which it had not before. But this is without vehemence, forasmuch as
the soul makes no great endeavor to assault, as we said; and the heat is
temperate, which require a moderate and equal motion. It is true, if Hope fall
into some cold and weak nature, it causes a higher and greater Pulse then it
had usually, forasmuch as the Soul, which knows her weakness, and whose design
is to fortify her self, somewhat augments the heat, which has afterward need
of the greater refreshment. But at that time the Pulse is nothing quicker; the
heat being not so increased, that the Soul had need to trouble her self to
temper the ardor it might cause; she contents her self to enlarge the heart and
the arteries, to receive the greater quantity of air. For it is the order which
Nature holds when heat increases, that first she makes the Pulse greater and
higher; after, she makes it quick; and, at last, renders it thick: imitating
herein what she makes beasts do, who, to go to a place, begin to march with
great paces; which, if urged, they double; and at last betake themselves to
run. Howsoever, what we said of the Pulse, happens in respiration, excepting
the hardness, which the Sense therein cannot be sensible of; although it be
likely that the substance of the Lungs may therein harden, as Hippocrates says
it happens in Anger, because it is almost impossible that the Spirits, which
run through all the parts, should not imprint the quality they have, in those
which are soft and obedient, as the Lungs are.

In a word, Hope fortifies all the parts, because the spirits therein are more
vigorous: and as it stops, and in a manner retains them, that they cannot
dissipate, nor make any violent motion, it is not to be disputed, that of all
the Passions it is the most advantageous for Health, for Length of life, for
Virtue it self, which with so great a care seeks Moderation, which naturally is
to be found with Hope. I say again, It is advantageous for the Length of life:
for, what serves for a great Health, is not always good to render Life long:
Active and vehement heat produces strong actions, but shortens our days,
because the Spirits easily dissipate, and suddenly consume the natural
moisture. So that, to live long, heat should be moderate, the spirits ought not
to be violently agitated, nor also should they be languishing. Now if Nature
give them not this justness, then it seems there is only Hope which can
acquire it us, being the only one which retains it, and secures it, without
suffering excessive heat, or irregular motion. And therefore we must not
wonder, if those who feed themselves with good hopes, live longer then other
Men: And if death often follows high successes, it is because it makes us lose
Hope, which is the true Anchor which holds fast our Soul, our Lives, and our
Years.

FINIS.
THE Second Part OF THE PASSIONS.

Wherein is Treated of the Nature, and of the effects of the COURAGEOUS
PASSIONS.

Englished by R.W. Esquire

LONDON, Printed by T. Newcomb, for H. Herringman, at the Anchor in the
New-Exchange. 1661.

The Stationer to the READER.
A Gentleman of quality during these late unhappy times, having betaken himself
to a retired life, made it his business to study this our Incomparable Author;
and that he might the better imprint him in his Mind, as well as render him
beneficial to others who understand not his language, made it his pastime to
transscribe into the English the First and Second Part of the Characters of the
Passions, which having been formerly severally brought to light, he easily
persuaded us to reconcile them, and obliged us upon a Review to present them
this second time in one volume, being confident that they cannot but
begratefull to all learned Men, no Man as yet having ever treated of the
Passions in his inimitable way, which has truly gained him the reputation of
one of the Chief Philosophers of our Age. Amongst the most eminent wits of his
Nation who are his fittest Judges, the One calls him, The most splendent light
of the time, and one of the greatest Genius of learning. But none flies higher
then Mounsieur de Balsac, who tells Mr. Chapelin in two of his Letters to him;
in the one, What great matters he expects from the learning and judgment of Our
Author; and in another he breaks forth into these expressions, Wishing his Book
had been far greater, that his pleasure might have been the more lasting; that
he never read any thing with more delight; and that he was sensibly charmed
with the beauty of his Passions. Others (says he) have given us touches and
essays of trash and trumpery, with disguised translations, and borrowed
conceits, but he shows us the truth in its original perfect luster; and were
all the parts of Philosophy rendered as intelligible in our language, Non esset
cur Greciae suos Platones, Zenophantes and Theophrastes invideremus. Nor
(continues he) do I know why he omitted Aristotle, whose sublime and methodick
style is most remarkable in this Author, which is indeed so very necessary for
the search and illumination of the Truth. According to my opinion Celsus his
latin has not the graces of his French. Imo vero tersam and elegantem
dictionem ipsae Gratiae vid^ntur mihi ijs manibus formasse quibus, ut vos
Poetae vultis, Dominae Veneri ministrant. So far he. Give me leave to add; his
Greatest Glory is from himself; His Design himself dares acknowledge the
greatest and fairest conceivable. Through all his Discourses he discovers the
vivacity of his knowledge, and the perspicuity of his judgment, clothed in a
style of inimitable elegancie; and in fine throughout he witnesses himself so
eminent a Philosopher, Nor in the judgment of the best, can he be denied to be
Doctor of the Chair. And were his Great design but perfectly finished, Our age
might truly boast, That by him alone Philosophy had been brought to its Achme.
I shall not cloud him with any farther Eulogie; But desire thee to read him,
and be thankful; And so farewell.

THE CHARACTERS OF THE PASSIONS.
PART. I.
CHAP. I. The Character of Boldness.
IF it be true, The Elogy of B^ldness.
that Love is the Queen of the Passions, we must believe that its birth, and
not its desert has given it that advantage; it being the first which is raised
in the Heart, those which are formed afterward, finding her in the Throne,
find themselves obliged to submit themselves to her, and to give place to
their elder, a right which they might contest, were Reason and not Nature judge
of the difference.

In effect, so turbulent and so factious a state as that of the Passions, ought
not to be governed by one that is blind or effeminate, who is born to serve,
and which would cease to be what she is, did she but cease to command. Boldness
were the rather to be employed, which is a noble and generous Passion, which is
the Mother of Valor, and the only one which can fight, which can overcome,
which can triumph.

It Is she who has established all the Powers and all the Empires of the World,
who has made all the great Princes, and all the Hero's, who first opened the
way to glory and immortality, and who only lawfully dispenses Victories; For
although Fortune vaunts to be the Mistress of them, to give them when and to
whom she pleases, they become shameful, if Boldness makes them not
meritorious: And those who conquer without her, yield to the conquered the
honor of the combat, and leave them the fairest part of the Victory.

To conclude, it is she inspires Virtue with that noble ardor which makes her
undertake the high and most difficult things, which lends her arms to combat
Vice, which affords her strength to quell the Passions, and which after she
has made her triumph over all the Monsters of the Earth, opens Heaven with
that holy violence w^^^ewith it would be violenced, and (...) her in possession
of those immortal Crowns which to be justly possessed ought to be ravished. For
we must not believe that the most noble employments of Boldness are to gain
Battles, to take Towns, and to conquer Kingdoms: Nature thinks not of these
disorders, when she sows the seeds of this Passion in the Soul. She minds more
important Combats and Conquests which are far more useful, and much more
glorious.

Knowing that Man is destined for Felicity, that there are a thousand kinds of
Enemies which defend his entry, and that himself most commonly opposes himself
most of all, against his own good; She gives him Boldness, as a necessary
succor to overcome obstacles, and to enter into the enjoyment of those goods
for which they contested him.

So that we may say without her, he would be exposed to the violence of all
both within and without himself; That his life would be but a continual sense
of fear and of despair. In a word, that he were the most impotent and most
unhappy of all creatures. For although he boasts to have a more perfect
composition of body, clearer knowledges, more noble Appetites then all other
Animals: And that he is not subject to that corruption which destroys all other
things; yet when we have well examined these advantages, they would be useless
to him, yea they would be pernicious if he were without Boldness; since the
perfect temper which he has, renders him weak and delicate, that his Reason is
naturally timorous and suspicious, that his Passions are base and effeminate,
and that immortality without a good issue is a mischief without end, and
without measure: So that Boldness bereaving him of Weakness and Fear, raising
him to generous actions, and conducting him to Felicity, we cannot doubt but
it is she who corrects the defects of our birth, which makes it enjoy
prerogatives which she affords it, and to which it ows all its nobility, all
its excellency, and all its good fortune.

But as this Passion follows the destiny of the most perfect things, whose
disorders are always the greatest, and their corruptions the most dangerous: So
it happens also, that when she passes the bounds she ought to keep, none
causes greater disorders, nor is more an Enemy to Man, and to Civil Society.

It Is from her that Vice, which of it self is timorous, and loves to hide it
self, takes heart and strength, becomes insolent and proud, that it shows it
self brasen-fac'd, and appears in public: All those detestable crimes which
have ruined so many Families, and so many Republics, had never entered into
the thoughts of those who committed them, or at least would have remained in
them without effect, had not Boldness been a Complice of their wickedness.

No, without her there had never been seditious persons, nor Rebels; Usurpers,
nor Tyrants; Parricides, nor committers of Sacrilege; without her we had never
seen so many Armies defeated, so many Provinces desolate, so many People
ruined, so many Empires destroyed without her. In fine, Pride and Ambition
which are the sources of all our mischiefs, and of all public calamities, had
been unknown or impotent Passions; And if we may so speak, perhaps Peace and
Justice had never retired out of the World, had Boldness never entered in.

So that if we rightly consider the goods and the ills she brings, she may
fitly be compared to the heat which the Sun defuseth on the Universe; for like
it she heats and stirs up all languishing Virtues, she inspires strength and
vigor into all the world, she causes the noblest effects which are to be found
therein, and if she produces not gold and precious stones, yet we may say she
makes Scepters and Crowns.

But like the same heat also she commonly corrupts all the best of things; she
brings forth monsters and prodigies, she forms thunders and tempests; and there
are whole Climates which she has turned into Deserts and Solitudes. Even she
so much the more resembles it, that as that quality makes use of the light to
produce its dangerous effects, this Passion also makes use of glory to execute
its evil designs. At least she fancies to her self that honor is still to be
acquired in all those undertakeings; and although they are criminal or unhappy,
yet she imagins, that the shame to have committed a crime, or to have had an
ill success, is far short of the glory to have dared much.

But neither is this a place to defend or condemn her; we must only therefore
describe her, and according to our proposed order, make those Characters appear
which she imprints in the Soul and Body of those who are sensible of her.

To design the picture of Boldness, a man had need of the Art and Pensil of
those great Painters, The Description of a Bold Man.
who represented only Gods and Hero's; for it is a Passion altogether heroic,
and which at all times has been placed in the rank of Enthusiasms, and of
divine Furies. In effect, when it enters the Soul it fills it with so much
splendour and majesty, it inspires such noble sentiments, and gives it such
wonderful motions and transports, that it seems as if it were for us to wrong
it, to seek its birth here below, and that with reason we may believe that
Nature is ^oo weak to produce a thing that is so excellent.

But whether it be a present from Heaven or no, it is certain it is the
greatest and most advantageous that the Soul could ever hope for: It compleats
all its glory and all its riches; and if it be true that the Sun has Houses,
where he is sensible that his power and forces increase, we may say that
Boldness is the Throne where the Soul finds its greatness and its elevation,
where she places her self above all those Powers which assault her, and where
she despises all those dangers wherewith she may be threatened.

And to speak truth, it is matter of astonishment, to see that a man should have
none at the sight of precipices, shipwracks and of all the most frightful
things in the world; Danger environs him on all sides, his Enemies press him on
all parts, Death presents it self to him in a thousand places, and in a
thousand manners; all these things astonish him not; nay, he often takes them
for illusions, and laughs at them as vain fantasms, which in his opinion are
fit only to terrify timorous minds. But if he expects to find resistance, and
that he judges it to be an honor to combat or to overcome them; then his
Courage swells, his Vigor awakes, his whole Soul seems to increase with his
Forces, and as if in effect she were grown greater, he entertains himself only
with great thoughts, he forms none but great designs, and suffers himself to be
moved with none but by the most noble and most generous of the Passions; For
his spirit is silled with nothing but the glory and the immortality which he
intends to acquire. He imagins that all the World makes ready Crowns for him
alone to deserve, and as if the approach of the Enemy did hasten him the
Victory, he sees him with pleasure, he accosts him with assurance, and believes
that the beginning of the Combat is but the commencement of his riumph.

You must not at that time think of withholding him; the advice you give will
be cowardly counsel, the ill omens which you observe will be superstitions or
weaknesses. In fine, all the cares we take to withdraw him from the danger
wherein he is going to cast himself, are injurious to him, and those that take
them are esteemed timorous Souls, or Enemies of Glory.

The forbiddings of a Father, the tears of a Family, nor the reverence of the
Laws are not able to stop him; he tramples all manner of respects under his
feet, and like a torrent which is irritated by obstacles, which throws down
Dams, and becomes more rapid by resistance, it adds fury to his passion, he
makes way with force; and what is opposed against him serves but to make him
with the more impetuosity run to the place of combat. He will not there spend
his time in unprofitable discourse; he speaks, but at the same time he strikes,
and his words rather serve to express his Courage then his thought; for he
imploys them not in injuries, nor in reproaches, nor in clearing himself, nor
in vain threats; they are but interfering words and short exclamations, which
his transport wherein he is, draws from the mouth; they are as if they were the
boylings of that ardor which agitates him within, or to say better, they are
like the claps of thunder which come pouring down on his Enemy.

And truly it can be better compared to nothing then Thunder; like that, at the
same time it causes the lightning, the noise, and the blow; like that, at the
same time it strikes, it pierces, it casts down all that resists it; and if it
be true that it disdains to touch dead Bodies, and spares those which sleep,
it is still the more like unto it; never assaulting those who have lost heart,
or are not in a condition able to defend themselves. For although in the heat
of the Battle he seems only to breath cruelty, and that his fury ought not to
be glutted with ought but blood and slaughter, yet it is very certain that none
make use of Victory more moderately: He never proceeds to insolency, and we may
say he at the same time disarms his Passion when he disarms his Enemy; As soon
as he sees him on the ground he raises him up, he embraces him, and not
remembering the blows he received, he complains only of those which he has
given; he speaks modestly of the advantage he had over him, and how great
soever a lover of glory he is, he yields to the chance of Arms, the greatest
part of what he has acquired. It is not that in his Soul he believes not but
that his Valor made his Fortune good, but that he ardently seeks the praises
and the honors which Victory has made him merit, and but that he esteems all
those stupid or envious who admire not the wonders which he thinks he has
done: But it is the nature of the Passion which moves him to fly unto glory, by
such noble and civil ways, and to cover his ambition by free and generous
proceedings and by a modest either discourse or silence: In a word, his
freeness is ambitious, his generosity is interest, and his modesty is proud.

And in effect, there are a thousand encounters wherein he loses his
discretion, and cannot hide that high and imperious humor which accompanies
him. For if he has any design in hand, he will always be chief of the Council,
and of the enterprise; He believes and speaks high, that he is the only man,
who knows the means to make it succeed, and it is he only can execute it. And
as if Prudence and good Fortune could do nothing without him, he confidently
assures that the success cannot but be unhappy unless he has the conduct of
it, or at least if he be not of the party.

In the mean time, it is certain that commonly there is no man less capable to
give or to follow good counsel then he; Presumption makes him despise the best
advice, precipitation bereaves him of foresight, and the great confidence which
he has in himself, exposes him to all manner of dangers, and makes him fall
into all the ambushes which are prepared for him.

It Is true, that he perishes nobly in them, and that the proofs which he gives
of his Courage, may wipe away the shame of his temerity or of his imprudence;
for although he be surprised by his Enemy, that he sees very well that
resistance is useless, and that all what presents it self before his eyes
declare his loss; yet all this makes him not lose Courage nor Judgment, after
having without trouble, and without apprehension, considered the greatness of
the danger, a certain generous choler and a noble despair seizes on him, which
transports him beyond himself, and carries him through fire and sword, and
makes him perform such wonderful efforts, that they seem to surpass his natural
strength. He strikes, he casts down, he kills all those whom his sword can
reach; and after a long fight finding himself rather cast down then conquered,
he leaves a sad Victory to the Victor, and an ample cause of admiration and of
jealousy.

But we labor in vain in one picture to represent all the motions which this
Passion can form in the Soul; they are so different amongst themselves, that
its impossible they should be found in one and the same subject. And we may say
that Boldness is a fire which produces as many several sorts of heat and
flame, as it is taking in several matters. There is no inclination nor
profession which has not its own particular; and although this Passion be
naturally generous and modest, and be far estranged from choler or cruelty, and
be imcompatible with fear or astonishment; yet some are found to be base and
insolent, some which are Bragadocio's, brutal and cruel. Choler almost always
accompanies that of Women and Children; and many of those who boldly run into
danger lose their courage as soon as it presents it self before them. But that
which is most strange is, Fear often devanceth the most noble Boldness; those
often who are most valiant in fight, dare not speak in public; and as the most
furious Beasts are frighted at the sight of Spectra's, and of the feeblest
amongst Beasts there are some who without cause are afraid at the first
encounter of some persons, who cannot endure the presence of some things, and
even without horror cannot so much as walk in the dark: We will here examine
the cause of these differences. We will now therefore see whether Boldness has
as much power over the body, as in has over the soul, and whether she can
imprint out wardly as fair characters as those which she forms within.

Certainly we must confess that no Passion gives so advantageous a Mind, nor so
noble and becoming a port to a man as this does; all others corrupt that
masculine beauty which he naturally ought to have; some render him fierce and
savage, as Anger and Despair, others make him soft and effeminate, as Love and
Joy; Boldness only gives him that majestical air, that graceful stateliness,
and that bold pride, which becomes his Nature and his Sex.

In effect, can we behold any thing more august, more full of pomp, then a man
whom Boldness leads into danger? That generous coldness which appears in his
face, that settled look, his proud march, and the noble efforts which he makes
in fight, inspire in the mind I cannot tell what kind of veneration, and in my
opinion, make the most magnifick representation of virtue which can be
imagined. For it is not only in the progress of this Passion that it takes this
heroic air; it forms it self from the first motions it makes in the heart, and
he no sooner perceives the danger, but we may see in his eyes the resolution
which he takes, and the confidence he has to overcome it.

He coldly considers it, without emotion, without changing color; and if
sometimes he trembles, and grows pale at the encounter thereof, we may believe
it is not that he fears it, but it is the greatness of his own Courage which
astonisheth him. Neither does this trouble last long; he presently recomposeth
and reassureth himself, and looking through and through his Enemy with a severe
smile, he makes us judge that he at once both scorns and threatens him.

If he thinks he ought to assault him, he marches toward him with large
paces, but gravely, with an erect and stable stature, with his brow lifted up,
and his sparkling eyes seem as if they would go out of their place, and begin
the Combat before they come to handy blows. For without winking, and without
heeding any thing else, he keeps them always fixed on him; he considers his
port, his pace, his arms; he measures him, and seems to seek afar off those
places which are weakest, and marks those which are to receive his first blows.
Afterward he accosts him with a silence both fierce and disdainful, with his
forehead shriveled up betwixt his brows, stooping his head, and all his body
bowed and shortened in it self; he assaulteth him, he thrusts him, he presses
him; and calling to his succor that noble fury which reigns in Combats, he
suffers himself to be carried away by it, and at last abandons himself to all
the turbulency and impetuosity whereof it is capable.

Then it is that fire flies up into his face, that his looks become terrible,
and that all his air, his port, and his mind render themselves formidable. His
hairs stand on end, his Forehead wrinkles, his Nostrils widen, and all his
veins are swollen and extended. Sometimes he blows with impetuosity; sometimes he
keeps in his breath, and shuting his Lips and his Teeth, he displaies his Arms,
and discharges his greatest and most heavy blows; Sometimes he sighs under the
endeavors he makes, and from time to time he sends forth the short and
penetrating lightnings of his Voice wherewith it seems he would provoke his
Courage, and startle his Enemy. He stamps the ground with his Feet, he puts
forth himself, he leaps, he bows himself; and the sweat running from all the
parts of him mixeth it self with the blood and dust wherewith he is covered,
and forms I know not what frightful color which renders him still the more
formidable, whilst his Breast all red and inflamed, raises up it self with
grievous secourses, and causes a strong and fond respiration; his heart beats
with violence, and did you feel his Pulse, you would easily judge by the
greatness, swiftness and vehemence of it, that the Soul has none of its powers
which are not employed in this Passion. But let us finish his Picture with this
Combat, neither is there ought else to be described therein, but either his
Victory or his Loss, which can add nothing to the Characters of Boldness, but
those of Joy or of Grief. Let us therefore seek the causes of all these effects
in the Nature of this Passion.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of Boldness.
THe Soul proposes not more difficulties in forming Boldness, The Difficulty
that is in defining of Boldness.
then the Mind encounters for attaining the knowledge thereof. It must combat
monsters, and assault whole Armies to acquire this knowledge; and at a less
rate then to be of its party; it is impossible to resist so many opinions, and
so many errors which have hid or corrupted its Nature. In effect, there is none
of the Passions which has more divided men's minds, which has been more
diversely defined, and of which more strange and more different pictures have
been made. For there have been some so extravagant that they would not have
placed it in the rank of Passions; believing, that to be bold was nothing but
to despise danger, or not at all to fear it. And that Scorn being an effect of
Judgment, and want of Fear, a privation, neither of them could be a motion of
the Appetite; but who can believe that a man that assaults his Enemy, scorns
him? Contrariwise, if he scorned him, he would not assault him, since we never
assault but those things which may hurt us, and we despise those only which
can do neither good nor hurt. And again, who will believe, that not to fear is
to be bold, since stupidity and sleep take away fear without making us bold.
Others affirm it to be only a powerful desire to assault and overcome what is
hurtful; but since we do not desire to assault any more, when we have once
effectually done it; in such an encounter Boldness must cease to be, since then
even the desire cease; yet it is certain, that Boldness continues and augments
its self even in fight.

Others will have it nothing but a great and a strong Hope; but besides that,
there are great hopes often found without any Boldness; what would you say of a
Slave whose Masters goodness has given him a very great and most assured hope
of his liberty, would he then have a very great Boldness? To what purpose
should he employ his Courage? must it be to combat his good fortune, or to
assault his succeeding ill hap?

There are others which call it a resolution of Courage, which makes a man
promise himself power enough to overcome the mischiefs which threatens him,
that he without astonishment sees them come, neither is he frighted when they
are come; But besides that resolution is an effect of judgment, and not of the
Appetite, and that often without being bold we are not astonished at the danger
because we know it not; All the utmost endeavor of this Boldness seems to be
employed to bear misfortues without daring to assault them; and yet this is the
most noble, and perhaps the only employment it can have.

Besides this, they will have, that one of the Passions of the Soul must
fortify it, and render it assured against all those ills which are to be
shunned with most difficulty, and encourage it to pursue those goods which are
acquired with the greatest pains: But force and assurance belong not to the
Appetite, and instead of being the effects of Boldness, they are rather the
causes of it; for the Soul must feel it self strong and assured before she
engage herself in Boldness.

To say also with the Schools, that it is a motion which the Appetite makes to
obtain a good which is to be acquired with difficulty; it is to be ignorant of
the true object of Boldness, which obliges it self to peril and danger. It is
to confound it with Hope and with Anger, even also with Fear, which according
to their Maxims, are also motions of the Soul to obtain a difficult good.

To conclude, what definition soever may be given, if it express not the
particular motion which the Appetite suffers in this Passion, it does disguise
it, instead of making it known; and rather presents us with the shadow and
fantasm of Boldness, then shows what it truly is. Let Us therefore endeavor to
discover it, and without staying to observe the ill ways, let us conduct the
Reader into that which is the best and most assured.

To this purpose we must suppose a thing known to all the World, That Ill is
the object of Boldness?
That true Boldness is stirred up at the sight of danger; that Combats,
Shipwracks, Precipices, and death it self, are the most worthy objects which
employ it. In short that she appears most where the difficulties are greatest,
and where she thinks to find most resistance.

Now as we said in the discourse of Hope, the difficulties and the ills appear
unto the Soul either greater or lesser then her forces; if they are greater,
she flies them; if less, she scorns or else she assaults them. And truly the
Schools say not enough when they establish it for a Maxim, That the Soul has
but two sorts of motions, the one by which she pursues good, and the other
whereby she flies ill; for she is not in a worse condition then other things of
Nature, which have not only an inclination to seek what is fit for them, and
fly what is hurtful, but they also have that to destroy what is contrary unto
them. However it be, it is certain that the Soul flies not all kinds of ill,
that there are some which it assaults; and that if there be any Passion which
it employs to execute so noble a design, it ought to be Boldness.

Now because that when an assault or a combat is to be made, That the Ill must
be present.
the ill must needs be present, otherwise the endeavor which were to be made
would be vain and useless: It thence follows, that the difficulties and dangers
ought to be present, which stir up this Boldness; for if we consider them as
absent, they may then perhaps oblige the Soul to prepare it self, and to put it
self in a condition to resist it, when it presents it self. But they cannot
draw from her any endeavor to assault them; for as much as the presence of the
Enemy is absolutely necessary when we ought to fight; then indeed it may be an
Assurance, a Confidence, a Resolution of Courage, but not a Boldness.

In effect, the order which the Soul observes to form this Passion, is to
consider the evil to come, and to compare its forces with her own, and then
having found hers great enough to surmount them, she forms a desire of
fighting, and a hope of Victory; and at the same time she prepares herself for
the assault by the assurance and certainty which she takes of the success of
her undertaking, by the resolution she makes to employ all those Faculties
which ought to obey her, and by the command which she gives them to prepare
themselves for the Combat; then the Appetite obeying her orders, strengthens
it self, stiffening and settling it self in it self, that the Enemy may not
surprise it, and that it may be in a condition to resist it, if it happen it
should present it self.

Yet hitherto there has been no Boldness, there are only the dispositions
which go before her. For even then when the ill suffers it self not to be
foreseen, and that it presents it self all on a sudden, these actions must
still precede the assault which she ought to make, and there must be some
moments which give the Soul time to make all those preparatives which are
necessary for her; otherwise in this encounter she would endure no other
Passion but that of Astonishment, of Fear, or of Despair.

In a word, all what precedes the assault which the Appetite makes, Objections
which show that absent ill may raise Boldness.
is not Boldness, no more then the preparatives for War are the Battle* And
truly, as the presence of good raises in the mind different motions from those
which its absence produces therein; the presence of ill must also cause other
Passions then its absence causes: Now so it is that she assaults the present
ill, and that there no Passion employed for that effect but Boldness; And
therefore all those which she forms in absence of the ill, and which she
raises before she combat it, deserve not the name of Boldness, or at least the
same name must be given to Passions which are altogether different: I know that
some will say, that we are often sensible of the motion and of the effects of
Boldness, although the Enemy appear not; That Anger which is never without her,
is sometimes raised against those that are absent; That Hope always accompanies
it, which respects only the future: In fine, that our common way of speaking
affords not only the name of Bold to him who affronts danger, but even to him
who proposes himself to combat it, even to him who has already fought it. So
that there is no likelihood to restrain Boldness to nothing but the assault,
nor to require the presence of the ill as a necessary condition to produce it.

not, and that Boldness and Anger forbear not to rise in the Soul; yet for that
are they not absent from her, seeing they are present to her thoughts, and of
necessity we must believe, that to raise such kind of Passions that she fancies
to her self, that her Enemies are at hand, that they are falling on her, and
that she is going to be oppressed by them, unless she assault them.



For there is a great deal of difference in saying, That Hope always keeps
company with Boldness, and in saying, That Hope and Boldness have one and the
same object, one end, and one employment; they both of them serve as well as
the rest of the Passions to attain the end which the Soul proposes it self;
but its an end which is strange to them, and concerns them not; every one has
his own proper and peculiar one, which it at first encounters, and whereto it
naturally tends, without taking care for the general which concerns the Soul;
they properly are Soldiers which march and fight without knowing the design of
the Head which conducts them. But to understand this, we must observe, that the
end of actions is that which terminates them, and that they are terminated by
their effects. Now there are effects which are near hand, and which are
produced first, and others which are made in pursuit of them, and which for the
same reason are farther off. In the actions also there is an end which is near,
and another which is farther off; that is uniform and changes not; the other
is several and inconstant, according to the diverse use whereto the principal
cause has destinated it. So the first effect and the nearest and natural end
of Heat, is to warm; the rest which follow for example, are to roast or to burn,
according to the Design which Nature or Art propose.

As the Passions therefore are actions and motions of the Appetite, they have
also two kinds of End, the one which is near, and which is nothing but the
first effect which is produced by them; so Union is the proper and true end of
Love; the approaching to the Good is that of Desire; the Enjoyment is that of
Joy; the Combat is that of Boldness, and so of the rest. All those other ends
which follow this first belong not at all to the Passion, but only to the
principal cause which is the Soul, which destines it to what use it pleases
her. So that the Combat being the first effect of Boldness, is also the only
and true end: And if there be any good which it afterward expects, it is not
she that considers it, but Hope, or rather the Soul, which stirs up the most
generous Passions to sight with those difficulties which hinder her the
possession thereof.

The present Ill is then the only object of Boldness; What the end of Boldness
is.
the Combat is the only End she tends to; and if that afterward serves to
obtain some good, it is a success which happens unknown to it, and which she did
not at all propose herself; otherwise we must say, that Hatred and Fear, and
the rest of the Passions which fly from ill, have good also for their object,
since we fly not from ill but for some good which may thereby accrue.

But if any man ask what good and profit the Soul may make by this Combat, in
a word, what the principal motive is which engages her to assault ill: There
is no man but will readily answer, That its to overcome it. But this is not to
give a full Answer to the Question; we would know what she pretends to by this
Victory; for it is not sufficient to say that it is to defeat or chase away an
enemy, that it is to have pre-eminence over him, or to acquire the glory to have
overcome him: Forasmuch as these latter motions touch not the Sensitive
Appetite, and that the other two leave the difficulty entire: Since we may
further demand, why the Soul would defeat or drive away an Enemy? and what ever
we should say, that it were to fly from ill: besides that this Reason is too
loose and too general, and befits all the angry Passions; It Is certain, that in
flying she estrangeth herself from it in another manner then when she drives it
away; so that we must enquire the particular which in this encounter she
proposes herself: Now he that will consider that the Soul stirs up forces in
Boldness, and that she imploys them only when she thinks that her enemy makes
use of her own to ruin her; it is to be believed that she has no other design
in assaulting it, but to take away from it the power and strength of ill-doing:
For which cause we are not satisfied to see our Enemies fly, but we pursue
them, that making them lose either their life or liberty, we may bereave them
of all their wreacking power. But we shall insist upon this matter in the
Chapter of Constancy.

After which, What the Nature of Boldness is.
we believe we shall have satisfied all the proposed difficulties; for as to
what concerns the common manner of speaking, which gives the title of Bold to
him who is no longer in danger, it is sufficient to say that we speak not here
of Boldness as of a Habit which keeps its name, even when it acts not, but as
of a Passion, which is altogether in motion, and out of which it no longer is
the Passion of Boldness.

Let Us then conclude, that Boldness is nothing else but the motion which the
Appetite makes in assaulting ill. But how does it assault it? It can be by no
other way but by that whereby all things use to assault their Enemies; for as
they fortify themselves, raise themselves up, and throw themselves on them;
the Appetite does the same, stiffens and fastens it self in it self, it
animates, it lifts it self up, and shoots out it self against ill. In effect,
either we must not fancy motions in the Soul, nor qualify the Passions with
the name of Motions, or of necessity we must confess that that of Boldness is
such as we have said it to be. It Is so natural, and so conformable to Reason,
that we cannot'assure that the Soul pursues good, and that she runs after it,
that she estrangeth her self from ill and flies it, but we must be forced to
confess, that seeing she ought to combat it, she is also obliged to raise up,
and throw her self against it.

And did not Reason persuade this, let us but consider the motions of the Body,
which provokes it, with which hers must necessarily have a correspondence; for
it is impossible to see the putting forward of the Head, the startings out of
the Eyes, the elevation of the Muscles, the motions of the Arms, the
precipitate course, and impetuous fallies which all the parts perform in this
Passion, but we must presently fancy, that it is the Soul which raises up it
self, that throws it self abroad, and even goes out of it self, to join and
fight against her Enemy, so that we cannot err in saying, That Boldness is a
motion of the Appetite, by which the Soul throws it self forth against ill, to
combat it.

For this shooting forth is the different motion which distinguishes it from
all the rest of the Passions in which the Soul shoots not herself forth, as in
that of Love and of Hatred, of Joy and of Grief, of Hope and of Despair; and
the motive of this springing forth, which is to assault ill, and to combat it,
renders it different from Desire and Aversion, from Fear and from Anger;
forasmuch as if the Soul cast it self forth in Aversion or in Fear, its to
estrange it self from ill, and not to assault it: In Desire it is to approach
the Good, and in Anger it is to revenge it self, as in its place shall be
declared.

It Is true this definition is very different from that which Aristotle gave us
in his Rhetoric, where he says, That Boldness is nothing else but a Hope which
comes from the opinion which we have that expected Goods are near, and that
things, which we fear are far off. But who fees not that it is the true
portraicture of Confidence, which is a kind of Hope; and that Aristotle in
that place pretended not to define that of Boldness? seeing that in that place
where he was obliged most carefully to observe it is Nature, he says in express
terms, That dangers ought to be very near to provoke this Passion. Beyond all,
what definition soever he has given it, he considered it not as a Passion, but
only as a Habit. Without stopping therefore at these things, which concern us
not, let us fall on those which are more important; and first, let us see
whether it be true, That the Soul has a design to assault and combat ill in
all sorts of Boldness.

There are two things which make us doubt this proposition, the first is,
Whether all sorts of Boldness assault ill.
That Boldness is not only employed in assaulting of ill, but also in
resisting and sustaining it: Since a man may support a mischief, and suffer
even death with a Courage. The second is, that there are certain Boldnesses,
wherein there is no combat to be made, there being no apparent ill: As when a
man runs into danger without knowing it, when he is impudent or ambitious; for
this considers nothing but honors, and boldly pursues them, and the other is
bold, and takes delight to commit dishonest actions, where it seems he has no
enemy to fight.

But these Reasons are easily answered, for as for the first, although we may
say, that resistance is a kind of combat, since the Soul cannot resist but by
opposition, and that to oppose, she must stiffen herself against ill, which in
some sense is to assault and combat it; Yet it is certain, that simply to
resist ill, or constantly to suffer its encounters and violence, without making
any other effort, properly are not the effects of Boldness, but of another
Passion which we call Constancy, or staiedness of Courage, of which in the
following Chapter.

As for the second, it is most certain, that there are those which run into
dangers without knowing it, and that in such an encounter the Soul needs not
assault the ill, seeing it sees it not; but neither then is there Boldness: For
as no man will say, that a blind man is bold when he passes a precipice which
he thinks not of; nor that a Child is courageous that will touch the flame and
take up coals of fire, being ignorant of the effects thereof: It Is the same of
any other, who goes or lights into dangers which are unknown to him: He will
only appear Bold to such as are like him, blind, or ignorant. In a word, the
Appetite moves not it self but through knowledge; and when that enlightens it
not, it remains immovable, and forms no Passion. It must have an object to
raise it; and if there be any which it knows not of, it is no more touched with
it then if it were not at all. So that the danger which is unknown to him, is
to him no danger, and therefore he neither flies nor assaults it, and has
neither Fear nor Boldness for it.

It Is true, that those who are in that condition do often seem to be bold,
because we see them in the midst of dangers without astonishment, that
difficulties stop them not, and that they march with assurance through those
obstacles which present themselves before them, but indeed are not such as they
appear, and they are rather possessed with blindness and stupidity then with true
Boldness.

Yet it is that wherein we are most commonly deceived, forasmuch as it is
nothing easy to discern those deceitful signs from those which are true, and
chiefly when the Soul is agitated by some ardent Passion; for carrying her with
precipitation whether she would go, she takes from her the thought of all what
may cross her, and makes her run after her object, without regarding the lets
and dangers she meets in her way. Now it is certain, that then it seems to be
Boldness, which inspires her with that ardor, and which gives her those noble
motions. Although in truth it is not she, but the impetuosity of the Passion
which transports her; And it is thus, that the ambitious, the proud, and the
voluptuous seem bold in several occasions, whereas in effect they are nothing
so, because that not considering the difficulties which are in the pursuit
which they make afree Honors and Pleasures, they neither see them, nor do they
assault them. And without doubt, we are to place in this rank the most part of
those who fear not dangers being accustomed thereunto as Soldiers and Seamen,
or having never tried them, like those who engage themselves in great
undertakings, the difficulties whereof they never foresaw, or because they
believe that they are not threatened by them, as such as think themselves far
off, such as are happy, such as are good men, forasmuch as honest men fear
nothing. For it is certain, that in the most part of those encounters Boldness
is not, if you take it for a Passion. Forasmuch as to some dangers are not
known to be so, and to others they are reputed so, although they be absent. Now
so it is, that unknown or absent ill raises not Boldness, and therefore it is
not really to be found in those we have now observed, unless as a disposition
or a Habit. But we will have another touch upon this Subject. How Impudence
assaults ill


Let Us now see how Boldness which is to be found in Impudence may assault ill,
since we cannot now say what we have said before, that it may be taken for a
Habit, or for a disposition, since Impudence is a Passion composed of the other
two, to wit, Pleasure and Boldness: So that if there be nothing to be fought
against in Impudence, there is some Boldness, which as a Passion is not obliged
to assault it.

Certainly to be Impudent, we must know the action we do, is contrary to
civility and honesty, otherwise it were folly, or brutality, and not Impudence:
For a Child, a Blockhead, one that is senceless, is never esteemed impudent,
forasmuch as they know not what actions are uncivil.

He therefore that knows them, and has an intention to do them, at that time
feels in himself the reason which opposes it, and the honor which defends him
to execute it. Now all what opposes it self to the Appetite, is an obstacle
against it, and seems unto it as an evil; and yet Reason, Honor, and Modesty
are the Enemies which Impudence assaults, which she fights with, which she
triumphs over. But we will examine this more particularly in discovering of
this Passion. It Is sufficient to show, That there is no Boldness which assaults
not true or apparent ill.

We have nothing more to enquire, What the ill is which Soldness asaults.
but whether all sorts of ill can raise this Passion; for besides that it is
not said, that there is Boldness in fighting with Enemies which are weak, nor
that any ought to accuse his ignorance, impudence, or other defects which may
be numbered amongst the greatest ills which can happen; Besides these, and many
other such like reasons which might be produced on this subject: I say there is
no likelihood, that what is properly ill should move this Passion, since that
is nothing but a privation of perfection, and that the soul nor ought, nor can
assault what is not.

To resolve this difficulty, we must observe, that the Soul acknowledges not
only this privation which we have spoken of, to be an ill, but even all the
causes which it produces, and all those disorders which customarily follow it.
For there ever is some weakness or some inconvenience which follows the
privation or absence of a perfection; and this weakness or impotency is a real
quality, as the Schools teach us; we may therefore say, that Privation which is
a Non ens, is not an object which can excite Boldness, because the Soul cannot
assault what is not, unless she fancy it as if it were a real thing, as it is
with Children who conceive death as a fantasm. That if there be any ill which
she ought to combat, it is those causes which she brings forth, and the
inconveniences which follow. And truly, she commonly confounds those two things
with the ill it self; for when we say, a man suffers death with courage, we do
not precisely understand it of death, for as yet it is not, but of the action
of those causes which destroy life, and of the grief which they raise; and when
with constancy we support the loss of goods, of honor, or of health, it is not
properly the loss which occupies the constancy, but the impotency, the
imcommodity and the affliction which are derived from thence.

It Is therefore certain, that all true ills are capable to stir up Boldness, so
as they be proportionable to our forces; for there are ills which of themselves
and by the common consent of men, are so weak, that without fear or fight we
ought to despise them; and others which are so powerful that its imprudence to
assault them, and which in reason we ought to fly. That if the Soul conceives
them otherwise then they are, and esteems those great which are little, and
those weak which are very powerful, there indeed the combat which she
undertakes against those she ought to slight, is a motion of Boldness; but this
Boldness passes for cowardice, and the assault which she makes against those
which are above her strength is Temerity; As it is audacity when she slights,
chiefly if she witnesses it by word or gesture. But we shall elsewhere have
another touch upon these differences, which being not essential concern not
this discourse, wherein we are only to examine the Nature and Essence of
Boldness. She therefore consists in the assault which the Appetite makes
against ill; and this assault is made by darting it self forth against it. Now
we are to enqure how this darting forth is performed, and whether it be any way
serviceable to the Soul, seeing that in casting forth herself she goes not out
of her self, neither does she approach nearer to her Enemy. But these
difficulties have been cleared in the Treatise of Desire, and ought not to be
here repeated.

There remains only one which might make us doubt of all what has been said,
With what pashons Boldness is compatible.
did we leave it without examination and resolution. For although we confess
that Boldness is a flying up, and a darting forth of the Appetite; yet because
it commonly accompanies Love and Pleasure, and is never without Desire nor
without Hope; that even Hatred, Grief and Despair do often call it to their
succor, and that Anger is never without it; It seems there is no likelihood
that this rising up which she makes can subsist with the particular emotion of
every of these Passions, which ought to be different from hers.

We must then say, That it is nothing difficult to conceive for what concerns
Desire and Anger, since in these two the Appetite darts it self forth, as in
Boldness, and that there is no other difference, but that Desire requires not
the establishment nor the employment of the Minds forces, as the other two do.
And that neither that nor Anger have the same motives with Boldness, for Desire
casts it self toward the absent good, to get near it; Boldness, against the
present ill, to combat it; and Anger against the cause of the ill to revenge
it self.

As for Hope wherein the Appetite stiffens it self, we have showed how that
hindered it not from casting it self forth, and truly it necessarily ought to
be agitated with these two kinds of motions in Boldness; Since to grapple with
the Enemy he must throw himself upon him; and to combat him, he must fortify
himself, which he cannot do but by stiffening himself. Nay, even it is certain,
that as Hope and Confidence always precede Boldness, the Appetite must
necessarily stiffen and settle it self, before it can either lift up, or dart
forth it self, as we shall hereafter declare. There is therefore no
inconvenience but that these four Passions may mix and subsist together. In
effect they are all to be found in Anger; for this is never without Boldness,
Boldness without Hope, nor Hope without Desire: And although Desire presuppose
Love, yet we cannot say that Love is to be found in Anger, because it has a
contrary motion to the rest. So that commonly neither that nor Hatred at the
same moment are to be found with Boldness, but must pass from the one to the
other, as has been already said in the former Discourses. Which is sometimes
performed with so much swiftness that it seems as if they mingled together,
that they confounded themselves, and never quitted one the other. Let Us return
to our first Discourse, and conclude, That Boldness is nothing but that motion
whereby the Appetite stiffens and darts forth it self against ill, that it may
combat it.

Now howsoever it be, the true sense which we ought to have of this Passion,
and that considering it exactly, and according to the Rules of Philosophy, its
essence and form must be all shut up in this motion; yet must we not altogether
condemn the common opinion which conceives it not so simple as we make it, and
who mix with it Courage, Assurance, Resolution, Confidence, and the despising
of danger. For although all these things are not essential to it, and are only
Dispositions which serve to produce and preserve it, We may yet say, they are
of her train, they make her appear, and that altogether they render this
Passion perfect and complete. They are indeed commonly confounded together, and
they are all used to signify one and the same thing: For we say a man of great
heart and of Courage, a confident man, resolved, that fears nothing, and all to
say he is Bold. And although it seems that this rather becomes the Habit of
Boldness then the Passion; yet we forbear not to use them for the one and for
the other; since we say an action of courage, an assured and resolute look, a
man who fears not danger, which are ways of speaking, which undoubtedly point
at the Passion of Boldness. After all, without contradicting the use of terms,
yet must we have the knowledge thereof, and distinguish the things which Nature
has separated, and which the people have confounded.

Courage in effect is properly the natural power from which Boldness proceeds,
as the Heart is the subject and principal organ of it. And forasmuch as it is
the most noble motion which that can have, and that the force of that part
appears more in that Passion then in all the rest, as its prerogative, it has
gained the name of Heart; for to call a man Bold, we say he is a Man of Heart,
for that he that is Bold has his heart raised up by the most noble of all the
Passions. Or else because his heart is as it ought to be; being hot and dry,
which as we shall hereafter discourse is its proper and just temper.

Now for Assurance, it is a pure effect of Judgment, which makes us believe our
selves exempt from danger, and it is nothing but the certainty we have to be
safe. Now because this belief is a great disposition to assault ill, and that
he who believes himself to be in safety, fears no danger, thence it comes that
we confound Assurance with Boldness.

Resolution is another effect of Judgment, which without hesitation or
stopping at those doubts which the Enemies presence inflicts on those who are
timorous, readily determines him to fight with him; and because this design
thus taken is an effect of Courage, and of the good opinion a man has of his
own strength, which are dispositions nearly related to Boldness, we confound
them together: So that we take Resolution for Boldness, and a resolute man for
a bold and courageous person.

Moreover, We call it Boldness to despise dangers, and not to fear them,
although in that there is no Passion; forasmuch as to despise an ill is a clear
effect of Judgment; and not to Fear it, is nothing but the want and privation
of Fear. Nevertheless, because it is the property of true Boldness not to value
little ills which usually affright and astonish weak and timorous Spirits; and
that in despising of these, and in assaulting the others, she makes it appear
that she fears nothing; Hence it is we take that for Boldness which is only the
effect of it, or to speak to the purpose, which is only the sign of it. For
not to Fear is no action but a privation; yet it commonly means the presence of
its contrary.

But what shall we say of Confidence, which the Greeks and Latins, and we our
selves often admit for Boldness? It Is certain, it is a kind of Hope; or to
speak better it is the consummation and perfection of it. For after the Appetite
has found Hope by stiffening it self against the difficulties which environ
the good it aspires to; the Soul which sees herself in a condition not to fear
them, fortifies herself in the opinion she had taken that the things she
expects help from, will not fail her, and after a manner gives credit to the
promises it seems to have made; Thus we trust in our forces, in our goods, in
our friends, forasmuch as we then believe that what we promised our selves of
them will succeed.

And because that we think there are no difficulties in this opinion which
ought not to be overcome, and in pursuit that we fear not their encounter;
thence it is that it has been confounded with Boldness, which ought to have
the same sentiments, although it only is a disposition which precedes it.

However it be, What the Dispositions to Boldness are.
and which way soever you will take these things, either as parts of Boldness,
or for dispositions which precede or accompany her; they serve to make known
those who are most susceptible of this Passion: For Assurance and Resolution to
despise, and not to fear dangers, are effects of the good opinion a man has of
his own strength, without which there could neither be Assurance nor
Resolution, Courage nor Boldness; lastly, without which the slightest evils
move terror; and even those things themselves which can do no harm, possess us
every moment with fear.

Now this opinion is grounded on the forces we effectually have, or else
believe we have; but because they are of two sorts; the one in us, and which
depend from us, as the forces of the Body, and those of the Mind; others which
are without us, and which are not absolutely in our power, as Goods, Friends,
Honors, etc. Those who are endued with the former are most susceptible of
Boldness; so that a strong and robustious man is commonly more bold then he
that is not, and if he has goods and friends also at his devotion.

But yet we must likewise observe that a man may be strong and robustious
several ways; for there is a force of Body which is only fit for resistance for
to bear; in a word, to suffer; such is that of Camels, of Asses, of Oxen, and
proceeds from a thick melancholy. The other is purely active, and all of fire,
which comes from choler, or from subtle and stirring blood, as is that of
young Dogs, and of generous Horses; the last is composed of the two former, and
is observable in Lions, Mastiffs, and in wild Boars.

Those who have this stupid and passive force, such as melancholy persons are,
are but little susceptible of Boldness, being deprived of that heat which is as
it were the sonl of strength and of courage; the others which are choleric,
which have that which is ardent and active, are easily carried away with this
Passion; but it has this defect, that it quickly passes away, and that it
discerns not those ills which are worthy to be combated, from those which are
not. The impetuosity wherewith she is carried away, precipitating her designs,
before Judgment can examine them: But those who have both, and who are
Choleric and Melancholy, have the Boldness of Hero's, which is not suddenly
kindled, but having once taken, it is long lasting; this fears nothing, it
scorns little dangers, it assaults great ones with assurance and resolution,
and often with a transport which makes it to be thought divine.

After the strength of the Body, we must produce the force of the Mind, for
those who think they have it, and promise themselves great help from their
address and good Judgment, how weak soever they be, easily undertake great
matters, and believe that they can supply the weakness of other things by the
force of their Spirits. Last of all, those who are powerful by their Dignities,
by their Goods, or by their Friends, those who never endured a disgrace, and
who believe Heaven, Men and Fortune are favorable to them, have always a good
opinion of their forces, and are commonly Bold. But to take away all
difficulties which may be made concerning these things, and to give that light
which is necessary for clearing the following Discourses, where at every turn
we are to speak of Courage and of Forces, it is fit we should more carefully
examine the Nature of those two, and examine wherein it is they consist.

CHAP. III. What courage is, and wherein it consists.
WE must first suppose that Courage is a quality proper to Animals, That
Courage is a power of the S^ul.
that they only are susceptible of it, and therefore that the Soul is the
principle of it, and that its in her it resides, as in its root, and in its
first and true subject; we call likewise a Soul courageous, and say, that the
Soul must have Courage to assault Vice, and to resist the Passions thereof.

Now if there be as Aristoile will have it, but three things in the Soul; to
wit Power, Habit, and Passion, this Courage must be some one of the three:
Perhaps its no Passion, since it is very true that a man may have Courage,
although he be agitated by none of the Passions, and even when he does nothing;
neither is it an Habit, because it is acquired by use, and that a man may be
born with Courage; it is therefore necessary it should be a Power.

But we must observe there are two sorts of Powers, the one, first and radical;
the other, second, and derived. The first are parts or inseparable accidents of
the soul, which for that reason are equal in all the individuals of every
Species; So the power of Reasoning considered in it self, and as it is a
Faculty of the Soul, is equally divided to all Men. Seconds are nothing but the
dispositions of those organs which are necessary to make these first Powers
move: Or to speak out, they are the same Powers which the disposition of Organs
renders capable to perform their actions. And as those dispositions are unequal
in their particulars, and that the one has them more or less perfect then the
other, so are they more or less fit to perform those actions; so that we use to
say of him who has them perfect, and who is most proper to act, that he has
the power and natural Faculty to do such a thing; and of him who has them
imperfect, that he naturally has an impotency and incapacity of working.

Now Courage is undoubtedly of the number of those derived Powers, because it
requires certain dispositions in the Organs proper to elevate and stir up the
Soul against difficulties; and the principal of these dispositions is nothing
but the natural heat of the heart capable to kindle and inflame this noble
ardor, which is necessary in these encounters.

But we must here consider two things. What that Power is which makes Courage.
First, What this radical virtue is, which enters into the Courage, since the
natural and derived Powers are nothing else but the radical, in that they are
joined with their dispositions; certainly we must say, that Nature which has
distributed to all Animals as much strength as was necessary for their
preservation, has also given them the virtue to raise up and employ them when
they have need of them. And this virtue is nothing but the irascible Faculty,
which is the principle, and as it were the form and substance of Courage:
Forasmuch as inflaming the Heart, and lifting up the Soul, it does nothing else
but move the natural forces of the Animal to oppose them against those
difficulties which present themselves. And indeed these differences, and the
effects of Courage are drawn from the quality of the forces; for as there are
some which are proper for the Soul, and others which belong to the Body, every
one has its particular Courage, which stirs it up and sets it on work; such a
man will be courageous in the greatest dangers of War, who dares not speak in
public, or will suffer himself to be overcome by the least Passion. On the
contrary, there are others who in such like occasions have courage, who lose it
at the sight of a weak Enemy, or of the least little danger they encounter; and
this proceeds from that the Courage being a virtue which stirs up the forces,
when they fail it ought also to fail; and therefore those who are deprived of
corporal strength ought to be cowards in War, and courageous in the actions of
the Mind and Judgment, if they have the forces which belong to those two
Faculties. Finally, as the forces are destined to assault or to resist, as we
shall make it hereafter appear, the Courage also employs them in both the one
and the other of those actions, and in pursuit brings forth two different
Passions, Boldness which assaults evils, and Constancy or Strength of Courage
which opposes it self and resists their violence.

The second thing which we ought to know is, Why beat is the principal
dispositi^n of Courage.
why Heat is the principal disposition that creates Courage, and what
conditions are requisite for to produce it. The first is easy to be decided,
because Heat is the most active of all the qualities, that it stirs up all the
other natural Virtues, and makes the best part of the Bodies vigor; neither
need we to be astonished, if the Soul being joined to so powerful a quality,
and conscious of the help she can draw from thence, have a good opinion of its
forces, and if she trust in them, and if she readily oppose them to those
difficulties which present themselves.

As for the conditions which this Heat requires to form Courage, What that heat
ought to be which forms Courage.
there must be three principal ones: The first that it must be natural; the
Second, that it must be great and strong; the third, that it must be
proportionable to the greatness of the Heart.

In effect, a strange Heat as that of a Feavor, although it inflame the Heart
and the Spirits, yet it augments not the Courage, on the contrary it abates it,
as not being conformable to Nature. Now for it to be thus conformable, it must
have two things; One that it must be born with the life, and that it must be as
it were a continuation of that first flame, which was kindled at its first
birth; for if it be once extinguished, there is no means left to reinflame it;
and how temperate soever that might be which may be substituted in its place,
yet would it be strange and useless; The other is, that it must remain within
those limits which Nature has prescribed; forasmuch as every thing has a
certain measure, beyond which it ought not pass, without breaking that
proportion which ought to be betwixt the organs and their principles to perform
their Functions; so that that heat which is more violent then the nature of
every Animal can bear, is not natural unto it.

But how conformable soever to Nature it may be, unless it be great, it never
will be accompanied with Courage. Wherefore those who are of a cold
temperature, as Phlegmatic and Melancholy persons are, those who are attenuated
with long sickness, with long griefs, and who by other Passions quench natural
heat, are not courageous.

Yet it is to be observed, that natural heat being not a simple quality, as
that of Fire is, but a hot and moist substance, which is commonly called
Spirits composed of the Humidum Radicale, and of this heat which Nature
inspired with life, it may be great two ways; to wit, in quantity and in
quality; that is to say, that there may be much of the Radical Humidity in it,
or many degrees of that heat: So Children have more of that natural heat, as to
the quantity, as those which are older have much more as to the quality. So in
the Winter and in cold Climates, the substance of heat is augmented, because
not dissipated, and exterior cold hinders it from issuing out; although it be
less burning then in Summer, the coldness of the Air somewhat diminishing its
vivacity. On the contrary the ardor of the Climate, or of the season draws
forth a great part of the substance of Heat, and imprints in what remains a
certain acrimony which renders it more violent.

Now although all actions are performed by means of natural heat, yet there are
some which more depend on its substance, as concoctions and digestions are,
being to be made by means of humidity; so that those who have most radical
moisture as Children, perform these operations most perfectly, although they
have a very temperate heat, such as it ought to be for such actions.

But there are also those which more depend on the quality of heat, as are the
actions of the Imagination, and those which we call Vital; for those who have
the most ardent heat, have the strongest respiration, the most vehement heart
beatings, and the most fertile Imagination.

Finally, There are those which equally require both, as those which employ
motion, and the forces of the Body, and such Courage is. For it is not
sufficient to make a man courageous, to have much radical moisture, since
Children which have much of it have but little Courage; nor to have a more
sharp and and vehement heat, since in the Summer, and in very hot Climates
where the humors and spirits are inflamed by the heat of the Sun, men are but
little courageous; but he must have both much humidity and much heat: Since in
effect, we see that people which inhabit the most temperate Countries are more
courageous then those of the South and North, having more radical moisture
then those, and a heat more active then theirs. Even amongst Beasts, those
which are of a hot temperature, and whose blood is thick, are most courageous,
for the same reason, because they have much of the substance of Heat, which is
not easily dissipated, being shut up and restrained by such humors as are
gross; and besides their heat is stronger, as well by reason of the advantage
which Nature has afforded them, as because she raises many vapors which
render it more sharp, and that she resides in a thicker subject which renders
her more efficatious.

And truly according as humors are gross or subtle, heat diversely operates,
and also forms several kinds of Courage; for those which have them subtle and
moveable, as the Choleric, are ready to be inflamed, but it is a flame which
lasts not, but its presently spent; others which are grosser, and moderately
hot, have a Courage which is not easily provoked, but which being heated is
with difficulty appeased. To conclude, those who are violently hot, and whose
humors are gross, fall easily into fury, and are of an undaunted Courage.

But that which makes the principal difficulty in all these things, What the
greatness of the Heart ought to be to make Courage.
is the greatness or littleness of Heart. For it is observed that all those
Creatures, which proportionably to their Bodies have a less Heart, are
courageous, as the Dog and the Lion; and that those which have a greater, as
Deer and Hares, are timorous. Yet there are other experiences which render
these observations doubtful; for even Man has a Heart greater then all other
Creatures in proportion to his Body, although he be one of the most courageous.
It Is certain, that large-Chested men have a great Heart, and that the breadth
of the Breast is an undoubted mark of the Hearts heat, which causes Boldness
and Courage: Considering also that those, the temperature of whose Heart is
cold and dry, have commonly that part very small, and are the most timorous. To
answer to these Reasons which destroy the precedent Proposition, there are some
who say that it is only true in the several kinds of Beasts, comparing the one
with the other, and not in the individuals of the same Species; So that the
Lion compared with the Stag has a less Heart, and is more courageous; but that
amongst Lions he that has the greatest Heart, has the greatest advantage over
that which has a less; yet this voids not the difficulty. For although it be
true, that amongst every kind of Creatures which are naturally courageous, the
greatest Heart is accompanied with the greatest Courage: It Is also certain that
in those that are naturally timorous, the greatest Heart denotes also the
greatest Timidity.

We must then say that the greatness of the Hearts does nothing of it self, as
to the Courage, and that we must add thereunto the abundance of heat and
spirits; for if the Heart be great, and that it has much heat and many
Spirits, it will certainly produce a very great Courage. But if the Heart be
small, and that it has as much heat, and as many Spirits, as that which is
great, it will make a more boiling, and a more impetuous Courage, because the
heat is more active when it is shut up and restrained; but that also is the
cause that it is not so noble and generous; forasmuch as that constraint makes
it easily pass to fury, and that the smalness of the parts is an effect of the
weakness of the formative Virtue, or a defect of the matter which in the
principal parts is always vicious. On the contrary, if it have but few spirits,
and but little heat, it makes Timidity; and in proportion as it is either large
or straight, it will render it litile or great. For even as a little fire warms
a great Chamber less then the same would do a little one: So likewise a little
natural heat, works less effect in a great and large Heart, then in one that is
little and restrained. Wherefore although Timidity be common to both, it
appears less in this, and is greater in the greater.

We have now nothing to add to the understanding of this business, but to
resolve two very considerable Doubts which may arise from the former Discourse.
For if the Courage consists in the dispositions we have now spoken of, two
things will follow which seem to combat Reason and Experience. 1. That Courage
will only be in the sensitive part, because those dispositions are all
material and sensible; although it be true that there be many which out of mere
Reason only are valiant and courageous, without having this heat in the Heart,
which we have observed. 2. That that Animal which has not these dispositions,
will never be moved by any Boldness, seeing he will want the Courage which is a
power whence this Passion proceeds; and yet it is certain, that the most
timorous in diverse encounters perform actions of Boldness and of Courage, and
that the weakest are most susceptible of choler, which is a kind of Boldness.

We must then say that there are two sorts of Courage, There are two kinds of
Boldness.
the one which belongs to the superior part, and the other which is in the
sensitive Appetite. For since the Irascible Faculty is the principle, and as it
were the substance of Courage, it must needs be that the Will which has its
irascible part, must also have its particular Courage, and must be as much
different from that which is in the Appetite, as the Will is from the Appetite
it self. It Is true, that Courage consists not only in the irascible virtue,
but that it supposes also in it a certain disposition which makes it the more
easily operate; for an Animal is not courageous for having the irascible part,
but for having of it such that it easily may move it self against difficulties.
But this disposition ever follows the nature of the subject wherein it is; and
it must necessarily be, that if it be in the Will, it must be different from
that which is in the Appetite, and consequently that there must be two kinds of
Courage. Now as the presence of heat which makes the best and most considerable
parts of corporal strengths, produces this disposition in the sensitive
Appetite, the force of the Mind and of Reason works the same effect in the
Will: It inspires a secret sense of its power, and of the succor she may draw
from thence; it fills it with confidence, and leaves it a certain facility and
readiness to oppose it self to those difficulties which present themselves
wherein Courage consists, as has been already showed. Such is that which
accompanies the excellent qualities of the Mind, whether they be natural or
acquired. For a knowing man, has the courage and boldness to speak; he that is
virtuous, boldly opposes himself against his Passions; and an expert Artist
undertakes things in his Art, in which others durst not engage themselves,
because that every of them have forces necessary to execute what they
undertake, and that the will which knows what they can do, is ready to stir
them up and employ them when it pleases.

Now although these two kinds of Courage may one subsist without another, yet
they are far stronger when they are joined together, and assist one the other.
For a man whom Virtue or Knowledge has inspired with Courage, is more bold in
undertaking any thing, if he have that fair fire which at his birth is kindled
in his Heart, then if he had a coldness which renders that part languishing,
and causes a natural Timidity; even as he whose temperature has rendered him
courageous, is far more resolute when the qualities of his Mind may second his
natural disposition. On the contrary, were there but one sort of Courage, a man
would be very sensible of the ardor it would inspire; we should know the
endeavors it makes in it self, and the many things which it proposes every
moment the performance of. But the cowardliness which would be in the other
part of the Soul at the same time, dissipates those fair resolutions. It checks
all those noble motions, and corrupts all the good designs it had formed. Thus
it is with those who having all the advantages of the Mind, dare never produce
themselves; and others who have much Heart, dare undertake nothing.

But although this be the true sense a man ought to have of this power of the
Soul; yet we must confess, that when we speak of Courage, we commonly mean that
which our births shed into our hearts, and which is proper to the sensitive
Appetite; because it is common to all Creatures, and that its effects are most
sensible and most remarkable.

As for the other Doubt which respects Courage; To wit, whether the
dispositions we have observed, be always necessary to its production, is no
less diffiult to resolve; For if it be true that Boldness is an effect of
Courage, contrary to the experience which we have, those Animals which are
naturally timorous, can never be susceptible of this Passion: Or that contrary
to the Maxims which we have established, Courage should not depend on those
dispositions.

Certainly, we must here again say, that the common manner of speaking sits not
so well the truth of the thing; for there is no Animal which has not Courage,
because there is none without some heat, for that its necessary to life; and
how little soever it has, it is capable to give that disposition to the
irascible Virtue, which is capable to make it undertake something. In effect,
there is no Animal which at every moment finds not some difficulty which it is
obliged to oppose. And we every day see that the weakest and most timorous make
endeavors to surmount the obstacles they encounter; they must therefore have
Courage, Since Courage is nothing but the irascible Virtue, which the Natural
heat of the Heart has rendered capable of working. But because this capacity is
greater in some, and lesser in others, the greater has deserved by its
prerogative the name of Courage, as the lesser is called Cowardice, or want of
Courage. So that even as we say a man has no wit because he has but little;
we also say an Animal has no Courage, because he has but little: And
certainly if we should well consider this gender of Qualities which the Schools
call Natural Impotencies, under which the default of Courage ought to be
placed, we should find that it is different from Power only in respect of less
or more. And that the word of [Impotency] means only a weak Power, and not the
absolute privation of Power, because it is a quality, and quality is a real
thing. So the default of Courage is rightly Courage, but it is little, weak, and
hid, which operates but seldom, and undertakes but light Skirmishes, or at
least, if it engage in greater matters, it must be very much solicited
thereto; and the difficulties must have powerfully provoked it, as it happens
in the Anger of timorous persons.

Last of all, the common way of speaking affords not the name of Courage, but
only to him who is most active, who boldly opposes himself to the greatest
dangers, and who is always ready either to assault or to defend himself. But to
have this Courage, and to be called courageous, a man must have all the
dispositions we have spoken of. So that when we said that Boldness was an
effect of Courage, we considered Courage in its Nature, and not according as
it is used in our Language. For it is true, that this passion cannot proceed but
from the irascible Virtue, in that it can operate, and when it operateth it is
called Courage; but it is not always that active and boiling Courage, which
marks a great facility of operating, for that it is necessary there must be
much natural heat in the Heart to give it this facility. All which will be
better understood when we shall have examined wherein Force or Strength
consists.

Of Force.
To speak generally, Force is a quality which first and properly belongs to
Power, Faculty, or Virtue, and by its means to those actions which it
produces, and to the subject it is found in. So we say that the natural Faculty
is strong, that it is operation is strong, and that the parts it resides in are
strong: Now the Virtue is strong, when it can perfectly, and with efficacy
produce its effect; and it is capable of it, when it has those dispositions
which are necessary for its operation. So that Force or Strength consists in
these dispositions, which proportionably as they are more or less perfect, make
that also more or less great, and its Virtue to be less or more strong.

Yet it is very true, To what the name of Force is most properly to be applied
that although in that sense, Force be a quality common to all Powers, as well
Spiritual as Material, all of them having need of certain conditions and
dispositions to operate; yet so it is, that to speak absolutely of Strength,
all kind of Strength is not to be understood, nor all sorts of Virtues; For
when for example we say, That Force is necessary to assault, That an Animal or
a Body is strong, it is not to be understood of all the Forces it may have, as
of the force of the Stomach, of the senses, and of the like, but of a certain
particular Strength, which being more noble and more excellent then the rest by
its prerogative, has deserved simply and absolutely to be called Force; and
it is that which the Passions of the irascible Appetite use, the nature whereof
must therefore consequently be here inquired. To this purpose we must suppose,
that all the Universe being composed and filled with things which are contrary
and opposite one to another, there is nothing which can be therein without
Enemies which assault and seek to destroy it. So that it was the providence of
Nature which gave unto all things, not only those Virtues which were necessary
to perform their ordinary, and as it were, domestic functions, but even those
which ought to defend them from foreign assaults, and hindering them from
receiving those violences which it might receive from abroad. It Is for this
reason that every thing has its proper qualities to preserve its being, as
also others to destroy its contrary; and that those Animals where those Virtues
are more distinct, and less confused, have two different Appetites. The
Concupiscible, to seek for themselves what is fit, and fly what is hurtful;
and the irascible to resist ill, and if it be needful to assault and destroy
it. But because there is more trouble and action to resist and assault, then
simply to pursue good, or fly from ill; and that Virtues are the more noble,
the more active they are, as we have showed elsewhere; it is certain, that in
this respect the irascible Appetite is more active and more noble then the
Concupiscible; and therefore those Forces which are the Instruments and the
dispositions which it has to work, are also more excellent and more
considerable then the rest. It Is also the reason for which the name of Force is
due unto them out of excellency; and then when we speak simply of Force or
Forces, we ever understand those which are destined to resist and to assault.

Now because all Philosophers and all Physicians are agreed, The force of
corporal things consists in the temperature.
that the Force of all the corporal Powers consists in the temperature which is
proper and natural unto them, because the temperature is the first and the most
efficacious of all the Dispositions which the Faculties find in the matter;
and that the proportion and fitness which ought to be betwixt the instrument
and the cause, require this temperature should be proper and natural to the
Faculty, as is before said, speaking of that natural heat which forms the
Courage; This Maxim, I say, being certain, we must see what this Temperature
is, which ought to serve the Irascible Appetite; since it is a material Power.
Certainly, since it is to assault, it has need of heat, being the principle of
action in Animals; and since it ought also to resist, it has also need of
dryness, which is the principle of this resistance. Now there is no temperature
which has these two qualities, but either the choleric Melancholy, or the
sanguine Melancholy, forasmuch as Choler and Blood are Humors which furnish
heat; and that Melancholy which is Terrestrial affords dryness, solidity, and
stability.

In effect, all Animals which are naturally strong and courageous, are either
Choleric Melancholy, as Lions and Dogs; or Sanguine Melancholy, as Bulls,
Bears, and wild Boars. And if we observe what has been spoken of the Hero's
in former times, we may easily judge they were all of the same complexion; and
that choler and melancholy Diseases, to which they are subject, are certain
marks of this temperature; In fine, he that will consider the body of a strong
and robustious man, will see that all parts answer these two qualities. That a
straight figure, a large Breast, quick Eyes, a strong Voice, and all vigorous
motions proceed from that heat which extends and animates the organs; as the
bigness of the Bones and Joints, the bigness of the extremities, the firmness
of the Muscles, the hardness of the skin comes from a Melancholy and
terrestrial dryness, which renders the humors thick, and the members solid.

Now if it happen that heat alone predominates, it will indeed produce Courage
and Strength, but it will be an impetuous and a boiling strength, proper to
assault and not to sustain. On the contrary, if dryness be there without being
seconded by heat, it renders the force stupid and passive, which serves to
resist and not to assault, as has been said.

But we must here observe two very considerable things. Wherein the temper
consists
First from the example of Physicians, we must not here take the temper for the
only mixture of the first qualities, but also for all the other dispositions
of the matter, as are second qualities, the conformation of parts, and the
concourse of spirits. As when we say that Force consists in a hot and dry
temperature, we understand not that the parts are simply hot and dry, but also
that they are of a thick succulent and firm consistence, that nothing is
wanting to their conformation, and that the spirits slide therein easily and
abundantly. For if this temperature meets with a subtle and loose matter, as
is to be seen in those purely choleric, it will indeed produce Courage, but
the Forces thereof will not be perfect, and cannot long neither maintain a
Combat, or a strong assault, because the spirits presently dissipate
themselves, and that the parts have not that massive and firm consistence which
is necessary for resistance; and should they even have these conditions, if
they receive not those spirits which are necessary for their functions, or if
there be any notable defect in their conformation, they will be weak, and
cannot execute the orders which the Appetite imposes on them.

The second thing which is to be considered is, That ^her ^re two pri^cipal
parts in which the ^^t and (...) (...) o^ght to b^.
That the Appetite which is the principle of all those motions which Animals
make, uses two principal faculties, which have the direction of those actions;
to wit, the Vital Faculty which resides in the heart, and in the Spirits; and
the Motive Virtue which is seated in the Brain, and in those organs which
depend on it; so that it is chiesly in those parts which we are to consider, and
wherein this temperature whereof we have spoken ought to be.

But because the Irascible Appetite is it self placed in the Heart, and that
the strength of that part is consequently nearer unto it, then that of the
other organs of Motion; and that we may in some sort say, that they are Arms
which it has in hand, or its domestic Forces, and that it leads them it self;
and this is the reason it has more confidence in them then in others, and that
they alone are capable to give him both Courage and Boldness.

For the heat of the Heart is a violent and impetuous Minister, which
incessantly sollicites the Soul to follow its motions, which abuses it out of
the ostentation it makes of its forces, and persuades it, that with them, and
without other help it can undertake all things: It Is properly an ambitious
Favorite, which engages his Master in a difficult War, without considering the
weakness of the State. He has Courage, Arms and Men; but the Nerves of War are
wanting, neither does he see that his Allies cannot favor him: So when Force is
alone in the Heart, the irascible Appetite may well stir up those noble
Passions, and declare War against its Enemies; but the Nerves and Muscles not
seconding its Designs, its Enterprises are vain and timorous. On the contrary,
when the Heart is weak, the Appetite is languishing and lazy; and although the
Members are robust, it trusts not their Forces, and thinks it a succor too far
off to make use of in such urgent occasions. Let Us then conclude, That that
Force which is necessary to assault and to resist, principally consists in the
hot and dry temperature of the Heart; and that that may be perfect and
accomplished, it must be accompanied with that of the Nerves and Muscles.

But there are still two great difficulties to be decided. The first is, The
Forces belong to the Irascible Appetite.
That all those Dispositions of the irascible Appetite serve also the
concupiscible; for besides that Heat and Spirits are necessary for all the
Faculties of Life, and that Love and Desire are ardent and impetuous Passions,
it must needs be that those Creatures which are to go, fly, or swim, and which
are often obliged to run after good, should have dispositions necessary to
perform these great motions, to wit, Heat and Firmness; thus Force will not be
particularly affected to the irascible part, but it will be always in common to
the concupiscible, which yet is contrary to our ordinary Philosophy, which will
have that different Virtues must have different Dispositions.

To answer these Reasons, We shall first say, That it is true, all different
Faculties require different dispositions. For if they are with things which
serve to many Virtues and Actions, there must needs be some diversity which
makes this difference, which every particular action requires. So natural heat
which serves as the universal Instrument to all the functions of life, is
diversified according to those operations necessary thereunto; it must for some
be moist or dry; for others, great, little, or temperate, and every one has
its portion and measure different from all the rest. We then confess that the
Concupiscible and Irascible Appetite both employ Heat and Spirits, and that
there must be firmness in the motions of either of them. But there is this
difference, that the one requires a sweet heat, moist, and pleasant; and that
the other will have one that is lively, dry, and pungent, for the Reasons we
shall hereafter deduce: And that that firmness which appears in the motions of
the Concupiscible part, is outward and purely accidental, not being to be
found in the Soul, and happening to the parts out of necessity, instead that in
others, it is first found in the irascible Appetite, which afterward
communicates it to the organs; for this Appetite only can stablish it self,
and when the Soul suffers this kind of motion, it even forms some Passion of
the irascible Appetite. Indeed this establishment of the Soul seems to be the
proper agitation of the irascible Appetite, because there is no motion more
efficacious to resist and assault then that which reunites the Virtue which
hinders it to yield, and which renders the assault the more strong; she also
makes use of it in all generous Passions; and if she casts herself into
Boldness and into Anger, it is certain, she first settles herself. And the only
difference which there is betwixt the motion of Desire and that of Boldness is,
that at first the Soul darts it self forth without settling it self, and that
in the other it performs both together, as has been said.

The other difficulty is, How Force is different from Courage.
That if Force consist in the heat of the Heart where we also have placed
Courage; it must follow that Force and Courage are the same thing; What ever is
said, that a man has Courage, but wants Force; and that Force and Courage must
be joined for the execution of great Designs. We therefore say, that heat alone
may make Courage all entire; but that it makes but a part of Force. Besides
Courage is the power it self, and Force is to be considered as the instrument
of this power. For heat is not Courage, but it produces in the Faculty this
disposition and capacity of operating, which we call Courage; instead whereof
we may say, that Heat is Force, or at least that it is a part of Force; yet
must we not from thence conclude, that Force does not belong properly and in
the first place to Power, because the nature and essence of the Instrument
depends wholly from the relation which it has to its Cause; and were there no
Cause, there would be no Instrument. So Strength being the Instrument of Power,
it properly and primarily belongs to it, and by its means to those actions and
subjects wherein it is. But it is to go too far into the subtilties of the
Schools. Let Us return to our Discourse of Boldness, and see what effect it
produces in the Spirits and in the Humors.

CHAP. IV. What the motion of the Spirits, and of the Humors, is in Boldness.
HAving shown you that the Appetite stiffens and darts it self forth in
Boldness, The spirits stiffen and dart forth themselves in Boldness.
we need not doubt but the same motions are made in the Spirits, since they
usually follow the agitations of the Soul, and that they are the first organs
which she employs to execute her designs; they do therefore stiffen and
stablish themselves, and then they rise up, and dart themselves out, just as
does the Appetite. Indeed he that will consider the countenance of a man before
he assaults ill, but who only sees it coming, will perceive no sign of this
sally of the spirits, forasmuch as he changes not color; and that fire which
we see afterward glitter in his eyes, appears not; for it is certain, that if
these spirits cast themselves on those parts, they would carry thither redness
and splendour, and would not leave them that coldness and equality with which he
looks upon, and considers dangers.

And truly since we must grapple with the Enemy to assault him, and that the
endeavors we should make against him would be vain and useless, were he out of
reach, the Soul would never rise up nor dart it self forth against it, did she
fancy it to be still far off, and not near enough to prove her force, and
resent the effects of her power. All what she does in this encounter, is, to
fortify and prepare herself for the combat; First, stiffening her self in her
self, and afterward inspiring the same motion to the spirits, and the rest of
the organs, which may be serviceable to her in this occasion; in pursuit
whereof it follows, that a man's color changes not, that his looks are staid,
and that without growing pale or without any disturbance he looks on the most
formidable things, because the spirits which are mixed with the humors, and
which cause all the other parts to move, stiffening themselves, render them
firm and settled, and by that means hinder the blood from shedding it self
abroad, or from retiring inwardly, not that those other motions of the Body
either restrain or render themselves impetuous.

This then is the agitation which the spirits suffer in the beginnings of
Boldness, or to speak better, in those preparatives which the Sonl makes for
this Passion; For Resolution, Hope, Confidence, and Staiedness of Courage,
which are the forerunners thereof, require this kind of motion, and without it
can neither form themselves nor subsist.

But after the Enemies approach, and that the Soul is risen up to assault and
fight him, she moves the Spirits in the same manner, and all stiffened as they
are, she with impetuosity drives them forth to the exterior parts, and so
carries redness to the face, ardor and vivacity to the eyes, and violence to
all the motions, as we shall hereafter declare.

Now to explain how this darting forth is made, we ought here to repeat all
what has been said in the Chapter of Desire; for there is no difference in the
motions of these two Passions, as to the agitation, since both in the one and
the other the Soul issues as it were out of it self, and casts it self toward
the object which moves it: They are only unlike in the end she therein
proposes herself; since in Desire she carries herself toward good, that she
may get near it, and thereby afterward enjoy it; and in Boldness she darts
herself toward ill, that she may combat and overcome it. It Is therefore here
we must seek that satisfaction which this subject requires. As also in the
Discourse of Hope, that which is necessary to make us understand how the
spirits settle and dart forth themselves at the same time, we are only to
observe, that when we said, that the motions of Desire and of Boldness were
alike, it ought to be understood in this darting forth. For its certain, that
the Soul never stiffens it self in Desire unless it be accompanied with Hope,
with Boldness, or with Anger; forasmuch as she stiffens herself only to
fortify herself, and that she needs not employ her strength unless
difficulties present themselves, which are not in the Passions of the
Concupiscible part, as elsewhere has been already said.

Now the first thing which follows this motion, Whence the Heat comes that
raises up it self in Boldness.
is, the heat which sheds it self over all the Body, and which by degrees
augments it self, and proportionably as the impetuosity grows greater. For at
first, before the spirits darted themselves forth, when they kept themselves
only firm, this quality was very moderate, as it is to be found in Hope; but
when they begin to make their fallies and dartings which drive and throw them
forth, it is then that it becomes violent, and that at last it inflames all the
parts. But the difficulty is to know whence this heat proceeds; for although
there be an appearance which the agitation of the heart and of the spirits
causes, since it is a Maxim received in the Schools, That Motion has the
virtue to produce; yet besides the experience which we learn, that Air and
Water cool themselves by agitation; and that the shock and encounter of Bodies,
by which we say heat is engendered, has no place in those which are subtle and
fluid, it is certain that there are Passions where the heart and the Spirits
have a very quick and impetuous motion, as we see in Fear, yet even in them
heat augments not, but even weakens it self.

For my part, I believe that without sticking at common opinions, we may say
that the Heart being the source of heat, has also the virtue of producing it;
and that being to lose this quality as a general instrument of all the
functions of life, it must have the power to augment it according to the need
we may have. Why should we deny it this Faculty, since there is no form which
produces not those qualities which are necessary unto it? The Water of it self
alone, does it not take back again the cold which was taken from it? Does not
the Earth also recover the dryness it lost? but what is most considerable, Does
not Heat augment it self in presence of its contrary? And if it be true that
that which inflames the Heart in violent passions, proceeds not from motion, as
we have shown even now, what other source can it have, but this secret virtue
we speak of? In fine, since the Soul resides in this part as in its Throne, and
that she is therein stronger then in any other part, what need we doubt but she
helps this production? She who in her self contains the virtue of all inferior
things, as we have showed in the discourse of Light. We must therefore believe,
that the Soul and the Heart augment the natural heat when it is necessary, and
that in performing their endeavor, and stirring it self to produce it, they
cause it to issue out of those principles where she potentially was.

Besides, Since the Soul has Forces which she imploys when she will, which she
awakes and stirs up at her need, she must needs have the same power over
natural heat, which is the most considerable part thereof, and that she may
raise it up and increase it when its help is necessary. And certainly as the
motive Virtue contains in potentia the motion which it afterward produces,
when it has received the orders of the Appetite; So the Vital Faculty has in
it self a secret source of Heat, which it stirs up and brings to light, if we
may so speak, when the Soul commands and judges it necessary. Now there is no
occasion wherein this succor is more profitable for her, then when she expects
the ill either to resist or to combat it, because she has then need of its
Forces, which principally consists in heat, as we have made it appear in the
precedent Discourses: But forasmuch as there needs more Forces to assault then
to resist, that is the cause that there is less heat in Hope and in Constancy,
where the Soul stands on the defensive, then in Boldness and in Anger, where
she assaults and destroys ill. As also that in these two latter the agitation
of the spirits is greater; for we do confess that their motion serves for
something, not of it self, but by accident, as we say in the Schools, because
they bring the heat which they have, and that of the humors which they draw
after them, to those parts where they light, and ever solicit the fixed heat
which is therein entertained, to awake and to render it active.

As for those Passions which oblige the Soul to flight, they make a quite
contrary effect, and because the Spirits retire unto the center, and the Soul
also finding it self too weak to resist the Enemy, loses all its Courage, nor
cares it to repair its strength, and so suffers the natural heat to be
extinguished without endeavoring to rekindle it.

But that we may well conceive what the endeavor is she makes in other
Passions, Wh^t the quality of heat is in Boldness.
we must not consider the quality of the heat which accompanies them, and
compare it with that which is observed in those Passions which seek good; for
in these it is sweet, humid and graceful; and in those it is sharp, dry, and
pungent. So that it is very likely that in the first the Soul employs it and
sheds it abroad without violence, and in the other she raises it and drives it
forth with impetuosity, that in those it only needs its ordinary virtue, and in
these it must be greater and more active. Finally we may say, That in the one
she uses it as a follower accompanying of her to her friends, but in the other
it is an Assistant which she leads with her, even against her Enemies.

In Love indeed, in Desire, and in Joy the outward parts receive not heat,
because it is sent thither, but because it flies from those spirits which are
sent thither, forasmuch as the Soul needs not that quality to approach or unite
it self to good, but only the Spirits which force it to the place where it is.
On the contrary, when she is to fight, she sends heat as a powerful instrument
to act, and to destroy what is contrary unto it; as also in this design she
renders it as strong as she can, whether it be by degrees augmenting it, or
stirring up the Spirits by a continual agitation, or in removing the humors
when she is most active, as choleric are.

And certainly, what the sensitive Faculty does in these encounters, the
natural also does it very often in those ordinary functions, as is easily
judged by the Feavor, which is just like Boldness and Anger, the same heat, the
same tempest of the Spirits and Humors, and the same design which the Soul has
in those Passions it encounters in that disease. For we must not think that the
Feavor is kindled in the Heart by some stranger fire. It Is the Soul its self,
or rather the Vital Faculty which reunites its force, which stirs up natural
heat, and which lifts it self up to fight those causes which destroy the
harmony and constitution of the Body. This is readily proved by its crisis,
which are those fits of the Feavor which the endeavors of Nature, and not the
Disease stirs up; by the inflammation which the coming of the spirits and of
the blood causes in the infested parts, by the cessation of the Feavor in the
height of the sickness, when the Humors are so malignant that Nature is
overcome with them, and that she dares no longer assault them; And by a
thousand other Reasons which we might produce, had we room for them; by which
we might evidently make it appear that the Feavor is nothing but an innitation
and a rising up of natural heat to drive away the ill; and that therefore it is
a motion like to that of Anger, and that in the lowest part of the Soul, as
well as in the highest there is an Appetite which has its irascible Faculty to
raise it self up against those difficulties which present themselves. However
it be the Soul increases Heat in Boldness and in Anger, producing and adding
new degrees to what it had, and stirring it up by the continual agitation of
the Spirits.

For although they stir themselves impetously in Love, Boldness entertains the
motions of the Spirits.
in Desire and in Joy, yet their motion is not therein maintained; and the Soul
takes no care for their entertainment, the transport and the ravishment which
the approach, or the possession of good affords her, bereaving her of the
remembrance of what she ought to do, for which cause languors and soundings
follow these Passions, unless Hope, Boldness, or the like, mix not with them,
and call back the Soul to her Duty, as it often happens in Love and in Desire,
which being commonly accompanied with Fear and Hope suffers not such great and
violent accidents as those in Joy are; the Soul therefore is more careful to
continue the motions of the Spirits in Boldness and in Anger, then in the rest
of those Passions, because the danger she is threatened withal keeps her in
breath, and continually sollicites her to oppose new forces, and to make new
endeavors against the pressures of the Enemy, which she cannot do, but by
producing every moment new Heat and new Spirits, and sending them to relieve
those which made the first assaults.

Nay often, What humors are moved in Boldness.
as if she mistrusted her succors, when the ill appears too powerful, she
raises up the most working and the most malignant Humors that thereby she
might the more easily destroy them. From thence it is that Choler is stirred up
in the violence of those Passions; and that in venomous Beasts, that poison
which is quiet and hid in the center of the Body, casts it self forth into the
outward parts, and chiefly into those which serve them for arms and defense;
which may oblige us to judge that it is the Soul which brings it into those
places to assault and destroy the ill, and by a very probable consequence, that
she does the like with those others which have any proper quality for that
purpose. To confirm this Truth, we need only to consider those dreams which
are formed when choler predominates; for they evidently make it appear, that
the Soul is accustomed to use this humor to assault evils, and that presently
as soon as she sees it in a condition to be thereby relieved, she prepares
herself for the Combat, and during sleep she forgeth Enemies, Battles and
Victories. At least its certain, that Choler being agitated in these Passions,
renders the Heat the more strong and pungent. Or because it is naturally dry,
and that dryness is a quality which gives most efficacy to Heat, or because
those sharp fumes which this humor exhales, when it is moved, cast themselves on
the parts, prick them and give them that angry sentiment which the heat of
those Passions uses to cause.

CHAP. V. The Causes of the Characters of Boldness.
TO follow the same method we have held in our former Discourses, The morol
characters of Boldness.
we must here examine two sorts of Characters; the one immediately formed in
the Soul, which we call Moral, because they consist in those actions which we
call Moral, or at least which respect Manners. The other which are Corporal,
and which are remarked in the change and alteration which this Passion imprints
on the Body. Those of the first order which accompany Boldness, are truly very
numerous, as may be seen in the description we have made of a Bold man; but we
may reduce them to certain principal Heads, the knowledge of which will easily
bring us to that of the rest: For he that shall know why a Bold man Hopes, and
why he is a lover of Glory, will at the same instant know the cause of the
greatest part of the other effects which Boldness produces, and which in some
sort depend from those two.

Let Us then begin with Hope which ever precedes Boldness, and never abandons
it; Hope always accompanies Boldness.
Certainly, it is nothing difficult to give the reason thereof; for after having
shown that to form Boldness, the Soul must know and measure its Forces, that
she must believe them greater and more powerful then those of the Enemy, and
afterward she must employ them against him, that she may vanquish him; It Is
impossible but she must hope for the Victory, since she desires it, and that in
her judgment she has all what is necessary for the obtaining thereof. Perhaps
some will say, that there are many who fight without hope of conquest; it is
true, but also Boldness which is employed in such fights, is not found in the
sensitive Faculty; nor is it of the common order of the Passions. It Is
particular to a man whose reason prepares often other designs then those which
Nature and the Senses are wont to inspire in Animals; For its certain that they
never assault any thing which they believe not they shall conquer; and if
sometimes they are forced to combat Enemies, which they did not dare to
assault, or even before whom they had already been put to flight, it is the fear
they have of falling into a greater danger, which awakes their Courage,
reanimates their Force, and so brings to life again the hope of overcoming
those to whom they had yielded before. But it is not so with men, who often
engage themselves in Combats, and cast themselves into dangers, out of which
they never hope to come with any advantage, and even where they know their loss
is certain, because Reason proposes them a more considerable end then the
Victory would afford them, and obliges them to undertake impossible things, to
gain honor, and other goods,, which always follow generous actions. But if in
these encounters they despair of overcoming the Enemy which assaults them,
they still hope to vanquish those difficulties which inviron the glory they
aspire unto; and we may say they yield a small Victory to gain a greater, and
hazard a little to gain much. But in the following Chapter we shall again touch
this subject. It Is sufficient to have here shown that in Boldness there is
still Hope enough, and that a Bold man is never without Hope.

Now the same principle from whence we have drawn this truth, ought also to
furnish us with the reason why a Bold man has so much Confidence and
Presumption in himself, why he is not astonished at the sight of dangers, that
even he is pleased when he encounters them, and that very often he despises
them; why he is not superstitious, choleric, or dissembling; In fine, why he
hates subjection, and will always command.

For if Confidence be nothing but a consummated Hope, fortified by the opinion
we have that those things whose help we expect will not fail us at our need,
it is certain that the Soul which knows its forces, and believes them more
powerful then the difficulties, and employs them against them with Hope to
overcome them, must also be assured that they will not fail her in this
occasion, and that she has cause to trust to the help which she promises
herself from them.

As for Presumption, which is an immoderate Hope, and proceeds from the too
great opinion we have of our Forces, although it does not always accompany
Boldness, yet it follows it, because heat increasing, and kindling it self in
this Passion, it stirs up the Soul by its vivacity. It troubles it, by its
agitation, and afterward easily persuades it, that its forces are greater then
indeed they are, and that they are all in a condition to serve her, although
there often be but one part of them; thus it is when Wine, Fury, and Love
inspire the weakest and most timorous persons with a blind Confidence, and a
temerous Boldness, which engages them to undertake things above their power;
for the Judgment being weakened by the vapors of the Wine, or by the violence
of those Passions and heat, being become stronger by the impression it made on
the humors, we need not wonder if the Soul finding it self upheld with the most
powerful assistance which she can use in her functions, be deceived in the
opinion she has of her strength, and that she believes them greater then
indeed they are.

These Reasons make it appear also, A Bold man is not astonished at sight of
dangers.
that a bold man ought not to be astonished at the sight of dangers, because
astonishment being ever accompanied with Fear and with some Despair, cannot be
susceptible of those Passions in the belief he is, that his forces are greater
then the difficulties, and in the hope he has to overcome them. On the
contrary, as he flatters himself in this thought, and places all his happiness
in the Victory, all these things which are to contribute thereunto are pleasing
to him; he takes a delight to handle Arms, the found of Trumpets animates him,
he beholds the Enemies approach with joy; and if there be any thing which
disturbs his contentment, it is the impatience he has to be at him, and to
begin that Combat which is to crown his valor. It Is the same with him who is
bold to speak or to write, or to undertake any other design whatsoever it be;
he pleases himself in the encounter of those difficulties which are to employ
him, and to make his courage appear; the place, the occasion, the subject of
his enterprise far from astonishing him, do but the more assure him, and he is
never so content, as when he sees himself ready to set his hand to the work.

But if it be true that he runs thus into danger, that he assaults
difficulties, A Bold man despises dangers.
and that he will overcome them, how can he despise dangers? For it is not to
slight an Enemy when we assault and seek to overcome him. Certainly, we must
confess that he despises not all manner of dangers, not all sorts of Enemies,
but only those who are far beneath his strength, and that therefore he judges
it unworthy for him to exercise his care and Courage; for since in Nature which
gives Animals the knowledge of their strength and weakness, and instructs them
to fly when they are too weak, and to assault when they are strong enough; its
very likely that being so wise and so just, as she is, she would not engage
them in a too unequal combat, and that she would restrain them when they meet
an Enemy incomparably less powerful then they are, and which cannot offend
them. In effect we see that among domestic Beasts, those which are naturally
strong and of a great size, scorn the assaults of those who are little and
weak; a Mastiff grows not angry, nor ever defends himself against a little Cur
which barks at him, and snaps at him, as if he scorned his temerity; he goes on
without regarding him, or stands still without being disturbed at the endeavors
he makes against him. A child securely plays with the most angry Beasts, beats
them with impunity, and hurts them without moving them, which they would never
suffer from another person.

Some say the same of those which are wild and savage; and some of them have
deserved the name of generous, not only because they disdain to assault those
who are not able to resist them but also because they often content themselves
to cast down their adversary, as if in that condition it were unworthy for them
any more to exercise their strength, and that it were a shame for them to end a
Combat which they had made so unequal. It Is true that they forbear not often
to pursue the most timorous creatures; but it is not as Enemies, it is as their
prey; and it is not to fight them, but to take them and feed on them; in a word,
it is Hunger and not Boldness which animates them; for when they are not pressed
with this hard and implacable necessity, they never assault but only those
which they think strong enough to harm them, and scorn the rest which have not
that power.

Whatever we believe, it is certain that when the Soul is persuaded that the
difficulties which present themselves are too weak to traverse her designs, she
scorns and disdains to fight them. Now this persuasion is grounded on the
certain knowledge which she has of the greatness of her forces, or on a false
opinion which she has conceived of them. For although those who are truly
strong and powerful, have reason to make no reckoning of the greatest part of
those things which alarm others; yet when Boldness has heated a Courage, how
weak soever it be, it abuses it by a vain confidence it gives it, and makes it
believe that the obstacles it meets are nothing considerable, that there are
none which ought to stop its course, or which is able to make the least
resistance: This is commonly observed in the anger of Women, of Children, and
of Men who are naturally timorous; they fear all before they are possessed with
this Passion; but when this has gotten mastery, shame, respect nor danger can
never bridle them. They slight all that opposes their fury, and blindly run
wheresoever rage and despair leads them.

Since Boldness scorns the greatest part of difficulties and dangers, A Bold
man is not choleric.
neither can it be Choleric or Superstitious, because Anger and Superstition
are not compatible with the confidence it has, nor with the despite it has
of most of those things which assault it.

And indeed we are not angry with what we scorn, because this Passion raises
not it self up but against things which may offend, and that scorn supposes
that they are without that power. So that if a Bold man do very much slight
Enemies and dangers, we may at least say, that he meets not with so many
subjects of anger, as he who is not in that condition. Moreover if it be true
that Anger comes from the opinion we have to have been offended, he that that
presumes much of his strength, and values not that of another man, never has a
thought that he can be offended: Thus Magnanimous Men, and those which are
naturally strong and courageous, are not easily angry, because Reason persuades
the one that most injuries are not so in effect, or that they are so slight
that they deserve not to be revenged; and their strength makes others believe,
that it is impossible, or at least very difficult for any to hurt them. Last of
all, if there are Boldnesses which are susceptible of this Passion, it is at
least certain, that the true and heroic is not for the Reasons beforesaid.

Neither is it Superstitious, He is not superstitious.
because Superstition proceeds from weakness and fear, with which Boldness
could never subsist; and truly it was never seen that a bold man did heed or
give any credit to Auguries and to all other vain observations which have been
introduced by Superstition. Those great Men of times past, although they were
bred and instructed in those errors, did often despise them. And Homer forgot
not to say That his Achilles stopped not on the presasages which were told him
of his death; That Hector mocked the Augurs, and that in heat of fight he
scorned both men and gods.

To speak truth, Boldness having so great an opinion of its Forces, believes
not that it needs foreign help, and its presumption making it forget that
natural inclination which Nature has given to men to have recourse to Heaven
in their necessities, far from becoming superstitious, it falls to the
despising of divine things, and easily gives it self up to Blasphemy,
Sacrilege and to all other impieties, which we see reign amongst Soldiers.

On the other side, he that shall consider the source of Superstition, will
find no other but the weakness of Men, and the mistrust they have had of their
own Forces. For believing themselves exposed to all kind of injuries, and
being instructed by Nature that there was a Power above theirs, they did seek
it every where, to gain such relief as was necessary for them: Those who were
basest did believe to find it in mortal and corruptible things, and so rendered
them the worship which was only due to the true Divinity. Others indeed
acknowledged it immortal, but have divided and multiplied it into as many gods
as there were things they stood in need of. To conclude, all men which are born
weak, being moved by fear or mistrust, imagined it was hard to be inclined and
to be pleased, that there ever was some want in the duties which were rendered
unto it, and that to render it exorable, new respects ought to be added to
those which Reason had already dictated unto them; and to observe all those
extraordinary things which were as Oracles, which it gave them of their good or
ill Fortunes, these are the springs whence all Idolatry has flown; the vain
observations of things to come, and the superfluous Ceremonies in the true
Religion. In fine, these are the undoubted witnesses, that all Superstition
proceeds from weakness and from fear, and that it is a Vice proper only to weak
and timorous persons, as may be judged also by Women and melancholy persons, to
whom it is more familiar then to any; By Southern people, who have ever been
accused of Cowardice and of Superstition, and by persons that are unhappy and
over-burthened with misery, who easily fall from Piety to Superstition.

Freeness is also one of the Companions of Boldness, He is free and without
dissimulation.
because a man who believes himself strong enough to overcome his Enemy, will
never call Artifice or Treachery to his help, which are signs and common
effects of weakness. Indeed all timorous Animals are more cunning and crafty
then the rest. Women are naturally more subtle then Men, as amongst them the
melancholy are more suspicious and more dissembling. Now this happens from that
they are conscious of their own weakness, and therefore are obliged to use
Artifice and deceit to supply the defects they have. Boldness then is not
subject to these Vices, seeing it has so much confidence in its Forces, and
speaks freely and open-hearted; its procedure is free, neither is there any
deceit or treachery to be feared from it, because it fears nothing. By reason
whereof there have been some Captains, who have often been hardly persuaded to
use stratagems, which are even allowed by the Laws of War, as if they were
unworthy of their Courage and of their Valor. We every day see that in the heat
of a Battle, and when Boldness is highest, we despise the rules and postures of
Fencing; and even those who are naturally weak and timorous, when they are
animated with this Passion, or transported with anger, they forget their
slights and subtilties, and pursue their Enemies with open force.

Finally, It will always command.
It hates subjection, and would always command; for having a good opinion of it
self, it is persuaded that it ought never to submit it self, and that it
deserves to have the pre-eminence above all the rest. And certainly, although
this inclination be common to all men, who being born free, think that their
Liberty ought to be preserved more entire, and more absolute in command then in
subjection; yet there are some to whom it seems more natural and more proper
then to others, because they truly have, or think they have those qualities
which are fit for command. Now if strength be one of the most considerable, and
if it be the most powerful, and perhaps the only Instrument of Dominion, we
need not doubt but Boldness which fills the Soul with so much confidence, and
gives her such an advantageous opinion of her strength, does also powerfully
imprint this haughty and imperious humor, which makes him take the upperhand in
all encounters, and renders him incapable to submit himself to the advice and
conduct of another: Whence it happens that Bold men are commonly haughty, and
but little courteous; that they are opinionative in their resolutions, and that
they will always be the head both in Councels and in Enterprises. In fine, its
one of the causes which makes Mutineers and Rebels in a State, which make
Heretics and Atheists in Religion, and which fills families with disobedience
and with licentiousness: For all these disorders can proceed from nothing but a
presumptuous Temerity which will not subject it self to lawful Powers, which
will be independent in all things, in a word, which will Command.

The second Head which must lead us to the knowledge of the other Characters
which we seek, is the Love of Glory; for he that shall well understand the
Reason why a Bold man has this inclination, will at the same time perceive why
he affects Praise, why he is modest, generous, etc.

Let Us then conclude, Boldness desires honor more then all the rest of the
Passions.
That there is no Passion which inspires the desire of Honor and Glory like
unto Boldness; for if they are recompenses or duties which we are obliged to
give to the excellency of persons, Boldness is the only one which gives us the
right to exact the debt, since it alone gives men the superiority and
excellency which they seek so ardently. In effect, all the Passions whose
object is good, in some manner subject man to the good he pursues; those which
fly ill, oblige him to yield to the ill as the more potent; constancy indeed
resists it, and yet commonly she believes not herself stronger then it, so that
this only dares assault it, and hopes to conquer it, which is more powerful,
and which ought to inspire the sentiments of excellency and of superiority,
whose just price is honor. Now Boldness alone has this advantage, and if Anger
pretends any share, we know it is from that Boldness is always of its company.

But why does it fancy That there is honor to be gotten in all its
undertakings? It fancies honor in all its enterprises.
since its a strange thing, and hardly to be found in the rest of the Passions,
that the worst actions it produces should appear glorious and praiseworthy;
certainly it is because they are led by Force and by Courage, which are
qualities which Nature has rendered so noble, having destined them to be the
foundation of power and of superiority, that it is impossible but all their
effects must also be so, and but that consequently they must deserve the honor
which is due to the nobility and excellency of the things. And this is so true
that men have formed the first knowledges which they had of Virtue on actions
of Force and Courage; At first they knew none but that which was employed
therein; at least it appears that they gave it the first place, since they
honored all the rest with that name, which ought to have been proper and
peculiar unto it; for amongst the Grecians, the word which signifies Virtue,
draws its original from War; and amongst the Latins, those who spoke most
purely, did believe that the name of Virtue was in the first place due to the
Military Virtue. And this in my opinion happens, from that nature which
destined man for a civil life, has also inspired in him an advantageous sense
of all those things which are necessary to maintain it; now because none is
more so then that Virtue which conducts Force and Courage, that alone having
right to command, to establish order in Society, and resist those enemies which
would destroy it, it is certain, that naturally we ought to have more esteem of
it then of all the rest, whose object is a good less common, and less
considerable; for this reason also more care has been always taken to render
it more duties and respects then to any whatsoever. At all times, and in all
kinds of States, the most worthy and the most noble rewards have been reserved
for it; the first Crowns which ever were, have been consecrated to it, and it is
the only one to which the glory of triumphs has been destined for the reward
of its actions, which is the highest top of all the honor of the earth.

As it is then a Virtue which Nature it self obliges us to respect by reason
of its being destined to the government of a civil life, we must not wonder if
that Passion which serves for matter and instrument to those actions, pretends
the same right, and bearing with it the same destination, it conceives that by
a just claim it ought to have the same advantage in all its enterprises. For
although Reason make it appear, that Temerity, Cruelty and Insolency, and other
Vices which sometimes are mixed with it, render it unworthy so noble a
recompense: yet so it is, that it does not always hearken to their devices, and
that it more willingly follows the inclinations of nature; so that looking at
nothing but what is honest, and having no other guide but the instinct it has
for glory, it imagines it ought everywhere to encounter it, and that it is a
prize due to all its actions, how evil soever they be.

Moderation in victory, Modesty in speech, The virtues which accompanies
Boldness.
Generosity, Sweetness and Courtesy toward the vanquished, accompanies not
all kind of Boldness, but only that which is conducted by Reason: For Passion
alone is not able to produce such perfect actions without being guided by
virtue. But as regulated Passion forbears not to be Passion, we may speak these
to be the Characters of Boldness, since they are proper to one kind of
Boldness; Add also that there are some seeds and dispositions in the principles
of this Passion, which naturally render it inclined to produce these actions;
for there are generous Beasts which content themselves with the Victory, and
which hurt not those they have thrown down: we see even that all Bold men
although they have not Virtue to regulate their Boldness, and that they propose
not honesty to serve them as the motive, forbear not to act the generous and
the modest, even like those who have true Valor. And what inclination soever
they have to take all the advantages they can over their Enemies, yet they
restrain themselves, and render not their Victory insolent. Now this partly
happens from that natural Justice we spoke of, which defends Beasts from
pursuing a Combat which is too unequal, and partly from the violent desire of
honor which this Passion inspires in men. For finding himself continually pressed
with this secret spur, and by experience knowing that insolency and vanity
dishonor a victory how brave soever it were; That on the contrary, Moderation,
Modesty, and Generosity render it the more glorious, they easily are moved to
those actions which ought to content their desire, and which promise them the
richer harvest of honor and of praise, for which cause we had reason to say,
that their Modesty was proud and ambitious, because they consider not the
Honesty which virtue proposes therein, but the glory only which redounds from
thence, and that they respect Honor but even for Honors sake.

Besides, Whence those Vices come which mix themselves with Boldness.
although in these occasions they follow this shadow and appearance of virtue
in all other ways they commonly are Arrogant and Proud, because esteeming
themselves more then others, they think all is their due, and will have the
pre-eminence, as we have already said; They boast and speak advantageously of
themselves, forasmuch as the heat of the Passion kindles the desire they have
of glory, and makes them seek praise even from their own mouths; and certainly
we need not doubt but that Boldness is the source of all those defects; but
when it appears base, artificial, choleric, or cruel, we must not lay the
accusation of these vices upon it, but the ill inclinations only whereto it is
received; For it is like that of torrents which enter into great Rivers, and
seem presently to break the course of the water, and to make a passage from one
shore to the other, yet their impetuosity must yield to the current of the
River, which swallows them up, and carries them away with it. What Passion also
soever it be which is mixed with the ill inclinations, must follow the course
they take, and suffer it self to be carried away with those defects and vices
which are proper unto it. Now these inclinations come from the temper, or from
custom; for this corrups the best Natures, and there are men whose births have
given them all the dispositions which are necessary to true Boldness, yet which
have those defects which we even now mentioned, having for a long time been
nourished in them; and the habit they have gotten has changed all those seeds
of virtue which Nature had given them.

But besides custom, the general source of their ill inclinations is in the
temperature, The effect of weakness.
and chiefly in that whence weakness proceeds; for it is that which makes men
undertake base actions, unworthy of a true courage, persuading them they must
fear all things, that no enemies are little, and that we ought even to assault
those enemies which are weak, or those which are without defense. It Is that
which makes them become Artificial and Perfidious, forasmuch as it would supply
the defects of those forces by cunning and deceit, as has been already said:
It Is that which renders them Choleric and Vindicative, because it is exposed
to all manner of injuries, that it is easily hurt, and that the vengeance it
takes is a necessary means to keep the rest in their duties. Finally, it is that
which makes them Cruel and Bloody, because in that mistrust which it has of it
self, what advantage soever it has over its enemies, it still doubts that it
wants strength sufficient to effect its own revenge; so that to put it self in
safety, it moves even to extreme violence, and so renders its victory brutal
and cruel. But we shall more particularly examine these things in their due
place. Let Us finish this picture by those shadows which Fear gives unto
Boldness.

For we have said, Whence that fear comes which sometimes accompanies Boldness.
that Fear often went before that which was the most noble and the most
generous; that on the contrary there were men who went boldly into dangers, and
presently after lost their courage; that the most part of the most valiant,
durst not speak in public; and that some without cause apprehended the
encounter of some things which were but little considerable.

To give a reason for these extravagant events, we must first remember, that
there are two sorts of Boldness; the one which is led by Nature, the other
which is regulated by Prudence. The first considers not always the greatness of
the danger it is engaged in, or else it wants strength to entertain a
long-winded combat; Wherefore when it finds the danger greater then it
imagined it to be, it is surprised with astonishment, which makes it take
slight; which commonly happens to new Soldiers, and to those who undertake
things without having foreseen the difficulties which therein were to have
been encountered. And if it be upheld by this active and glittering force which
accompanies delicate tempers, as those of Children, of Women, and the like, its
first fury and first impetuosity is only to be feared; for its forces being
unable to furnish it for a longer fight, it quickly gives ground, and makes way
for Fear, unless some new relief arrive. But it happens not so with that
Boldness which is conducted by Reason; before that undertake the Combat, it
exactly considers the forces of the Enemy, the greatness of the danger it is
entering upon, and all those obstacles which may traverse its design; for which
cause it has not at first that impatient ardor which is to be observed in the
other. On the contrary it appears cold and restrained; and sometimes even
paleness, trembling, and such other accidents of Fear which surprise it in
these encounters, do so hide it, that a man might believe that it was not there
at all, or that it was associated with its enemy. And certainly the Soul might
conceive the danger so great that for a time she may not be capable of any
motion unless it be that of Fear; and in that case she could not be agitated
with the Passion of Boldness, although she might have the habit thereof. Now
although we must say, That the image of the danger being carried to the
sensitive Faculty by the Knowledge which the Senses or the Judgment may have
given her, the Soul will form Fear in the inferior part, whilst the superior
will be raised with a true Boldness; and then a man will boldly go to the
fight, whom we shall see look pale and tremble at the sound of the Trumpet, and
at first sight of the Enemies. Its true, this disturbance will not last long,
Reason presently getting the mastery either by reassuring it self, or raising
the Courage of its inferior part. Neither after a man has taken this noble
resolution, is he susceptible of Fear or of Astonishment; he meets with no
difficulties which seem not less then he fancied they were; and if his strength
fails him in this occasion, his virtue forbears not to hold fast, and obliges
him rather to perish then to fly, or rather yield to undergo the burden, then
quit his undertaking.

As for those who valiant as they are dare not speak in public, or who fear
the encounter of certain things which in appearance ought not to give them the
least apprehension, besides that this rather respects the habit of Boldness
then the Passion, it is an examen which more fitly belongs to the discourse of
Fear then to this: We can only say, That a Bold man is not so in all things,
because he has not, or believes he has not competent forces to undertake
them, and to surmount the difficulties which are therein to be encountered,
every profession, and even every action requiring its particular forces. Such a
man may have the one, and want the other; so he may be bold in those and
timorous in these. He who is naturally valiant and courageous, has not
commonly those dispositions which are fit for the great actions of the Mind;
Coldness and Quietness which they require, cannot allay themselves with heat,
and that tumult which accompanies Courage: So that if he find himself engaged
to speak in public, or to do any other the like action, astonishment and fear
surprise him, being sensible of his own weakness to execute a design beyond his
strength.

We are now to examine the Characters which Boldness imprints on the Body, The
corporal Characters of Boldness.
which as in the rest of the Passions, are of two kinds. For some of them are
formed by the Souls command, and the others unknowingly, and out of a
necessity, useless to her design, as we shall make it appear in the examen we
intend of every particular.

Let us therefore begin with the Eyes, which afford us the sight of all, and
which are the Souls Looking-glasses.

An assured Look, although it be common to all the generons Passions of the
Irascible Appetite, belongs particularly to Boldness, because she assaults ill,
and that she ought to have more assurance then the rest, which do only expect
it; For we have said in the Discourse of Hope, That this Look was made by a
wide opening of the lids with a fixed sight, and with vivacity. This opening is
that we might see the enemy the more exactly; the steddiness of sight
witnesses that the Soul is not astonished, and this vivacity comes from the
arrival of the spirits which dart themselves forth to combat it. And to speak
truth, it must have at least these three conditions to form this kind of look.
Most of the Passions makes us open our eyes to consider the good or ill which
is their object, even Fear seems to be most careful of it, being most of all
obliged to provide for her safety. But it has no set look being not able long
to suffer the presence of the enemy, the disquiet she is in rendering her
inconstant and startled. A strong meditation settles, the sight but not with
vivacity, forasmuch as the spirits retreat toward their principles, and so
leave a dimness in the eyes: These three things therefore ought to meet to form
the Look we speak of; and he that will but observe it, will find that the
motion of the Eyebrows, the carriage of the Head, and the rest of the Face
contribute somewhat thereunto.

However it be a Bold man looks upon danger with assurance, Why a Bold man
shuts not his eyelids.
without winking, and this partly is from that the soul stiffening it self in
it self, stiffens the Muscles, and so hinders the lid from falling, and partly
because she will not lose the sight of her Enemy, nor so much as one minute
interrupt the looks she casts on him. Moreover we may say she has not then so
much need of winking as before, having rendered them stronger by the quantity of
spirits which she sent thither. For it is certain, that when these parts are
strongest, this motion is least necessary, for which cause Birds of prey, and
all other Creatures, which have a strong sight, wink seldomer then the rest; as
on the contrary, men whose sight is weak wink at every moment. Moreover this
motion of the lids moystens the eyes and cleanses them, and thereby preserves
their transparency and mobility; it is chiefly destinated to assuage and temper
by an interposing obscurity which it brings the splendour of the exterior, which
continually beats on it. Now so it is, that those who have a strong sight, can
longer and more easily endure the light then others, and consequently they are
not obliged to close their eyelids so often. If it be therefore true, that
Boldness sends a great quantity of spirits to those parts, and so renders them
more strong and vigorous; It must also at the same time dispense with their
winking so often as they did formerly. In fine, if weakness and fear cause them
to fall, to cover and hide them from the ill which persues them; Boldness which
apprehends nothing, and sees peril and danger without astonishment needs not
this vain precaution, nor to employ an unprofitable relief.

A through Look is also common to many of the Passions, Why he looks through.
and chiefly to Indignation, Anger, and to Boldness; to form it, the Face must
have somewhat of severe, the Eyes must impetuously cast themselves toward the
Enemy, and the Head must be somewhat turned on the other side. Now severity is
necessary, because we may cast our Eyes aside without looking through, as it
often happens in all those Passions which pursue good and fly from ill; for
Love, Desire, and Fear at every moment cast their Eyes aside, because severity
is wanting in some by reason of the pleasure which they inspire, and in the
other by reason of the astonishment which accompanies them: In effect, Severity
is a certain rude, pecuish stifness, which the presence of ill imprints in the
whole countenance, and which is only to be found in these Passions which
assault ill; forasmuch as the Soul stiffens it self only in these encounters
which we have spoken of; the Eyes impetuously cast themselves against the
Enemy, because the Soul having put it self in a posture of fighting, employs
its looks as so many darts which she intends to cast on it, but at the same
time it turns the Head another way to show its aversion from it, that it fears
it not, and that it disdains to employ greater forces against it; wherefore we
commonly use this kind of look in threatenings, where by the mind, and by
words, without coming to handy-blows we seek to stop the ill, esteeming it not
strong enough to need to be assaulted with its strongest arms, in Indignation,
and in other little Angers, whereto we intend not Vengance to all extremity,
and in the beginnings of Boldness, before we are come to blows, when we think
to decide the combat by little skirmishes. It Is true, that it often happens
that a man who dares not assault a potent Foe, will look through him; but that
is but to hide his weakness, and make him believe it is not for want of force
that he assaults him not, but rather that is out of generosity, and because he
esteems him worthy of so great an endeavor.

There are other kind of Looks which often happen in this Passion, Why he
contracts and raises the Brows.
as those which are urgent and unquiet, those which are rude and furious; but
the first proceed from Desire, and from Impatience, whereof we have elsewhere
spoken; others come from Anger and from Fury, which shall be examined in the
Discourse of Anger.

Let Us now come to the motion of the Forehead and Brows. To find the cause, we
must learn it from Physic, that Nature has not given to the Forehead a
proper motion, for the muscles which cause it to move belong to the Brows,
which ought to be moveable for the preservation of the Eyes, and to help them
in their functions; so that the Front never moves but when the Eyebrows move.
Now amongst those motions which they are capable of, there are two principally
which are commonly to be observed in Boldness and Anger; the one is to lift
them up, and the other to strengthen them; but its very hard to tell what the
motive is which the Soul proposes it self in every of them, nor of what use
they might be in the Passions we have now spoken of; It Is certain that
according to the order which Nature has prescribed to those parts, they lift
themselves up, that they may the more freely see the object which presents it
self, either by enlarging the circle of the sight, which restrains it self when
they abate themselves, or that they serve to the opening of the lids, which
after a manner they draw after them: And they strengthen themselves to
strengthen the eyes, making as it were a rampire before them to stop those
things which might fall from on high, and to defend them from the light which
comes from without; for that the obscurity it causes, tempers the splendour,
gathers the spirits, and in pursuit renders the sight stronger and more exact.
But if we consider these motions in the Passions, the Soul indeed must propose
other motives then these. For I grant that the presence of ill obliges it to
seek all the liberty, and all the strength of the eyes, the better to discover
the enemy, and assault him the more rightly; yet there are encounters wherein
these cares seem useless, or at least where they are greater then they need to
be, because it often happens that we that move the Brows and the sight, at such
things as never so little displease us, and wherein its nothing necessary to
bring the least precaution. Let Us therefore conclude, that the disturbance and
the blindness which the Passions cast in the Soul, divert it often from those
ordinary ways which Nature teaches, which make her forget the true use for
which those organs were destinated, and pursued her, that what ought to serve
her for one end may also be useful for another. So in all vehement desires she
brings water into the mouth, although it be only necessary in that of Food; so
she makes those that are alone, laugh and speak, although all those actions are
reserved for Society, and Conversation. As therefore she is accustomed to
shrink up the Brows, to fortify the sight, and to defend the Eyes against what
might offend them, she fancies she ought do the same in the encounters of all
kind of Enemies; and by an error, like that of Creatures, which think they
have hid all their Bodies when their Heads are covered; so she thinks that
fortifying her Eyes she inspires the same strength in the other parts, and then
all of them are in a condition to assault ill, having put that upon the
defensive. It Is even so also, that she raises up the Brows, when she raises
herself; for although that serves her the better to see the Enemy; yet she
fancies this elevation helps her rising up, and that it so far advances the
execution of her design, as to make the organs move so also. Yet we may observe
that that which furthers this error is that the parts are extremely moveable
and obedient, and that they are in action sooner then the Soul is aware of it.
For the rest which are more heavy, resist these preparations, and require a
greater deliberation to oblige them to stir.

We may yet add to this reason, that the Soul will often by these external
motions manifest the state and condition she is in. So that she raises the
Brows, to show that she raises herself and shrinks them up, to witness that
she fortifies and gathers her self together; and this is the more likely, for
that without being moved with those agitations, she forbears not also to make
those parts move when she will dissemble her weakness and her fear, and make us
believe she has a design to fight.

And now in pursuit of those motions which are made by the orders of the Soul,
the figure of the Forehead necessarily changes and alters; for of
necessity, when the Brows are lifted up, the Forehead must wrinckle, and when
they shrink up, that must gather it self betwixt the eyes; and then certainly
if the skin be fleshy, it makes, as it were, a great cloud in the midst of the
Forehead, which Aristotle calls for the same reason Nebulous, which is proper
and natural to Lions and to Bulls, and which is one of the principal signs of
the natural disposition a man has for Boldness, as elsewhere shall be said.

When the hair stands on end, Why the hair stands on end.
it is because the skin its rooted in, is moved; but this motion may be made
two ways; for those creatures which have a moveable and musculous skin make it
move when they please, and when they will assault or defend themselves, they
shrink it up that they may render it stiffer and stronger, and then necessarily
those plights and wrinkles which are formed must make the hair or feathers
stare with which it is covered. It is not so with men, their skin being not
musculous, they cannot voluntarily move it, but only out of necessity; and
that happens when the spirits with precipitation quit the outward parts of the
Head, and fly away elsewhere. For the skin which is then forced to restrain
and shut up it self, makes the roots of the hair retire, which are commonly
obliquely laid in the thickness of the skin, and in reverting of it it makes
the hairs rise and stand on end. Commonly fear and astonishment cause this
flight of the spirits; and which calling them back again to the Heart, render
the Face pale, and makes the hair stand: But this is sometimes also done by a
great endeavor of the Courage. For the Soul seeing it self pressed by a
puissant Enemy, gathers the spirits from all parts, in which its principal
strength consists, and sends them to the Arms, and so those other parts which
are appointed to assault and combat, so that those which are abandoned of them
grow pale, and the skin shrivels, and the hair stands on end, even as they do
in fear. Now as Boldness and Anger only can cause this endeavor, its only
they which are capable to produce this effect in the manner spoken of. But when
that happens, it is a sign that those Passions will rise either to fury or
despair; for which cause we commonly say that a Man that looks pale with Anger
is terrible, because the Soul never uses these extraordinary means, but when
she is extremely pressed, and when she carries her self away to her last
violences. To conclude therefore this Discourse, a Bold man's hair may stand
upright, from the fear and from the astonishment which may sometimes surprise
him at the sight of danger, or by the last effort of Courage, as has been said.

The Nostrils open and widen themselves, because the heat growing stronger
requires a greater respiration, and obliges the soul therefore to enlarge the
passages; by reason whereof those who naturally have those parts wide and open,
are commonly bold and choleric.

The Smile comes from the indignation a man has to see himself assaulted by a
temerous or insolent enemy, or from our despising of his weak endeavors. But if
we would know why these Passions cause these effects, we must see what has
been said in the Discourse of Laughter.

Silence is proper to true Boldness, Why he is silent.
chiefly when its going into danger, either because it is then entirely
gathered up in it self to consider the greatness thereof, or because it
disdains to speak to any body with whom it denies society, either because it
hates or scorns them; or last of all, because it knows Words are arms of
weakness, and with them Combats are not to be decided. And certainly, Boldness
abounds not in words, unless in such who have their weaknesses, for the Soul
which knows its defect, uses all those means which may relieve her, and
employs besides those endeavors which she makes, threatenings, cryings out, and
reasons to fright the enemy, and hide her own imbecility; such is the Boldness
of Women and Children, such is that of Bragadocio's: And this Maxim is so
general, that even amongst Beasts we see that little Dogs continually bark,
when Mastiffs and great ones, which are bigger and taller seldom bark, and are
readier to fall on then we are awares. A man that is truly Bold does the like;
he is silent when he sees the enemy, he goes toward him, and assaults him
without speaking a word; but it is a threatening Silence, and which better
expresses his desire he has to fight, and the confidence he has in his
forces, then even words themselves.

Yet this hinders not, What the voice of a Bold man is.
but that in the heat of the Combat from time to time, some flashes of his
Voice, short and piercing, may escape him, which commonly accompany the blows
he gives, or the steps he takes; and this in my opinion is to astonish the
enemy by those exclamations which remark Ardor and Courage; or to animate and
provoke himself, his cryings out producing the same effect with that of the
sound of Trumpets; Or rather this comes from the endeavors and struggles which
the parts make within; which with impetuosity driving the air to the Lungs,
force it at its issuing out to resound again, and to form a strong and
penetrating sound, because its driven out with violence; Great, because the
passages are enlarged by heat; and short, because it is made by sallies and
shocks; it seems even as if it issued not with liberty, and as if the lips and
the teeth stopping it in its passage would force it to return and retort it on
himself, and to seek other passages, in which it is inwardly heard to resound.
This appears in the howlings of Mastiffs and Bloodhounds, in the roaring of
Lions; for all of these cast only forth a great sound, of a short and
resounding voice, which loses it self in the hollow of the Throat and Breast,
and which they do not redouble but by long intervals, by reason that the Soul
which trusts its strengths, thinks not it ought to double its shocks with that
eagerness which always accompanies weakness. The voice of a Bold man is then
constrained, disturbed, and as it were entangled in it self, (...), as
Aristotle calls it, which the Commentators understood not when they said it
signified words which precipitated themselves the one or the other, and
enterfer'd by the swiftness of the pronuntiation: For this indeed may happen in
Anger for these reasons we shall note; but not in Boldness, which is neither
loud nor talkative, which shortens as much as possibly, not only its voice,
but even its discourse; for besides that it never uses any long threats, it
cuts them short at first, and leaves always more to be thought then is said.
Quos ego?

Sometimes he blows with impetuosity, whether the pantings and shocks he gives
his Breast cause the air violently to issue, or that from time to time keeping
in his breath, he is afterward constrained to use more blowing to drive out
the fumes of the Heart, which could not get out during this constraint.

But why does he keep in his breath? Why he keeps in his breath.
Doubtless to fortify the motion of the other parts; for that we commonly
never employ this action, but when we intend to give a great blow to do some
other great endeavor. The reason of this Effect is drawn from the nature of
the Motion, which is to be on some stable thing, whereon the body moving
upholds it self. It Is thus that Beasts move, that Birds fly, and that Fish
swim, and that all other things move; for in all these motions, the Earth, the
Air and the Water, or some other Body remains firm, and resists the thing
agitated; and in proportion as the resistance and firmness is greater, the
motion also is greater and stronger. Now as the parts of Animals lean more the
one upon the other, when any of them is to perform any powerful motion, it is
necessary the rest keep close and even to the furthermost which contribute
thereunto. It must find without it self somewhat which may sustain it self;
otherwise the motion of the first of these will be weak, and their actions will
be the less perfect. Whence it comes that Birds are troubled to fly when their
Legs are broken; that we run not so well when our Hands are tied, and leap but
ill unless we stiffen our Arms, and shut our Fists; because those parts in the
condition they then are cannot uphold, as they ought to do the motions of the
rest.

The Soul then which has a secret knowledge of all what is beneficial unto
her, and who knows that in violent endeavors there must be a great and strong
support for those organs which are to move, retains the Breath, that that air
which is stopped in the Lungs may keep up the Muscles of respiration, and that
pressing them on all sides, she stiffens them to support the rest which are
engaged in the action. So that we are not content only to stop the breath, but
we drive it, and cause it to descend down that the diaphragma may dilate it
self, and press the neighboring parts which thereby are rendered more fit to
support those which are in motion.

In pursuit he shuts his Lips and his Tteeh, as well the better to stop the
passages of respiration, as to confirm the parts, whether it be that their
confirmation truly contributes to the great designs we have spoken of, or
whether the Soul is abused in the choice she makes, as being useless; as it
often happens in diverse other occasions, wherein she is hindered by Passion to
discern things, and to remember the true use of the organs.

That Coldness which is observed in the beginnings of Boldness, Whence comes
the coldness of the Face.
is nothing but a certain constancy and assurance of countenance, which is not
astonished at the sight of danger, and which also witnesses neither ardor nor
impatience to fight. And it has been so called, because that besides that, it
is the property of cold to render things immovable; defect of heat is commonly
called Coldness. Now this constancy and outward assurance comes from that which
is made in the Soul and in the Spirits, and which retaining the humors and the
parts in the posture she finds them in, hinders the blood from retiring or
expanding it self, and the organs from moveing. For in this condition the
countenance must not change color, must remain firm and settled, must appear
cold and resolute at the encounter of difficulties: But the first cause of all
these effects, is, that at that time the Soul raises it self not yet up
against the enemy, only prepares herself for the combat, as has been said;
for when she assaults him, the Spirits must rise up with her, must carry blood
and redress to the face, and fill all with vivacity, ardor, and impatience. The
fierceness of the Countenance.


This Coldness is followed with a noble fierceness, which animates the
countenance of a Bold man chiefly when he goes into danger; for it appears not
commonly in the first motions of Boldness, nor in the heat of fight, but only
when he is ready for the assault, and marches toward the Enemy: So that it
seems it is as a mean betwixt his staiedness at first, and that ardor which
transports him at last.

In effect, as this Fierceness is a kind of severe and disdainful Pride, which
comes from the presumption and scorn which Boldness uses to inspire: The Soul
cannot be susceptible of it before she has conceived a great opinion of her
own strength, because that is the ground of her Pride, nor after she has found
any strong resistance, because that makes her perceive the danger greater then
she fancied it, and that therefore she ought not to slight it. It Is therefore
only when she is ready to fight, for then she is full of the esteem which she
has of herself, and then she disdains the enemy, whose forces she has not yet
experimented.

However it be, the Head is then kept erect, and the Brow lifted up, the look
quick, and full of assurance, the countenance swelled and double-gorged, and
has I know not what in it, that is rude and disdainful. Now all these are the
effects and characters of Pride, as in its place shall be said. For the Soul
which in this Passion swells it self, raises up the Head, lifts up the Brows,
and swells the Face, as if she thought more room to enlarge her self, or by
those exterior motions she would make that appear which she has in herself. An
assured look comes from that considence which accompanies its Pride, and that
severe and disdainful countenance from the indignation she has to find
obstacles in her designs.

The Posture and the Gate contribute also to this Fierceness; for all the Body
keeps it self straight and set, and if he stir, his march is haughty and proud.
The Stature erects it self, because the Soul raises and stiffens it self, in
the design which she has to assault, which puts the Body into such a posture
as is most advantageous for it to act, as we said in the Discourse of Hope.

As for the proud Gate, its that which Aristotle calls Magnifick, which is
natural to Lions, and is a sign of strength and of greatness of Courage. It Is
performed with great and grave paces, balancing the Body on either side, and at
every step lifting inwards and forewards the Shoulders. But how difficult
soever it be to express this action to the life, its yet harder to find the
true cause thereof. Some have sought it in the same temperature which renders
the Body robustious, and have said that constitution being more firm and solid,
their parts also were more united and shut together, and so they communicated
the motion wherewith they were agitated to one another, and in pursuit that
when the Legs did lift themselves up, and advance to go, the Shoulders must be
moved in the same manner.

Of a truth, if all those who were of that temper walked after that manner,
this proposition would be somewhat probable. But besides that all those who are
robustious walk not so: There are those which are not so, to whom this gate is
natural, or at least who in some occasions use it, as in Boldness, in Pride,
and the like. We must then refer this effect to a more general cause, which
must not be constant and unchangeable as the temperature is, but changes
according to its encounters. And truly if it be a Character proper to Boldness,
it must proceed from the agitation of the Soul, whether it serve its design, or
be done out of necessity. Now he that will consider that the Soul which will
board the enemy, stiffens herself to fortify herself, and begins to raise
herself, as to make trial of the assault she is going about, will judge for the
reasons which we have so often alleged, that she ought to inspire the same
motions into the organs, and consequently that she stiffens them, and drives
them vigorously: So that the march and the other actions of the Body must
suffer some change and must be performed after another manner then they were
wont to be, by reason of that new and extraordinary impression which they
receive: A man then which is animated with Boldness, marches with a stiffer
and more vigorous pace, having a greater number of Muscles which stiffen it,
and that all his body weighs and rests it self on that foot which upholds it:
So that he the more strongly treads the ground when he walks, wherein the
stediness of the things supported consists; and because he cannot so readily
displace that foot which stands strong under so great a burden, of necessity
his pace must be slow, and he must go the more heavily. But this slowness is
recompensed by the greatness and largeness of his steps, his strength seconding
the desire he had to get to his Enemy, mixing, if we may so say, haste with
gravity: In pursuit of those motions, the Shoulders are moved and stirred, as
we have said; Because all the Body stiffening it self, and laying all the
weight on the foot, it must needs be that changing place, and carrying the same
burden to the other, the Shoulder must advance and weigh down it self on the
same side; and this being done with vigor, the impetuosity of the motion
causes it to turn somewhat inwardly, and passing so from the one to the other
it ballanceth all the body in marching. Thus then Boldness uses this kind of
gate, so that if it be natural and ordinary, in some it is a sign of greatness
of Courage, because the Soul which has a secret knowledge of the motions it
ought to make by instinct, bears it self to this kind of pace, which is proper
to Boldness and to Generosity, and marching without minding it, as if she ought
always to affront the Enemy.

Furthermore, Why he stoops his Head when he assaults.
when a Bold man is near danger, and upon the point of assaulting his
adversary, he stooping his Head, throws himself on him, whether he thinks he
should therewith knock against him, or that his desire of fighting makes him
advance that part, as it does the rest of them; Or that stiffening the Arms to
strike, the Neck must stiffen it self to support the endeavor of that motion,
and in pursuit the Muscles shorten themselves and so cause the Head to stoop,
or in fine, because it would cover it self, and not give aim to the enemies
blows; for this reason it is that he bows all his Body, that he gathers himself
up, that he contracts himself, and puts himself on his guard, to use the terms
of Art.

In the heat of the Combat, His Face is inflamed, his Eyes become ardent, and
his sweat runs from all parts; Forasmuch as the spirits and the humors cast
themselves impetuously to the outward parts, and that the heat which the Soul
stirs up in this encounter, expands it self every way, dissolves the humors,
and causes them to run through the pores which she keeps open. It Is thus, That
in great endeavors, we have often seen blood startle out of the Eyes, Lips, and
other parts, and sometimes even from all the Body, in form of sweat. But when
this last happens, the transport of the Soul must be excessive. For she must be
much urged and constrained to do a very extraordinary endeavor after this
manner to drive out of the veins this treasure of life.

He beats the earth with his feet, to make his Force and vigor appear, and to
astonish the enemy by the noise and tempest which at once his Foot, his Voice
and his blows make.

He darts himself forth, and leaps lightly, his forces being augmented by heat,
and by the motion of the spirits which render him lighter and better disposed.

His respiration is strong and impetuous, because heat is increased, which
augments the force of the vital parts, and requires a greater refreshment, for
which cause the Breast and the Lungs extend and enlarge themselves the more to
attract the greater quantity of fresh air, and they fall with precipitation,
the more readily to drive away the fumes which the boiling of the spirits and
the humor excite.

The Pulse is great, high, quick, frequent and vehement, for the same reasons;
for the Arteries open and extend themselves very much, that they may receive
the more air for the refreshing of the spirits; and as this opening satisfies
not yet the need which presses the Heart, the Soul adds to the greatness of
its motion, swiftness, and frequency, the more readily to attract refreshment,
and the oftener to discharge those fumes which heat raises up. To conclude,
Because she gathers together her forces to assault and combat ill, we need not
doubt but the vital Faculty grows stronger, but that she more powerfully moves
her organs, and that consequently she makes the Pulse more strong and vehement.
It Is true, that all these diverse beatings of it are also in Anger; but when we
speak of that Passion, we will show the difference she makes therein; Let Us go
to more pleasing subjects which hither to have been observed by no man, or at
least which our ordinary Philosophy has not yet examined.

PART. II.
CHAP. I. The Characters of Constancy, or of the strength of Courage.
IF it be true that Boldness has no other function but to assault and combat;
Constancy is different from Boldness.
yet is the Soul often obliged to labor in its own defense, and simply to
resist those ills without daring to assault them; there must necessarily
therefore be a Passion which must serve it in this encounter, and must be
different from Boldness. And truly fince Passions are motions, there must be
several Passions where there is a diversity of motion. Now the motion which the
Soul makes in resisting, is altogether different from that which she makes in
assaulting, whether it be in the manner wherewith it is agitated, or in the end
which she has proposed to herself. For in resistance she knows nothing but how
to stiffen and streng then herself in herself to stop the effort of the Enemy.
But in assault she goes out of herself, and casts herself on it to combat it;
here she darts and precipitates herself, there she stays and remains stable;
here she boldly bestows the blow, there she receives them with assurance. In a
word, in the one she would overcome, in the other she is content not to be
overcome.

But if this Reason will not oblige us to distinguish these Passions which
Philosophy has always confounded, let us but follow the common opinion of men,
and the ordinary way of speaking in such like encounters; For they never say,
That a man with Boldness bears his ill fortune; nor that he suffers Infamy,
Grief or Death boldly, but that he endures them, that he suffers with Courage,
with Resolution, with Constancy and with Patience.

If it be not Boldness therefore which produces these effects, and if amongst
the Passions mentioned by the Schools, there is none whereto we can refer them,
we are constrained to increase the number of them, and to add to the emotions
of the Irascible Appetite, that which serves to support ills, and to resist
them.

Now as those who discover a new Land, commonly give it the name of those
Countries which are best known unto them, and which have some likeness
together: We have by their example taken the liberty to give this Passion the
name of Constancy, a virtue known to all the world, and whereto it has a great
conformity.

And truly there are Passions which always carry the name of Vices, because
they always appear to be vicious, as Envy and Impudence. It must follow, that
those which always appear virtuous, should also bear the name of Virtues. Now
this is of this kind; for in what condition soever we find her, what defects
soever she has, we still see some image of Virtue in her. And even when she is
altogether irregular, we are forced to admire her, and to afford her those
praises which are due to fair actions; let us boldly therefore give her the name
of Constancy, since she is not unworthy of those advantages which are due unto
Virtue.

But if any man would object, That what we call Passion is nothing but the
action of that Virtue; and therefore that it is nothing necessary to introduce
a new Passion, since the actions of Virtues are not properly Passions.

We must first say, That all the actions of Constancy cannot be reckoned for
actions of Virtue, since some of them may be vicious, as when we resist ills,
which necessarily we should fly, or when we do not resist them as we ought,
nor when we ought, nor for that end which Virtue has proposed to it self.
Moreover an action of Constancy may be performed without possessing of the
Virtue; forasmuch as Virtue is a habit which is gotten by custom, and that
there is no habit acquired till we perform the first actions of Constancy. Now
if there are but three things in the Soul, Power, Habit, and Passion, this
first action must be a Passion, since it is neither a Power nor an Habit, as it
is easy to be judged. In fine, If Constancy is a Virtue, it must needs have a
Passion which serves for its subject, and which makes, if we may so speak, the
body and the substance of this action; for Virtue, to speak properly, is but an
order and a rule which Reason gives to the actions and motions of the Soul: So
that we must suppose motions before they can be regulated; and these Motions
are Passions, which for that cause are called the substance of Virtues.
Constancy being then a Virtue, ought to have a Passion to work upon, which is
no other but that which we have spoken of, for the reasons already declared.

Now although we ought not to think it strange that both of them bear the same
name, since the word Boldness is common both to the Passion and to the Virtue;
yet if after all these reasons any shall think its to profane the name of
Constancy to assign it to a Passion, I will not oppose him; he may if he please
choose that of Strength of Courage, because the Soul stiffens it self to resist
the ill which assaults it, as shall be seen in the following Discourse. Let Us
therefore no longer stop at words, but examine the things in that order which
we have proposed.

You must not think to meet here with an insolent and an ambitious Passion
which like Love or Boldness would be Queen and Mistress of the rest. The Elegy
of Constancy.
She is too generous to use flatteries and baseness, which the one employs to
establish its power; and she is too modest to subject her Companions by force
and violence as Boldness does; what advantage soever she has over them, she
yields them the precedence without pretending to command, she contents her self
not to obey them. And without marching at the head of the Passions, it is
sufficient for her to be a follower of the Virtues.

In effect, it is she which maintains and preserves them, it is she which makes
them overcome, and which crowns them; and he who would more nearly examine what
she does for them, might boldly say, that if she brings them not forth, yet at
least she accomplisheth them, and renders them worthy of the names they bear,
and of the recompense they expect; and truly a virtue which yields and keeps
not firm, which gives up its arms after the first fight, or flies after the
victory, is an imperfect Virtue. And the perfection which it wants can be added
unto it by nothing but Constancy, which alone can consummate commenced virtues,
and make them deserve the glory they aspire unto.

But I say further, that to examine them from their birth, we may see that they
wholly owe it unto her, and that after reason has conceived them, it is she
that brings them forth, which makes them operate, and makes them subsist. For
it is certain, that what service soever Virtue draws from the Passions, they are
the only enemies which resist her; they alone form those difficulties which
cross her, and it is none but they which are capable to stifle her when she
comes to light, and to destroy her when she is in her greatest strength.
Without doubt, were there no Passions, Virtue would appear in the Soul like a
pure light which would have neither vapors nor clouds to overcome. It would be
a Star which would direct its course toward good without any let, and which
would conduct us to felicity without trouble or disquiet. We should no longer
speak of those vices and crimes, but as of such monsters as were invented by
Fables; and all that great crowd of ills, which at every moment disturbs the
tranquillity of life, would be unknown or impotent; at least if it yet caused
any disorders, we should not rescent them, since it is Fear and Grief only
which render them sensible.

But as it is a necessity imposed on Virtue to be born and dwell with its
enemies; we must also confess that if any thing can defend it from their
violence, and stop those endeavors whereby they seek to oppose it; certainly,
it is she alone to whom it is obliged both for its birth and preservation, and to
whom its obliged for all the good which happens unto it. Now it is Constancy
alone which deserves this glory, since it is she only that is capable of
resisting the Passions, stopping those passages whereby they might enter upon
the Soul, and which dissipateth them after they are gotten in.

And truly its herein we are to admire the providence of Nature, who in the
general revolt wherein she sees all these seditions have engaged themselves
against reason, does like a wise Politian, who casts division amongst the
Rebels, who gains the most powerful, and makes use of their forces to destroy
their own Confederates: For she makes Constancy quit the party of the
rebellion, and inspires her with that noble perfidiousness, which causes her
to betray her Accomplices; in a word, she arms one Passion against all the
Passions, against all Vices, and against all ills; and this was the only
expedient to yield unto Reason that Empire which belonged unto it, and to bring
it to the enjoyment of those Virtues and of that Felicity which it was destined
unto: For being she could perform no action without the help of the Passions,
had she been abandoned of them all, she must have remained always idle; and it
was necessary that some one of them should be faithful upon this occasion, and
that it ought to succor it in a design wherein it meets with such great
obstacles and such powerful adversaries. Now it will be nothing difficult to
persuade that she whom we have spoken of, is only one responsible in this
expectation, if we consider that all her nature and essence consists in that
stability which the Soul gives herself; and that even as water stops and loses
its motion when it freezeth, so also when the Soul settles it self, and that
all its motions cease, that those Passions wherewith she was agitated,
dissipate themselves, and the ills which assaulted her can no longer make any
impression on her.

And indeed, she is in the condition of a rock which remains immovable against
the violence of the winds, waves and tempests; she cannot then be moved,
neither by the impetuosity of desire, nor by the over-slowings of lusts, nor
with the storms of Fortune. She has an impenetrable Hardness against scorn,
against offenses, and against injuries; and although she is assaulted with
sickness and grief, we may say that they are floods which indeed by degrees
undermine the shore, but which can never overturn her, nor make her change
place.

So that these advantages being not different from those which accompany
Wisdom, we must necessarily confess, that Constancy is this same Wisdom, or
that it is its general and inseparable instrument; and that amongst the
Passions some are common to all Creatures, others proper to Men, but that this
is only peculiar to the Wise; for it is she has formed all the Philosophers of
Antiquity, which in all Ages has produced so many wonderful examples of
Fidelity, of Temperance, and of greatness of Courage; which has made Religion
triumph over Vices and Tyrants. Finally, which has made the Virtues reign on
Earth, and which has crowned them in Heaven.

Yet we must confess that she owes all the glory of these fair actions to the
councels of Reason; and were she not enlightened with its light, she would
continue in that blindness wherein all the rest of the Passions are born, and
cast the Soul into those precipices whereunto her own evil inclinations
commonly move her: When this wise Guide indeed forsakes her, she takes part
with Vices and Crimes, and renders them the same service she is obliged to
render to the Virtues; for she upholds them, and strengthens them, she
compleats and consummates their malice; and all the duration they have is but
an effect of the unhappy perseverance which she affords their ill designs. Its
she that locks up the Heart from all the persuasions of Prudence, from all the
warnings of Heaven, from all the sentiments of Nature, which hardens it, and
renders it immovable against all their endeavors, and inspiring it with
opinionacy in its resolutions, with Hardness of heart toward the miseries of
others, and with Obstinacy in all ill, it renders a man unworthy of civil
society, and an enemy to God, to men and to himself.

But we need say no more of it, nor by a long invective dishonor a Passion
which is so useful and necessary to Wisdom, and which has caused no disorders
in the World but through the ill use which men have made thereof. Let Us pursue
our design, and content our selves here to represent those Characters which she
uses to imprint in the Soul, and on the Body of those who are sensible of it.

Although at first this design ought to be neither long nor difficult in the
execution, The description of a Constant man
and that this Passion making no change of countenance, and being not
susceptible of that variety which is observable in the rest, so that we need
but one figure, and as we may say but one simple touch to draw this Picture;
yet besides that it is difficult to express any motion, and that that is one of
the most secret and most hid which is in the Soul: There are so many other
things which are to be brought into the piece, that it is impossible but the
work must be greater and more painful then any man could think. In effect, we
must here represent shipwracks and precipices, poverty, exile, and slavery; the
loss of honor, of parents, of Friends; all what grief, and the most violent
sicknesses; all what tortures, and the most cruel torments; all what despair
and death have that is frightful and most hideous; and what is yet more
formidable, all what the charms of Voluptuousness and Ambition have of most
deceiving: For to conclude, these are the principal enemies which arm
themselves against Constancy, which assault it and endeavor to overcome it.

Let Us therefore fancy a man animated with this Passion, and see what
sentiments he may have at the approach of such powerful adversaries. Certainly,
it is in these encounters that the Soul forms its most noble designs, and takes
the most generous resolutions which it is capable of; everywhere else where she
expects and affronts ill, she thinks to be stronger and more powerful then it,
she still hopes for the Victory, and never fights, but she is upheld by some
stronger forces; but here she has an enemy in front who appears invincible,
whom she dare not assault, and against whom she alone must resist, and that
without any other help.

In the mean time, she sees him come without fear, and without astonishment;
she considers him without trouble and without disquiet, and if she pretend not
to conquer him, she at least assures herself that she shall not be overcome; as
knowing that the strongest waves break themselves against the rocks, and that
the banks hinder the overflowings of the most impetuous Rivers; she promises
herself the same success from her resistance, and believes that the strength of
her Courage will break off the violence of the ills, and stop the course of all
those mischiefs which come pouring upon her. In her opinion there is no effort
strong enough to make her yield; all the Elements would change place, without
making her change her station; and were it possible the mass of the Heavens
should break, she imagines that she could sustain its ruins without being
over-turned.

But what is more wonderful, is, that she often mistrusts her forces, and sees
well enough that her resistance will be useless, and her loss inevitable.
Neither is this capable to make her change her resolution; although even she
might escape the danger by flight, she remains firm and expects the shock of
the enemy, with the same tranquillity and with the same confidence, as if she
were sure of the Victory. She also believes that a man is never overcome, if he
loses not his heart, if he delivers not up his arms; that yielding to force,
we yield not to honor of the Battle; and that in that of Constancy, we have
always this advantage, To triumph over the Conqueror.

She in pursuit hereof represents to herself the glory which so many great
Courages have acquired in torments and in punishments; the Crowns which they
have deserved in the most difficult proofs of patience, and the immortal renown
of such fair examples, make her hope, if she can but constantly suffer the ills
which threaten her; with this thought she encourages her self, and without
hearing those reasons which might make her yield, she puts herself in a
condition to receive the enemy, and vigorously to maintain his assaults.

Behold her now grappling with him; behold her either assaulted with the
violence of grief, or by the outrages of Fortune, or by the darts of Calumny:
as if she were insensible of all their blows, she neither troubles herself to
fly from them, or to repel them; and although she be cruelly wounded by them,
she suffers not so much as a complaint nor a threat to come from her, which
might make the least resentment of hers appear. She sees her body torn with
tortures or with sickness, as if it did not truly belong unto her, or in
effect, were but her Garment: She considers the loss of her Goods as a debt she
repays Fortune, and thinks that an injury is ill only in the opinion of him
that suffers it, and can truly offend only him that does it.

Whilst by these reasons she seeks to sweeten her ills, they forbear not
incessantly to perplex her with fresh pangs, which sometimes are so violent
that she cannot save the Body from succumbing under their violence, and from
betraying its sensibleness by its weakness, and by that languor which appalls
it. But for her own part, instead of growing weaker she becomes more strong and
vigorous; and as the earth strengthens it self, when its beaten, we may say,
that the blows of grief harden her and render her impenetrable against all its
attaints; Grief it self, which seems to be the inseparable companion of
adversity and misfortune, cannot reach her; at least it never rises to that
high Region where she forms her designs, and where she entertains a calm and a
continual serenity. It Is from thence she securely beholds the storms and the
tempests which agitate the inferior parts, the troubles and sufferings whereof
she with pleasure often considers and sheds abroad a cheerfulness in the
complaints and tears which the rigor of her ill often extorts from her Mouth
and Eyes.

And truly there is cause of astonishment to see her so calm in the midst of
chains and fire, in the midst of public desolations, in the midst of so many
things, the thought of which alone produces horror and terror; but that in
these encounters she should witness joy, that she should bless her persecutors,
and that she should speak her pains to be pleasing and glorious, it is a thing
which seems to combat Reason and Nature, and which is almost unconceivable: We
must also confess that this is the last effort of Constancy, and that she then
ought to be upheld by some great and noble Passion, to produce some great and
wonderful effect: For commonly griefs and misfortunes use to convey into the
strongest and most resolute Soul I know not what kind of bitterness which
renders it pecuish and wary, which at every instant forces from it some secret
complaints, and at length bereaves it of its strength, at least of that ardor
and vivacity which it had at first.

It Is then there that the Soul employs Constancy against Adversaries: It Is thus
she defends herself from those ills which assault her with open force. Let Us
now see what she does against those which under the appearance of good seek to
seduce her, which to betray her, flatter her; and to overcome her, use no other
violence but only those of enticements and charms. I mean Voluptuousness and
Ambition, and all those unjust desires which continually present themselves
unto her, which at every moment provoke and solicit her, and which are the
more to be feared, the Senses keeping intelligence with them, and forasmuch as
they promise felicity to those who suffer themselves to be overcome by their
allurements.

We must certainly confess that she uses no other arms to defend herself
against such dangerous enemies, but only those which Constancy in these
encounters affords her; she knows that to render their plots and their forces
useless, she needs only to keep herself stiff and firm; and that in that
condition she cannot be mollified with Pleasures, nor lifted up with the wind
of Honor, nor carried away by the hope of those goods which she has not; she
knows that Pleasure is ever accompanied with Repentance, that Ambition never
walks but on precipices, and that Desire is not so much a sign as it is the
cause of Poverty. Moreover she knows that all the contentment, and all the good
fortune which those deceivers promise are but impoisoned sweets which corrupt
Health and Reason, and destroy the quiet of the Mind, and the tranquillity of
Life.

On such like Reasons being resolved to hold out against them, she puts herself
upon her guard, and shuts up all the avenues by which they might surprise her
affections; she turns her eyes from the most pleasing objects; she shuts her
ears to the most charming words and persuasions; she flies the approach of all
those things which might tickle or seduce the sense; For it is certain, that she
expects not such kind of enemies in a steadfast posture, and that she receives
them not cheerfully, as she does the rest. She commonly defends herself from
these by a wise retreat; and when she cannot shun their encounter, she puts on
a certain disdainful severity, which checks them, and renders their caresses
vain, and their flatteries of no use. We may even say, that as there are things
which instead of being molified, harden themselves by heat, it seems that the
ardor of these Passions produces the same effect in her, and that that
pleasure which melts and liquifies hearts, hardens hers. She becomes indeed as
if she were stupid toward all those things which are the most desirable, and
the most delicious in the world; the charms of Beauty, the splendour of Riches,
move her not; Praise and Glory have no allurements for her; but quite contrary
to that unhappy man who is feigned to be environed with goods, which fly from
him when he seeks to enjoy them, she appears in the midst of delights, which
she flies as soon as they become sensible. If it happen that the Senses betray
her, and that unknown to her, they taste the poison which they present them
withal, she chastises them by the grief which she causes them to suffer; and
for fear least she should herself be infected, she keeps herself pecuish and
austere, and takes a certain disgust of all sweets, and against all the
enticements of Pleasure. It Is thus also that she preserves herself from that
Pride and Vanity wherewith Prosperity is commonly puffed up, from the disquiet
and impatience which move violent desires, from those languors and transports
which follow irregular contentments. In fine it is thus, she maintains herself
in so just a temper, which renders her modest in good Fortune, severe in
Pleasure, content in Necessity, and every way equal and like herself. These are
the principal touches which Constancy imprints in the Soul: we must now observe
those which she makes on the Face and on the other parts of the Body. But we
may at first say that they are so like those which Boldness forms thereon, that
did we know them no other ways but as two Sister Germans, we might easily by
the likeness of their lineaments judge, that they are of the same family, or at
least that they both have the same inclinations.

For as soon as ill presents it self to a Constant man, he expects it with the
same Eye, with the same Front, and in the same posture as if he were ready to
assault and combat it; his look is firm and assured, his Countenance changes
not color, and without stirring his Brows or Lids, he coldly considers the
danger which threatens him, and seems to brave with a resolved mind the
misfortune it self.

You must not expect from him complaints of injuries, nor any of those
exclamations wherewith Fear and Anger unprofitably beat the Air. Silence
commonly shuts his mouth; and if he is obliged to speak, its with a tone of
Voice which remarks the tranquillity of his Mind, and the strength of his
Courage; for his voice is neither weak nor vehement, slow nor impetuous, it is
strong, equal, and settled; and it is upheld with a certain majestical accent
which mixeth respect and admiration with the fear we have to see him so near
danger. He holds up his Head without impudence; his port is noble without
Pride; his pace is grave without Haughtiness; and in all his actions there
appears a generous coldness, and a modest confidence.

But it is not only before the assault that he appears thus resolved; he
carries the same air and the same assurance into danger and into fight. When he
is first pressed by the enemy, he stiffens his Nerves, he holds his Breath, and
gathering himself up in himself, he confirms and settles himself in his
posture. In this condition, without going back, he beats all assaults which are
made against him; he feels fire and sword fall on him without looking pale; he
sees his blood run from all parts without astonishment; and finds his Body
wounded with wounds, and torn in pieces without complaining, and without so
much as wrinkling his Brow. If sometimes any man makes him change color, cast
forth cries, or turn up his looks, it passes so suddenly that we may easily
judge, that the violence of the ill surprised him, and that it has robbed from
him, if we may so speak, those motions from his Constancy. For at the same time
he suppresseth his complaints and his sighs; he devoureth his grief, and
bringing back a calm in his Countenance with a smile, and with the sweet looks
of his eyes he does not only reprehend his first resolve, but makes it appear
more gay and better pleased. In fine, if he perceive the strength of his Body
forsake him, and that he must succumb under the effort of the enemy which
assaults him, in falling he makes it appear that his Courage is not cast down;
that by his fall he raises up himself, and that it is not he that yields, but
his ill Fortune.

For he suffers all the insolency of the Victor without murmuring or so much as
moving. He sees those blows come without being frighted, which will be the loss
of his life, and he is already sensible of death, yet still has a care to
compose his Countenance, and to leave on his dying body the remains of his
Constancy.

But it is time to enquire the cause of all these effects; neither have we any
thing more to say of those Characters which this Passion imprints on the body,
when she resists those pleasing and deceitful ills of which we have spoken,
since she adds nothing to her settled Countenance but severity, disdain, and
frowardness wherewith she arms herself against their Allurements, and that we
have already observed them in the first figures of this Picture. Let Us now
examine what its nature is, since its the source whence all these effects ought
to take their original.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of Constancy, or strength of Courage.
ALthough at our entrance into this Discourse, Why this Passion is necessary.
we have made the nature of this Passion appear, having been obliged to
distinguish it from Boldness, to observe the difference of its motions, and the
end which the Appetite proposes it self; yet we must say that we have made
therein but an imperfect draught wherein we have only traced out the most
remarkable parts, and the grossest lineaments, and that now we must add the
last touches, and those colors which were wanting thereunto.

For which purpose we must again betake our selves to those principles which we
have established in the precedent Discourses, and say, that Nature has
inspired in every thing the care of its own preservation, having taught them to
seek what is fit, and to fly what was hurtful, and to combat what was
contrary to them; that the Soul as the most noble and the most excellent, has
this knowledge, and these inclinations most strong and most perfect: And that
all those Passions wherewith she is continually agitated; are the means she
uses to attain those ends; some of them being appointed to pursue good, others
to fly ill, and others to assault it; That in fine she flies or assaults ills
according as she believes herself weaker or stronger then they; and that Fear,
Timerousness, and Despair are signs of Weakness; as Hope, Boldness and Anger
are effects of Power.

But because this division is grounded on more and less, and that amongst these
two there is ever a middle, which is equality: It Is not sufficient to have
shown that the Soul is stronger and weaker then the Evil. We must yet add, that
their forces may be equal; so that if she ought to fly when she is the weaker,
and assault when she is the stronger, of necessity when their strengths are
equal, and consequently being neither to fly nor assault, she must remain
simply on the defensive, and that without yiedling to the end eavors of the
enemy, and without also undertaking any thing against him, she must content her
self only to resist. It must needs, I say, be, that as flying she retires with
precipitation, and that she darts herself forth with impetuosity when she
assaults, she must also stop and keep herself stiff when she intends only to
resist; and this stiffening having resistance only for its motive, and
proceeding from the equality we have now spoken of, it must make all the Nature
and Essence of this Passion, there being no other which this motion in all
circumstances befits.

But before we examine more particularly the manner wherewith the Soul is then
agitated, Objections to show that Constancy is formed with this equality of
strength.
we must clear a difficulty which arises from those propositions which we have
established; for there is great reason for us to doubt, That equality of forces
should be the principle of this Passion, since it is certain, she often forms it
when the Soul is stronger or weaker then those ills which assault her. How many
have we seen of those noble Courages who have opposed enemies far more powerful
then themselves, who have been firm and resolute in those dangers, wherein
their loss was certain, and who have constantly suffered the greatest
imaginable ills without hope, even without having a mind to shun them? On the
contrary, is it not an ordinary effect of Magnanimity not to employ all ones
forces against a weak enemy, and to oppose against him a man's own endeavors,
only without fighting with him, or pretending to a Victory, whereby he might
gain honor? The Soul then may be moved with Constancy at the encounter of these
ills which she esteems weaker or stronger then herself; and therefore the
foundation on which we thought to have so well established this Passion, cannot
sustain it self, and threatens the ruin of all the superstructure.

Answer to the first Objection.
To answer to such strong Objections, we must first observe, that the opinion
which the Soul has of her forces is not essential to the Passions, but an
action of Judgment, and not of the Appetite. And that it only is instead of a
natural condition toward their production, in that general order which Nature
has prescribed those Powers; but forasmuch as this order is often changed in
particulars, it also happens, that when the Passions form themselves, this
condition is often wanting as all other things which are strangers to them, and
enter not into their essence.

Now this general order will have the sensitive Appetite immediately conducted
by the imagination, as by a light which is proper and necessary unto it, and
destinated to show it all what it ought to do. And as she would in vain propose
unto it to do any thing, unless she thought it were in its power, these forces
must necessarily be known unto it, and she must know whether they are great
enough to oppose those difficulties which present themselves.

So that if the Faculties be not put out of that road which naturally they
ought to keep, the Appetite could never form any motion, but the imagination
must first have compared her strength with the difficulties; but that she must
have thought her self stronger then them, when she ordains them to combat
them; but that she must have believed she was weaker when she counsels us to
fly them; and finally, but that she must have judged that at least her forces
are equal with theirs, when she obliges it to expect or to resist them. For it
sometimes happens that she thinks herself stronger, and yet she will not
assault, whether it be because she slights the enemies weakness, or because
natural Justice forbids her to undertake too unequal a Combat, as has been
showed in the Discourse of Boldness. However it be, that order which we have
now remarked is ever observed in Beasts, in whom these two Faculties absolutely
command, and are not hindered in their Functions by any superior Power which
they are subject to. But it is not so with Man, in whom Reason and Will ought
to govern the sensitive Appetite, and cause it to move as it pleases them; for
it often happens that these Faculties, without having respect to those motives
which the imagination proposes to the Appetite, oblige him to fly when he
might assault or defend himself, and to fight and resist when he ought to
betake himself to flight: It is not but that Reason sees that the Combat and
the resistance which she causes the inferior part to make, are uselsst to
overcome those difficulties, or to stop their course. But as unprofitable as
they are for these particular motives, they serve for others, which it judges
more noble and more useful then those. And the vain endeavors which it then
moves in the Appetite, are the means which it employs to attain the proposed
end. Thus she often assaults an enemy, when she knows not very well who shall
be overcome. But it is only to acquire honor and glory wherewith generous
actions are rewarded; she suffers courageously grief, torments and death it
self, not to avoid the effect which she believes inevitable, but to merit those
Crowns which Heaven and Earth give unto Constancy. In a word, there are diverse
motives which may engage her in those designs, and which are good or ill,
according as she is enlightened with false or true light. But it is still
certain, that in all these encounters she goes against the general order which
ought to regulate the motions of the inferor part, and which she herself uses
to follow in her ordinary actions, there being nothing more reasonable then to
fly when we are weakest, to assault when strongest, and to resist upon equal
terms.

But it is not enough to know that the Soul resists; Why Constancy resists ill.
we must see what the end is of this resistance, and what profit she gets
thereby; for it seems as if it would be more advantageous for her to fly those
ills which seem invincible, then to expose herself to its violence, and suffer
those efforts which may give her, if not much discommodity, yet at least much
trouble, considering also her natural aversion toward it, its principal effect
being to put it by, and estrange it from her presence, she ought to follow the
motion of this Passion, and not expect an enemy she cannot overcome.

Did Reason only engage her to this resistance, it were easy to discover the
advantages she pretends to make; those motives of honor and glory which she
commonly proposes in those encounters, would evidently make it appear, that
she aspires to those noble rewards, and that those are the fruits which her
Courage pretends to gather; but because these motives are extraordinary, and
unknown to the fancy, as has been shown, that they are not in beasts; and that
in our selves Reason does not always force the inferior part, but suffers it to
go its common road; we must seek some other end proper and natural unto it, and
see what she pretends unto, when she takes a resolution to resist those ills
which assault her.

To speak to the purpose, it is not so easy to be discovered as some may think.
And we must confess, that that light which enlightens the Soul in those
occasions, is of the rank of those which Nature sheds abroad in all those
things, which without knowing, know whereto they ought to tend, and which
without perceiving it moves to their end. The Soul indeed knows that she ought
to assault ill, and that she ought to overcome it; that she ought to resist it,
and that she must oppose violence; but she knows not why; and the understanding
it self, which often does the same actions, is not always advised of the true
motion which made it undertake them.

Upon this ground we may say, that as the Soul assaults her enemy out of hope
to overcome him, and that she seeks to overcome him; to take from him the power
of doing ill; that she also resists him not to take away his power, but only
to stop the course thereof, and hinder it from producing its effect; that the
advantage she pretends to make from this hinderance, is to retard her own loss
as long as she resists; or to cause the enemy to lose its will to contuinue his
assaults, letting of him know that with the strength she has, she cannot be
overcome. And last of all, to shun the danger wherein she would be engaged, did
she but yield or take flight; for she can never slye but she must forsake and
quite abandon her Strength and Courage, and to augment those of her enemy, or
at least give him freedom to do all the ill he is capable of.

In effect, did we not oppose grief, fear, and other evils which are in us,
they would overflow all the parts of the soul, and would bring her to languish
and to despair: Did we not constantly suffer injuries, adversities, and other
mischiefs which come from without the imagination, seeing no means whereby to
stop their course, would fancy them greater then they are, and make them
always appear extreme and insufferable; did we not even sometimes stiffen under
the burden of our sufferings, we should be oppressed by their weight; and those
parts which yielded to the violence thereof, falling on those which upheld
them, would batter them by their fall, and fill them with grief. In a word,
whatsoever ill the Soul would fly, she is in the same danger that a Soldier
casts himself into who falls before his enemy, or that a whole Army incurs when
it flies the sight of a Conqueror, who comes pouring down upon it.

Let Us then conclude, that the motive which she proposes in Boldness, is to
bereave the enemy of the power of doing ill, that in Constancy she only
suspends its effect, and that in Fear she seeks to shun it by flight. Now as
there is more security to have no enemy, then to have one who does harm us; and
neither is this so much to be feared as one who puts himself in posture to do
it: So it is also true, that the Soul is more secure in Boldness which destroys
ill, then in Constancy which hinders only its effect: As for the same reason,
she ever thinks to fight before she thinks of her own defense, and never
resolves to fly but at her greatest extremity, that being her worst condition
and the saddest posture she can be reduced unto, leaving the enemy with full
power and liberty to work her ruin.

The soul then resists the ills which assault her, Why Constancy resists ill.
to stop the course of them; Let Us now see how she resists them. For we
question not here that exterior resistance, which is performed by the action of
the parts which oppose themselves against the efforts of those things which
might harm them. Besides that, there ate ills, against which the motions of the
Soul would in vain employ this resistance, as those which are purely spiritual
are; for it resists not afflictions by the opposition of corporal forces, but
by her own proper strength. Besides that, the motions of the Appetite do not
always descend to the organs, whether it be because they are restrained by
Reason, or because they are sometimes formed so quickly, and move so readily
that it is impossible they should have time to communicate themselves with the
Body. It Is certain that all these exterior motions, which are observed in the
Passions, are the effects and sequels of those which are formed within the
Soul; so that if the Body resist outwardly, the Soul also must within herself
perform the same action, or to speak it better, she must of herself resist
before she can resist by the Bodies means. So that we are obliged to seek in
what manner she makes this secret and inward resistance, which she employs
against spiritual ills and which is the source and cause of that which she
causes to be made in the organs. This will be nothing difficult, having so
often shown that the agitations of the body are the images and the Characters
of those which are made in the Appetite; that there is some relation and some
resemblance betwixt them; and that the Soul exciting both of them, its very
likely she would render them as uniform as she can.

Now we experiment it in our selves, that when we must make an outward
resistance against a puissant Adversary, we stop and remain firm; and to
fortify our selves against his assaults, we stiffen our Muscles and our
Nerves, and there is no part about us which becomes not harder, and more solid
by the effort which we give our selves: Somewhat therefore like this must be
done in the Soul, and consequently she must necessarily stop and confirm
herself, that gathering her forces together she must stiffen herself in
herself: In a word, she must take, as it were, a kind of a consistence, which
yields not easily to the shock and assault of the enemy. The stiffening of the
Soul stops the course of ill, and how.


We are now to see how she can stiffen herself, and of what nature this
Firmness is, which she makes use of in this occasion; but because this has
been already done in the Discourse of Hope, and that in that place the Reader
may find wherewith to satisfy his curiosity, It will be sufficient to examine
here what it is that makes this stifness, and whether it be a means able to
stop the course and violence of the ills which assault the soul.

For it seems at first, that this firmness serves to this purpose only but in
corporal things, which being unable to penetrate one another are constrained to
stop when they meet with any which yields not to their motion; so that in
stiffening the Body, and keeping of it firm, we sustain the weight of a
burden, we break the current of a wave and of a torrent; we stop the
impetuosity of an enemy which presses upon us, and would overthrow us.

But in those things which have no Bodies, as the Will and Appetite, the
stifness which either of them takes, cannot in all likelihood stop the course
nor the motion of ill, whether corporal or spiritual, the reason of penetration
having no place in those things. In effect, let the soul stiffen and strengthen
it self as much as she can, she cannot stop the least corporal motion, unless
she also stiffen the parts and the organs of the Body she animates. And if she
assaults those ills which are truly or any way spiritual, such as are injuries,
mishaps, afflictions, and the like; this stiffening we have spoken of seems to
be a means altogether useless to resist it.

Let Us first therefore say, Two forts of Firmness.
that there is two sorts of Firmness; the one which proceeds from material
qualities, and is only to be found in hard and solid Bodies; the other comes
from the impetuosity of the motion, and is common to all things which move,
whether corporal or spiritual. Thus Water, Air, and Wind which are of a fluid
nature, and yield easily, acquire a firmness by their agitation, which stops
the most solid Bodies. Thus Angels, Demons, and all separated substances
restrain one the other, according as their motions are more powerful, as we
have elsewhere manifested it. Now the Firmness which the Appetite has is of
this kind; for it proceeds from the only motion it makes in stiffening it
self, even as the members become firm by the tonick motion, of which we have
spoken in the Discourse of Hope. And as by the first stiffening the bodies
resist, because they are hard and impenetrable; so also by the latter, all
other things resist by reason of the motion which they make, which stops what
it encounters, and is incompatible with it. So that the Appetite resists ills,
by making a contrary to what they make.

But because there are some which are corporeal, and other spiritual; it is
certain, that the Firmness which this part of the soul takes in stiffening it
self, cannot of it self alone stop corporal motions, how weak soever they are,
but necessarily the exterior organs must contribute thereunto, and that if it
be formed without them, it would prove a vain and useless violence, and an
imperfect motion, which would not move to that end which Nature had prescribed
it. For she has afforded the Appetite the power to stiffen it self at the
encounter of corporal and sensible ills, but only to inspire the same motion
in those Faculties which are under its direction, and cause the organs to make
that resistance, which is necessary in those encounters.

As for those ills which truly, or in some manner are spiritual, we must
consider whether they have motion, as Grief, Fear, and the rest of the
Passions; for it is certain, that these may be stopped and restrained by the
resistance only which the Appetite makes by stiffening it self in it self.
Forasmuch as water loses its rapidity, and even its fluidity when it settles
and congeals; so when the Appetite stiffens it self, the motions of the rest of
the Passions must cease or diminish. If the Soul indeed shut it self up in
Grief, if it dilate it self in Joy, if it retire it self in Fear, we need not
doubt but Constancy foreseeing these motions, or arriving afterward must needs
hinder or restrain them, bereaving the Appetite of the liberty or facility of
moving it self by that stifness which she imprints in it.

But when the ills are without motion, as injuries, exiles, poverty, in a word,
all those which are not in the rank of Passions, we cannot say that the
Appetite properly and immediately resists them; for that it cannot resist those
things which move not, as has been said; consequently those ills must then
have had some motion; but it resists them only by opposing it self to those
Passions which they usually cause. Truly he that constantly suffers Poverty,
does not properly resist Poverty, but the grief, the impatience, the
peevishness which follows after it. And he that suffers death with a courage,
cannot truly resist death, since it as yet is not, but only Fear, Grief and
Despair which the image of so frightful an ill raises up in the Soul. Neither
are all these things Ills in effect, but only as we know that they are so;
forasmuch as a Man who thinks not himself poor suffers not the Ills of Poverty;
and that there are many who effectually are so, and who have the knowledge of
it, yet place it not in the rank of Evils. So that ill is not ill but from the
knowledge and the resentment we have of it. Now the knowledge is no true
motion, there being no part of the Soul which moves but the Appetite, and
therefore there is no resistance to be made against ill, when it continues in
the Knowledge, but only when it descends in the Appetitive part, where it
forms those Passions which the Soul may resist, as has been said.

Let Us return to our former Discourse, and say, That after having cleared all
those dfficulties, it seems as if nothing could hinder us from defining
Constancy to be a motion of the Appetite, whereby the Soul settles and stiffens
herself in herself, to resist those ills which assault her.

But this definition raises new doubts; Wherein Hope and Constancy consist.
for if the Soul settle and stiffen it self in hope to resist difficulties; and
if this stiffening is the difference of the motion which distinguishes this
Passion from the rest, as has been said; Constancy, to which we give the same
definition, is nothing different from Hope, or that neither of them are well
defined. If indeed we ought to consider in the Passions nothing but the simple
agitation which the Appetite gives it self, this consequence certainly were
infallible; but it is not the only thing which specifies the Passion; there is
another motive which regulates this motion, which is as it were the form of it,
and restrains it to such or such a species. So that according as the corporal
motions are different the one from the other, by the difference of the term and
end which they tend unto; those of the Soul are diversified by the several
motives she proposes to herself. So we have observed, that she equally darted
herself forth in Desire and in Boldness, and that notwithstanding she suffered
two different Passions; forasmuch as in the one she darted herself forth
toward the good, that she might draw near it; and that in the other she casts
herself forth against ill, that she might assault and combat it. We may also
say, that in Hope and in Constancy she moves after the same manner; that she
stiffens herself in both to resist the difficulties; but that there are
different motives which distinguish them from one the other. For in Hope she
stiffens herself not actually to resist difficulties, but only to put herself
in a condition to resist them, if it happen she be assaulted by them; Forasmuch
as she considers not the ill but by the way, as a thing far off, as an enemy
she can master; but in Constancy she stiffens herself effectually to resist it,
because it is present that assaults her, and seems invincible: So that we may
say, that the Soul in both these Passions, does like the General of an Army
when he passes through an enemies Country, and when he finds himself surprised
in some Ambuscado; in the one being doubtful of meeting the enemy, he marches
in good order, he keeps his guards, and puts himself in posture of resistance
if he should be assaulted; in the other he finds himself engaged amongst them
before he was aware of them; and of necessity, unless he will fly, he must
defend himself: Even so when the Soul hopes for any good, she marches toward
it through all those difficulties which environ it; and being in doubt of being
assaulted by them, she stands on her guard, fortifies and prepares her self to
fight if they should come and assault her; but in Constancy she finds herself
surprised by the ill, which perhaps she had never expected, had she but had
time to have discovered it; nor dares she assault it, being unable to do ought
else but oppose herself to its violence, and bear its effort.

Having cleared this doubt, another arises far more important, which also is
more difficult to resolve; for if the Soul stiffens herself in Constancy, and
if by its means she resists Grief, and Joy, and the rest of the Passions, the
Appetite must be agitated with contrary motions; and for example, opposing it
self to Joy, it must stiffen it self at the same time when it dilates it self,
How Constancy may be compatible with the rest of the Passions.
and consequently suffer two opposite and incompatible motions.

It seems very easy to answer this Objection, if it were true, That Beasts
were not able to resist their Passions, and that this kind of Constancy were
proper and peculiar unto Man, forasmuch as we might then say, that these
opposite motions would not be found together, and that resistance must be
formed in the Will, whilst the other Passion did agitate the inferior parts;
yet were it true that Man alone were capable of Constancy, as it is very
likely, the difficulty would still remain entire, since its certain that the
Will may resist its own motions; and that being susceptible of all the Passions
which touch at the Senses, and there being some of them particular which are
unknown to the inferior parts, such are Envy, Ambition and Impudence:
Neceslarily in opposing the Passion of Constancy, she must at the same time
suffer these contrary motions, even communicate them to the Appetite, when she
is constrained by its to resist those motions which agitate it.

Let Us first therefore say, that the Will and the Appetite may engage
themselves in so great a resistance, and settle and stiffen themselves so
strongly, that they will not be able to suffer any other motion; and that in
this condition if they have not hitherto received a Passion, they will
altogether hinder it from forming it self; or if it already be there, they will
stifle it and stop its course by the firmness which they have confirmed
themselves in. And it is certainly so, that a strong and magnanimous man so
streng thens his Courage against injuries, losses, and other accidents of
Fortune, that they make no impression in his Soul; or if he be surprised by
them, he presently stifles the resentment of vengeance, and of the affliction
which they give him. Now in this case it is certain, that the inconvenience
proposed is not to be feared, because that then the Will and the Appetite are
agitated with one motion only, and that they are moved by no other Passion but
this, Constancy and strength of Courage; but when they stiffen not themselves
so much, and that their Firmness is not so great but that they may also suffer
some other motion; then you must imagine that the same thing happens to them as
unto the Air, when it is agitated with contrary winds, or the Sea when it
suffers in some streights the encounter of several currents and the shock of
the encountering waves; for as in those Bodies which are fluid, and yield
easily, there are parts which make way through others, which are driven by a
contrary motion; It Is very likely that the Will and the Appetite have also
several parts which may be agitated with different motions, and that in some of
them the effusion which Joy requires, will be made whilst the rest stiffen
themselves to resist it; And this may easily be persuaded, if we consider that
the reasonable Soul and the intelligence which are altogether undivisible,
have, as it were, diverse parts, wherein we may receive different agitations.

Or we must say, that even as the impression of two opposite motions makes not
the Bodies which receive them move at the same time forwards and backwards; but
it confounds these two motions, so that if they are of an equal strength, the
body moves neither this way nor that, or else it moves but on that side whereto
the strongest compells it, but more weakly then it would have done, had it not
been kept back by the other: So when the Will and the Appetite are agitated
with any motion, if another contrary thereunto happen, a certain mixture is
made which weakens them both, and which also diminishes those Passions which
are formed of it. And indeed by experience we know, that Constancy weakens
affliction, but that this also abates very much of her force, and that from
time to time the Soul had need to reanimate its Courage, and to take up new
Arms for to continue her own defense, and not suffer herself to be overcome.

Now for the rest, The Will only can resist the Passions.
how strange soever it seem that we have placed the Will and the Appetite as
parallels to one another; yet it is certain that the inferior part alone is not
able to resist these Passions, but that the superior must inspire it with the
design and motion; otherwise the imagination which proposes to the Appetite
designs which it ought to take in its motions, must at the same time make unto
it two contrary propositions, the one to form the Passion, and the other to
stop it, which is above the power of a material and determinate Faculty; Nay,
even the Understanding how separate soever it be from matter, and how universal
soever it be, would never go so far, had she not those several stages, and
those several degrees which its known to have.

For those who have most curiously examined the nature thereof, confess that
there are, as it were, two parts in it; the one of which is low, next to the
sensitive Soul, and which by reason of that neighborhood suffers it self to be
easily carried away, and corrupted by the senses; the other is more pure and
raised up higher, which for that cause is called the top and height of the
Understanding, wherein God has effused the light of true Reason, and the seeds
of all the virtues; and it is that also which inspires the Will to resist those
Passions which the other has raised there, unknown or contrary to its advice;
thus these contrary designs whereof we have spoken, are not formed by one and
the same power, since that which serves for Constancy is formed in the highest
part of the Understanding, and that which serves to that Passion to which it is
to be opposed, is made in the lower region.

But we have marched too far on precipices and on thorns; The Soul resists not
ill but by Constancy
let us leave these byways, and these subjects, which with their difficulty
astonish the mind: Let Us only observe, that Constancy and strength of courage,
is alone the only means by which the Soul truly resists the Passions; for
although ordinary Philosophy proposes others unto us, as to divert our
thoughts from the object which raises them, to weaken their power by
Ratiocination, to fall upon other contrary Passions, and the like. Yet to
consider it well, therein there is no true resistance; they are rather flights
or fights then a simple defense. For when we will not consider the injury which
we receive, that is not to defend our selves from Anger, it is to fly it; even
as it is to assault it, when we employ a contrary Passion for to destroy it.

But yet to deserve the honor to have resisted them, in what way soever it
were, we must have had the design; for we may divert a man from being angry; we
may also inspire another Passion in him which may appease his fury, and fear
may fall upon him, which may take from him that fence of vengeance which he may
have conceived. And yet a man will not say that in these encounters he resists
his Passion, for that he had it not in his intention. It is even so with
Beasts, in whom one Passion may weaken and destroy another, in whom the same
Appetite may stiffen it self, and by its stiffening hinder it self from taking
the impression of another motion: No, they do not for that resist their
Passions, because besides that they cannot, as I have said, form the design of
it; it must needs be that they must be able to reflect on their actions,
against those maxims which we have elsewhere established. Let Us then conclude,
that Constancy is a motion of the Appetite, by which the Soul confirms and
stiffens it self in it self, with an intention to resist those ills which
assault it.

To examine now those ills, would be to fall into useless and impertinent
repetitions; for they are the same which move Boldness, and all what we have
said of them in that place, may be here applied. It will suffice if we remember
that under the notion of ill, we understand not only a pure privation, but
also the causes which produce it, and the incommodities which follow it; and
that the two latter are the true ills which the Soul resists. The differences
of Constancy.


We should have nothing more to say on this subject, did not the method which
we have followed in the rest of the Passions oblige us to observe the most
remarkable differences of Constancy, and chiefly those which may serve to
afford us a reason for those Characters which she imprints in the Soul and in
the Body. Let Us then say, that there are none essential, forasmuch as the
motion and the motive which cause all the essence of this Passion, are equally
to be found in all sorts of Constancy; as for those which we call accidental,
the most remarkable are drawn from the subject wherein she is found, or from
the object which raises it, or from the relation which it has with Reason:
For if we consider its subject, it has one which is in the Will, and another
which is in the sensitive Appotite: In respect of the Object there are diverse
sorts, according to the several sorts of ill which assault the Soul; but the
most considerable is that which resists the Passions, and that which opposes
it self to the violence and endeavors of exterior ills; this is common to all
Animals, and depends altogether on corporal strength, namely on those which are
most proper to suffer, such as are to be found in the melancholy temperature,
of which we have spoke in the Discourse of Boldness; the other is proper and
peculiar for Men, and principally for those which are most reasonable, because
it is commonly Reason which moves us to oppose the Passions, so that herein
there needs no other strength but that of the Soul; wherefore those whose
spirits are strong by nature or by study, are most susceptible of it: It Is
true, that the force of the mind depends often from the temperature; whence it
is that young people and Women whose spirits by reason of their constitution
are less strong, are troubled to resist their Passions.

Finally, There are some that are virtuous, others vicious, according as they
are conformable or contrary to right Reason, and so serve for the matter of
Virtues or Vices. In effect, Justice borrows from this Passion Firmness which
is necessary unto it to resist Love, Hatred and such other things as might
corrupt it; Temperance could not moderate the motions of the concupiscible
Appetite but by its means; and those Virtues which force produces by
resistance, such as are Patience, Constancy and Perseverance, are maintained
only by it. On the contrary, when she straggles out of the right way, and
abandons the conduct of Reason, there is no Vice which she does not encourage
and assist, because she alone resists those motions which the Conscience
inspires always in those who undertake or execute any evil design: But although
she may be found in all vicious actions, there are some wherein she appears
more, as in Temerity, in Hard-heartedness, and in Opiniastrecy, as we shall
hereafter make it appear.

Now all those terms wherewith we use to express Boldness, are also employed
for Constancy; For to say a man has suffered death Constantly, we use to say
he has suffered it with a Courage, with Resolution, with Assurance, without
fear, and without apprehension; and this happens from that Constancy is as it
were a demi Boldness, at least it is instead of it, when it has no cause to
fight, whether we despise the enemy, or because its forces are not sufficient
to assault it. Wherefore the same causes and the same preparatives which serve
the one do also serve the other. And certainly, after the Soul has found its
forces to be equal with those of the enemies which assaults her, she assures
herself that she shall not be conquered, and consequently she has no cause to
be afraid: In pursuit whereof she takes a Resolution to resist him, and for
that cause she raises her forces, that she may stiffen and confirm herself in
herself, and if it be necessary, she causes the same motion to be made in the
outward organs. As for Courage it is certain that it is in common with Boldness,
and with Constancy, for the Reasons alleged in the former Chapter.

CHAP. III. What the motion of the Spirits and of the Humors is in Constancy.
SInce the spirits follow the motions of the Soul, How the Spirits stiffen
themselves.
and that they always move as she moves; if it be true that she stiffens
herself in Constancy, they must needs also suffer the same agitation; so that
since we have treated of their stiffening in the Discourse of Hope, it seems
that we should have nothing more to say here, unless we should repeat those
things which we have there already examined. Yet besides that, the nature of
this motion is extremely hid, neither is the repetition of these obscure and
difficult things useless, and that it would be troublesome to seek far off what
ought to be here known; it is fit we should repeat a part of the things which we
have said, adding thereunto some new considerations for the better clearing of
the Subject.

We must first therefore remember that the Spirits stiffen themselves not by
congealing themselves, as it happens in some diseases, forasmuch as that would
render them immovable, and that this Passion hinders them not from being
carried to those places where they are necessary, nor restraining and taking
themselves up in themselves, for that they cannot restrain themselves but they
must retire inwardly, and then it must needs be that contrary to the nature of
Constancy the face must look pale and change color, the blood with which they
are mixed being forced to follow them, and as they do, to abandon the exterior
parts. They therefore stiffen themselves by the intermission of the Soul, which
subjects their parts to a certain order under which it restrains them, without
being more free or Vagabonds, as before they were. But to conceive this kind
of motion, which is extremely hid, and most difficult to be conceived, we must
make use of the same example, which we formerly made use of, and imagine that
it herein happens near upon as water which settles and congeals: For those
parts which before were fluid, being seized by the cold which is insinuated
amongst them, stop and become firm without confounding or mixing themselves
together: whilst all the body of the water so settled may be transported from
one place to another; and the current of Rivers often draws along with it great
pieces which tear down those Bridges and Dams which they meet in their way: But
with what rapidity soever they are then carried away, their parts change
neither the position nor the order which they keep amongst themselves without
penetrating; they amongst one another maintain themselves; and they remain firm
without confounding themselves, just as long time as the cold keeps them bound
and captivated.

The Soul does the same in the Spirits; she sheds and slides herself into all
their parts, and being she may place them as she pleases, she stops them in
what order she will, and lead them as it were by the hand to the place she
assigns them; so that how fluid soever they be, the one cannot be mixed with
the rest; and what agitation soever they suffer, they remain stable in that
rank wherein they are placed.

Now although this comparison may give us some knowledge of the condition,
wherein the spirits are in this Passion; yet it shows us not what is most
difficult to be known; for it supposes, and it is true, that the parts of
congealed water are no longer in motion, and we pretend that the spirits have
one which entertains this stiffening. We must therefore seek another example
which may make this truth appear, and have more relation to the Soul then cold
has, or any other sensible quality.

Without doubt, How the Angels stiffen Bodies.
this is to be found in the firmness which the Angels may give to the Air, and
to some other fluid bodies; for besides that they are substances which have a
great natural conformity with the Soul; it is certain, that they agitate their
Bodies after the same manner as she does the spirits, and that the stiffness
which she imprints on them excludes not motion, as it happens to congealed
water.

Let Us then suppose with the consent of the Schools, that a certain space of
Air be occupied by an Angel, and that the Wind or some other Body seeks to move
or penetrate it; it is a certain thing that the Angel may so stiffen it that he
may stop all its endeavors so that he cannot be shaken or penetrated by them.

To know now how he can impose this firmness, we must believe with the common
opinion of Philosophers, that the Angels have a motive virtue by which they
move themselves, and may also remove bodies, and transport them from one place
to another, as all profane and sacred Histories teach us. In effect it must
needs be, that those things which work the one on the other, must have some
proportion together, and there must be amongst them some common nature, which
must serve for the foundation and principle of their action: Now there is
nothing which can be common betwixt spiritual and corporeal substances, but the
motive Virtue, and the Motion; and therefore if they work the one on the other,
it must be by that means; which being so, the Angel cannot stiffen the Air but
by the motion which it imprints in all its parts, since it is that only which
gives him power over bodies: And to show that this is true, it is that he is
able to be present with all those parts without stiffening them; so that it is
necessary that he should raise up his vigor, and agitate them, thereby to
imprint on them this quality.

If any should say, that being thus moved, they must needs either be driven, be
drawn, be born, or be turned, because these are the several ways by which one
thing may be moved by another; and howsoever it may be done, they must
necessarily change place; so that herein not changing it, and remaining still
in the same situation, there is no probability to believe that they suffer any
motion.

We must answer, that it is true, that when the Angel imprints any motion in the
Bodies, he necessarily makes them change place unless there happen some
obstacle which hinders them: Now there is nothing which can hinder them but a
contrary motion, because there is nothing common betwixt them but motion, and
consequently if there be no contrary motion in the parts of the Air, it is
certain that the impression which the Angel will make on them will cause them
to change situation: If it happen that after having received it, that they
remain in the same condition they were, they must have had a contrary motion
which resists this impression, and which being of equal force with it, puts
them in aequilibrio, and keeps them as it were suspended without stiring from
one side to the other, wherein this firmness consists.

But what? continuing thus firm and stable, and not changing place, can they be
in motion? Certainly, We need not doubt it, since it is by motion that they
keep this situation, and that we cannot deny but that the impression of the
motion must be received therein, but that it agitates on them, and that she
resists not the first motion which they made, like as a great weight which we
hold lifted up or high; for although it still remain in the same place, yet
would it not forbear to have that motion which its weight gives it, and we
should be sensible of the effort it would make, falling and returning to its
center. Finally, as it were nothing probable to say that a thing which were
powerfully drawn on both sides by equal forces, should suffer no motion because
it would neither move on the one or on the other side; nor that the arm we
stiffen should be at rest, because it still remains in the same place:
Philosophers and Physicians being all agreed, that these are the most violent
motions which bodies can suffer; we must necessarily conclude that those parts
of the Air which are stiffened by contrary motions are in motion, although they
remain stable and change not their situation.

Let us now apply this Doctrine to our subject and say, that what the Angel
does in this encounter, the Soul does it on the spirits; for although she be
present to all their parts, yet she renders them not stiff; she must also move
them, and before that they also must be moved by a contrary motion; so that
being equally driven from one and another, they can neither advance nor go
back, but remain immovable betwixt these endeavors and violences. Now this firm
motion which they ought to have, may proceed from the Passions which agitate
them; Constancy seldom forming herself unless she be preceded by some other
Passion, or from the impetuosity they are driven unto in ships; for being very
moveable, she easily makes them straggle from one the other, as it happens to
all fluid Bodies, when they are agitated; and then the Soul giving them a
contrary motion proportionable to the first they had, they retain it, and stop
them in a certain order which they change not, unless one or the other cease.
But although in this condition they appear immovable because they remain in
the same situation, they forbear not to be in motion, as has been already
sufficiently demonstrated.

This is what the motion of the spirits is in Constancy. Why the Spirits
stiffen themselves.
Let Us now enquire the end and profit which the Soul proposes it self in this
firmness. We must not doubt but she desires them for her defense, and employs
them to resist those ills which assault her; but at first it seems as an
unprofitable means for that design: For if ills have no motion, as Exile,
Infamy, and Slavery, this stifness were against them to no purpose for the
reasons before alleged; and if they have any, either they are Passions which
are formed in the Appetite, whose motions the spirits cannot hinder, or they
are Bodies whose violence they cannot stop. In effect, what can this stiffening
do against the effort of Grief, against the force of a blow, against the weight
of a burden which falls on them? No, being so easily overcome as they are, it
seems that the Soul in vain uses them in these encounters, and that in vain
she opposes herself against such powerful things, against which she is not
able to resist. We must undoubtedly confess, that she often abuses herself in
the motion which she gives those organs, and that she does not always get those
succors which she ought to expect from them, and that she even sometimes
agitates them without any need. For when she resists the Passions, it is certain
that neither the stiffening of the Spirits, nor any other moti^ on of the Body
whatsoever, can be either necessary or useful unto her, since they are actions
proper unto her, who never goes out of herself, and so consequently is above
all the efforts of the corporal organs: Yet if she then cease not to agitate
them, it is from that that the Appetite which stirs up these motions, is a
blind power, which cannot judge when she ought to make use of those parts; and
they are destined to obey unto it; it rather in this occasion commands them out
of custom, then out of design; and they also are so obedient, that we may say
that at the least solicitation it makes them that they put themselves in a
readiness to assist it, and that even they seem to prevent its orders and
commands.

It is not so when the violence of corporal things is to be resisted; the
stifness of the spirits is therein so absolutely necessary, not only because
they are bodies which may work powerfully on those things of the same Nature;
but also because they are the first which receives the Souls commands, and
carries them to all the rest of the parts; for being employed in this
commission, they must needs take that esmotion which they ought to inspire in
the rest of the organs; and as an Ambassador ought to carry with him the sense
of him who sent him, and be thoroughly persuaded of what he is to make others
believe; they ought to be agitated with the same motions which the Appetite
suffers, and of those which they would imprint on the rest of the parts; so
that they stiffen not themselves immediately to resist the forces of the enemy,
but that they may stiffen the Muscles and the Nerves against them, and so
powerfully resist their violence. And truly we may consider the body as a great
Machine wherein are several Springs which move one another: The first go
slowly, and seem almost not to move, although it is they which make the great
Wheels to turn, and cause those great motions which are observeable in them:
The Spirits are the same thing; we hardly feel their motion, neither is it they
which perform the last actions, yet they lead the dance to all the rest of the
organs; and did that Spring but fail, all the Machine would become immovable,
neither could the Body act any more.

But the principal reason for the which, in my opinion they thus move, is, that
their stiffening contributes to maintain the Muscles which in this occasion
ought to be stiff; for the Soul which knows that all motion is to be made on
somewhat which is stable, stiffens as much as it may the parts upon which those
which are agitated are supported; so that often she holds back the breath, that
that air which is stopped in the Lungs may serve to uphold the instruments of
respiration, which thereby the better support the rest, as has been elsewhere
showed. She therefore affords this stiffening of the Spirits to uphold those
vessels wherein they are enclosed, and afterward they support those parts
which touch them, and they again the rest, to the very last, which serves for a
foundation and basis to the principal motion which is made; for although it
seems that such frail and moveable things are not very fit for that use, yet as
the number of the Wheels and Springs augments the force of the motions; so the
number of Butteresses and Upholders renders the resistance the stronger; and
sometimes for want of the least, a whole Building falls to the ground. It Is
true that if all the stifness of the Body were only grounded on the Spirits,
it would be very doubtful and suspicious: But as all the rest of the parts also
stiffen themselves of themselves, or at least by the intermission of the Soul,
if the spirits contribute never so little, it still helps to make the
resistance stronger; and this small succor being joined with several others,
produces at last a great effect. Let us hereunto add, that being in this
condition, those which carry with them natural heat wherein the force of the
parts principally resides, they retain and fix it, if we may so speak, in those
places where such actions are to be performed, and not suffering it to retire
inwardly, nor dissipating it outwardly, they stop and preserve it in those
organs which have need of its service.

These are the Reasons for which the spirits in Constancy stiffen themselves,
What change Constancy brings in natural heat.
but the last gives us occasion to examine what change this Passion brings to
the natural heat; for if the spirits stop, as we have now said, it seems as if
it should be the more quiet and the more moderate; yet this ought not to hinder
us from following the general maxims which we established in the Discourse of
Boldness, and from saying that when the Soul has need of its forces, she
raises them and renders them as vigorous as she can; that there is no
occasion in which they can be more necessary unto her, then when she assaults
or defends herself. And that heat being the most considerable part, she must
augment it, and stir it up in those Passions, which are to serve these designs;
and consequently, she must render it greater and stronger in Constancy then it
naturally ought to be. This principally appears to be in those which are of a
cold and dull complexion, or which are moved by some timorous Passion; for when
this comes to animate them, they feel themselves warmed with I know not what
kind of extraordinary flame; their pulse and respiration increases, their
face takes a more lively color, and all their parts become more agile, and
more robustious then they were before. It Is true, that heat is not so active
nor pungent in this as in Boldness and Anger, having not the liberty to diffuse
it self through the organs, being restrained by the spirits, which are
stiffened, and because it is not necessary it should be so strong in a Passion
which is not undertaking, and which keeps it self only upon the defensive. We
may perhaps say, that if the Soul ought to augment its forces proportionable to
the need she has, she ought herein to render the heat stronger then in any
other occasion whatsoever, having an enemy in front which appears invincible,
which also has the advantage to be the Assailant under whose efforts she often
believes she must succumb. But we may answer, that it is true, that she has
here need of all her forces, that she raises them, and employs them for her
defense; but it is only those which are fit for that purpose, since she would
in vain use others which are destined to assault, being not in a condition to
do so, and having neither the Will nor the Courage; now the violence of heat is
only proper the more strongly to work and to destroy the power of the enemy,
in which consists the end of the Combat and of Boldness; and therefore it is
nothing necessary in Constancy, which has no such great pretentions, and which
has nothing else to do but to keep the Soul stiff, and to render the organs
firm against those evils which assault it: It Is certain that heat is increased
therein, but it is but to a certain degree proportionable to the design, and
capable to give the organs that force which is necessary for them to execute
it. For it is not here as with those Passions which tend to good, in which heat
increases without order and without conduct; because it is not therein ordered
by the Soul; that is, it is not called thither as a useful thing for her end,
and that it is but an effect which happens to the agitation of the spirits. But
in this and in all the rest which assault, the Soul herself takes care to
produce heat, she proposes to herself to use it profitably, and she regulates
it as she thinks fit. So that we may say that in this occasion she does like a
subtle Artist, who knows how to order his fire for his works; for some he makes
it slow and moderate, for others strong and violent, and sometimes he forces
it to the height: the Soul does the same, she knows to what degree of heat she
ought to rise in every of the Passions; in Constancy, she makes it moderate,
strong in Boldness, but in Anger she drives it to all extremity.

This is what we had to say on the motion of the Spirits; for to know how they
can preserve their stifness when they are agitated by other Passions, is what
we have examined in the Discourse of Hope. As for the motion of the Humors, it
necessarily follows that of the Spirits which are ever mixed with them; and it is
impossible to fancy that they should stiffen themselves in Constancy, but we
must presently judge they also ought to suffer the same agitation.

CHAP. IV. The causes of the Characters of Constancy.
WE have said that Constancy and Boldness were Sisters, whose features and
lineaments were so like, that a man might often take the one for the other; and
indeed they have many Characters which are common to either, as Hope,
Confidence, Assurance in dangers, Presumption, Temerity, Desire of glory, and
the like; but they also have some which are particular; for Constancy is not as
Boldness is, Imperious, neither is she subject to Anger, to Insolency, nor to
Cruelty, which the other is often carried away withal: She has this property
also to make men Patient, Persevering, Opinionated, Insensible, Modest in good
Fortune, Severe in Pleasures, Content in Necessity; and these latter we must
carefully examine without minding the others, of which we have already
discoursed in the former Chapter. And for these it will be sufficient to say,
that although they are common to both these Passions, yet they in every one of
them have a difference in respect of the end which it proposes it self; for
Constancy hopes as well as Boldness; but this hopes to overcome, and the other
to stop only the course of the evil; both have confidence in their forces; but
that promises its self help to assault it, and this only to defend it self;
both of them may be Temerous, but the one has the Temerity to assault an enemy
that is too powerful, and the other only to resist him: Neither of them fears
danger; that, because it believes it self stronger then the difficulties which
present themselves; And this judges herself as strong as they can be. Finally,
both of them propose Glory in all their designs; but that aspires to it by
fighting and taking advantages over the enemy, and this by opposing his
endeavors, and not yielding unto him. For it is certain, that who will not
suffer himself to be overcome, renders himself equal to him who assaults him,
and consequently deserves as much honor as is due unto the other; and even that
in some encounters it is more glorious to resist then to assault; either when
the enemy is powerful and formidable; for then it is Temerity to assault, and
yet to resist his power we had need of a great deal of Courage; or when he is
too weak; for that were Cowardice and Injustice to take the advantage which we
have over him, and that it is to slight him, not to measure our forces with his.
Thus it is that there is more glory to resist Pleasure and Ambition, or with
small Troops to oppose himself against a powerful Army, then if we should
assault or would force them: It Is thus that Lions and Mastiffs often suffer the
assaults of little Creatures without being moved, and that magnanimous and
generous men scorn the weakness of their enemies, without seeking a victory
which would but be shameful unto them.

To return to our former Discourse: this Passion is no more subject then
Boldness to those defects which proceed from weakness and from fear, such as
are Superstition, Deceit, Cowardice, etc. Constancy is not imperious.
because it is courageous and has a good opinion of its strength. But she has
this particularly, that she is not imperious as the other is, neither is she
carried away with Anger, Fury, or Cruelty; the reason is, that seeing she
pretends not to conquer, she seeks not that pre-eminence nor superiority which
is necessary for command; but also being she will not be overcome, she will
also be independent; and without pretending to command she will neither yield
nor obey: whence it is that she renders not men haughty and proud but opiniated
and unteachable, as we shall hereafter show. As for Anger, Fury, and Cruelty,
being turbulent and impetuous Passions, they are not not compatible with this
which is reserved and moderate. It Is true, there is a kind of Cruelty which it
easily falls into; to wit, Hard-heartedness and insensibility of other men's
sufferings; but it is not an active Cruelty, as that is which persecutes, which
triumphs, and which exacts punishments; it is rather a defect then an excess;
and if the Soul suffers not herein, yet she less acts, as we shall shortly make
it appear.

One of the first effects of Constancy is to render Men Patient. She is Patient.
But to understand this, we must know what we understand by the word Patience;
for some confound it with Constancy; others reduce it to the suffering of
injuries, others extend it to all ills which may be resented. In effect, we say
that a man has patiently suffered an injury, a sickness, or even death it
self; that with patience he has suffered Exile, Slavery, the loss of Goods,
and of Friends; but we can never say that he has patiently suffered Pleasure,
Ambition, or good Fortune, although we may say he has constantly resisted
them; thus Constancy ought to be more general then Patience, since she respects
good and ill, and that the other concerns only troublesome things; now ills have
this property, that besides that they shed abroad in the Concupiscible part of
the Soul, Hatred, Aversness and Grief, they also raise up in the Irascible part
generous Passions to overcome them to Riot, Boldness and Anger, or the timorous
to fly them, as Fear and Despair; those of the Concupiscible part may subsist
with Patience, seeing a man may be patient, although he hate him who has
offended him, have an aversion against him, and be sensible of the wrong which
he has done him; but we can never say that he is so, if he seek to revenge
himself, if he appear afraid, and if he abandon himself to Despair: So that to
speak properly, a Patient Man is he that suffers ill without being moved by any
of those motions which ill uses to stir up in the Irascible part, so as it
happens not out of stupidity; for we never say, that he who has lost his
Understanding, or is senseless, is Patient, although he suffers his ill without
any resentment of revenge, without disquiet, and without apprehension; but he
must know that he feels it, and that he resists it; And consequently Patience
is a kind of Constancy; or to say better, it is but its effect, forasmuch much
as this stiffening the Soul hinders the entrance in of the Passions, or
dissipates them when they are entered. And their absence which is the effect of
this stiffening, is what we call Patience; whence we must conclude, that as it
happens from that resistance which the Soul makes against the Passions, it is
proper and peculiar to men, because Beasts are not able to resist their
Passions, as has been declared.

She renders men persevering, She is persevering.
Perseverance being a kind of Constancy, by which the Soul stiffens herself
against that difficulty which the length of time produces: For whether it be
that the Faculties which she employs are tired, or that the novelty of the
objects obliges her to alter her design, she cannot long remain in the same
action without trouble and digust, and then proposing to herself the good which
ought to happen unto her, if she do not change she fortifies herself against
the difficulty which this length might cause, and stiffening herself in her
first design she continues the action to the last. But that we may not confound
things, we must remember that we speak not here of Constancy, Patience, nor of
Perseverance as they are Habits; we consider them only as the actions of those
same Habits, or to say better, as the motions of the Soul which cannot be
continued when difficulties are encountered withal, but only by this stiffening
which we speak of, which yet lasts not so long as Habits do, as the Schools
teach us. Besides we must not believe that Perseverance properly and
immediately resists the length of time, because it is an ill which is of the
rank of those which we have called immovable, as are Poverty, Exile, Death,
and the like, against which the Souls resistance is vain and useless; but it
opposes it self against Frowardness, Fear, Disquiet, and such other Passions
as she usually raises up; so that it is not to be found in Beasts, who know
neither the parts nor differences of time, and which never resist their
Passions; yet this may be doubted; for Dogs do a long while entertain the heat
they have in hunting; and there are exercises which are taught them, wherein
they are so diligent either out of Fear or out of Hope, that it is very probable
these two Passions oblige them to stiffen themselves in their first design to
shun the ill, or to enjoy the good proposed unto them. But to speak to the
purpose, it is but a shadow or fantasm of Perseverance, forasmuch as to
persevere truly, we must know the length of the time to be employed in the
performance of a thing, be sensible of those Passions which accompany it, and
afterward take a resolution to resist them. Now this cannot be but by great
abstractions which Beasts are incapable of, as has been showed; they may
indeed continue a commenced action, and persist a long while in the labor; but
it is the other Passions which keep them in breath, and drive them to that end
which they aim at, without any necessity of the Souls stiffening it self to
continue them in the action, and to resist those difficulties which the length
of time might produce.

To be Opinionate is another kind of Constancy, She is Opinionate
by which she remains firm and stable in her resolutions, by unadvisedly
opposing another man's reasons, and persuasions: Now a man may several ways
unadvisedly oppose himself to ill, either when he knows they are best, and yet
he will not follow them; or when he flatters himself in his own opinion, and
persuades himself it is most reasonable, although it be nothing so; or even when
indeed it is the best, and we persist against it unreasonably; for there are
occasions, and places, and persons which oblige us to yield, and which ought to
make us quit our resentments and pretenses. How ever it be, a constant man
easily falls into all those kinds of Opinionateness; for that Confidence
having stiffened the Soul against those difficulties which assault her, there
is no further persuasion which can take place, so that by the same resistance
whereby she seeks to stop ill, she opposes Truth and Reason; so that she does
like a besieged Town, where the gates which are shut to the enemies, hinder all
friends and releif from entering in. Moreover this Opinionastrecy commonly comes
from Presumption which will not yield nor submit to another man's judgment; and
consequently that Constancy which has a great opinion of its forces, and
believes it self invincible, is easily abased by the Confidence it has in it
self, which causing it to despise all advice and help from others, renders it
incredulous, indocible and Opinionasted.

Sometimes she advances even to Hardheartedness, and to Insensibility; She is
insensible of another ill.
for in the power that she has to stop all the rest of the Souls motions, she
may hinder herself from being sensible of the miseries of another, which is, as
has been said, a kind of cruelty and inhumanity. For Nature which takes care
for society, gives us a certain tenderness to resist the ills of those which
are afflicted, that we might relieve them: And when a man has so hardened his
heart that he cannot be mollified by the resentments of pity, certainly we may
say, that he wants not only the Heart of a Man, but that he is of Marble or of
Iron. Beyond all, we must not wonder if Constancy easily falls into this
defect, since its principal employment is to resist Grief, which is a good part
of Compassion, as in its place we shall declare.

She is Modest in good Fortune, She is modest in prosperity
because with the stifness which she gives herself it is almost impossible for
her to suffer herself to be swelled with Pride, or blown away with Vanity; and
that Insolency which is commonly bred from one of those two Passions, may
render its prosperity odious.

She is Severe in Pleasures, She is severe in Pleasure.
not only because that in stiffening herself she stops those motions which
they might raise, and that they serve her as a bank to hinder them from
overflowing: but also because she finds herself in their presence seized with
a certain frowardness, and with I know not what bitterness of mind, which
mixing it self with the joy which they give, weaken her, and take from her
those transports, those raptures, and those sweets which are wont to accompany
her, rendering her Serious, Reserved and Severe. But how can such sweet and
charming things cause peevishness* It Is without doubt, that she considers them
as ills; now the presence of ill is unpleasant, and although it cast not the
Soul always into grief, yet it gives her I know not what kind of distaste,
which renders her wary and peevish; and truly as liking is the first thing
which good inspires, which is not, as we have already declared, a Passion, or
at least, which is but a breeding Joy: so before ill produces hatred and
sadness in the Soul, it produces therein a certain angry sense, which is not a
motion of the Appetite, because it remains simply in the Understanding, which
observes the disproportion which is betwixt it and the Object; yet forbears not
to disquiet it, and to give it this secret peevishness which we speak of, which
is neither Hatred nor Grief; at least, if we may so call it, it is but the
commencement thereof. Howsoever it be, when the Soul resists Pleasures, they no
longer are graceful objects unto her; she looks on them as on poisons to
corrupt her, and conceives the same aversion for them which she has for all
such as may destroy her; for which cause we must not think it strange if they
render her Severe and peevish, since they are the sense which the presence of
ill is always accustomed to imprint.

But if this be so, How Joy is to be found with Grief.
How is Joy to be found in the violence of Grief, of Scorn, and of Infamy, with
all those evils which so often exercise Constancy? For if it be true, that
evils always bring peevishness with them, those which are the greatest we can
suffer, must needs fill the Soul with Grief, nor permit never so little a Joy
to have any place in her; and yet it is true, that the most part of Lovers take
pleasure in suffering for those they love; that the Ambitious bravely support
those traverses which they meet with in the way to Glory; and that Martyrs have
always had contentment in their Souls, and vigor in their Looks in the greatest
of their torments and sufferings. Yet this difficulty is easily resolved, if we
do but remember that there are two Appetites in Man, which at the same time may
be moved with two contrary Passions; and that in the Will it self there are, as
it were, two parts, which may be agitated with several motions; for these
truths being supposed, it is easy to conceive how Grief assaults the Senses,
whilst Joy sheds it self abroad in the Mind, and how Sadness disturbs the lower
region of the Will, whilst the higher is quiet, as ravished with those
pleasures which Love, Ambition, or some other noble Desire proposes unto it.
Yet I will not say that Joy and Grief move to that height in Constancy. No, it
is impossible that either of them can be very great by reason of the stiffening
of the Soul which hinders their motion; but this signifies that if when strong
they are compatible together, they may more easily be so when they are
weakened; and consequently Frowardness which commonly accompanies Constancy,
and is but the commencement of Sadness, may subsist with that gayity which is
often observed in this Passion; not but that transports and ravishments of Joy
may cause soundings and faintings of Grief; neither is there then any Constancy
left, and in that very moment the Appetite must release it self to follow the
violence of those Passions. It Is true that she afterward stiffens herself, but
yet it would be but an interrupted Constancy, and which continues but by
several efforts which are sometimes so quick, that the Passions which
interrupted them, confounded themselves with this, as we have said it often
happens in all the rest of them.

For the rest, from the insensibility which she has for the ills of another,
She is indifferent to all.
and from the severity she takes in the use of goods, an Indifferency springs
which she is subject unto; forasmuch as he who is not touched with those ills
which he sees others suffer, and resists all the pleasures of life, is
certainly free from all those things which may the most powerfully stop the
Mind and engage it in the duties of civil society: we are not from him to
expect the sweets of friendship, nor those succors which compassion promises
to those that are miserable; the good and ill of particulars and of the public
are indifferent to him, so that rendering himself useless to all the world, he
becomes rude, austere and savage.

These indeed are those vices which have been observed in the Sect of the
Stoics, who studied nothing but to exercise Constancy; since all their
Philosophy consisted to abstain, and to sustain, which are the two employments
this Passion is destinated unto; so that it is no wonder if they fell into
those defects which usually follow her when we use her not as we ought. Yet we
must observe that the indifferency we speak of respects not those things which
Constancy is not tied unto; for if she oppose a difficulty, she has no
indifferency for it. On the contrary, she stiffens herself, opinionates and
obstinates herself against it; but beyond that, all is indifferent to her, and
she cares neither what may happen nor what concerns the rest.

And again, She is equal and content.
it is for the same reason that she always appear Equal and Content, forasmuch
as that indifferency which she has for all things, she has no desires nor
apprehensions for them, and is exempt from those cares and disquiets which
those Passions breed; add hereunto that equally stiffening herself at the
encounter of goods and of ills, good and ill fortune find her always in the
same plight, and without being carried away by that, or being cast down by
this, she always remains in one posture, and ever appears like herself.

But we have strayed too long to find Reasons, which are easy to be drawn
from the principles we have established, and which present themselves unto the
Mind as soon as a man would but know them. Let Us turn to those Characters which
this Passion imprints on the Body.

We shall not be much troubled in this enquiry, there being but few whereof we
have not spoken in the former Discourse, since in the Chapter of Boldness we
have examined the causes of an assured Look, of the motion of the Lids and
Brows, of silence, of coldness of the face, and of the retention of the breath,
as in the Chapter of Hope we have observed, whence was the strength of the
Voice and of the Pulse, why the Face changed not its color, why the Head and
Stature were straight; for Constancy has these effects common with them, and
uses the same motives and the same means which they employ to produce them; we
shall only remark some little differences, which are to be encountered in them.

For it is certain, What the Looks are in Constancy.
that this Assured Look is here formed with a large opening of the Lids, a firm
Sight, and with vivacity: But its vivacity is not so great as in Boldness,
because that in the design which this has to assault ill, she drives the
Spirits out, and so abundantly fills the Eyes with them, that they become
altogether sparkling; instead of which Constancy, which stands upon the
defensive, stiffens them only without driving them forth with impetuosity, so
that she renders the Eyes quick, because she stops the Spirits which give them
force and vigor; but they glister not because they come not thither in any
quantity, and that they want that active motion which makes them glister and
sparkle. On the other side, this firmness of sight is accompanied with a
certain severity which is not to be found in Hope, because the Soul considers
here only the Ill, the presence whereof makes her peevish, and that even there
she looks on the Good, the expectation whereof sweetens the pain which springs
from the difficulties which she encounters.

When the Brows are lifted up, What kind of motion the Brows have.
it is only the better to behold the Enemy, and not to help the rasing up of
the Soul, as it happens in Boldness; For which cause they lift not themselves
up so much nor so often as in that Passion; because the Soul keeping herself
firm and stiff to defend herself, sollicites not the organs to make those great
and frequent sallyes which follow that impetuosity which she suffers herself to
be carried away withal in assaulting. So that she lifts up the Brows no more
then the necessity of the sight requires, and not to serve the motion wherewith
she is agitated: She also represseth them for the same reason as in Boldness.
For she thinks herself fortified when she has provided for the securing of her
Eyes, as has been showed in the former Chapter. But it sometimes happens that
in the strongest assaults of Ills, she keeps them unmovable, and that a
Constant Man will see the greatest dangers, and suffer most cruel pains without
bending his Brow. Now this comes either from his great attention in considering
the ill; for it makes him the more to open his eyes, and consequently to lift
up his Brows, which then cannot be restrained; or from the confidence he has
of his forces, which defends him from thinking on such small precautions; or
from the design he has by this outward immobility to make it appear that his
Courage is not to be shaken. What his Silence is.


Silence is not here fierce and disdainful as it is in Boldness, because
fierceness and disdain are effects of Pride, which are seldom to be found in
true Constancy; But it is modest and serious, and proceeds merely from the
attention the Soul is in for to defend herself, and from the confidence she
has of her own strength; for that makes her forget words, and this defends
them, since, as we have already said, they are arms of weakness.

As for the rest of the Characters which we have now spoken of, such as are the
coldness of the Face, the strength of the Voice and Pulse, holding the Breath,
having the Head and Stature erect, there is no difference neither in their
effect nor in their cause, from those which accompany Hope and Boldness, for
which cause we send back the Reader to those places where we have carefully
observed them, and where it does appear, that if they follow those two
Passions, it is because they are always upheld by Constancy, and strength of
Courage.

But if she has such a contexture and conformity with them, Why Constancy has
not the rest of the Characters of Hope.
why has she not also all their other Characters? Certainly it is because
besides the stifness which they give the Soul, they inspire also other motions
which are not to be found in Constancy; for Hope indeed stiffens it self
against difficulties, but at the same time she aspires to the good which she
seeks, and still expects some help which may deliver her up the possession,
which makes her unquiet and impatient; she sighs and casts up her eyes, which
happens not in Constancy, because she has no other design but to resist Ill.
The same happens in Boldness, which stiffens it self also to strengthen it
self, but besides that darts it self forth, and throws it self on the Enemy. So
that all what follows this darting forth belongs not to Constancy, which when
she is alone never suffers this agitation; so the through Looks, the widening of
the Nostrils, the thunder of the Voice, the fierceness of the Countenance, a
vehement respiration, the redness and heat of the parts, and the like, which
proceed from the raising up of the Soul, and from the violence wherewith it is
agitated, are not to be met withal in all in that Constancy which is exempt
from those great storms. It Is true, that its Pace is like that of Boldness,
because that in stiffening herself, she makes the Body weighty and march the
more heavily. But she balanceth it not as that does, forasmuch as she has not
that impetuosity which causes the shoulders to turn inwardly, in which this
ballancing of the body chiefly consists, and this bold Gate. We may say as much
of the Post which is Noble without Pride; for the Head is lifted up without any
fierceness, the Stature is straight without lifting up the Shoulders, and the
motion of all the parts without constraint or violence is equal and modest: Now
all this is conformable to that condition which the Soul is in in this Passion,
for that in stiffening herself she stiffens the parts also, which consequently
become straight, and that this posture is most safe, and least exposed to
injuries, seeing she can the better see the enemy, and is every way the readier
to resist him. But the fierceness of the Countenance, the lifting up of the
Shoulders, which are principal marks of Pride, as shall be shown in its place;
they are to be found therein, because the Soul nor ought, nor can extend or
lift it self up, nor make any violent motion being stiffened as she is.

The stifness of the Body and parts is a proper and particular effect of this
Passion; When com^^^ stiffness of the Body.
for if it be in some other of them, we may say that it is by her means, and
because that she accompanies them; but she employs it not when she is to resist
any thing which is corporeal; otherwise she abuses herself, and makes a
useless endeavor, as has been said. Now to know wherein this stifness
consists, and how it is made, we must observe besides what has been said
hereupon in general, That a thing may be two ways stiff; either because it
resists the touch, or that it cannot be staggered; now it may resist the touch
by being hard; and it is hard either because it is dry and solid, as a stone; or
because it is extended as a Baloon, or because its parts are shut up and
gathered together, as those are which are pressed and crowded; neither can it be
shaken, either because its weighty, or because it has a motion contrary to
that which would overturn it. Thus a Column stands firm on its own weight, a
building supports it self by its props and butteresses, the Members stiffen
themselves being equally drawn by the opposing muscles, which being supposed,
it is certain that Constancy uses all these means to stiffen the parts, if we
except that hardness only which comes from dryness, forasmuch as there needs a
long time to produce that quality. Yet must we make some distinction, for that
some stiffen themselves in one way, others in another; the Spirits and the
Members which move voluntarily become firm by the opposition of their motions,
the Muscles by compression, the Body by its weight and props, which we must
particularly examine.

We have shown how the Spirits stiffen themselves, and how they communicate
their stifness to the parts; but there is this difference, That the stiffening
of the Spirits comes from the contrariety of motions, and that which is
communicated is performed by their upholding of them; for being stiffened, it
must necessarily be that they support the parts which touch them, especially if
they be fluid as the Humors are.

Those Members which are destined for voluntary motion, as the Head, the Eyes,
the Arms, and the Legs render themselves also stiff by the contrariety of
motions; for being composed of several Muscles, some of which cause them to
move upwards, and others downwards, some to the right hand, some to the left,
when they are all agitated at once, they must needs remain firm and stiff and
without going either way, and then they must suffer that motion which is called
Tonick, which is the most violent of all, and which makes us most weary. For
which cause we are more weary standing upright then walking up and down; and
it is more troublesome to look long upon a fixed and settled look, or continually
to keep ones Arms stiff, then if we used them to different motions, because
that all the Muscles agitate therein, without taking any rest; and herein there
is but a part engaged, which rests also when the other is in action.

Every muscle in particular grows stiff when its work operates, but that is
because it grows hard; now it hardens by pressing and contracting the parts
together; for having no other action but to contract and shut up it self, to
bring toward it the members it ought to move, it must needs take up less room,
and therefore its parts must be the more straightened, whence this hardness
comes. Which although it happens out of necessity, forbears not also to be
sought for by the Soul, as a thing which may render the body stronger, and the
less exposed to injuries; and it is for the same reason, that the skin of
Animals streightens it self, when they will defend themselves, whence it
follows that their hair and feathers stand on end, as we have elsewhere
declared.

Besides this stifness, the Muscles and the skin may also acquire another by
tention. But because there are two sorts of it, the one which is made by
drawing strongly those things which may be extended as a rope or parchment; the
other of filling them with some body, as a baloon; it is certain, that Constancy
cannot render those parts firm and strong by this, but only by the former. And
this happens when the Muscles cause a member to bend very much; for those which
are opposed to them, and which do not agitate are constrained to lengthen out
and extend themselves; and by this extention they become firm, and so render
the skin hard. It Is thus, that this Passion sometimes extends the hands, that
the inside which they oppose to the danger, may become harder, and consequently
more fit to resist ill.

As for the Body, it grows stiff not only when all its parts are stiffened,
but also by the support and weight which it gives it self. Now it may be
upheld by some exterior prop; for the Soul which puts it self on the defensive,
seeks both in and out of it self all what can stiffen it. So that when a man is
assaulted, he who has somewhat at his back to stay him up and help to support
him against the effort of his enemy, may make the better resistance. The body
also upholds it self by the situation and posture which it takes; for by
advancing a foot, or widening a little the legs, it makes for it self, as it
were, a prop or a butteress to support it self, which hinders it from being
overturned on that side it rests on. Add also how it also enlarges its Basis,
and does that which Art ordains for great pillars, which are better upheld, the
larger and greater the pedestal is. Lastly, by making it self weighty, its less
subject to be shaken, because that augmenting its weight, it the better resists
the motion of those things which beat against it, and so renders it more firm
and more stable in its situation. But how can it make it self heavy? Certainly,
it is not that it has more weight then it had, but it is that it makes it more
efficient by the motion which it gives it self; for weighty things have much
more strength, and make incomparably a greater impression when they are moved;
when the Body therefore stiffens it self, it burdens all the superior parts on
the lower, and those pressing the earth, by the motion of the Muscles, which
are destined for that purpose, they make an effort which augments the force of
the weight which they sustain, and so render the Body more firm, and less easy
to be shaken.

Besides these motions this Passion employs also that of the Hands, to oppose
herself against the shock she is threatened withal; for as they are parts
destined to the service of the body, she freely exposes them, and hazards them
to save it from danger, and uses them as Barriers to stop the enemy, or as a
Buckler to receive the assaults, for which cause she opens them that she may
cover and defend a greater space; she extends them to render them stronger and
harder, and she advances them that she may break and dead the violence of the
blows, which she cannot hinder from falling on it.

This is what we had to say of the Characters of Constancy; for the rest which
we have observed in its description, they belong unto her only by reason of
those Passions which sometimes mix themselves with her. So Cries, Sighs, Tears,
Groans, the weakness of the Body, proceed all from Pain; Indignation,
Threatenings, Blows follow Boldness or Anger. The sweetness of the Eyes, the
gayness of the Countenance arise from the contentment which Love, Desire and
Hope propose.

PART. III.
CHAP. I. The Characters of Anger.
ALthough Anger be a flame which Nature kindles in the soul of all Animals, The
Elogy of Anger.
and that it may be compared to that fire which shines in the Stars, for the
preservation of the Universe; It Is strange that it is almost never considered
but as a frightful Comet, which declares and produces nothing but fire and
sword; and that Humane Reason should be so unjust as always to condemn a
Passion which always fights for Reason and for Justice: Yes without doubt,
since she is only raised in the Soul to repel injuries, and to chastise those
she believes have unjustly offended her, we may boldly say, that she never arms
herself but against Violence, and ever sides with Reason and Equity.

It is not but that men which abuse all the most useful presents of Nature, do
often make it serve evil designs; but besides that, to judge according to
Reason of the price and value of things, we must not consult concerning the
abuses which are found in them, nor the ill use which may be made of them. It Is
certain, that when she appears most unjust, she has motives which seem
equitable, that she must at least have the appearance of Justice to oblige her
to take arms; and that if she be deceived therein, it is not she that is to be
accused, but rather Malice and Error, who call her to their releif: As we do
not blame Soldiers who are of a Princes Guard when they follow him in temerous
enterprises; and that it is sometimes the duty of a good Subject to obey a
Tyrant; neither must we condemn Anger which was submitted to Reason to serve
for its guard and defense, when she follows it in its irregularities, and obeys
its orders how unjust soever they be. In a word, it is not in corruption we are
to seek the purity of Anger; we must go back to its source, and enquire in the
first channels wherein it runs, if it has Virtues and Qualities useful for
life, and worthy the praise we have given it.

If it be then true, that she comes from Nature, and that this Nature is
nothing else but the Art of God, and the effusion of his goodness and wisdom in
all his works: we must not doubt that she is not sensible of so excellent an
origin, and but that the admirable motions of this Passion are raised by the
same spirit which animates and rules the Universe; It Is what would imprint in
all Creatures the image of his power, and render them as near as possible like
unto him, which has signed in all Animals the strokes of his Justice, and has
given them the knowledge of the wrong which may be done them, and the just
desire they have of revenging themselves.

And truly, as if it were the last touch which were to finish their perfection,
and his liberality, it seems that there was more care employed to inspire this
Passion in them, then for any whatsoever. That there is none which it has made
so common and so natural; and that all the rest are particular to some one, or
so imperfect that it is difficult to find them therein. Love and Pleasure
indeed, which seem to be the most necessary and the most general, are hardly to
be remarked in the most part of Beasts; Boldness is only to be found in those
which are strong and courageous; Fear surpriseth only those which are weak;
and even there are those which are so fit for certain ages, and for some
conditions, that they seldom pass to others: But it is not so with Anger, which
makes it self be resented by all in general; the least suffer its esmotions as
well as the greatest, and the weak as well as the strong, and there are none
which are not provided with arms which may serve for their revenge. Finally,
she knows no privileges, and makes no difference amongst men; she agitates
Children, as old Men; sick, as she does the sound; poor, as rich; Kings, as she
does the Subjects; and without confining herself, as the rest do, to some
particulars, she animates Families, Nations and whole Kingdoms. But as in the
order of Nature, the most necessary things are, the more common they are; we
must believe that this Passion should not have been so generally dispersed in
all Animals, had it not been most important and most necessary for their
preservation; and that it would not have been so sensible, and so imperfect in
all those which are most imperfect, were it not most profitable and of greater
use then all the rest, which for the most part are unpolished and confused in
them.

And certainly since all have far more ills to fear, then goods to desire, and
that ill it self is more powerful to destroy, then good is to preserve; it was
from the wisdom of him, who exposed them to so many dangers, to give them
stronger Passions to safeguard themselves, then for to seek what was for their
use; since it was more advantageous to overcome ill then to fly from it, and
that all could not have the Boldness destined to conquer it: It must needs I
say be, that to supply this defect he must have inspired another Passion to
warm the courage of the weakest, and stir up the forces of the most timorous to
engage them to fight those Enemies which flight or patience would have rendered
terrible.

Moreover, since they were all to defend themselves, not only from such as do
ill unwittingly, but also from those who do it out of malice: It was fit they
should have lights to discern them, and means to destroy not only their power
but also their ill designs; for it had not been sufficient to have provided for
their security, if after having overcome them they could not have bereft them
also of the desire of taking up arms again, and of convincing their unjust
untertakings.

It Is therefore Anger which causes them to get the better of such dangerous
enemies, which stop the course of their violence, and making them lose the will
of doing hurt, tear up ill by the roots, and shelter themselves from whatsoever
they might fear. And indeed Revenge which this Passion employs to that purpose
has no other end but to chastise him that offends, that the punishment he
suffers make take from him the desire to continue the injury, and that he who
has received it may not again fall into the like danger. Is there any thing in
the world so equitable and so necessary? Is there any thing wherein the
providence of Nature is more resplendent? And were it not to be ungrateful
toward it to slight so useful a relief, and to condemn so just a defense?

For we must not believe that none but Beasts may lawfully make use of it, that
it is incompatible with Reason, and that its never kindled in man, but that at
the same time it extinguisheth that divine light which in all its actions ought
to enlighten it. No, no, it is in us, and for the same purpose, and for the
same necessity that it is in the rest of Animals; we have the same enemies
which they have, we are exposed to the same dangers; and the cares for our own
safeguard can be no less innocent then theirs are; whatever we may say, Reason
and Anger are not in the number of those Stars which never look on, or meet
with one the other without imparting their virtue or brightness, or causing
some troubles in the world. On the contrary they fortify one another when they
are united, and their conjuction breeds that celestial light in the Soul which
raises up those languishing virtues, which give heat to those which fight, and
inspires them with that divine fury with which they are animated against Vice.
Whence can you fancy proceeds that noble Indignation which the Soul conceives
for unjust things, but from that Anger which cannot suffer injustice without an
alarm? Whence springs that virtuous Frowardness, and that holy Impatience which
seiseth upon us at the sight of crimes, but from this Passion which has no
other care but to chastise the Authors of them? And whence can that just
Despite come wherewith Virtue is provoked at the encounter of such objects as
cross her, but from the same source whence she draws those forces which are
necessary for to overcome them? To conclude, the most excellent Virtues would
at every moment be lessened, were they not raised up by this Passion: Justice
would never proceed to revenge crimes with that zeal wherewith she is so often
transported, did she not call it to her assistance. Valor would very rarely
produce those great actions which render it formidable, were it not solicited
by it. In a word, there is none to whom she is not as a spur to advance them in
the way of glory; and he that would bereave civil life of her, would
undoubtedly leave in it only Weakness, Languor, and Cowardliness.

But notwithstanding these great services, we must at last confess, it is the
most to be feared of all the Passions, as that which causes the greatest
disorders in the world: By a strange mishap, scarce conceivable, the commerce
it has with Reason, instead to render it more perfect, has corrupted it; and
innocent as she was in Beasts, she is become criminal in men; So that we may
say she is in some manner like the vapors of the Earth, which change into
thunders and storms when they come near the Sun; and that if she did not rise
into the highest Region of the Soul, she could never be able to produce those
thunders and tempests, which have caused so many public calamities, and have
desolated so many Provinces, and so many Kingdoms.

For we must not believe that the ill it does, falls only on some particulars,
as that which proceeds from the Anger of Beasts, and from the most part of
humane Passions; besides that it renders Cities and whole Nations furious, it
never strikes one person only, but the blow threatens and offends all civil
Society: For which cause the Laws which often tolerate the ill use of the rest
of the Passions, have never suffered that of Anger, how just soever it were;
they ever reserved the revenging of injuries; and whosoever has usurped that
power, commits a crime justly to be resented, and has most commonly added to
the infamy of the punishment, the shame of the outrage. In effect, they could
not have left to particulars a power which only belongs to the public, and
put the arms of Justice into the hands of a furious person, without abandoning
the life and fortune of all men to insolency and cruelty, and without breaking
those sacred bonds which unite them together in the forms of Communities and
Republics.

But what severity soever has been practiced, what restraint soever they have
bridled this wild and untameable Passion withal, they could never hinder it
from bringing disorder and confusion where ever it came. It has made the
wisest lose their Judgment and their Reason, brought confusion amongst the best
friends, filled the most illustrious families with blood and slaughter; and we
may say that the earth reaks every where still with the broils it has raised
in the greatest Cities, and in the fairest Provinces. Those things which were
ever had in veneration amongst men, are violated by this insolent Passion,
which tramples under foot all the respects which Nature inspires with our
lives; and its impiety raises it self even against Heaven, and against the
Divinity it self. In fine, if we should speak all the ill it causes, perhaps
we should learn all the ill which is done upon earth. But the better to show
the disorders it causes, we need but represent a man who has suffered himself
to be carried away with these excesses, and consider the strange change which
it makes in his Mind and in his Countenance.

Anger is none of those Passions which sweetly insinuates it self into the
soul, Description of a man in Anger.
which flatters it at first, and by weak beginnings takes from it the suspicion
of its violence; it enters with impetuosity and with open arms; or to speak
better, it enters it not; it falls like thunder which strikes unawares, and
there is no distinction of time between its fall and the burnings it causes;
for as soon as a man is possessed with it he perceives himself inflamed with
despite and disdain. Vengeance like a torrent of fire disperseth it self in
all its thoughts; Fury prevails over his Reason and his Judgment, and like a
devouring flame it runs and crackles in his Veins, it sparkles in his Eyes,
thunders in his words; they are nothing but complaints, reproaches, and
injuries; nothing but threatenings, and imprecations, and blasphemies. The more
sweetness and weakness he naturally has, the more sharp and impetuous his
Passion is, the more stormy and insolent. Neither respects nor considerations
can restrain him; he acknowledges neither Masters, nor Friends, nor Parents;
Silence provokes him, Excuses commit an outrage, and often innocence it self is
no less insufferable then injuries.

As if he minded nothing but to torment himself, he is not able to hear any
reason which might calm the disturbance he is in, but he is very ingenious to
find out all those which may increase it: He fancies the offense greater then
indeed it is; he remarks the least circumstances that may aggravate it; and if
it happens that words and effects offend him not in the tone of the voice, or
in the motions of the Eyes, he finds great causes of wrath and revenge.
Neither does he stop there, he calls to mind all the former good offices he
has done his Enemy, and the ill usage he has received from him; even those
actions which were before indifferent to him, do then seem injurious; the
smallest of his faults appear sensible affronts and bitter injuries: And being
astonished that he foresaw not his ill designs, he accuses himself of
impudence and of stupidity, and adds to his first fury the indignation and
despite which he conceived against himself: Whereupon after having made his
resentment sparkle by the extravagancy of his discourse, and by all those
exclamations which grief and rage drive forth, he all at once falls into a
profound silence, and walking with large paces, with a wild and frightful
mind, by the frequent shakings of the Head, and by the grinding of the Teeth,
and by his furious Looks he declares that he revolves in his mind the designs
of some great and terrible revenge. In effect, there is no ill which a man
could make his enemy suffer, which presents not it self to his desires; infamy,
punishments, tortures, are the sweetest chastisements he prepares for him; the
sword and poison are the meanest instruments which he means to employ; he
thinks which blows may be the rudest to be inflicted, what places are most
sensible, what death might be most cruel. And to glut his rage, he proposes to
himself nothing less then to strangle him himself, to tear in pieces, and to
feed on his very Heart and Bowels. After a thousand such like designs which
most commonly destroy one the other, he would that some disorder might happen
in Nature for his destruction, that the earth would open and swallow him up,
that the plague might stifle him, that he might be thunderstruck. Finally, he
makes vows for his ill fortune that they may supply his own impotency, and
sollicites the wrath of Heaven and Hell to perfect the punishment which he has
commenced. But should all this happen, yet would not he be satisfied unless all
men did believe that it was he who was the cause of all these mschiefs, that he
drew them on his Adversary, and that even he also suffers them far rather for
his particular satisfaction, then for the chastisement of his crime.

Whilst he feeds his Passion with these cruel thoughts, we hear long and
scalding sighs which at every moment are fetched from the bottom of his Soul;
confused and interrupted words, which from time to time escape his fury; and
the noise he makes by beating all what he meets with under hand or feet. At
last breaking out of his silence, he detestss, he threatens, he blasphemes and
discovers all what he has on his heart, and betraying his secret, he renders
the revenge which he meditated often useless, sometimes pernicious.

These are near upon the motions he has in the absence of his enemy, but this
is nothing in respect of those which he suffers in his presence. At first it
seems as if he endeavored to shun his encounter, as if he were unwilling to see
him, and in a proud and disdainful way turning his back toward him, he
grumbles, he murmurs, and forms betwixt the teeth words of indignation and of
disdain. But he remains not long in that condition; the flame growing more
violent when it is shut up; his wrath is provoked by this restraint, and
changing it self altogether into fury, it transports him out of himself, and
renders him like a wild and furious beast; he cries out, he runs, he strikes,
and without fear or knowledge of the danger he casts himself through fire and
sword, he drives his friend into them, and cares not to lose what is most dear
unto him, so as he may lose him who has offended him. Like one in despair, he
throws himself into a precipice that he may draw him therein along with him; he
seeks shipwreck so as he might perish with him; he calls him to fight, wherein
the chance of Arms is doubtful; and commonly the ardor he has to revenge
himself, bereaves him of his revenge; all his skill and address is then
useless, most of his blows are vain, he has no ward against those which are
given him; he blindly exposes himself to danger, and like those ruins which
break themselves on what they fall, he often locks himself in the arms of him
whom he casts down.

If it happen that he has the advantage, and that he thinks he has satisfied
his Passion, he adds insolency to cruelty; he outrageth his enemy conquered as
he is, he laugheth at his misfortune, and feeding his eyes on the slaughter
which he has made, he feels a certain malignant joy break forth in his heart,
which afterward disperseth it self over his face, and which he makes appear in
all his actions. But if he believes that he is not revenged, he despairs, he
rages, he accuses insensible things, his Friends, God, and himself; he breaks
his sword for not having given the desired blow, he is angry with those who
would have appeased him, he strikes the ground, he rails against Heaven, he
beats his own face, and tears his hair; at last when he cannot hurt the person,
he assaults the reputation; his enemy has no defects which he publishes not,
he brings the vices of his Ancestors out of their graves, and if truth cannot
furnish him with reproaches and injuries, he borrows them from lies and
calumnies. In a word, to describe all the actions of a man in his wrath, we
must fancy, all what temerity, cruelty and fury can effect.

Not that all those who are touched with this Passion, suffer themselves to be
carried away to this excess: There are dumb and disdainful Angers, there are
those which are quite vapored away in words; there are some that are weak and
timorous, others that are noble and generous; and without doubt those are not
so extravagant as that which we now described: Yet there is none which raises
not a great disturbance in the mind, which drives not out of it sweetness and
humanity, and which bereaves not a man of the best part of himself. But we
shall elsewhere speak of all these kinds of Anger; let us now see the effects
which the violence of this Passion commonly produces on the Body.

It Is most certain, that there is none which so strangely alters the Face as
this does: There is no man whom Anger will not render unknown both to his and
to himself; his Eyes are red and inflamed, their motion is peircing and rapid;
sometimes they look through, sometimes they fix, and seem as if they would go
out of their places; we may observe a sparkling dryness in them, a wild and
savage disquiet. The Eyebrow is sometimes cast down and sometimes lifted up,
and after they restrain themselves. The Forehead is wrinkled and gathered
betwixt the Eyes, the Hair stands on end, the Nostrils open and widen
themselves; the Lips thinken and lowr themselves, they tremble, they press
themselves, and sometimes they form a cruel and disdainful smile. He grinds his
Teeth, he foams, he blows, his mouth grows dry, his breath stinking, his voice
more vehement and sharp then it was at first, at last becomes terrible, and
rattling. It often stops all at once, and when it chances to form any words,
the Tongue faulters, his words interfere, and his discourse is entangled: If he
holds his tongue, it is an enraged silence, which at every moment is interrupted
with sighs, with groans, and the frightful outcries which he makes; his Face
grows pale, inflames and swells; the veins of his Forehead, of his Temples and
Neck are swelled and extended; his Pulse beats quick and vehement; his Breast
which is redned is lifted up with great throbs, and he breaths with a violent
and precipitate respiration. But who can describe the shakings of the Head, the
clappings of his Hands, the throwing about of his Arms, the trampling of his
Feet, all his brisk and bold motions; In fine, that continual agitation, which
accompanies Anger. It Is sufficient to say that his Countenance, his Mind, his
Gesture, is an assembling together of all what is most deformed in most cruel
Sicknesses, and of what is most horrible in the wildest of Beasts. Let Us now
seek the cause of all these effects in the Nature of this Passion.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature of Anger.
ALthough Philosophy has more spoken of Anger then of any of the Passions, The
difficulty to define Anger.
either because it is more easily known, or because its moderation is more
important to a civil life then the rest; yet neither has it succeeded in the
definition thereof, better then of those which we have examined. For besides
that it observes not the motion proper for it, which is a part of its essence:
it is in doubt what gender to give it, what object raises it, and the true
motive which it has. Some indeed say it is an effect of vengeance; others that
it is not an Appetite, but a rising up of the Soul; some will have it the
slighting of that object which moves it; others add thereto injury; othersome
there are who deny that vengeance is the true and proper motion of this
Passion, seeing as they suppose, it pretends always to revenge it self, and
that Hatred has often the same design without being advised by this.

In a word, of all the definitions which have been given it, there is not one
which expresses all the Nature of Anger, which leaves not other difficulties
which are hard to be resolved by those principles which we commonly suppose in
this business; and truly that of Alexander which seems to be the most exact,
has its defects as well as the rest: For in saying that it is a desire of
vengeance, caused by the grief we have of seeing ones self unjustly slighted;
besides that Beasts are not touched with scorn, who nevertheless are
susceptible of this Passion; there are a thousand encounters wherein we may be
provoked to Anger, without having cause to believe we have been slighted; as
when we are angry with our selves, or against insensible things. If instead of
this slighting you put Injury, the same difficulty remains entire; since it is
very probable that Beasts know not injustice, nor consequently Injury; and that
there are many things which make us angry at which we cannot justly be
offended. Add also, that a man may have the grief to see himself offended, and
the desire of being revenged without being angry; for the motion of Grief, and
that of Desire, which belongs to the Concupiscible Appetite, seem not as if
they should enter into the essence of this Passion; besides they should tell us
what Vengeance is, and why we desire it; for if to revenge ones self be nothing
but to retort the ill on him who afflicted it, causing him to suffer the same
pains: There is no likelihood that a man should be angry with himself or
insensible things, seeing no man would be revenged on himself, and that it is
impossible and useless against those things that are without sense.

To say likewise that it is a rising in the Soul, whereby she overcomes those
difficulties which traverse her designs; This definition would be too general,
seeing it befits also Boldness, and that therein the Soul may raise it self
without being moved by Anger; for I mind not those who say that this rising up
is not an Appetite; since it is a received maxim, That all motion of the
Appetitive part is called the Appetite.

To conclude, the worst of all those, is that which raises it to an ebullition
or fixing the blood about the heart; for it it not therein that the essence of
Anger consists; that is only its effect; it being certain that all Passions are
impermanent actions, which are formed in the Soul before she agitates the Body,
and principally the humors which are no parts of it.

These are the difficulties which are entertained in common opinion; the method
which we hold, and the principles which we have established, render not the
thing the more easy. For after having showed that the Soul which will not fly
before the enemy, has but two courses to take, to wit, Resistance and Assault,
which are Constancy and Boldness; it seems as if we had exhausted all the
springs whence Anger might proceed, as if we were obliged to confound it with
one or other of these two Passions. Indeed it raises it self up against ill,
it assaults it, it would overcome it, even as Boldness; so that they seem both
to have but the same object, the same motive, and the same motion, and
therefore to be but one Passion, since these three things which make the
difference of all the esmotions of the Soul, render them equal, and every way
alike.

Yet since it is undoubted that they are different, and that by experience we
know there are ills which move Boldness and not Anger; that this is more
impetuous and turbulent then the other, and that there are many persons which
are choleric, as Children, Women, and those that are sick, which we cannot
call Bold; there must necessarily be some circumstances, and some conditions in
their causes which must make the difference; let us first therefore examine the
matter and the object of this Passion, and consider whether it be truly the
same which raises Boldness.

In the former Discourse we have shown, What ill is Angers object.
That the word Ill did not only signify the effect which properly is ill, but
also the cause which produces it. And this distinction is so necessary for the
knowledge of the Passions, that there are some which have no other object but
the ill it self, as Grief; others which consider only the cause, as Anger,
Hope, and Despair. Lastly, others which confound them together, as Boldness,
Hatred, Aversion, and Fear.

Now Anger assaults nothing but the cause only of ill; for a man cannot be
angry with an injury which he may have received, but with him who did it: Quite
contrary, Boldness looks on the danger without often considering whence it
happens.

But as there are causes which produce ill without knowledge, as others which
effect it without design, if we considerately examine those which Anger
assaults, we shall always find them agitating with design; for we are not
provoked to anger against a stone which hurts us, but against him who threw it.
And what ill soever we suffer, it will never raise this Passion, if we do not
imagine that there is some cause which had an intention to make us suffer it.

Yet because he who chastises with a purpose to do ill, does not always
provoke Anger, there must be one kind of ill proper to move this Passion,
which being properly moved, may cause the Soul to rise against that which is
the cause thereof.

Others as we have already said, will have it be Scorn; there being nothing
more powerful to provoke Anger, nor any ill which a man more impatiently
suffers; yet since Children and Beasts are not sensible of it, who nevertheless
are often touched with this Passion; and that we every day see very many who
patiently suffer Scorn, who are all in a fury if you do but take from them what
they believe is their due. Finally, we are angry with our selves, with chance,
with insensible things, by which we can no ways be despised; so that we must
confess there must be some other ill which moves Anger.

Others will have it to be an Injury; men indeed are never so angry as against
those by whom they think they have been unjustly offended. And when we think
the offense has been done without design, or believe that we have deserved it,
we no longer seek to revenge it. On the other side, it seems as if Beasts
cannot know injuries, since they know not unjust things: and so we must say
that they are not susceptible of Anger, could injuries only provoke it.

But if we consider that Children who have not the use of Reason, and whose
knowledge is not much different from that of Beasts, forbear not to know when
they are unjustly offended; that a Lion is not angry with a stone or a thorn
which hurts it; that there are Beasts fierce enough which in play suffer ill
without seeking revenge, and are seldom angry with Children: It Is very probable
that there is some kind of justice amongst them, that they know there are ills
which they ought not suffer, and that they know who offends them out of design;
not that they have the knowledge of things so clear and so distinct as men may
have; but the same instinct which guides them to their end without their
pretending to arrive thereunto, affords them also the knowledge of the wrong
which is done them, without discerning it. It Is true, there is a great
difference in this knowledge, and it is more or less perfect according as
Creatures have more or less perfection. A Be casts out its sting against a
stone as well as against an Animal; but a Dog, unless he be furious will never
assault any but him who purposely has hurt him: Beasts are therefore capable
of knowing injuries, and therefore we may say, that there is no other ill but
that which ought to move Anger.

Now there may be as many kinds of injuries as there are things which may
unjustly offend; Scorn is a great injury.
but amongst us there is none which so commonly and generally does it as
Despite. And Nature has given so great an Aversion to the Mind of man against
it, it endures no ill whatsoever more impatiently then that, nor is it more
easily or more violently born away by any to revenge; And this in my opinion,
happens from that that Scorn is nothing else but the opinion which we have that
a thing merits not consideration, having no considerable quality, and that we
judge it can do neither good nor hurt; for we ought to honor excellent things,
love those which are profitable, and fear those which are hurtful: so that
those are to be despised which deserve not honor, and are capable of neither
love nor fear: But besides, that man is naturally a lover of himself, that
desire of vengeance is born with him, and out of that consideration he believes
himself amiable, and that if he be offended he can be hurtful: he has a secret
sense of the dignity of his being, and thinks that he commits an injustice who
renders him not the honor which is due unto him. That to despise him is in a
manner to contest the advantages which Nature has given him. Finally, as there
is no good which is more his own then that, there is also nothing which can
transport him more then for any to seek take it away.

If this original excellency is accompanied with those which birth, study, or
fortune may advance, such as are the natural and acquired qualities of the
Mind, the strength and beauty of the Body, Honors, Riches, and Friends; it is
then that the sense of Scorn is more common, and most insufferable, because
that those who think to excel in any thing, believe also that there is honor
due unto them, and that in several occasions many are wanting to give it them.
Whence it happens that Great, Rich and Young men, those who have many Friends,
Honor, or Beauty, are easily moved to wrath; yet I also know that such as are
deprived of these excellent qualities, as are Poor, Old, and Sick persons, in a
word, all those who have any defect are Choleric, believing at every moment
that they are despised by reason of their imperfections; and although they
think not that they ought to be esteemed for them, yet they do believe it is to
commit an injustice, whether it be because their defects seem to deserve
compassion rather then scorn, or whether every one thinks they have sufficient
store of other good qualities to counter-ballance those wants. Whence the
greatness of an injury.


Now although the kind and the nature of the injury ought to render it more or
less sensible, yet neither is it that which measures its greatness: it is the
opinion alone of him that suffers it; for how great soever the offense may be,
it would never kindle Anger unless we acknowledge and resent it. And often an
indifferent thing will grow to a gross injury, if we but imagine it to be so.
Now there are two causes which may form this opinion; Truth, and Error; this
comes from the precipitation and weakness of the Mind, which commonly follows
the temperature and custom; wherefore Children, Women and sick people are
easily moved; whereas a judicious and magnanimous man seldom grows angry. As
for the Truth, it proceeds from the just value we have of the offense,
examining the greatness of the ill, the persons, the places, the times, and the
causes; for if the ill be great indeed, if he who receives it is a person of
quality, and he that offends is his inferior, or is obliged unto him in any
kind of duty, if it were in public, if for a slight cause, or that malice was
the only motive, we cannot doubt but the resentment must be the greater. In a
word, the further he that offends errs from justice, and from his duty, so much
greater effectually the injury is, and the esmotion which it raises up in the
Mind, must also be the more violent.

He therefore who does an injury is the object of Anger, Why it rises up
against the cause of ill.
and the only enemy against whom it imploys all its efforts. Let Us now enquire
the reason why the Soul rises up against him, and the design she has when she
assaults him.

All the world is agreed, That it is to revenge herself; for there is no body
agitated by this Passion who respires not vengeance, who speaks not of it, and
with pleasure executes it not, unless he be diverted.

In effect, To revenge ones self on any man, is to make him suffer a punishment
proportionable to the ill he has done; so God revengeth himself on the wicked
by punishing them; the Laws revenge crimes by those chastisements which they
ordain; and Men revenge particular injuries, by the ill which they inflict on
those which have offended them: Anger therefore has no other design, but that
it intends only to seek satisfaction for the offense received, to chastise him
who has committed it, and to cause him to suffer an equal or pronortionable
punishment to the ill which he has done.

But what profit or benefit can accrue unto it by this chastisement? For the
injury is done, is received, is resented; and were there any remedy to be
applied, it were to be employed for the taking away or sweetning of the ill,
and not against the cause which can nothing ease it, and can no ways undo what
it has done.

Were it true that this Passion had no other object but Scorn, we might say
that revenge were a necessary means to take away the stain and the shame,
because that doing ill to him who despises us, we should make him know that we
were nothing despicable, since scorn is nothing but the opinion which we have
that a thing can do neither good nor hurt. But besides that Scorn is not the
universal object of Anger, the revenge it seeks has a more general end then
that; for we are not content to do ill to him who scorns us, to make him lose
that conceit, since there are other means to persuade him to it, without losing
the desire of our revenge; but necessarily Revenge must be a punishment
wherewith this Passion seeks to chastise those who offend it.

Now all pains and all chastisements are the remedies which Justice employs
against Malice; but thoroughly to examine them, What the motive and the end of
chastisements is.
they are only preservative remedies. For although we say that the ill
committed may be repaired by chastisement, that the equality of Justice demands
punishments for those who have offended, as well as rewards for those which
have done well. And finally, That it is just that he who has lift up himself
above that degree wherein the Law has placed him, should be cast down by it,
and suffer pains for the pleasure he took in doing it. Yet the question remains
still unresolved, What the punishment does against that fault which is
committed, since it takes not away the ill which is done, nor the blemish or
deformity it may have left in the Soul, since even those sufferings have not
that power.

And truly all the difficulty is, concerning those punishments that God
inflicts in the life to come; for as for those which the natural and civil Law
have prescribed, we may say with the greatest men of Antiquity that they
respect the future only, having no other end then to make him better who did
the ill, or to restrain others in their duty by the example, or to provide for
the safety of him who may be offended. But all these motives have no place in
those chastisements which the wicked suffer after death, since they will then
be no longer in a capacity to correct them, and that they last to eternity,
wherein the example will be useless, and where those whom they would offend
need no longer have any thing to fear.

What design therefore has Divine Justice proposed it self in those long and
severe punishments? For we must have a a care that we fall not into the error
of those who say, God has no other design in punishing, but to punish; it were
to offend his Wisdom and his Justice, to make them act without being guided by
that sovereign Equity, which renders to every man according to his deserts.
It Is true, that those he punishes, deserve to be punished; but why do they
deserve it? because they have offended him. And why does the offense deserve
punishment, since we cannot hinder the ill from having been done, and that the
pain has no proportion with the offense, nor with the satisfaction which God
may require; there being no likelihood that the ill which he inflicts on them
can or ought to satisfy?

I know that in the design I have to endeavor to resolve such great
difficulties by my particular sentiments; some will say it is a great temerity
to seek to fathom the profundity of the Counsels and Judgments of God; that
they are mysteries which are rather to be adored with humility, then examined
with presumption; and that those who dare enquire after reasons for their
chastisements, are in danger of such punishments as that Equitable Judge
prepares for them. Moreover, if we are obliged to speak of it, we must follow
the already received Maxims, and go by the ordinary road, without taking
by-ways, which in all such cases are always dangerous. But I shall oppose this
advice only with the respect and submission wherewith I undertake to speak of
things which are toward men ineffable and incomprehensible: The necessity
which this subject imposes on me to seek all the motives of punishments, that
so I might find that which Anger proposes to its self in Revenge, and the
liberty which every man takes to speak what he thinks on questions which admit
of no certain decision: Whereupon I suppose I may with security propose my
opinion hereupon, since others do not satisfy the difficulties which are to be
found therein; and that even according to mine advice they do not sufficiently
make known that sovereign Equity which God observes in his judgments.

We may therefore say, That when God has ordained Punishments, he considered
the future no more then the civil Laws do, and had no other design but to keep
men in their duty by the severity of punishments, and to hinder them by the
terror of sufferings from offending him, and rendering themselves unworthy of
his grace. But because this forewarning were useless, unless he executed what
he has ordained, he at last makes the guilty suffer the punishment wherewith
he before had justly threatened them; not that he would thereby repair the ill
committed, or satisfy the offense done him, but because he is faithful and
true; so that threatening and establishment of the Law is a work of his Justice,
which ought to hinder ill; but the execution is an effect of his faithfulness,
which ought to maintain his Justice. For which cause when the holy Scripture,
wherein we ought to learn the manner how we are to speak of divine things, says
that God is just, it commonly adds that he is true and faithful; all its pages
are full of the fidelity of his Laws and of his Judgments; and when it
represents the history of things which happen after they were foretold, it
precisely observes that they happened that the prophecy might be fulfilled; As
if the event were only to render God in his word true and faithful, and to
show that his Justice and his Goodness cause him to make Laws and Decrees; but
that after they are made, it is his fidelity which obliges him to put them in
execution.

And truly did Justice exact punishment, and that it were necessary to repair
an offense by its chastisement, we could never be pardoned without offending
Justice; and he who would remit the pain due to crimes, would remain
responsible to the Justice which of right belongs unto it. And consequently
Clemency, Mercy, and Lenity how excellent soever those Virtues are, would be
useless, and contrary to reason. To avoid these inconveniences, we must
conclude, that it is not the Justice but the Fidelity of the Law which exacts
punishments, and so neither is pardon contrary to Justice; and if there be
ought else which it seems to clash withal, it is the Fidelity of the Law which
the Legislator in particulars may dispense withal, since the Law is a floating
general thing, which is not determined to any in particular. In effect, the
Prince has power to diminish or change chastisements; he sometimes suffers an
innocent to suffer punishment for the guilty, and believes he has satisfied
the Law, when the punishment it ordained has been executed on him, who imputed
on himself the crime of the guilty.

Finally, this reason to me seems the more receivable, because it easily
resolves that great difficulty which Theology has always held of the eternity
of pain; for to say that pain ought to be infinite, because it respects an
infinite object, this and all other reasons which are commonly given, do not
fully satisfy the Mind, and still leave some doubt why Divine Justice should
exact an eternal punishment for a crime committed in a moment; what necessity
is there the chastisement should be infinite, because the object is infinite;
and what satisfaction can God have of an offense which most commonly hurts
only him who committed it?

But if it be true, that God ordains punishments but for preservative remedies,
it must necessarily follow, that having imposed eternal pains to hinder men
from offending him, he must inflict such as he has ordained, when they become
guilty, or else he could not be faithful, and his forewarning would be useless.
Now it was fit to impose these pains; for unless men had been threatened with an
eternal punishment, there had been no way to keep them in order; and for what
time soever God had limited their pains, the hope of being afterward released
would have encouraged them to ill; and with the little sense they had of
another life, they would have hazarded millions of years for some moments of
this, as they might have but contented their evil inclinations. It Is certainly
evident that a less severity could not have been; since with all the terror
which it gives, yet does it not perform so full an effect as might have been
hoped, and that no body can with reason complain of it, since those who do well
are not subject to it, and the guilty voluntarily submit themselves thereunto.

When we have said all, we must say of Punishment what is faid of Reward, since
there is a proportion betwixt them; now it is certain that the Reward which we
expect from heaven, is only grounded on the fidelity of the Promises of God,
and not on his absolute Justice, which was no ways obliged to give us glory,
which is a good which furpasseth all natural capacity, which has no proportion
with created things, and whereto we can pretend nothing, but altogether from
the pure grace of the Divine goodness, which of our selves we can by no means
deserve.

But I shall yet go further, to consider man in his natural condition; he
cannot of right demand so much as any temporal reward unless it be by virtue of
the promises made unto him by divine and humane Laws; for besides that virtue
is satisfied in herself, and that the pleasure which accompanies good actions,
is the last perfection, and if we may so speak, the only recompense they can
aspire unto; God is not obliged to give man more then to the rest of the
Creatures, but only what is necessary for the accomplishment and preservation
of his being; neither do men ow themselves to one another, but as they are
obliged to render themselves out of the rigor of Justice; now Rewards before
they were promised, are not of that order; they may pass in the rank of Graces.
For to render what is due is no recompense; it is a payment, and reward is
somewhat more then payment: So when we pay a Servant for the service he has
done we reward him not; to reward him, you must give him more then your
obligation bore, neither could your gift have been exacted for him by the rigor
of Justice, unless by virtue of the promises which were made unto him: For
which cause some have had reason to say, that Honor was not the reward of
virtue, because it is a right due to its excellency. It Is true, that this duty
has its bounds and measures, beyond which it may pass for a reward, as titles
and badges of Honor are which Laws and Princes bestow on those who perform fair
actions, forasmuch as they go beyond the obligation they have to honor Virtue,
and that they bestow them not as things due out of necessity, but only by
virtue of their promises, whereby they oblige themselves to recompense such as
performed such like actions: those also who perform them, render themselves
worthy of the effect of those promises, and that is what we call to deserve a
reward.

Yet this imports not that promises which Princes and Laws make upon these
occasions, are not inspired by Justice: it is the same as concerning those pains
wherewith they threaten those who perform evil actions; for as there are
preservative remedies to hinder Vice, those are as nourishment to entertain
Virtue; and it is as just to encourage and provoke men to do well out of hope of
reward, as to intimidate and withdraw them from ill by threatening of
punishment; As also the exacting of punishments is not the work of pure
Justice, but of the fidelity of the Law; after the same manner, the reward a
man receives is not an effect of Justice, but of the faithfulness of the
promiser; for that besides that a virtuous action is out of duty and
obligation, it can pretend to a reward only but as from an expectative grace;
the Justice of the Law having considered the future only, and being not
destined for things done, unless for example sake, and to render the promises
true and faithful.

But it is to carry the matter we treat too high; Let Us satisfy our selves in
saying, that what concerns punishments ordained by natural and civil Laws, the
greatest men of antiquity have been of my opinion, and have believed as we do,
that they are only preservative remedies destined to make those better who have
erred, to serve for an example to other men, and to provide for the security of
those who have been offended.

If this be so, Why Anger will cha^ise him who has done the injury.
Anger which employs Revenge as a chastisement must have some of these motives.
Now its design is not to correct the defects of others, nor to give examples,
because Beasts which are subject to this Passion can have no such thought.
Neither aims it at the severity of him who has been offended; as all the rest
of the Passions, she respects her own particular preservation only, and being
unable to hinder the offense from having been done, it will at least hinder its
continuance. In a word, it endeavors to take away the power of doing ill from
him who has done the injury, that he may do it no more.

And indeed, since Anger is a kind of Boldness, and that Boldness assaults ill
to take away its power, Anger which assaults the cause of the ill must needs
endeavor to take from him the power of doing ill; and because that in those
causes which act with design, the Will is the best part of this power; it is
certain, that taking the Will from them, the power is also taken away, or at
least it is rendered useless.

Now there is nothing which can better take away the will of doing ill but by
making him suffer ill who has already done it, forasmuch as the remembrance of
the pain he suffers must needs hinder him from falling another time into the
like danger.

So that the Soul has no other end when she will revenge herself in Anger, but
to hinder him who has done the injury, from continuing to do him the like: we
find it certain by experience that whatsoever stops the course or the
continuation of the offense, appeaseth the Anger. So we are satisfied when he
who has done us an injury, has been hurt, when he repents, when he flies,
when he makes it appear that he offended us not out of design. Forsmuch as we
believe that the pain of his wounds will make him afraid to fall into the like
fault; that his repentance has changed his design of ill doing; that flying he
has lost the power of it; and that having offended us unawares he did it
unvoluntarily.

On the other side, he who is angry will himself execute his revenge, or if any
do it for him, he will have it known that it was he that procured it, as if
that knowledge served to hinder the other from continuing any more to offend
him; instead that he who simply hates, cares not for that, and so his enemy
suffers ill, he cares not whence he believes it comes. In fine, it is for this
cause that those calamities and great miseries, extremety of sickness and death
it self, which happens to those who have injured us, take away from us that
desire of revenge, although they take not away the hatred and the aversion
which we have against them; forasmuch as in the condition in which they are
they have not as it seems the power to offend us, and that Anger pretends not
to do ill simply to incommodate him who suffers it, but to guard it self from
that violence which a man may afterward receive.

This is the general end which Nature proposes to this Passion in respect of
vengeance, which it inspires in all creatures, and which consequently in its
source and original is an effect of this primary Justice, which moves every
thing to its own preservation. The policy and opinion of men has added
thereunto other particulars as Correction and Example, the reparation of Honor
offended, and the preservation of that excellency and superiority wherewith
they flatter themselves.

For although man considered in himself, may as well as the rest of Creatures
revenge himself of those injuries which he has received: Yet having been
destined for a civil life and society, having reserved to it self the right of
revenge, as a matter belonging to the public, he cannot lawfully exercise it
without the help of Laws, unless the danger be very urgent, that he wants time
to expect or seek their assistance; when therefore they revenge the injuries of
particulars, it is first to provide for their security, because it is the natural
end of the Passion, and then to correct those who have offended, and by their
examples to keep others in their duties; they accommodate themselves even to
the opinions of men who think their honor receives some diminution when they
suffer an injury without resenting it, and that Vengeance alone can repair it;
wherefore the Laws labor to give them this satisfaction, when they take upon
them to revenge them; for although this opinion is a vicious fonndation, and
proceeds from that pride which is born with us; yet nevertheless having past
into a custom, and being in some manner upheld by Nature, the Law which
accommodates it self to out weakness tolerates it, and will not take away from
those who have been offended, the consolation they have to believe that their
honor has had reparation by revenge.

In effect, Man who is naturally proud, and places one part of his glory
neither to yield nor submit himself, cannot suffer an injury without resenting
it, but he must at the same time confess his impotency and his submission; for
if he get no satisfaction, it is out of weakness; if he will not seek it, it is
out of respect: both ways he yields that pre-eminence which he pretends to with
so much Passion: But when he revengeth himself, he makes it appear that he is
not less powerful, nor less considerable then he who has offended him, and
thereby he thinks to change the opinion which might have been conceived in
prejudice of his excellency. Its therefore self-love which casts him in this
error, and bereaves him of knowing himself destined for a civil life, wherein
he may not exercise his revenge, but by the authority of the Laws, which after
having made use of punishments for the public good, does also leave this
belief in those who have been offended, that by that means they have preserved
their rights and advantages. However it be, this satisfaction is a particular
end belonging to human revenge, since Beasts cannot pretend unto it, nor are
they capable to seek reparation for an honor which they can neither acquire nor
preserve.

Beyond this, we can say no more on this subject, In all Anger there is a
desire of vengeance.
but only to clear the difficulty which we proposed at the beginning of this
Discourse; to wit, when a man grows angry with himself, with his fortune, or
with insensible things, since it is unlikely a man should seek to revenge
himself on himself, and that Fortune is an imaginary thing, which is no more
capable of suffering grief then all the rest of insensible things; certainly we
need not doubt but in all these encounters there is a desire of vengeance, but
its a blind and mad Appetite which the precipitation and impetuosity of Anger
stirs up in the Soul; for this Passion raises it self so quick that it often
prevents all the lights of Reason, and then we need not wonder if it know not
those things which move it, and if it often vary its designs. We may indeed
call it a kind of Drunkenness, which makes trees appear like men, which
represents all things double, and which fancies to it self Chimera's to combat
them withal; for he who is angry at his chance, does he not fashion out a
fantasm for an enemy? does he not divide himself when angry with himself, and
is not his sight troubled when he knows neither Parents nor Friends, and takes
insensible things as if they were capable of sense? These are therefore the
effects of an offended Fancy, like those which dreams or melancholy raise, and
which make us believe that it is in these encounters that Anger is the
commencement of folly, as says one of the most ancient of all the Latin Poets.

Let Us therefore conclude, Wherein Anger is different from Boldness.
That an offense received is the ground of this Passion, that who has
committed it is the enemy it assaults, and that it rises up against it to
procure its revenge. But for all this we have not yet found the principal
difference which ought to be in this definition, and which distinguishes it
from all the rest; for the Soul may rise up against him who has offended her,
assault and combat him to revenge herself, without being moved by Anger; does
not this happen every day in War, wherein we assault our enemies, or we revenge
the injuries we have received without accusing this Passion of bearing part?
Wisdom it self, Magnanimity and Justice do they not often seek revenge of
wrongs done them, without being suspected of having followed the counsels or
motions of Anger. Certainly we must confess this is that rock whereon we may be
afraid to lose our selves; for after all this long discourse we seem
constrained to say, that Anger and Boldness are but one and the same Passion,
seeing they have ill for their object, they both assault it, and both would
take away its power of doing ill. And although we may say that the Object of
Boldness is more universal then that of Anger, since this assaults only the
cause of ill, and the other assaults it what ill soever it be; that their End
admits of the same difference, Anger having no other design but to take away
the power of ill doing from that cause which has already done it; and Boldness
endeavoring to take it away without considering whether it be done or no; yet
all this would only serve to conclude, that Anger is a species and a
difference only of Boldness: And without doubt if we respect the end and the
object only of these two Passions, we must be forced to fall into this error;
so that there remains the motion only, whereby the diversity which is betwixt
them is observeable.

But what? What the motion of the Soul is in Anger.
Both of them rise up against ill, and it signifies nothing to say that this
rising up of Anger is more impetuous then that of Boldness; for besides that it
often happens that this is moved with as much or more violence, and more
readily then the other, less and more cannot cause an essential difference in
the Passions. Must it not then be Grief which ever accompanies Anger, which
causes some diversity in these motions? for it is she alone we can fancy is
able to contribute any thing thereunto. And indeed this conjecture would be
very likely, did not Grief very often join with Boldness, without moving Wrath;
we may indeed resent the ill, and repel it without being moved by this Passion;
and we see daily in single combats that the grief for the wounds we have
received, or the displeasure we might have to see ones enemy have the
advantage, accompanies often Boldness without any esmotion of Anger: We cannot
say a Judge is moved with it when he compassionates him who has suffered an
injury, and will revenge him according to Law; and that a Father may not
chastise his Children who have offended him without being sensible of the
motions of this Passions. Finally, is it to be believed that a man always makes
himself angry with sickness, with a Beast that bites him, or a Serpent that
stings him, when he drives them away, or assaults them? and yet in all these
encounters Grief and Boldness are both met.

Yet must we not upon these considerations renounce our proposed conjecture;
Anger is a mixture of Grief and Boldness.
for since Grief is so strictly conjoined with Anger, that it can never be
separated, and that it is but by chance it mixeth with Boldness; It Is to be
believed, that it unites it self with this after another manner then it does
with the other, and that this diversity causes an essential difference in
their motions. And certainly the Passions may mix together two ways; the one is
by confounding their motions, so that the Soul at the same time suffers two
Passions as Hope and Boldness, Boldness and Anger; the other is by making the
motion of the one succeed the other, so that two Passions remain not together,
but so swiftly follow one another that they seem to be but one, as Love and
Desire, Joy and Hope.

Grief therefore may join with Boldness both these ways; and without doubt, in
the examples proposed they do but follow one the other at several reprisals
without uniting their motions. But when they confound themselves together they
cause this Passion of Anger, which is nothing but the union and the confusion
of the former; for which cause Anger is never without them, because they are
the essential parts whereof it is composed. To confirm this truth, we need
only consider, that the same offense raises up in Anger a far more sharp and
fretful grief then in Boldness; for there is no other reason of this diversity
but that Grief and Boldness have contrary motions; and that the Soul being at
the same time agitated by both, cannot but suffer a great violence, and that
the displeasure she conceives for the injury received must needs be augmented
by the pain she is sensible of in the combat of these two Passions. Nature in
effect which loves order and equality in all, flies as much as it may this
contrariety of motions, and if she find herself engaged in it she suffers it
with pain and disquiet; and if it be lawful to say so, she groans under so
heavy a burden which she cannot long support without being overwhelmed, which
is the reason why Anger is not long lasting, and that it presently changes
into other Passions, as into Hatred, Sadness, and into Despair.

But when Grief joins wsth Boldness so that their motions are not confounded,
and that they do but follow and succeed one another, the Soul is not
constrained, and tortured, and suffers not that turbulent and painful agitation
wherewith she is necessarily moved in the encounter of two opposite motions.
For which cause Grief is not so pungent, nor does it admit of that increase
which the pain and trouble of the Soul in Anger suffers.

Its true, that in this occasion these two Passions follow one another so close
that they may easily be confounded, and so form Anger, as in fight it often
happens, and after the same manner as Grief therein becomes more pungent;
Boldness also becomes more impetuous by reason of the endeavor the Soul makes
in the constraint which those two contrary motions cause in it, as we shall say
hereafter.

What may be objected against this doctrine, may be, Whether any Anger may be
found without any cause of offense
that to form Anger there must be a cause which offends with intention; and
that it may happen that Grief and Boldness might confound themselves, were it
not for that cause, and therefore altogether without their moving of Anger. But
we may boldly answer, that it is impossible it should so happen, and that if
Grief and Boldness unite, when no cause has caused an injury, still the Soul
fancies one, as when a man is angry with himself, with fortune, and with
insensible things; because the Soul which is instructed by nature, in all what
is necessary for the production of the Passions, knows what motion is proper
for every one of them, what object ought to move them, and what end she ought
to propose herself in them; and not one of these things presents it self so
soon to our knowledge, but it presently adds two others, so that in the same
manner as when she resents an injury, she at the same time forms the design of
revenging herself, and afterward agitates herself by that motion which is
proper for Anger; so when she finds herself agitated with this motion, the
cause which ought to move this Passion not occurring therein, knowing it is
that she is accustomed to make use of in Anger, she forms to herself the cause
and object of Anger, and so perfects that Passion which this motion had only
commenced: And this is the more easy to be believed, for that the motion of
the spirits which makes no part of the Passion as that of the Appetite does,
causes the same effect. For if it happen that the spirits are agitated with a
motion proper to a Passion, the Soul which sees what passes in her organs, and
knows after what manner she is accustomed to stir them up, presently fancies
that object which ought to excite this motion; and at last agitates it self
conformably to that motive which this object inspires it withal, and so that
esmotion which it meets within the spirits. It Is thus that Music produces
Passion; it is thus that Love out of inclination is formed, as we have showed in
the Treatise we have made thereof. It Is then true that Anger is nothing else
but Grief and Boldness united and confounded together, and that the turbulent
and unequal agitation which the Soul is constrained to suffer in the encounter,
and in the shock of these two opposite Passions, makes that difference of
motion which is proper unto it, and which distinguishes it from all the rest.
In effect, we cannot conceive that the Appetite in Grief retires it self, and
that at the same time Boldness raises it up, but we must fancy we see a Sea
agitated with contrary winds and waves, for the same combat which is made
amongst the waves, the same boylings which it raises up, the same efforts with
which it beats upon the shore. Finally, the same trouble and confusion which
this great Main suffers during the tempest, are in the Soul when she is stirred
up by these two violent Passions.

So that it is not without reason that we say the Sea grows angry, and that
Anger is a tempest, since there is the same agitation in either of them, and
that both of them spring from the contrariety of motions which shake these two
great depths.

But we may say That if Anger be a mixture of Grief and of Boldness, it cannot
be in the rank of simple Passions, as we have hitherto conceived, and as at the
beginning of this work we our selves resolved. Certainly, there needs no
contest hereupon, and it were to fight against the truth to defend the common
opinion; for if there is a Passion which is mixed and composed, it is chiefly
this, where Grief and Boldness, Desire and Hope are all met together. That if
we proposed it as a simple Passion, besides that we did not then deduce those
reasons which ought to oblige us to shun the errors of the School, we may
freely confess that upon the way we often discovered those things which at
first we never thought to have met withal, and that considering more nearly the
nature of this Passion, Reason and Truth have made it appear unto us to be
altogether composed, that is to say, of Grief and Boldness, as of its essential
parts, and of Desire and Hope as of inseparable accidents or necessary
conditions which accompany it. For it is certain, that he that is angry ought to
desire and hope for revenge. Yet the Mind may separate these two Passions from
Anger without destroying its Nature, forasmuch as without considering them it
may conceive the Soul may be touched with Grief for the injury received, and
that she assaults the cause which caused it, wherein all the Essence of Anger
consists.

So that now we may define it to be A turbulent Agitation which Grief and
Boldness move in the Appetite, Definition of Anger.
whereby the Soul retires in herself, to estrange herself from the injury
received, and at the same time raises herself up against the cause which
caused it to be done, for to revenge herself of it. Whence we may judge, that
as this Passion is mixed, its causes and effects are also of the same nature;
for it has indeed two objects, to wit the Injury and him who did it: It has
two ends, the one to estrange it self from ill, and the other to revenge it
self. Lastly, it is composed of two motions, which being united cause this
turbulent agitation, wherein we have said the principal difference of this
Passion consists.

Yet we are to observe, that as commonly Boldness vapors more in Anger then in
Grief, and yet that there are some Angers in which Grief appears stronger then
Boldness; Its certain, that in these encounters the motions of these two
Passions are proportionably stronger or weaker, and that it often happens that
its rising up is greater then its contraction; and that sometimes also its
contraction is more then its lifting up; but if they are equal, Boldness always
appears more then Grief, because in that the Soul produces and casts it self
forth, and in Grief she hides and inwardly retires herself, as we shall make it
more particularly appear in the Chapter, wherein we shall examine the nature of
that Passion.

We must conclude this long Discourse with a resolution of an important
difficulty which may here be made: Who those are which are inclided to Anger.
For perhaps some will say, that if Boldness makes a part of Anger, it will
follow that those who are naturally bold, will also be most inclined to this
Passion. On the contrary, those who are timorous, should never be sensible of
it. Although experience teaches us, that those who are truly Bold, are seldom
provoked to Anger, and that Children, Women and sick persons which are weak and
timorous, are easily moved thereunto. But this objection is easily answered, if
we remember that Boldness alone never produces this Passion, but that Grief
must also meet with it, that these mix and confound themselves together. In a
word, that a man must be sensible of injuries, and have a quick and agile
Boldness to be susceptible of Anger. Now those who have an heroic Boldness,
are not sensible of injuries unless they are very cousiderable, because they
despise most of those things which assault them, and that that Melancholy which
is in their temperature retains the fury of their spirits, giving them time to
examine the offenses, and to consider whether they deserve to be chastised. On
the contrary, those who are weak of body or of mind, and who have a very agile
heat, as Children and Women, and those who have any remarkable defect, finding
themselves more exposed to injuries, are easily born away with a desire of
vengeance, because their weakness makes them apprehend every thing, and the
subtle heat which they have is so quickly inflamed, that they have not time
enough to consider whether they are truly injured, and whether they ought to
revenge themselves, or whether indeed they have the power; and that is the
reason why the Choleric are the most angry of all, because they have an ardent
and active heat, which renders all their actions precipitate, and bereaves them
of time and means to judge rightly of things; For it is certain that there is no
quality so much an enemy to Reason as Heat, and a violent agitation; all the
functions of Sense, and principally those of Judgment, being not to be
performed but when the Soul enjoys a great Tranquillity, as Aristotle says.
Whence it also happens that Nature has placed the brain so far from the
principle of heat, that its quiet might not be disturbed by the neighborhood of
that active and turbulent quality, as we shall more amply hereafter declare.

CHAP. III. Of the Motion of the Spirits and of the Humors in Anger.
AS Rivers which run into the Sea are sensible of those storms wherewith it is
agitated; The spirits in Anger have contrary motions.
those spirits which like Rivers take their source from the Soul, and discharge
themselves there also, must needs suffer part of that great tempest which Anger
raises therein: And they must be shaken with the same violence and agitation
which she resents in herself. If it be therefore true, that she is then moved
with two contrary motions, and that at the same time when Grief makes her
retire, Boldness raises her up and drives her forth; it is necessary that the
spirits to whom she communicates all her commotions must be agitated after the
same manner; and that as she does, they must restrain and retreat themselves at
the same instant, when she raises and darts herself forth against ill.

And certainly did not Reason force the mind to confess this Truth, the effects
which Anger produces would sufficiently prove it. For besides that a man often
grows pale when he is carried away with this Passion, that his voice is
vehement and sharp, and that commonly we see in his Face sadness mix and
confound it self with fury, which can proceed from nothing but this contrariety
of motions; it is impossible to doubt it, if we consider the different pulse
which is proper for Anger, and the consistence which the Heart and the Lungs
have when it is kindled in those parts; for it has this in particular, That it
makes the pulse higher, and more elevated, then large and extended; And that it
retires the Heart and Lungs in themselves, although it then swells them and
raises them up; now this can be but from these two opposite motions we have
spoken of, as we shall more fully declare when we enquire into the causes of
those effects.

But although this be most certain, yet we must confess that it is harder to
conceive how such bodies as the spirits are, can at the same time suffer
motions which seem incompatible; for although there are many examples in Nature
which make it appear that a body may be moved in such a manner; that Fish which
swims against the course of the water, are insensibly carried away with the
force of the stream; that a man may walk in a ship contrary to the course he
shapes, and that the heavens themselves, are, as they say, carried toward the
West by the Primum mobile, whilst by their natural inclination they tend
toward the East. Yet this clears not the difficulty, but leaves still a great
difference betwixt these motions, and those wherewith the spirits are agitated
in this Passion; for that there is but one motion in the former proper to the
body moved; the other is as a stranger, and as the School says, happens by
accident; but here these two motions which the spirits suffer are proper unto
them, it is the same mover which produces them, it is the same subject which
receives them; and it seems a contradiction, that at the same time a thing
should advance it self and go backwards, that it should tend to two opposite
places. In a word, that it should be and not be, in the place where it is.

We must therefore fay, that there are two ways whereby the spirits may receive
these contrary motions; How the spirits suffer contrary motions.
The first supposing them to have diverse parts, some of which are agitated
after one manner, and others after another; just as it happens in the
Streights, where contrary Currents and Seas meet; for as there are some waves
which enter into one another, some which justle and cause the beatings they
give one another to boil exceedingly; the same thing certainly is here done,
where one part of the Spirits which follows the motion of Grief, and another
which is carried away with that of Boldness, and which meeting on the way
causes this turbulent and unequal agitation which is observable in this
Passion; the same way is like that which is performed in Boldness, wherein the
spirits stiffen themselves in themselves, and yet forbear not to dart
themselves forth. For seeing the parts of a body may amongst themselves suffer
a motion which may be different from that wherewith the whole body is agitated,
as it happens to the Arm, when at the same time we stiffen and stretch it
forth. So it may also be that the spirits may retire in themselves, and at the
same time be violently driven into the exterior parts. And truly as Grief makes
its impression before Boldness, because we must resent an injury before we will
our revenge; it is certain, that at that instant the spirits restrain
themselves; so that Boldness coming after, and not driving Grief away, it must
raise the Spirits restrained as they are, and without making them lose the
disposition it finds them in, drive them to those places where they are
necessary.

Now although in little Angers it may happen that the Spirits will be moved
only after the latter manner, yet commonly they are by both sorts at once, and
it must necessarily be. The better to conceive this great storm which they
raise in the veins, we must fancy to our selves that they do not only restrain
themselves, as we have said; but that there are some which run and fly to the
heart, and others which issue out and impetuously cast themselves forth, and
that in this encounter which is thereby made, they embroyl and confound
themselves, they justle and raise themselves up, and so they make a current
full of boilings and of foam; it is true, that according as Grief or Boldness
predominates in this Passion, the ebbing and flowing of the spirits is stronger
or weaker; for when Grief is greater, which is properly what we say is to be
vexed, there are more spirits which retire to the heart then there are which
are darted forth. On the contrary, when Boldness is greater, as when Anger is
violent, and turns even into Fury, there are more spirits which dart themselves
forth then retire; and then although the shock which they give themselves
cannot be so great, and seems to be unable to cause this agitation, which is
when they are of equal force; yet this hinders not that trouble and tempest to
be therein formed with the same violence which the excess of this Passion
requires; forasmuch as if the shock is not then performed by the encounter of
these opposite motions; yet it is made by the frequent arrival of the spirits,
which like impetuous floods precipitate themselves on one another, and making
haste to follow the first, finding them in their way dash against them, and
drive them as if they indeed opposed their course.

For it is the property of Boldness and Anger to move the Soul and the Spirits
by sallies and by swinges; The Spirits move themselves by sallies.
forasmuch as the danger they are threatened withal continually sollicites them
to make new endeavors to surmount them, which commonly happens not to those
Passions which tend to good, where the Soul having nothing to fear abandons
herself to every object which pleases, and as if she would cast herself whole,
and all at once before it; she drives the Spirits thereunto like a flood,
without minding to recreate them, whence afterward follow Languors, Swoonings
and other accidents which we have treated of in our Discourse of Joy.

But although these sallies are common to Boldness and Anger; it is certain,
that they are more frequent and more readily doubled in this then in the other;
because Grief which always accompanies it, provokes, and at every moment urges
the Soul; and that weakness often meets with it, which renders it the more
diligent and careful; instead that in Boldness, seeing only the ill comes
without resenting it, and confiding in her own strength, she believes that this
crowding of them together is no ways necessary.

Let Us therefore conclude, that Grief restrains the Spirits, and makes them
retreat to the Heart; that Boldness stiffens and drives them forth, that the
forcings of the Soul cause them to make these sallies, which at every moment
precipitates them one on another, and that from the combat of so many
different motions this turbulent ebullition and agitation proceeds wherewith
the Spirits are agitated in this Passion.

To seek now what the end of all these motions is, and what the Souls motives
is when she excites them, were a useless thing, at least in respect of the
stiffening and darting forth of the Spirits, which have been curiously examined
in the precedent Chapters: And as for those which Grief causes, we shall then
propose them, when we treat of that Passion; for as concerning the shock, the
ebullition, and the trouble which here happens, they are effects which are done
out of necessity, without the Souls intention of producing them, being
altogether useless for her design.

Yet not to leave the Reader in doubt concerning those two kinds of motions
which in Grief we assigned the spirits, it shall suffice to say by way of
advance, that the soul is not at that time content to cause the Spirits to
retire to the heart, but that she also causes them to shut themselves up in
themselves, and in the design which she has to estrange herself from the ill
which urges her, she conceives slight is not able to save her from the danger,
unless she shut herself up in herself, if she stop not the Enemies passage, and
if as much as she possibly can she hide not herself from him.

After this it will be nothing difficult to declare how Hope and Desire which
are always with Anger, may find in the esmotion she causes that which is
proper for them, and causes their subsistence; for since the spirits dart
themselves forth in desire, and stiffen themselves in hope; Boldness which
causes both of these motions, must needs favor the birth and preservation of
these two Passions; even so it is with Hate and Aversion, which commonly
accompany Anger, forasmuch as their agitation being conformable to that Grief
raises up as in its place we shall make known, it is nothing strange that they
are found with it, that they dwell together and maintain one the other.

What is most difficult herein, How the motion of the spirits in Anger can
suffer that of Joy.
is, to explicate how all these motions may accommodate themselves with that of
Joy; for it is certain, that in the hight of danger, the hope of revenge alone
satisfies the Mind, and even we have an extreme pleasure to imagine we are
revenged, and that Vengeance executed is sweeter then honey, as the Poet says.
Now if Joy dilates and sweetly disperseth the Spirits, how is it possible it
can subsist with Anger, which restrains and drives them forth with impetuosity?
We may hereupon say, that Joy may form it self in the superior part of the
Soul, whilst Anger agitater the inferior, and that when the Spirits which serve
these two Powers are moved with contrary motions without incompatibility,
because it is performed in several places. But if Joy descends into the inferior
part, we must necessarily believe that in the same instant she drives away
Anger, that the storm which this raised dissipates it self at the arrival of a
Passion which always brings with it a calm and serenity. In effect, when a man
flatters himself with the pleasure which he shall reap in his revenge, he
resents not the same agitation and those transports which possessed him before,
his looks are more sweet, his countenance is calm, and all his actions are more
modest. I confess that this may be very suddenly changed, but yet it is still
true that at that instant he resents it not, and that Pleasure and Anger are
two Passions which may succeed one another, but yet are incompatible as well by
reason of the contrary motions which they produce, as of the opposite motives
which they have. This clearly appears when we have effectually revenged our
selves, for then Anger quite cease, and the Joy of the Victory we have
obtained remains alone, and those Passions which usually follow it, as Vanity,
Insolency, etc. What kind of heat produces Anger.


We should now speak of that Heat which accompanies these motions, and the
ardor which this Passion kindles in all the parts. But this has been amply
done in the discourse of Boldness, wherein we did show that the Soul and the
Heart have power to augment the natural heat when it is necessary, and that she
has no occasion wherein its assistance is more useful then in those Passions
which are to assault ill. For as this quality is the most agile of all, and
most fit to destroy what is hurtful, it is also the most powerful instrument
which the Soul has to employ in its combats, wherein the first design she
has is to bereave the enemy of his power of doing ill. For which reason in
these encounters she raises it up, she augments it, and entertains it in the
Heart, which is its natural source, and from thence by a particular privilege
which these two Passions have, she sends it to those organs which she intends
to employ. If in effect there are others in which she is dispersed to the
outward parts, it is not that it is sent thither because it is useless; it is
because it follows those Spirits which are sent thither; but herein both of
them are led by the Soul, being necessary for the design which she proposes
herself; the Spirits to conveigh strength to the parts, and heat to destroy the
ill which presents it self.

Now ill is more urgent in Anger then in Boldness, for those Reasons which we
have deduced, we need not doubt but the heat renders it self therein also more
violent, as well out of the greatness of the endeavor it makes to produce it,
as for that of the agitation of the spirits, and the rising up of those pungent
humors which it incites. In effect it is certain that it separates Choler, and
all what is most malignant in the veins, and that it uses them as offensive
arms, the more easily to destroy the enemy. Whence it happens that the bitings
of all kind of creatures are in some sort venomous when they are angry, and
the more irritated they are, the more dangerous, and hard to be cured; which
ought to make us judge that their teeth are then infected with some malignant
humor which Nature brings into those parts, after having separated it from the
rest, to render it the more mischevous and fitter to effect what she intends:
It Is also true, that the separation of the humors renders them more active,
giving them liberty, and restoring them that strength which mixture had
weakened. But that we may the better clear the Truth of so new a proposition,
we must examine whether the Soul has the power thus to separate the humors;
and if after having separated them she can remix them again, and reinstate them
as they were before.

As for the first, a man must be very ignorant of what is done in Nature, and
of what is performed in our selves, to doubt of so certain and so evident a
thing. The choice which the Soul makes of what is fit for every part, so many
kinds of humors as she at every moment drives out of the most healthful
bodies, so many evacuations as she causes in sickness, make it sufficiently
appear that she has the power to separate what is profitable from what is not
so, and that if she have a design to employ venom or choler to execute her
revenge, she may draw them from the mass and places where they are, and
afterward send them to those places where she intends to use them.

The other point is more difficult to be resolved; Whether Nature can reunite
the Humors which she has separated.
for it seems that the order which Nature observes is to drive out what it has
separated, and never to remingle ill humors with good, when she has once
divided them from one another; so that if in Anger she separate venom and
choler to employ them against ill, she must drive them out without remixing
them any more with the rest. And yet we cannot doubt but that when Anger is
over, the Humors retake their former places, and but that the Body returns to
his pristine constitution. We must therefore say that there are useful and
useless Humore, that both of them may be within and without the Veins, and that
that order which Nature observes is different according as she is free or
constrained. When she acts freely, after having separated the Humors, and
driven them out of the veins, she recalls them thither no more, and how good
soever they be, she must needs drive them out of the Body: So the Serosity
which is in the Bladder, Choler which is in the bag of the Gall, Blood it self
being out of its vessels, never returns into that Mass from whence they were
drawn, but she quite expels them; but whilst these Humors remain in the veins,
she may separate them from the rest, and after remingle them together, as she
commonly does in Passions, in Feavors, and in those Crisis's which are
imperfect; for when Choler is driven by Anger into the surface of the Body,
after the storm is over, it resumes the place again which it had in the mass of
the blood, and remixeth it self with it as it was before. It Is true that this
is not done in a moment, and that time is requisite to resettle it; for which
reason a man that is let blood, at his going out of the violence of this
Passion, his blood commonly appears altogether changed, and a diversity of
colors appears, which would make a man believe it were corrupted, were one not
assured that after the return of a calm no such thing is to be seen, and that
it proceeded only from this disunion of the Humors, which uniting themselves
again return to the blood its former color.

This reunion is also to be found in Feavors which are commonly caused by the
separation which is made in the veins of those ill Humors which are there
gathered together; for although it be Nature which separates them that she may
drive them out, it often happens that they are so malignant that she dares not
undertake it, and leaving them thus in their vessels, she endeavors to repair
the error which she had committed by raising up heat to overcome them, remixing
them with the rest to temper and sweeten them; and lastly laboring for their
decoction, the first effect whereof is to reassemble divided things; but if we
observe what is done in these crisis^s, we need no longer doubt of this Truth;
for it sometimes happens that Nature being disposed to terminate a sickness by
sweat, after even having already begun, she all at once stops and retains that
humor which was ready to issue out. Now it is impossible it should be left in
the veins, but it must embroyl it self with the rest of the blood, since she
often retains it the better to concoct it; that she reassumes her design of
driving it out many days after, and that there is no likelihood that in so long
a time so fluid and penetrating a Humor should preserve it self in its paucity,
without mixing it self with the rest. To conclude, if the spirits issue out of
their vessels, to insinuate themselves not only in the parts but in the Humors
themselves which are corrupted, and that after having performed their function
they retire to their principles, and reunite themselves with those spirits
which they had left, as we have showed in our Discourse of Digestion, why
should not those parts of the blood which go not out of the veins do the same
thing? For when we say Choler rises in Anger, we mean nothing else but the
most subtle and the hottest part of the blood, and not that Choler which is an
excrement and without the veins; it being true that the Soul never causes this
to remount when she acts freely, and follows her ordinary course, if it happen
that she is pressed and constrained by the violence of a Passion, or of some
disease, it is true then there are no Humors how malignant soever they be, and
in what place soever they may be, but she can raise them up, and force them to
re-enter the veins, and the most considerable parts. It Is thus that vehement
Anger is sometimes followed with the Jaundise, with an Apoplexy, with
Convulsion fits, trembling of the Nerves, and other such like Diseases, which
are caused by that violent transport of Humors we have spoken of.

It Is thus that in malignant Fevers we see so many sad and unlooked for
accidents happen, which astonish the Physician, and overthrow the Patient: But
this Discourse concerns Physic; let us pursue our design, and seek the causes
of those Characters which are proper to this Passion.

CHAP. IV. The Causes of the Characters of Anger.
ALthough Anger be composed of Grief and Boldness, and for the same cause its
probable it should have no other Characters, but those which those two Passions
separately produce; yet as in all other things mixture affords new virtues, or
so confounds those which are principal, that it makes them appear altogether
different from what they were; it also happens that Anger besides those
Characters which are common to her with Boldness and Grief, it has others
particulars added unto it, which are not at all to be found in the other, if at
least they encounter it is with very great difference.

Indeed if we do but consider these which it forms in the Soul, it has even as
Boldness, Hope, Confidence and Freeness; it has just as Grief, Peevishness,
Impatience and Heaviness: But Pride, Fury and Despair are far different herein
from those which accompany those two Passions; for if Boldness is proud, it
has strength to maintain its Pride, if it be carried away with Fury, it is
after great strivings, and it never happens at its beginning: If finally Grief
easily fall into Despair, it is a timorous, base, heedless despair; but Anger
has a Boldness which is commonly vain, and without any ground, a precipitate
fury kindled at the instant of its birth; and when it is in despair of revenge,
it is a temerous, violent and enraged Despair; Besides which, it in particular
makes great threatenings, speaks much, discovers its secrets; it is credulous,
impudent and opinionate; it is base, cruel, and insolent: But this diversity
appears also in the corporal Characters, as we shall make it known after we
have examined the causes of these.

Let Us therefore begin with Hope, Why Hope devanceeth Anger
which ever gives a beginning to Anger; for it is certain that this Passion is
never kindled in the heart, what injury soever a man has received, or what
desire soever to retort it, but first he hopes to have his revenge: So that we
are seldom angry with those that are extremely above us; Demons or dead bodies
although they may offend us, will never provoke us; and it has seldom been
seen that a man of a low condition has been carried away with wrath against
his King or against his Lord, forasmuch as such persons are so high that they
seem to be out of reach, and that it is, as it were, impossible to do them any
harm, and that so having no hope of being revenged, they find it is to no end to
be angry with them.

But since this Hope cannot be founded but on those forces which we believe we
have, How weak persons hope to be revenged.
and that Natures which are most weak, such as are Women, and Children, and
sick persons, are extremely susceptible of Anger; how is it possible they
should hope to be revenged, having not the power, and carrying always about
them a secret sense of their own weakness, as hereafter we shall make it appear?

Certainly it is easy to judge by those vain endeavors which they make in these
encounters, that it is from the error of their thoughts, and that the Soul
suffers it self often to be deceived in the Judgment she makes of her forces.
Now this error commonly proceeds from the motion of heat which awakens and
augments it self in this Passion; for as we have said in the Discourse of
Boldness, this quality taking part with the corporal forces, being seated in
the Heart, and being, if we may so speak, nearest the Irascible Appetite, it
cannot be irritated nor increased without the Souls being abused with a vain
opinion which it persuades that she is strong enough to undertake great matters.

It Is as with a Prince who hearkens only to generous counsels, to whom his
power and greatness are only represented, and who sees no man that provokes
him not to take up arms. For how weak soever he is, incessantly finding himself
solicited by those violent Ministers, having his ears always filled with their
flatteries, he at last suffers himself to be persuaded, and without considering
his impotency engages himself in temerous undertakings; the Soul often does
the like in the weakest bodies, when natural heat kindles it self it the Heart,
seeing nothing about it, if we may so speak, but this floating and unquiet
quality, being every moment provoked by its ardor and by its vivacity, and
suffering it self to be surprised by the ostentation she makes of her power and
virtue, she at last imagines her forces are greater then indeed they are, and
without remembering her weakness she resolves to combat the ill, and flatters
herself with the hope of obtaining the Victory.

But it may be enquired, what it is which then thus irritates and augments this
heat, What it is that irritates heat in weak persons.
forasmuch as if it be the Soul, as we have said, which employs it to destroy
the ill, she must needs hope to overcome it, before she will offer to make use
of it, since the design always goes before those means which are proper to
execute it, and that in effect the Passions are immanent actions, which form
themselves in the Soul before the Body resents them; for there is no question
but Hope accompanies strong and robustious constitutions; where it is not
necessary that heat should be irritated to raise up this Passion, it is enough
for them that they know their forces, and are assured of them; but here where
weakness is whereof the Soul has the knowledge, and which consequently ought
to make her mistrust herself, there must needs be something to animate her
courage. In a word, it is necessary Heat should be augmented before Hope can be
therein formed: And yet we see nothing which can raise it, since we suppose
that there is nothing in the Soul but Grief which proceeds from the injury
received, and that this Passion far from increasing heat, is that which
diminishes and at last extinguisheth it.

To resolve this difficulty, we must discover a secret which has not hitherto
been discovered in the Passions, That there are Passions in the lowermost part
of the Soul.
and say, that in all Animals there are two Appetites, the one which is
sensitive, and the other which is natural; that both pursue what is profitable,
and fly what is ill; And that both of them again raise themselves up against
what is contrary unto them to overcome it.

For it is certain that in sickness Nature irritates herself against ill, and
stirs up her forces to drive it away, and that this motion is answerable to
Anger and to Boldness, which form themselves in the sensitive Soul.

So that all motion of the Appetite making a Passion, this natural Appetite
which has its particular motions, must also have its particular Passions. It Is
true, they are not so perfect, nor in so great a number as the others, being
led by a knowledge less exact, and which discerns not the objects so well as
the imagination, for which cause there are few, unless it be Pleasure, Grief,
Boldness and Fear, which are observed to be in this lower part of the Soul;
they are likewise so imperfect that we may see they are but gross unfinished
images, or the roughcasts of the rest; for the pain which Nature suffers, and I
know not what kind of peevishness which follows the indispositions of the Body,
are to speak truly, but feeble beginnings of true Grief; like as those secret
glimmerings, and those pleasant resentments which accompany natural actions,
are but the shadows of Joy and of Pleasure; And although Nature provokes and
insensibly raises herself up against ill, and that we also often see that she
is astonished and loses Courage in the conflict, they are motions which indeed
have relation to the Boldness and fear of this sensitive part, but are very far
from their perfection, as it is very easy to judge.

All what can be said hereupon is, that these motions deserve not the name of
Passions, being not conducted by any knowledge which is absolutely necessary to
form the Passions; but besides that there is a hidden knowledge in all the
things of Nature, it is most certain that it is more distinct and more apparent
in some then in others; and that this natural Appetite is more enlightened in
Animals then in Plants; for besides this obscure and secret knowledge, which it
has for vegetative actions; it is also conducted by the vital faculty which
acts with so much light and discerning, that diverse did believe it was the
spring of the sensitive Soul; Now although Philosophy has restrained the name
of Passions to such motions as are made by the direction of sense, yet we may
perceive that its a far fetched circumstance which comes not near the essence
of the thing, and that the motion of the Soul forbears not to be a true motion,
although it follows not the orders of the sensitive Soul, so that if it has
not all the conditions of Passion exactly so taken, yet at least it has, if we
may so speak, the body and substance thereof: In a word, it is so like it that
as the name of Passions has been given to the esmotions of the Will by reason
of the resemblance which they nave with those of the sensitive Appetite, for
want of terms more fit, we may call the motions of the natural Appetite
Passions, although they are not so perfect, and that even perhaps they are of
another order, and of another gender.

However it be these two Appetites which may sometimes, move separately, as we
may experiment it in our selves, when Nature combats sickness, and we are
nothing sensible of any of the sensitive Passions, they commonly relieve one
the other, and communicate their motions when they are powerfully agitated;
whence it happens that violent Passions cause such great disorders in the body,
that the peevishness and secrer contentment which we have now spoken of ends at
last in sadness or in real joys; and that Grief cannot be very strong in the
sensitive part, but that it must be sensible to the natural Faculties, and
particularly to the vital.

Now Nature has this property, when the ill is come to her knowledge, to raise
up herself against it, and endeavor to overcome it, stiring up the natural
heat, and with the spirits conveighing it into those parts where she thinks it
is. Thus inflammations happen to wounds; thus pain increases when the
impostumes ripen, and that a Feavor breeds in a corrupt body; for all these
accidents are effects of this Heat which Nature stirs up, and renders stronger
to combat the ills she resents.

This being true, we need not doubt that when weak and timorous persons suffer
a very sensible injury, the grief it causes in the sensitive Appetite can
never descend to the natural Appetite: And then this power following its
inclination must needs rise up against the ill, and according to its custom
stir up natural heat to overcome it; for its undoubtedly from thence the
redness proceeds which appears in the countenance upon the arrival of a great
grief, and which commonly accompanies those first tears which grief makes us
shed, as in its place shall be more fitly expressed.

If it be therefore true, that Heat awakens and augments it self in Grief, she
may form Hope for the Reasons already related; so that we can no ways doubt but
that Anger is ever devanced by this Passion, even in the weakest and most
timorous Natures.

Yet we must here remember what we said before; That that disposition which was
necessary to produce this effect, is, that we are very sensible of injuries,
and that heat is very agile, as without doubt it is in the Temperature of Women
and Children who are composed of an agile and subtle humidity, wherein heat
and the spirits are easily agitated without encountering any obstacle; Because
that in that weakness wherein the Soul perceives her self, she has no time to
consider it, so that she must needs be surprised, and as it were drawn away by
the precipitate motion of heat; She would otherwise never engage herself in
fight, nor ever believe she could overcome her Enemy.

Thence it is that Natures in whom Melancholy and Phlegm are thick and gross,
are hardly made angry what ill soever you do them, because the Spirits move
themselves with pain under the weight of such heavy Humors, and that the Soul
has time enough to consider its weakness before they can make their way or
free themselves: So that what endeavor soever the Natural Appetite can make
afterward, it is not capable to make her change the resolution which she had
taken to suffer the ill, and without being touched with the least hope of being
able to surmount it, resolving herself to Patience, or abandoning herself to
Grief, and to those Passions which follow it. But it is to stop too long on
those Subjects which must be handled again in other places.

Let us only clear two Doubts which may arise from the precedent proposition;
for if we often grow angry without Hope of ever getting satisfaction for the
injury received; And if even then when we are agitated with this Passion, we
grow furious when we despair of our revenge, it must necessarily follow That
Hope ought not always to go before or accompany Anger, as we have said.

To answer to the first of these Reasons, Every man that is angry hopes to
revenge himself.
we must remember that in the order of Nature, Vengeance is a chastisement
whereby we would take away from him who has done us an injury the means to
continue it. Now as no body makes himself angry, but he believes he has that
power; so neither is there any man but hopes to be revenged. And truly, all
those actions which proceed from this Passion, how slight soever they be, are
punishments by which we pretend to chastise him who has offended us, since
there is not any but affords him Grief or Fear; for a bold and brasen-faced
mind, an action full of disdain, and despite, and injurious words are able to
displease persons even that are of the highest condition, and threats are for
no other purpose but to fright those against whom we make them.

Now if Grief and Fear are ills, and consequently punishments with which the
Soul intends to chastise him who has committed an injury, that he may do so no
more, believing that they are able to change his mind; and that it is sufficient
to witness our Courage and resentment, to make him even lose the desire of
continuing his ill design, and that he may imagine that their little essays are
but the beginnings of a greater vengeance: It Is thus that the wild Beasts
commonly bound their anger with a slight snap, or a weak blow, and that they
often content themselves by affronting those who pursue them, looking through
them, showing their teeth only, and putting themselves in posture of
assaulting them: And although the weakness the Soul is in checks her often from
undertaking more, she had rather act thus weakly then to take flight, which
would be far more disadvantagious; and by these motions which seem bold and
generous, she would hide her impotency and her defects, as in other occasions
she uses to do. How ever it be, she never makes herself angry but she hopes to
be revenged, and to make him who has offended her suffer some kind of ill.
But it follows not that she ought always to hope for full satisfaction of the
injury which she thinks she has received, because it commonly depends on the
opinion of men, and not in the intention of Nature; in effect, the means and
the degrees of revenge are commonly different according to the humor and the
condition of the persons, and according to the customs of the Country. A Prince
or a Gentleman revengeth himself after another manner then does a Clown; a
cruel and bloody minded Man is not so easily satisfied as another; and there
are places where we believe without a single Duel no satisfaction can be had
for an offense; and others where poison and assassination are commonly
employed. Now as it often happens that a man has not the power to use those
means nor to pursue his vengeance to that height; it is most certain that then
we despair to revenge it after that manner, but not absolutely to be unrevenged
for the reasons aforesaid; and it is therefore true, that the hope of revenge
always precedes Anger.

As for Despair, What kind of Despair it is happens in Anger.
which sometimes happens and renders it more violent, neither is that an
absolute loss of hope, nor does conclude against the Doctrine already proposed.
For we shall show in the Discourse destined for that Passion, what the word
Despair signifies in our Language as well as in the Greek and Latin; two
Passions altogether different; to wit, the common despair wherein we lose all
hope, and wherein the Soul gives back and loses courage, perceiving that she
cannot obtain that good which she expected; and that despair, or desperateness
which is particular to Anger and Boldness, which instead of mollifying or
abating the courage, stiffens it against all difficulties with a greater
impetuosity and transport then it had before. For it is certain, that in this
the Soul which finds obstacles which she never foresaw, loses the hope of
effecting what she proposed; but at the same time she conceives another, and
forms new designs which engage her in those transports and fougadoes, which are
commonly called actions of despair, as shall more fully appear when we
thoroughly discourse on that subject.

Let Us now take a view of the other Characters of this Passion, and without
stoping at Confidence and at Presumption, which have been examined in the
Discourse of Boldness, and depend on the same causes which produce Hope, let us
enquire the nature and source of Fury, which so often mixeth it self with
Anger; for although they are often confounded together and that we commonly
give the latter the name of Fury; yet they are two very different things, since
there are Angers which are nothing furious, and that Fury is to be found in
other Passions and in other actions wherein there is no suspicion of Anger.

There are indeed diverse sorts of Fury, What fury is.
some have been called Divine, others Brutal, and others have been placed in
the rank of Diseases. But all have this in common, that they put the Soul out
of its natural place, and transport it as it were out of it self; some making
it perform actions beyond the ordinary strength of men, and which for the same
cause seem to have something that is divine; the other causing him to lose his
Reason, and embasing him to the nature of the wildest beasts. It Is not a place
here to examine by retail all these differences; it shall be sufficient to say,
that this violent transport wherein the essence of this Fury in general
consists, may proceed either from the Soul which raises up and animates
herself, or from that heat which pricks her up, and irritates her; the fury of
Love, and the Poetic Fury, are amongst those which are divine, those which
commonly acknowledge no other cause but the Soul alone, which of herself
raises herself up, and makes those miraculous sallies which are as Enthusiasms
and divine inspirations; for having the power to move herself, she in those
encounters darts herself forth with so much ardor that she carries herself
away; and as he which runs with too much impetuosity cannot stop himself, and
often goes further then he willingly would, she abandons herself to the loose
which she gives herself, and so passes beyond her ordinary limits: But it is
not so in Martial and Bacchick Furies, nor in those others which follow Anger
or corporal sicknesses. For it is not the Soul which begins this motion,
wherewith she is in these encounters carried away; it is the heat which the
Wine, Boldness, or the distemper of the body imprints in the spirits, which
being agitated by this turbulent quality, at every moment strikes against the
seat of the Animal Faculties, which drives them forth, and casts them into
these extraordinary motions. This therefore is the general reason whereby Anger
passes into Fury; for a man need not doubt but that this Passion kindles a
great fire in the bowels, but that it violently agitates in the spirits, and
that the quiet which those noble operations of the Soul require, must needs be
trouled by that tempest which she raises in their principal organs; so that
the Faculties which conduct the Animal, act no longer conformably to the Laws
of Nature or of Reason, and having no longer a bridle to restrain them, are
hurried away with the rapidity of the spirits and the Passion which drives
them, and so perform all their actions with disorder and temerity. But what
contributes much to this precipitation, it is Grief which is the first cause of
Anger, and weakness which commonly accompanies it; for both of them are
naturally impatient and constrained, and eagerly solicit the Soul to provide
for her security; that by reason that the ill is present; this because it wants
forces to resist it, and that there is no time to be lost in so dangerous and
urgent an occasion; and from thence it comes, that Anger is most impetuous in
the weakest Natures; and that Fury kindles not it self so suddenly in all the
rest of the Passions as in this, for that they are commonly exempt from Grief
and weakness, and that consequently there can be no cause for the Soul to
hasten its endeavors for her defense; its true, that although robust Natures
are not so soon transported as the rest, as well for the reasons already
alleged, as for that they are of a stronger and more solid complexion,
wherein heat is not so easily catching: yet when once Fury has seized on them,
besides that it is more vehement and more dangerous, it is also of a longer
continuance, because the heat is stronger, and is longer preserved in gross and
massive subjects, then in such as are subtle and moveable, such as are women
and Children, and all those who are of such like a temperature.

Pride is so proper to Anger that there is no Passion it more often
accompanies, Anger is proud.
nor with which it is so familiar; and certainly it is a strange thing, that as
soon as it is conceived in the weakest and vilest Mind that may be, it takes
away from it the knowledge of its baseness and impotency, making it lose all
the respect it ought to others, and persuading it neither to yield nor submit
to whatsoever it be. We need not go far for an example, since at every moment
we may see that from its counsels Servants dare confront their Masters,
Children their Parents, Subjects their Lords, and what is most frightful, such
vile creatures as men are, spare not the most holy things, but often wrack it
on God himself; and although this discord appear not so great in persons of a
high condition, when they grow angry with their inferiors, yet they cannot
forbear being guilty of a very and unjust and odious Pride, when they will hear
neither Reason nor defenses, when silence or excuses provoke them the more, and
when a discovered innocence is to them but as a new injury; for all this
proceeds from the haughty and proud Nature of this Passion which will always be
in the right, and have reason on its side, which will never yield to any body,
and will never acknowledge him for innocent, from whom it believes it has
received an offense, without ever accusing it self of impudence or injustice.

But whence may this Pride come, which is often so ill grounded, and is
commonly upheld neither by strength nor reason? Certainly, we must not seek the
source elsewhere then in the motion of heat, which troubles the judgment, and
drives the Soul out of her ordinary limits, as is before said. For Pride being
nothing but a swelling, and as it were an immoderate extention of the Soul,
whereby she raises herself up more then she ought to do, and in pursuit
esteems her self grearer then indeed she is, it is impossible that heat should
be provoked without giving her a very great confidence, without transporting
her out of herself, and consequently without causing this excessive elevation
wherein Pride Consists.

Moreover, the secret sense which every man has of the excellency of his
being, which awakens him by the despite he believes he suffers by having been
offended, for to repair this wrong which he thinks he has received by being
despised, he would lift himself up above him who abased him, and filling
himself with a great opinion of himself, finds himself thus puffed up with
Arrogance and Vanity.

Anger abounds in Words and in Threats, Anger is talkative and railing.
because the Fancy which is heated by the ardor she kindles in the spirits, and
which is full of such thoughts as Pride and Vengeance inspire, is forced to
cast them out on the Tongue, and in its words; and truly we may say, that it is
in some manner like liquor which the heat of the fire causes to rise up in
great boilings; for the fuller the vessel is of it, the more easily it rises
above the brims, and so the more, and the more abundantly they issue out and
shed themselves. It Is true, that Grief which is always to be found with this
Passion, very much helps this effect by that precipitation, and by that
impatience which it gives the Soul; for which cause Boldness alone loves not to
talk so much as Anger, and we may see the same person who boldly without
speaking one word will go to fight, who having been offended cannot forbear to
cry out and threaten, because Grief at that time mixeth it self with Boldness,
which is as a spur unto it which stimulates it, and affords it a useless Fury:
But if Weakness joins also with them, Anger becomes so highly brawling, and
rises to such an excess of words and threats, that we may say that its at that
time a torrent, which it is impossible to stop, as is to be observed in that of
Women, of Children, and the like. Now this happens from that the Soul which
knows its defect, has a design to hide it by such actions as seem courageous,
and whereby she thinks she ought to fright her enemy; or from that Grief and
weakness which are as we have said, naturally unquiet and urgent, not giving
her time to tempt more powerful means to revenge herself, cause her to have
recourse to these first arms of Nature, and cause her to dissipate her courage
in these vain assaults. And without doubt, he that will but consider that
Beasts which are courageous, and Men who are bold and generous, use not to
brawle or to talk much when they have been offended by any man, and that they
seek their revenge, may well judge that cryings out, reasons and threatenings
are the natural defenses of provoked weakness, and that those who employ them,
mistrust their own forces, and resemble those thunders, which only make a
noise and are heard a long time after their lightnings vanish; for when a Bolt
falls, the fire, the noise and the blow are resented at once; and such is that
Anger which is kindled in great Courages and in strong and robustious
Constitutions, as has been said in the Discourse of Boldness.

From the same source whence the abundance of words comes, Anger is indiscreet.
this indiscreet Frankness proceeds, which renders it so facile to discover its
most secret thoughts; for there is no Passion which is so ill a Guardian of a
secret as Anger; and although Love and Joy also are alike unfaithful as that
is, yet they commit not the same violence on the Heart; they rather open it
then cast it forth, and if they shed it abroad, it is rather because they fill
it, then that they empty it; but Anger suffers nothing there which she drives
not out with force; it exhausts it, by breaking it, and as a fire kindled in a
Mine, it tears up and discovers all what is hid therein. In effect, it is
impossible to conceive the impetuosity with which heat and the spirits issue
out of the heart, and the violence with which the Soul throws herself forth for
her revenge: but we must also fancy we see an effusion and scattering abroad of
all her thoughts, and of all her designs; and chiefly of those which have
conformity or alliance with Anger, as conspiracies made with or against an
Enemy, those secret good offices which have been done, and the like; which to
satisfy its revenge, this Passion discovers. For when a man in anger reveals a
conspiracy, in which his enemy was one of the accomplices, it is to bring him in
danger; when he publishes an enterprise which he had formed against him, it is
a threat; and when he reproacheth him, it is to convince him of wrong, and
render him odious: They also are commonly the weakest which fall in this
default, whether it be because they speak more, and that it is hard but that in
many words much folly must needs be, or whether they would hide their weakness
by the liberty they take to speak all they know, and all what they have a mind
to do.

Yet there are some Angers which are Dumb, Some Angers are dumb.
and yet forbear not to be violent, although they make no noise; often even
those which are lowdest, stop on the sudden, and fall into a silence wherein
Fury appears as high as in threatenings. Now this silence happens either from
the confidence we have in our own strength, which seeks a more noble and a more
solid revenge then that of words, as we have said in the Discourse of Boldness,
or from the despite we have of seeing our selves offended by persons from whom
we expected not we could have received an injury, or from the scorn wherewith
we pretend to chastise their insolency; or from that strong intention which the
Soul gives herself to find out means of revenge to discover the motive of the
wrong done her, or for such other like designs which Passion casts into the
thoughts.

It Is impatient and constrained, Anger is impatient
not only by reason of the Grief it resents, and of the desire it has of
Revenge, which are two Passions naturally very unquiet, but also because of the
heat and of the agitation which it causes in the spirits; for it is impossble
that these organs which serve the motions of the Soul and of the Body, should
suffer this great ebullition without powerfully agitating both of them, and in
pursuit without causing trouble or precipitation in the thoughts, struggling in
the discourse or in the looks, and a continual change of posture and place
which is observed in anger.

All Passions are credulous in those things which favor their design, Anger is
opinionated.
and opinionated in those which resist them, because it is easy to drive the
Soul whether she would go, and dfficult to make her take a new course: But as
there is none so impetuous nor so rapid as Anger, there is none also in which
persuasions are more easily received to hasten its course, or wherein such as
would oppose it are more strongly reputed. Indeed we can propose nothing to a
man agitated with this Passion which may render the injury which he has
received greater or more sensible, which may advance or increase his revenge,
and which flatters his design and proceedings, but he greedily receives it, and
affords it a ready approbation. On the contrary, he stiffens himself against
all those reasons which endeavor to sweeten his resentment and his fury; and
although he acknowledge the truth and justice of them, yet he is obstinate to
combat them, and believes that his opinionacy is able to justify his Anger.

Yet he that would near-hand but consider all their actions, will perceive that
Pride bears a great part in them, and that besides this general cause which we
have now observed, this also particularly contributes thereunto: For Pride
loves to be flattered, will always be in the right, and never yields to
whomsoever it be. So that we need not wonder if Anger which is naturally proud,
easily hearkens to those who approve and favor its designs, if it repulse those
who condemn it, and if it continue sledfast in its resolutions, when even it
acknowledges them unjust.

Cowardliness, Anger is cowardly, insolent and cruel.
Insolency and Cruelty seldom abandon this Passion, whether it be that the
impetuosity and blindness it is in cause it always to pass beyond those bounds
which Nature and Reason have assigned unto Revenge: Or because that Pride
causes it to abuse those advantages which it has over an enemy: Or lastly,
for that weakness which often accompanies it, gives it such counsel, and
persuades it that to secure it self against all those accidents which it may
fear, it is obliged to use the height of the victory, and to carry it to extreme
violence, as has been said in the Discourse of Boldness. For which cause Women
and those who are naturally weak and timorous, are more insolent cruel in their
Anger then others are; and when those who have offended them fall under their
power, they suffer all the indignities, all the outrage, and all the excess
which rage and cruelty can inflict.

Indignation, Disdain and Despite are not properly effects of this Passion,
they are rather kinds and differences of it; for they are light Angers which
seem to keep themselves almost quite shut up in the Soul, and which never fall
into those extravagancies and violences which are observeable in the others.
All three have this in common, That Grief is always mixed with them, and that
they stir up the Soul against those things which give them any displeasure. But
there is this difference, that Disdain is never without Scorn, although we have
a despite and an indignation against such things as we esteem. On the other
side, Indignation never is but in Men, although the other two are also to be
found in Beasts. To conclude, it is certain that there are persons whom we
despise without having any disdain or indignation against them.

And certainly the word Indignation means, What indignation is.
that to raise this motion in the Soul, something must happen to a man which he
deserves not, and which he is unworthy of; now as we may grieve for the good or
ill which so happens, the difficulty will be to know whether either of them be
capable to raise it, or whether it be good only, as Aristotle believes; For
his thought is that the Grief we have to see him who deserves it not to suffer
ill, causes compassion; and that which we have to see those prosper which are
unworthy of it, causes ndignation. But this seems not to agree with that
signification which all Languages give that word, nor even with the Nature of
the thing: Forasmuch as the Soul may two ways grieve for the ill it sees those
suffer who deserve it not, to wit by compassionating only their sufferings,
without employing its forces to combat the ill; or else by raising and lifting
it self up against it to repel it. Now it is certain that Compassion is
altogether without this commotion, taking care only to fly the ill and being
quite plunged in Grief and Fear, as we shall show in its place; And therefore
if the Soul makes any effort when she is angry with the ill which happens to
any man undeservedly, since this motion can neither be compassion nor pity, it
must needs be a kind of indignation. Indeed the common manner of speaking
teaches us that there are persons who cannot see their enemies without
indignation. That their words are full of indignation and threatenings; that God
chastises the wicked in the Anger of his Indignation, and even that we are
sometimes in indignation against our selves. Other Languages also use the word
in the same sense, for the (...) of the Grecians which Aristotle has placed
for this, has a larger signification then he has given it, and may be as well
applied to the indignation which we conceive seeing a man too ill used, as for
that we may have for him who is used but too well. In effect himself confesses
that this Passion is attributed to God, who yet ought not to be in indignation
for the prosperity of the wicked, because it is he who dispenses it to them,
but justly because they abuse it and use it unvvorthily by their crimes and by
their ingratitude. And truly we must not stick at all at what this incomparable
Author has said of the Passions in his Rhetoric, in which he has treated of
them but superficially and in most common notions. For its certain, that had he
thoroughly examined them, he would have made two sorts of Indignation, the one
which the good of another begets in us, and that which happens from the ill
which we suffer or see others suffer; and that the true and only motive
which provokes them is Indignity; for without that there can be no
Indignation; it is Despite, it is Envy, or the like. So when we are angry at
the good which happens to a man, if we do not consider him as unvvorthy of
it, it is Envy; and although the ill must be always unjust which moves us to
Anger, if we do not particularly look on it as an indignity, it may well beget
Despite, or such a kind of an Anger, but never Indignation: for which cause
the motion which the Soul suffers in this encounter, runs not into those
violences and excesses which true Anger is carried away withal; because the
real ill which causes Grief consists not in this Indignity, but in the
Injustice which out of that consideration being a stranger unto it augments it.
So that if the Injury for example-sake is not great, what indignity soever you
may conceive, it obliges not the Soul to make any great endeavors, forasmuch
as it is but as a color which she gives herself to the body and substance of
the ill, which in some manner renders it more sensible, though not the greater.
And it is also for this reason that Beasts are not susceptible of it, being
unable to make such reflections as are necessary to know whether one is not
worthy of a thing; Besides men are in indignation to see good or ill happen to
those who deserve it not, because it is a thing which seems unjust, and that
naturally we have an aversion against what is opposite to Reason and Justice;
but how ever we interess our selves so much for them, we often abandon them in
the Judgment which we make of the merit of persons, whom we often esteem
worthy or unworthy of things according as Pride, Love, or Hatred counsel it.

For which reason Ambitious persons and Lovers are extremely subject to this
Passion, for as much as Vanity easily persuades those that all other men are
unworthy of those Honors which they aspire unto; and that Love gives a high
esteem to those of the person beloved, and a great opinion of their service,
for in that, though at every moment they find cause of offense, or are not
sufficiently esteemed, or else from that they are not well used, or that others
are better used, who as they think deserve it not so well: On the contrary,
those who are of a servile mind, or base spirit, and are not capable of any
noble desire, they do almost never resent the motions of Indignation. What
Disdain is.


Disdain is also a kind of Anger, seeing that to provoke it there must be
something which displeases, and must cause the Soul to rise up against it. But
what renders it different from the rest is, that Scorn which ever accompanies
it; for we never disdain any man but we scorn him, although we scorn many
things which we do not disdain. So that we may say Disdain is a scornful Anger;
and thence it is that it never is violent or impetuous, because those things
which we scorn deserve not that we should trouble our selves for them: Not that
what we disdain is always scornful, or else the Soul would never care to rise
up against it, since Scorn is nothing but the opinion which we have that a
thing is unworthy of our esteem and of our care, not judging it capable to do
good or hurt, as is before said. And therefore it must needs be, that what we
ought to disdain may do some ill, but that its power is not so great, or at
least that we feign we fear it not: For it often happens in these Passions,
that the Soul which knows its weakness endeavors to hide it by actions, which
seem outrageous, as has been said.

As for Despite, What Despite is
it has nothing particular which distinguishes it from Anger, as the former
have; for it is but a weak Anger, and as it were a slight throw which the Soul
to oppose ill gives it self, whether it be because it is of small concernment,
or because she dares not or will not strongly assault it: For weakness commonly
restrains it and hinders it from driving the Passion whether it ought to go;
And Reason which is not Mistress of the first motions of the Appetite suffers
Despite well enough as the beginnings of Anger, but permits it not to go any
further; for which cause timorous persons, and those who are moderate despise
those things which in others would kindle Anger it self.

The Characters which Anger imprints on the body, The corporal Characters of
Anger.
mark out also the same mixture of those two Passions of which we have shown
they were composed: For we cannot doubt but a sad and crabbed mind which it
sheds over the face, sighs and cries which at every moment it casts forth, and
those tears which it so often vents, proceed from Grief; and that the ardor
which appears in the Eyes, in the voice, and in all its motions, proceeds from
Boldness; it is true, that this commonly produces those which are most sensible
and more in number then the other, because it causes the Soul to issue out,
and to discover it self; instead whereof Grief making her retire within
herself, causes also the greater parts of its effects to remain hid, and not
to appear as the others do. And certainly, in that number of corporal
Characters which are observed in Anger, there are but three or four which
depend on Grief, all the rest coming from Boldness and from Fury.

But from what source soever they deduce their origin, we must not forget that
some are made by the order and command of the Soul, and that the rest happen
out of a mere necessity, she having no design nor intention to produce them, as
is the paleness and redness of the Face, the wrinckles of the Forehead, the
swelling of the parts, stammering, etc. For they serve for no other purpose in
the design of Anger, and they are only formed in pursuit of the motion of the
spirits, and of the rest of the parts.

Now as there being many of both of these which have been examined in the
foregoing Discourses, which we intend not to touch any more; It shall suffice
to let the Reader know that in the Chapter of Boldness he may find the causes
of that through-look, the motion of the Lids, Brows and Forehead, the widening
of the Nostrils, the standing of the Hair, and that paleness which sometimes
happens in the beginning of Anger; That in the Chapter of Love, he may see
whence sighs spring, and why the ruddiness which that Passion raises begins at
the Eyes; He shall in that of Constancy know whence the firmness of the parts
proceeds. As for Tears, and other effects of Grief, we shall speak of them in
the Discourse which we have destined for that Passion.

Besides the Through-look there are two others which are familiar to Anger, to
wit, a Fierce Look, and a Furious Look. Both of which have that in common, that
they are made with force and vivacity. But the Fierce one has somewhat that is
sad and severe, which is not always to be encountered in the Furious, adding
also that it is not so ardent and wandering as is this.

To render the Look Fierce, Whence the fierce look comes.
the Brows must lowre, and gather themselves together, the Eye must be quick
and piercing, and the Sight firm and assured; Such is that of Lions, of
Leopards, and of Mastiffs, for they naturally have their Eyebrows cast down and
restrained, which makes as it were a great cloud in the Forehead, and their
Eyes have a certain ardor which seem to breath forth blood and slaughter. And
certainly there needs no less then these three conditions to compose such a
kind of Look: forasmuch as an Impudent man may well have firmness and vivacity
in his looks; but because he archeth up his Brows, and that rude and severe air
which proceeds from the contraction of the Brows and Forehead is wanting to
him, he therefore cannot have a fierce look. On the other side, Frowardness and
a strong attention of mind may cause this severity to appear in the Face; but
because they take away vivacity from the Eyes, they never render the Look
fierce. That piercing splendour indeed which appears in the Eyes, and chiefly in
those which are blew, which the Latins call Caesios, inspires somewhat of cruel
and frightful in the look, for which cause Tacitus calls the Germans eyes
Truces; and we are taught that Panthers and Leopards, have I know not what kind
of fierceness in theirs, which the Lions have not; by reason that they have
that color, and that the Eyes of these are altogether red, which color is
more obscure and less splendent.

However it be, Anger casts down and bonds the Brows to fortify it self
against the Grief it resents, and against the Enemy which assaults it, as has
been said elsewhere. It Is Look is quick and assured, by reason of that splendour
and strength which it casts into the eyes by the quantity of spirits which it
sends thither. For we cannot doubt but that the firmness of the sight must be
an effect of the strength of the parts, and that the spirits must make the
greatest part of their strength, since they become languishing when they
receive them no more. To know wherein this firmness of sight consists, we must
consider what has been said concerning it in the Chapter of Boldness.

Although the Furious Look is often taken for the fierce, What a furious Look
is.
yet is it not the same; for there is a great difference betwixt the ordinary
looks of a Lion, and those which he has when he is provoked: Betwixt the look
of a man who is yet Master of his Anger, and that he has when madded and
enraged; that is fierce, but this is furious, and witnesses an extreme
transport, and a very straggling away of the Soul; it is made also with red and
sparkling eyes, which shout forth and seem to go out of the Head, and which
rolling from the one side to the other cause a wild and wandering sight; and
as in the other the brows are bent downwards, in this they are commonly lifted
up, and drawing their lids after them they make the opening of the eyes to be
wider and rounder, and so discover almost all the white of the eye. Now all
these Characters are so proper to Fury, that even Physicians make use of them
to know when the sick person will fall into such a fit, and that it is
impossible to consider the state wherein the soul then is without perceiving
that necessarily she must produce an effect.

For as the blood boils in the vessels, Red Eyes.
and impetuously casts it self on all the exterior parts, all the veins of the
Eyes are filled therewith, and consequently become thicker and redder, for
which cause Aristotle says, that those who naturally have theirs so, are
subject to that kind of furious Anger whereof we speak, and that this relates
to the proper character of this Passion; but you must observe that this redness
ought principally to be understood of the Eye, and not of the Lids, and that
the veins which are dispersed in the blew of the Eye are those which are
swelled, and which cause that redness, which also is a sign of raving in
sickness, when it proceeds not from any particular vice of those organs.

The Eyes are sparkling, Sparkling Eyes.
not only by reason of that splendour which the spirits bring with them, but
also by reason of the approach of those vapors which the Humors casts on those
organs, which extending the Membrane which environs them, render it more
united, more polished, and more fit to reverberate the light which they
receive. Add also that the continual motion wherewith they are agitated makes
them sparkle and glister the more: to which we may also add, that their Dryness
renders their brightness more quick and peircing; it being certain that
humidity dims the light, and that the refraction it makes there weakens the
rays, instead that on dry and polished bodies it is reflected and reverberated
all whole and pure; for which cause in Love and in Joy, how sparkling soever
the eyes be, by reason of their humidity, yet they have not so strong and so
penetrating a splendour as these have.

But whence does this dryness proceed? Is it not from the vehemence of the heat
which consumes all the humor which runs over the Eyes, or rather sharp and
drying vapors which rise from that choleric humor which is agitated? for
wherever they arrive, they render the skin dry and parched, as is observable
in burning Feavors and in choleric constitutions.

Besides this, Fiery Eyes.
the splendour we have spoken of, mixing it self with that color which the
blood brought to those parts, produces an enflamed redness, which renders the
Eyes fiery, even like unto coals of fire.

They cast themselves forth, The Eyes advance outward
whether because they receive a great quantity of spirits, of vapor, and of
blood, they swell, and so are constrained to occupy the greater room; or
because the spirits which issue out with impetuosity, drive those parts out of
their natural situation; or finally, because the Soul which is carried out of
her self draws them along with her, and causes them to make a sally like her
own.

Wandering Eyes, The Eyes are wandering.
which continually move their sight here and there, without fixing on any
object, make a part of this furious look, and it is principally what renders
them frightful and formidable, for which cause those who have treated of the
Nature of Beasts, say, that the Panther which after this manner always rowls
its Eyes, has a more terrible and frightful look then any other, and that
there is no Beast how fierce or bold soever it be, which it does not fright and
terrify therewithal. However when the sight becomes thus wandering in
sickness, it is a certain sign that the party is falling into fury. Yet we must
observe, that fear also produces the same effect, and often renders the looks
wild and inconstant; but besides that the air of the Face which accompanies
those Passions, may alone observe a great difference betwixt those looks, it is
most certain that they are effectually different from one the other, neither
are they made in the same manner. For fear causes us to cast our eyes on this
and on that side; but how light or quick soever the motion it affords them is,
it for a while stops them on those objects which present themselves, and it
appears clearly, that it seeks them to consider them, and to see whether it be
from them the ill must happen which she fears. But fury without design carries
the sight here and there, and without heeding what it encounters, casts the
eyes on things without seeing them, and all its looks are lost looks, and truly
wandering. Now these motions partly come from heat, which is a moving quality,
and when it is provoked it puts all in disorder, partly from that agitation
which the spirits suffer, which easily communicates it self to the Eyes, being
as they are moving, partly from the Souls transport which abandons the conduct
of those organs, and suffers them to move at the pleasure of the tempest which
she raised. The Brows are not knit.


And according to my opinion its also the reason why the Brows are not shrunk
up, as in the fierce look; for since their contraction is an effect of that
care which the Soul takes to fortify herself, which she always also preserves
so long as she is herself, when she is once carried away with fury, and that
she is as it were out of herself, she then loses the remembrance of her
preservation, and has no other motions but those which the blindness and
madness of the Passion gives: For which cause when she darts and impetuously
casts herself out of her natural situation, she draws with her the most movable
parts, and so causes the Brows and Lids to lift themselves up, in pursuit
whereof the openings of the eyes must not only be greater, but they must
also-become rounder, because the Lid cannot open much but its angles must be
widened, which must also be drawn the nearer to one another to facilitate this
extention which is made in the circumference. Now besides that this causes a
round figure, a greater part of the white of the Eye must also appear, which
renders the look more strange and dreadful.

Tears which are sometimes shed in Anger may come from the Grief which we
suffer by reason of an injury; Whence Tears in Anger.
yet commonly they have no other source but the despite we have for not being
revenged; for which cause Women and Children are more subject to weep in the
strength of this Passion then Men; because they then acknowledge their
weakness, and are forced to suffer the wrong which was done them without
seeking satisfaction. To know now how these tears are formed, and what the
motive of the Soul is, when upon these occasions she sheds them, its what in
its place must be examined, and to which we have destined a particular
Discourse, which shall follow that of Grief. But we have sufficiently spoken of
the Charact^^^ which Anger imprints on the Eyes; (...) now consider those which
she forms on the other parts of the Face.

The Lips grow thick by reason their substance is soft and spungy, The Lips
grows thick.
which easily imbibes the blood which runs thither. And being filled therewith
they overturn themselves, their bounds being free, and being not restrained by
the neighboring parts.

But whence comes their trembling, The Lips tremble.
and principally that of the lower Lip? Is it not that the spirits crackle in
those parts, and cause that part which is extremely movable to tremble? or that
the Choler which is moved, pricks the stomach, which has a great sympathy with
the nether Lip; whence it is that in sickness the trembling of that part is a
sign of vomiting. The Lips press one another.


Sometimes they join and press one the other, to retain breath, and thereby to
render the motion the more strong; or to fortify those parts which grow hard
and stiff by the contraction of the Muscles, as has been said in the Chapter
of Boldness.

They also sometimes retire themselves, The Lips retire themselves.
and discover the teeth, which most part of Beasts usually do when they are
angry, because those are their natural Arms, which they discover to fright
those who would offend them, or to be the readier to make use of them. This is
also observed in some persons, when they fall into a rage, and fasten on the
flesh of any one, whether it be that the Soul makes this endeavor, thinking to
fortify herself, as she does by knitting the Brows, or whether in effect she
would with her teeth tear in pieces, and if she could even devour her enemy.
For there are men who grind their teeth, who in their anger bite what they meet
withal, and who would eat the heart and bowels of those who have done them an
injury.

The Voice is sharp and vehement because Anger being composed of Grief and
Boldness, What the Voice is in Anger.
this with impetuosity driving the air which is in the Lungs, and Grief
restraining the Muscles, and streightning the passages, so that the voice must
needs become shrill, passing through so straight a channel, and being driven
out with vehemence, must needs also be strong. But there are two Propositions,
which Aristotle has made in his Physionomy, which may make us doubt whether
this voice be that which principally belongs to Anger. The first is that which
is gross at first, and at last grows sharp, is the sign of a choleric person,
and this relates to Oxen, and to the likeness of their voice. Indeed when these
Beasts bellow, their voice at last grows sharp, and has somewhat in it which
is sad and languishing, and even in men, affliction and grief in complaints
form the same air, and the same languor. Now if this be so, the voice of Anger
is not as we said strong and vehement.

The second is, That those who have a sharp and vehement Voice are choleric,
and that this relates to Goats; But besides that these creatures have not that
kind of Voice, they were never observed to be inclined to that Passion: we must
therefore say, that there is an error in those two propositions by the fault of
the Translators: for in the first, the word (...), signifies not Anger, as they
have translated it, but sad languishing, cast down for matter of courage, and
in that sense it is true, that the Voice which is gross at first and sharp at
last, is a sign of sadness, as we shall show in the Chapter of Grief. In the
last there is also the same fault in the word (...), which signifies not Anger,
but rather Lasciviousness, which is indeed a quality proper to Goats. Add also
that the word (...), signifies not simply a strong and vehement Voice, but a
forced and constrained Voice, such as is the bleating of Goats, as shall be
said in its place.

The Voice becomes hoarse by the inequality of its organs; The Voice is hoarse.
for heat melting the humors and making them run on those parts, it renders
them moist and unequal, and the voice which it utters is rude, and sounds not;
and because that vehemence is joined with this sharpness thence it is it
becomes terrible and frightfull.

Lastly, The Voice stops all at once.
Sometimes it stops all at once in despite of ones teeth, whether it be that
the violence wherewith it drives the breath, quickly clears the Lungs and
deprives the Heart of its refreshings; and that in this necessity the Soul
making haste to cause a new attraction of the air, the Voice is constrained to
stop to give it passage. Or whether the Nerves which help to form it, suffer a
kind of convulsion being pricked by those Humors which heat agitates, as it
happens to children which cry, whose voice and respiration leaps, and so cut
and suddenly stop themselves.

The Tongue faulters, The Tongue faulters.
either by reason of the quantity of blood which thickens it, or renders it
heavy, or by reason of dryness which hinders its motion; or by reason of the
Souls transport which sends the Spirits elsewhere, and hinders them from having
recourse to those parts.

The Words interfare by the have and impetuosity which the Soul causes, The
Words imerfare
which precipitates the words and thoughts one upon another.

The Discourse is entangled from the disorder of reason, The Discourse is
entangled
and from the several designs it weaves and confounds together.

The Breathing is vehement, Respiration is vehement.
and proceeds from the impetuous respiration which the heat of the Heart and
the endeavor of the Soul causes: For the principal end of Respiration is to
refresh the Heart and the Spirits; wherefore when they are heated, it is at the
same time augmented. But because also this action is partly voluntary since it
will advance or retard even as the Soul desires it should, thence it is that
the endeavor she makes in all her actions, appears in this, rendering it violent
and precipitate.

The same heat renders the Mouth dry, The Mouth is dry.
and gives it an ardent Thirst which is not so easily satisfied as that which
happens in Fear; as shall be said elsewhere.

Those malignant humors which are moved and heated cause a Sticking Breath.

Laughter is often an effect of Indignation or of Scorn, Laughter in Anger.
which are mixed with Anger, as we said it happened to Boldness; but commonly
it comes from the malignant pleasure we have in Revenge; yet the Temperature
contributes much to this effect: For Septentrional people have almost the same
air in fight, and we may see them assault their Enemies with a certain insolent
Fierceness, and with I know not what kind of scoffing Laughter; instead whereof
the Southern people carry on their Countenance a fierce Frowardness, and a
sharp and cruel Sadness; the reasons whereof shall in its place be discovered.

The Redness which this Passion commonly raises up in the Face is not
altogether like that which Joy, The Face becomes red.
Shame and some other Passions shed abroad in it; it is far more clear and less
vermilion then in this, for that it proceeds from a choleric blood, whose
color is more pale, by reason the tincture of the Gall which weakens the
splendour and Vermilion of the Blood, and causes this inflamed Redness which is
visible in the Face and Breast of those who are angry. It also sometimes
happens that it becomes obscure and blackish, and this chiefly is when Anger is
turned into Fury; for the agitation is then so great that the thickest blood is
cast on the outward parts which affords it its natural color, and paints them
of that black and livid color which is to be observed on the Cheecks and on
the Lips, because they are the most sanguine parts of the Face. As for that
paleness which sometimes happens at the beginning of this Passion, we have
spoken of it in the Chapter of Boldness.

We must not stay long on the most part of the rest of the Characters which
this Passion imprints on the body; the reasons are easily found by those
principles which we have established. For we cannot remember the impetuosity
and the boilings wherewith the blood and spirits are agited, but we must
presently judge, that that is the cause which makes the Veins and Arteries
swelled and extended, and that all the rest of the parts are full and puffed
up, and whosoever shall represent to himself the impatience and the transport
wherein the Soul is, will nothing wonder at these motions which in this Passion
the Body suffers.

The Head is lifted up, and the Stature grows erect, for as much as the Soul
raises up herself to assault the Enemy. And although he be absent she forbears
not to put herself into this posture, as if she were ready to throw herself on
him, for that the violence of those Passions which trouble her represent him to
her thought as if he were truly present, and as if he ought in effect to feel
the blows she intends to inflict.

The frequent flinging out of the Arms, The motion of the parts in Anger.
a light and quick pace, a continual change of posture and place, are effects
which note the endeavors and sallies of the Soul, the precipitation and
impatience she has to revenge herself.

But whence comes it that we set up our Hands by our sides, when with anger and
threatenings we quarrel with any man? it is without doubt to confirm the parts
that the Muscles of respiration which they uphold may the more powerfully
operate, and by that means the voice may have the more force and be the longer
lasting. For which cause we are never content to place our hands thus on our
sides, but that we also advance the Arms and the Elbows, whereby enlarging and
extending the Shoulders we render them for the same purpose more stiff.

As for those blows wherewith a man in Anger beats the ground, and all what
comes under his hands or under his feet, it is very likely that they are such
means as the soul uses to give a repulse to those difficulties which traverse
her designs; and that the trouble and blindness she is in causing her to take
all things for true obstacles which stop her, she strikes against, she drives,
and she beats them, as it were to break them and to put them by, or else they
are the effects of a precipitated Vengeance which Anger does discharge on the
first Objects it meets, having not either the patience or the power to make
them be rescued by its real Enemy. It Is thus that Dogs bite the stones which
are thrown at them; it is thus we break the Sword which wounded us; in a word,
it is thus we revenge our selves on our selves, and above all, its what
concerns those from whom we have received an injury.

But what reason can we give for all those shakings of the Head which are
remarkable in this Passion? Whence the shakings of the Head.
What can oblige the Soul to move it one while to the right, and then to the
left, sometimes up and sometimes down, and sometimes on one side only? And to
what end does she cause these so extravagant motions, and so different the one
from another? For to conclude that they are signs and natural effects which
Anger produces in all men of what Nation or of what constitution soever they
are; So that if Nature does nothing in vain, she must herein have her causes
and reasons as well as in her greatest and most considerable actions. It is
true, in my judgment, they are very hard to be known, and it is with them as
with most part of things which hide them selves so much the more unto the Mind,
the more they discover themselves unto the Senses, and which are as difficult
to be comprehended as they are easily remarkable. And certainly as all natural
things are made for some end, or out of necessity; we cannot say but that the
alteration of the Body, or the agitation of the Humors must cause these motions
by a necessary consequence, as it happens in the redness of the Face, in the
wrinckles of the Forehead, in the splendour of the Eyes, and the like, which are
formed by necessity, without being destined for any use; and if we would place
them in the rank of actions which are performed for some end: it is nothing
easy to observe what motive the Soul therein proposes it self, no, what
service she pretends to draw from thence.

To give further light to these obscurities, you must first know whether these
motions are not in other Passions, and afterward seek those motives for the
which they were therein formed; and lastly to see whether they may be applied
to Anger.

It is certain that we use to shake the Head and to give it readily two or
three turns about, when any thing displeases, Why we toss the Head.
as especially when we refuse or disapprove of any thing, when we are sensible
of an ungrateful smell, or when we taste ought that is disgustful. For which
cause the vulgar commonly call Wine when it is not good, Wine with two ears,
because it makes those two parts move when we turn the Head from one side to
the other, and that by that motion we would signify that we found it to be
naught. But what relation can this action have with these sentiments? Is it not
that the Soul would turn away the face where the organs of the senses are, from
those objects which are displeasing to it, as she uses to fix them on those
which please; Or that she seeks by that endeavor to estrange from her what is
troublesome? At least it is thus, that when any thing incommodates those parts
we shake them about to drive them away; for although this in these encounters
we speak of be useless unto it, yet are they nothing extraordinary, since she
often deceives herself in the same manner upon other occasions, wherein she
abuses those means which Nature has prescribed her to attain her ends,
employing them in others where they are of no use, as has been showed,
speaking of that water which Desire causes in the Mouth, and of the motion of
the Brows at the sight of distasteful things. Or we may rather say, that this
shaking of the Head is a mark the Soul would make of the impression which some
kind of objects make on her, and that it is an outward image of that action
which she performs in herself: For it is her custom that when she would have
that appear outwardly which is done within, she causes those motions of the
organs which have some relation and resemblance with her own, as we may judge
by the laughter of the looks, and by all those other effects whereof we have
spoken in this Work.

And certainly, since that at the encounter of pleasant things she makes
particular signs which make known the sense she has of them, she must needs
also have some for those which are displeasing. So that if she sweetly casts
down the Head when good presents it self unto her (as it happens when we meet a
friend, when we approve a good action, or when we consent to the will or advice
of another) to signify by this casting down that she submits herself to the
good which by reason of its excellency, and because it always communicates it
self with some empire, can never be but with some submission and allowance; it
must needs be I say by the reason of contraries, that when she perceives any
ill, she who has a natural aversion from it, which in its presence always
disquiets its self, and with which she can never have any society or
communication, must also make some outward motion which represents her
impatience, and the endeavor she makes to estrange herself from it. Now he that
shall consider the shaking of the Head which we speak of, will easily confess
that there is none which can better express her averseness, her disquiet, and
the care she takes not to unite herself with it; for aversion causes the turn
away of the Head; impatience makes the change of posture, and those contrary
and redoubled motions make it appear that she will not unite with it, since
union in natural things, is always made by a simple and uniform motion, if
there be no obstacle which hinders it.

Besides this it will be nothing difficult to declare why Anger produces the
same effect, since it has the same object which the rest of the Passions have,
and that it cannot consider its enemy but as a vexatious ill, for the which it
has an aversion, and whereunto it will ever witness the hatred it bears, and
the impatience it has to revenge it self. In effect, this shaking of the Head,
is a kind of threat whereby we intend to fright people, and which is not made
use of in fight, or when we come to blows; threatenings being then useless, as
has been said.

As for the other motion of the Head upwards, Why we lift up the Head.
it is but little observable in this Passion, unless when it would witness the
scorn which it conceives of advice given it, or of the designs and threatenings
of the enemy. In effect, it is a Character fit for Scorn, for him to whom we
propose a thing which he slights, usually to lift up his Nose, to witness
thereby that he rejects and repels it as unworthy of his esteem and care.

Finally, Why we turn the Head.
Anger often causes a man to turn and lift his Head on one side, chiefly when
he cannot or will not be revenged: For when we receive an injury from a
powerful person, and have not the power to demand satisfaction we cause our
resentment to appear by that action, which is familiar to children that have a
courage, after they have been ill used, as also those who form a design to
revenge themselves when their enemy is absent or far off; Because those are not
then in a capacity to execute their revenge by reason of their weakness, nor
these by reason of the absence, or far distance of him who has offended them.
On the other side, when for some certain consideration a man will not revenge
himself although he may, as when we esteem the injury not very considerable, or
that those who have done it deserves a more severe chastisement, we content our
selves with this motion of the Head to cause some fear in them. And certainly
it is in the rank of those actions which serve for threatenings, whereby the
Soul intends a displeasure or an apprehension in those who have offended her,
making them believe that those slight punishments are but the beginnings of a
greater vengeance, as has been said: However it be she intends thereby to make
known that the injury touches her; and that she means to retort it; but that
she retains this Passion, and gives it not the liberty to go further; for it
turns the head to witness aversion; it lifts it up to signify its endeavor,
and presently brings it into its first posture to show that it has no more to
do, and that its enough for it to have witnessed its courage and resentment.

Some perhaps may say, That we often perform the same action, when we find a
thing to be excellent, as when we would declare that a thing is well done, that
a man has some eminent virtue, that Wine is extremely good.

To which we must answer, That there is a great deal of difference betwixt
these two; For besides that in this we never turn the Head, it is not thrown,
but as we have said it is rather drawn and raised up, neither falls it again so
soon as in Anger; because its admiration which causes this motion, which
raising up the Soul and keeping it in suspense to consider the wonder she
incounters, disposes of the organs conformable to the condition she is then
in: Whereunto must also be added, that the subject of admiration which here
occupies the Mind is but mean; for when its very great, it not only causes a
man to lift up the Head on one side; but he lifts it up altogether, he opens
also his Eyes and his Mouth, raises and extends his Arms and all his parts
take such an extatick figure which usually accompanies those great transports
and raptures of the Soul, as shall be said elsewhere. But let us conclude this
enquiry which to many may seem of no use, or too much scruple; and let us see
whether Anger may be lulled asleep, and whether it affords any release to the
Mind, whilst the Body is at rest.

We cannot doubt but that if Sleep can hardly insinuate it self in those
Passions which are least violent, it is as it were impossible that it should
ever surprise this which is altogether in excess and vehemence; The calm it is
accompanied withal, cannot agree with the tempest it raises; and whether it be
formed by the intermission of the Soul which knits and stops the spirits, or by
means of those sweet vapors which digestion sends up, which like pleasant
clouds tempers the heat of the Brain, and shuts the passage of the senses; we
ought not to expect that any of these causes should produce it here wherein
there are none but sharp and burning vapors, which heated Choler causes to
rise up in the Brain; and wherein the Soul is so powerfully agitated, that far
from being able to stop the Spirits, she cannot retain even herself. Yet this
ought to be understood of the time when this Passion is in its rage, and in its
greatest ardor; for when it is a little appeased it suffers sleep to benum the
senses, to repair those losses which its watchings and labor has caused.

But what rest soever it affords, it forbears not to preserve in the Soul and
in the Humors the remains of that storm which Anger had raised in them. For it
is commonly disturbed with a thousand kind of Dreams which sometimes represent
fires and burnings, sometimes threatenings, and Combats, and Victories; now the
cause of all these Dreams comes either from the imagination, which being still
full of those species which Passion had there left, and feeling also, if we may
so speak, the shake which the desire of Vengeance had given it, it insensibly
suffers it self to be carried away, and so continues its first designs, which
it always causes happily to succeed, being no longer conducted by the Senses,
nor by Reason, nor taking any other counsel but such as self-love and Pride
which Anger brings along with it, affords it. For it is from thence these
advantages come which a man who sleeps upon his wrath, believes he receives in
all his Dreams; it seems to him that he is always the stronger, of the better
address; he never sees his Enemy but he represents him unto himself either weak
or submitting, and he in them undertakes no combat but he comes off with the
Victory and in Triumph.

But it may also happen, that the Soul may be altogether in a calm, and that no
remains of the trouble which the Passion had before brought, may stay behind;
and yet all these illusions will not forbear to happen, and then it is no
longer a continuation of its first designs, but a new motion which the Spirits
and the Humors raise in the fancy; for whether their agitation subsists after
that of the Soul, the impression of the motion, preserving it self longer in
these bodies then in the Appetite, whether by reason Choler being separated
from the mass of blood, cannot so soon resume its just place; both are able to
form all these violent Dreams which we have spoken of: The difficulty is to
know how this may be done, since these things touch not the senses, which are
benumbed; nor consequently the imagination, which works only on those images
which it has thence received. And were they even at liberty, there is no
likelihood that they should know what passes thus in the secret of the Veins;
What then is it which can raise in the Soul all these Chimera's and Phantasms,
which have so much relation with that Motion which the spirits then suffer, and
so much resemblance with that humor which is in disorder?

We must certainly confess, that besides this exterior knowledge which the
Senses afford her, she has another which is interior and secret, which Nature
has inspired, by means whereof she sees and knows all what is done in her
organs, and that with that light she who is present with all the parts, easily
observes what is done in them, and afterward communicates it to the
imagination, which is as it were the center of all her knowledge. But forasmuch
as this is obscure and confused, she instructs not this Faculty clearly, and
affords it only a general view of those objects which concern her; it is for
the same reason also that she forms no perfect images which respect things as
they are, but which only have some relation and agreement together. So when
choler is moved, although the Soul distinctly knows not the nature nor the
species, yet she knows it to be a humor which is hot and ardent, and upon the
report which she has made thereof to the imagination, this fancies to it self
sparkling colors, flames and burnings, which have a conformity with that
general notion which she had received of them. And because that she also knows
that this Humor serves Anger and Boldness to destroy the Enemy which they
assault, seeing herself in such a condition as in these Passions she uses to
be in, she presently thereupon proposes such objects and designs, and so
forms Enemies, Assaults, and Combats. We may say as much of the agitation
which remains in the Spirits after the esmotion of the Soul is at an end. For
observing it during sleep, she who knows that it is the motion which in Anger
she makes use of, reingageth herself afresh in this Passion, and sleeping
reassum the desires and designs of reven^^ which waking she had already given
over. She does the like also proportionably, when the other humors are
irregular; when the spirits find themselves agitated with the motion of some
other Passion; in a word, it is thus, that she forms all Dreams which come from
the good or ill disposition of the body, as we have showed in the Treatise of
Love out of Inclination.

There remains two effects only to be examined, concerning which we must
consult Physic; for it is from her we must learn What Pulse there is in Anger,
and in what disposition the Heart and the Lungs are when it is kindled in those
parts.

As for the first, All Physicians are agreed, That the Pulse herein is great,
high, quick, frequent, and vehement, and that the violence of the heat, and
force of the vital Faculty, are the principal causes of all these differences.

But although all this be true, yet we may say that this kind of Pulse is not
proper and particular to Anger, since it is also to be found in Boldness, as we
declared treating of that Passion; and that certainly there must be somewhat
which hitherto has not been observed, which distinguishes it from this, there
being no probability that these two Passions should diversely agitate the Soul
and the Spirits, without causing also in the Heart and in the Arteries
different motions: It is therefore certain, that in both of them the pulse is
great and high; but in Boldness it is full and extented, and we may feel the
Artery under our fingers which swells every way; instead that in Anger it puts
all her endeavor forwards, and without enlarging it self it darts it self
outwardly, making the pulse thereby high, which seems rather straight then
large. And certainly as the Spirits follow the design of the Soul which throws
herself out of herself to assault the Enemy, their sally must needs be made as
hers is, from the center to the circumference, and that if the Arteries are to
be restrained as it is necessary, and as we shall hereafter demonstrate, it
ought to be by the sides, that the Spirits may be left at liberty to dart
themselves forth; but there is no question to be made of this effect nor of its
cause, if we remember that Grief and Boldness are here mingled together, and
that at the same time both of them agitate the Heart and the Arteries with a
motion proper to them; for if Grief ought to restrain it, that Boldness at the
same time might open it, they must be straightened in some of the parts, and
enlarged in others, in pursuit whereof, the Pulse appears high without being
extended, as has been said; yet we must observe that it is principally so in
the motions of Anger, or that when it is in the ardor of Vengeance, or that it
turns into Fury, this contraction is no more felt but it is found to be
altogether large and full, as it is in Boldness; or whether the sense of Grief
be stifled, or its effect suspended by the violence of other Passions; or
whether the Soul which is then as it were out of herself, minds no longer her
preservation, and without having a care of sheltering her self, she blindly
exposes her self to danger, and abandons her self to all the rage which
possesses her.

The Respiration in this is just as it is in Boldness; for although it proceeds
from the same causes the Pulse does, that it is of the same use, and that its
motions have the same relation: yet has it not all the differences, or at
least it has not made them known, because we are not sensible by the touch of
the Body of the Lungs where it is formed, as we are sensible of that of the
Arteries, and that there is not such a tie betwixt that and the rest of the
exterior organs which renders it sensible, as there is betwixt the Heart and
these kind of Veins; for which cause there is neither hardness nor softness in
the Respiration, as is in the pulse, nor can we observe any thing which comes
near this kind of beating, which we said was proper to Anger; although the
Lungs suffer the same changes, and be in the same condition as the Heat then
is; for Hippocrates assures us, that in this Passion both the one and the other
retire and restrain themselves in themselves, (...), although heat at the same
time swells them and lifts them up. Now although we cannot doubt but these
contrary motions come from the mixture of these two Passions whereof we have
spoken; yet it is not easy to observe how they may be compatible together, nor
what parts are destined for their reception, it being not probable that the
same should be agitated by both together. For we cannot herein say of the Heart
and Lungs, what we have said of the Arteries, their natural constitution and
the action which they are obliged to perform, suffers them not to be
restrained, as they are to be lift up: It must necessarily be that they must
extend when they open themselves.

But if they extend themselves so, how can they restrain themselves? Certainly,
we must say that their flesh and substance gathers comprench and restrains it
self, and that their cavities enlarge themselves, instead that in Joy all the
parts release and soften themselves, having not that need to fortify
themselves as here they have; in effect, the pulse which appears harder in
Anger then in Boldness, is a certain sign that the substance of the Arteries
restrains and hardens it self; and we cannot doubt but that the hardness of
these parts comes from the contraction of the Soul, since it is for that only
reason that the pulse becomes hard in Fear.

All the difficulty remaining is, To know why the Arteries which borrow the
virtue of moving themselves from the Heart, have not a motion like his, and
that they streighten their cavity on the sides, although that enlarges his own
on all sides.

To resolve this difficulty, we must observe that the beating of the Arteries
is not the same which is in the Heart, since those open and lift themselves up,
whilst this fall and shuts it self. So that they must needs be too different
motions, and consequently proceed from two different virtues. And if this be
true, there is no necessity that they should resemble in all things, and the
Heart in any sense may enlarge it self without any necessity for the Arteries
to do the same; now as the Heart has its Ventricles placed on the right and
left which necessarily ought to open themselves to receive blood and air which
enters therein, it is impossible the Soul should cause it to make a motion
conformable to the Passions wherewith it is agitated, as is made in the
Arteries where this impediment is not, and where she has all the liberty to
satisfy Grief by restraining them, and Boldness by raising them up, as has
been said. As for the Lungs, there is a particular reason for which they cannot
restrain themselves as the others do; for they have not the power to move
themselves, and of themselves they lift themselves not up to give place to the
air which enters. It is the muscles of respiration, which extending themselves
widen the capacity of the Breast, and constrain the Lungs to open, to hinder a
vacuum; for which cause waving the motive Faculty, they have not those kinds of
motion, which depend therefrom.

But it is to pry too far into the secrets of Physic, and the further clearing
hereof would be useless to those who know it, and those who are ignorant of it
would never be sufficiently informed. Let us only say, That although Anger
causes often very great disorders in the Soul and in the Body, Anger is
profitable to health.
yet it is not always an enemy to Reason, nor to Health. It is absolutely
necessary for weak and idle minds, and for cold and gross constitutions; and
even in all others it may be compared to winds, which how impetuous soever they
are drive away vapors and mists, clearing the air, and rendering it the more
pure and wholesome. In effect, if we seek to hinder its course, or that we would
restrain it, without suffering it so much as to exhale it self by words, it
preserves it self a long time in the Soul, and at last alters the humors,
whence often happen great and pernicious sicknesses. For as the inferior part
is deaf to the counsels of Reason, and that she proposes to herself revenge as
the end she tends unto, she will cause her motion to cease until she is at
least in some manner revenged. So that the Will may then hinder those actions
over which it has a power, such as are words, blows, and the like; but for
those which are not under its direction, as are the motions of the Heart, and
the agitation of the Humors, they must necessarily be continued, they must even
by this restraint be rendered the more violent, and they must last the longer
time, since we delay our revenge, which is the end which ought to terminate
them.

FINIS.

