A LETTER From a GENTLEMAN at London to his FRIEND at Edinburgh.
SIR,
I Am informed that those, who in the last Meeting of our Parliament appeared
for the Interest of the Country, have taken a Resolution to begin the ensuing
Session with an Act declaring the Nations Right to Caledonia; which I presume
to be a very wrong step, and such as will prove of very bad consequence. I
suppose, the great Argument that has been offered for this Method, is, that
nothing will more Unite the Members of Parliament, than the sensible Injury
done to the Nation by the Destruction of that Colony. But, I hope, that upon
better consideration Men of Honesty and good Intentions will not suffer
themselves to be led into such a Mistake. For a Declaration of our right to
Caledonia can do no real good to the Nation at this time: But the disbanding of
the Army will. If they would be even with those who have ruined our Colony,
they can never do it any way effectually, but by breaking the Army. They are
now to choose upon which of these two Heads they will again break with the
Court; for in my Opinion neither of them will be granted. But if it should be
thought convenient to yield to either of these Propositions, 'twill certainly
be to that of disbanding the Army, on Account of the Interest the Parliament of
England might take in it, and perhaps second it for their own Security. Whereas
the declaring our Right to Caledonia will (how unjustly soever) be attributed
to mere pique and humor, because of no present Advantage to the Nation; and
will sound ridiculously among our Neighbors, where our Weakness, and ill
Conduct in that Affair has but too much exposed us. So that the Court can never
desire a fairer pretense to vindicate themselves both to the English and Dutch,
then to break up our Parliament upon such an Account. And we who are crushed by
a Power which we are no way able to resist, ought to have great regard to such
things as may engage all Men of good Intentions in those Countries to be our
Friends; and not continue to mistake what is done in both by the Court Party,
as proceeding from the Nations themselves. Besides, till the Army be disbanded,
there is not the least probability of obtaining Money from the public, for
carrying on the Trade of the Company. We must have lost our senses, if we do
not see that a quarrel with us is industriously sought, that a pretense may be
found to keep up an Army. And if the Court Party should prevail in the
Parliament of England, who knows, how far our insisting upon the Business of
Caledonia, without any prospect of present good to the Nation, might be made a
handle to excite that Nation against us? I cannot but think there is just-ground
to suspect the Conduct of those who by all means would push the Affair of the
Colony at so unseasonable a time. We don't abandon our Rights and Privileges in
this point, because we think fit in the first place to enter upon another
Affair, which threatens us with the utmost danger. As long as we have a
standing Army, we can have neither Trade nor Liberty. We expelled King James
because he would keep up an Army in time of Peace. We are now struggling with
this Government about the same thing. And a certain Person, though he stand
looking on a Crown at such a distance, as amounts to a Vision, is yet so dazzled
with its brightness, as to make it his business to employ the present Spirit
and Vigor of the Nation in any thing rather than in breaking the Army. I value
not Protestations; they are Nauseous things; I look only upon what Men do, and
cannot forbear to think, that those, who after due consideration of our present
Circumstances, shall in the Ensuing Session of Parliament, prefer any other
Business to that of disbanding the Army, are Men seeking their own Interest,
and not the good of their Country.

I am Sir Your, etc.
October 13. 1700.

