REMARKS ON THE GROWTH AND PROGRESS OF Nonconformity.

The Fathers seem to call those Heretics, who separated, or made divisions in
the Church, though the Error they maintained were very small. See Mr. Baxter's
Infants Church membership, his Answer to Mr. Tombs's Valedictory Oration at
Bewdly, p. 169.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1682.

THE INTRODUCTION.
IF Aegles the Champion that was dumb all his life before, had the strings of
his Val. Max.
Tongue loosed, that he spoke for ever after, to see the deceit that was at the
sacred Exercises in Samos; it is certainly enough to amaze us to see the
greatest disturbers of the Churches Peace yet talk so much of Love and
Holiness, terms of Union and ways of Concord, Pleas for Peace and Cures of
Church-divisions, as the Provincial of the Protestant Schismatics does; to see
them become as Firebrarnds in the Church, that were ordained for saving Lights,
and as Trumpets to sound Martial alarms, that were designed for Retreats to
popular Furies; to see pretended Holiness a Cover to the deformity of Sedition
and Innovation, and the most barbarous Villainies set on the Score of Religion
and Reformation; to see those that, to remove him from evil Counselors, have
murdered their lawful Sovereign, yet to startle at the use of a Ceremony, like
a Capuchin at the sight of Money; to see these still hunting upon the File,
insinuating the vilest abominations in show for the public good, abhorring
Idols, yet committing Sacrilege, espying Moths yet winking at Beams, crying
down the Whore of Babylon when they mean nothing but the overthrow of
Episcopacy; in a word, pretending nothing but Piety and Peace, when intending
nothing but Schism and Sedition, and by the help of these holy Guises [as our
Royal Martyr called them] to (...).
come to such a summity of seditious insolence, that if one offer a fight with
these Beasts of Ephesus in contradiction to their peevish Faction, (as one
merrily observed) they presently play the Duke of Anjou's Cow, that bedaub'd
the fingers of any that offered to pull her back by the tail, they make him the
very Butt of the most infamous defamations, that the twisted malice and
subtilty of Earth and Hell can devise. Now one would think this enough to make
a dumb Ass speak, in reproving the insolences and dotages of such Prophets,
who run thus in the ways of Balaam, to curse a Church and People that the Lord
has blessed: At least, it is enough to put any serious person on enquiry into
the causes of these honest religious Villainies, as Seneca calls prospering
Wickedness, and how such a pernicious Faction could arrive to such a pitch of
Reputation and Insolence. The Enquirer will find these following means among
others regardable.

REMARKS ON Nonconformity, etc,
1. Toleration and Indulgence.
HE is much a Stranger to Nonconformity, that knows not how much Connivance
and Indulgence have conduced to its Increase, and how necessary are the
coercive means to the safe suppress of that dangerous Faction.

The first Instance I assign for this, is in Queen Elizabeth's How Presbytery
first got footing in England.
tolerating the French Church to be settled in London upon Calvin's Principle in
1560. Calvin having solicited Bishop Grindal; upon the impetration of the
Bishop the Queen assigned to the French Exiles the Church of St. Anthony, with
liberty to erect the Genevian Discipline, and set up a Form of Prayer which had
no conformity with the English Liturgy; which proved in the event a designed
expedient of Calvin's for the advancing of Presbytery in the room of
Episcopacy. Upon this Toleration their numbers so increased, that in 1568. they
broke out into open Schism, choosing to meet in Barns and Fields rather than in
Churches with their Brethren as formerly; teaching that it was impious to hold
any correspondence with the conforming Churches. Upon this very occasion,
(viz.) the Queens toleration, and particularly her indulging them the liberty
of the Genevian Discipline, within eight years time their numbers so increased,
and their insolence also, that the Queen plainly saw (as her own words were)
that such were the restless spirits of that factious People, that no quiet was
to be expected from them, till they were utterly suppressed. In order to which
she calls a ParlJam.nt in 1592. wherein strict Laws were enacted against them,
and executed accordingly. Barrow, Penry and Burchet, were hanged for such their
Non-conformity-principles Cambdens Eliz.
and practices as were treasonable. And by these sharp Laws made against them,
and some severe executions done on them, the Ringleaders of them were humbled,
the whole body of them brought to a good measure of quietness, which these
wholesome severities kept them in till the end of the Queens reign: and in all
probability, as a late Writer observes, they might Aer. Red. l. 11. n. 1.
have been for ever suppressed and kept quiet, had K. James at first held the
reins with that strict hand that Queen Elizabeth did before him; but for want
of that they soon grew bold, fell a petitioning for Reformation of sundry
Ceremonies and Abuses, (viz.) Cross at Baptism, Bowing at the name of Jesus,
Surplice, etc. which occasioned the Conference at Hampton Court, Conf. at
Hampton Court. p. 85.
where the defense made for their Cause was so mean, that the King turning his
head to some of the Lords expressed himself thus; If this be all they have to
say, I Will make them conform, or I Will hurry them out of the Land, or somewhat
worse.

This Conference being in February, the next Month produced the Kings
Proclamation, wherein he strictly enjoins Conformity; admonishes all his
Subjects never after to expect alteration in the Form of God's public Service
then established. Accordingly the Laws were put in execution, without sparing
Non-Conformists or Half-Conformists, and by this they were reduced to that
quiet state again, that he found them in when first come to the Crown, till the
Gunpowder Treason, at which time they began to be very bold and busy; the King
being terrified with the apprehension of so great a danger, turned all his
thoughts upon the Papists, and so let the Non-Conformists take breath, and
regain some strength. And as their custom ever was to fish in troubled Waters,
prodigious Lies and Stories still finding best entertainment in troublesome
times, quia tutius finguntur and facilius creduntur, says Livy. Therefore upon
the occasion of this horrid Plot, the Gunpowder Treason, their next expedient
was (upon discovery of this Plot) to alarm the Court and Country with the fears
of Popery, and of new dangers from the Papists, to exert the greatest zeal for
the Reformed Religion, for preserving their Liberties and Privileges against
the encroachments of the Court, and by this very means (the Reins being loosed
to them on the occasion of the Plot) they drew much people to them,
strengthened much their Faction, and by degrees made a Party in the House of
Commons, who at last came to that height, that the King could do little in
ParlJam.nt without applying himself to that popular Faction, and by the
pretense of standing for the Subjects Property, the preservation of the true
Religion against Popery, etc. they grew strong in ParlJam.nts, weakened the
Prerogative Royal, aspersed with the name of Papists all Anti-Presbyterians,
and by this means grew so strong in both Kingdoms that they wanted now nothing
but occasion to break out into open War. Now their last advance to all this,
beginning at the discovery of the Gunpowder Treason, the Faction having that
opportunity for their revival, it is hard to say whether did most promote their
designs, their taking this opportunity to arrogate to themselves the reputation
of the greatest Anti-Papists, or the King's loosing the Reins, and letting them
grow headstrong by employing all his care in the discovery of the hellish
Popish Plot, and punishment of the Plotters; but certain it is, that upon the
Kings remitting his former severities, and increasing their Liberty, they soon
grew headstrong beyond the power of his Son King Charles the First ever to
suppress. And it is known beyond the reach of scruple, that that martyred King
did merely comply himself into nothing, by his Tolerations and Indulgences
toward that Party, and delivered him himself into their bloody hands by his
mere condescension and compliances with them; and that as he said, (...). cap.
5. it was his suffering them to get to the Pinnacle of the Temple that so
tempted them to cast him down headlong. And 'twas undoubtedly the sound and
smart experience of the evil of Toleration, that made the wisest of our
Ancestors so decry it. St. Augustine wrote several whole Epistles of the evil
of tolerating Dissenters. In his Epistle to August. Vincentio Ep. 48. Bonifacio
Ep. 68. Ceciliano Ep. 166. Ep. ad Dona.
Vincentius he expresses at large his great joy de correctione Donatistarum,
for the punishing (or suppressing) of the Non-Conformists of his time: adding
in the same Epistle that he was once for Toleration, but that that opinion of
his was overcome Ep. 48. l. 5.
non contradicentium verbis, sed demonstrantium exemplis. And he tells us in
his Epistle to Donatus, Ep. 166. that after Constantine had made strict Laws
against the Donatists, i. e. the then Nonconformists, Julian the Apostate, one
of his successors, gave toleration to the Donatists for their Schismatical
Meetings, suffered their sacrilegious dissensions (as he calls them) as the
expedient whereby he thought the Christian Religion most likely to perish out
of the World, in these words, Julianus Christi August. Ep. 166. L. G.
desertor and inimicus -- libertatem parti Donati permisit -- eo modo putans
Christianum nomen posse perire de terris, si sacrilegas dissensiones liberas
esse permitteret. And accordingly Constantine the first Christian Emperor
dealt with the Non-conformists of his time, saying, Pestium illarum audacia mea
executione coercebitur.

And Archb. Whitgift declared it impossible to defend the Religion and Rites of
the Church of England, to appease the Schisms and Sects therein, to reduce the
Ministers thereof to Uniformity and due obedience, if after a long risk of
Liberty, Dissenters had any countenance showed them; adding, That if way were
given to their clamours and surmises, it would cause that confusion which
hereafter the State would be sorry for. But hark what the grand Church-Barreter
himself says in his Treatise of Self-denial, (Ep. Ded. to the then honorable
Mr. Baxter.
Colonel James Berry one of the Council of State, now reduced to Beggary.) In
his Epistle to this great Belizarius, he calls Toleration Englands misery, a
liberty for drawing men to Hell, a wicked damning liberty, a strengthening the
Party tolerated, a making way for their Power, a giving away our own Power, a
preparing Faggots for our own Martyrdom; he speaks of the Magistrates
tolerating, as of a sort of men that rule as though they were uncertain whether
there were a Heaven or Hell, etc. Such a sin was Toleration in the times of
Usurpation, and after this manner did he call for fire down from Heaven to
consume all that gave any toleration to the Episcopal Loyalists, that now upon
the least touch of restraining Non-conformists, cries out of Gaols, Starvings
Ruin, bloody Persecution, etc. It Is true indeed, in some of the forecited
places, it is against tolerating of Popery he speaks; but what is that? It Is well
known that Pope ry and Episcopacy were then made termini convertibiles, and
that the English Hierarchy was the Popery then opposed, as incapable of the
least degree of Toleration.

It Is a good observation of Mr. Baxter in his Examination of Mr. Tombs' s
Praecursor, Sect. 13. p. 390. being an Appendix to his
Infant-Church-membership; That it is from Separation that so many in so many
parts of the Land have turned Ranters, Blasphemers, and commonly unclean, that
seemed religious, yea some downright Infidels, so that not only the Racovian
Catechism, but the most hellish Books that ever was written, (called the Three
Grand Impostors) laboring to prove Christ a Deceiver, was Printed in London.
Such Enthusiasm there was that Women ran naked into the Assemblies, and men
went about the Streets, saying, they were Christ, that this their wickedness
spread far and near. I cannot hear (says Mr. Baxter) of one among a multitude
that comes to this fearful pass by any other way, than first turning to
Anabaptistry and Separation, and then to vilify the Ministry, and then who
knows whither? Thus Mr. Baxter.

On the like consideration it was undoubtedly, that St. Augustine taught, That
there was scarce any thing so bad as Schism, Ep. contra Parm. not Idolatry,
says Dionys. ap. Eus. l. 6. not Sacrilege, says Optatus l. 1. it is the
Original of Evils, says Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrn. a heap of Evils, says Mr. Baxter
of Church-divisions, Cure, Pref.

And in consideration of all this, what State-Physician but will judge the
coercive means as salutary to the Body Politic, in case of such
State-Convulsions, as the present Separation causes, as dismembring is to the
Body Natural in cases of Gangrenes. And it is observed that of late years, while
the Oxford Act and other poenal Laws were put in execution, it is notoriously
known how quiet they were. It Is true they would please themselves with their
Gloriola's concerning Persecution, as they called their just punishment, would
congratulate to one another their sufferings, as for Christ's sake, though it
were for disobedience to Christ's Precept and Example, as well pleased with
that love and pity which the noise of Persecution gains to their persons and
persuasions; but all this while they were quiet, desiring nothing but the
exercise and liberty of the Conventicle. And no sooner had they gained this
point, but by degrees, as their liberty increased, their number increased, and
their interest increased, and their insolence increased which has now at last
improved its self into such libellings and licentious discoursings, as can be
interpreted little less than praeludes of Rebellion. So that what Bishop Jewel
said of Cartwright the Father of the Non-conformists, may fitly be said of
these his childish Followers, Folly is bound up in their froward hearts, and
it is the Rod of Correction must fetch it out; The Non-conformity-Faction being
always observed Crescit indulgens sibi diru^ hydrops. Hor.
to have this Hydropical humor of increasing by being indulged, which makes
them just as fit to be indulged as a desperate Dropsy which is exasperated by
mitigations. But the unreasonableness of Non-conformists Plea for Toleration,
and complaints of Sufferings in being restrained, will sufficiently appear, by
considering distinctly the Persons suffering, and the Things suffered. The
Persons suffering, are 1. Such who at the same time revile the Government,
reproach and expose their Governors, managing their pretense of Conscience in
such an invective way as makes their complaints and clamours more like matter
of superiority than of scruple.

2. They are such as have kept days of Prayer and Thanksgiving for Victories
over the King; have preached the People into Rebellion against him, have
preached from him his Arms and Money, Laws and Credit, Liberty and Life, and in
the most solemn manner have Justified all when they have done, and after this,
endeavored all they could to keep this present King out of his Throne. That
Mr. Baxter's Holy Commonwealth was wrote to that very end and purpose will
appear to any that compares the time of his publishing it, (which his Book was
wrote as he says, (...) to satisfy the demands and doubts of) which was the
Year 1659. when the grand point in doubt was, whether the King should be
restored or no. He that compares this with those three Theseses 145, 146, 147.
where he hints that the King was justly dispossessed, as by a lawful War, that
being conquered by the People, they were not obliged to restore him, nay though
he had been dispossessed unjustly, yet it was not the duty of Subjects to seek
his restitution. I say these things compared with that vital circumstance
(viz.) the time of writing it, make it evident that the design of it was only
this, to keep out the King: But

2. The Unreasonableness of Non-conformists Plea for Toleration and complaint
of Sufferings, will further appear by considering the things suffered. Consider
it in the Comparison, and in it self.

1. In comparison of what the Conforming Clergy suffered under them. Their
sufferings in the Usurpation times will appear to be little less than those of
the Spanish Inquisition, or the Marian Persecution, to any that reads but (1.)
the Bill of Mortality of the Clergy of London, wherein we have account of 115
turned out of their Livings, Plundered of their Goods, their Wives and Children
sent a begging, whereof above 40 were Doctors in Divinity, 20 imprisoned in
London and the Ships, 25 fled to escape imprisonment, 22 died with grief in
Prisons and remote places. The Protestants Remonstrance recounts many more
alike sufferers in the Country, both which together show that there were more
suffered by Ejecting, Sequestring, and barbarous plundering by the
Presbyterians in three Years time, then did by the Papists in all Queen Mary's
Reign. But (2.) Consider what their suffering is in it self, and it will appear
to be little else but a self-silencing, merely because they cannot get
privilege above the peaceable and loyal Sons of the Church. I call it a
self-silencing, because all that the Law does is to hold forth one common rule
indifferently to all: every man has the conditions of his Freedom tendered
him, which are such as themselves have for the most part acquitted from all
intrinsic turpitude or sin; and he that will not comply with these conditions,
siilences himself; beside, it is not the Man that is silenced neither, but only
this or that irregular Practice or Opinion, which the Magistrate seeing
insuperable necessity for, has authority from God to regulate and restrain.
Moreover their Plea in this matter is no more than what Dissenters of all sorts
may use, so that if Rulers may be judge, they are to be suppressed; if the
People must be judge, then Papists, Quakers, etc. must be tolerated also. And
such Liberty Plea for Peace, Preface.
(says Mr. Baxter) in matters of Worship and Faith, is the way to set up
Popery in the Land. But let Non-Conformists Scruples be what they will, if it
seem good to our Rulers to put the restraint upon them, I humbly recommend to
them that good advice of Mr. Baxter; See to this my Brethren, (says he) that
none of you suffer as an evil-doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters,
as a resister of the commands of lawful Authority, as ungrateful to those that
have been instruments of our good, as evil speakers against dignities, as
opposers of the discipline and ordinances of Christ, as scornful revilers of
your Christian Brethren, as reproachers of a laborious and judicious Ministry.
Saints Rest. p. 131. examining well whether the grounds and reasons of their
sufferings be not the same as that of Popish Priests and Jesuits, (viz.) not
their religious Principle, but their seditious Practice, encouraging People to
tumultuate and rebel, by rendering the Government and Governors odious, by
teaching (as Mr. Baxter does in his Plea for Peace) that it is not in the power
of Princes to forbid The King forbids none preaching, only regulates preaching.
Ministers preaching, (as much as to say,) it is lawful to resist the King's
Authority in defense of the Conventicle.

2. Grindallizing.
A second thing that promotes the interest and increase of Separation is
Grindallizing. By Grindallizers I mean the Conforming Non-conformists, or
rather such as are Conformists in their Profession, Half-Conformists in their
practice, Non-conformists in their judgment, like the old Gnostick-Separatists
which the Apostle calls. Jam. 1. 8. Jam. 4. 8.
double minded men; or like the Sinner in Eccl. 2. 13. that looks two manner of
ways, or like the Haven in Creet, Acts 27. 12. that bows and bends to the South
and to the North, to the Church of England, and to the Kirk of Scotland, as
interest and opportunity shall incline.

These are they which down with all Oaths and Subscriptions required, though
what they swallow whole in their Subscriptions, they mince and mangle in their
practice, they conform to all seemingly but hypocritically; mangle the
Common Prayer, handle the Surplice gently, plow socunningly with their Ox and
Ass together, carry it so cunningly that they can scarce be known, but per
modum opinionis, by their open compliances with the Enemies of the Church, by
their Gallionism in defending the Orders and Ceremonies of the Church, and
other matters of Conformity, which require their proportion of Zeal and
Resolution, by their hearing with patience and unconcernedness, the interest,
honor, and peace of the Church run down by swaggering Sectaries; by their
talking Conformity and Nonconformity with such compassionate and serious
innuendo's as may sufficiently signify their favorable opinion of, if not
good will to their Cause, by their defending the popular Election of Bishops,
by ambiguously representing the separation, as if it were no Schism; by their
writing fraudulent Pleas for the Non-conformists; by endeavoring to acquit the
Presbyterians and Independents of the King's Murder; and in statu quo, by their
Votes in choosing ParlJam.nts and Convocations, by their being a secretis with
professed Non-conformists, by their Self-designing compliances with them, under
pretense of Moderation, and similibus; whereby they contribute as much to the
encouragement of Dissenters, as the professed Encouragers themselves; like King
Charles's Presbyterian Murderers, who had the Villainy to manage the
contrivance, but the Cunning to disappear in the Execution. These
Half-Conformists are the veriest Church-Moles, that by their blind Principles
and undermining Practices contribute little less to the increase and interest
of Nonconformity, to the danger and dishonor of the Church, than the open
Enemy, whether Popish or Peevish. And of this we have frequent instances,
particularly in Archbishop Grindal, whose indulgence to that Party, gave them
the first revival in England, by his conniving at the Half-Conformists of
Yorkshire, by his complying first with Beza in procuring a French Church settled
in London on the Geneva Principle. And afterward with those, who upon their
return from Geneva, Franckford, and other places (where they lived during the
Marian Persecution) were preferred in the Church, where they lived for some
time Half-Conformists, as Cartwright Minister in Warwick, Whittingham Dean of
Durham, Sampson Dean of Christ Church, afterward turned out for
Nonconformity, with great numbers preferred to Cures in City and Country;
where they were not wanting to prepare the People for such Innovations as were
in aftertime to be brought into the Church, and by the professed Non-conformists.
As soon as safety and impunity permitted, they broke out into open Schism, and
still when the Laws just severity frighted them, they crept within the Pale of
the Church, seeming to conform, that they might have the Laws protection to
shelter their contempt of Authority, and under the wing of Episcopacy to breed
up their Presbytery. When Archbishop Whitgift's zeal and industry had reduced
them to that, that in all probability their ruptures were crumbling to nothing,
their then refuge was (as Beza advised in his Letter to Cartwright) to unite
themselves again to the main body of the Church, there to be nurtured into
contempt of the Churches Government under the indulgence of its Governors. And
of this kind of Half-Conformists are those who at this very day, by outward
Conformity have opportunity, and by masked Nonconformity want not will through
sneaking compliance to betray the Church into her Enemies hands, and themselves
(though they know it not) into the veriest contempt and slavery; so that in
this contemplation we might (as the Church of old did by the Waters of Babylon)
sit down and weep when we remember Zion. Zion (says the Prophet) tearing her
self with her own hands. Or as the Tree in the Apologue, that was rent and
splint, and torn asunder by Wedges that came out of its own sides. Therefore as
we would not hypocritize and dissemble with God and Man, as we would not be
found Church-Traytors, that have espoused a Cause which we are afraid to
defend, and ashamed to own; as we would not be found in conspiracy against our
selves, and in breach of those solemn Oaths took at our entrance into the
Ministry, by a dastardly compliance with our own and the Churches Enemies; Let
us every man to his Tents, O Israel, with resolution and courage in gainsaying
Seducers, in daring to look Faction in the Face, and opposing it, though never
so insolent and domineering; according to the advice of Mr. Calvin to Bucer,
that he should take care to avoid moderate counsels in matters of Religion,
intimating the intense zeal that is required in Ministers in order to the
interest and honor of the Church: remembering that of the Wise man, Eccl. 2.
13. Woe unto them that have a fearful heart, and to the faint hands, and to the
sinner that goes two manner of ways.

3. Their Zeal against Popery, a third Expedient.
So odious is Popery now in England, (blessed be God for it) that even Children
will spit at the very naming of it: so that a better pretense could never be
for the setting up of Presbytery, than a show of the greatest Zeal against
Popery: and therefore has it been always accounted the most necessary Tool in
the framing of Innovations.

When the Earl of Bothwel, having a mind to the Camd. Eliz. A^r. Red.
Crown of Scotland, could not bring to pass the murder of the King by his
dealing with the Witch of Keith, nor by his assaulting him first at Haly-rood,
and afterward at Falkland, his last expedient was to join himself with the
Presbyterians, and act hand in hand with them zealously against Popery; and
under that holy guise attempted openly to assassinate the King. It Is well known
how the very force of this Word (Popishly affected) blew up three Kingdoms but
the other day; hurrying People from the fear of Popery to the prostitution of
Christianity it self; when to palliate their hellish outrages against the
King, they feared not to tax even him of Popery, who had said and done as much
to satisfy the World of his detestation of Popery, and true zeal for the
Reformed Religion, as the wit of man could devise, or the malice of man demand,
as does abundantly appear by his Royal Declaration or Manifesto sent from
Oxford in 1644. And at this day a fiery zeal against Popery is the best
expedient they have; it is that single pretext that supports their Cause; to
accuse Governors or Government of Popery is an expedient that in England never
yet failed to render them odious to the multitude.

Now that the design of these groundless outcries against Popery is not so
much to keep down Popery, as to promote Presbytery, will appear very probable
to any that shall but examine the way and manner of their exercising this Zeal,
which is threefold.

1. Branding with the Name of Papist, or Popishly affected, every one that is
not of, or at least that sets himself against their Principle and Practice.
Archbishop Whitgift, a Prelate of the greatest Piety and Learning, eminent for
his zeal against Popery, yet because against Presbytery also, they styled him
Beelzebub of Canterbury, Pope of Lambeth, a monstrous Antichristianism Pope,
etc. and but the other day in Smith's Protestant Intelligence, the King's
Council is called Popish; of the 26 Bishops, four are called Protestant, and
all the rest Popish. To that pass are things now brought that whoever will not
side, vote, and petition as they would have them; whoever speaks reverently of
the Orthodox Clergy, of the Order and Discipline of the Churches of England, in
vindication of loyal Episcopacy against a confused and factious Presbytery, is
presently a Tory and Popishly affected: and why all this, but for a Blind or
Stratagem to blend and confound Popery and Prelacy, that People may not
distinguish, but destroy one under the name and pretense of the other.

I shall not insist upon the Malice and Diabolism of these slanderous
imputations, it will somewhat discover their design, if we do but take notice
what little reason they have thus to traduce our Church and Church Rulers;
considering these two things:

I. That their correspondency of Principles and Practices with the Church of
Rome, so far as they are erroneous and dangerous, is so very apparent to any
that understand Popery. Ex. gr.

1. Both equally deny the King's Supremacy. The Papist says, not the King but
the Pope is Supreme; the Presbyter says, not the King, but the ParlJam.nt.
Prove (says Mr. Baxter) that the King is the higher H. Commonwealth. Pref.
Power, and I Will offer my head to Justice as a Rebel. And Calvin in his Comment
upon Amos cap. 7. v. 13. calls them inconsiderate men that had conferred the
Supremacy on King Henry VIII. Bellarm de Pontif. l. 3. c. 7.


2. The Pope says, an Heretical, i. e. a Protestant King is to be deposed. The
Presbyterian says, it is lawful and commendable to fight against the King for
Call before the ParlJam. Dec. 25 1644. Pol. Apho. These. 358. with 368.
Religion, to depose him, says Baxter. And Martin Mar-Prelate in his second
Book, advises the ParlJam.nt to put down the Bishops whether the Queen would or
no.

3. Papists say, Heretical, i. e. Protestant Kings may be not only deposed,
but killed by their Subjects. Presbyterians say the same, Ministers may
excommunicate Princes; and after a King is by Excommunication cast into Hell,
he is unworthy to live upon Earth, says Buchanan. Buchan. de jure Reg. p. 70.
Guignard the Jesuit has it, France is sick and they must cut the basilick
vein to heal her. The Presbyter has the same words concerning King Charles the
First, Wound that Hazael under the fifth rib, you must Zion's Plea.
strike the basilick vein, none but it can heal the Plurisie of State. And Mr.
Love, O that our State Physicians Sermon. at Uxbridge Treaty
would imitate God in cutting off from the Land those that have distempered it,
meaning the King, as his next words show, praestat unus pereat quam unitas. And
accordingly they have practiced, as will be shown in its proper place.

4. They both proceed in the same method; The Pope first Excommunicates, then
Deposes, then Murders. The Presbyter first Deposes the King, then Murders
Charles Stuart.

5. They agree in so much as time; The Jesuit, i. e. the bloody Papist and the
Presbyter are both of an age, the year 1535. is remarkable for the Geneva
Discipline, and the spawning of the Jesuits Order.

6. Papists teach, That Truce is not to be kept with Heretics, i. e.
Protestants. Presbyterians teach, That Promise is not to be kept when -- the
preaching of the truth, i. e. Presbytery is hindered. See their Marg. Not. on
Matthew. 2. 12.

7. Both will reproach and slander, plunder and sequester, kill and slay for
the Churches good; though the Apostle says, We must not do evil that good may
come thereby.

8. Both agree in that Principle, that Dominion is founded in Grace.

9. It Is the business of them both in Protestant Kingdoms, by ill interpreting
their Princes actions, by slandering, libelling, and the like means, to draw
Subjects from their Allegiance.

10. The Jesuits call themselves the Saintly Brotherhood, the Church of Rome,
the only true Church, and all Heretics beside themselves. The Presbyterians
called themselves formerly the Godly Party, and all others Malignants. Now the
People of God, the Zealous Protestants, and all others Carnal, Superstitious,
Formalists, Popishly affected, etc.

11. The Papists formerly Plot, Rebel, and Massacre, by entering into a
Covenant, called the Holy League, (as in the Massacre at Paris, and Rebellion
against King Henry the Third). The Presbyterian did the same by entering into a
Covenant, called the Solemn League, (as in England and Scotland against King
Charles the First).

12. Papists warring against King Henry the Third French Hist. of Presbyt. p 88.
of France, in performance of their Holy League, have frequent Fastings,
doubled devotions, to persuade weak Consciences that they aimed at nothing but
the setting up of Christ's Kingdom, and to instruct them to cut their Kings
throat, as for the love of God, and the gaining of Paradise. Presbyters in
warring against King Charles in performance of their Solemn League had frequent
days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving for success in fighting against the King.
The Papists French Hist. of Presbyt. p. 88, 89.
Holy League and the Presbyters Solemn League were both entered, upon a
groundless jealousy of the King's Religion. In both there is a League with
Strangers, and Armies raised in the Kingdom against their natural Sovereign:
who gave them no occasion of the War, but the too much gentleness and
condescensions of them both. In both the Fire of Civil War was blown about by
seditious Preachers.

13. Papists and Presbyterians both in their distinct Parties do still combine
against the Government.

14. Both for many years have been the great disturbers of the Peace of all
Christendom. Tell me (says a late Gentile Writer) of any Massacre, or bloody
Wars, or Stratagems against the Magistrate, of any Treason or Match. Rediv. p.
71.
Rebellion whatever, within the memory of man, but what was carried on by one
of these two Parties, Papists or Presbyterians, and I Will be content to undergo
the bloody Inquisition of the one, and the fate of the two Archbishops,
Canterbury and St. Andrews, murdered by the other.

Now if they will go no further from the Church of Rome than she has gone from
the Truth, let them show, if they can, half so many parallels between the
Church of England and of Rome. It Is true indeed, the Churches of England retain
some things that are in use in the Church of Rome; but must we disbelieve and
difuse every thing as Popish that the Papists believe and use, then must we not
believe that Christ is the Messiah; then must we renounce the Word, Sacraments,
and Prayer, because the Papists believe and use them. But if we will depart no
further from the Church in Reformation, than she departs from the Truth in
Corruption, let the Non-conformists show, if they can, wherein the Church of
England agrees with that of Rome in half so many erroneous Principles and
dangerous Practices as the Nonconformist does. What reason then have they so
to curse a Church which the Lord has blessed? Her Sisters (the Reformed
Churches) all calling her blessed, and joying Col. 2. 5.
to behold her order and stedfastness in Christ; so to stigmatize with the
brand of Popish, all that are not peevish and turbulent like themselves.

II. What Reason have they for it, considering what great things the Episcopal
Divines have done and suffered above them all along from the beginning of the
Reformation to this day, in detestation of Popery, and attestation of the
Reformed Religion as now professed in the Church of England, some laying down
their lives to testify against Popery, as Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc.
others standing in the Gap upon all occasions to oppose the return of it with
most eminent abilities and greatest zeal above what Non-conformists can pretend
to. In the beginning of the Reformation, when Calvin sent to Cranmer, and after
that to the Protector Seymour to offer his assistance, they rejected him
utterly; so that neither he, nor any of the Consistorian Principle, had any
hand in the first Reformation in England; or have any of them ever since done
any thing comparable to what the Episcopal Divines have against Popery. It Is
true, Mr. Baxter, Pool, and two or three more of them have done their parts,
but what to those many of the Church of England, Usher, Hall, Morton,
Reignolds, Chillingworth, Laud, Abbot, Jewel, Bramhall, Barlow, all Bishops,
beside Hammond, White, Buckeridge, Sutcliff, Stillingfleet, Tillotson, and many
others of our Churches education, of as great Learning and Judgment in
Religion, as holy Lives, and as comfortable Consciences, as any the World
affords, which one would think enough to make Malice it self ashamed to charge
the Church or Churchmen of England with any thing like Popery, or Popishly
affected. Add to this:

III. If the Church or Churchmen be any thing Popishly affected, how comes it
to pass that the twisted strength and subtlety of Papists, with all their
hellish malice, is engaged chiefly against them as their mortal enemies, as
though nothing stood in their way but the Church of England, that has the
countenance of Laws and Reason, Antiquity and Decency to support it; never
regarding Quakers or Non-conformists, as though it were below the wit of a
Jesuit to encounter a Nonconformist, as one that is doing the Popes business,
yet will not be made believe it. Now these three things considered, judge who
will, what reason dissenting Protestants have to brand with the name of Popish
or Popishly affected, the Church or Churchmen of England. And if so, whether
it be not probable that by their factious and extravagant zeal against Popery,
they design not only the overthrow of Popery, but the increase of their Party,
and the promotion of their Interest also. But once more,

IV. If there be any Church of England men Popishly affected. I heartily wish
in the Apostles words, (...), that they were utterly cut off from among us; and
here will every true Church of England Gal. 5. 12.
man say heartily, Amen.

A Second way that they have of exerting their zeal against Popery (whereby
they increase their Party, and promote their Interest) is to amuse the People
with the Fears and Jealousies of a Popish Revolution. I confess this being
purely politicae considerationis, is beyond my Province, but with humble
deference to Superiors, suppose we the worst, even that of a Popish Successor,
yet have we many good allays to the extravagance of that Jealousy, (viz.) all
Offices and Power being in the hands of Anti-Papists, there being so many
strict Laws in force against Popery, and the King's offer and readiness to
concur in making more, or any other thing (that is lawful just and honest) to
secure us against it.

To instance in the revolution of Queen Mary's reign is vain; for there being
now in the two Kingdoms so universal a detestation and loathing of Popery
(which was not then) what Prince in the World would offer to set up that
Religion so much against his own interest, so utter inconsistent with his quiet
and safety, and which will so certainly involve him into continual fears and
troubles, most desperate dangers and inconveniences, as that which, next to
Hell, is most formidable and abominable to almost all his Subjects, and that
which they will scarce ever be brought to submit to. Upon these and many the
like considerations wise men think it not advisable to forward a Popish
revolution by exasperating the Heir to the Crown with the factious and
unnecessary fears of a Popish succession, and to abandon our quiet and security
for mere future possibilities, to make our selves certainly miserable
beforehand for fear of being miserable hereafter. Like Gundamore the Spanish
Ambassador, who procured a valiant English Knight to be put to death, (as he
said) not for any hurt he had done, but for fear of doing hurt.

3. A third way they have of exerting their zeal against Popery (whereby they
increase their Interest and Party) is by appropriating to themselves the
reputation of the zealous Protestants, and greatest opposers of Popery: which
will appear as impudent a cheat as it is a falsehood, (if by zeal and opposing,
we mean not factious, but only such as is of regular and religious tendency to
the overthrow of it,) when it is considered:

1. How abundantly the Episcopal Divines have outdone them in opposing and
keeping out Popery; (as has been noted before) to which I add, that of Dr.
Saunderson, That all along from the beginning of Pref. to his Sermon.. 17.
the Reformation, our Bi^^ops with others of the Prelatick Party were the
Principal, if not the only Champions to maintain the cause of Religion against
Popery, and in these latter times none have slept in the Gap more readily, nor
championed the cause of Religion against Popery with more dexterity, zeal and
gallantry than the Episcopal Divines, by whose endeavors some that have been
bred Papists have been gained to our Church, others that began to waver, were
confirmed and settled in the Protestant Religion; but I profess (says he) as in
the presence of Almighty God, and before the World, that I have not known, or
at least cannot call to remembrance, so much as one single example of any of
this done by any of our Anticeremonian Brethren, whether Presbyterian or
Independent. But

2. These Non-conformists are so far from being the truly zealous opposers of
Popery, that (as the same Dr. Saunderson observes) they are really and
eventually Pref. to his Sermon.. 18.
(though not intentionally) the great Promoters of the Roman Interest among us,
and that several ways.

1. By putting to their helping hand to the pulling down of Episcopacy (the
main Bulwark against Popery, as having the support of Laws, Reason, Scripture
and Antiquity against it). It Is well known (says he) what rejoicing that Vote
(against Episcopacy) brought to the Romish Party, how in Rome they sang their
Io Paeans upon the tidings thereof, saying triumphantly, now the day is ours,
now the fatal blow is given to the protestant Religion in England; they could
not but foresee that if the old Government (of England) a main pillar in the
Building were once dissolved, the whole Fabric would be sore shaken, if not
presently shattered and ruined, that things would presently run into confusion,
distractions and divisions, (as the event soon showed.)

2. They promote the Interest of Rome (says that learned Author) by opposing it
with more violence than reason; in opposing Popery (he observes) the Episcopal
Divines have done it by dint of Argument, the Non-conformists by opprobrious
clamours, revilings, etc. so that it has been obs^rved (says he) that in
Lancashire, and other places, where there are most and most rigid
Presbyterians, there are the most and most zealous Papists. Thus that judicious
and learned Prelate.

3. Non-conformists promote Popery by causing those divisions in the Church
which Jesuits have endeavored among us, as more conducible to Popery than all
their strength of Argument; as is said to be determined at Rome in their
concilium de propaganda fide. And as Mr. Baxter observes (in his Collections
Pol. Aph.
out of Contzen the Jesuit, and in his Defense of the Principles of Love.)
Popery will grow (says he) out of our divisions; thousands have been drawn to,
and confirmed in it by this means. I am persuaded (says he) that all the
arguments in Bellarmine and other Books, have not done so much to make Papists
in England, as our Divisions and multiplied Sects. And afterward, who sees not
how fair a game the Papists have to play by our divisions? Archbishop Whitgist
in his Letter to the Lord Treasurer, Fuller.
and Dr. Oats in his Narrative, and others speak it as upon their own personal
knowledge, that the Dissenters have been animated to Nonconformity by the
Jesuits. It has been lately made out by a Peer of this Seasonable Address to
the Parl. p. 8.
Realm, that their making a Court-party and a Countryparty, and fomenting fears
and jealousies between both, was an expedient agreed upon in France, and sent
over into England, for the promoting of Popish Interests. And in Queen
Elizabeth's time, as soon as ever the Puritan had made the Schism, over came
Sanders and Harding Cambd. Eliz.
into England, and practiced in that sort as proselyted many to the Church of
Rome.

4. They promote Popery by vilifying the Church and Churchmen of England; when
in Queen Elizabeth's time they traduced Archbishop Whitgift (that great and
pious Prelate) calling him Beelzebub of Canterbury, Pope of Lambeth, bloody
opposer of Gods Saints, Esau, Antichristian Beast, etc. and the rest of the
Bishops as Petty-Popes, the Ordinance of the Devil, paultry Prelates, pestilent
Usurpers; in the Convocation they called them Clergy-masters of the
Confocation-house, Monsters of the Conspiration-house, the Convocation house of
Devils, and Beelzebub of Canterbury the chief: and when they called the
inferior Clergy Dolts and Drunkards, Hogs and Dogs, Wolves and Foxes,
Simoniacks and Usurpers, etc. See what advantage the Papists made of this;
Parsons in his Book of Three Conversions, reports these Slanders and Calumnies
for undoubted Truths. Martin Mar-Prelate is said by Sir Edwin Sandys to pass in
those days for unquestioned Credit in the Court of Rome, and his authority much
insisted on to disgrace the Protestant Religion. Kellison a later one does
build as much on the credit of these Libellers to defame the Reformed Religion,
as if they had been inspired by some infallible Spirit. And Mason tells it as a
serious thing, Appellant Episcopum Cantuariensem Lib. 3. cap. 16.
Pseudo-episcopum, Principem Daemoniorum, Caiapham, Esaum, Monstrosum, etc.
Alios autem Episcopos Angliae, degeneres, perniciosos, Usurpatores, Lupos,
Episcopos Diaboli, etc. Now upon these considerations, judge who will, what
reason these men have to charge the Church or Churchmen of England as
fautoring of Popery, to amuse the People with fears and jealousies concerning
it, and to arrogate to themselves the reputation of the most zealous opposers
of it, and yet by exerting their zeal these three ways they have strengthened
their Faction and promoted their interest in Church and State.

4. Their Veneration to the Scriptures pretended above others.
Another way by which they increase their Party and Interest, is the great
veneration which they above others pretend to have for the Holy Scriptures,
their confident appeals to Scripture, as Judge of their Controversy, and
constant retreat to it for defense of their Cause; teaching their Followers
(even in matters of indifferency which the Scriptures are silent in, and leave
to humane prudence) to swagger with the demand, Where do you find in Scripture
such precept or example? And this to the more unwary and less knowing
Professors, is one thousand Arguments, and as apt to take with them as any
thing. Now there are three things among others which do much liable this
pretense to hypocrisy and delusion. 1. Their gross perverting and
misinterpreting of Scripture, beyond what the Papists themselves do. 2. The
impracticableness and error of demanding a Scripture-Text for the very
externals of Gods worship. 3. Their disregard and sl^ght of those Scriptures
(though speaking never so plainly) which contradict their errors and practices.

1. Their perverting and misinterpreting of Scripture; when Fathers and
Councils, Reason, Antiquity and Scripture fail them, then a good Gloss must
serve for a Text, vexing and urging the Holy Writ, which the Apostle calls
emphatically (...), i. e. cogging Ephesians. 4. 14.
the Die to make it speak what they list; and (...), i. e. crafty deceitful
applying and expounding 2 Cor. 4. 2.
it. Thus by Babylon they understand Episcopacy, by beggarly Elements they mean
Church-Ceremonies; they justify their outrages against the late King and
Nobility, with a Bind your Kings with chains, and your Nobles with Dr. Hammond
observes that that (...) from whence the first Non-conformists, the Gnostics,
had their names, signifies such a knowledge as was the interpreting the
mysteries of the Scripture after their own fancy, (erroneously.) Annot. on the
N. Test. Postscript concerning New-light, p. 12. lin. 6. preliminary to Matthew.
fetters of iron; they have commented Rebellion out of the very thirteenth of
the Romans, which enjoins Subjection and Loyalty upon pain of damnation, and
have fetched Presbytery out of the first of Titus ver. 5. which plainly exhibits
the very essentials of Episcopacy. The Murder of the late King they have out of
Daniel's Dream, and from the Beast and the little Horn in the Revelations; and
because the Apostle says Moses was faithful in all the house of God, therefore
there must be nothing in the externals of God's Worship but what you have a
Text for; for the like reason that that ignorant Popish Priest urged out of the
Psalms, Paveant illi non paveam ego, to prove his Parishioners ought to pave
the Chancel. Look in the Geneva Bibles, their Note on Rev. 9. 3. you will find
that by the Locusts which came out of the Smoke (they say) is meant false
Teachers, worldly subtle Prelates, Monks, Friars, Cardinals, Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Bishops, This Translation was made about the time that Cartwright
(who had a hand in it) was denied his Doctors Degree, and driven out of
Cambridge by Doctor Whitgift then Vicechancellor.
Doctors, Batchelors, Masters, (to which is subjoined) which forsake Christ to
maintain false Doctrine; where they bring all Archbishops, Bishops, and all
that take University Degrees, under the name of Locusts, and rank them with
Monks and Friars, whom they beheld as no other than the limbs of Antichrist.
One would think that that Curse at the end of the Last Chap. Ver. 18.
Revelations, should make them afraid so to wrack Scripture-Texts, those 2 Timothy
3. 16.
God-breathed Oracles, to make them obstetricate to their Impieties, and
confess such abominable falsities. But thus it was ab origin, The Donatists
justified their separation with that 1 Cant. 7. Tell us where thou make thy
Flocks to rest at Noon, Meridiem versus, the French Translation is, toward the
South: therefore they being Southern confine the Church of God to themselves,
and separate from the Orthodox Christian Churches. And we know who it was that
first practiced this Art, by the manner of his urging our Savior with a
Scriptum est, in all his temptations, Matthew. 4.

2. A second thing that liables their pretended veneration for the Scriptures
above other men, to the suspicion of seducing, is their frequent use of
demanding Scripture-Texts for every thing in the Discipline and Orders of the
Church, denying Church-rulers the power of appointing Ceremonies. Before I come
to speak of the delusion of this pretense, I would premise something concerning
its error, which did not the constant practice of the Seduced require, it were
a shame to take notice of, it has been so often refuted by Grotius, Morton,
Sanderson, and others, showing;

1. That even in the Jewish Church (from whence they fetch this doctrine) in
which God did by immediate Revelation prescribe the Rites and Orders of his
Worship, even in that Church the Magistrate had a power in the Circumstantials
of Religion. David altered some things, and instituted others, he appointed
Instrumental Music to be used in the Worship of God, without any Commission
from God that we read of. He distributed the Priests into Orders for the
convenience of their Ministration, yet 'twas 1 Chronicles. 23. 5, 6.
not accounted any innovation in Religion. Hezekiah caused the Passover to be
kept in all Judah and Israel 2 Chronicles. 30. 5.
on the second Month, on the advice of his Council, upon prudential and pious
considerations, though not according to any Divine Institution. He appointed
the Levites to kill the Passover, which by God's appointment V. 17.
was to be done by the People. He preferred the Levites to assist the Priests
in killing the other Sacrifices, which before they were never admitted to; and
all this was afterward retained in use without reprehension. By all which, it
appears that the Magistrate had once a power of ordering matters in God's
Worship, and that, even in times when God prescribed the rites and orders of
his Worship by immediate revelation. And in the New Testament, the Apostle's
circumcising Timothy after Circumcision had been abolished, shows that all
ceremonial appendages are but subordinate, and ought to yield to the designs of
Peace, Charity, and Edification. The same Apostle in prescribing Church-Orders,
leaves out particulars, prescribes only generals, (viz.) Obedience to Rulers,
doing things decently and in order, to edification and the like. Now all the
question is, who shall be Judge of that decency, order, and edification? The
Scriptures cannot, for they no where determine it: The People may not, it was
denied them in the Directory, the Worcestershire Association, etc. Therefore
Church-Rulers must, those higher Powers that are ordained of God, and
established in authority by the Fundamental Laws of the Land. Besides, that
every Church-National has authority to appoint and change Church-Ceremonies
and Ecclesiastical Rites, Sir Richard Baker Chron. p. 359.
was a main Argument that the first Reformers, Jewel, Cox, etc. used against
the Popish Bishops for the changing of Religion from Popish to Protestant.

But it is enough to show the error and delusion of this pretense, That the
most learned of the old Non-conformists themselves have believed and taught
that a Scripture-Precept or Example is not necessary to the Institution of
Church Discipline or Ceremonies. Calvin Instit. l. 4. cap. 10.. 30.
teaches, That Christ would not prescribe singularly and particularly
concerning external Discipline and Ceremonies, because he foresaw things to
depend on the occasions and opportunities of Times; nor did he think on Form to
accord with all Ages; whereupon (says he) we must have recourse to the general
Rules, that all things may be tried by them. Finally, he delivered nothing in
these points expressly, because they are not of necessity to salvation, but
ought to be accommodated to the edification of the Church, according to the
different disposition and custom of Times and Countries. Thus Calvin himself,
and accordingly he practiced, when (without a Scripture-Precept or Example) he
caused a consult to be Barkley's Paraenesis ad Scotos, l. 1. c. ult. Reasons of
the Christian Religion.
held at Geneva in the Year 1543. for changing the Lords Day from Sunday to
Thursday. Master Baxter himself has confessed, that the vesture, gesture, (and
other Ceremonies) are all at the determination of the lawful Magistrate. Now
when they suggest thus to People what themselves believe not, what can one
think of their design in teaching the seduced Ignorants (when they have nothing
else to say) to cry, Where does the Scripture this or that? where have you
Scripture-Precept or Example for it?

3. If their pretending such Veneration for the Scriptures above other men,
were not delusory, their regard to the Sriptures would certainly be more
uniform. They would not (as they do) disregard and contemn those Texts (though
speaking never so plainly) which make any thing against them. Tell them (as the
Apostle does the Corinthians) of Whisperings, Backbiting, Tumults, etc. and
that while they are full of strife, envyings, and divisions, one of Paul,
another of Apollos, (one of this man's Congregation, another of that) they are
carnal, they will perhaps laugh at you, but neither regard you, nor the
Apostle. And here is regardable what the learned Doctor Littleton observes (in
his Sermon, entitled The Churches Peace asserted, p. 25.) of these Corinthians
that the Apostle charges with envyings, strife, and Schisms, which he calls
carnality; that they kept to their public Ministers, yet are charged with
those things, merely because they preferred one before another, who were both
(Paul and Apollos) men of eminent abilities, and extraordinary graces. And if
this be envying, strife and carnality, what would Paul have said of us? How
carnal are they who desert the public Ministry, and gad after, not the Paul's
and Apollos's (there are not so many among them to gad after) but (as that
Reverend Doctor speaks) after every Will-in-the-Wisp, men neither Orthodox nor
able. If you urge it to them, that Christ and his Apostles have foretold us of
false Prophets that should be amongst us, and that the marks they have given us
to know them by are such as these (viz.) They are such as separate themselves,
Jude 8. 9, 11 This description the Apostle gives of the Gnostics, to prove
them Seducers.
(Geneva Translation, Such as make Sects) that they are such as despise
dominion, i. e. that cannot endure Superiority or Government: that they are
such as speak evil of dignities, (Geneva Translation, of those that are in
Authority,) that they are such as are murmurers and complainers, i. e. never
content under any Government: Such as shall perish in the gainsaying of Korah,
which was disobedience to the Magistrate, mutinying against Moses and Aaron,
the Prince and the Priest, telling them, that all the Lords People are holy,
that they had as good a right to govern as Moses and Aaron had, that they took
too much upon them, etc. Tell them that the Scriptures call Seducers, false
Accusers, (as those that accuse our Worship of Superstition and Idolatry)
Traitors, (as those, who like Absalom, draw away the hearts of the Kings
Subjects with fine words and fair Speeches): Tell them that the Scripture
describes Seducers to be of that sort, that creep into houses, and lead silly
women captive, they will no more regard you than if you quoted the Alcoran.
Though these Characters hit them, like the left handed Benjamites, to a hairs
breadth, yet it is strange to see with what scorn and contempt they will reject
that man that shall tell them of these things, though with the greatest
demission and meekness that may be: and with what slight and disregard they
will hear and read these plain Scripture-marks of Seducers, though as
competible to them as Treason to a Traitor. Now upon these three
considerations, judge who will, what fit persons these are to pretend to
Scripture-rule above other men: yet this pretense is one of their wiles whereby
to seduce the People and increase their Party.

5. Their pretense to Reformation, Purity of Religion, Tenderness of
Conscience, etc.
Mr. Baxter has well observed, that the appearance of more spirituality and
strictness was that which drew Catho. Theol. Pref.
Tertullian to the Montanists, and which promoted a great part of the Heresies
which have torn the Churches of Christ. This kept up the Donatists (whom St.
Austin calls, Impios and fastidiosos, pertinaces and superbos separatores; Ep.
48. Ep. 166. 17^.
and their Separation he calls Sacrilegious, Heretical, and Seditious; yet
these kept up their reputation and separation from the Orthodox Christians
Assemblies by this very means, the pretense and show of greater purity and
sanctity than others.) This kept up the cause of the Priscilianists and
Manichees, this kept up the Novatians long in great reputation; this was the
strength of the Anabaptists in Germany and the Low Countries; this is the
strength of the Quakers, and (he might have added) of the Non-conformists and
their Party at this very day. And the truth is, Piety and Holiness command such
an universal love and veneration, that the very show and counterfeit of it,
has deluded thousands into erroneous ways, and has ever been accounted the
most useful Tool in the framing of seditious and schismatical Innovations.
Lycurgus could never have ingratiated his Laws so effectually, had he not
pretended conference with his goddess. Nor could the Factious of our late Times
have carried on their designs, have gained to themselves such strength of
number, and height of reputation, but by the specious disguise of a pretended
Reformation and show of Sanctity above others. Those late Usurpers never wanted
a religious pretext for their most hellish undertakings. As King James told his
Son King Charles, that under the pretense of Religion, he should find from
(...).
that sort of People (as he soon did) the most barbarous and bloody Villainies
in the World. And King Charles the First to his Son King Charles the Second. I
have (...). c. 27.
observed (says he) that the Devil of Rebellion does commonly transform himself
into an Angel of Reformation; and when men's consciences accuse them of Sedition
or Faction, they stop its mouth with the name and noise of Religion and Zeal.
And accordingly the Non-conformity-men of his time in their Sermons before the
ParlJam.nt 1643. taught, That 'twas commendable to Calamy Sermon. to the House of
Lords.
fight against the King for Peace and Reformation; that the War was God's
Cause, and it should at last prevail: they called fighting for the ParlJam.nt,
a following the Marshall.
Lamb; and a fighting for the Lamb against the Beast, etc. And at this very
day, when Uniformity in God's Worship is called Superstition, Decency called
Idolatry, and Loyalty Popery. Grindallizing compliances with the Enemies of the
Church, perjurious omissions in Church-ministration is called Moderation,
Discretion, Prudence, etc. Cartwright the great opposer of Kneeling at the
Sacrament, died of a Disease that for a considerable time before his death,
yielded him no rest or ease in any other gesture but upon his Knees, who had so
bitterly inveighed against those, who in that reverend and religious posture
received the Sacrament, Aer. Red.
Sitting at the Sacrament [a Custom brought first into England by John Alasco,
from among the Arrians of Poland, who used it in denial of Christ's Divinity.].
This sitting at the Sacrament, and many the like peevish contumacies in
Nonconformity, are all put upon the Score of Tenderness of Conscience, Purity
of Religion, etc. and indeed so venerable is right Reformation in Religion, so
great a blessing, and so gracious a fruit of the Spirit of God is tenderness of
Conscience, that it is no marvel if the mere pretense and show thereof so
influenceth a Faction, and captivates the credulous and unwary populace: and
therefore for the better discovery of that sort of men, consider we distinctly,

1. Their pretense to Reformation.

2. To tenderness of Conscience, and that without making our selves Judges of
their Consciences any further than the Law of God allows, and the evidence of
things compels.

I. In their pretense to Reformation, we consider the Method and Manner of
their Reforming, and the Object or matter to be reformed.

1. The Manner of their Reforming was for the most part by savage and
sacrilegious depredations. Such savage depredations never were committed by the
Goths in the Sack of Rome, as were by these Reformation-men in the Cathedral
Churches, particularly Winchester and Westminster, Exeter and Chichester,
Canterbury and Rochester, with many others; where their manner of reforming was
by breaking down the Organs, Aer Red. l. 13.
throwing down the Communion Table and Rails, and in some places burning them
in an Alehouse, turning the costly Pulpit-cloths, Cushions, Gowns, Surplices,
and Plate into ready money. A golden Chalice belonging to Westminster, which is
said to be worth three hundred pounds, was sold to one Allen a decayed
Goldsmith, but then a Member of the House of Commons, for threescore pounds.
When the Depredators of Hazlerigs conduct, were desired in the Cathedral Church
of Chichester, to leave but one Chalice for the use of the Sacrament, they
refused with these profane words, A wooden Dish may serve turn. They violated
the Tombs and Monuments of the Dead; finding in Winchester Church two brazen
Statues of King James and King Charles the First, they broke off the two Swords
placed by their sides, and with their own, mangled the Crown of King Charles,
swearing in scorn, that they would bring him to his ParlJam.nt. There being in
this Church several leaden Chests, containing the dust and bones of some Saxon
Kings and other Bishops, they overthrew the Chests, scattered the dust of their
Bodies about the Pavement, and threw their Bones at that part of the Glass
Windows which they could not reach with their Pikes to batter down. The like
they did in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury by those under the Conduct of
Not that eminently loyal Sandys of Worcestershire, but he that within three
Weeks after, was killed at Worcester fight in Pewick Field.
Colonel Sandys: In this Church (as lately upon the Royal Effigies in
Guild Hall) they strangely exercised their reforming Madness upon the Arras
Hangings in the Quire, representing the Hist. of our Savior, some of them swore
that they would stab him, others that they would rip up his bowels, which
accordingly they did, so far as those Figures of him in the Arras Hangings were
The very Heathens made it Treason not only to assassinate, but to offer to
punish their Prince, but in Effigy, Salust. Bell. Jugurth. What is it then for
Christians to -- God their Savior in Effigy.
capable of it. Finding another Statue of Christ in the Frontispiece of the
Southgate, they discharged their Muskets at it, triumphing greatly when they
hit him in the head or Face. In the Cathedrals of Exeter and Westminster
(horresco referens) to these horrid outrages they added such prodigious
irreverences, as have not been heard of; turning the Church into a Jakes, and
leaving their Excrements on and about the Communion Table, after they had sat
about it with their Ale and Tobacco. Thus did they go about to reform the State
with ruin, and to sweep the Church with desolation, taking the same method in
Reforming, which Pelias's daughters took to make their old Father young again,
viz. by cutting his throat to let out his old blood, which when they had done,
knew not where to get new blood, nor how to put it in him. Consider who will,
the hideous spectacle of their ruining Ministers, abolishing of Government,
devastation of Church, and desolation of State, profanation of God's Worship,
and depravation of Religion, the violation of Duty, Conscience, Peace, Order,
Laws, Justice, etc. and compare it with the Persecution of the Greek Churches,
and he shall find that all the ravages of the Turks since the taking of
Constantinople, has not so disfigured them in two hundred years, as these
Reformers did in six or seven years in their own native Country. Such
abomination of desolation is Presbyterian Reformation, which (Mr. Case says)
Armies fought for, ParlJam.nts consult Sermon. before the Parl. 1644.
for, Ministers pray for, and all good People long for. And let no body pretend
in this, as Mr. Baxter First Plea for Peace.
does about the Regicidy, that it was a rude conquering Army: For read who
will, their Soldiers Catechism, Set forth by Mr. Rob. Ram Minister.
their Zions Plea, Christ on his Throne; as also their Ordinance on August 28.
1643. and he shall see that all this was done by Authority [from the Houses of
ParlJam.nt,] and in the fear of God [by the advice of the Assembly of Divines.]

2. The extravagancy of their Reformation will further appear by considering
the matter of it, or the things to be reformed, which are chiefly Episcopacy
and the Liturgy.

1. Episcopacy, an Order which has been proved abundantly to be founded on no
other than Scripture and Apostolic practice, Antiquity and Necessity;
necessary (as woeful experience has verified) to the support of the English
Monarchy; according to those words of King Charles the Martyr, That he could
scarce ever boast of one days felicity, after he had once consented to the
taking away the Bishops Votes in ParlJam.nt. Which I take notice of the rather,
since in a place of note in this Kingdom, at the last Election of ParlJam.nt in
the year 1681. the Rabble of the Faction cried it, No Bishops, No Bishops, the
very same words and with the same kind of violence as Dr. Burgess's Myrmidons
did before the ParlJam.nt House doors in 1641.

2. The other thing to be reformed is the Liturgy; whose Reformation from
Popery was sealed by the blood of Martyrs. When it was first composed and used,
the People of England received it as a heavenly treasure sent down by God's
great mercy to them. All moderate men beyond Seas applauded the felicity of the
Church of England, in fashioning such an excellent Form for God's public
Worship. And the Act of ParlJam.nt that first confirmed the same, declared it
to be done by the special aid of the Holy Ghost; (as the words of the Act are)
and Mr. Fox the Author of the Book of Martyrs fears not to say, that it was
indicted by the Holy Ghost: Yet this is that Liturgy which the peevish
Professors of these stirring Times would have laid aside, for Reformation sake;
that so (as King Charles observes, (...).) Ministers may be left to Cap. 20.
their liberty and private abilities in God's public Service, where no man can
tell to what he may say Amen, or what adventure he may make of seeming, at
least, to consent to whatever errors and ridiculous indecencies bold and
ignorant men list to vent in their Prayers and other Offices. But it is enough
to satisfy any unprejudiced and judicious Reader, of the unreasonableness of
scrupling the Liturgy, that will but consider well those frivolous flaws and
exceptions which the great Non-conformity-Champion has made against it, as the
best First Plea for Peace.
he could devise, after the twenty years study he speaks of.

II. The second thing to be considered in their pretensions above other men in
their greater Sanctimony and tenderness of Conscience, which were it real, as
it is pretended, I should tremble to think of charging them with the
counterfeit, and pretense of it only. But that which liables it to the
suspicion of Counterfeit, lies in these two things:

1. The erroneousness of it, which is so gross as to call the Design of
overturning the Government, no Treason; the taking up Arms against the King, no
Rebellion; dividing from the Communion of the Church, no Schism; appropriating
to private uses the Church-plate and Revenues, no Sacrilege; and using the name
of God to all this, no Hypocrisy. How can such thickness of error consist
with true Sanctity and tenderness of Conscience, especially if we take
tenderness of Conscience (as that Party does) in the same latitude with a good
Conscience, for such a tenderness as to be afraid of sin, and to decline the
temptations, occasions, and appearances of evil.

2. Their pretended tenderness of Conscience above others, is to be suspected
upon the account of its great partiality and defect, wanting that uniformity
which is required to its sincerity. When a man shall scruple a Ceremony, and
yet neglect an Institution of Christ; not dare to kneel at the Sacrament, yet
wholly neglect the Communion; boggle at the use of a Ceremony, yet openly avow
the blackest of Crimes, backbitings, slanderings, schism and sedition; is this
true tenderness of Conscience, or is it not rather (as one says) a conscience
of making no conscience at all.

But more particularly, does not the partiality and defect of their
conscientiousness appear, in their notorious uncharitableness and
censoriousness, rash censuring and condemning, slandering and defaming all that
differ from them, especially Ministers. But above all, those that oppose their
way (if subtlety and malice can do it) shall be sure to be rendered odious: but
the partiality and defect of their conscientiousness is most apparent in their
old Dr. Hammond Annot. on the N. T. page preliminary to the Romans.
Gnostick Principle of disobedience to Magistrates. Will any man believe that
Practice to be conscientious, or that Religion to be of God, which so
dishonours God and Christianity, that so confronts God's Vicegerent, and those
in Authority under him, which God commands obedience Disobedience to an
inferior Authority among the Jews was to be punished with death, Deuteronomy. (...)
to, upon pain of damnation; and which (as though foreseeing the pretense of
Conscience for their disobedience) does so indispensably urge, you must needs
obey, and for Conscience sake, and that even Heathen Governors; whereas the
Governors, i. e. the ParlJam.nt (in part) that our Dissenters are to obey, are
of their own choosing, and so the Laws are partly Laws of their own making, as
made by their own Representatives. What they urge for their disobedience is so
ludicrous, and of so frequent and obvious confutation, that it is a shame to
insist upon them: But just to mention them; as,

1. That it is better to obey God than Man; which in Obj.
the form of an Objection, is nothing else but a factious slander, intimating,
as though our Rulers enjoined any thing in disobedience to God.

2. A second thing urged for their disobedience, is Obj.
that of Christian Liberty: The same that the Gnostics urged for their revolt
from Christianity, and which was used among the Jews as a Passport for Dr.
Hammond's Annot. on 1 Timothy 6. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 26. Gal. 5. 5.
fugitive Servants, and a praetext to all Outrages and Rebellions; and which
the Gnostics used to justify their disobedience to Magistrates: Whereas
indeed this Christian liberty is a quite contrary thing, viz. a discharge from
the necessity of observing the Mosaical Law, and Rites of Judaism, and a power
in utramque to do or leave undone things not determined in the Scriptures, but
in obedience to the commands of our Rulers, as the ends of Society shall
require.

3. Another thing they urge is Passive obedience; Obj.
an obsolete self-contradiction, which they have taught the Rabble to vapor
with, but themselves are ashamed to own: as being no other kind of Plea than
what Papists, Thieves, Murderers may use with the same reason as they; the
vilest Malefactors are passively obedient. So that since so leading a man, as
Mr. Baxter has said it, that the Priscilianists, Donatists, Novatians, Cath.
Theol. Praef.
Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Sects, were kept up merely by a pretense to
more spirituality (Reformation, tenderness of Conscience, etc.) let the present
Non-conformists exempt themselves, by improving their religious pretenses into
religious realities, loyalty, charity, meekness, and the like, and our
animosities and divisions will be quickly at an end. But notwithstanding these
pretenses to Reformation, Religion and tenderness of Conscience; yet are,

6. Sedition, Rebellion, and Murders, real Promoters of Presbytery.
Of these I may truly say, in relation to Presbytery, as the Aenigmatist said
of Ice and Water, Matter me genuit, eadem mox gignitur ex me.
Rebellion has all along nursed up Presbytery, and Presbytery has tolerated
and taught Rebellion. All History does assure us, that for this last hundred
years there has been no Sedition nor Rebellion, no Tumult, Treason, or
Massacre in all Europe, but what has been acted wholly, or in part, by Papist
or Presbyterian, as a means, and for the sake of propagating their Religion.

1. This has been their frequent Doctrine. 2. Their constant Practice.
1. Their frequent Doctrine ab origin. Calvin in his Institutions (l. 4. cap.
10.) If there be any popular Magistrate ordained to moderate the licentiousness
of Kings -- so far am I from hindering them in restraining those Kings, as
their Office binds them, that I conceive them rather to be guilty of a
perfidious dissimulation, if they connive at Kings if they play the Tyrants;
and wantonly insult over the common People: i. e. if the People do but judge
their Kings to do so. And after him Beza in his Epistle to the Outlandish
Church in England, Ep. 24. Si quis, etc. If any man being lawfully invested
with the Supreme Magistracy, shall unjustly spoil or deprive his Subjects of
their Rights and Privileges, (of which he makes the People Judge) -- then the
ordinary and inferior Officers are to oppose themselves against him, etc. It
was the frequent Doctrine of Knox, Buchanan, Willock, and the rest of Scotland,
(as may be seen in their Writings) that if the King refuse to reform Religion,
(i. e. to set up Presbytery) then the Nobles may, and if they refuse, the
common People must. The present Non conformists of England have taught, that if
the King raise War against the ParlJam.nt -- the King may not only be
resisted, but he ceases to be King* and much more to the same purpose: Mr.
Baxter's Political Aphor. These. 358. 368. 147. 136. 151. and passim. When King
James in his (...) (...). Pref. advises his Son King Charles, to take heed of
those People called Puritans, as the very Pest of the Church and Commonwealth,
whom no deserts can oblige, nor oaths bind, breathing nothing but Sedition and
Calumnies, aspiring without measure, railing without reason, and making their
own imaginations the square of their Consciences, protesting before the great
God, that he should not find in any Highlander, greater ingratitude, more lies,
and viler perjuries, than among those fanatical Spirits. We find the ground and
reason of these words of the King, to be his observation of their frequent use
in their very Sermons, to preach, that all Kings and Princes were naturally
enemies to the liberty of the Church, and could never patiently bear the Yoke
of Christ; thus seditiously endeavoring to steal away the hearts of the People
from their Sovereign. And in Queen Elizabeth's time, when Burchet stabbed
Hawkins a Sea-Captain, thinking it had been the Lord Chancellor Hatton
(because a zealous opposer of Presbytery) he declared (as the old
Non-conformists the Donatists did before him) that it was lawful to assassinate
any man that opposed their religious Principle or Practice. And as this was
their Doctrine, so

2. It was their constant Practice: At the very first starting of Presbytery,
in the Year 1535. when the Bishop of Geneva would not admit of such alterations
as Viret and Farellus, with their Followers would have had, they presently
tumultuated, drove the Bishop and Clergy out of the Town, set up Calvin,
altered the Government Ecclesiastical and Civil, disclaimed all allegiance to
their Duke and Bishop, and standing on their liberty, as a Free State, governed
the City by a Common Council of two hundred men, out of which, they chose four
as Supreme, whom they called Syndicks. And Presbytery having thus been first
settled in Geneva by Rebellion, was presently sent over into France, where the
Abettors of it, supported by the Earl of Toulouse, made its way by murdering
Trincannel the Viscount, and chief Governor of the City Beziers, and dashing
out the Bishops teeth. They set it up in the Low Countries beginning at the
City Embden (the principal City of the E. of Friesland) by renouncing all
allegiance to their Prince, taking up Arms against him, and setting themselves
inform of a Commonwealth. Poltrot, who being set on by Beza, murdered the Duke
of Guise, when he was upon the Rack, confessed that he was promised great rewards
by the Admiral, and was assured by Beza, that by taking out of the World such a
persecuter of the Gospel, he could not but exceedingly merit at the hands of
God. In Scotland, under pretense of removing the Popish Lords, and promoting
the Presbyterian Discipline, the Earl of Bothwel and his Accomplices raised
Forces to depose and murder the King. And after that, by the insinuation of
fears and jealousies of the Kings aversness to the Gospel, his inclination to
Popery, and of subverting the Presbyterian Discipline, the Gowries conspire to
kill King James; which Plot was so approved of by the Presbyterian Ministers of
Edinburgh, that they refused to give thanks for the King's deliverance, when
commanded by his Proclamation so to do. The murder of King Charles I. was first
attempted by Poison and Pistol by Captain Rolph, set on by the ParlJam.nt Army,
before they proceeded in those more gentle methods of disburthening him of his
large Revenues, easing him of the charge of Royal Housekeeping, clearing him
of his stately Palaces, putting him out of care of repairing his Armories,
Arms, Ammunition and Artillery, taking him off the charge of keeping his Wife,
Children, and most trusty Servants, easing him of a multitude of his best
Subjects and Friends by charitable famishing and brotherly banishing, liberal
or free imprisoning, and ParlJam.nt-plundering, by friendly throat-cutting, and
unlawful beheading and hanging; utterly ruinating as many as could be caught of
those that loved, served, and honored him; and at last making him a glorious
King, by cutting him off with the Sword of Justice for the sake of God and the
Gospel. I say, before they proceeded in these gentle, religious methods, they
first designed his murder with Poison and Pistol by the aforenamed Captain
Rolph set on by the ParlJam.nt Army: Sir Rich. Bakers Chron. p. 585.

Thus has Presbytery all along like any Penthesilea furens, been bred of
blood, and fed of blood, and (as common History shows) was begot in Rebellion,
born in Sedition, and nursed up in Faction.

7. Aspersing Governors and Government.
To this Head of Faction and Sedition may be reduced their frequent custom of
aspersing, and reproaching Governors and Government.

It Is a Rule in Polity, Corruption optimi est generatio pessimi, so that when
the Monarchical and Episcopal Government are rendered odious, the Republican
and Presbyterian must of course be hugged, and endeavored to be trump'd up:
therefore has it always been their restless endeavors to cast what odium they
can upon the Government and Governors, as Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and Popishly
affected; and on the Worship and Discipline of the Church, as Formal,
Superstitious, and savouring of Popery, because when once People are seduced to
opinion thus of it, they have plausible pretense to oppose it, and to endeavor
all they can, an alteration in it; and therefore I say, it According to their
Sol. Leag. and Covenant.
has always been their practice (as the Apostle observes of the old Gnostick
Schismatics) to despise dominions, and speak evil of things they know not; and
that loudest of all in their infamous Libellings. Though the holy Scriptures
teach, that he that provokes the King to anger, sins against his own soul,
Prove. 20. 2. and that none may say unto Kings, ye are wicked; or to Job. 34. 18.
Princes, ye are ungodly. Though the Scriptures call it Blasphemy to speak
reproachfully of the King, and by Moses' s I King. 21. 10.
Law, it was death to disobey but an inferior authority: Deuteronomy 17. 12.
yet in despite of these Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, it is, and ever was
their constant practice, by insolent and treasonable discourses, by impudent
and seditious libellings to cast what odium they can upon the Government, as
that which is very conducible to the pulling of it down. Queen Elizabeth they
compared to an idle dirty Slut, who swept the middle Ae. Red.
of the room, but left the dirt behind the door, because she would not (for
their Innovations sake) sweep all Decency out of the Church. For the same
reason they called K. James the greatest and most deadly Enemy Alt. Damas. Pref.
of the Gospel. And it was his frequent observation, (...).
that in their Sermons they used to teach, that all Kings and Princes were
naturally Enemies to the Churches Liberty, and could never patiently bear the
Yoke of Christ. And in King Charles the First's time, (to say nothing of their
Sermons before the ParlJam.nt) they kept in constant pay Mercurius Britannicus,
and other scandalous Writers, by their horrid Libels to defame the King, or as
their word of advice was, to blacken him, and to enrage the People against him.
And the other day Fitzharris in his Depositions before Sir George Trebee (as I
remember) and others, says, that Father Patrick the Jesuit desired him to send
him over into Ireland all the Libels that came out in London, telling him, that
libelling the King and the Government, was a thing necessary to be done, in
order to distaste the King, and to make him and the People jealous of each
other. And accordingly has been their practice; as appears by their late
Letter of Advice for Election of ParlJam.nt; their Appeal from the Country to
the City; the Nations Aggrievance, and many the like venomous Libels, which
send forth such poisonous evulsions and belchings of Fanaticism, as are enough
to turn the very heart and stomach of any that has but the least sense or
savor of Loyalty in him. And yet how much these contribute to the
encouragement and increase of their Interest and Party, may be partly seen by
that pleasant eagerness, and jocond titillation, wherewith they entertain and
read them.

7. Their boast of their number and strength.
It has always been their practice to endeavor the increase of their Party by
boasting of their increase. When they had a mind to proceed in their
Innovations in the Year 1585. Penry advised it as an expedient to terrify the
State into a compliance with them, that they present themselves to the
ParlJam.nt with a Petition subscribed by a hundred thousand hands. It Is said
nothing more alarmed the Queen, no not the Spanish Armado, than the report of
their strength and number, published in a Book called, The Humble Motion, in
which it was affirmed, that thousands did sigh for the Holy Discipline, and ten
thousands had sought it; and that the most worthy men of every Shire had
consented to it, that the Eldership was at hand, that all People were inflamed
with a zeal for it, and that it was hard, dangerous, nay impossible to stand
against it. The very first thing they offered at in King James's time, (soon
after his coming to the Crown) was to present a Petition to him in the name of
the Ministers of England, desiring reformation of sundry Ceremonies and abuses
in the Church; it was given out to be subscribed by a thousand Ministers, and
therefore called the Millenary Petition, which when 'twas examined, wanted
several hundreds of the number. Of the same kind was that of B. H's True Prot.
Intelligence, who lately printed an Address from the City of Colchester,
subscribed by a great number of hands; which Address was never seen, nor
presented by any of the Inhabitants of Colchester, as was made appear by an
Instrument under the Town-Clerks hand. The Appeal from the Country to the City
says, that the City of London, is too powerful for any Prince, that governs not
by the love of his People. A man can scarce come into any of their company, but
he shall hear them with this kind of boast, flattering themselves, deluding
others, and belying the whole Kingdom. Now whether the design of this be to
encourage the People in a Rebellion, if opportunity should serve, or whether it
be merely to intimidate the Rulers into a compliance with them, and a
suspension of the poenal Laws. Certain it is, that this kind of boast of their
number and strength, and what a considerable Party they are, is one frequent
way they have, and of very proper tendency to encourage their Followers in
Schism and Faction, and to increase their Party. But as the design of it speaks
Rebellion, so does its falsity show the Cheat.

CONCLUSION.
Now upon review of the whole, it will appear to any, not blinded with
prejudice, or hardened in Faction;

That Toleration of Church-Dissenters was never hitherto the way to
Church-Union; but that Toleration and Separation are as inseparable in
themselves, as intolerable in their effects, which are constantly such as
these, Schism in the Church, Sedition in the State, Disorder, Distraction, and
Confusion in both.

That the Grindallizers and Half-Conformists threaten little less to the danger
and dishonor of the Church, than the open and professed Non-conformists, that
their great familiarity and intimacy with, their complying and conniving at,
and (instead of zealous, prudent opposition) their halting and sneaking to
them, is that, which cannot but work in People a love and liking to their
persons and their ways; and so by their treachery within the Pale, like Moles,
undermine the Foundation, when the other, like Wolves and Foxes, can but howl
and foam without, the Mound and Fence of the Church being strong enough against
them. And that therefore the Eye of Government had need be watchful over these
Half-Conformists, as well as over the professed Non-conformists.

That notwithstanding Non-conformists noise about Popery, they are far more
conformable to Papists than the Conformists are, in principle and practice
both; that in things relating to Monarchy, they are merely be-jesuited, and
Popishly agent in weakening the Cause and Interest of Protestantism several
ways, (as has been shown) and that by their extravagant zeal, their irregular,
disloyal, and irreligious pretenses against Popery, they design something more;
since common History makes evident, that Presbytery was never promoted any
where, but under pretense of pulling down Popery.

It Is obvious from the aforementioned Instances of their former Reformation,
how dangerous is all superperfluous Innovations, unnecessary alterations, and
but pretended Reformation in matters of Church and State.

That so far as the Laws permit, they are still hunting upon the same File,
treading in the same steps as those in Forty one, since the pretenses and
practices of both are so very self-agreeable; and since the best of History
assures us, that Discontent and Ambition, Faction and Sedition, Libelling and
Tumultuating have been the ordinary promoting causes of their Interest and
Cause.

That the Non-conformists will never make good appeals to Scripture, their
claim and pretensions to Sanctity above others, till putting away the Diabolism
of their false accusations and slanderings, their spiritual pride and malice,
they become more humble and charitable in their judgments, more meek and loyal
in their behavior and discourses, submitting themselves to those that have the
rule over them, bewailing before God, and publishing to the World their
Repentance for what they have contributed to the present sad Separation, as
that which hinders the success of a learned, orthodox, and able Ministry,
encourages the Papists, and multiplies other Sects, scandalizes the Weak,
hardens the Infidel and wicked into a scorn and contempt of Religion it self,
exasperates Rulers, tends to Sedition and Faction, weakens the Church and the
Kingdom, causes such envy and wrath, hatred and contentions, (as the Apostle
speaks) such biting and devouring one another, as is like enough to end Gal. 5.
15.
in being consumed one of another. Since the present state of things is such,
that either these things must be put upon the score of Religion, or that the
Non-conformists must take the shame thereof unto themselves, and vindicate the
honor of Religion by a full and free acknowledgment to the World of their
pernicious errors in the present Separation. What men fearing God, would dare
to justify a Separation which has so deplorable and dismal tendencies, as
aforementioned.

Their laying the Separation at our doors, and charging it upon the King and
ParlJam.nt, in causing such impositions as they cannot in conscience submit to,
has been sufficiently proved to be delusory, impudent and false, by the
testimony of the Reformed Churches beyond Seas, (as well as by our English
Divines) as may be seen in the French History of Presbytery, in the Letters
appendiced to Dr. Stillingfleets Separation, etc. And if they have any mind to
lay down their Schismatical doings, to leave the Conventicle, and to come into
the Pale of the Church, bringing their Flocks with them, and there behave
themselves as the Disciples of Christ, and Sons of the Church, sound and
sincere in their Conformity, peaceable and loyal in their behavior; if so,
behold, the sweet severity and prudent goodness of our Rulers to them, in
choosing this very crisis of time to execute the Laws against them, when that
which they call the great Mountain in their way is removed, (viz. the
obligation to renounce the Solemn League and Covenant ceases,) which they
cannot but look on as their Rulers gentle driving through that gap, which March
28. 1682. the renouncing of the Covenant is not injoined. See the Act of
Uniformity. History of Presbytery, l. 9. n. 34.
this 28. of March opens to them. But if this severity of Rulers will not drive
them, let the examples of their Predecessors (the learned of them) lead them.
Beza himself, when Archbishop Whitgift in a long and learned Letter laid before
him the deplorable rupture which, not without his concurrence, had been made in
the Church of England, he justified the Church in her whole proceedings, so
clearly, that Beza confessed himself conquered, and thence-forward never breathed
any thing but Peace to the Church, and respect to that Reverend Prelate.
Cartwright after all his clamours History of Presbytery, l. 9. n. 30. 33. 35.
and tumultuous proceedings against Conformity, when he saw to what sad ends he
brought some of his Followers, Barrow, Penry, etc. and with what horrible
confusions he had disturbed the Church, he was at last content to conform; he
confessed that there was more Discipline in the Church of England, than in any
of those Churches beyond the Seas; (therefore more than in Geneva, and other
transmarine parts in which he lived, where Presbytery was.) After some time of
imprisonment, the Archbishop procured his enlargement, which he accepted,
promising never to write, preach, or act in any thing to the disturbance of the
Church, either in reference to its Government or Forms of Worship. Henderson
that greatest Champion for Presbytery in his time, was so confuted by King
Charles I. in a dispute about Church Government, Hist. of Presbytery p. 77.
and so confounded with shame and grief, at the Kings Answers to his Cavils,
that he fell into a desperate melancholy and sickness, which soon brought him
to his Grave, professing (says that learned Historian) that he died a Convert,
frequently extolling those great abilities, which he declared to be in his
Majesty. And the other day Lewis Du-Moulin after he had written his Several
advances of the Church of England toward the Church of Rome, and done all he
could against Conformity, at last repents and recants, acknowledging Dr.
Stillingfleet, Pres. to the Unreasonableness of Separation.
his errors. And now Mr. Baxter's turn is next, if it please God to hear and
answer that good Prayer of his for himself, in his Cure of Church-division:
Lord hide not from me my miscarriages, and suffer P. 251.
me not to take any sin that I have committed, to be my innocence, or duty,
lest I should dare to father sin on God, and lest I should live and die without
repentance, and lest I should be one that continues judgments and dangers to
the Land.

Amen.
FINIS.

