C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A Letter from a Friend to the Wise and Learned, in England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland.
FOr to procure and secure great Sums of Money to the Crown of England, above
Ten Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year for ever. And that in a Right Lawful,
Honorable, and most Commendable Way, and Manner; for to maintain and uphold
the great Honor and Exaltation of our Royal Sovereign, Charles the Second,
King of Great Britain, among the Sons of Men, and above any of them; above all
Heathen and Popish Kings, Priests, Princes, and Emperors in the World: for the
Glory, and great Glory of the God of Heaven; for the Credit of his holy Gospel,
that so it may run and be glorified among all Nations where it is not; and may
flourish more and more where it is. For the Honor and Renown of the Protestant
Religion, and the Government of the Church of England, and the Peace and
Prosperity of all Kingdoms. That this may be done, and well done, and many
hundred thousands of Pounds yearly to the Crown of England, let there for ever
be provided and made ready, by the Command of Authority, in England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, many hundred thousands of Bibles, with the Public Prayers
of the Church of England, and let them be sent among all People, in all
Nations, for their Information, Reformation, and their great Joy, Peace, and
Consolation. And for every hundred thousand of Bibles, will bring to the Crown
of England (in a short time Yearly) above a hundred thousand a Year. And well
it may? Because there is no Religion, or Wisdom, to be learned among the Sons
of Men, or from any Books made by them; but what is Ten thousand times more to
be learned in the Bible (which is the Word of God) and does contain the Mind
and Will of God toward Man; and all men's duty toward Him, who is their
Creator, Redeemer, and Preserver; who only can save, and will deliver them from
Wrath to come, that do obey his Word, and believe in his Son. The time is come,
that in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign,
Charles the Second, King of Great Britain: That all Heathen and Popish Kings,
Priests, Princes, and Emperors in the World, are to know and understand, that
the Lord of Hosts, who is the God of all Wisdom and Power, has the greatest
Power and Command over them; and that he will command their Kingdoms from them,
or them from their Kingdoms, if that they will not maintain and uphold a
Religion that is suitable and agreeable to his holy Word, which is the Bible,
which does contain his Mind and Will. This will be the way for to win many
Souls from the Devil, so that the Heathens will be Converted, and Jews and
Gentiles brought into one Fold; so that the Knowledge of the Lord will cover the
Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea. This will be the way for the Kingdoms of
Sin and Satan, to grow weaker and weaker, and the Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior, stronger and stronger. This will be the way for all false Religion to
be discovered: The Religion of the Turk, and that of the Pope, to be known that
it is full of Deceit, and a great Cheat. Men cannot but sin against God, and
wrong their own Souls, for to be of any Religion that is of man's Judgment, or
Opinion; but they that make the Word of God their Rule, his Spirit their Guide,
and his Glory their Aim; their Lives will be comfortable to themselves, and
profitable to many in the Wilderness of this World. That man that is Converted,
should know when and how, in due time and season, to hold forth the Word of
Life, to counsel, comfort, and strengthen his Brethren; not only they that be
in a state of Grace, but they that be in the state of Nature: Because that the
best of men that have the greatest Knowledge, and the strongest assurance of
God's Love and Favor to their Souls, are as bad by Nature as they that want
Grace, and do not enjoy the means of Grace; therefore they are to be pitied,
and all means to be used, that they may come to the knowledge of the true God,
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; and that is by having the Word of God sent
among them, and made known unto them. For the Word of God is such a Light, as
does discover and hold forth the Lord of Life, who is the Savior of all men,
but especially them that do believe in him, and are not afraid and ashamed to
own Him, and appear for Him, who is a Person most worthy, and altogether
lovely. As God, who is most Great, and most Good, is willing that all should be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth; therefore all People in all
Nations, should have the Word of Truth made known unto them: Because the
salvation of a man, is more worth than the gaining of the whole World. By the
Word of God, which too many do slight and undervalue, the simple do come to
understand the Mind of God, to do his Will, and to enjoy his Favor; which is
better than Life, and all the delights of this World.

But there is a Generation of men, that have made separation from the Church of
England, that be pure in their own Eyes, these take upon them to condemn all
but themselves; but it will be well for them, if that God and their own
Consciences, do not condemn them; too many of them having a name to Live, and
are Dead. The condemnation of such men at the Day of Judgment, will be more
heavier, than upon them that do want the means of Grace, and never heard of
Christ. Is not God willing that any should miscarry, but that all should come
to the knowledge of the Truth; then let not any take up Religion upon man's
Judgment, or Opinion, but let every one search the Scriptures, for they be they
that testify of Christ; which make the Bible to be more worth than thousands,
ten thousands of Gold and Silver. For the Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the Soul; the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the Simple;
the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart; the Commandments of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes; the Fear of the Lord is clean, enduring
for ever; the Judgments of the Lord are True and Righteous altogether: More to
be desired are they than Gold, yea, than much fine Gold; sweeter also than
Honey, or the Honeycomb. The Word of God is the richest Treasure, and gives
unto the Mind of man the sweetest pleasure, above all other Books in the World.
That Exhortation is full of Consolation for Young and Old, High and Low, Rich
and Poor, for Learned and Unlearned, for to have the Word of God to dwell
richly in them; because it is the Word of Power, of Authority, of Majesty, and
of Prophecy. O, how did King David love the Law of God? It was his delight and
his meditation Day and Night. It made him wiser than his Enemies, yea, wiser
than his Counselors. It is the highest Interest, and will bring the greatest
Honor, Profit, and Comfort, to all Kings, Priests, Princes, and Emperors, in
the World; for to delight themselves in the Word of God above all things in the
World: because it does hold forth that Pearl of Price, which is more worth than
all the Kingdoms of the World. And that Pearl of Price is the Lord of Life, the
King of Glory, the Prince of Peace; who only can make them Wise, Strong, Rich,
and Honorable in the sight of God, and holy Angels; who only can make them
partakers of the Divine Nature, which is the highest Honor, and the greatest
Favor; who only can give them endurable Riches as an Ornament of Grace, and a
Crown of Glory, that will for ever last and flourish; when all things under the
Sun will soon waste and perish. Because the Church of England has kept the word
of God's Patience, he will keep her in this hour of Temptation, which is come
to try all Nations. The enemies to the Word of God, and to the Gospel of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is the Turk, the Pope, and the Devil, and all
the workers of Evil, because it does blame them, and shame them, and will
condemn them, if they will not learn to be lovers of God, and Workers of
Righteousness. The work of Righteousness is Peace, and the effect of
Righteousness is quietness to the Mind, and will prove profitable, comfortable,
and advantageous to all Mankind; so that the People will praise God, yea, all
People in all Nations will learn from his holy Word, to praise him with new
Obedience: so that the Earth will bring forth great increase, and among all
People in all Nations, there will be a free Trade, great Joy, and a lasting
Peace, from the Gospel of Reconciliation, which is to run and be glorified
among all Nations, for their Information, Reformation, and everlasting
Salvation. So that England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, will soon become the
Wonder and the Glory of the World, the Crown of Kingdoms, the desire and
delight of Nations; the Joy of the whole Earth, and the City of the Great King;
for Unity, Peace, and Concord; for Piety and Virtue; for Wisdom, Power, and
Strength; for Honors, Riches, and great Glory. As these are Trying Times, so
this high and honorable Work is Trying Work; as it does try and exercise all
the powers of my Soul, so it will try and exercise all the Powers of the World;
for the Glory and great Glory of the most High, and the great Honor and
Exaltation of England's Royal Majesty, among the Sons of Men, and above any of
them. This work will try who are Enemies and Friends to God and Man. They be
Enemies that will not mind and regard it, but will do what they can to hinder
it, and oppose it; and they be Friends that do what they can to countenance,
encourage, and set it forward as soon as they can, and as well as they can; for
it will tend to their great Honor, Peace, Profit, and Comfort. And though I
have met in this high and honorable Work much discouragements from many of the
Sons of Men, yet I have great encouragement from the God of Heaven, who is with
me as a mighty God, a great King, and a righteous Judge; who will judge the World
in Righteousness, and his People with his Word of Truth: Therefore they that be
incensed against me, or offended at me, will be ashamed. As the Sons of Men
cannot hinder the Wind from blowing, nor the Waters from flowing; no more can
they hinder the God of Heaven from working in me, and with me, for to manifest
his Wisdom and Power, among the Sons of Men, to bring about what he knows that
is best to be done, for the great Honor, Peace, and Prosperity of our Royal
King, and all Kingdoms. Though I am but a mean and ordinary Man for person, yet
the Spirit of God is no mean and ordinary Spirit for Counsel, that has enabled
me to understand his Mind, and to make it known in due time.

Upon so noble a Design therefore, let not any despise the Day of small things;
for the Lord who is most Wise, and most Strong, loves to bring about great and
wonderful things by weak and unlikely means; that so all the Glory may redound
to Him, and that no Flesh should glory before him; because all the Sons of Men
have their Wisdom, Power, and Strength from him, that is comfortable to
themselves, and profitable to others. Let not any slight and undervalue the
Bible, which is the Word of God, because it is an Iron Rod, to bring home
Children that do go astray, and a sharp Sword to cut down them that will not it
obey. Ministers of the Gospel, that do preach the Word of God in season, and
out of season, are to be minded, regarded, and honored, so far as their
Doctrines do agree to the Word of God. And so are all men, so far as they
honor, love, and obey the Word of God, which abides for ever; for Heaven and
Earth will sooner fail, than one tittle of God's Word come to nothing.
Therefore Glory be given to the most High, from Men and Angels, and that
continually for his great Wisdom, Power, Glory, and Majesty; and great Honor
and Renown, great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity from the most High, upon England's
Royal Majesty, upon his Royal Person, and all his Royal Relations, that so he
and they may long live to Reign for God, and with God, among the Sons of Men;
for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of them, and at last for ever with
him, among the holy Angels in his Kingdom of Heaven, Amen, Amen. Let all Loyal
and Faithful Subjects in England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, say, and pray;
yea, all Persons in all Nations, that do love the peace and prosperity of their
Souls, and the comfort of their Lives. Made known in due time, how to procure
and secure many hundred thousand pound a Year to the Crown of England, for the
great Honor and Profit of our Royal Sovereign, Charles the Second, King of
Great Britain; and for the peace and prosperity of all Kingdoms, by John
Varney, a Member of the Church of England, and of the City of London; a Subject
to his Majesty of Great Britain, and Servant to the God of all Wisdom, Power,
and Strength; who can do what he will, and work with whom he will, among the
Sons of Men; to manifest his Wisdom, and Power, for the great Honor and
Exaltation of a Kings Person, and the great joy, peace, and prosperity of all
Nations.

There be many seeming Friends among the Sons of Men, that be real Enemies unto
them; but a true and a faithful Friend, is more precious than Gold, or the Gold
of Ophir: Because in the worst of Times, and before the best of Men, he will
venture his Life, endanger his Liberty, and expose himself to many Losses,
Crosses, and Reproaches; not only for the good of his Friends, but of his
Enemies. A Friend loves at all times, and the Wounds of a Friend, is better
than the Kisses of an Enemy. Our Lord and Savior, who is the Lord of Life, the
King of Glory, and the Prince of Peace, has Friends as well as Enemies, among
the Sons of Men; that will own him, and appear for him: when that so many are
not ashamed to appear against him, in these times of his Gospel. But what will
the end of such Men be? For the Face of the Lord is against them and all evil
doers, to cut off the remembrance of them from the Earth. But his Eyes run to
and fro through the whole Earth, to show himself Strong in the behalf of them
whose Heart is perfect toward him. Let that Man be where he will in England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, that is become a reconciled Friend to the God of
Heaven, by his Word and Spirit; that Man should know when, and how, in due time
to prove himself a faithful Friend to the Sons of Men, to prevent much evil,
that it may not come to a City, and a Kingdom, to remove much evil that is
come: And to procure and secure great Honor, Peace, and Prosperity to our
Royal King, and his Kingdoms, and that without making a noise about Religion,
for any man's Judgment, or Opinion. Therefore not unto Man, not unto Man, no
nor to the Angels in Heaven; but let all the Glory be given to the God of
Heaven, who can by weak and unlikely Means, for the great Honor and Exaltation
of a King's Person, and the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of all Nations,
bring Order out of Confusion, Light out of Darkness, Good out of Evil; and
Peace out of Trouble.

There is not any so fit to manage this high and honorable Work, which Divine
Wisdom and Power has enabled me to make known in time, for the great Joy,
peace, and prosperity of Mankind; than the Parliament of England; because it is
for the Glory, and the great Glory of the most High, and the great Honor and
Exaltation of England's Royal Majesty; that so all Nations may be freed from
Slavery, and throughout the whole World, great Joy, peace, and prosperity; to
the great Shame, Contempt, and Terror of the Turk, the Pope, and the Devil, and
all the Workers of Evil, who are for Strife, Contention, Sedition, and Treason,
for Wars and Confusion; so that most People in all Nations will be in love with
the Protestant Religion, and all Heathen and popish Kings, Priests, Princes,
and Emperors in the World will be ashamed of their Religion, and will be ready
and willing for to serve and honor our Royal Sovereign Charles the Second,
King of Great Britain, as the chief Sovereign among the Sons of Men, for
Wisdom, power, and Strength, over them; and well they may, because the Lord of
Hosts is with him by his Spirit as a mighty Man, in Man, and for Man, to have
his Enemies subdued both by Sea and Land; to have his Enemies subdued under his
Feet, that so all Strife, Contention, and Wars, throughout the whole World may
cease; and among all People in all Nations a free Trade, great Joy, and a
lasting peace. The Lord who is most Wise, and most Strong, is slow to Anger,
but he is great in Power; and he knows when, how, and in whom to arise, to
manifest his Wisdom and Power; that so they that hate him may fly before him.
As Wax melts before the Fire, so will the Wicked before the presence of the
Lord. But the Righteous will be as bold as a Lion, for the great Honor of God,
and our Royal King, and the Protestant Religion.

November, 3. 1680.
FINIS.
LONDON,

Printed in the Year 1680, by Tho. James, according to the Mind, Will, and
Desire of the Author, for the Public Good of all Nations, being the Fruit of
his Meditation for England's great Honor, Riches, and Glory.


