THE LIFE OF DONNA OLIMPIA MALDACHINI, Who Governed the Church, during the time
of Innocent the X.

Which was from the Year 1644. to the Year 1655.

Written in Italian by Abbot GUALDI: And faithfully rendered into English.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. and are to be sold by Robert Littlebury at the
Unicorn in Little Britain 1666.

THE PREFACE.
GUALDI, the Author of this little Treatise, was one that infinitely loved
Truth; and had no doubt been Cardinal, could he have dispensed with that
profitable Sin of Lying. None that have seen Rome to any purpose, during the
^ime of Innocent the tenth, or the begin^ing of Alexander the seventh, but must
^ave heard of him at least; as being one (...) the greatest Wits of his time,
inge^ous, and of a modest temper, a great ^rtuoso; one who considered Honor so
^uch, and the World so little, that whoever knew him, must needs approve the
work before he reads it. But truly, here were was no use of Lying, where so
many ^onsiderable Truths might so easily be met ^^th. For the Business is of so
late a ^^te, that it were infinite to examine ^^at will yet be delivered by
Eyewitnesses upon Enquiry. Indeed it is the great entertainment of
Conversation at Rome, to relate the several Stories of Innocent the tenth, and
his Sister-in-law Donna Olimpia. And surely if Oral Tradition be of that force,
as the late Innovatours would have it; they themselves must confess (to their
own shame and confusion) the truth of this Story: and by the great example
laid before us, that the Churchmen of the Roman Faith, will do any thing with
a Woman, but Marry her. I^ must not be expected that the tenth part of the
Lady's story is to be found in this small Volume: for I suppose a full Relation
would take up more Paper, than tha^ learned Man's Works, who has troubled the
World with two sheets for each day it his Life. But this he writ to undeceive
such as took Rome for the Model of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the Pope and
Cardinals for the Mayor and Alderme^ of the Corporation. It is probable Donna
Olimpia, who had a spite at all deserving persons, did whet the Pen of this
goo^ Man by some Affronts or Injuries, and provoke his Zeal to a more vigorous
prosecution of the Work: as God knows, we have all need to be awaked by some
unreasonable passion to do reason: Yet I dare say, nothing should tempt him to
say more than truth. And now, if matters have gone thus at Rome, what hopes of
Infallibility? Donna Olimpia indites to Innocent, some broad-backed Groom or
Coachman suggests to her, and where to find the first mouth of this Oracle is
not to be determined. This Pope was chose for his Senselesness: For when the
Conclave had been tired out with bandying of Factions, and were resolved to
pitch upon some indifferent person; not being able to find out any among
themselves honest enough to keep to that Integrity, they chose this as the
greatest Block-head, and so least able to do mischief. I have heard of an old
Civilian, who with drinking Sack and studying the Laws, had so addled his
Brain; that having occasion frequently to pass by a Chapel Door, which joined
to that he came out of, would never fail to piss against it: and is it any
wonder that he who had beaten out his little Wits upon the dull Volumes of the
Canon Law, and so long doted upon a Woman, should do worse, not only at the
Church Door, but within the very Rails of the Altar? In the mean time, though
Children and Fools will be pleased with Bables: shall they think to impose upon
the reasonable part of the World, and exempt the Pope from that determination
in the Text, Every Man is compassed about with Infirmities? The Jesuit brags
much of his Harvest here in England, while we hold our selves obliged to them
for weeding our Church of such Creatures; who, if the soberest of their own
Party be to be believed, conduce more to the shame, than propagation of their
Sect. So that we may say of them, They Went out from among us, because they
were not of us. However, that which carrys on the work of these Ecclesiastical
Mountebanks much more effectually among us, is that they subtly practice the
method of the Devil, tempting the weaker Sex, and through their Charms draw the
poor male into their Net. For who can show his head in this Generation, and be
so little a Courtier, as to deny the impertinent demand of a fair Lady? It is
very seasonable therefore this account to the World, for a Pope in these our
days to warn us of the sad effects of love transported beyond the bounds of
Honor and Virtue in his own person: thus to confront the impudence of Rome,
which, while it pretends to direct all Christians, by I know not what ^entayled
Donation, tells us by its practices, what once in the time of the Ligue the
Cardinal Legate at his entry into Paris, said all the time he intimated a
Benediction by the cross motion of his Hand, Qui vult decipi, decipiatur: He
that will be an Ass, may. But I shall stop here, least I should draw a Wasps
Nest about the Ashes of the dead. The truth is, the Author is thought never to
have designed this for the Press: but only writ it to satisfy the curiosity of
some particular Friends. However they, who most esteemed him, judged it fit
since his Death to eternize his Name, by publishing so ingenious a Piece. Some
were of opinion to moderate certain Expressions: but the most thought it not so
equitable, to impose upon the Dead. It is therefore to be taken, as it was
first brought forth: and if any find ought to say against it, let them write
into the next World to the Author for an Answer, and keep in their right
Senses till it comes.

The LIFE OF Donn^ Olimpia Maldachini.
IT is not my design to give an accurate account of Donna Olimpia's Life; who
in the City of Rome acted a Man in Woman's apparel, and in the Church a woman
wearing the breeches. (...) would require a Pen, all eyes, to set ^own the Life
of a Lady, who cast her ^es so universally upon all affairs. To ^rite the
faults whithout mentioning ^e virtues of a person, who for ten years space had
so great a share in the Government of the Church Catholic; is impossible to
perform, without the reputation of a Heretic: and to mention the virtues only,
would be to dip my Pen in the Ink without staining of it. Our Age has felt too
much the smart of the activity of this Lady: So that if a Writer should take
never so much pains to separate the wheat from the chaff, that is, to pick out
the good and leave the bad, according to the custom of the present times, when
they treat of great persons; the world hat^ beheld so much chaff before the
whea^ could be discovered, that such a story would win no credit.

I must needs say, it was a very foolish Age, that invented Writing: if it only
end were to make false appea^ true, and true false. Much better ha^ it been to
have left men's manners to b^ delivered down by tradition from eye^ witnesses,
than to such Scribes. Doubt less the world took very ill advic^ when it
subjected the reputation of Mankind to the capricio of a frail pen. And
certainly it has been great inadvertency in man to let a mischief grow so
beyond the cure of Ages.

But why do I thus decry Writing, while I my self pretend to write? Alas! to
write what one is an eyewitness of is so natural, as the contrary is
estranging the world from it self. Give me leave therefore to say with the
Apostle St. John, What we have beheld with our eyes, what we have seen, and our
hands have touched: that declare we unto you.

I will write no other thing of Donna Olimpia but what I have seen in her. Her
descent I will omit: only that she was born of the Family of Maldachini, which
name made but little noise in Rome at that time. However I would very willingly
have spoke of her childhood and education: but that I saw her married before a
Virgin. She was born before me: so that I cannot speak of what I have not seen,
without breaking my promise of delivering only what the Theater of Rome has
represented to my eyes for the space of five and twenty years and upwards. I
will but deliver what the common report of those, which knew her in her younger
days, has informed me of. That from her very infancy almost she showed an
ambition to rule: insomuch as at her childish plays amongst her companions,
she alone would ever give law to the rest. Thus she grew up, and thus she lived
even till she arrived to the years of marriage. It is said, that her Parents,
considering the small share they had in Fortunes favor, used all means
possible (as it is ordinary in Italy) to make her resolve upon a Monastic
life. But she, that had more propension to Matrimony, than a Vow, denied flatly
to yield to any such purpose.

She was therefore given in marriage to Seignior Panfilio, brother to Gioanne
Baptista Panfilio, who came afterward to be Pope. These Nuptials were
celebrated in Rome with satisfaction on both sides, as loving reciprocally.
Which kindness produced a numerous offspring of females, with but one only
male, which is Prince Panfilio, who served for the state to his Mothers
interests. The first Scene that represents it it self (as I may say) in the
Tragi-comedy of the Life of Donna Olimpia, is the coolness of affection toward
her Husband; which by little begun to discover it self, without any grounds the
good man could find out for it. Nevertheless, how difficult soever it was to
the Husband, the Romans easily smoaked the cause. Who seeing how fond she was
of her Brother-in-law, began to have a general suspicion of her virtue; as
believing for a certain the times of Herod were revived. Nor may we blame any
for thinking amiss of these two; when their actions, gestures and behavior
gave so palpable grounds of suspicion.

Donna Olimpia went much oftener in in the Coach with her Brother-in-law, than
with her Husband: entertained her self much more in the Closet with the one,
then in Bed with the other: and many times the poor Husband knew not where to
find either Brother or Wife, that is in plain English, they always went
together.

There was but one reason, which qualified this foul suspicion. And that was,
diverse debated it, nor could imagine, that a Lady as Donna Olimpia who had a
body of no ordinary shape, should be in love with the ugliest countenance that
ever appeared in humane shape, as it is most certain her Brother-in-law was.
Especially since her Husband had something pleasing and comely in him, though
not exceeding. Whereas this could only give evidence how great is the ambition
of Women to domineer: which passion blinds them to that degree, they will not
only surrender themselves up to Men, but Satyrs.

Seignior Panfilio, the Husband of Donna Olimpia, following the common practice
of Italy, did all his business without calling his Wife to counsel. On the
other side, the Abbot Panfilio his Brother never entered upon any affair public
or private, but first acquainted his Sister-in-law with it; whose advice he
took his measure by, as from ^n Oracle: nay often times he went not ^broad,
before he had received her benediction.

Nor is this so wonderful: since the greatest part of the Prelates in Rome ^ake
this course to oblige such Ladies ^s are ambitiously inclined. And indeed if
they did not do so, they would be as much hated, as they are now beloved of the
Ladies of their relations. However this kind of condescension makes Prelates of
Ladies, and Ladies of Prelates, to the no small shame of Rome.

Notwithstanding that which was no great matter for another man, found some
difficulty in the person of Abbot Panfilio: who conscious of his unwelcome face
to womankind, studied to win the love of his Sister-in-law by presenting her
with the entire dispose of his will. She, who desired nothing more then the
exercise of such a power, freely bestowed her affections the more to oblige him
to an absolute surrender of himself. Thus the more he submitted his will to
Donna Olimpia, the more love she heaped upon him. Being stepped from an Abbot
to a Prelate, and advancing daily in Ecclesiastical preferments: Donna Olimpia
had still a longer field to exercise her authority in. For she was resolved her
Brother-in-law should not do the least matter without her: who most willingly
submitted himself to her disposal. Meanwhile the Husband dies: by which means
she remained not only Mistress of her Brother-in-laws will; but also o^ all the
affairs of the house of Panfilio, which went no farther then the Brother, the
Son and two Daughters.

How great the respect was this Brother-in-law had for her, may be judged by a
Letter which lit into my hands by accident. It came from Spain, where Seignior
Panfilio was Nuntio, directed to Donna Olimpia at Rome, and was this.

Most dear Sister,
MY affairs in Spain succeed not so fortunately as they did at Rome: since ^t
Rome, and not in Spain, I had the ^ssistance of your advice. Remote from ^ou I
am like a Ship without a Rudder, ^eft to the sole mercy of Fortune: So much I
am forced to say in testimony of my affection. I beseech you to answer me at
^arge to what I write by the hand of my Secretary, and to believe me

Your most affectionate servant and Brother PANFILIO.


An incredible story to one that had ^ot read it: that a public Minister
should write such fond Letters to a woman, without regard had to Reputation, or
apprehension how easy it is for Letters to miscarry, as in effect this did.
But since he had delivered himself over as a prey to this Lady; what could he
do less?

Indeed this Letter was a great evidence of their love, and confirmation to
what the speculative people gave out, That Donna Olimpia gave instructions to
the Popes Nuntio's. But it will not be out of the way to touch a little upon
the Nature of this Lady: before she mount the Vatican, if not with the Miter,
at least with the Command.

She was one of few words in the ordinary company of Ladies: but made it up
sufficiently, when she came to discourse with men. Though this could not be
called properly her nature: because she would often say, she had no^ words to
cast away upon a Sex, from which nothing was to be learned worth mentioning. By
which you may gather, she forced her Nature to condescend to ^er Judgment.

Her discourses were always prop^ed with Reasons of State, and many ^imes with
the addition of some sen^ence: which made people think she ^ad studied much,
though there was ^o such thing. She had so happy a memory, that with once
hearing or read^ng over she would remember any thing: which made her be thought
a ^ady of great learning. It was very ^ard for her to submit to the opinion of
another, without offering great vio^ence to her nature. And it is certain, he
had rather perish with her own fan^y, than live by another counsel.

She was covetous to that degree, as ^he would not so much as hear any body
^alk of the bounty of others. Nay by (...) certain maxim she held, she made a
virtue of that vice, by excusing her ^varice with this pretense, That Women
were made to gather, not to dispense. She often changed her Servants: lest in
time they should become too familiar with her conduct. And indeed the Servants
commonly mutiny'd before the years end for want of their wages* She went seldom
or never to Feasts Balls, or other recreations, which the Ladies of Rome use to
divert themselves with: lest she should be obliged t^ make the like. That which
gave he the greatest reputation, was her charit^ to the poor Religious. Though
she did it rather out of vainglory, tha^ Religion: She never did an alms, tha^
she had not first carried in processio^ round the Palace. And indeed she wa^ no
sooner got into the Vatican under the protection of Innocent: then alms (...)
Religious deeds were laid aside. Which shows plainly what she did before w^
feigned. Hence Pasquin made bold (...) say that Donna Olimpia was olim pi^ nunc
impia. She had some goodne^ heretofore, but now she was good f^ nothing.

She neglected the education of h^ ^hildren, especially of her Son: for ^ar it
might waken his spirits a little, (...) a future disturbance of her absolute
^ower over the house of Panfilio. A ^abolical principle which reigns in the
^arts of almost all the great Ladies. ^hus Don Camillo grew up in igno^^nce,
that he could hardly read at ^^enty years of age. She kept no great ^ble, and
made her Steward bring in (...) Accounts every day to a far^ing. Complements
she would be^^w most liberally, and promise much ^ore than any one could ask of
her: ^ll knowing that she had the knack of ^cusing her self, and denying
what^er she had promised, being most ex^^lent and ready at it.

When her Brother-in-law was made ^^rdinal; it was not to be imagined ^h what
joy she received it: promi^^g her self from that moment hopes a higher advance.
Panfilio's red Hat ^de Donna Olimpia grow higher by the ^d. Her Brother-in-laws
Scarlet enflamed her heart to a more passionat^ kindness, and so much the more
by the death of her Husband, which remove all obstacles from diverting her lov^
upon any other object. They lived t^gether, and ate together for the mo^^ part.
Whosoever had any grace (...) demand of Cardinal Panfilio, must have applied
himself to Donna Olimpia: b^ he must seek to the Cardinal for a^ grace from
her. When any one ha^ received a denial from the Cardina^ they never took it
amiss, only it m^ be said as they went out, Perchance (...) has not spoke with
Donna Olimpia y^

Donna Olimpia was she that taug^^ the Cardinal the art of dissimulatio^ though
it be an ancient and one of t^ most principal customs of the Court of Rome. I
my self heard her one d^^ talk in this manner to the Cardinal.

Brother, it is not to be expressed w^^ sparks of joy your Scarlet kindles in
(...) heart: far beyond the pleasure you yo^ self can take in it, who have the
k^ of my affections. It was your merit and not Urban's kindness that made you
Cardinal: who could not refuse the Hat to a Prelat, that so well knows how to
serve ^he Church. Desert may call a man to be Cardinal; but never Pope, which
requires ^ther qualifications. I do not see that ^hey call men to this eminent
degree, who ^re really good; but such as seem to be so. It is the outward not
the inward man, that makes a Pope. He that will be a Cardinal must speak with
all, and have to do with all: but he that would mount Saint Peter 's Chair,
must change the Scene, and ^peak little, and have to do with no body. The
Cardinals demur not upon virtue in ^he election of a Pope: the only virtue at
^uch a time consists in the pensive looks of ^me Cardinal. All the Histories
teach us, and the experience of Urban has made ^s see, that the Popes change
their nature, which during the time of their Cardina^te appears to have been in
them, and not ^f them. Nothing now remains to accom^lish the happiness of the
house of Panfilio, and my content; but to see you seated it the throne of the
Vatican. That Fortune which has promoted so many others to such an honor
without merit or expectation; may as well advance you, whos^ worth has just
reason to expect it. Sixtu^ Quintus, who was a most learned person feigned
ignorance all the while he was Cardinal: very well knowing that such a
dissembled simplicity had more efficacy t^ mount the Chair, than a speculative
understanding.

To these exhortations she likewise added some more; which to deal clearly, I
think not befitting an Ecclesiastical pen to set down; besides, that i^ would
put me upon relating, what saw with my eyes, which God forbid It is sufficient
to know the whole design and care of Donna Olimpia was nigh and day to mind the
Cardinal of putting on the mask of dissimulation, which she used to call the
Porter of the Vatican.

Neither had these remembrance any ill success with the Cardinal. For though he
was sufficiently ill natured: ^et was he very simple, and ignorant ^n many
Court Maxims which are ^eculiar almost to Rome. And therefor knowing that the
whole design of his Sister-in-law was his advancement, and having none more
intimate to con^er with, he entertained long confer^ences with her perpetually
till the ^ext Election, expecting daily, by rea^^n of the great age of Urban,
an empty hair.

In order to his success, the good ^ardinal was become Master at dissimu^^tion
in all particulars, but his love his Sister-in-law: in the Congrega^ons none
more un-concerned, in Con^^rsation humble, and in the Church he ^ted the Devout
to a hair; yet all is while it was impossible to conceal ^s Passion for Donna
Olimpia. He loved ^r and idolized her as well in public (...) private: to the
astonishment of ^ery body, that a Cardinal, who had his pretenses, though
remote enough in some share to the next Election should enslave himself so much
t^ the love of a Lady, and his Relation.

But Donna Olimpia had a transcendent talent in the Politics. She knew at the
same time how to be complaisant to her Brother-in-law, and turn his resolutions
to her own bent: an^ yet so neatly, that the generality could find no objection
against her. Indeed she understood so well how to hide the power she bore over
the Cardinal will, that it was much more easy ^^ discover in the Slave then
the Mistre^^ She always spoke of her Brother-in-law with great modesty and
respect and would sift out with a great deal ^^ art the inclinations of the
other Cardinals toward hers.

When it came in her way to spe^^ with any of the Spanish faction, ^^ would
represent the great devotion t^^ Cardinal her Brother-in-law had ^^ the Crown
of Spain. On the oth^^ side, if she met with any of the French faction, she
assured them of the inward affection her Kinsman retained for the French, with
which upon occasion he would be more serviceable to them under hand, than
others that made show of open friendship.

Toward the latter end of Urban the 8th. every moment seemed an age to Donna
Olimpia. For having with a great deal of secrecy procured one of ^he most
Eminent Astrologers to Calcu^ate the Nativity of her Cardinal, she ^ound by his
Horoscope, that in the Seventieth year of his Age he was to be promoted to the
highest dignity in the Church; whence she concluded infalli^ly he must be Pope.

Urban dying in the mean time in the year 1643. in the month of May, which was
much upon the Seventieth year of ^he Cardinal: the confusion and distraction
she found the Court in at that ^ime fortified her hopes with much more strong
assurances.

The Cardinals use not to enter the Conclave upon the death of the Pope, till
after ten days be passed. In which time they balance the interests of the
several Crowns, with the manners and inclinations of those Cardinals which
pretend, or that ordinarily they judge to have some ground of pretention Now, it
is, if ever, that the Ambassadors demonstrate their zeal in employing all
their industry for the service of their Masters. They talk with thi^ and that
man, bespatter with a thousand calumnies those they dislike, extollin^ the
virtues of those they approve with as much partiality. So that the multitude,
who esteem by hearsay, set u^ a new Idol every half hour. They mak^ more Popes
than there are Cardinals and many times the Spaniards decr^^ those of the
French faction, and the French those of the Spanish, to that degree; as the
poor people cannot fin^ amongst all the Cardinals one worth their choice. The
life and conversatio^ of Cardinals at such a time is as cheap ^s Onions in the
Market: where you ^ay see their Eminences stand like so many poor Lambs at
Sale. He that is ^ryed up to day, to morrow is brought ^s low. In this Corner
of Rome is ^ertainly concluded such a Cardinal shall be Pope; in another that
the same shall never be. In an instant it is repor^ed all over the City, that
the Spaniards have carried it: and the next moment here is no such thing. How
many ^opes are made by the people, that either French nor Spaniard ever ^ought
of: and by the French and ^paniard unknown to the people!

In such a pickle was Rome during the ^acancy after Vrban's death. When ^onna
Olimpia with all the diligence ^^aginable applied her self to discover ^he
intrigues, combinations and designs ^f the Cardinals and Ambassadors, as ^^
the Election of the new Pope. And ^^ough she was naturally covetous: ^et in
this conjuncture spared she no cost in Spies to procure the best information.
She had her Emissaries in every part; even to search into the hearts of men, if
it were possible. But all in vain. For she could inform her self o^ nothing
more, than that her Brother-in-law was laid aside, as to any hope of the
Chair. And it is certain, tha^ the Cardinals at their first entering into the
Conclave, preferred the whole re^ of the College before Cardinal Pan^filio.

One day as the Cardinals were she up in the Conclave, it was told Donna
Olimpia that there was but one on^ reason that hindered her Kinsman from being
Pope; and that was the ill unde^standing he had with the Barbarines to which
she presently answered, that be all, this very thing will man him Pope; since
none are more hated this time than the Barbarines.

The Cardinals came into the Co^clave with a firm resolution not so much as to
mention Panfilio. Not in consid^ration of his little merit. For that is an
Objection never takes place in the Conclave, where the Cardinals in no ^vise
suffer goodness to come into the ^cale. For so he were an Enemy to the French,
the Spanish faction would choose a ^ury: were he the like to the Spaniard, ^he
French would choose him, though it were the Devil himself: and for the Cardinal
Nephews of the last Pope, who ^re always upon this occasion most vigilant,
they would set up Antichrist to ^e assured of his Friendship.

The night before the Conclave began, Cardinal Panfilio had a long conference
with his Sister-in-law. What it was I could never learn further, then that some
will have Donna Olimpia to have told him at parting, Perchance I shall see you
Pope, but never more Cardinal. To which it is said he replied, Were you but
Popess, I would willingly relinquish my claim. There was now six Weeks passed
in the Conclave that the Cardinals had not the least thought of Panfilio: nor
when they did begin to mention him, was it without Ten thousand difficulties.
The Spaniard, who perceived all his creatures laid aside, pressed hotly for
the inclusive of Panfilio: but the French instigated by Cardinal Antonio
Barbarino made all their endeavors to have him excluded*

There were many reasons why Cardinal Panfilio was neither desired, no^
approved of. His Satyrick, Sower* Brutish, Saturnal look made him be taken for
a contumacious spirit. Which gave some occasion to say, It would no^ do well to
choose an universal Father (such as in a manner is the Pope) with such a
beastly, deformed countenance* lest he should fright his Children with his
looks from coming near him.

Others accepted against him for hi^ want of knowledge and learning, having
spent all his time in dreaming over the Canon Laws, which he begun to faulter
in too. So that he was fancied to prove a Prince not much inclined to favor
learning, which is so essential ^o the good of the Church. Besides his study of
the Laws was looked upon as such as would make him sick of all that were
eminent in any other kind. Neither were these Diviners deceived: for during his
reign the Church was ser^ed with ignorant Prelates, and many deserving persons
kept out of Bishoprics, nay persecuted so far as to be ^anished Rome.

It was foreseen in him by others (and ^his indeed had like wholly to have
excluded him) that if he were elected, ^he power would be subjected to the
frail disposal of a woman, through those ^owels of affection he bore to his
Kinswoman, who, as I have told you before, was absolute Mistress of his will.
And this Objection lay the har^er upon him, because all the Cardinals ^new very
well how deep root this love had taken in his heart; and therefore a hard
matter to take off the ^mpression, besides the consideration of what a
pernicious spirit was Donna Olimpia.

This was the consideration that fortified Cardinal Antonio and the French
faction in their opposition: which they objected as the only motive to exclude
him. They pleaded that as the state of affairs went, it was dangerous to give
the Heretics such an occasion o^ scandal. Who would not fail of a thousand
pretenses, seeing the Pope resign the whole disposal of his resolutions to a
woman, to defame the Church with Libels, that should be dispersed about Rome
daily under the name of Pasquin. Besides that the passed kindnesses betwixt
Panfilio and Donna Olimpia, which hitherto were gone n^ further than the City
of Rome, would be divulged over the whole world, t^ the no mean scandal of all
Christendom.

All this nevertheless helped but (...) delude the Court, and show the weakness
of those that opposed Panfilio. For ^he more Cardinal Antonio strove to
^rustrate his Election, the more he ^rognosticated the decree of Fate, which
had determined the fortune of ^ominion in a man of this kidney. Thus ^nexpected
to Rome, in despite of Cardinal Antonio, and the astonishment of those very
persons that gave their voices for him, was Panfilio made Pope, taking upon him
the name of Innocent.

How Donna Olimpia received this ^ews, let those judge that have heard ^alk how
predominant the ambition of ^ule was in her, and the influence she had upon her
Brother-in-law.

So highly was she transported with ^oy, that from fifty years, which was her
age, she seemed to be restored to five and twenty.

She flung open the gates of her Kinsmans Palace, now Pope, to the people who
came to rifle it, with demonstrations of great Satisfaction. They say also,
that some days before this Election a certain Prelate to curry favor with
Donna Olimpia (which he did as well to the relations of all the rest of the
Cardinals, that were in election to be Pope) went to advise her, that her
Brother-in-law would undoubtedly be Pope; and therefore she would do well to
remove the richest furniture from becoming a prey to the people, who are
accustomed always at the Election of a Pope, to rifle the Palace of his
Cardinalship: but Donna Olimpia told the good man, That on that condition her
Brother-in-law were Pope, she would not sacrifice the Palace, but herself to
the people. Indeed so she said, but she did it not. For her avarice prevailed
so far with her, that she hid the best goods. So as the people finding no great
matter: began from that time to receive ill impressions of the most insatiable
avarice of this Lady.

The visits a new Pope used to receive were few, giving audience only to those
of his most intimate confederacy, before he was settled; though from the first
hour of Election they have the absolute power: whereas those to Donna Olimpia
were frequent ^eyond belief. The nobility of Rome ^ocked to her in Troops, the
Embassa^ours, the Cardinals, and the Ladies: ^ll which she received with a most
ob^ging countenance at the beginning, ^ll afterward, that she begun to find
^er self fast in the seat, she put on a look that sower'd all.

The very night Panfilio was chosen, about two hours after the day was set
(...), she went privately to the Popes ^alace to give him a visit: who recei^ed
her with great demonstrations of ^ffection, and it was observed in kissing ^is
Feet Donna Olimpia and the Pope ^oth wept for joy. This Lady enter^^ined here
self here till midnight, the ^ores shut all the while, only that ^eignior
Camillo, her Son, went in and ^ut several times. By the Popes permission she
visited all the Chambers, even to his bed, which she would se^ whether it was
well made or no, givin^ order for the disposal of other furniture.

Next day, when she was come home she began to take the state of a Princess
upon her with all those that cam^ to visit her. Cardinal Antonio, wh^
apprehended more than others wha^ afterward befell him, showed the greatest
respect and reverence toward her. Insomuch as it was observed when he
complemented her, he often repeate^ the title of Excellence; besides that h^
was not with the last that presente^ both her and her Son. But the goo^ Lady
finding it was now the time t^ revenge those injuries she had receive from the
Barbarines, made no gre^ return to Cardinal Antonio's civilitie receiving them
with a great deal (...) coolness, as probably keeping in min^ the rumor this
Cardinal had set abo^ the Town concerning her amors wi^ her Brother-in-law.

This action renders her worthy the ^itle of treacherous. For when Urban ^ay a
dying, and during the vacancy, both by her self and others she held ^he
Barbarines in hopes with fair promises, that if her Brother-in-law chan^ed to
be Pope, they should not only be confirmed in their present prosperity, but
advanced. Though it is very true, the Barbarines, well read in the Court
dissimulations, gave no great ^eed to her words, but opposed his Election with
all their power. So that Donna Olimpia on the other side perceiving their
diffidence, resolved to ^rust them as little.

The first thing Donna Olimpia pro^ured at Court, was the ruin of the
Barbarines. However knowing it would prove no easy matter through the
^nblameable life of Cardinal Francesco and the strong interest of Don Tadeo to
oppress a family fortified with so im^nence a treasure as that was; she
counseled the Pope only to the destruction of Cardinal Antonio, as assuring
her self of matter enough to attaque the life of a person so much hated i^ Rome.

It was reported with a great deal o^ truth, that the Pope had not persecuted
the Cardinal to that degree, had no^ Donna Olimpia been so frequent in he^
importunities. Though he hated him for many reasons, particularly for the
opposition he made against his Election: yet was he resolved for all this but
to mortify him a little. But Donna Olimpia pressed still his utter
extirpation, that she might get his Abbeys and other Revenues into her
clutches* Which indeed, as to his possessions she effected, though she missed
of his life* For the Cardinal being warned of the Popes good intentions, and
Donna Olimpia's, fled disguised through Italy into France, scaping narrowly at
Savon^ to be seized Prisoner. And mos^ assuredly had he then fallen into the
Popes hands, he had been tried for hi^ life, and executed. But God had merry
upon him.

Donna Olimpia was designed imme^iately to remove into the Vatican, and ^t up
her station next the Pope. Which ^e had not only yielded to, but sought; (...)
Cardinal Panzicolo by force of reason ^d not labored to divert both him ^d her
from such thoughts; Repre^^nting it as scandalous not only to ^ome, but the
whole world: as enough (...) confirm the truth of those rumors, which were as
yet doubtful to many. upon this consideration, the Pope ^ide her keep at home:
But withal, ^ve her leave to come every day (or ^ght I should say rather;
because it ^s commonly after Sunset, she went ^d stayed there till midnight)
into (...) presence, which he never failed of.

This Cardinal Panzicolo was the on^ engine that set the great mass of the ^pes
brains a going after Donna Olim^^^. Nay, oftentimes he had greater in^ence upon
the Pope, than Donna Olimpia her self. He had exactly the length of the Pope's
foot, and knew how to advise him suitable t^ his inclinations; which was a
great satisfaction and ease to his Holiness, with whom he would confer all day,
an^ sometimes the night too. For this Pop^ had a laudable custom, never to go
t^ bed till after midnight. Quite contrar^ to his Predecessor; who went to
(...) Rest presently after the Evening, an^ got up again at break of day, to
dispat^ the public Affairs.

The Government of this Pope was little embroyled, while Cardinal Pazicolo
lived. For he made it his end^^vour for the most part to disappoint t^ Counsels
of Donna Olimpia: And she^ the other side to find some objecti^ still to what
he advised. But after t^ death of this Cardinal, the Governme^ was wholly
Feminine and scandalo^ to the justification of what the Card^nals, Lantes and
Barbarino, declared the Conclave. Cardinal Lantes, w^ was a man of an exact
experienced wis^om, was demanded what Judgment he ^ould give of Cardinal
Panfilio, in case ^e came to be Pope: who answered without demur, That he would
be a good ^ope from the Pontomolle to Rome; the which Bridge is but a mile from
Rome. Meaning that he would do good for the City of Rome, by Buildings and
other ^races, for the aggrandizing the hou^es of Rome, as in effect he did: but
he ^dded, That he would prove very per^itious to the State, and profit of
Chri^endome; besides, that many particular ^ersons would smart for it.

This Cardinal, without doubt, took ^is measure from the absolute devotion ^he
Pope bore to his Sister-in-laws will: ^oncluding that as Women think of nothing
farther than what they have before their eyes, and within reach of their hands;
the Pope would surely lay ^l other Considerations aside, through Donna
Olimpia's advice for the embel^shing of Rome, to the neglect of Church and
State: Nor was he out i^ his Prophecy.

In the same manner Cardinal Francesco Barbarino, a man of a most exemplary
life, being entreated to give h^ opinion of Cardinal Panfilio, presently
replied; He would make an excellen^ Pope for the Women. A Sentence to notorious
to be interpreted a Prophecy* To say the truth, Donna Olimpia disposed of all
the Court Affairs, public^ and private: There not being the lea^ Business
ordered without her goo^ liking, in part at least. For most frequently, as he
has been treating with Cardinal Panzicolo about any particular, it has been
heard come from h^ Holiness his mouth, What will Donna Olimpia say? Which makes
it most pa^pable, that he was afraid of di^pleasing her. For which Reason,
Panzicolo consulted with Donna Olimpia for the most part before he proposed an^
business to the Pope; for fear he might otherwise contract the Odium of tha^
aspiring Lady.

She importuned to have her Son ^ade Cardinal, which was not refused ^r; and to
have him declared Cardi^^l Patron, as being a Title conferred ^ways upon the
Pope's nearest Ne^^ew. Donna Olimpia was induced to ^is upon a double motive;
neither of which proceeded from any natural af^ction, but merely politic. The
first ^s to lessen Cardinal Panzicolo's In^^rest with the Pope, by taking the
^ansaction of Affairs off his hands: Pro^ising her self for certain, when once
Cardinal Patron should be declared, (...) whom of course belongs the manage^ent
of Affairs both public and pri^te, Panzicolo would voluntariliy ab^^nt himself
from the Court; besides, ^^at the Pope having so near a help, ^ould seek no
further. The other was (...) make her self more absolute: For ^ough her Son
were in so considerable Station, yet by the incapacity of the ^bject she made
no doubt to be Mi^ess, her poo^ child not daring to trust his own strength in
any busine^ without the advice of his Mother. An^ no doubt it had proved so, if
her So had not repented so soon of his bargain in taking such a task upon him.

The Pope undertook at the creatin^ his Nephew Cardinal, to instruct hi^ by
degrees in the conduct of public Affairs; being conscious of his might
ignorance. But the Nephew, in stea^ of advancing, went backward, not ataining
in so many months to the capacity of negotiating the least circumstance alone.
For which his Uncle r^^proved him a thousand times a day, f^^ a block-head. To
prevent which faul^ there came not the least business to hi^ that he did not
consult his Mothe^ which fell out to her hearts desire. The defect of his, as
it made him avoid a business to his power: so was he likewise troubled at it to
find himself e^gaged in what suited not with his tale or way of living. In this
mean wh^ the Princess Rossana became a Wido^ ^en which he could not have wish^d
for a better occasion: nor would he ^se it, but resolved immediately to ^y by
his Scarlet, and marry the Prin^ess, against the consent both of Mother and
Pope.

There was no great distance of time ^etwixt his renuntiation to the
Cardi^alship and his Wedding: to the asto^^shment of Rome, at so unexpected a
Marriage. The news of this was no ^oner brought to the Pope's ears, than ^e
held a two hours conference with ^onna Olimpia, to resolve what was to ^e done
in this case. The result of which was, that the Prince Camillo and ^is Lady,
should be banished from ^ome. Upon which the Orders were ^rought him to depart,
to the amaze^ent of all people. However it was ^ubmitted to, though not without
some ^egret on the Princess her side: who ^iqued at such usage, took the
liberty to ^tter some discourse, which made not ^or the honor of the Pope, or
reputa^ion of Donna Olimpia.

There was none but wondered at th^^ disgrace: there not being the lea^^
objection to the Match, that might di^please his Holiness; especially since h^
was the only branch of the house (...) Panfilio: Surely the Pope ought (...)
have excused his natural infirmities, an^ have approved his noble change, much
conducing for the keeping up t^^ Family. Besides the considerablene^^ of the
fortune with a person of h^^ quality, beauty, and youth: all which she had in
perfection, with several other virtues, and the hopes of a numerou^ offspring,
which was fulfilled by the production of three Sons. One would think the Pope
had more reason t^ commend than quarrel his Nephew after all this.

Those that looked more narrow^ into circumstances, would not have (...) to be
any dislike the Pope took again his Nephew, that he was in disgrace but out of
a certain vainglory, to mak^ the world believe him a zealous Patriarch, in
laying aside all considera^ions of his blood and family, to vindi^ate the
honor of the Church, which ^e looked upon as undervalued by his Nephews laying
down his Cardinals Cap.

The other design in banishing his Nephew, as many will have it, pro^eeded from
this reason: That the Pope perceiving the Revenue of the ^ouse of Aldobrandino,
which was that ^f the Princess, charged with Legacies and other encumbrances,
did his Ne^hew this courtesy by banishing of ^im; that being out of the way in
the Country for the most part, he was ^xempt from that expense and state he
^ust otherwise have been at upon the Marriage of a Popes Nephew with a Princess
born to so great a fortune: By his means declining the present charge ^he
inheritance came in the more clear. ^ut this was a consideration so sordid,
that I can scarce believe it of a private ^erson: much less of a Prince, whose
mind is daily excited to generou^ actions.

This discourse, to say the truth, begu^ in the shops amongst the Tradesmen who
for the most part measure by the largeness of their own Souls, at six pe^cent.
However it gained credit through the discourse and opinion of the mos^ refined
Courtiers: who said, the Pop^ would never have done this of himself but that
Cardinal Panzicolo seeing the importunity and noise Donna Olimpia made for the
banishment of these tw^ persons, to humor the business, gav^ this out for the
reputation of the Pope good nature, and Donna Olimpia avarice.

But it is time I now show you, wh^ Donna Olimpia forced her self to put he^
Son in disgrace with his Uncle: which might otherwise appear impossible for a
Mother, or common humanity. Therefore thus it was, that no man doubte^ but the
Mother was the main and only instrument that wrought the banishment of her Son,
and so it will be worth ^ains to know the particularities of a thing so
extraordinary.

Upon the notice of Prince Camillo's ^esign, Donna Olimpia grew jealous lest
^he considerableness of so great a Match might create her Partners in the
^isposal of the Pope, at least limit her ^n part if not in the whole. What gave
^er the greatest suspicion, was the ^nowledge she had of the Princess of
^ossano her Daughter-in-law, reputed ^or a Lady of great wit and discretion,
who spoke solidly always upon good ^rounds; which would no doubt in ^ime have
won upon the Pope. And that which the more aggravated her ^ealousy, was that
she very well knew ^he inclinations of the Pope to love the Female Sex: so that
she certainly con^luded his Holiness would take more pleasure in having to do
with a young Niece, then an old Sister-in-law. For ^his cause she used all her
cunning to ^ender the Nephew odious to the Uncle, against the bonds of nature
and consanguinity: that she might satisfy her Ambition of guiding the Popes
will at her own discretion. Nor was it strange that the same Pope should put
all his affairs into her hands, to whom he had long since resigned his heart:
though she abused this power to such a degree that she brought the whole Court
to he^ beck.

Besides, if we consider the endowments of Prince Camillo, we cannot bu^ think
the Pope had some reason on hi^ side to forget his Relation. For at what time
he made him Cardinal, he designed to fit him for the employment of a first
Nephew, for the which he found a great incapacity in him; insomuch that the
more his Uncle instructed him, the greater Dunce he grew, that scarce a day
passed without a multitude of reproofs and chidings: the fear of which as he
endeavored to be more diligent run him still into greater absurdities; s^ that
the Pope could never see him with out extreem regret.

The Court wondered most at these ^wo particulars, in the banishment of ^rince
Camillo. The first was to see a ^ope so besotted with a Woman, as to ^unish his
Nephew for having directed ^s love to a Princess of equal quality ^^ himself.
Who could but admire to ^e a Pope given over to the excess of (...) aspiring
Woman, who governed church, State, Court, and Pope him^^lf with a high hand:
and at the same ^me become so cruel to his only Ne^hew for appropriating with
the love ^f so noble a Lady, so considerable a ^atrimony to the house of
Panfilio!

The second wonder was to see a ^rincess so much sought after by other ^^eat
Princes, to place her affections ^^on one that was noted for his simpli^ty and
ill nature. Had it been for ^is reason alone, he was obliged to ^ve commended
the choice of his Ne^hew, and received them both into his ^^vour. But for all
this it is no strange ^^ing to see a Princess condescend to such a Match; when
we consider the nature of the Roman Ladies, who had rather govern a City of
Churchmen, tha^ a Kingdom of Cavaliers.

It may be wondered at, that the Pop^ in the beginning of his Reign, should seek
to extinguish the house of Panfilio by taking his Nephew into the Church who
was the only branch of the Family when we see for the most part, that former
Popes, to establish their House and Name, have ruined the State, and set a the
world together by the Ears; an^ this on the contrary to the amazemen^ of all
men, to seek the ruin of his own House. But to do him right, the Pop^ was
never of this mind: but resolved (...) marry him, as Panzicolo advised. Done
Olimpia was she (an incredible story (...) experience did not prove beyond
co^trole) that unmanned the Pope, an^ brought him to yield to the banishme^ of
his Nephew: choosing rather to bl^ out the Name of Panfilio, than suffer the
least diminution in that authority she ^ad over the Pope, which she appre^ended
might be endangered by her ^ons Marriage.

Prince Camillo being gone from Rome ^ith his Lady, Donna Olimpia engrossed ^^e
whole Court affair, yet with no shall regret at Panzicolo's so good credit with
the Pope. However Panzicolo ^ot interrupting her in her main design ^f heaping
up riches, she would not ^iscover that private malice she bore against him. She
would have had the ^ope discharge himself of all business, and leave it to his
confidents, which ^^e comprehended within her sole person. To this end she
sought all means ^o divert him from that care he then ^ook of Church and State.

For he was wont at the first to be ^ery sollicitous in enquiring into all ^he
affairs of Rome, receiving the Peti^ions, and hearing the Complaints of those
which were aggrieved, from their own mouths. But Donna Olimpia made ^im quit so
good thoughts, by insinuating that it would be better to kee^ himself in repose
for the good ^^ Christendom, than to harass himse^^ out so with hazard of his
life. She conjured him to speak but little, an^ when he was never so little
indisposed she would seem very much afflicted and blame him as accessory to his
ow^ mischief, by troubling himself wi^ business more than needed. The poe^
Pope, who believed she did all the with a sincere and single heart, adore her;
for want of sense enough to pe^ceive that this zeal proceeded not from the love
she bore him, but a mere tric^ to get the disposal of all into her own hands.

She persuaded him to moderate suc^ expenses as she thought superfluous, b^
abating the Sallaries of diverse Officers making particular Laws, and reformin^
his own Table, and indeed all thing whose charge drained the Popes purse^ which
she kept without ever giving any account to him.

The greediness of the Barbarines in ^raping up Money, which was the ^ost
excessive Rome had ever seen; in ^omparison of that of Innocent I ^ould say
Donna Olimpia was a flea^ting. No Judge Criminal, but was ^ade by her
recommendation, to whom ^e gave most barbarous instructions to ^pply her
avarice. She warned them to ^ok after the Purse, and not the Blood: and would
frequently write to them, (...) send her the Redemptions of the ^uilty, because
she intended to lay ^em out for the benefit of the Poor. upon which the
covetousness of the ^^dges, seeking for their share too, the ^e Extortion and
Rigor was brought (...) that height, as it was impossible to ^agin it higher.
And though the Pope ^d certain information that those ^dges were excessive
cruel, and robbed without measure or distinction: yet either were the Oppressed
relieved, ^or the Judges punished; and that ^rough the pernicious impression
Donna Olimpia had made upon him*

He said, that Divine Providence which disposed his Will, had appointe^ by his
hands good Men, for the execution of Justice: Therefore to speak ill of h^
Ministers, were to charge Divine Providence, which had inspired him to the
choice. Neither Words nor Example which made out clear to him the contrary of
that false Belief, and scandalou^ Opinion, he had entertained; could ever make
him quit that wicked Fancy.

A certain German Count, a Protestant, having heard speak one day o^ this
Belief of the Pope's concerning h^ Ministers, told his friend: I see plain it
will one day be requisite to hold all t^ Popes Subjects for Infallible.

But Donna Olimpia did all she could to hinder Complaints from coming (...) the
Pope's ears, receiving them he^self, after she had first received the Money of
the Oppressors: Thus admitting of contrarieties at the sam^ time.

All the discourse of Rome, was Donna Olimpia's insatiable thirst after Wealth:
^or every one admired that in the time ^f so many other Popes, who had ma^y
Nephews, that all robbed, that is, ^rovided for themselves; there was ^ot so
much extortion seen, as in the ^me of Innocent; when all went into ^^e Purse of
Donna Olimpia. For she ^ould not let her Son-in-law see a Far^ing, but
considered them as if they ^ad not been: of whom it will do well ^^ give some
account.

The House of Panfilio (except Don^a Olimpia, who came out of the House ^f the
Maldachini) consisted only of the ^ope, his Sister, Don Camillo and his two
^sters. His Holiness his Sister much elder ^an himself, was called Sister
Agatha; ^oncerning whom there is not much to ^y: For she never came out of her
^oister, but when the Pope sent for ^er; which he did to cheer up his heart
(...) see her so lusty at an age more ad^anced than his own. This Lady, during
the time her Brother was Cardinal held a very good correspondence wit^ Donna
Olimpia her Sister-in-law: b^ after he was Pope, she began to de^ her, and not
without some reason: F^^ she perceived her Brother had debared her from
soliciting any grace while he heaped them upon her Siste^-in-law. So that as
most that lead M^nastick lives, are naturally propense (...) Envy, she
entertained a greater Hatre^ for her Sister-in-law, that reaped ^^ Benefit;
than her Brother, who affored the Harvest. And truly for the spa^ of ten years
under the Reign of h^ Brother, she never could obtain a^ favor above the
blessing of a Meda^ This unkindness proceeded not direct from the Pope, though
he was a person not over free of his Favors: b^ from the prejudice Donna
Olimpia h^ possessed him with; making him b^lieve, that if once he began to
grati^ his Sister; the Nuns, who are natural very importunate, would never lea^
^essing her to beg Favors: by which ^eans, neither he nor his Sister should
^er be at rest. This charitable consi^ration, was all this while, the least of
^r thoughts: But she apprehended that ^ster Agatha would receive all the
Pre^ats of those she procured Graces for; ^d therefore contrived it so, that
no^ng should be granted her, that she ^r self might make that profit.

Of Don Camillo's two Sisters, the first ^s married to Don Andrea Justiniani,
Prince that may be reckoned amongst ^rtune's Disciples. This man was cal^ to be
Heir to the late Marquess Justi^^ani: who finding no Heir by descent, ^st his
eye upon this Creature, at that ^he a miserable poor Knight: Who ^ough it was
at a great distance, yet ^ginally he came of the same Stock ^th the Marquess.
Arrived therefore (...) so considerable a pitch of Fortune, ^mself made it yet
greater by marry^^g Innocent's Niece, who though he ^s then but Cardinal,
became Pope soon after, which conferred those privileges upon the Prince, as
alway^ attend Popes Nephews. However, h^ Relation made him not much richer For
except the usual Honors an^ Charges, that are conferred of cour^ upon the
Popes Nephews, which a^ not unprofitable; the Pope never i^tended farther,
knowing that as h^ was a good manager of the Esta^ which was fallen to him, he
would think himself very well, that he ha^ made so good a Pass in his Knight
E^rantry. Besides, the Pope thought n^ fit to commit any Charge of weight upon
him; finding him a person, exce^ that he was a good honest man, of ve^ ordinary
parts. The Princess his Lad^ was welcome enough to the Pope; b^ with the same
restrictions, that nothi^^ was to be got: For her Mother wou^ seldom or never
suffer her to come i^ to the Pope's presence. Thus we Husband and Wife both
deceived, ev^ in ordinary Favors, which their d^ ^ands never exceeded, nor
often pre^iled.

Don Camillo's second Sister was ^arried to Signior Don Nicolo Ludovisio ^rince
of Piombino, Nephew to Gregory ^e Fifteenth, and Brother to that ^ardinal
Patron who in the time of his ^ncle disposed absolutely of all Church ^ffairs.
This Prince thought to have ^ad great matters by his Wife, receiving ^he
greater part of her portion in large ^opes, which Cardinal Panzicolo gave ^im,
who made the Match. And truly ^here was some grounds to believe it: because it
was in that nick of time that Don Camillo was made Cardinal. For he ^resumed,
considering the weakness of his person, the real power of a Nephew would
devolve to him; and that being exercised in government, all business of State,
public and private, would fall to his share: which was the reason made him so
hot upon this Match. But he found himself mightily deceived, his Mother-in-law
(Donna Olimpia) not suffering the disposal of a thing so considerable to pass
through other hand than her own: so that the poor Princ^ was obliged to be fed
like a Child wit^ what she gave him.

Nor did the Prince get any thing b^ lamenting his sad condition, to be
debar^red the means to those favors which always attend so near Allies to a
Pope For Donna Olimpia, nettled at his di^course, gave him to understand, tha^
he had received sufficient grace an^ honor since the Pope had laid a^ others
aside to prefer him to the Marriage of his Niece. As much as to say^ he had no
reason to complain of (...) Match, that put him in a capacity o^ repairing the
breaches made in the fortune of his Family. Upon this answe^ the Prince
remained silent by the advic^ of his natural prudence; dissemblin^ all, and
continuing his observance to he^ as Mother-in-law, and the Popes favorite.

However, this Prince omitted no^ (...) vent his passion among friends upon
^ccasion, by saying, that his alliance ^ith the Pope in stead of raisiing, ^^d
diminished him through the dis^ust it gave him with the French, who ^ereupon
had made his State of Piom^no, the object of their fury. So that not ^eing able
to revenge themselves upon ^he Pope, they would at least fall upon what
belonged to his Relations. Thus by his alliance, he became a cer^in loser:
Whereas the recompense ^e received was not considerable, being comprised only
in the Vice Admi^alship of the Pope's Galleys, and some ^ther slight matter,
that was not com^arable to his loss. The Command of ^he Galleys was bestowed
upon him at ^he instance of Donna Olimpia: not out ^f any desire to advance
him, but by that means to send him far enough from Rome: for the Pope was
resolved ^o send the Admiral with his Galleys, to ^ssist the Venetians in the
Levant-war. The Prince was also displeased, that the Pope ever sent for him at
vacant hour when there was no discourse admitted more than for Recreation: And
thoug^ the Prince would begin sometimes t^ to talk seriously of Business, he
wa^ still interrupted by his Holiness. B^ which the poor Prince perceived h^
was to be treated as Buffoone, and no^ Nephew to the Pope.

And now we come to Donna Olimpia who, for five years and upwards, execised in
a manner the whole power o^ Pope Innocent. This Lady, as I have told you
elsewhere, governed the Pop^ for a long time before. As she was (...) woman of
a great deal of wit and subtlety: she knew so well how to ti^ her business and
order circumstance for the captivating his will, as foreseing what might
happen; nor failed she of her aim. Thus she not only disposed of him when he
was Bishop, Ca^dinal, and Nuntio; and of all he ha^ without the least
contradiction: b^ even after he was Pope, she understood ^ well how to keep her
ground in the ^iddest of so much greatness, by hold^g off all those which were
not her ^eatures; that it was no easy matter (...) move her in the least
either by con^^deration of the great inconveniency ^very way to see the Supreme
of the church subjected to the licentious ap^etite of a most ambitious Woman;
or ^he general dissatisfaction of the Court, which for want of a Cardinal
Nephew, would be wholly excluded from all Af^airs by this Lady. But alas! Who
should govern the Chair sooner, than ^he, who was absolute Mistress both of ^t,
and him that held it? A Lady, that ^ught deservedly to be admired for a
^udicious and ready Wit, especially where any thing was to be got, or for any
wickedness. And it is most certain, ^one but Donna Olimpia could have overcome
all difficulties for the hold^ng the Reins of Government but six Months,
whereas she continued six Years together. And what was the more to be wondered
at, excepting he^ exact rules of Economie; her endowments were like other
persons. But she ordered this so cunningly, that it gained upon the Pope's
affections to such (...) degree, as made way for her to ac^ without law or
restraint.

She reduced the Datary to her absolute dispose: For whereas before the Master
of the Datary was absolute to sell all Places at a certain Rate; he^ was now
left a simple Executour of the Pope's Orders, and many times of Donna Olimpia's
little Notes; though indeed, what the Pope commanded, proceeded from her
directions. However, the Cardinal that was Master of the Datary, being a wise
man, took all in good part; though every one pitied him for so great a Slight
as was put upon his person.

In fine, whatever Office at Court fell, nothing was disposed of, without the
knowledge and good-liking of Donna Olimpia. If any Benefices were ^ be
bestowed, great or small, the ^fficers of the Datary were to keep ^em in hand,
till she had fully inform^d her self of their value; and then she ^alled out
the best for her own disposal. Whatever Bishopric fell void, they ^at
pretended to it, were to address ^emselves to her; and he that offered ^ost,
without consideration, either of ^apacity or Desert, was introduced. ^bbeys,
Canonicates, and all other Dig^^ties and Governments, whether Civil ^r
Ecclesiastical, were all conferred at Donna Olimpia's pleasure and command:
before whom, there was no appearing ^mpty handed. Nay, you must bring ^e full
value of the Place: For the ^ates were so set, that an Office of a ^ousand
Crowns a year, that lasted ^ut three years, he that had it, was to ^ay a Years
Revenue to Donna Olimpia; (...) six years, double, and so on propor^onably: But
if it were an Office for ^ife, she would not be ashamed to ask ^he Moiety of
the Revenue for the first twelve years. Some Bishoprics ^void, more than five
years togethe^ (however, she received the profits ^^ them all that while,) only
because s^ could not find a Chapman for the^ that would present her at so dear^
Rate. An Abbot of the Kingdom (...) Naples, beggered his House, by cove^ing a
Bishopric, that was at Donna ^limpia's dispose: For he was given (...)
understand, he must pay twenty tho^sand Crowns for it, if he would ha^^ it. The
poor man, who could not ma^^ up such a sum in his whole Family, pe^swaded his
Brothers to join in the se^ling all their Patrimony, and take t^ upon Credit
what they could, to mak^ up the sum: Which being done, and the money paid, he
was named to the B^shoprick, but died before he had bee^ fully possessed. Thus
was the who^ Family ruined, and Donna Olimpia restored to the possession of the
Benefic^ which she sold again to some oth^^ person.

Such was the exorbitance of this ^odern Agrippina's avarice, that she ^ade her
consent so necessary in pro^oting any body, as without it nothing ^uld pass.
Oftentimes she would ^ake the Cardinals treat the same Bu^ess over again in
their Congregati^s, which they had dispatched once ^fore, and confirmed by a
Definitive ^ecree; nay more, in those very Con^egations where the Pope himself
had ^en present, and concurred in person. Through this great influence came it
(...) pass, that all the Court Officers, ei^er out of fear or hopes, made Court
^her, not performing the least duty ^thout her knowledge and advice.

Cardinal Panzicolo himself, though (...) much taken up with the business of
(...) Place, besides his frequent indispo^ons; was nevertheless, to humor ^s
Lady, obliged many times to go (...) person to find her out, and give her (...)
account of all the secret Affairs that ^curred. Thus she from time to time with
a Majestic nod, Pope-like, a bu^dle of Memorials in her hand alread^ resolved
upon, would spend hours wi^ his Holiness in ripening her Propo^tions; the which
were often descante^ upon, with bitterness enough som^times. For the sharp Wits
were as w^ piqued as astonished, to see the Cou^ so close toward men of
desert, and (...) prodigal upon those that deserved n^thing. There was no
meddling with t^ faults of those that had the power (...) their hands, though
all men were m^ved with indignation, to reflect, ho^ with a look of this Lady,
people we^ banished the Court, even those the were the sole hopes of the Family
(...) Panfilio. Every one was amazed to (...) the unnaturalness of the Pope, w^
was not sensible of the propitious inc^nation of Heaven toward his Fami^^
through his Nephew; who in the ti^ of his exile had two Sons by the Pri^cess
(which by other Popes was a ways esteemed the greatest blessing ^ ^t continued
so little concerned at all ^is, that he never so much as thought (...) calling
him back.

And now it is fit you should know ^e reason, why the Pope was so harmed, as to
regard his Nephews Off^ing so little. At what time Donna ^impia had persuaded
the Pope to ^ke Don Camillo Cardinal, against his ^oliness own sense, that of
his Rela^ns and Panzicolo's; she made use of ^s devilish pretense, that her Son
^s insufficient, and therefore it would (...) very ill to make any Lady so
mise^ble by such a Match: besides that it ^st have been a great affliction to
the ^n, when he found himself incapable ^er of having Children. Upon this, ^en
she understood the Princess was ^th Child, and afterward brought to ^d of a
lusty Boy, she took up ^re wicked and hellish courses than ^merly. She put it
into the Pope's ^^d (I tremble to think of so horrid ^action) to suspect the
honor of the Princess of Rossano her Daughter-law, and made him believe the
C^^^dren were indeed hers but not (...) husbands, who was utterly uncapa^ of
generation.

The Pope soon believed it, as co^ing from Donna Olimpia's mouth, (...) whom he
had sworn entire submissi^ For between these two there pas^ nothing more than
command and o^^dience: she said the word, and (...) obeyed. Insomuch, that some
said (...) had laid a charm upon him. And t^ ^ly I am apt to believe it: how
else (la^ing aside all other considerations) w^ it possible that such a
red-faced, clow^ish fellow should prove so compleis^ in love to a Lady,
especially to the without some Diabolical Encha^ment?

The Histories of former ages can (...) produce the like, I do not say i^ Pope,
for in that it is particular, bu^ any other Prince or Monarch. I co^^ there
has been, and that a Tyra^ who has delivered himself over to ^ome Woman: but
it was in the affe^tions of his Soul, and not his Scepter. ^he admitted her
into his bed, she ^ntred not into his Councels: if in pri^ate he adored her, he
took no notice ^f her in public: if he made a present ^f his person to her, he
did not so of ^s Kingdom: if he permitted her to ^le himself, yet not his
people: and ^he did go so far as to allow her some ^thority in public, some
power in his ^hrone, it was undoubtedly with so ^uch caution at least, that she
should ^t be able to transgress the bounds of ^e respect to the regal Majesty.
But ^nocent, on the other side, presented ^onna Olimpia, not only with his
heart ^d affections, but with his hand, person, ^d dominion; without restraint,
limit or ^spect: and it is most assuredly true, ^at never any King gave so much
^wer to his Wife, nor any Queen ^egent commanded her Councels with (...) much
authority, as Donna Olimpia had usurped unto herself both ove^ Pope, Council,
and People.

Such was the imperiousness of the Lady, that she endeavored to null the
Decrees of the Church, and did i^ effect so shake them, reducing wha^ former
Popes had ordained to tha^ degree, that all men apprehended (...) Schism in the
Church. And truly on^ would think it were Schism enough t^^ see a Lady and the
Pope change place^ A thousand examples might be brough^ of the unheard of power
of Donn^ Olimpia: but that they are such as would more offend the ears than
satisfy the curiosity of any man. I will therefore conclude all in one, both
for brevit^ and civilities sake.

Donna Olimpia had a Nephew (wh^ is yet alive) one of her Brothers Sons about
eighteen years of age, of (...) sleepish look, no presence or aspect of (...)
man, wholly unexperienced in the world, a great Dunce incapable o^ impression,
not able to entertain di^course, ill made and worse spoken, ^dicted only to
such recreations as suit ^ith mean and low Spirits. This crea^re with much ado
was once brought ^fore the Pope, who turning to Donna ^impia that had
introduced him, said, ^eseech you Sister let him come no nearer, ^r he is ten
times uglier than my self. For (...) this, through the importunity of ^e Aunt,
he made him Cardinal at ^ghteen years old, not only to the ^onder of the Court,
but all Christen^ome. And this is Cardinal Maldachini, ^ho in his visits that
he either gives or ^ceives always makes use of a set form ^f Complements, which
he has got by ^eart; and if you put him out of his ^ad, he never fails to talk
nonsense. ^ust about the same time at Rome the ^tatue of Marforio was hid by a
Palace ^at was built about it: upon which ^ere were a thousand Pasquils made;
among which I remember one was, Take it not so to heart Pasquino,
Your Companion is Maldachino.


And truly this Cardinal is and wi^ be the Carneval or Jack-pudding of the
Apostolic College, the Churche^ scandal and the reproach of the Cour^ The
instructions that Donna Olimpia h^ Aunt gave him, that he should kee^ Learned
men in his Family, was of sma^ use to him, who had not wit enough (...) make
any benefit by their conversatio^ Nor wanted this Lady cruelty: for she was the
cause of Mascambruno's execution, and of diverse others, out of who^ when she
had drawn what money she could in their lifetime, she hoped for more by their
Death. Nay she too^ away the Datary from Cardina^ Cecchini, and used Palotta so
ill, that h^ would often say, he had rather be in Cloister liable to the
impertinence of Monk, than in Rome under the Tyrann^ of Donna Olimpia.

So did this Lady govern the Court that Panzicolo made it his business wit^ the
Pope to make him understand the complaints of all the Ambassadors t^ ^d the
Court without some Minister to ^nvey their addresses to his Holiness; ^ing
concerned that they must still be ^rced upon all occasions to treat imme^ately
with the Pope, who would ^ver give them a good nay, for a bad ^a; that is, an
answer to any purpose. ^t last, weary, as I suppose, of the ^ntinual
importunities of his Sister-in-^w, and the taking upon him all ^udiences, not
having allowed himself ^therto that assistance his Predecessors ways thought
requisite, he hearkened advice.

The place the Title of Cardinal-^atron carries along with it (which is ever
conferred but upon a Nephew) (...) very considerable, and of equal eight of
honor and business. When ^e Pope is indisposed, or has a mind ^^ be private,
he receives the Embassa^ors; with whom he has power to ^reat, but to resolve
nothing; though ^ndeed Gregory the Fifteenth referred ^l to his Nephew. Besides
he subscribes the Letters of the Nuntii Legates, Gove^nours of Provinces,
Presides in the Council of State; and in short, all the ought to come before
the Pope pass^ thorough his hands. As yet this he^ was wanting to Innocent, who
through his languishing condition had gre^ need of it, as being very
troublesom^ to the Ambassadors that had to do wi^ him.

Therefore, to ease himself of busines^ he held conference with Panzicol^ which
likewise set his Nephews all (...) work. Many were proposed and sti^ thwarted
by Donna Olimpia to preserv^ her own interest, though she ever seemed willing,
and at last through the urgency of affairs was so upon cond^tion it were one
wholly at her be^^ Cardinal Albergati was first thought o^ who calls himself by
the Title of Ca^dinal Ludovisio. This the Princ^ Ludovisio pushed earnestly
forwards, a^ being desirous, since he had none himself, to have one so near of
blood t^ ^im in public employment: But his ^rothers ignorance and simplicity
in ^rivate affairs much more in public, ^rocured him the Negative. Next was
brought up Father Fabio Albergati, ^he Cardinals Brother, a Jesuit: but ^he
Pope declared he would not ag^randize one house with the advance^ent of three
Brothers. At last, after ^ong debate, to the wonder of all men, and the great
dis-satisfaction of the ^opes kindred, was declared an adopt^d Nephew of
another house, who with ^is Cardinalship had the name of Pan^lio conferred upon
him, and the title of Cardinal-Patron. But it will not be ^miss to give you the
whole story of it, ^s being an Election that did highly ^xasperate Donna
Olimpia, who inveigh^d most furiously against the promoter ^f this business.

This new Cardinal may be reckoned amongst the most unexpected prodigies ^f
fortune for these many Ages. For without any relation of blood to the Pope,
without merit, nay void of al^ endowments that should render a man estimable in
the Court of Rome, no^ having the least familiarity with the Pope, only known
to him by sight; wa^ for all this (not the least suspecting o^ it) advanced to
be Cardinal Nephew as if he had been of the blood of the Panfilii. He had no
other qualificatio^ for so eminent a place, but the extraction from a truly
noble Family, which notwithstanding was so deeply engaged in debts that it sunk
every day. Hi^ name was Camillo Astalli, of twenty seven years of age, of a
gentile Gar^ and address, and good qualities enough to advance him to a
Bishopric, but ^^ farther. That which added to the Court wonder, was to see
one raised to so important a preferment for the assistance of the Pope in the
most weighty matters of State and Politic^ affairs; who was to seek in all
sorts o^ Politics for want of practice i^ businesses of that nature, which
never ^ame in his way till now. The intro^uction that he had by means of his
^harge at Rome, came through the affi^^ty the Marquess his Brother had
con^^acted by marrying the Niece of Donna Olimpia; who made it her business to
^ok after honor and preferment for ^e advance of a strange Family now by
Marriage become her own, as esteeming ^erself not in so splendid a condition as
^as fit for a Pope's Kinswoman. And that encouraged her the more to be
^olicitous, was the consideration of the ^ender portion she went off with,
coun^ng the rest upon the expectations so ^ear an affinity with the Pope must
^eeds promise: though indeed it had ^roved a bait that had gulled many, and
^ade them reckon without their Host. ^owever the House of Astalli had great
^ood luck to ally themselves with Donna Olimpia. For howbeit they ^anted not
for Nobility, yet had they ^o Estate to maintain it; besides that ^he greatest
share of what remained was by the connivance of Donna Olimpia laid out upon a
Clerk of the Chambers place, upon which the whol^ Family of Astalli relied; nor
had the had that to trust to without her advice And indeed it succeeded well
with him, who had by that means a free address to the Court, together with the
relation his Brother had contracte^ with Donna Olimpia, besides that the place
was very Honorable. He applye^ himself to court Cardinal Panzicolo i^ the
highest manner, and he did wisely in it: for he plainly saw next to Donna
Olimpia, he had the greatest power with the Pope. Fortune would have it so that
he found an equal return of kindness from the Cardinal, who gave himself up
captive to certain modest an^ obsequious behaviors that appear in this youth:
however against the Cardinal's usual manner, who would never undertake to
favor any bod^ before the Pope; not out of any i^ nature, but because he found
the Pop^ ^illing all favors should proceed from Donna Olimpia. Nevertheless
here it ^ll out otherwise: for Panzicolo had ^ossessed the Pope so far with a
good ^pinion of Astalli, representing of him as man fit for great employment;
that he ^^duced the Pope to be taken with the ^^rriage of the young man.
Afterward ^hen they came to consult how the ^ope might be eased in the weight
of ^usiness, there not being one of his ^indred found fit for so great an
under^^king, and he having through Donna Olimpia's persuasion an utter aversion
^r them; Panzicolo was hearkened to, ^ho had preferred his favorite before ^^
other considerations.

This action was remarked by the ^ourt of Rome for one of the most
^^traordinary that had appeared upon ^^e Stage of Rome a long time.

However they knew the Pope could ^^t do otherwise: For though it was ^his
power to ease himself, by appoint^^g Ministers, to whom he might give what
authority he pleased, without placing a person not qualified for it in (...)
eminent a degree, which must oblig^ him to provide all necessaries for (...)
Nephew, Astalli being wholly unfurnished; yet here lay the difficulty, the
whereas the main design of the Pope i^ this, was to remit the Audiences an^
negotiations of Ambassadors to him, an^ the discussion of all Intrigues; and
the Ambassadors never used to treat with any under the title of Nephew, it wa^
found requisite to advance Astalli to a Cardinalship. But before they would
accept of Audience from him, the Ambassadors would have it published through
Rome: which was done, an^ the Pope declared him his Nephew giving him the
adoptive name of Cardinal Panfilio, and the title of Cardinal Patron. By which
declaration, all difficulties being removed, the Ambassador disposed themselves
to treat with thi^ new Nephew, though not without distaste.

Many applied themselves to a strict examination of this Affair: and what made
them the more curious, was a ^trong fancy, that it wholly proceeded from
Cardinal Panzicolo. They considered therefore what motives carried him on, to
bring such a person upon the stage, who must of necessity eclipse him and all
his deliberations, by the conspicuous degree he held above him. At last ^hey
discovered it to be a piece of great Cunning, and like the Product of
Panzicolo. His main design was to weaken ^he insolent authority of Donna
Olimpia; which he thought impossible to work any other way, than by introducing
a Nephew to the Pope's liking: and thus finding the Pope inclined to take that
course, he made it his business to effect it. He knew moreover, that not only
the power of Donna Olimpia would be diminished by this, but his own ^ugmented,
as well alluring himself, ^he young man unexperienced in the Politics, that he
might not appear wholly ignorant before the Pope, would undertake nothing
without his advice and thus should he have the absolute dispose of Court
Affairs, at least for some time. They will likewise have it that Panzicolo had
another design deep than all this; that is, by this means when the Pope dyed,
as he was one tha^ flew at all, he imagined to compass hi^ ends more readily:
For he looked upon it as a very fair occasion, by having raised this young man
to so high a preferment; who would no doubt be so mindful of the good turn,
that in gratitude to him, he would seek all mean of return by assisting him in
the Election to Saint Peter's Chair, being pretty confident already of the
Barbarines and the Spaniards.

But he gained not more (less perchance) upon the young man's affections, than
he did upon the hatred o^ the Pope's Kindred and Relations: For hardly was it
known (being so secretly carried, that Donna Olimpia never mistrusted the least
till it was done) but ^ealousies multiplied immediately, and ^itterness against
both promoter and ^romoted, that so eminent a Favor should be conferred upon a
strange Family. The affections of the Pope were ^o sooner won toward this
adoptive Nephew, but they took deep root pre^ently; so that he did all for the
making ^im considerably great to his Place, which tended very much to the
lessen^ng the House of Panfilio. Hence pro^eeded fierce exasperations against
Panzicolo as the chief Engine of this mis^chief. Principally Donna Olimpia, who
^sed to have account of all the State ^ysteries at Court, and now seeing her
^lf clearly wiped of that interest, was ^^verely netled, thundering out nothing
^ut fury and disdain against Panzicolo, ^xing him for a Villain and a Traitor,
^ot forbearing her invectives (through ^e confidence she had with him) in the
^ope's own presence.

Innocent however employed this Nephew, committing to his charge, the Affairs
of his own House, and the administration of the additional Fortune to the
Primogeniture of the House o^ Panfilio, as knowing him fit for such business.
And this helped to make the Blood of Prince Camillo boil highe^ who was the
true Nephew of the Pope being upbraided thereby, as one tha^ understood not how
to manage hi^ own Affairs, sometimes with suspision of his honesty.

This Cardinal Patron gave Audience to the Ambassadors and Minister of
Princes, with great patience and civility, as likewise to Courtiers and o^ther
particular men, who not having easy access to the Pope themselves, ha^ their
recourse to him to mediate for them. Nevertheless, this was b^ a seeming
satisfaction in the general For to particular business of importance he never
gave other answer, tha^ that he would relate it to his Holiness nor upon the
relation, made any oth^^ report, than that the business would be taken into
consideration; which in the language of the Court of Rome, is as such as to
say, there would little or nothing be done in it.

The Pope communicated all State affairs to this Cardinal, not in order to ^^y
the weight of them upon him, but ^^ train him up to Business. For he ^ould not
confide too much in so raw Statesman, lest he should fail him. ^o that he had
no more of Cardinal-Pa^^^on than the Title, and Honor (which ^as yet of no
small consequence) to ^^bscribe the Letters of the Nuntii, ^egats, Governors
of Provinces, and ^her of the most considerable Officers under the
Ecclesiastical State. For shall matters and dispatches of Letters, ^^ey were
drawn up by a young man, ^ho was bred Secretary under Pan^^colo, and by him
brought into this Of^e, as well deserving it for his aptness ^^ business.

To comfort a little the checked ambition of Donna Olimpia, and to asswag^ her
wrath, the Pope would have the Cardinal visit the said Lady sometime^ and
impart to her such Affairs as h^ thought best. But he for the most pa^ told her
all, as being of little value (...) him; since neither he nor she were
determine them. The Pope's Relation durst not seem dissatisfied with the
Cardinal-Patron's advance; lest they should be thought to question his judgment
who had made so free a Choice: besid^ that the Cardinal always showed him self
unwilling to oppose himself to, ^^ promote any thing that might give d^ like to
the Relations of his chief Ben^factour: For all that, the jealousy the one,
and inveteracy of the other burnt inwardly like hot embers.

The advice of this new Nephew w^ hardly dispersed over Christendom; before
there appeared upon the Stage Scene, which many did expect wou^^ follow the
Declaration of a Cardinal Patron.

The Pope was resolved to dism^^ Donna Olimpia the Court, but with ^ood words,
as unwilling to disoblige ^r Ladyship, who was the Idol of his ^eart. Nay, they
say, he did it with ^ars in his eyes, and the greatest regret imaginable: but
yet he did it.

He gave order therefore that D. C^^upia should not only withdraw her self ^om
all his Affairs, Public or Private, ^emporal or Spiritual: but for the future
^ould not presume to come into his ^resence, or under the roof of his Pa^^ce.
Which Injunction was something ^^tigated the next day, permission be^^g given
(such is the force of Love) ^^ come Incognita and confer with him, which was
denied to those of his own ^ood. This accident, as it was thought
^^practicable, upon consideration of old ^ores: so after it came to pass,
forced ^pplause, even from those that hated ^^ who were concerned in it.

The Reason that moved the Pope to ^^ke up such a Resolution was diversely
^^ledged. Some would have it that the little Rallies that run daily about the
Court, in every corner still playin^ upon the strange course of Governmen^ was
taken: which Rumors were either concealed from, or at least dissemble by the
Pope hitherto; not being resolved what course was best to take t^ stop the
mouths, not only of the Court but of all Christendom; and partic^larly of the
Protestants in the Northern parts, who made it the greatest pa^^ of their
divertisement, to jest upon Donna Olimpia and the Pope: so that the did not
only take the liberty of trea^ing both the one and the other wi^^ sharp and
biting discourse: but a d^^dainful mien evidenced how firm they believed what
they said.

One day amongst the rest was p^^sented to the Pope a Gold Medal, about ten
Pistols value, by the Cardinal Patron: who told him he had receiv^ in a Letter
some Satyrs without a Name and so showed them to him. Upon the one side of this
Medal was Donna Olimpia, with the Pope's Mitre upon ^er head, and S. Peter's
Keys in her ^^nd; on the reverse, the Pope, with ^s head dressed up like a
Lady, and a ^indle and Rock in his hand: a thing ^at provoked much to the ruin
of Donna Olimpia. It is very certain, the Cardinal ought not to have discovered
^^, for fear of discomposing his Holi^ess: but he would show it to help to ^^e
destruction of Donna Olimpia, who ^ood in competition with him. Thus under
color of doing his Duty, played ^e his own game.

It was said the Pope resolved to ba^ish his Sister-in-law from the Court, upon
advice of a certain Comedy that was represented in London before Crompel,
called The Marriage of the Pope; in which amongst other things was brought in,
for sport to the English, and ^eproach to the Papists, that the Pope desiring
to marry Donna Olimpia, and ^he refusing him, saying, she would not have such a
Beastly ugly fellow for her Husband; to win her, offered her Key, which she
refused as to mean Present; upon which being resolve to have her, he offered
both Key^ But you must know first, that when h^ presented her with one, Donna
Olimpia asked him whether it was the Key of Hell or Paradise, to which the Pop^
answering, it was that of Paradise; she replied, then give me the other too for
you shall not think to have it in you^ hands when you are weary of me, t^
command the Devil to take me away Thus when he had presented her wit^ both
Keys, the Wedding was kept an^ concluded with a Ball of Monks an^ Nuns, who
took great satisfaction t^ think that it might come to their turn one day to be
married likewise.

It was thought by many, that wha^ helped to widen this breach, was a clos^
discourse the Emperor had with the Nuntio Melzi, that was at Vienna, wh^ was
condoling with this Prelate the fatal stroke he had received from Rome by the
conclusion of Peace with the ^wedes, without regard had to the Catholic
Religion; in defense of which, they ought always to have stood upon their
Guard. In so much, that ^he Emperor could not refrain a sharp ^esentment of it
to the Nuntio, telling ^im, The Pope has a brave time of it, ^ignor Nuntio,
for Donna Olimpia to ^aw his Pate to make him sleep: and so ^id no more. Melzi
after this being ^ome back to Rome, and urged by ^he Pope to relate clearly
what the ^mperour had said upon the receipt of ^is Letter about the account of
the ^eace with Sweden, failed not to re^eat it word for word. This a little
^akened the Pope, and made him re^^ect, that if he had such checks from
Catholic Princes, such as is the Au^rian Family in Germany: surely he ^ust
expect much more severe from those that detested his Usurpation.

All these things were enough not ^nly to shake, but utterly to have ruined
Donna Olimpia. And no doubt they they made deep impression in the Pope, however
that some will not have it so, but that it was all a Fable of the Cardinals
presenting him with the Medal. But be it so, it is most assuredly true, that
not one but many, both o^ Gold and Silver were dispersed about Rome: and
probably, he that found a way to coin them, was ingenious enough to find a way
also to convey them to the Pope. Others will have it, that it was as little
true, that such (...) Play was acted before Cromwell, as w^ spoke of above. We
will grant therefore, that it was a mere Invention o^ the people of Rome, and
by consequence much worse: for it must need be a greater mortification to see
h^ own Subjects take the part of Heretics against him. Neither could he remain
ignorant of ought, fin^ those that breathed out nothing b^ destruction to Donna
Olimpia, would leave no stone unturned to make know ^o the Pope any thing of
this nature.

The general opinion is, that Panzicolo was the contriver and instrument of
this ^all. For as he stood always at the Pope's elbow, to wait an occasion of
^verthrowing that great confidence and ^ower Donna Olimpia had: this was
^ffered him, that at that very time he was taxed by the same Lady for a
Traitor, one that had undermined the whole house of Panfilio, by preferring ^o
the Pope's favor one that was a ^tranger to them. Panzicolo therefore ^ets
fall these expressions: That he was much concerned for the misfortune of ^he
great Princes, that they should be ^he last in resenting the wrong was done
them, and the affronts put upon that majesty they held, putting all up with
that patience as seemed monstrous to the world. Thus with a dryness which was
natural to him, aggravating the circumstances, he pursued the series of his
discourse, and pressed it so home to the Pope, that (being in that distraction,
and reflecting upon the out-crie^ and noise the whole world made, together with
the insufferable importunity of this Lady; for her too great presumption beyond
the bounds of common modesty) he forbad her his Presence and the Court.

There are those that are verily persuaded, what contributed much to the
disgrace of Donna Olimpia, was the discourse of a Royal Ambassador, wh^
endeavored slily to subvert this Lady not out of any private grudge, but tha^
he was displeased as a Roman Catholic, to hear so many discourses, to the
great scandal of the Church. Talkin^ therefore one day with the Pope, an^ being
denied his Request, he mad^ bold to tell him, Perchance what you^ Holiness will
not do for my King, yo^ will do it for your Donna Olimpia, ^ whom I now go to
make my Addres^ This he spoke betwixt Jest and Earnes^ but so, that it cut the
Pope to the ver^ heart. However, he seemed not to tak^ ^otice of any thing, but
replied in ge^eral terms: That not the whole world, much less Donna Olimpia,
should remove him from a just Resolution. The ^mbassadour gone: he struck his
hand upon the Table, and was heard to say, ^he Devil take all Women, and those
that ^refer them thus. An evident token of ^he Popes displeasure, that his
Autho^ty should be made so ridiculous through means of this Lady. And it is
^ost certain, the Papal Authority was ^ever so little respected, as it was in
the ^me of Innocent. The Catholic Prin^es would often make sport at this new
^ode of Female Government, because ^hey saw the Protestant Princes laugh ^t it.
Nay, these would at times bewail ^he miserable condition of the Romish church,
because they saw the Catho^cks themselves do so. Who indeed ^ould forbear
tears, to see that there ^as no more sending of Ambassadors ^o the Pope, but
to Donna Olimpia; no more to the Court, but to a Ladies ^alace!

One Prince among the rest, of the most considerable in Europe, sent a^
Extraordinary Ambassador to Rome (...) to whom, after having given him his
necessary Instructions, he gave in charge a^ his last farewell, If by the
application of ou^ Authority, you can make no impressio^ upon the Pope,
endeavor to gain him by bribing Donna Olimpia to use her power And it was a
reasonable advice: for (...) know by one of the greatest Confident of the
Ambassadors retinue, that the Business had not been obtained without great
expense.

Cardinal Astalli, after the death o^ Innocent, has said in some companies
that nothing was said of Donna Olimpi^ in any part of Europe, that the Pop^
knew not of, seeming ever to take little notice, and to slight all, as only a^
effect of malice. Thus he bore it ou^ before others, though he himself wa^
pricked, as it was evidently seen b^ the alteration of his countenance. Bu^
upon advice of a Sermon preached a^ ^eneva, wherein Donna Olimpia was
^entioned: he was so highly disturbed, that he ate nothing for two days
together, but fretted and vented his cho^r upon whomsoever was with him. ^ow he
was informed of this Story ^us.

The Pope's Nuntio's Secretary that ^as at Paris, by order of his Master
^turned to Rome, to confer with his ^oliness about some Affair, that could ^ot
well be committed to a Letter. So ^on as he had delivered his Errand, ^d would
have taken his leave for the ^st time: the Pope began to enquire (...) him
concerning his Voyage, and by that way he came from Paris to Rome; upon which
the Secretary answered, ^at he passed Incognito through Gene^; and what says
that rebellious Ci^ of Us? reply's the Pope. The Se^etary told him, You can
expect no ^odness, most holy Father, from your ^emies. Well but, says the Pope,
that say they? Then the Secretary thinking himself obliged to tell the truth,
and not to lie in the Pope's presence, or whether he had some other Reason for
it; thus told him: Most h^ly Father, I stayed but one day in the City, where I
observed a greater Civili^ in the People, than I imagined to ha^ found. But the
more satisfaction I r^ceived from without, the greater w^ my inward
mortification: for havi^ the curiosity to observe the religious Rit^ of these
People, so much contrary to the^ of Rome: I got my Host to carry me (...) their
Church, just at Sermon time. (...) Host told me afterward the second Pre^cher
was a Lucchese, of the noble Fami^ of the Diodati, and was indeed a great
^ratour. This person, whether he knew a^ thing of my coming, or that he did it
(...) order to the discourse he had formerly pr^posed to himself, took for his
Text t^ words of Saint Paul written to Timoth^ Suffer not a Woman to Teach,
neith^ to rule over the Man. Upon which (...) enlarged, to the great reproach
of o^ church of Rome, that suffered it self to (...) governed by a Woman. This
was one (...) the most fatal strokes. I cannot tell ^hether the thing was
really so, or that ^e Secretary invented it; let it suffice ^at Cardinal
Astalli confesses, this ^formation took so strongly with the ^ope, that he
verily believes he ^ok up his Resolution at this instant (...) banish Donna
Olimpia from the ^ourt.

Nevertheless, he that will consider a ^tle closer the Reason of this disgrace,
^ill find that the Pope did not this out ^f dislike or hatred to this Lady, but
^ther out of extreme kindness, that is, (...) take off the revilings of so many
as ^t themselves against her, and to ap^ase the murmurings; and too besides ^^t
of some politic consideration, that ^e might be taken for a zealous Pope. ^ut
it was impossible all the world ^ould be able to persuade that a Ves^ of sour
Vineager was become Mos^del; and truly it is hard to take a false Work out of a
piece of Cloth^ without spoiling the whole.

That the Pope was not distasted, (...) no difficult matter to believe: For the
Evening before he came to this Resul^ he sent to call Donna Olimpia, wit^ whom
he held conference four or fi^ hours in private: and it is veril^ thought the
Pope advised her to tak^ the disgrace of banishment for a litt^ while from the
Court patiently, t^ such time as the malicious mout^ should be stopped; and
then he pr^mised to call her back again, as in e^fect he did. Thus the Pope
did, (...) Mothers that threaten their Children all the while they hold them in
the^ arms. He commands Donna Olimp^ with a loud Voice, that upon any pr^tence
whatever, she appear not before him: but afterward tells her (...) her Ear,
she may come privately; (...) he discards her and calls her at t^ same time,
and forbids her to be se^ in public, that he may have her t^ more to himself.

But the good Man's Plot would not ^ke: For in stead of stopping the ^ouths of
the malicious, it made them ^n times worse: and the retirement of ^nna Olimpia
to her Palace, and with^awing from public view, made them ^port about Rome,
that the Pope was ^come Jealous in his old age: and this ^mour took the more
easily, because (...) the more private conveyance of ^e matter, she went to him
for the ^st part by Night.

Now behold all the Pope's Indigna^n against Donna Olimpia, and all the ^sgrace
she underwent, during her ^other-in-law's Reign: which was to (...) him by
Night and not by Day, pro^e Favors in private, and not in ^blick, and to go to
the Vatican for (...) own Interest, and not for that of ^ers.

And the truth is, this Lady reflecting ^on what was past, and what would ^most
for her Credit, did for some ^s forbear to appear publicly: but all this while
bated not an Ace of h^ satisfaction. For though in appearan^ she seemed a
little to be eclipsed: (...) made she all good in secret, have Audience of his
Holiness incognita, a^ told you before.

In this very nick of time that (...) Pope appeared to cool in his affection
toward Donna Olimpia, he began (...) grow kind toward his own Family a^
Blood. Who, after threee years ^^nishment, at the Instigation and Di^ctions of
the Sister-in-law, were be Prince Camillo and his Lady (to ta^ off the blemish
of Unnatural) called (...) to Favor again, upon condition the would expect no
great matter of kin^ness from their Uncle, who was disp^sed to oblige no body
but Don^^ Olimpia.

There was no body in Rome t^ did not come to welcome them hon^ and that not so
much for the Prince, (...) the Princess her sake, who deserved be pityed for
many Reasons, havi^ ^ceived the highest Injuries, and with (...) gross Affronts
to her person, not ^nly from the Pope and her hair^ain'd Mother-in-law, but
even from ^er own Husband; that after Hony^oon was over, he seemed to cool in
^s affections, though to so fair and no^e an Object. However, being return^
into Favor and good Reception ^ith the Pope, though they lived not ^ery
happily together, yet the Princess ^rryed it so prudently, as to wink at (...)
faults. But hardly was Innocent ^ead, when all broke out to the pre^dice of
them both, as giving occa^on to the World to put diverse Inter^retations upon
the Rupture.

The little understanding between ^is unhappy couple fortified the Opi^on of
Donna Olimpia. Who, when ^ld of the Match, declared not only ^o the Pope, but
to every body, that her ^on had no inclination at all to marry, ^ut that the
Princess by little tricks and ^elusions had inveagled him to quit his Cardinals
Cap, and marry her, in hop^ of wearing the Breeches. And this, upon the
discovery of their difference^ got credit every where.

Mean while Cardinal Astalli, I shou^^ say, Cardinal Panfilio enjoyed so
abso^utely all the Prerogatives, the oth^^ Nephews should have had by right
(...) Blood; that the Pope seemed to b^ kinder to him every day than other
Notwithstanding there was no exce^^ in Favors, as not being in his nature*
Indeed the Cardinal by Panzicolo's I^structions never asked any thing, tha^ he
was not most sure beforehand would please the Pope. So that many time^ (this
the Cardinal says now) the Pop^ himself would complain of him, that h^ was so
modest in requesting of Favors, that he asked not those which of absolute
necessity were to be allowed him.

The true Relations of the Pope a^ this while could take no satisfaction t^ see
one of a strange House so highly i^ ^he Pope's favor and they; who should be
so near kept at such a distance. The very sight of this Cardinal did ^fflict
them to that degree; as by their ^ood wills, they would never come (...) his
company, at least would never seek it. For in despite of them ^hey were forced
to see him, and I ^ay say, be beholding to him upon se^eral occasions. Yet they
bore not so ^reat a malice to this adopted Nephew, (...) to Panzicolo: whose
destruction they ^otted Night and Day: imagining ^erchance by his Fall they
should lay ^e way to open to the overthrow of ^s Creature.

They met perpetually at Donna ^limpia's House in Consultation, how (...) bring
down Panzicolo. They spent ^hole Nights many times in quest of ^is point, each
Relation employing ^s best Rhetoric, and endeavoring (...) devise Cabals, and
to lay all Designs ^r the ruin of this Person: but every ^^ing fell out to
their dissatisfaction, as not being able to find out a means (...) execute
their Propositions. They were vexed to the heart, to see all their Designs
vanish into a wish, insomuch tha^ some took their Bed upon it for ver^ madness.
To lessen him in the Pope opinion, was not difficult, but impo^sible: for his
Credit with him had taken too deep root. In fine, they were never able to hurt
such a man, that always walked with his eyes open, an^ upon even ground.
Panzicolo had Wi^^ enough to keep well with the Pope though his frequent
Indispositions mad^ him scarce able to keep upon his Fee^ The continual
Conferences he was use^ to hold with the Pope till Midnight had so much broke
him, that on^ would have thought him unfit for an^ undertaking: and yet he held
up s^ well against the Injuries of Time an^ Wiles of his Adversaries, that he
mad^ them despair so much as of thinking t^ attempt the least.

But what the malice of the Pope ^indred could not effect, Death's dart
^erformed: Panzicolo dies by the course ^f nature, while others are endevour^ng
to make him die in the Pope's Fa^our. This pleased Donna Olimpia so ^ighly,
that the very same day she ^arched about Rome in triumph. To ^he first that
brought her the News, she ^nswered, He is dead and I live. The ^ope took his
Death very much to ^eart, and had the Ambassadors came ^o condole him, not
being able to overcome his grief for many days. But above all, the
Cardinal-Patron lamented ^is loss, his eyes gushing out with tears, ^s ominous
to that mischief afterward ^efell him.

The day after the Death of this Car^^inal, the Pope's Relations had another
Consultation among themselves in Donna Olimpia's House, in which they ^hought
good in no way to attempt the ^^ssening of the Cardinal-Patron his ^uthority,
or rather his Person; but first (...) work the Pope out of all good conceit of
the memory of Panzicolo: For they could not expect, while the Pop^ retained any
good opinion of him, tha^ he should ever be persuaded to entertain an ill
thought of his Creature.

They all therefore set themselves t^ this Work. Particularly Donna Olimpi^ as
most concerned, left no stone unturned. At last they had their will and though
in his life time they were never able to put him out of Favor nevertheless,
after his Death they prevailed to make him be forgot of the Pope, who laid
aside all favorable thoughts he had of him during his life.

An evident token of this, are the Complaints which have been heard from the
Pope's own mouth, against the Conduct of Panzicolo: slighting all Businesses
that were left by the said Cardinal, nay even to a bitter refusal of whatever
savoured of his memory. Likewise in any Business of small importance (which
showed the nature of the Beast) that Panzicolo had left in his Will to desire
to be passed, he would protest against it. Many times treating with
Ambassadors and others, he would say he was cheated by Panzicolo. This
discovered the unstable nature of the Pope, who never could keep to one
Resolution: but did things not as they ^ught to be, but upon persuasion.

After the Death of Panzicolo, Donna ^limpia frequented the Court a little
^ore, but incognita: beginning by de^rees to repossess her self of her first
^ation, and truly she made large steps. The other Relations, that is, Prince
^anfilio, Prince Ludovisio, and Prince ^ustiniani, were pretty well in Favor,
^eing kindly received so far as cost nothing. The Princess of Rossano thought
^range that her Husband was not ^eated in a more particular man^er than the
rest of the Nephews; (...) being the only person among them, ^at was of the
Blood of the Panfilii: though in truth he had no reason to complain much of
this: since how partially soever he carried himself amongs^ his Nephews, it was
but in appearance* For he took order, and would have i^ so; that in the
unclosing of his Fist, a^ he used to call it, all the most considerable
benefits should go to Prince C^millo: and this he made his whole Business, and
employed the Cardinal-Patron in it too; thus did he give the Substance to one,
and to the rest the Shadow. One day as he was busy in assigning I know not
what advantage, h^ was demanded by the Cardinal-Patron whether he would have it
given t^ Prince Panfilio, or Prince Ludovisio; t^ which the Pope answered, Know
yo^ not that near is my Doublet, but near is my Shirt? Another time being
aske^ by the same person, which of the^^ three Nephews he had the greate^^
kindness for: he replied without de^mur, We love Prince Justiniani for hi^
Wifes sake, Prince Ludovisio because he is a good Prince, and Prince Panfilio
because he is of our Blood.

He gave Donna Olimpia to understand several times, but not without a promise
to restore her to all her former power, that it was his absolute Will, that she
should leave all, or the greatest part of her Acquisitions to her Son. And he
had reason: for he well knew the Ladies inclinations were more to her
Daughters. Therefore the Pope admired she should think of bestowing her Estate
out of the House of Panfilio, which was comprised in that one person, who was
his Nephew and her Son: ^ay: he could hardly believe it possible, she should
contribute sooner to a half Family, than that which succeeded her in a direct
Line.

Donna Olimpia found no small reluctance within her self to do this. However,
she durst not openly deny him, for fear he should take it ill: knowing very
well there was all the reason for it ^n the World; and that she was tied by all
the Obligations of Gratitude to contribute that to the establishing of the
House of Panfilio, under whose protection she had gathered it. Upon which
consideration, she promised to do all the Pope desired: as well assured she
could leave her Daughters and Grandchildren enough besides to make them defy
the Devil and all his Works. Thus you may see it was no want of kindness on the
Popes side, that made Prince Panfilio be banished: but for the Reasons I told
you before, and the malice of the Mother, made him guilty.

The Princess of Rossano collogued with her Mother-in-law all she could: but
being against the grain of her generous temper, she could not crouch so much as
the others. She showed her all respect indeed, yet without owning in the least
to have her dependence upon her: whereas on the other side, the rest, when they
saw her so great with the Pope, resigned themselves wholly up to her disposal.

The Pope thought it impossible for ^im to subsist without Donna Olimpia: (...)
that it was his daily discourse to the Cardinal-Patron her commendations,
^alling her a Lady of great Prudence. The Cardinal, who saw himself depri^ed of
Panzicolo's help, and perceiving ^e propensity of the Pope toward his Lady,
durst not contradict him in ^e least, but complied with his Holiness (...) the
praise of Donna Olimpia, that he ^ight not be guilty of his own ruin. ^et
willingly he would not see her at ^ourt, as jealous of his own Interest, ^hen
he saw what power she had: who ^as become more Mistress than ever, ^oth of the
Court, Church, State and ^ope. The Cardinal had the Honor (...) receive
Ambassadors: but still they ^^eated with the Pope and Donna Olim^^a. At last,
all private Visits were laid ^de, and she came in and out at plea^re: the good
man forgetting all the ^squils and Stories that had passed a^^ut the World. But
truly it was no ^^nder the Pope should forget Reports; when he had forgot
himself, as the honor of the Church.

By this time the Pope grown so Old that he was thought incapable (...)
undergoing his Dominion longe^ The Physicians, whom naturally (...) hated,
discovered no other Disease (...) him, than that of Fourscore Years, an^ the
Gout, which by his excellent Di^ he had carried off in his Old Age. In the
beginning of his Reign, he would (...) have a Physician wait at his Table,
a^cording to the usual custom: but w^ dissuaded from it by Donna Olimpi^ that
the Papal Majesty might not see to stand in need of help; though t^ custom in
this case, was more for Majesty and Greatness, than for any nece^sity. His
Physician at last, after Donna Olimpia had advised him to it, prevail^ with him
in his latter days, not to d^sturb his Head with any Business: but he had a
mind to live any longer, to p^ his Affairs into some other hands. (...) the
Pope, out of a desire to prolong (...) days, flung off all Care, both of Church
and State, referring the first to certain ^ommittees of Cardinals, and the
other (...) Donna Olimpia with the Cardinal-Pa^on.

However, this Lady was not satisfied, (...) the Oracle of Policy, to give Law
(...) State, Church and Court: but she ^ould dispose of the Spirituality, as ^e
had done formerly: So that many ^mes the Committees met at her House, before
they went to their ordinary place ^f Consultation. Though to say the ^^uth, she
took cognizance of nothing, ^t what might bring her in profit: re^tting Cases
that merely concerned ^onscience, to the Committees, as the ^ope had ordained.

It must needs seem an incredible ^ing to any one that hears it, when I ^all go
about to describe the Industry ^is Lady used in scraping up Wealth. ^t the
truth is, she saw the Pope in a ^clining condition, and her self charg^^ on all
sides with Children, and Grandchildren, obliged to leave the bette^ half to her
own Son, and yet resolve^ to raise the rest to a considerable fo^tune: so that
the plentiful Revenue (...) the Church could not satisfy her u^reasonable
appetite. The persecution of the Barbarini made her suspect, th^^ after the
Pope's Death she should (...) be wholly exempt from her share in the like. She
well knew the proper Instr^ment to qualify such a misfortun^ would be store of
Money. And the she was the rather induced to believ^ by having seen the
Barbarini persecut^ to the utmost by the Pope, their (...) inveterate Enemy,
with a Sequst^tion upon all their Goods: and yet continue in Honor and
Reputation, out (...) the mere force of a Bank they had pr^vided against such
an Accident. Therefore she made the more have to fill (...) Coffers, upon
presumption that (...) would fall more heavy upon her: beca^^^ she had nothing
else to trust to, havi^^ no body to pity her. The Prison ^ere full of
Innocents, and the Streets ^f Guilty: the one preventing their ^onfinement by a
price, and the other ^^nstrained to buy themselves out of ^^ison.

There was a Gentleman of Rome, ^o in confidence of his own integrity, ^ore
that Donna Olimpia should ne^^r touch any of his Money. Now, that (...) might
never be obliged to make a ^^tition; he took his Son from a Clerks ^ffice he
was in. Yet could he not keep (...) Oath: For Donna Olimpia hearing it, gave
order to a certain Officer to ^^ke it his business to draw him into (...) Net.
And he failed not to effect (...) For he ordered a Sbirro, who en^^ged himself
I know not how one day (...) Contest with this Gentleman: upon ^^ich the poor
Gentleman finding him^^^f undervalued so by a Sbirro, gave (...) a box on the
Ear or two, and was ^ryed to Prison for it, and arraigned (...) contempt of
Justice, in striking a ^blick Minister, and so condemned to die. Therefore, to
save his Life, h^ was not only obliged to present Donna Olimpia with a Purse,
but likewise (...) pay a considerable sum into the Exchequer.

This was the Lady that persuade the Pope in no wise to meddle with the Treaty
of Peace between the Christia^^ Princes; that is, between the Crow^ of France
and Spain, upon whose agre^ment depended all the rest.

Popes are used immediately aft^ their Installment, to dispatch Nunti^^
extraordinary to Princes, to sollici^ with all earnestness an universal Pea^^
sparing no pains or cost to effect it. I^nocent, contrary to all the rest, w^
pleased to see them in pieces; layi^ aside not only the consideration of
Universal Father, but all good Policy

It will not be from our purpose h^ to propose a pretty Case, something ^lating
to this. Two Porters were Fifty-cuffs one day about some Di^rence that happened
between the and it chanced to be under the Pope's Windows, where he was
standing at the ^^me instant. Some there were that would ^ave parted them; but
the Pope forbad (...), giving order they should let them fight (...) out. They,
according to the custom of ^uch sort of people, after having fought about half
an hour, gave over of themselves, and made Peace without any In^ercession. Then
the Pope turned to ^anzicolo (who was living at that ^ime, and stood by him)
telling him, So ^ill the French and Spaniard do: when ^hey are weary of beating
one another, they will agree of themselves without Help or ^mportunity of
others. And indeed he ^rophesied truly: for afterward we ^aw them do so.

Hence we may gather how little a friend the Pope was to Peace. But ma^y excuse
him by laying the fault upon Donna Olimpia: who counseled the Pope to let them
alone to themselves, and save the charges of so many ex^raordinary Nuntio's;
making sure to herself all that should be saved upon that occasion; and she had
her will.

The Popes Nephews perceiving the avarice of this Lady: would not, (...) hopes
of large shares at her Death, sto^ her Career, but rather furthered he^ in all
she ordered and disposed. It wa^ a wonderful thing to see a Woman (...)
Threescore years of Age toil so nigh^ and day, treating with this and t'othe^
running up and down, without eve^ giving the least appearance of being tired,
answering all that came to he^ in proper terms. Though whoeve^ came empty
handed, was neither we^ come, nor well looked upon.

How shall we say Donna Olimpia governed herself in regard to the Princ^ of
Christendom? It is certain this, the^ had all reason to commend and bewa^^
themselves at the same time. For wha^ partiality soever the Pope had for on^
more than another: Donna Olimpia, e^ther out of fear of making Enemies a^ home,
or being at too great expense brought the good man not only to be Neuter, but
to have such an indiffe^ency for even the most weighty Affairs of Princes:
that, whereas other Popes esteemed it greatness to have the most ^mportant
Affairs of Christendom in their hands; Innocent, on the contrary, never thought
he spent a day worse, than when he was to give Audience to Ambassadors. But why
should she make the Pope so lazy? Why not rather did she ^ounsel him to attempt
great matters for the advance of his Authority, Cre^it and Renown far and near?
A Prince that will acquire a great name; must ^reat with all Princes, and
thrust himself into all Businesses abroad. This was ^he course those Popes
observed that ^ought the name of Universal Father. But Innocent was the only
he, that ^ook the course rather to be considered ^s a private Gentleman, than
so great (...) Prince. And in truth, Donna Olimpia made him let slip the
fairest opportuni^es of immortalizing his Name, as it may be ever any Pope will
have again. Had Urban been alive at the time of the Revolutions at Naples in
the Year 1647. things had gone at another rate (and all for the better too) for
the advantage of the Church. A Pope that will interest himself in all public
and particular Concerns of Princes, carries a great Reputation and stroke in
the World, it is true: but it is as true, that it cannot be done without great
expense, as well in receiving as sending o^ errands. Wherefore it is no marvel
i^ Innocent, contrary to all others, little regarded such Honor: when he had
Donna Olimpia with him, who valued a hundred Crowns in her Purse, more than the
expectation of eternal Glory* But Popes must not often have such Counselors,
if we would have Christianity flourish.

The Emperor could procure no other help, then a few Indulgencies. S^ that
abandoned on every side, he was forced upon all disadvantage to make up Peace
with the Swede, to the great loss ^f the Roman Religion. The Spaniards ^^d flat
Denyals upon all Demands, (...) the grief and complaint of Conte d'O^atte and
il Duca dell' Infantado, who ^ere Ambassadors at Rome in the time ^f Innocent,
and who received gross ^ffronts from that Court. The French ^^quired nothing,
keeping off like out-^^wed persons for some time: and not without grounds. For
if the Spaniard ^^at had made him Pope, could obtain nothing, the French
certainly had small ^^ason to expect favor, who had ^pposed his Election. So
that they ^d well to stand off. The Duke of ^avoy, during the time of Innocent,
^retended to forget those distastes, which had formerly provoked the ^uke and
Duchess to withdraw their ^mbassadour from Rome: but they ^ere much out, if
they thought to get ^y thing by it; unless you will say the ^uke got enough for
the time he had (...) enjoy it. However Donna Olimpia had a great desire to see
a Cardina^ Cap promised to one of Prince Tomas^ Sons, that she might as much as
poss^ble disappoint a House, so ill affecte^ to hers, of Heirs. This the Pope
yielde to: but because neither Duke nor Du^chess had a hand in it, it fell to
nothing The Duke thought (and will ever, an^ not without reason) that the
greatne^^ of his House did an honor to the College of Cardinals: and
therefore pr^tended without more ado, that h^ Blood gave him title enough to
such Creation. And the rather, since Ca^dinal Mauritio had out of a Capric^
against the Church renounced his Ca^ the Church ought to restore it to the
Nephew as due. But these considerations took no place in Rome, whe^^ Cardinals
are made according to the inclination to the Interest of the prese^^ Pope. They
say her Royal Highne^^ stopped a Prelates mouth, that proposed this Business to
her, with this answer, A Hat of a Ladies presenting, w^ ^e too heavy for the
Head: intimating ^hereby, that she would not be beholding to Donna Olimpia;
taxing the Pope ^t the same time of Effeminacy.

The great Duke was not so scrupu^^us, after he had been so often disob^^ged.
For when he found them stalled ^^ the making up the Agreement with ^he Duke of
Parma: he struck in with ^^e Opportunity that offered it self, ^rocuring
another red Hat to his Fa^ily, that his party might be the strong^^ against the
next Election. He never ^^quired whether Donna Olimpia or the ^ope gave it. And
herein he did wise^^: as indeed the great Dukes know ^ow to deal with the
Priests, being ^^eir near Neighbors; and make no ^reat matter of their
Affronts.

Donna Olimpia carried her self in a ^iddle way toward the Venetians. For
(...) she knew that Commonwealth was ^ther of the receiving, than the giving
and with the Church: so she well un^derstood nothing kept them off better, than
observing a distance. Yet toward her latter end she expressed great kin^ness to
them: in hopes of protection, (...) any misfortune (that is, Persecution should
attend her. The Genouese, wh^ promised themselves great matters (...) Vrban's
time, in order to their Titl^ and Royal Prerogatives, upon the co^pliance of
the Barbarini with their desire, out of hopes of getting a sum (...) Money;
when they saw how they we^^ deluded by them, applied themselv^ to Innocent: but
they found he wou^^ not hear on that Ear, not so much to put them in the Hopes
that Vrb^^ did. Desponding therefore, they called home their Ambassador, who
la^ at Rome for that purpose. Neverthel^^ being resolved to compass their end
after having withdrawn their Minist^ from Rome for some time: they se^^ him
again, with greater assurance from Donna Olimpia's side, than former^ they had
had from the Pope. So th^^ gave Instructions to their Embassado^^ (...) treat
with this Lady: who, as some ^ill have it, was the person that put ^he Genouese
upon sending back a new ^mbassadour, putting them in Hopes ^f bringing their
Business about again (...) some purpose. Nor did she this without Design:
assured of a very great ^ain; because they were able to make (...) good, and
desirous to do it upon the ^ccomplishment of their Suit. Truly ^he Lady was
very zealous in the Busi^ess, and pursued it heartily: upon which, the
Genouese, to advance the Work, sent her no small Presents, to ^^ake her the
more vigorous in their ^ffair. The Court seemed to be for ^^; and Venice, which
was the likeliest ^o oppose it, seemed to be willing to ^et it pass, as not
considerable enough ^o impair any of their Dignity. But ^hey met with so many
other Rubs and ^mpediments, that came out of Germany, Italy and France: that
the Gran^ees of Genoua thought fit to desist, ^o their no little Discontent,
that they had cast so many Presents away upon Donna Olimpia.

Lucca was the only place not talk of in the time of Innocent: as being o^ no
great consequence for the streightness of their Confines. So that the had not
enjoyed so much Peace for long time, as under this Pope. An^ Donna Olimpia
would take occasion several times to reprove the Barbarini, for prosecuting so
fiercely the Ruin of (...) poor little Commonwealth, that ha^ deserved so
well of the Church. How ever, this was not said on free-cost: because the
Lucchesi had provoked he with a Present.

Now to come near a conclusion o^ the great Industry of Donna Olimpia I say,
that the nearer the Pope's Death aproached, the greater was her affliction to
find her self alone, and destitute of those necessary supports a person in her
condition required. She knew very well none of her party would be able to do
her any service if Adversity should come upon her: and she ^as pretty well
assured to have her ^^are of it, considering her passed A^^ions. To see all her
Relations discon^ented, her own Son so ill used by her ^^lf, and all the
Nobility of Rome dete^^ing her very Name: made her reflect ^^ght and day upon
her Condition. The ^rincess of Rossano her Daughter-in-law, ^aving so near
Relation to the Duke of ^arma, made her, if not fear, at least and upon her
Guard: And the rather, because the Princess apprehending to that height the
daily disgusts betwixt ^er and her Husband might at last come ^^, very wisely
thought upon fortify^^g her Interest in her own defense, such ^^ would be a
Cardinal Prince of her ^indred, that should own his prefer^ent immediately from
her. To which ^^d she employed all her Wits to get (...) the Duke of Parma's
Brother, her ^ear Kinsman, to be Cardinal. But Donna Olimpia opposed it for the
same rea^^ underhand: that she might not become too powerful. Thus was the
D^sert of this Prince wholly laid aside Therefore Donna Olimpia did expe^^
both Prince and Daughter-in-law to ^^ at open defiance with her, after
Inn^cent's Death.

To deliver her self of all these Inco^veniencies which threatened her Ruin^ it
came into her Head to play a Ga^^ should hardly be believed, when it w^^ done.
And that was to propose an A^liance with the Barbarini: whereby (...) oblige
them with so near a Tie, not on to forget passed Injuries, but to sta^^ her
Friends in future Occurrence

The Barbarini were in despair of ^^ver having so fair an Occasion offer^^ them
as was, never expecting to (...) reconciled to Innocent, it being the eight
years the Persecution had be^ upon them. So that Donna Olimpia m^ with no
difficulty in her Design. For the Barbarini had tried a thousand ways to be
reconciled, and could never compass it: upon which they we not backward, when
an honor was of^red. Cardinal Antonio was more glad ^f this Conjuncture than
the rest: ha^^ng been banished for the space of ^^ght Years from his own House,
from Rome; nay, out of Italy; and forced (...) live in Forain Parts at so great
an ^xpence, as (besides the Suspention of his Revenues, which he had in the
Church) had cost him some Millions, ^sing also the charge belonging to the
^^rimogeniture.

Donna Olimpia therefore having a ^aughter of her own, and Prince Ju^niani's
Wife another marryageable: ^oked upon this as the only Means to ^^ing about her
Designs. These her ^tentions she made be broke to ^ardinal Francesco Barbarino,
with a ^^omise, that if the Barbarini would ^^nsent to a Match for their Nephew
^ith Justiniani's Daughter, she would ^^store them to all again, upon condi^^on
that should serve for the Portion. and so it did.

The Barbarini looked upon this as a Blessing to their House, which w^^
somewhat low at present. For the doubted; if Innocent should die, whither his
Successor would restore the Revenues, but rather keep them f^^ his own
Relations, as Innocent ha^ done, and so they should utterly be di^appointed.
They therefore made (...) other answer, but that they should (...) happy in
such an Honor. Donna Olimpia had designed the Match to be with t^^ Eldest Son
of Don Tadeo: but the Ba^barini, though very earnest to ha^^ the thing done,
yet managed the B^siness so cunningly, as to pretend t^^ Eldest was resolved to
be a Cardinal, relinquish his Birthright to the Abb^ and take the Abbey
himself. And tru^ it was discreetly done: For by the means they were restored,
and got another Cardinals Cap into their Fa^^ly. Donna Olimpia easily agreed to
i^ as being desirous to fortify her sel^ which she thought she could not
better, than by fortifying that House ^he had allied her self to; nor could
^hey better secure their Interest, than ^y having another Cardinal in their
^amily, who made the third. A thing ^ever seen before, three Cardinals of ^he
same House living at a time.

All being concluded, and the Wed^ing kept in great state, and to the
^stonishment of all men, to see such a Change: the next Creation that came, ^he
elder Brother was made Cardinal. Thus the Barbarini got off; which was ^^eir
principal Concern. For if they ^ad not dispatched their Business now: ^he next
Pope would not have failed ^o have given them work enough; which labor they
now saved.

Returned into Favor, the Pope ^ave them very great respect: and to^ether with
Donna Olimpia, they go^erned all the Church Affairs of Importance. Now for the
Damage they ^uffered through eight Years Absence: ^n two Years and upwards that
Innocent lived afterward, it is most certain they had licked themselves so
whole again by having been formerly experienced in the Government and manne^ of
that Climate, that you could not find where they had been hurt.

No man ought to wonder, that the Pope should so easily condescend to the
Creation of another Cardinal Barbarino, or that they should presume to demand
it over and above the Honor o^ so great a Match, and restoration to all their
Revenues: since there was al^ the reason in the World for it. And will tell you
how.

It is an ancient and common practice among the Popes, for the Successor to
relinquish his Cardinalate to the Kindred of his Predecessor, from who^ he had
first received his own. Now Innocent, who was created Cardinal by Urban the
Eighth a Barbarin, stood obliged to relinquish his Cardinalat^ so soon as made
Pope, to the House o^ the Barbarini; that is, to create ^ Cardinal at their
Instance. The Barbarini did not forget to make the Demand for their Nephew the
Abbot: but the good Innocent, hardened and incensed against them, would never
hearken to it. So that upon the Reconcilement ^y the Match, it was no longer to
be deferred, as being so clearly due.

The Barbarini drove on another Design with this Marriage, which they had long
sought for and desired: and that was to match with some free Princes. And truly
for many Years with promises of large Sums they could never bring it about;
till after they were ^allyed to Donna Olimpia, and then they married their
Niece to the Duke of Modena, a Prince of noble descent. This came easily to the
Barbarines: because the Duke seeing them returned into Favor, and in a rising
Condition, expected great matters from them; besides that he was a little
straightened at that time, and wanted Money. However, the Barbarini gave no other
Portion with their Niece, but the resignation e^ the Abbey of Nonantola, which
Cardinal Antonio presented to Cardina^ Este, Brother to the Duke of Moden^
being worth some twenty thousan^ Crowns a Year.

Behold the Revolutions of the Barbarini under Innocent and Donna Olimpia: dead
and raised again, cast dow^ and exalted beyond the fear of Fortune's
vicissitude. They say it wa^ pleasant, to see their near Combination and
Friendship with Innocent: when committed the greatest part of his Affairs, as
well Spiritual as Temporal to their management; by which means having not
forgot their old wont o^ heaping up Riches, they gathered a fast as they could,
both for themselves and Donna Olimpia, whom they instructed with new Devices to
get Money on all hands.

The better to fortify the House and Person of Donna Olimpia; the Barbarini
advised her to marry another of her Nieces to some other great Roman Lord. But
her Design reached farther: ^or thinking her self secure enough with the
alliance of the three Barbarini, he had proposed to her self the conti^uance of
Dominion, through a confi^ence of meeting with some opportu^ity to match her
Niece with the Nephew of the next Pope, by giving a good round Sum. This made
her she would not hear of bestowing her Niece, ^s looking upon it very
feisable, and a good way, if not so entirely, in part at ^east to continue her
power: well knowing, that the Idol of Rome is rea^ly Money, without dispute.
But this Design did not take.

There were that put her in the head of marrying her to the Duke of Parma, with
a promise to make his Brother Cardinal, and a large Sum of ready Money. But
this was a subject rather for discourse than practice: because it ^s certain,
the Duke would never have ^greed to such a Match, though originally he came
from the Church himself.

So soon as the Barbarini were full restored, the Authority of the
Card^nal-Patron began to decline apace insomuch, that some Embassadou^ would
not lose so much time, as t^ treat with him, whose address the knew was no
longer welcome to the Pope. Besides, the Pope was so we satisfied with the
Assistance of the Ba^barini, that he disclosed all the secre^ of his Heart to
them: being confide^^ of success, through the great experienc^ these had gained
by the manageme^^ of so many several Affairs, which ha^ succeeded to them for
two and twent^ Years together under the Reign o^ their Uncle. And therefore he
left n^ more but the shadow of Power an Command to his adopted Nephew
dispatching all by the Barbarini. The worst for this Cardinal was, that excep^
his ordinary Emoluments, which might be worth to him some fifty thousan^ Crowns
a year, attended with no small ^xpence, he had not the opportunity ^o get one
farthing to lay up; so nar^owly did Donna Olimpia watch his ^ater. For the poor
man had made (...) little money once of a vacant Bene^ce: and Donna Olimpia
having smelt ^t out, run open mouth to the Pope to ^omplain of him, that he had
presumed ^o lay hands upon that he had nothing ^o do with; upon which the Pope
commanded him to refund all presently to ^he said Lady. The same Cardinal
re^ated this to me, just as I tell you: only that he told me so much more, as
would ^equire Siri's pen to set it all down. The ^arbarini looked not with a
good eye upon this Card. Patron: not out of any ^mmediate hatred to him, but
because ^e was Panzicolo's creature, whom they ^ad had a perfect aversion for.
Therefore they disparaged him, to the Pope from time to time, as one that
under^tood not the place he held: and indeed made it appear by evident
demonstrations enough. All this while Done Olimpia was not wanting to contri^
his ruin, as neither the Pope's nature Nephews, who all conspired to h^
overthrow. So that the poor Cardin^ stood betwixt Hawk and Buzzard, e^pecting
on each hand to be made a pr^ of every moment, little relying upon his
authority, when he saw how co^ the Pope grew toward him, and ho^^ warm in his
kindness to the Barbarin^ However he abated proportionably his respect to Donna
Olimpia, as he foun^ the Pope indifferent toward him. B^ to the Barbarini he
was not only civ^^ but obsequious, paying them the gre^test honor imaginable,
with all expresions of affection upon every encounte^ to procure their good
will: but the devices are so stale in Rome, that (...) body heeds them any
more. Ever^ body knows that in this Country me do reverence to the ground in
the morning to those they could willingl^ see hanged in the afternoon: so tha^
^^servance, courtship, reverence, salutes ^d kissing of the hand in the Roman
^ourt, are performed by the eye and ^t the heart. The Barbarini had been ^o
long trained in that School to be ^oved at those ceremonies the Cardinal ^atron
bestowed upon them: and ^erefore they paid him in the like ^yn, not from the
heart, but with ^e service; which sweet they omitted ^t to embitter with such a
seasoning as ^ould poison his fortunes. And they ^d their desire to the
satisfaction of ^^emselves, Donna Olimpia, and all the ^ope's kindred.

As the interest of the Cardinal-patron as thus dwindling away, his hidden
^nemies were not backward to give ^e fatal blow: which to the great ^tonishment
of all Rome was publicly one. For the Pope in great wrath against the person
of this Cardinal, ^undred out such storms of indigna^on against him, that one
would have ^ought greater could not have been sentenced upon one guilty of Hi^
Treason. He forbid him his presence the most disgraceful manner: comman^ed that
upon no pretense whatever, should be permitted to approach t^ Court: took away
from him the Ti^ of Cardinal-Patron: deprived him that of Nephew, with express
or^^ that he should no more be called Pafilio, but Astalli: Sequestered his
Rev^nues, and all the Offices and Prefe^ments he held: and at last banished h^
from the City of Rome, with a restrai^ from taking any of his Movables (...)
way. These Extravagances made so^^ laugh, and others complain: thou^^ from so
unexpected an advance, (...) thing could be expected less, than a m^^ and hasty
Destruction, such as this w^

The noise of this was no soon spread about the City, and Cardin^^ Astalli
stole privately away, out (...) shame to be seen in a condition so d^^ferent
from his former: but the ^^mans, according to their usual custo^ would needs
find out the ground of all ^is. Some ascribed it to the ambition (...) the
Barbarini, that they might di^ose wholly of the Pope, whom they ^d got into
their hands: others laid (...) the fault upon Donna Olimpia, who ^^uld endure
no Competitor or Assi^nt in gathering up her Wealth: nor ^nted there such as
verily believed ^e Pope himself had taken occasion to this thing, that toward
his latter ^d he might be reconciled to his true ^ephews, who were much
offended (...) him for creating an adopted Ne^^ew. There is something of Reason
(...) each of these Opinions to prevail ^th us: but the chief ground of this
^eformation came from another ^^urce; the Pope being inclined to it ^on more
intricate and deep conside^ions, such as were these following.

In the time of Urban their Uncle, the ^^rbarini were grown so high, that they
^ought, after so long a Reign, to do ^racles; nor could they with patience read
that Sistus quartus, Paulus terti^ Alexander the sixth, Clement the ^venth, and
so many other Popes, whi^ did not continue half the time the Uncle had then
dated, yet should co^pass their wishes to that degree, as leave great and free
Princes of the posterity; and they after so long Reign, and with a greater
treasure cou^^ not overcome that difficulty of maki^ themselves free Princes.
They direct all their thoughts to that Design, a^ with the Prospective Glasses
of the ambition daily surveyed all Italy. The thought they had Urban sure, ^ter
the Duke was dead without He^ in the Year 1631. But when that D^sign failed
them, they cast their e^ upon Luca, where they met with ru^ before they had
begun their Proje^ Afterward the War with the Duke Parma coming on, they
concluded the had gained their purpose by resolvi^ to drive the Farnesi out of
their Pr^cipality by main force: however the ^und it requisite to desist from
that ^nterprise, for fear of draining their ^urse too much. At last, they fixed
their eyes upon the Kingdom of Naples, (...) likely to meet with better Fortune
in ^^e Acquisition of a Crown, than that ^f Principalities. Now as they were
^ontriving to out the King of Spain, and ^vest themselves of Naples, Urban
dies, and soon after succeeds the Election of ^nnocent: and then they had
enough (...) do to save their own lives without ^oking after Crowns, which
their am^tion only gave them Title to. Cardi^l Antonio returned to Rome, and
all ^e Barbarini into Favor with Inno^nt, they began to torment his decre^t
Carcass with the suggestions of con^uering the Kingdom of Naples, not without
reproaching him for letting ^p so fair an occasion in the Year 1647. (...) the
time of Mas' Anello's Revolt. The ^eclining estate of the Spaniard, made ^em
suppose the attempt more feisable ^an they themselves could compre^end.

The Pope, doting with Age, readi^ consented to the Design. Donna Olimpia
expecting to have the largest sha^ for her Nephews and Sons, was reso^ved to
contribute a considerable Su^ of ready Money: and the Barbarini e^gaged to
maintain an Army of t^ thousand Men at their own Cost, till the Church should
be absolutely in possess^on; only upon condition that the Princ^pality of
Salerno should remain exemp^ from the other Dominions to the Hou^ of the
Barbarini, with a freedom (...) pretense to buy in other with the Money. The
truth is, finding this Kingdom so spacious, and full of Principalities; they
thought not only to man their Nephews, but all their Footboy Princes. Thus
furiously does Ambition drive.

These Transactions were carrye^ with great secrecy betwixt the Pop^ the
Barbarini, Donna Olimpia, and some of her nearest Relations. The
Card^nal-Patron was judged unfit to be taken (...) as one that discovered too
much in^ination toward the Spaniard: and so (...) was wholly excluded from
such ^onferences. However, they could ^^t be so close, but that the Cardinal ^d
a mistrust of it; which made him ^dustrious to discover the bottom; ^d that no
sooner done, but to give ^oof of his Fidelity to Spain; and ^thall to be
revenged of the Barbari^, who would not trust him; he gave (...) exact Account
to the Spaniard, with whom he held a straight League of ^iendship.

Monsignor Azzolini was at that time ^er the Briefs, which is a charge of ^eat
Importance, Trust and Secrecy: (...) that he was likewise privy to the ^ot we
spoke of before. The Pope (...) sooner understood that the Spaniard ^d sifted
all out, and by consequence ^ew his Design; but he presently ^ve order to
Azzolini, to use all dili^nce possible, to find out who had re^aled the
Business: with an assurance of a Cardinals Cap, so soon as he should discover
the Traitor. Azzolini tempted by this invitation, set to his tas^ which in
plain language is a Spy: ar^ with little noise and great indust^ found out the
Traitor, intimating privately to the Pope, making it ev^dent to him the
treachery of his adop^ed Nephew, as being the Person the had revealed this
Secret. For whi^^ Cause, the Pope used Cardinal Ast^^ so ill, as he did: and
made Azzoli^ Cardinal in recompense of this Service the first Promotion that
fell after the Accident. Thus of these two Youths t^ one as Traitor, was in
disgrace wi^^ the Pope; the other as Spy, good Cardinals Cap; and one way or
oth^ both remain Cardinals.

Upon this, Donna Olimpia finding (...) Brother-in-law quite decayed as it we^^
with the Age of fourscore Years, whi^^ is considerable for a Gouty person, w^^
had continually a world of Cares upon him; or whether it was that the Po^^
himself, sensible of his own failings and ^ay of parts, with the loss of his
Taste; ^prehending least the Spaniards, in^^sed against him, should procure his
^ath, by some little preparation they ^^ used to provide for such as they not
confide in; and not knowing to ^^om better to commit his Life, than that dear
Kinswoman, for whose ^^e he had forfeited the reputation of (...) Person, and
the honor of the ^arch he resolves to call her into the ^ace, and put himself
entirely into ^^ hands, and the discretion of her ^^^duct. A thing altogether
new, not ^r heard of before; that Ladies ^ald govern Popes. Though to me ^ems
not at all strange: that the same ^^^y which had commanded him in his ^^th,
should take care of him in his (...) Age.

A pretty sight, they say, it was to Donna Olimpia in the Pope's Cham^^^
constantly by his Bedside, holding (...) of his hands between hers: for he was
not able for weakness to fit up. S^ had so contrived Curtains to be dra^^ at
the side of the Bed, that she co^ see without being seen, and hear wi^^out
being perceived. And this she (...) to withdraw her self at any time, wh^^^ the
Pope gave Audience to Embas^^dours, who should not be able to u^ a word that
this concealed Lady wo^^ not be privy to: though often times Veil was taken
off, and she would answer herself in behalf of the langu^ing Pope, to the no
small affliction of Ambassadors.

This Lady fed the Pope with own hands, having given much ^cter order than
usual, that no b^ should come into the Pope's Kit^ unless she were by, only the
Cook h^self. Most commonly she made a li^ Table be drawn to the Bed-s^ where
she dined with the Po^^ though she would never admit her (...) Son to that
Honor. In fine, there (...) no more talk in the Palace, but of Donna Olimpia,
Donna Olimpia here, and Donna Olimpia there, all Letters deli^^red to Donna
Olimpia; it was Donna Olimpia that perused them: the Memo^^^s were no longer
brought to the ^^pe, but to Donna Olimpia, who told ^n the Contents of them,
and had always this Duplicate for Answer, Fate (...), fate voi; as much as to
say, Pray (...) you look after it.

A man could see nothing but Pre^ts still going up the Vatican Stairs: (...)
you never saw any come back a^^^n. Every two or three days, you ^^uld meet
three or four Porters load^^^ with Money. At night Donna Olimpia would slip out
to visit her own Pa^^^e: having first locked up the Pope's Chamber, and taken
the Key with her.

All the Pope spoke with, he told ^^em plainly, that but for Donna Olimpia he
should be dead, and that he ^^^ed his Life to her. The Princess of ^^stano came
into the Pope's Chamber ^^^e day to visit him, while Donna Olimpia sat upon
the Bed by him, holdi^^ him by the hand. The Princess in t^^ middle of their
discourse finding a (...) opportunity, said laughing to the Po^^ Most holy
Father, I am jealous to see y^^ make so much of my Mother-in-law th^^ is old,
and not of me that am so mu^^ younger. The Pope seeming to h^^ up the Humor,
answered her merri^^. The hand that wounded me, is that wh^ gives me relief.
Words that howev^^ meant, confirmed the Princess in t^^ suspicion she had of
these two.

At last Donna Olimpia grew so sus^^cious that any body should come ne^^ him,
as she would not leave him a m^^ment, though her own Son or Re^^tions were in
the room. Having th^^ made herself a Prisoner, she was seen more to pass the
streets of Rome, not much as to go in Devotion to a Church: only, as I told
you, sometim^^ she would steal out to her own Pala^^ by night to turn over her
Bags.

Her keeping so close to the Pop^ and by consequence her not appearing ^broad,
made the Courtiers interpret (...) not her care of the Pope, but fear of ^he
People: who as soon as ever they ^^w her, would set a running after her Coach,
crying Bread, Bread. Insomuch, that one day she had much ado to save ^^er Life.
For the people, enraged to ^ave one continual Famine last all over ^he City and
Territory of Rome, be^^des so many other grievances, which produced nothing but
the embellishing ^f a few streets with Fountains, and ^^e satiating Donna
Olimpia's thirst after Gold: as they saw her Coach pass ^^^y, they came up to
it in a rude and ^^solent manner, calling her a thousand Whores; so that she
was fain to make ^er escape into a Covent, and afterward to the Popes Palace,
leaving it ^o his Holiness to qualify them by a ^ole of some quantity of
Bread. After ^his affront, she was ashamed to appear (...) public: besides
that she mistrusted (...) meet with some worse misfortune. Notwithstanding the
people ceased not to exclaim daily against her, singing scurrilous Ballads of
her all night about the streets. Nay, I must tell you a great company of the
Rabble got into her House one day in a great Fury and were going to pillage it,
if the Pope had not presently in prevention sent some Bishops to disperse a
thousand or more of Crowns to be scrambled for by the people, which with large
promises quieted them for the present.

She would have made her peac^ with all the Malcontents toward the latter end
of her Brother-in-law: but that her greediness after Riches would not let her
think of the means of doin^ it. Besides, that she presumed to b^^ well enough
fortified by the alliance o^ the Barbarini: having Wealth enoug^ to defy
Fortune. She was a litt^^ concerned, that she had any differenc^ with Cardinal
Sforza, for the displeasure she had done him: not out of an^ fear she had
directly of his person; b^^ because she knew him to be a man of a ^urbulent
Spirit, and easily provoked (...) talk; so she doubted, when Innocent ^as dead,
he might by his discourse procure her more trouble.

This Cardinal, who is yet alive, and has a Genious, fitter for a Soldier,
man a Priest, was made Chamberlain (...) Cardinal Antonio's place, which ^arrys
profit as well as great Honor along with it. But according to his ^^ree way of
speaking, he began to in^eigh openly against Donna Olimpia, not being able to
mention her but with ^reat bitterness in all company, to the ^reat
disparagement of her person: so that she was necessitated to disgrace ^im with
the Pope, and oblige him to ^etire to his Church of Rimini, where ^e is Bishop.
There was nothing at his time terrified Donna Olimpia so much, as this
Cardinals tongue: and she would most readily have obliged him, upon condition
he would have left off ^is murmuring kind of Music. But when she considered
one of that Kidney w^^ never to be won, either with Gifts, Promises, or Hopes:
she changed her Note^ and made as if she was not concerned a^ him; about which
time Innocent died*

After the Month of September in the Year 1654. the Pope began to decline past
hopes. With the vigor of h^^ body, the faculties of his mind began (...) fail
him, insomuch as he forgot by nigh^ what he had done in the morning, an^ many
times talked idly. Upon which Donna Olimpia suffered him to be seen a^ little
as possible, even to his best Friend^ and when she could not hinder the
admittance of an Ambassador, she entreated him to use as few words as might
be; ever pretending that he had no^ Rested well that night, to make the^ think
his distemper came from want o^ sleep, and not decay of Spirits.

Prince Camillo, otherwise called Panfilio, removed his Habitation to the
Court, that is the Vatican, to receive the Audience of the Ambassadors But
they made little address, seeing the Popes condition, and that nothing ever
came to a Result, but still put off with this answer: that they must wait for
the Recovery of a decayed, dying Pope. The Princess likewise came to Court with
her Husband; but did not appear publicly, and for the most part continued in
her own Palace all the day time. In short, the Ladies were seen walk up and
down the Vatican by Night. The Princess Justiniani, the Princess Ludovisi, and
the Princess Pansilia, came in all one Night, to the high displeasure of Donna
Olimpia. Howe^^ver, this great Concourse of Women was observed only for a Month
before the Pope died. Hence was it that Pasquin seeing many Ladies in the
Vatican, contrary to the usual custom, made bold to tell Marforio merrily; Se
tu vuoi fare il Ruffiano,
Troverai Done a'l Vaticano.
If you have a mind to play the Ruffian, You may find Wenches at the Vatican.

The Pope continued ten days without any use of Reason: and it is thought;
Donna Olimpia got in that time, above half a Million. For the aspiring Spirits,
for fear of letting slip so fair an opportunity, and knowing the greediness of
Donna Olimpia run as if the Devil drove them to buy Ecclesiastical preferments:
which she bestowed with her eyes shut, so they came but with their hands open.
I know a Canon that had sought for a Bishopric more than a hundred times,
without ever obtaining it. And the reason was, he would give Donna Olimpia but
five thousand Crowns for it, and she demanded eight thousand: so that though he
came up at last to six thousand, they could not agree. But now toward the
latter end the same Donna Olimpia sends for him, to know whether he was still
in the mind he he had been formerly; and when she found him a little cool,
protesting to her that a violent temptation of the Flesh had made him spend two
thousand Crowns upon a lewd Woman: Oh, well, well, says she, then you have four
thousand Crowns left, bring them to me, that you may not lose that which I keep
for you, and you shall be Bishop for me; so shall I not lose the satisfaction
of presenting so worthy a person to that Dignity. Thus was he declared Bishop
at the very instant he laid down his four thousand Crowns. Another Clergy Man,
that had purchased a Benefice for two thousand Crowns, felt such a remorse of
Conscience a little while after, that he would not go to take possession, but
came to Donna Olimpia, and did beseech her to accept his surrender of that he
had never yet entered upon, and only pay him back three parts of what he had
given her: for he felt the torments of Hell for the Simony he had contracted.
Donna Olimpia gave him no other answer, but that the Pope was yet living, and
that he gave him his Benediction; by which means the Devils could do him no^
harm. This was the comfort she ordinarily gave to Simoniakes.

It is incredible to reckon up the gross Simonies that were committed in Rome,
during the sway of this Lady, especially toward the latter end. The Barbarini
made great have to be Rich, under the Reign of their Uncle: but yet they never
forgot their reverence to the Church, still making their gain some other way,
than by that of Simony. And if they did chance to make bold a little, it was
very privately, and not with such open impudence as this Lady. But the truth
is, the Barbarini disposed of a Church, where they were to continue as
Cardinals a now Donna Olimpia commanded a Church, which it was likely some time
or other, she would be obliged not only to quit, but fly from as a Woman.

A certain Marquess had the curiosity at a great expense and trouble, to make a
Computation of the Simonies committed by Donna Olimpia: but for fear ^f being
reputed a Heretic, he left ^is Work unfinished, having discovered that in
Marca only, which is but an ^different Province; she had sold in ^he space of
ten Years, three hundred ^hirty six Benefices, that were com^only known,
besides what had pas^d underhand. The Confessors pro^ested the name of Simony
was become ^^ scandalous and frequent, that many ^ould not go to Church,
because they ^ould not meet with Churchmen; and others finding the abuse so
general, ^ould not believe it to be a Sin.

The French Prelates had nothing to ^nswer the Protestants, that Jeered at ^he
Church of Rome for its Simony, and ^ther Enormities there committed: so that
they increased their Church very ^uch by it.

A German Bishop, who had some ^umber of Protestants in his Diocese, ^oubled to
hear so many Reproaches, and see so many Writings they published, to the shame
of the Roman Church for her frequent Simonies: took occasion one day to write
to the Congregation of Cardinals; that if the Simonies of Donna Olimpia ceased
not i^ Rome, he should run hazard of losin^ his Bishopric, and the Church of
Rom^ the People. This Letter came not t^ Rome till three days before the Pope
Death: and then Cardinal Frances^ Barbarino kept it from the other Cardinals.

Spain, which is thought the firme^ part of Christendom to the Church ^^ Rome,
began to waver a little upon tho^^ horrid accounts were brought of the Ladies
disposal of the Church. Nay, the^ were Bishops that called a Synod, to advise
how to extinguish that scandalou^ name of Simony, which gave so hig^ offense
both to Clergy and People.

At last it pleased the divine goodness, which rules all, to free the Church of
so abominable a scandal by the death of the Pope.

Innocent died the seventh of Janua^, in the Year 1655. after he had go^^erned
ten Years, four Months and ^^enty Days. A Pope, that truly might ^ve deserved a
better Record, had ^t his Manners been debauched by his ^^^ster-in-law.

The Church has no reason to com^ain of him, as he was himself; but it
^^mplains in him of Donna Olimpia. Had ^^ made Donna Olimpia live in him, and
^t he in her, his Ashes might have de^^ved an eternal Monument, and not (...)
be buried in oblivion, as it is now ^^cessary, to abolish the memory of ^^
Sister-in-law. He was not innocent, ^^cause Donna Olimpia: was Innocent: ^t had
she been innocent, he might ^en have deserved the name of Inno^^t.

The two Nights before he died, all ^^e Kindred were busy in carrying a^y the
Movables from the Vatican Donna Olimpia's Palace: and that ^^th great secrecy,
for fear if the People should get knowledge of it they should out of confidence
that the Pope were dead, stop them by the way by force, out of the great hatre^
they had for Donna Olimpia. But Fo^tune was so favorable, as not to ma^^ the
least rub in the way, as I suppos^ that she might conclude with the san^
propitious aspect upon this Lady, (...) she had begun.

Thus had Donna Olimpia no soon closed the Pope's Eyes: but leaving t^^ Body
where it had expired in the Q^rinale; she, by the assistance of some her
Confidents, got to her own Pala^ with her Son and Nephews, after h^ving given
notice to the Cardinals a^ Ambassadors by some of the Cler^ as the custom is.
But this advice w^ two days going about after the Pop^ death. For his Relations
conceal it long as it is possible, that they may f^tifie their Interest in the
mean time, a^ get Money so long as they can.

The Death of Innocent was no soo^ ^ivulged, but the City began to re^^yce, as
it always does in such Conjun^ures. And no wonder: since that which gives the
People so great a sa^sfaction, is the Liberty they have ^uring an empty Chair.
The Cardi^^ls are ravished with the Hopes that ^^ch pretend to, if not directly
to be ^ope, at least to have one of his own ^oosing. All the Kindred and
Friends ^^ the Cardinals are drunk with joy, (...) think that they may arrive
to the ^ne pitch, the former are fallen from. and lastly, the disconted parties
are and to find themselves quitted of a ^^esent oppression.

But if ever Rome was in a merry ^ood for the Death of a Pope, cer^inly it was
for that of Innocent. It ^s beyond all comparison, not so ^uch in respect of
Innocent himself, as Donna Olimpia, whom they perfect^^^ hated. All sort of
People blessed ^od for his Mercy, in delivering the church from the violence of
Donna Olimpia. It was verily believed, tha^ during the vacancy, the Fury of the
rude Multitude would have offere^ some Insolence to the P^^ace and Person of
this Lady: who therefore appeare^ abroad as little as she could. Howeve^
nothing happened. For as they say i^ Rome, When the Dog is dead, all Malidies
with him. Thus they thought (...) more of Donna Olimpia: as fearing (...) the
other side, to draw the displeasu^ of all those other great Families, s^ was
allied to, upon themselves.

But yet if ever she found her self a peck of Troubles, it was at this tim^ for
fear she should see some Pope the was her Enemy, in the Vatican. S^ was
industrious beyond measure, in si^ing out the Addresses and Inclination of the
Cardinals, and entertaining p^^vate Conferences with her Intimat^ the Barbarini
especially. So that by h^ Vigilance and contrivance she prevaile^ with some
Cardinals to make up a fl^ing Squadron, as you shall see hereafte^

It began to appear plainly in the Conclave, which was held in the Sa^resty of
S. Peter, that there was an ^vident division in the Opinions of ^he Cardinals:
and by consequence it was like to hold long, each Faction ^esolving to be
obstinate in their Cause. Donna Olimpia, that she might likewise ^ave her share
in the Conclave, that ^ight look like a Party, addressed her ^elf to some
Creatures of the New Col^edge; that is, Cardinals created by ^nnocent, to form
themselves in a Bo^^y, under the name of the Flying ^quadron. The motion was
very well ^eceived, and put into execution. It ^s true, there were some
admitted that ^ad no great kindness for Donna Olimpia: but she was assured of
the major ^art, who resolved to make no Pope, that were not a Friend to the
House of ^anfilio. Yet at last, she could not but ^ave a suspicion of them:
when having ^ent her Son, the Prince Panfilio, to en^reat the Cardinals of the
Flying Squadron, to put themselves under a Head which he named, and it was
Cardina^ John Carlo di Medici, who for his Seniority in the New College, and
the greatness of his Birth, and being the first of Innocents creation, might
have deserved; they ^ave this answer, Thi^ they had each of them a Head of
their own, and Feet to walk upon, without being beholding to any Body else for
their*

It would require some time here t^ set down all the passages and tran^actions
of the Conclave. For to sa^ truth, setting aside the Interests (...) France and
Spain, every thing be^ either to the ruin or preservation o^ Donna Olinpia.
The Cardinals the^ were her Enemies, would have give their Voices for the
Devil, if he would have stood her Enemy: and he^ Friends would have shut out a
Saint had he declared against her. And truly, their violent proceedings gave
(...) to understand as much. Those tha^ most stickled for her, were these six
^he three Barbarini, Azzolini, Cheru^ino, and Gualtieri. They were more ^han
thirty that opposed her, of which ^ight or nine of Innocents own Crea^ures,
which were the Cardinals Sfor^a, Savelli, Astalli, Lomellino, Impe^iale,
Borromeo, Pio, Ludovisio, Aldo^randino, and her own Nephew Mal^achini; who
first declared himself her ^nemy, as the Fates would have it, and made more
Noise than all of them against his Aunt. Though indeed, he ^as but laughed at
for his pains by the ^onclave, which had a very mean O^inion of him. Nay his
Aunt, when ^he heard how loud he was, said only ^his, The Voice of an Ass will
never reach ^eaven.

It was verily thought, nay, the Car^inals themselves made it appear, that ^ad
it not been for the Interests that Donna Olimpia drove on, the Conclave ^ad
been at an end within a Month, whereas now it lasted three. The La^y pleased
her self to think of Cardinal Francesco Barbarino his being Pope: (...) he that
laid her Concerns most t^ heart, after the Reconcilement. An^ truly he pushed
hard for it: carrying more than thirty Voices, that stoo^ stiffly to have none
but him. A Cardinal, who for his uprightness of Life deserved such an Honor:
had tha^ been the Rule the Conclave went by Except Barbarino, Donna Olimpia wa^
to seek whom to wish for, as a Pope t^ her purpose, had it been left to he^
choice: so that all her Endeavors were only to keep off her declared Enemies*

Among these, there were three particularly excluded for this Ladies sake* The
first was Cardinal Palotta, a Man well deserving, and one that was biassed with
no Interest, which used to b^ the great obstacle to that preferment He was no
sooner brought into play but Cardinal Barbarino declared h^ he would never give
way to the Election of a person, from whom was infallibly to be expected the
Punishmen^ ^f Donna Olimpia, who had done con^derable Injuries to Palotta. So
this Man's hopes were disappointed, to the ^^slike of many an honest Man. The
^cond was Cardinal Maculano, of the ^der of St. Dominike, who bare the ^tle of
St. Clement: and indeed there ^as not so much stir for any body in the
^onclave, as about his Election. He (...) as a Cardinal, but lived more like a
^ermite, than a person of that quality, ^ever being able to forget his Cloister
^fe: upon which many judging him to ^e a conscientious person, put hard for ^s
Election. But Donna Olimpia looked upon him as a Fury, or the Devil in hu^ane
shape: because Innocent, out of ^e perfect hatred he bare him, had ^ways
represented him so to her. And ^erefore during his Reign she was ^ontinually
putting affronts upon the ^oor man, not so much to satisfy her ^wn malice, as
to please her Brother-^^-law. Now this made the Lady doubt (...) Maculano
should be made Pope, he would take all his revenge out upon her. So she gave in
charge never t^ approve of Maculano, but to set hi^ down in the book as the
first to b^ excluded.

Barbarino promised to do his best and did it with a great deal of pains and
the help of Cardinal Antonio, wh^ concurred likewise in the exclusio^ The
Partisans of St. Clement findin^ themselves at a stand, made all mea^ possible
to quiet Donna Olimpia. The alleged that Maculano or St. Clement being a
Subject of the Duke of Parm so near a Relation to the Princess Rossrio her.
Daughter-in-law, wou^^ certainly never do her any prejudice because the
greatest mischief being what should concern her estate, h^ would never do that
for the Prince her sake, who was to share in the Inheritance. But these seeming
reason incensed Donna Olimpia the more. For when she considered that her
persecution must be kept off by the Prince^ ^er means: she took on like a
Mad^oman, swearing, That she had rather ^erish under the Indignation, than live
^^on the recommendation of her Daughter-in-law. Thus was St. Clement kept ^ut.

The third they shut out was Cecchini, ^ho hated her more than all the rest, by
^eason of the Process that was commen^ed by her means against him and
Mas^mbruno, to take away the Datary ^om th^n, and to be made incapable (...)
any office where the Pope had to ^o. In short, he was persecuted as ^^ilty of
high Treason against this ^ady: and therefore apprehending his ^^ger, she made
it her business to exclude him, and did effect it.

Many others there were that she excluded: but not with that violence as ^e did
these three, openly professing ^ther to dye, than see any of them ^ope.
Nevertheless if she had her ^ill against her enemies, which were not ^^w; she
missed of it in the behalf of her friends: and indeed she and Barbrino
declared, so they could keep o^ her sworn enemies, they did not mu^ care who
else was chosen.

However they did endeavor to s^ up Cardinal Cherubino, one of little
experience, and no Conjurer. But suc^ defects are not much consdered in the
Conclave, and therefore did him sma^ harm: They were only Donna Olimpia
Adversaries that would not admit him, because he was of her side. (...) that it
was observed more than twen^ Cardinals answered those propose Cherubino in the
self same words o^ after another, I give my vote against his because I will not
have Donna Olimpia triumph amongst the Cherubins.

This Lady had no great opinion Sacchetti, yet she did not oppose hi^ openly.
Afterward seeing how fierce his Partisans carried on his cause, wh^ thought
verily to have made him Pop^ being less afraid of him than of man others that
put for it, to cajole wi^^ ^im, she began to make Azzolini and ^ualtieri for
him; who did their weak ^ndevour, though in vain.

Cardinal Spada counterfeiting himself sick, got out of the Conclave, and
presently began to treat with Don^^ Olimpia, desiring her to stand Car^gna's
friend, who had gone all along ^ith her party: to whom she made answer, that
she had referred all to Cardinal Barbarino, whose choice she ^as resolved to
stand to. Thus retur^ed the good man into the Conclave a^^ain, but without ever
compassing his ^^esign.

The Cardinals Gualtieri and Azzo^^ni without doubt got a great deal of I will
in the Conclave, of which Cardinal Francesco Barbarino had no small ^are: and
that for the great distur^ance they made to maintain Donna Olimpia's Interest,
who was discoursed of a the Conclave with most ignominious language. They
wondered not so much ^t Azzolini and Gualtieri, because they looked upon them
as men of lives little answerable to their dignity; beside that, they were not
made by the Church but Donna Olimpia, and so not by deser^ but that which
amazed them, was to se^ a Cardinal, such as Barbarino, so good and sincere a
person, that we may say he was the glory of the Consistory forsake the Interest
of the Church, an^ embrace that of a Woman. Dive^ Cardinals, when they saw
Barbarino would not allow of Palotta and Mac^lano for Donna Olimpa's sake,
began to say, they should never have believed, that Barbarino would prefer
wicked woman before two good me^ Cardinal Sforza, who endeavored mo^ than any
to procure a Pope, that should be her enemy, that he might have the
satisfaction to see her well chastized not able to endure that Barbarino should
concern himself so much for her, we^^ about all the Conclave, telling then
according to his wonted bluntness, The till then he had taken Barbarino for ^od
Cardinal, but for the future he should ^^ok upon him as the Son of a Whore.

At last the Cardinals, weary of a three months prison, resolved to make ^n
end: the rather because it was told them the people would endure no lon^er to
be without a Head, and so much ^o their inconvenience want the usual Courts of
Judicature; besides that, ^hey murmured more and more against Donna Olimpia, as
the person they supposed in great measure guilty of this delay. This they
feared might draw ^n some. public as well as private ^hischief: and therefore
they agreed to ^ome to the election of one that should give distaste to neither
side.

And that was Cardinal Ghigi, now Alexander the Seventh. His good manners, and
exemplary Life to the world, his discreet manage, and universal learning, made
so just a composition in him, that he was the only man judged capable of
governing St. Peter is Ship in ^o boisterous times.

He was made Cardinal by Innocent with the approbation of all the house of
Panfilio. Wherefore Donna Olimpia, and those Cardinals that stuck to he^
willingly concurred in his election. For they did not think it any way likely
that he should entertain an ill though against the Kinswoman of that Pope who
had made him Cardinal.

On the other side, those Cardinal which did not favor Donna Olimpia did not
only forbear to hinder but promoted the advance of Ghigi more that all the
rest. For they did believe suc^ a Pope would be more inclined to the severity
of Eliah, then the mildness o^ Elisha: and therefore would not fail to chastise
her Ladyship for the mischief she had done the Church. They though it
impossible so zealous a Pope should forbear to give testimony to all the world
of his high resentments against that Woman, who was looked upon a engine of all
the rogueries that were committed under Innocent's reign. The Cardinals Sforza
and Astalli her sworn enemies, speaking with other Cardinals their friends
about the election of Ghigi; told them, if they both were ^^ntrived into a
Pope, they should not ^e able to punish her so sufficiently, as Ghigi would do.
For nothing could contribute so much to the scourging of ^er for her Simonies,
as the zeal of Ghigi.

Thus the night before the scrutiny, (...) being resolved upon, the Cardinals
^edici and Barbarino sent to Ghigi to ^^d him be of good comfort, that on ^e
morrow they would come to pay ^m adoration. Cardinal Rosetti Ghigi's ^^emy,
being not able to hinder the election, asked Cardinal Barbarino, that strange
extravagances are these, ^^at Donna Olimpia's enemies will have ^e same Pope
her friends desire: and her friends the same her enemies wish for. ^o which
Barbarino, that he might stop ^s mouth, and make him go along with them in the
election, answered; Marvail not: For we are resolved to have on that is not our
Creature: the Medici, on of their Subjects: France, one that the had excluded:
and Spain, an unintere^sed Person.

It is not to be imagined what Jo^ there was every where, at the Election of
Cardinal Ghigi. There was not on Negative Voice found in the Scrutiny which
seldom happens at the Election of a Pope. Rosetti himself, that sword he would
cut his Hand off, before should contribute to Ghigi's Election gave his Vote in
the end.

So soon as he was declared Pope, I fell upon his Knees, and prayed, an wept a
little, and then gave his Asse^^ taking the name of Alexander. The going out of
the Conclave in Process^ on, and conducted to the Vatican, I began to exercise
his Parts upon the Papal Authority. You could hear n^ other Discourse
throughout Rome, b^ of his Piety, from which they expected great matters.
Prince Camillo Panfilio, went one of the first to congratulate him: to whom his
Holiness ex^essed a great kindness and respect. Donna Olimpia was resolved to
be none (...) the last: but besides a Congratulation, she made him by her
Maggior^omo, she sent Cardinal Azzolini on ^urpose to spy out the Land, (an
employment very natural to him) and to ^t the Pope know how great Joy she ^^d
to see one Pope, to whom her ^nsman had opened the way by ma^ng him Cardinal;
and the more, be^^use she had always represented him to Innocent, as a Man of
extraordinary ^^rts; so that she seemed to share with ^^m in the advance of his
Fortunes.

Alexander, that knew Azzolini very ^ell, and the constitution of Donna
Olimpia; answered him in ambiguous arms, that neither argued an acceptance, nor
undervaluing of their Service: which, when Azzolini had related to the Lady,
she began to mistrust ^e worst.

Indeed Alexander had a very ill opinion of her; but would not show the effects
of it at first so vigorously, lest b^ should seem moved out of self-interest
always professing to do things leisurely and with advice, as his practice
wi^nesseth. Her Adversaries would no^ importune the Pope about her, just soon
as he was estalished: and they ha^ reason for it. For by this means, the Pope
of himself, would upon seven occasions, discover the wicked practices of the
said Lady: and when the way was once opened to her persec^tion, then would they
set their last ha^^ to the work.

They failed not of their aim. For the Pope met with Motives every day both in
his Civil, and Ecclesiastic^ Transactions, to quarrel and impriso^ Donna
Olimpia. The Datary was wholly corrupted by the Simonies she ha^ introduced, all
Places sold, no Treasure left, and a thousand other miscariages appeared every
day. His Ze^ could not see this, and sit still. Therefor he gave full
Instructions to all his Officers, Spiritual and Temporal, to ^nake strict
Enquiry, and thoroughly ^nform themselves of the Conduct of Donna Olimpia, in
the Reign of Innocent: and that he might be the more exactly certified, he not
only gave ^harge to his ordinary Officers, but debuted other private
Inquisitours in Rome, and about the State.

Donna Olimpia was so well advised of this diligence the Pope used against ^er,
that she tried all was possible to have her self. She sent Prince Panfilio to
beseech his Holiness not to give credit to the malicious Informations of ^her
Enemies, and that she referred her self to his untainted Justice and Bounty: to
which he only answered, If she ^rely upon Us, We will do her Justice.

Her Adversaries by this time began to play their parts: each profering to
prove a hundred Misdemeanors Donna Olimpia had committed against the Church.

There was not a day passed over the Pope's head, that he had not presented him
a hundred Memorials, to demand Justice against this Lady: beside private
Informations without number All those that she had made her Bargains with,
posted them.

Cardinal Barbarino, at the entreaty of Donna Olimpia, went himself to speak to
the Pope in her behalf, before matters should be gone too far: but found him so
averse to hear of any Intercession, that he durst not appear for her, as
plainly finding his word would do her more harm than good For he saw the Pope
so zealous for the good of the Church, that in stead of Clemency, he
recommended Justice to him: so that he told him at parting That he wuld treat
Donna Olimpia, as Prince ought to do with Justice, and Pope with Clemency:
though her Action showed she had neither Clemency nor Justice. But Barbarino
would not terrify the poor Lady, by repeating to her the same words, only
wished her to be as wary and circumspect, as she could.

Now the Pope began to discover his Intentions, of calling Donna Olimpia to an
account for all the Money she had received of the Church: upon which, her
Relations fearing to lose their share of so goodly an Inheritance, especially
the Prince her Son, all joined to help her. The Princess Rossano, had it been
only designed to torment her Carcass, no doubt would not have spoke a word for
her: but finding it extend to the Purse, thought her self obliged for her
Childrens sake, to endeavor her utmost to preserve not her, but her Estate.
However some of the Cardinals would not meddle with so ticklish a Business: as
to oppose a Pope, who was admired and adored, not so much for the emininence of
his degree, as his exemplary Life. Yet all joined in this advice: that she
should stand the first shock, before she fled.

In the mean time Donna Olimpia proffered to have Audience of the Pope a but she
was shamefully refused, the Pope declaring he would give Audience to no Woman,
but upon a very urgent occasion. And they say he answered the Messenger over
and above, That Donna Olimpia had been too familiar with Popes, and therefore
she might dispense with seeing them any more.

The private Inquisitours that I told you of before, who were appointed to
learn out the Carriage of Donna Olimpia while her Brother-in-law was Pope,
brought in daily thousands of Accusations against her, that ought to have been
punished not only by pecuniary Mulcts, but bodily chastisement. The cries and
complaints of so many poor Bishops that were oppressed, so many worthy learned
Men undone, so many honest Men persecuted with Hunger because they had not
Money to present Donna Olimpia for a preferment, reached up to Heaven: besides
that many times as the Pope passed the Street, you should hear the people cry
out for Justice against Donna Olimpia.

Many began already to be scandalized at the Pope, that he proceeded so slowly
^n a Business of this nature. The Barba^ini themselves, who considering the
Pope's zeal, thought it impossible for her Ladyship to escape, knew not what to
think of it: when they saw how gently he came on, after so clear Evidences. Her
adversaries daily instanced against her, and the Plaintiffs brought in their
Depositions: though indeed one would have thought the general outcry and
clamor, would have been Evidence enough to have punished her by, that had
robbed all and some.

While things were thus wavering, Donna Olimpia calls all her greatest
Confidents together, to advise how to provide against the storm. which she
looked upon as unavoidable. There were those that counseled her to retire from
Rome into some neighboring part, or into the State of some of he Nephews,
under pretense of taking the Air: but this was not approved o^ For by her
departure, she would certainly encourage her Enemies, and cause many to show
themselves, that ha^ not yet appeared: besides that the Rabble would be ten
times more Insolent in her absence, than now. Some would have had her gone to
Loreto, incognita, as out of Devotion: which was not liked for many reasons.
The rather, because not being able to get out of Rome without the Pope's Leave
and Blessing, to be sure he was already resolved to grant or deny, acccording
as it best suited with his Designs and thus it would not be discretion to make
a bootless attempt, The Prince her Son, who was by, judged it not convenient to
call the Surgeon before she was wounded: then turning to his Mother, he bid
her be of good comfort, telling her, Madam, the Fool runs away while his House
is burning down. Stay at Rome, and think of no other Refuge. Look you but to
your Person, and we will take care of your Estate. Thus was this Conference
determined with a sumptuous Collation: though Cardinal Barbarino, who was one
there, would not stay, but excused himself after his usual manner upon such
occasions.

That which Donna Olimpia's Friends and Relations proposed for her Honor, the
Pope executed by way of Justice. For he sent one of his Courtiers to Donna
Olimpia, to command her expressly from him to leave Rome within three days, and
in eight to be at Orvieto, which is a City about thirty Miles from Rome: from
whence she was not to stir, without new Orders from his Holiness.

It is no easy matter to say, how much this Order disturbed her. Yet she put a
good Face upon it; telling those that were about her, that she thanked God, who
had given her a Judge, whose good nature disposed him to nothing but what was
just; to whose Breast she referred her Cause most willingly, as assured of her
own Innocence.

Barbarino was resolved to vente^ another bout in her behalf, against his own
inclination; but he found the Pope so much more hardened than formerly, that
there was no coming near him; and so was fain to take his Leave, with a Lord
have mercy upon us. The Pope gave him no other answer to all his Discourse,
than this, We shall take more pity of Donna Olimpia, than she had sometimes of
the Barbarini. The Cardinal casting down his Eyes with his wonted gravity,
remained silent; till provoked by I know not what suggestion at last, desired
his Holiness to pardon Donna Olimpia, as his Family had done after so many
provocations. These words seemed to warm the Pope a little, without putting him
by his constant gravity: and he answered the Cardinal in his own terms, You
have excused her, because it was for Your Interest: but We cannot, because it
will hurt Our Conscience. Here the Pope stopped, and the Cardinal immediately
took his Leave, with the usual Ceremonies: returning strait to Donna Olimpia,
to give her an account of what had passed. Much about the same time, Prince
Panfilio desired Audience of the Pope: who made him be told, he would give
Audience to none of Donna Olimpia's Relations, till she were gone out of Rome.

It was therefore thought convenient that without any more to do, she should
prepare to obey his Holiness: since her delay would do her but an Injury. So
she went out of Rome, incognita, the second day after the Order. That night she
lay some two Miles out of Town, where almost all her Friends and Relations came
to see her, in particular, the Cardinals Azzolini and Gualtieri, who bid her
take heart, and fear no colors. The Prince her Son would have gone with her to
Orvieto, but she would not let him: as esteeming it more seasonable to stay at
Rome, and and see how things went. Thus continued she her Journey, and the
Prince returned, receiving at his entry into the Town, an affront from some
Boys that ran about his Coach, and sung Songs and Libels upon his Mother. It
was therefore found good prudence that Donna olimpia had conveyed her self so
privately out of Town, to escape those Insolences upon her own person.

The Town talked very much upon the commanding this Lady away. Every one spoke
to her disadvantage with a concerned bitterness. Her Relations, though Princes,
durst not almost stir abroad for three or four days, to avoid the clamours and
invectives of the people.

The same day that Donna Olimpia quitted Rome, the Pope ordered to begin to
take the Examination of Witnesses for drawing up the Process. He likewise
resolved to speak to the Consistory of Cardinals, that they would refer all to
his Prudence and Justice.

In the mean time Prince Panfilio had Audience of him, where amongst other
things he told him, that if every Pope should undertake to correct the
presupposed Faults of the Relations of his Predecessor, it would make a Noise
in the Church not a little scandalous: for the Heretics would charge all the
Blame upon the Popes themselves, without whose concurrence, his Relations would
have been able to have done little. The Pope did not like this Discourse, but
told the Prince, The Heretics are scandalized to see Faults go unpunished, and
not to see them corrected: and it is but fitting that they should give account
to the Pope, who is to be responsible to God. And so he dismissed him.

The Politicians taxed the Prince very much of Weakness and Indiscre^ion, that
he would entertain with such Discourse a Pope, who had intimated so great an
aversion to his own Kindred, as to swear he would never suffer any of them to
be admitted into Rome, or to any Command whatever: though his Predecessors had
always done it.

The Examinations all this while went on for accomplishing the Process, which
they thought would never come to an end, so many several Charges and
Impeachments coming daily one upon the neck of another* Therefore the Pope
appointed that Donna Olimpia should first give an account of what was already
brought before him. For which purpose his Holiness sent a Commissary to her
Ladyship; to give her notice, that she was to answer distinctly to these
following particulars.

1. To give an Account of all the Money taken out of the Datary, without any
occasion of the Church requirring it: forcing the Officers with Menaces to
comply with her insatiable desires and avarice.

2. That she should clear her self of what was laid to her Charge, of having
sold multitudes of Benefices: and that upon pain of Excommunication, she should
confess to the Pope all the Simonies that were committed in her time.

3. That she would refund all those several sums of Money she had received in
Composition of those that had Suits at Law, throughout the whole state of the
Church.

4. That she would give account what was become of the Revenues of so many
vacant Benefices, which the Stewards confessed to have paid in to her.

5. To show where the Salaries of so many Officers were, which were proved to
have been carried to her House.

6. She was to give account for all the Corn she had made be carried out the
State to other places, where she ordered.

7. She was to pay back again all the superfluous Expenses she had been the
cause of.

8. To count for so many Taxes, Imposts and Gabels, as were laid upon the
people, to their great oppression, by her instigation: since the Officers that
gathered them, confessed they had paid all in to her.

9. She should be obliged immediately to restore all the Jewels she had taken
out of the several Treasuries, as well of Churches, as the Popes.

10. And last of all, she was charged by more than a hundred Witnesses, to have
received over and above the ordinary Revenue, two Millions and an half of Gold
Ducats, for which no account had been given: and therefore his Holiness was
resolved she should make it good. This News was hardly so unwelcome to Donna
Olimpia, as it was to her Relations, who expected to be her Heirs: so that they
went buzzing about like so many Bees, to justify the Innocence of Donna
Olimpia. The Lady drew up a formal Writing, to make it appear that she had not
Interessed her self in the Government, and that whatever came to her hands, she
delivered it up to the Pope, who ordered it, and laid it out where there was
occasion, as other Popes used to do before him.

But these excuses were too weak to balance so many Proofs as were made out
against her. So that it was verily believed, what was whispered about Town,
that the Pope was resolved to Sequester her Estate, and imprison her Person. It
is true, this was but the rumor of the people: but assuredly, the Pope
intended to have made her give account for every particular.

While Affairs went on in this manner, the dreadful Visitation of the Plague,
fell upon Rome: so that most of the Courts being shut up, common Justice was
ecclipsed by the great Judgment, Trade left off, Commerce among themselves
suspended, and the Pope wholly taken up to save as many as he could, to give
order for the Sick and the Dead; gave a stop to the Process and time to those
who were concerned to devise a way for Donna Olimpia's delivery.

But if the hand of Man, or rather the Popes, was kept from punishing Donna
Olimpia for a season: yet Heaven, that watches while Mortals are asleep, could
not but waken the divine Vengeance against so guilty a creature. The Scourge of
the Plague visited many in Orvieto, and amongst the first that died under the
execution of that Judgment, was this Lady; who surely by her practices, thought
her self immortal.

Thus died Donna Olimpia of the Plague in Year 1656. at Orvieto, some few
Months after her persecution. Her Corpse lay above ground two days, having but
few Servants with her, that were all dead before. So that her Body was left to
the mercy of the Searchers, who were more sollicitous about her Jewels, than
her Carcass, which was in a manner exposed to be eaten by Dogs and Cats. She
died without a Confessor; which was looked upon as a Judgment upon her, who had
so highly affronted and oppressed the Clergy.

Her Name was buried in Oblivion for some time, while the Contagion stopped the
peoples mouths: and this Lady, who made so much Noise during her Life, had not
a Mourner to bewail her Death. Though no doubt had she died at any other time,
she should have had all the honor of the Church, with a solemn Funeral: but in
the mean time the Piazza's would have been fil^ed with Satyrs and Pasquils: For
the Romans neither spare living nor dead.

It was thought she left more than two Millions of Crowns in ready Money,
besides Land and Movables instimable, and what she had already bestowed upon
her Kindred. The Prince her Son was Heir to her Palace in the Piazza Navona:
which is the fairest in Rome, and where she had he^ richest Goods. Indeed,
except some few Legacies to her Kindred and certain Churches, which in all
amounted not to above three hundred thousand Crowns; all the rest fell to the
Prince who took up his Habitation in the Piazza Navona.

After her Death there was nothing more done: though it was expected the Pope
would have come upon he^ Heirs. But the truth is, by this time the Pope was
become like other men by having changed his resolutions. For he called all his
Relations up to Rome; which sight so melted his Heart, that he could not but
think of enriching them To which end it is believed, he drew a Million out of
Donna Olimpia's Estate; which, without regarding the Church the good Alexander
distributed amongst his Kindred: and so fell that Persecution in secret, which
was commenced in public. Cardinal Sforza, according to his wonted freedom,
told Friend of his, that Donna Olimpia's ^oney was passed from one Thief to
another. And thus went Donna Olimpia ^ff the Stage.

Thus conclude I her Story: least with two long a Discourse of the Dead, should
importune the patience of the ^iving.

And thus; gentle Reader, be con^ent to have read that, which I have ^een
satisfied to take the pains to write.

FINIS.

