A REPLY To the Second PART of the CHARACTER OF A POPISH SVCCESSOR. By Roger L'
Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Ioanna Brom at the Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1681.

A Reply to the Second Part of the Character of a Popish Successor.
WHoever duly considers the Bent, and the Spirit of the Two Characters here in
question, will easily Discern that the Exclusion of the Duke of York, is the
Least part of the Authors, either Hope, or Pretension. For there are but Two
ways to bring it about, viz. An Act of Parliament, or a Rebellion. As to the
Former, the King has over and over Declared himself against it; and most
Expressly in his Late Declaration, (Apr. 8. 1681. P. 7.) in These words,
(speaking of a Total Exclusion) [A Point, that in our own Royal Judgment, so
nearly concerned us, both in Honor, Justice, and Conscience, that we could
never consent to it.] Now with what face shall any Subject Presume to Importune
his Sovereign; or how can he Expect, by a Pamphlet, to Gain upon him, to the
Violation of all these Duties? And yet we see the Point pursued, though no way
in the world to be Effected but by a Sedition: which, by the method taken, a
body would suspect to be the Business too; for the Dint of the Discourse
strikes altogether that way. It Is the Popish Successor I must Confess that
makes the Report; and the Wind drives the Smoke in the face of the Duke; but
it is the King all this while that receives the Shot. As for Example: He takes
ye the Treachery of a Wolf, the Fierceness of a Tiger, the Ingratitude of a
Pardoned Traitor; and here is, in short, the Composition of his Character of a
Popish Successor; with Slavery and Damnation at his Heels. This Frightfull
Figure puts the People naturally upon That Question, Act. 16. 30. What must we
do to be saved? Why truly (says the Character) the King has lost himself
Strangely with sticking to his Brother. [His Peoples Knees are almost as
Stubborn, as their Petitions and Prayers have been Ineffectuall. (And I am
afraid there are too many, who in Detestation of that One Gangreen'd Branch of
Royalty, can scarce forbear (how Undutifully soever) to Murmur, and Revile,
even at that Imperial Root that Cherishes it. Pa. 10. Part 1.] Insomuch that
[in Studying to Prevent Tyranny, they grow Jealous of Monarchy, etc. And so far
from Supplying the Real and most Pressing Necessityes of his Majesty, that they
are rather well pleased, and Triumph, in his Greatest Wants: and that perhaps;
when his Glory, nay possibly when his nearest Safety calls for their
Assistance. P. 11.]

The Writer of the Character has told the People a Heavy Tale here, but what if
their Knees will not bend? what if there be Murmurings and Revilings; and not
one farthing of money to be gotten? Are we ever the nearer the Disinheriting of
a Popish Successor, for all this? No; But if the King will not yield, the
Character will show you a Trick for that too. The Lords Anointed? [I would ask
(says he) what this LORDS ANOINTED Is? And who it is is our Native Sovereign?
When instead of being Free Subjects, Pope and Tyranny shall rule over us, and
we are made Slaves and Papists? P. 20.] And then below: [What's a Passive
Obedience, to a King of England? Alas! That Bugbear, Passive Obedience, is a
Notion crept into the World, and most Zealously, and perhaps as Ignorantly
Defended [Kings were made for the People, and not the People for the King P.
21.] And yet once again. [If now at last Popery must, and shall come in; (as by
Law it cannot) and consequently must be restored by Arbitrary Power: If a new
Monarchy, then a new Conquest; and if a Conquest, Heaven forbid we should be
Subdued like less then Englishmen; or be Debarred the Common Right of All
Nations, which is, to Resist, and Repel any Invader, if we can P. 21.] Now to
run it short (he might even as well have told us in plain Terms; Look to your
Selves my Masters; Here Is a Popish Successor coming on that will send yeu all
to the Devil. Ye have the whole Nation on your side, Never trouble your heads
about the King. What Is a KING? What is this LORDS ANOINTED? Is he not Our
Servant? May not we Resist him if he Invade us? Passive Obedience is a Bugbear
and does not concern us here in England, Wherefore let us Maintain our Rights,
or fall like Englishmen. If This be not a Sedition, Contrived Chalked out, and
Justified. I do not know what Is.

To this Ch^racter of a Popish Successor, etc. I wrote a Reply, Entitled, The
Character of a Papist in Masquerade; to which the Author of the First Character
has now put out a Rejoinder, which he calls, The Character of a Popish
Successor Complete: In Defense of the First Part; against Two Answers, One
Written by M. L'Estrange, called The Papist in Masquerade, etc. And Another, by
an unknown hand.

Upon a Thorough Examination of this Piece, I find it to be only a Pompous,
Wordy Thing, and wholly made up of Shifts, and Suppositions; without so much as
one Argument. either Offered, or Answered, upon the Stress of the Question: so
that I shall; both for the Readers ease, and my own, pass over the Ramble of
his Discourse, and keep my self as close as I can to the Subject in hand.

It is the main Scope of his Design, first, to show the People a Popish
Successor, in Imagination, as Black and Hideous as the Devil and Malice can
Paint him. 2. to set forth the Absolute Necessity of Barring, and Precluding
such a Successor, upon pain of Bondage, and Damnation. And 3. Since the King
will not be wrought upon, against his Brother; To teach his Subjects a way of
doing it by themselves; by Absolving them in this Particular Case from the
Common Ties of Christianity, Prudence, and Allegiance.

To These Three General Heads, I opposed Certain Previous Considerations, which
he takes very little notice of in his Reflections upon my Papers, though the
whole sum of this Controversy does most undeniably depend upon the Resolving
of those Points. But of this hereafter. As to the rest, I followed my Parallel,
betwixt the Barefaced Jesuits, and the Disguised; betwixt the Proceedings of
One and Forty, and of Eighty One, as a necessary Precaution, that under the
Pretense of Abolishing the NAME of Popery, we might not Establish the DOCTRINE
of it.

In the first Page of the Preface, it is observed upon L'Estranges Character,
that [the sole Drift of his Book was not in the least to Expose Popery any
further, then to make the Fanatical and Iesuitical Principles agree, etc.]

Well! and what can expose Popory further then to prove it Fanaticism; and to
Range the Papists with the Smiters of their Fellow Servants, (Matthew. 24. 49.)
and according to that Dreadful Sentence, (Matthew. 24. 51.) to appoint Jesuits
their Portion with the Hypocrites?

Take his Opinion (says the Character) abstracted from that Design, and his
whole Book has no other aim, but to make All our Dangers of Popery, and a
Popish Successor; and all the whole Plot against the King, Religion, and
Government (to use his own Phrase, P. 69.) but a Painted Lion upon a Wall; and
the Opposers of those Dangers a real Bed of Vipers.

Is L'Estrange then so great a Friend to the Fanatics, that he Acquits the
Pap^sts, in making them Both Criminals alike? Or how will it hang together,
that under the Notion only of Two sorts of Jesuits, and Both equally Dangerous,
the One shall be but a Painted Lion, and the Other a Real Bed of Vipers? Now
over and above this Contradiction implied how many Impious, Impudent, False,
and Non-sensicall Fellows should I have been, if I had dealt but half so
disingenuously with the Character-maker as he has done with me. Take notice
first, how he has Imposed upon me in misapplying the Citation, for my Words are
these, P. 69. It were no Ill Emblem of the Original of our Late Troubles, to
fancy a man in a fright, and Leaping from a Painted Lion upon a W^ll, into a
Bed of Vipers. From hence does he infer my disbelief of the Plot, and
pronounces upon me, as one that makes it his b^siness to turn All the Dangers
of Popery, and a Popish Succ^ssor into a mere mockery: when yet my Reply upon
his first Char^cter, speaks the clear contrary [So far am I from undertaking to
dispute the danger of a Popish Successor, that I Will compound the matter with
him beforehand, and take all his suppositions of Difficul^ies and Hazz^rds for
Granted:] And then again in the same Page [I am as much against the Principles
and Practices of the Church of Rome (wherein the Church of England has
departed from that Com^uni^n) as any man living that keeps himself within the
compass of Christian Charity, Humanity, and Good Manners: and so far I shall
heartily join with the Compil^r of the Character, by a Previous Concession of
the Inconveniences (as I have said already) that may arrive by reason of that
Religion. Is this fair dealing or no? But you shall see now how he Rivets it.

You must allow him (says he) this Great Fundamental; that all the Sticklers
against Popery, and a Popish Successor are Fanatics, and that all Fanatics
hate both the King and Kingly Government, and are Tooth and Nail downright
Republicans. Upon this Basis his whol^ Fabric stands, Ibid.

The Author has put a thing in my Head now, I should not ^ave thought of, and
truly I could find in my heart to give him his asking. For I would Distinguish
betwixt the Litigious Humor of Stickling against Popery, as the Fanatics do,
and the Modest Judicious way of opposing it, after the manner of the Church of
England: a Stickler, in this case, being only a Waspish kind of Common Barreter
in Religion. But however, he must be a Stickler against the Communion of the
English Church, as well as against that of the Church of Rome, to be a Fanatic
in my opinion: In which case, his Zeal, on the One hand, does not at all Excuse
his Schism on the Other. And to Gratify him yet further, in his other Point;
let him name what sort of Dissenters he pleases, and let me try if I cannot
show him Anti-Monarchical Principles; and Positions Destructive both of Church
and State, in the Avowed Writings of the most Eminent of the Party.

When he has Handy-dandy'd the Character, and L'Estrange, Just as Puncinello
plays his Puppets, and given which of them the better on it he pleases; he sets
up a Great Fundamental for me; and runs away with it for a matter of a Page and
a half, calling Heaven and Earth to give Evidence to the truth of a Plot, which
no Mortal denies; and winds up at last in the Definition of a Fanatic of these
Times.

He that values the Safety of himself and his Posterity; he that thinks he has
an Estate, and Liberty worth Preserving; a Country worth Saving; a Religion
worth defending; and indeed a God worth Serving, it a FANATIC. Pref. P. 3.

I shall Appeal to the World now, which is the True Fanatic, His, or Mine.

He that places the safety of Himself and his Posterity in breaking the Laws,
both of God and man; He that makes his Liberty a Cloak for Maliciousness; He
that Cries, Give the King no Money, when his Country is ready to be Swallowed
up; and Triumphs in his Majestys Greatest Wants. (Char. Part. 1. Pa. 11.) when
his Glory, nay his NEAREST SAFETY Calls for Assistance; He that Contends for
Schism to the Overthrow of Religion, and calls Murdering of Kings, and
Subverting of Governments, [doing God good service] He is a Fanatic.

He Proceeds in his Preface, to the Invalidating of my Parallel, betwixt Forty
One and Eighty; and upon my saying, that the very Sound of Popery did the
business against the Last King, as well without a Ground, as with it; [What's
all this (says he) but to tell us, because a Bugbear Frighted us once,
therefore a Real Fiend must not Fright us now? Because a Judas once Kissed and
Betrayed, and a Joab Embraced and stabbed, therefore no man must ever Kiss and
Embrace without a Treacherous and Murtherous Intention?

And what is all this; (say I) but to tell us, on the Other side, that though
the Bugbear of Forty One proved a Real Friend to us, we are yet to take the
same Fiend again, in Eighty One for a Bugbear? And so for Judas and Ioab, If
the Same Judas, kisses again, and with the Same Words in his Mouth too, why may
we not suspect the Same Intentions? And likewise if the Same Ioab Embraces
again, and the Old Poniard be found about him still, (the Deposing Maxims of
Forty One, which is the very Case) Have we not Reason then to believe that he
has Murder in his Heart? And Hear him once again now.

Because a Knot of Achitophels once Pretended Grievances where none was, to
accomplish their own Wicked Purposes, therefore no Subject shall, or may
Petition or Vote, though in a Legal, Parliamentary way, for the Redress of the
Greatest Grievance in Nature, and that in the Plainest and most Imminent
Exigence of a Nation, etc. Pref. Page 3.

My Answer must be still the same; that the very same Achitophells, Pretending
the very same Grievances, and Proceeding by the very same Met^ods have probably
the very same Wicked Designs and Purposes. And now to that which follows; Bear
me Wittness Good People, that I meddle with neither Votes, nor Petitions, but
only with Seditious Libells that carry the name of Petitions: as who should say
[Take notice, (my Countrymen) the King is wholly carried away by Iesuitical
Councills, May it Please your Majesty to Call a Parliament. His Majesty will
never suffer this Plot to be searched to the Bottom; A Speedy Parliament we
Beseech ye Sir. The King Employs none but Popish and Disaffected Officers, Let
us have a Parliament we Beseech your Majesty, to sit, till All our Grievances
are Redressed.] Do You Call this, Addressing, or Libelling? Or how come these
Scandals to wear the name of Petitions?

He has another Touch at my Parallel in the next Page [The Design (he says) of
that Age, being to Reduce us to Slavery, and this to Free us from it] This is
more said then he is able to make out; for how does he know that the men of
Forty One Designed us to Slavery; and that the same men in Eighty One are
Designing to Free us from it? Does not Popery and Arbitrary Power, from the
same Lips signify just the same thing now that it did then? And why may not a
man Conclude, that the Same Persons, with the same Pretenses have still the
Same End^?

Th Grievance of the Nation (he says) is a Popish Successor; and That Grievance
once Removed by a Bill of Exclusion, we Counter-mine All the Arts, and
Subtilties of Rome. The King shall have Money, and the Entire Affections of
All, or most of the Commonalty of England, which have, or can be Alienated, or
Estranged, by his Unhappy and too Vigorous Defense of a Successor, so
universally Odious.

This Clause is to Possess the People, that the Excluding of a Popish Successor
would do the whole Business. It is a Great Blessing to the Party that men of
this Kidney are never to be put out of Countenance; for the Author would Blush
else at a Suggestion that every man that can read, is able to Contradict.
Here Is the Subject of a Popish Successor Started, and the Prerogative of a
Protestant King, in Possession, Invaded, by every Pamphleter that Presumes to
handle this Question; for there are Popish Forts, Popish Castles, Popish
Militia's, Popish Guards, Popish Courtiers, Popish Counselors, Popish Judges,
Popish Iuries, Popish Bishops, and in fine, Popish Torys, and Tantivys, as well
as Popish Successors. And All these Popish Circumstances must be either
Removed, or secured, to the good liking of the Faction; or else the Diverting
of the Succession (according to the Ordinary language of the Press) is as good
as nothing. And then to Crown the Contumely, That Prince is Charged with
Affecting an Arbitrary Power whole almost Fatal Concessions already have but
barely left him Power enough to keep the Crown on his Head. But what is the
meaning now, of Cramping, and Imposing upon the Civil Power, what is that to
Religion and the Plot? The Solution is this: The Faction, Designing upon both
Church and State, finds it Expedient to Attaque both together; to the end that
the Project upon the score of Religion may hold out till they have Gained their
Ends upon the Monarchy.

His next Intimation of the Kings having lost the Affections of the People; for
asserting the Rights of his Brother, (though according to Honor, Justice and
Conscience as his Majesty himself Declares) This Intimation (I say) is so far
from the Report of a Truth, (as appears by the almost Unanimous Addresses of
the Nation to the Contrary, that it is clearly an Artifice to Render his
Majesty low in the Opinion of his People.

He Passes now to a Reflection upon Times and Times, wherein to my thinking,
the Reason lies strong and Directly against him. [The Miseries of the Late
Civil Wars) (he says) are too lively in the Peoples Memorys, for them ever to
be wrought up again into the same Frenzy.] Now I fancy on the other hand, that
the Comig off so Cheap, and with so much Profit and Advantage for one
Rebellion, is a great Encouragement for the same Persons to venture upon
another. I am the larger upon the Preface, because it is somewhat better
Colored then the Text.

Though the Deluded Multitude (says he, Ibid.) were then put out of love with
Kings, they found too soon, by Woeful Experience, that the Protectorate was ten
times worse, and whatever Prejudice they had conceived against the Old Unhappy
King, yet the Grievous Oppressions, Taxes, and standing Armies, under Cromwell,
quickly opened their Eyes, and to their own Sad Cost, Assured them, they had
not mended, but Marred their Condition by Rebelling. Ibid.

I would he had Explained himself whether it was TOO SOON in the Peoples
opinion, or in his own. And then he speaks again as if the Rebellion had been
only the setting up of the Protector; for he takes no notice of any Grievous
Oppressions, Taxes and standing Armies till the Protectorate of Cromwell; And
all the Interval, (betwixt Driving the King from London, and the setting up of
that Mock-Royolet) under the Blessed Administration of the Lords and Commons,
was only a Certain kind of method peculiar to the Godly for the asserting of
the Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the Subject, against the Fears of
Arbitrary Power, and Popery. I come now to the Conclusion of his Preface.

I will confess (says he) This present Age has Derived one thing from Forty
one, and Forty two; and that is, a Curse they l^ft behind 'em: The Curse of the
Sheperds boy in the Fable; Our Crying out so often formerly, Help Master, Help;
the Wolf^s in the Sheepfold; when he was not there, has made us Disbeliev'd at
last now he is there; and like him too, be left most Helpless when we most want
it]

The Author may be pleased to take notice; that our Business does not lie with
the Wolf in the Fable, but with the Wolf in the Gospel; the Wolf in Sheeps
Clothing: and that the very Wolves that Worryed the Flock under the Last King,
are now again Grinding their Teeth at 'em under This. And so much for his
Preface; We shall now proceed to his Text.

Upon my Arguing, that if Christian Princes, under Articles of Treaty, and
Agreement, keep Touch even with Infidels, much more will Christians keep Touch
with one another. [What Relation (says he) P. 1.) can Christian Princes keeping
Touch with Infidels have to a Popish Successors Tyranny, and Injustice over his
own Subjects?] And again P. 2. The Fidelity between Prince and Prince, holds no
Proportion or Affinity with that betwixt Prince and People. A King for Breach
of Faith with his People, Esteem^ himself only accountable to God; but for
Breach of Faith with Foreign Princes, whether Christians or Infidels, he is
accountable to man, and may draw down a just War upon his Head for such a
Violation, etc.

If I had not more Respect to the Rules of Good Mann^rs, then to the force of
his Reasoning I should, upon such an occasion as this, treat him as Coursly as
he does me upon all occasions. The Question is not what a Popish Prince will do
upon Interest, but what upon C^nscience, and Religion, In which Case, the
Morality is the Same to another Prince and to a Subject; so that our Author is
quite beside the Cushion, [But what (says he) if his Priests shall persuade him
that he ought not to keep his Faith? And what, say I, if his Conscience shall
tell him he will be damned if he does not? Is not the Why and the Wherefore
here as broad as it is long?

The Characterizer (says he) tells us P. 3* That in a Bigoted Prince, his
Moralls shall be Slaves to his Zeal. And then [I am ashamed that any men that
pretend to write sense, should endeavor to Persuade us that a Popish Bigot,
and a man of Courage, and Wisdom in a Successor, should not go further toward
the Establishing of Popery, then a Coward, and a Fool.]

I will allow that he that is Daring enough to Attempt any thing, and Subtle
enough, to play his Game to the most Advantage, is much m^re Capable, then a
man less Bold, and Crafty, of bringing his Ends to Pass. But what is this
Fear^^ssness, and Cunning, to True Courage, and Wisdom, that Govern all our
Actions according to the Measures of Right Reason, and Justice? So that the
Author gets nothing upon this Point, unless he can make out Temerity, and
Breach of Faith to be Virtues. But the Great Danger I find is in a Bigoted
Papist, and either our Popish Successor is That, or That Danger does not fall
into this Case.

Had we an Heir Apparent (says the Character, Ibid) of no more Religion then a
Julian, or a Nero, and yet at the same time were Completely Master of the Moral
Virtues, possibly he might steer, etc. Now would I fain have the Author of the
Character, and his Deputy to lay their Heads together upon this Text. We might
do well enough (he says) with a Julian, a Nero, etc. and why not well enough
then, as he himself has stated the matter? P. 13. in his Reply upon L'Estrange,
[If his Royal Highness (says L'Estrange) would have played the Hypocrite as the
Characterizer charges it upon him, he would have Rendered himself a Protestant
to the Eye of the World, though a Papist in his heart; That being the only
means to have Gained him his Point. But Behold now with what Indignation the
Character-maker Reflects upon such a Supposition.

I wonder (says he) to what Readers these Authors write, that at this time of
day, they would make us believe that his Squeamishness against the Test, and
the Oath of Supremacy, made our Conscientious Heir quit his Honorable
Employmentn! As we better remember, 'Twas not so much the Test, as the
Test-makers, that Disgusted him. His natural Antipathy to Parliaments, his
Continual Little thoughts of that Great Council, (and less of them he will
have if ever he comes to the Crown) with his Disdain, that such Insolent Earth
and Ashes should dare to give Laws to his Divinity. So that in short, his
Pride, not his Conscience got the Ascendent; and whatever Advantages he might
have gained by-keeping his Employments, and swallowing the Oaths, yet such is
his Perverse, and Stubborn Haughtiness, that he would rather cry, Sink
Interest; Perish Succession; and even Popedom it self, rather then Truckle to
what I Scorn.

The Reader will take notice here, of the shifting of the Scene, and that the
Business is no longer the POPISH Successor, the BIGOTED Successor: but the
PERVERSE, the STVBBORN, the HAVGHTY Successor: The Successor of no Religion at
all. So that he has Changed his Battery, from the Opinion and Profession of the
Successor, to the temperament of his Humor: and the same Bolt strikes a
Perverse KING to the Heart, as well as a Perverse SVCCESSOR. Nay, the Character
lays violent Hands upon it self in this Paragraph, and cuts the very throat of
its own Arguments. What Is become now of all his Expanded Rhetoric, and his
Embroder'd Allegories? One hasty word has laid this mighty piece of Ostentation
level with the ground: And the Character-man has discharged the Successor, of
the most dangerous point, out of his own Mouth. Why here is no Popery in the
Case, it seems. [Perish Popedom it self (says he) rather then Truckle to what I
Scorn] His Spite (as we are told) was not at the Test, but the Test-maker, and
it is the Character-maker Probably too that has the Spite at him. And who knows
but the Test-maker, and This Character-maker may be somewhat akin too?

Now for the Dukes Antipathy to Parliaments, I never heard this charged upon
him, but by those that had an Antipathy for Kings; And all this is only
Fleshing of a Faction upon the Duke, to prepare them for further Attempts upon
his Majesty himself.

After this Gross and Palpable Contradiction of himself; First in casting the
whole weight of his Argument, and of our Danger upon the Religion, and
Bigottery of the Duke. And then in declaring him to be of no Religion at all;
and so far from Bigoted to the Church of Rome, that he would Sacrifice even
the Popedom it self to his humor; (which shows that he writes his Gall, not
his opinion) The Reader will not be surpised, I suppose, at the boldness of
any Calumny, after so Malicious, and so Shameless an Imposture. This is to
prepare the Reader for another piece of Confidence and Invention in the Story
of one R^hux, P. 3. Wherein, if it were possible, he has outdone himself.

Take notice that this Relation was first exposed to the World, (at least I
never heard of it before) in the Second Letter about the Black Box, under the
Title of [A Letter to a Person of Honor, etc.] The Character calls him Rohux;
the Letter Monsieur Rohan: the one being only an Improvement of the other, and
the Original came into the world with the Black Box, unless possibly the Hint
might be taken from the Story of Marsilly, the Person that Negotiated the
Triple Alliance, who having been in England went away again about his Business;
was taken afterward by a Party of French out of one of the Cantons of
Switzerland, carried to Paris, and there broken upon the Wheel. This Account of
Marsilly agreeing with that of Rohux in all the Circumstances of an Agency in
England, his Seizure, and his Execution. Now though this Narration carries in
the very face of it the most Manifest Marks of Falsehood, in Respect, not only
of the Incoherence and Incredibility of the Parts of it; but in regard also of
the (almost) Impossibility of the Particulars coming to light, which are
therein Suggested; I shall yet, over and above, Recommend to the Peruser of
these Papers, the Disagreements betwixt the Character, and the Letter, which
will abundantly Evince the whole matter to be only a Scandalous Contrivance.

This same Rohux (says the Character, P. 3.) was Commissioned as an Agent into
England, to Implore his Majesty's Mediation to the French King in favor of the
Hugonots of France, and applied himself to his Royal Highness to Facilitate his
Access.

Now the Letter says, that Monsieur Rohan (as he is there called, came into
England to treat with the King concerning an Alliance betwixt his Majesty, and
Foreign Protestants, merely for the Preservation of their Religion, and that
having acquainted the Duke of York with his Errand, etc.

We Will first observe the Differences, as we go; and afterward, set forth what
moved the Author of the Character to change his Tale. The One makes Rohan's
business to be a General Proposal of an Alliance; the Other only a Bare and
Particular Intercession for the Hugonots of France. The one only makes the Duke
acquainted with the Proposal; the other Addresses Expressly to the Duke for his
Recommendation.

Now says the Character again. [This Royal Heir, or Masquerader, (or by what
other Title Disguised or distinguished) with a seeming Cordial Friendship
Embraces the Poor Hugonots Cause; and day after day Receives his Addresses with
many Solemn but Airy Promises of Speedy Assistance; but in the mean time,
Disgusted, and Galled to the Soul, at so Audacious and Impious a Petition, as
the Protestant Pr^^ervation; and Abhorring so Detestable an Employment; (Nay,
(...) very Name of the Heretics Defender) instead of his Promised Aid, he, on
the contrary, most cunningly laid the Platform of a Revenge, as exquisit as so
Heinous a Petition deserved. Immediately ^e goes to the French Ambassador, and
tells him how one of the French Subjects had very Arrogantly and Scandalously
Calumniated his Great Master, with Opprobrious names of Tyranny, Oppression,
and Breach of Faith; into which very language he himself before had Exasperated
him, on Purpose to make his Ruin Secure, which the Bare accusation of a suit
in behalf of his Religion would not alone have Effected. The Ambassador, (as
bound in Duty, for the vindication of his Kings Honor) desires a further
Testimony of the Offense and Offender: which the Royal Informer effectually
gives him, by appointing another Conference with Rohux; Where Privately he
Plants this Kingly Representative as an Honorable Eves-dropper to overhear a
Repetition of the whole Discourse, and Confirm his Belief from his own Ears.
This Conference P. 4.) Contrived and Managed as heart would wish, the
Ambassador Posts over this Rohuxs Treachery to France, whilst he, Poor
unsuspecting Innocence, Continues his Daily Prayers to his Great Advocate. But
finding in time so many Dilatory Demurs, He luckily at last Discovers he is
Betrayed: Upon which, Dreading the French King, not daring to Return to France,
He steals away into Switzerland for his Protection; but the French King being
advertised of his Motions, gets him Trep^nn'd by an Ambuscado in the night, and
being by Surprise forced out from thence into France he is broken upon the
Wheel.

Now hear the Letter. Mounsieur Rohan having acquainted the Duke of York with
his Errand, after he had in a Private Conference or two transacted with the
King about it, this Royal Prince, out of his wanted kindness to Protestants,
and the Reformed Religion, caused Ruvigni (Lieger Ambassador from France at
this Court) to stand behind the Hangings at St. James, while he made this
Innocent Gentleman discourse over the whole busness. Upon which, Mr. Ruvigny
being obliged to acquaint his Master with it, M. Rohan, who, (upon some
Information that the Duke had betrayed him) had withdrawn hence to Switzerland,
was there seized by a Party of French-Horse, and brought to the Bastile,
whence, after some time of Imprisonment, he was carried to the Place of
Execution and broken on the Wheel.

Here Is nothing in this Letter, of the Seeming Friendship mentioned in the
Character; the Promises of Assistance; the Plot of Revenge, the Trepanning of
Rohux into Outrages against his Master, nor of the Dukes Lewd Contemplations
upon the whole matter, which it is Impossible for him to give an account of too,
and fitter, in short, for a Stage then a History. So that all these
Aggravations are only the Old Story Corrected and Amended, with Additions, for
the Credit of his Character. And what is his Authority now for this Diabolical
Report, but that Infamous Composition of Forgery and Scandal, the Letter about
the Black Box? Wherein, after all these Vile Imputations upon his Royal
Highness, the Duke comes off yet better in it then the King.

After his Utmost Effort upon this Romantic Masterpiece of Defamation, he
lets himself down for a while into a vein of Quirk and Cavil, and then takes
wing again ( P. 8.) into another fit of Rapture and Imagination.

Were there a Country (says he) where Commissions of Peace, day after day, and
Time out of mind, have been taken away for daring but to lift a hand against a
Son of Rome; Nay, at the same time; when all other Recusants have been
Prosecuted, and that with Encouragement, and Reward: And all by a Royal Heirs
Pretection and Interest, etc.

This way of Trifling might do well enough in a Chimney Corner with a Once upon
a time there was a Country, etc. but Majesty is not to be played with at this
Idle Rate. The Plain English of it is this; [Look to your selves Good People;
the King is Popishly affected; he will not let any man touch a Papist, but the
poor Protestant Dissenters all this while; they go to pot; etc,] and then he
thinks to bring it off by casting it upon the Interest or Power of the Duke
with his Majesty. The very affirming of it is a Scandal; for how does he know
whether it be so or no? Or what if it were so? Is it not the Kings Act, whoever
advises him to it? Or can any man say that the King does an ill thing (however
influenced) without reflecting upon his Majesty's Honor and Justice? Beside
the Evident untruth of the matter of Fact, the Laws being vigorously Executed
against the Papists; and the Recusants, on the other side Indulged, till they
so far abused the Kings mercy by daily affronts, that it was not safe to
forbear them any longer.

His Ninth Page is stuffed with Reflections upon the Government, and first,
upon the Bench for the Sentence upon Harris for Publishing the Appeal; a Libel
that excites Rebellion, and supports it self in the Encouragement of it, upon
this Position, that He that has the worst Title makes the best King.

And again in the same Page [had the Papists Execrable Blow succeeded, the
Blood of Majesty might in all Probability have found the same Inquisition as
the firing of London. What is this but to Imply an Imputation upon the House of
Commons, that had the Examination of the whole matter before them; and likewise
upon his Majesty himself, his Ministers, and Courts of Justice; as if they had
not done their parts toward the Discovery of it in their Respective Stations?

And yet once again (Ibid) Has not our Late Design against both King, Religion,
and Government, in Contradiction of the Unanimous Vote of the whole Nation in
Parliament, being Confidently Retorted upon the Presbyterians? And that too
without the least Proof or shadow for it? And then how easily might the Papal
Policy have made a Popish Murder, a Fanatic Stab?

They do ill Certainly that turn the Popish Plot upon the Presbyterians; and
little better sure, that turn the Plots of the Scottish Presbyterians, and
their Fellow-Covenanters in England, upon the Papists: And for the Popish
Policy of making a Popish murder a Fanatic Stab; that is only a shift they
learned of the True Protestant Papists, that turned a Fanatic murder into a
Popish Stab. I proceed now to Page 11.

Now in my apprehension (says the Author) never did any man so forget himself
as Mr. L'Estrange has done here: He believes here, that that Unchristian
Impression, as the Allowance of Perjury, is only the Tenet of some profligate
wretches wholly lost in Brutality and Blindness. But at the latter end of his
Book, (P. 83.) he downright contradicts that Belief, and says, Pope Pius
Quintus absolved the Subjects of Queen Elizabeth from all their Oaths of
Allegiance to her for ever. So that now belike it was not only the Maxim of the
abovesaid profligate wretches, but even of the Great Successor of Peter, etc.

Now in my Apprehension, the Author is every jot as much out of the way as
L'Estrange; for the Same Person may be a Pope, and a Profligate wretch into the
bargain; even by the Concession of Baronius himself, and the best of their own
Writers.

In the twelfth Page I am Corrected again; Mr. L'Estrange (he says) forgets
himself, a little further in this Point; and says in the same 83. Page, [That
the Romish Jesuit holds, that Dominion is founded in Grace, and upon that
Principle, Deposes Protestant Princes, etc. then adds, that the Pope may
deprive a King of his Royal Dignityes for Heresy, Schism, etc.

Now by the Authors leave Those Two Words THEN ADDS, refer to another
Paragraph. My business being only to show Certain Instances wherein the very
worst Positions of the Romish Jesuits are Matched, if not Outdone, by the
Covenanting Jesuits; and as much the Tenets of Profligate Wretches on the One
side as on the Other.

He takes me to task again (P. 13.) for saying [That in the Case of a Popish
King, who is either kept out, or Driven from the Exercise of his Right by the
tumultuary License of the Rabble, an Oath of Abjuration, in Case of any fair
opportunity for him to Assert his Claim with his Sword in his hand, will be so
far from Engaging any man against him, that yielded contrary to his Conscience,
to Swallow it, for the saving of his Stake, that he will find no Firmer Friends
to his Cause, or Interest, then those men that are stimulated both by Honor
and Revenge to the Execution of their Duties.] And upon this Clause, (he says)
it is plain, that by those Abjuring-Oath-Swallowing Friends, I can mean no other
but the Church of England Protestants. And afterward, (P. 14.) once again for
laying so wretched, so Despicable and so cowardly a Condescension at their
Doors, as the Abjuration of Gods anointed, and their Native Sovereign, to save
a Stake, a Cow, a Farm or a Cottage. Aye, But that Abjuration is but a Copy of
their Countenance he tells ye. Fie Mr. L'Estrange, this is worse and worse!
What? the Members of the Church of Englands Communion of Notoriously break a
Gospel Precept, as to come to a So help me God, with a Lie in their Mouths, and
a Reserve in their hearts; to play the Hypocrite, and that too, even with
Oaths; and to do so Impious an Ill that Good may come of it?

What a Stir is here about nothing? My Reasoning lies thus: If it comes to a
Push, the Enemies of the Successor will undoubtedly have recourse to their old
Practice of Imposing an Oath of Abjuration, for the securing of themselves in
their Usurped Possessions: And if any (say I) shall be so weak, or so wicked,
as to take it, It will only serve for a Spur to their Revenge, so soon as they
shall meet with a fair opportunity to Break it, without any obligation upon
them at all to the contrary. So that I do not say, either that it is Lawful to
take such an Oath, or that any Church of England-men will Submit to do it; but
that whoever shall be so far Prevailed upon, will find himself both bound in
Conscience to break it, and Pricked in point of Honor to Avenge himself upon
the Imposers of it.

I would here desire the Reader to wash his Eyes; for the Author is about to
show him [one of the most notorious falsehoods averred that ever looked Light
in the face.] (P. 15.) And this is it. L'Estrange says in the Case of Harry the
Great, [The People of France, though Roman Catholics, would not submit to the
Dispossessing of a Protestant Successor.] Now says the Character; [The Roman
Catholic People of France were so far from admitting this Protestant Successor
to the Throne, that it is Recorded, they shut their very Gates against him; and
so little acknowledged him their King, that the Pope, and the States of France
were for setting up no less then Three Competitors against him, etc.

It Is very true; the Iesuited, and the Rebellious Papists of the League did
shut their Gates upon him, as our Iesuited Covenanters shut the Gates of Hull,
and other places here in England against our Sovereign. But still there was a
Party of Honorable, and Loyal Roman Catholics that joined with the
Protestants in his Defense, and Support; And if the Author of the Character
had not been very much to seek as well in the Civility as in the History of
France, he would never have called that a Point Blank Falsehood, which has the
Best Authority of France to Vouch it for an Unquestionable Truth. And then so
many of his Roman Catholick-Subjects adhering to him, notwithstanding the Popes
Declaring against him, makes it a clearer Case that his Holynesses Deposing of
an Heretical Prince does not Absolve all Papists from their Allegiance to him.
In one word; It was upon that Revolution, with the Papists in France, as it was
not long since with the Protestants in England. Those that were Factious, and
Seditious, took up Arms against their Prince; and those that were Honest and
Loyal, Assisted him.

He goes on with a Flourish upon the Instance of Sigismund King of Sweden, [In
whom (says he) Neither Magnanimity, Justice, All the Cardinal virtues that
adorned him, nor all the Promising Perfections and Accomplishments of Nature,
strengthened with all the Bonds of Protestations, Oaths, or Sacraments, could
hold the Headstrong Violence of his Religion.] P. 16.)

Here is first an Argument drawn from a Particnlar to an Universality; as if,
because this Prince brake his Faith; no Popish Prince ever did, or will keep
it. Would either the Author of this Character now, or his Deputy take it well
to be paid in his own Coin, or by his own Measure? Here Is an Opposer, in truth,
of his Royal Highn^ss rather then of a Popish Successor; who to get the fairer
blow at his Person has Discharged the Point of Religion. This Opposer (I say)
of the Duke of York has let fall many Dangerous words (as is already proved) in
his two Characters, against his Majesty's Person, Authority, and the very Frame
of the English Monarchy; Does it follow therefore, that All the Adversarys of
his Royal Highness are Enemies to the King and Government.

In the next Page, upon my saying that Expedients had been offered for the
Obviating of Difficulties, and for securing the Protestant Religion. [If the
Parliament at Oxford (says he P. 17.) were not damnably mistaken, or very
Lewdly forgetful, they have declared Nemine Contradicente) that neither they,
nor their Predecessors have ever heard or seen one Syllable or such a Frame of
Expedients offered them.]

The Gentleman, under favor, forgets himself, if he means that there never
were any such Expedients offered; for this Project of Accommodation was
Agitated, and Modified, even in the late Long Parliament. And Expedients have
been likewise since Proposed, unto which his Majesty refers himself in his late
Declaration, in these words [But contrary to our OFFERS and Expectation we saw
that NO EXPEDIENTS would be ENTERTAINED, but that of a Total Exclusion, etc.]
P. 6.

Toward the bottom of the Seventeenth Page, the Character makes an Invidious
Descant upon the hopes the Papists had of a Toleration; but not one Syllable of
the Persons that started those hopes, nor upon what Interest, and Consideration
the Design was set affoot. Now he knows very little of our Affairs, who does
not understand that none were so forward and so Importune for the Gaining of
the Dukes Assistance toward such an Indulgence, as those very People that are
now so Clamorous against his Royal Highness for it. Not that any such
Disposition was wrought by his Interest, but they Labored it however, under
that Plausible Pretext; that Provided the Dissenters might be eased on the one
side, they would do their best also and Content themselves that the Papists
might be eased on the other.

The Nineteenth Page, smells of the Romance: Second Ajax, Ulysses, Palladium;
Troynovant; Tullia, etc. as if the Author were speaking to us by his Deputy:
And then toward the bottom of the Page, Enter the True Author again; who (P.
21.) guides his Deputy's hand while he writes these words. [The Author of the
Character is a Person so far from laying his hand on his heart, and owing any
Benefit to Royal Pardons, or Acts or Oblivion, that I must say this Truth for
him, January 48. was past before he was born.] I would he had taken in the
other two Figures (16.) to have told us what Century he speaks of. There was a
Gentleman of my acquaintance in the late times, that would needs make himself
the Author of Killing no Murder; and had like to have been hanged for his
pains, though he never wrote Syllable on it; But if Mr. Deputy has so great a
kindness for his Principal, as to take the Character upon him, the Millers man
that was Trussed for his Master, was told I remember, that he could never do
his Master better Service.

The Remainder of his Discourse is almost wholly Foreign to the matter in
Question, Insisting Principally upon two Points; the Danger, and the
Inconvenience of a Popish Successor; wherein I have declared my self in my
first Character (P. 3.) that [I take All his Suppositions of Difficultyes and
Hazzards in the Case for Granted.] not that I think them so great as he
Represents them; but yet admitting them so to be, that very Concession will not
do his Business. The second Point is, Whether the Parliament of England, may by
the Laws of England Exclude the next heir of the Blood from the Succession of
the Crown? upon thi^ Question I have thus delivered my self in my Case Put (P.
9.) [Some are of opinion For it; others Against it; but the Legality or
Illegality of such an Act, is a Point that I am not willing to meddle with
either one way or other. For whether the Thing may Lawfully be done or not;
there may be Danger yet and Inconvenience in the Putting of the Question.] And
so likewise in my first Character (P. 53.) [As to that way which is matter of
Parliamentary Cognizance I reckon it my Duty to Acquiesce in the Legal Issue of
their Debates; as an Authority to which I have ever paid a Duty and
Veneration.] So that it would be utterly superfluous to spend Time, and Words,
upon an Argument wherein I can for Quietness and for brevity sake allow him his
asking, and preserve the main of the Cause still untouched. But for such
Passages as fall in by the by; and properly within the Compass of my Design, I
shall take such notice of them as I find Pertinent to my Purpose.

In the 24th. Page, he makes his Gloss upon that Clause in the Oath of
Allegiance where we swear to be faithful to the Kings Lawful Heirs and
Sucessors. [There's nothing in that Oath (says he) that binds them to the
Person but to the Thing; to no Particular man, any further then he is Heir and
Successor; Lawfully so; and no man truly is either Heir or Successor, till he
Inherits, and Succeeds.

Now if this Clause binds us not to the Person, but to the Thing; We swear
Fidelity Previously to the Right, which takes place before the Succession.

In the Lowest Line of this Page, he Lodges the Absolute Power of the Law in
the Three Estates in Parliament. And P. 25. Expounds this Position, under the
notion of the Higher Powers of England; King Lords and Commons; which is a Flat
denial of the Kings Sovereign Power. And since he is pleased to set up a new
form of Government, He should do well to furnish us with a New Oath of
Supremacy too: That instead of Declaring the Kings Highness to be the only
Supreme Governor of this Realm; We may Swear Faith and True Allegiance to
King, Lords and Commons, and to their Highnesses Lawful Heirs and Successors.
This Coordinate Imagination was the Main Pillar of the Late Rebellion.

See what Work he makes now upon these following words in my (First Character.
P. 60.) With Reverence to the Utility and Constitution of good and wholesome
Laws, it is not presently to Cite a Statute, or say there is a Frecedent, for
those Laws, that are Repugnant to the Light of Nature and Common Right, are
Nullities in themselves.

Now (says he.) Here Is one of the boldest Master-strokes of the Pen that ever
came in Print. This Point once gained, All the Protestant Laws since the
Reformation, and the whole Fabric of the Present Government, are Totally
Subverted. It Is but a Popish Successor believing and maintaining that all the
Protestant Laws ever since Harry the Eight's Perversion, are against the Light
of Nature, and Consequently, Nullityes in themselves.

His Logique, I perceive, is all of a piece: If one Popish Prince be a Tyrant,
or a Faith-breaker, All MVST be so. If one Statute BE found against Common
Right, therefore All MAY BE so. And then, what fear, (I say) of a Popish
Successors Damning All Protestant Laws, when it is a Known Rule that the Judges
are the only interpreters of the Law? But These Possible Nullityes will find
better Quarter perhaps from Walker, then from L' Estrange; and therefore I
shall refer Mr. Deputy to the History of Independency, Page 116. 117. Printed
at London 1648. The Authority of the Judges is Iudicative; whose Office is
(upon Cases brought before them) to determine whether an Act be Binding or no:
(For Acts of Parliament against Common Right, Repugnant, or Impossible, are
Void: Coke 8. fol. 118. Dr. and Student. L. 1. C. 6.) and to expound the
Meaning, and Signification of the Words of such Act.] Mr. Walker was a man of
Law, and Abilityes; and far from a stickler, either for Prerogative, or Popery:
Nay, even a Borderer upon Coordination it self. But yet he brings himself off,
with a Distinction, from the point which our Author swallows Whole. It is most
certain (says the Other, Page 116.) that when the Three Estates in Parliament
have passed any Act, Their Power Determins, as to that Act; and then, the
Authority of the Judges Begins. And whereas the Character (Page 25.) calls
King, Lords, and Commons, the Higher Powers of England, without any more ado;
Mr. Walker qualifyes it, (Page 117.) [Though this Kingdom (says he) has always
been Ruled by King, Lords, and Commons; yet by the King Architectonice, and the
other Two Organice; the King as the Architect, the Lords and Commons as his
Instruments; Each in his proper Sphere of Activity, without interfering: And
till This again come in use, look for no Peace.] This was the Principle of 41.
and 42. brought off as well as the matter would bear.

From hence he proceeds upon the agitation of the Question of Disinheriting;
which (as I have said before) is nothing at all to my business; nor of any
moment in the least to the deciding of this Controversy, till all other Rubs
and Difficulties that lie in the way to it shall be first cleared: and
especially that undeniable Impediment of the Kings Refusal; which must be
allowed on all hands (whether the thing may be Lawfully done, or not) to be an
Obstacle not to be Disputed, or Opposed.

The Character-maker, (Page 26.) finding himself pinched, upon the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, according to the Practice and Precept of the Primitive
Times, and the very Text of Holy Writ it self; brings himself at last to this
Notable Resolution of parting with his Religion rather then his Argument.

The Correspondence (says he, P. 26.) between Ours and the Primitive Christians
Case is here so incoherently balanced, [by L' Estrange,] that never were
Arguments more Fantastical. The Primitive Christians preached Obedience to Nero;
Yes, and they had forfeited their Christianity, if they had done otherwise. But
what was that Nero? An Absolute Monarch: And what those Primitive Bishops? Not
such as Ours; they were not a part of the Legislative Power of the Nation, as
Our Prelates are. If Nero invented Racks, Tortures, and Gibbets, for
Persecuting or murdering the poor Christians; he did it by his own
uncontrolable Authority; nor were those Primitive Bishops called to make Laws,
and therefore had not the Lawful power of the least Vote in moderating of
Nero's Cruelty, or in redress of the Christians Torments.

The Author begins now, to speak English. First, he slips in the difference of
the Case betwixt an Absolute, and a Limited Monarch. It Is true; the One Acts
according to his Pleasure; the Other is so far bounded by Rules, and Laws, that
it is a Violation of Honor, and Conscience, in Ordinary Cases, to pass those
Limits. But what is all this to the Subjects Obedience? For it is as much
Rebellion, in Them, to take up Arms, contrary to Law, against a Limited Monarch
that plays the Tyrant; as against an Absolute Prince that Governs by his Own
Will: For the Duty of the Subject is the same to the One, as to the Other;
unless there be some clear and explicit Provision, or Stipulation in the
Government, to the Contrary. And his Other Shift, upon the Difference betwixt
Their Bishops and Ours, looks as if Mr. Deputy had written that out of his own
Mother-wit, without consulting his Oracle: For how should that Diversity of the
Case operate upon the point of Passive Obedience, to make it more or less a
Duty? He has but one way in the world, that I can see, to support his Argument;
and that must be by destroying his Cause: For if there be no more then this
in it that the Primitive Bishops had no Votes in Parliament, which our Prelates
have, his Meaning is, that when they come once to Vote in Parliament, they Act
no longer in the condition of Subjects; which is a further Explanation of
himself upon a Coordinate State: Only I think he had as good have kept himself
under the Blind of a Legislative Power, without Translating it into the Power
of MAKING LAWS; For though the Two Houses may be properly said to Make, or to
Prepare Bills; yet the making of Laws is the Sole Privilege of the Supreme
Magistrate. If by what he says of the Power (or Right rather) of moderating
Votes, he intends only Offices of Mediation, or Council; so far, it is well
enough: but if he stays there, 'twill never do his business; for there must be
Resolution also, and Action, as well as debate, and Advice; and that is the
thing he does more then intimate he would be at, in the remaining part of this
Paragraph.

We are not (says he page 30) to wait Gods further Pleasure, and Providence to
come, with so entire a Resignation, till we neglect a Lawful Preservation,
when approaching Ruin Threatens us.

The Question (with the Author's favor) is not the neglecting of Lawful
means, but whether the Expedient here under Consideration be Lawful, or not:
And the Writer of the Character is so candid, as in the next Clause to come
within a very little of agreeing with L' Estrange, in the Negative. [However
(says he) that the Authors Opinion may not appear so strangely Enormous, nor
his Passion so wholly destructive to Government, and so opposite to
Christianity as his Answer would render it, let us make a little Explanation of
the Character, etc.] But he does yet, in the same Page, declare himself, that
Passive Obedience may be laid aside, under the Tyranny of a Popish Succession;
That is to say, It is Lawful for Protestant Subjects to Resist a Popish
Prince, in the Actual Possession of his Authority, and Government: For so he
expounds himself (P. 27.) upon the word Successor. No man (says he) truly is
either Heir, or Successor, till he Inherits, and Succeeds.

And then he palliates the matter over again (page 31.) whatsoever Passive
Obedience (says he) is due to our Native Prince we have none due to a Foreign
Invader; and it is a plain case, that the Popes Supremacy entering into England
is an Invading, and Usurping Regality.

How the Opinion of a Prince shall discharge Subjects of their Obedience to
Laws, I cannot imagine; Or by what Right one sort of People under the same
Government shall pretend to Overrule another in such a Case. Or I would fain
know, whether upon the same Ground they may not alter the Form of the
Government as well as destroy the Lawful Successor. Or, in one word, is not
the Government already overthrown, and all the Laws, ipso facto, dissolved in
this very Position? Those Laws that have made us the Envy of the Christian
world, and the Glory and Bulwark of the Reformation. And again; if the People
may be Judges in This Case, they may, upon the same pretense, be Judges in any
Other; and as well exterminate a Prince for any other Reason, as for his
Religion. It Is but for Mr. Deputy to tell the People, that the King himself is
not fit to Govern; and what has his Majesty to expect, but to march after his
Brother? Grant but this Point, that the Multitude (who are, in effect, Hands
without Heads) shall overruled the Laws; where are we then, but in a state of
Horror and Confusion, and Effectually in the Possession of One Hell upon Earth
as the Earnest of Another; without any Religion at all, and every ones Knife at
the throat of his Brother? But am I a Subject to the Kings Religion or his
Title? Or where shall I find the Rules, and Bounds of my Civil Duty? In the
Law? Or, in the Character? The Law makes my Allegiance, Absolute; the Character
makes it Conditional: The Law binds me to be True to his Majesty, his Lawful
Heirs and Successors, without any regard to This, or That Religion; the
Character discharges me in case any of them should happen to be Papists. --
[Magno Iudice se quisque tuetur.] King, Lords, and Commons are of One Opinion,
and Mr. Deputy, of Another. The Law obliges me, upon pain of Life and Estate;
and the Gospel upon pain of Damnation: But then comes the Author of the
Character, with the Serpents Dispensation in his Mouth, and supersedes all.
Has God said ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? And the Woman said
unto the Serpent, We may eat of the Fruit of the Trees of the Garden; but of
the Tree which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said, ye shall not eat
of it, neither shall ye Touch it, least ye Die. And the Serpent said unto the
Woman, ye shall not surely Die; for God does know that in the day ye eat
thereof, Then Your Eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good
and Evil. Genesis 3.] There Is no great Disproportion either in the Appetite, or
Temptation. There Is the Voice of God in both cases, on the One hand, and the
Voice of the Serpent on the Other.

[I cannot find (he says) by this Text, By Me Kings reign, etc. But that By Me
Subjects possess their Lawful Inheritance, might Claim the same Right. P. 32.]

The Question is not, the Kings Dispossessing Subjects of their Lawful
Inheritance, but the Subjects Disspossessing a Prince of his Lawful
Birthright; And by his Argument, Popish Subjects may be Dispossessed as well as
a Popish Successor, and Phanatical Subjects too as well as Popish; If a point
of Occasional or Preventional Prudence shall overruled a Positive Law: And
according to his Descant, By me Kings are DEPOSED (that a House of Commons may
Reign) is as good Divinity as By me King REIGN, though the One is a matter of
Divine Institution, for the Comfort of mankind in General, and the other only a
Divine permission for the Punishment of some Particular Princes or People. And
see now how Extravagant an Instance he has brought in for his support.

Nor can I perceive (says he Ibid.) that there lies so much Stresse in Gods
giving the Government of the Earth, Man, and Beast, unto whom it seemed meet
unto him, as to Nebuchadnezzer in the Text, but that a MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL,
VPHARZIN, written by the Almighties own hand against his Impious Heir, the
Sacrilegious, Idolatrous Belshazzar was as much the word of God, and had as
much Divine Institution in it as By me Kings reign.

His Application here, is not only Rude, and Impertinent, to the Highest
Degree; but the Argument flies directly in the face of him; unless he can show
such another Handwriting upon the Wall, against his R. Highness, as is here
produced against Balshazzar: Beside that the Intervening of an Almighty Power
in the Case, does as good as tell us that the Disinheriting of Princes is a
privilege Reserved, by God, Peculiarly to Himself.

He proceeds (P 33.) to Invalidate (as he pretends) the Chief Argument of all
my Discourse, and the Fundamental Design of my whole Pamphlet, viz. The
Un-alterable Right of Succession.] And advances, Confounding Extraordinary,
with Common Cases.

Now so far am I from laying the Stress of my Discourse upon that Text, that I
have Industriously Declined the Question, as the last Article to be handled in
this Controversy. And then he spoils the Cause with the very eagerness of
defending it, by drawing Conclusions from God's Unaccountable Actings, upon
Immediate Revelation, or Direction, to the Practices of men that are under
certain Common, and Indispensable Rules and Methods of Obedience and Government
[So Timely a Care (says he p. 34.) did the Great Founder of Empires, the Divine
Omnipotence take, to show that the Dispensations of Majesty, for his Peoples
good, and his own Glory, were to be preferred before the Sovereignty of Birth,
that Blinder Gift of Chance.]

This does only prove that God Reserves to himself a Freedom of Dispensing with
his own Laws, but not the least shadow of any such Power Delegated to the
People, to Dispense with Gods Laws; and let any man Consider, whether is the
more Competent Provision for the Glory of God, and the Good of his People, that
men should be Tied up, though (with some Inconvenience) under God's
Appointment, to the Orders of Government, where the Public Peace is preserved,
and the Harmony of Humane Society maintained, or to leave the Multitude the
Judges of those matters which only belong to the Supreme Magistrate, and at
liberty to change Governments and Governors as often as they please, which
must Inevitably run into Consequences of Blood and Confusion. And if this be
not the thing he would be at, what is the meaning of his recommending the
Precedent of the Late King of Portugal to the English, as a Practicable Example.

Have we not had (says he, Ibid.) a Late King of Portugal Depofed, as
Delirious, and Frantic, and Consequently renderd by Law Incapable of Reigning;
and All this done by HIS OWN SUBJECTS, and those of HIS OWN Religion, without
the least Reflection of Treason or Rebellion, or the Aspersion of lifting a
hand against the Lords Anointed.] As who should say, what a stir is here made
about the Duke of York? As if it were such a matter to Exclude a Popish
Successor. I Will show ye a way to get quit of the King himself though a
Protestant, and in the Legal Exercise of his Authority. But then you will say
there must be Delirium, or Frenzy in the case? Just so much as was found in the
Late King will be enough to do the Business. Do but possess the People once
that the King is a Papist, and that single Charge of Popery Includes all
Inabilityes. For (says our Author Ibid.) There must go so strong a dose of
Folly and Madness, or indeed both together to make up the Composition of a
Popish Heir to the Protestant Crown of England; Especially an heir that can be
so Fond of the Gew-Gaws, Bawbles and Trumpery of Romish Superstition, as to
Hazard Three Crowns for them -- So that if in Truth he but fairly stood the
Test of an Old Statute we have already, the Begging of his Reversion would be
so Fesible, that it would be Cross we won, and Pile he lost (P. 35.] Here Is a
short way of Putting the King as well as the Duke out of Capacity to Govern.
First; say that he is a Papist, and then, Beg the Possession of the Crown, as
well as the Reversion, for so being.

We are come now to the End of the Character Complete, which is so far from
being a Defense of the first Part against L' Estrange's Papist in Masquerade;
that first he has not spoken One Syllable to the Point in Question. 2ly In the
very Title of Complete, he does as good as Confess that he has no more to say.
And 3ly. he has in the 18th. page of his Second Part Blown up the very
Foundation of his Former; and Effectually of his whole Pretense, and Design.

The Scope of his Discourse is briefly this; First, to Render the Duke as
Odious and Dangerous to the Nation, as Art and Malice can make him, by Virulent
Reflections upon his Person under the Dreadful Character of a Popish
Successor. 2ly, To show from the Precedents of former Times, that it is no new
thing for the Supreme Power to Divert the Succession. Now as to the Danger of a
Popish Successor; so far was I from Disputing it, that for Quiets sake I gave
it for Granted (Papist in Masquerade P. 3.) So that he must not call his
Character Complete, A Defense against L Estrange, of what L' Estrange did not
oppose. And for the Point of the Succession; I have not said one Word whether
it may lawfully be done or not; but on the Contrary, Industriously Declined it;
(as I have showed already P. 18.) So that his Mighty Defense is only a Beating
of the Air, and a Flourish upon two Topiques out of the Limits of the
Controversy: The First Point being out of doors upon the admittance of the
Danger; and the Second Postpon'd out of this regard, that it is a king of a
Preposterous Question to enquire whether it may be done or not, if the King
would agree to it, before we know whether the King will agree to it or no: And
this way of Pressing it, will bear yet a worse Construction, his Majesty having
already, and over and over Declared that he cannot in Honor, Justice and
Conscience Consent to it.

As to the Title of the Character Complete, it Expounds it self, in the
Concession, that he has said all that he has to say. Nor shall I need to
Enlarge upon that Stabbing Contradiction of himself, which I have already
noted. (P. 10.) Only in one word I shall recommend it the second time to a
Remark. That whereas he Grounds all the Dangers, Terrors and Fatalityes of a
Popish Successor upon the Dukes Bigottery in the Romish Religion, he Discharges
us (P. 13.) of all those Apprehensions, by a Positive Averrment that the Duke
is so far from being a Bigot, that it is his Pride, and not his Conscience
makes him a Papist; and that he would rather see the Popedom Perish, then lose
his Humor. Wherein first, he dissolves his Argument. 2ly, He betrays himself
manifestly to Espouse the Interest of a Faction against his Judgment. And 3ly.
He Authorizes (in so doing) the Disinheriting of a Prince as well for his
Complexion as his Religion.

And this is not all neither. For after the frighting of the Careless and
Impious, with the Fears of Slavery; and the Weak, and Scrupulous, with the
Dread of Hell and Damnation (in case of a Popish Successor) Representing the
Calamity to be wholly Insupportable; and making it a Point of Conscience, upon
what terms soever, to Prevent it; he chalks out to the People such a way for
the doing of it as shall much more certainly destroy the King himself and the
Monarchy then the Successor. He sets forth the Necessity of doing the thing:
His Admiration that the King should Refuse it: How he has lost the Hearts of
his People by it; and all the way bespattering his R. Highness, though two
thirds of the dirt fall upon his Majesty. Resolving all at last into Two or
Three Modest Propositions, upon the Foolery of Passive Obedience, the
Fundamental Sovereignty of the Multitude, etc. Upon which Positions, If the
Duke be thrown out to day, the King is almost sure to follow him to Morrow. His
Reply upon my Exceptions to these Positions is in Effect rather a Yielding of
the Cause, then a Defense of it: But such a Yielding, as Discovers only an
Impotency (though with Great Good will) of Defending it. This is the Substance
of his Discourse, and how far it will be found a Defense of his Former
Character against the Papist in Masquerade will best appear, upon Comparing the
Reasons, and the Arguments on both Parts.

It is the main Drift of his Pamphlet to Terrify People into a Dread of his R.
Highness, and into Undutifull thoughts toward his Majesty by the Dismal Story's
he tells of the Danger of a Popish Successor. Now say I on the other side (P.
3.) It would have been Fair Play in the Character-writer if he had Balanced
the Dangers; and told us, This is the Danger One way, and that Another. For
First; there are many Dreadful Dangers, which we cannot avoid, but by
Incurring Greater: As the Leaping of a Garret Window when the Fire has taken
the Staircase; which is only a Prudent Election (under a Calamitous Necessity)
of the less Evil of the Two. Now the same Action which would have been a
Madness, without that Necessity, becomes an Act of Prudence with it, The Great
Danger of the Leap being Warranted by the Greater danger of the Fire.

Secondly, It happens many times, that we have no other choice before us, but
either to suffer the Highest Degree of Misery that can befall us in this world,
or else to Prostitute our Souls, for the saving of our skins and Fortunes. Now
under such an Exigence as this, let the Prospect of things be never so
terrible, we are to oppose the Duty of Christians, of Subjects and of Honest
men to all Hazzards whatsoever, and patiently to Endure whatever we cannot with
Conscience, and Honor, either Resist or Decline: According to the Practice of
the Primitive Martyrs who witnessed their Profession with their Blood, as
Christians, and submitted as Loyal Subjects without Resistance. So that we are
not to Govern our selves by a naked Speculation of the Perils that we are to
Encounter; and the means of Avoiding them; without enquiring into the
Consistency of those means with the measures of Conscience and Duty.

And again (P. 51.) [We shall now Counterpose Dangers to Dangers. Here is a
Present Opposed to a Future; A Greater to a Less, and a Protestant King to a
Papist. The Present Danger is the Probable Effect of these Intoxicating Methods
to the People. If Fancy was Poison to the Multitude under the Late King; the
same Fancy in a Larger Dose, and with less Corrective to it, will be at leaft
as strong a Poison to the People under this. So that we are in Forty times a
Greater Danger of a Sedition at Hand then of a Popish Successor at a Distance.
Now what is there in the Future to weigh against the Life of the King, the
Safety of the Church, the Law, Government, and the Peace of the Kingdom? There
may Possibly be a Popish King; and there may Probably not. And then (P. 3.) I
must Distinguish betwixt the Unhappy Circumstance of being under the Allegiance
of a Prince of that Persuasion, who is Actually in Possession, and Exercise of
his Power; and the Remote Possibility only of that Danger; And a Possibility
too of such a Condition, that a Thousand things may Intervene to Prevent it: As
the Contingences of Issue, Survivorship, etc.

As to the Balance of a Greater Danger and a Less (P. 52.) We Will even take the
matter as they suppose. A King upon the Throne that is Principled for Arbitrary
Government and Popery; but so Clogged and shackled with Popular and Protestant
Laws that if he had never so great a mind to it there is not a Subject in his
Dominions, that would dare to serve him in his Design. But on the other hand;
there is no King at all, No Church, No Law, No Government, No Magna Charta, no
Petition of Right, no Property, no Liberty, etc.

And again (P 52.) Here Is a Protestant Prince Exposed for fear of a Popish one.
Is the Chimera of a Future Danger of more value to us then the Conscience of an
Incumbent, and Indispensable Duty? Shall we take pet at God Almighty's
Providence and not go to Heaven at all, unless we may go our own way? Shall we
Level a Shot at the Duke at a distance, if there be no coming at him but
through the Heart of our Sovereign?

Moreover (P. 53.) The Diverting or Disappointing of the Succession must be
either by Prevention, or by Exclusion.

If there be danger from a Popish Successor, during his Expectancy within the
Kingdom; the Danger is Infinitely Greater if he be Driven out of it. For First,
(supposing it the Peoples Act, (which the Character does manifestly allow of
rather then fail) there must be an Illegal, and Popular Violence to accomplish
it; and there is the Peace of the Government broken already. Beside that the
Authors of that Violence can never be secure, but by following it with More,
and Greater. And this comes presently to be a natural Transition from a Murmur
against a Successor to a Tumult in the State: In which case, the King has only
this Choice before him; either to part with every thing for the asking, or to
stand the shock of a Rebellion. Now take it either way, Here Is much a Greater
Mischief Incurred then that we feared: Beside a Standing Army, Taxes and
Oaths, that follow in Course; and a new set of Liberty-Keepers, and
Major-Generalls to secure the Peace.

This is the Scene of things at home; and if we look abroad, we shall
undoubtedly see the Successors Interest and Reputation increasing daily, in
regard of his Sufferings, his Title, and his Religion (P. 54.)

Now in Case of a Popish King, who is either kept out, or Driven ont, from the
Exercise of his Right by the Tumultuary License of the Rabble: whether that
King makes any Attempt or no, the Nation must be at the Charge, at least of a
Defensive War, and of Impositions to maintain it. And this will be the
Inconvenience, even in the Bare Prospect of the State of the Nation, without
striking a Blow; But from Scotland at least, if not from Ireland too, they must
Expect to be Plied with Continual Alarms, till the Insupportable Expense of
Guarding the Borders and Coasts, shall make them as Sick of their New Patriots
as ever they were of their Old ones; and force them at last to render
themselves, and their Spoil, to the Irresistible Conjunction of as many Powers,
as will be then Confederate to their Destruction.

And then comes in the Popery in Earnest, that was dreaded but in Fancy before.
When this new King shall, by the Proper Act and forfeiture of a seduced and
unforeseeing people, be delivered from the Fetters of both Honor, and Laws.
Who brings in Popery then, but they that Discharged him from those Sacred
Bonds, by the folly and Contumacy of their own Inconsiderate Undertakings?
Compare now the Danger of a Popish King bounded by Protestant Laws, and Ruling
over a Protestant People, where he may be as happy as an Imperial Crown, and
the Affections of his Subjects can make him. Compare I say, a Popish King under
these Gracious and Obliging Circumstances, in the Quiet Adminstration of his
Government, with a Prince that is forced to make his way with his Sword for the
Recovery of his Own; and is not only Pricked on by the Impulses of Justice, and
Vengeance, but Animated by the Pope himself, and Provoked by Indignation, to
take the Utmost Advantage of that Foolish Forfeiture: the People themselves
having Cancelled the Bonds of Authority and Obedience. Let any man Compare
these two Cases, and then speak his Opinion. (P. 55.)

And yet once again. If it be reasonable to Believe (as we are often told, and
no Mortal can deny it) that our Religion is an Eyesore to the Church of Rome;
and that this Island would make a Considerable Addition to our Victorious
Neighbors late Conquests, what way in the world could be propounded, more to
the Advantage, both of the Crown of France and the Court of Rome, then the
bringing of matters to the Issue here in question? When in the Powerful, and
Liberal Assistances to this supposed King, for the Regaining of his Own, the
One and the Other are but doing of their own business: This Prince, in the mean
while, being led to the One by Inclination, and overborn upon the Other by
Necessity (Ibid.)

I shall leave it now to the Reader to Judge how far the Second Character in
Reply upon the Papist in Masquerade, may be admitted as a Defense of the
Former. It is the Authors design, in both Parts, by Amplifying, and
Rhetoricating upon the Dangers of a Popish Successor, to transport the People
into the most Desperate Resolutions of Acting and Suffering all Extremities
rather then submit to that Inconvenience. Now (as is already said) the Danger
of a Popish Successor is a point that I have given for Granted beforehand; and
no part of the matter here in Controversy. Nor is the Danger it self (simply
considered) of any Concluding Force, in this Case; for First, a Less Danger
comparatively must give way to a Greater. 2ly. Let the Danger be never so
Great, if we cannot avoid it with Honor, and Conscience, we must resolve to
abide it. 3ly. Here is a Certain, and a Greater Danger Incurred for the
Avoidance of an Uncertain and a Less. 4ly, Here is a Disturbance wrought in the
Present Government of a Protestant King for fear of a Popish King to come. 5ly.
his Majesty having Positively, several times Declared, that he cannot in
Conscience, or Justice agree to the Disinheriting of his Brother, and that
therefore He will never do it; the Exclusion of his R. H. which is here aimed
at, can never be compassed but by a Rebellion. 6ly. In making a mockery of that
which he calls the Bugbear of Passive Obedience, the very Position that seems
to be Levelled at the Duke, Destroys the King. 7ly. Upon a Fair Collation of
the Public Danger both ways; that of Expulsion, or Exclusion (over and above
the Iniquity) is Evidently much Greater then the Admittance of him; and the
Ready way to bring in that Popery, and Arbitrary Power, which they Pretend to
fear. Beside that it is Manifestly the Project of the Book, and of the Abettors
of it, to Reduce This King to the straits of his Late Majesty, and leave him at
Last his Fathers Game to Play. Upon the due Ballancing of these Cases, the main
Question depends; and that which he calls a Defense has not one word of
Argument upon any of the Passages above Recited; the whole Discourse being
rather a Flourish, then a Debate.

To say nothing of the Dangerous Consequences that may reasonably and probably
arrive upon the Agitation of this Question, by exposing the Life of the Present
Prince, to a thousand Difficultyes, and Hazzards, in the Contemplation of
either Preventing, or Establishing the Successor; Whereas in the Regular Course
of Order, and Government, there is no place for those Extraordinary
Deliberations. And to me it seems to Imply less Veneration for the Sacred Life
of a Prince, then we ought to have; if we can with so much Indifference, think
of the Death of our Present Sovereign, and yet at the same time enter into
Fribbling and Captious Questions about the Successor Nig^am Illam Diem, and
Luctusam expectare, Peccare est contra, and C^^iles omnes, and Naturales Leges.
Neque certe Disputationem de Regia Successione, contra Regis ipsuis Vol^^tatem,
Ipse Rege Vivo, Institutam, unquam viri boni probaverunt.

It is against the Laws both of Nature and of Nations, to stand Calculating, in
the Contemplation of that Black, and Dismal Event. Nor did ever any Good man
approve of Entering into a Dispute about the next Successor to a Crown, during
the Life, and contrary to the Will, of the Royal Incumbent. This was the
Judgment of a French Apologist for Harry the 4th. and not without very great
reason too; for men grow weary of the Present King; Intent upon the Successor;
Enemies to the Government in Being, as Placing their thoughts and Fortunes
wholly upon the Reversion: Insomuch, that they look upon themselves at last as
(Effectually) the Subjects of Another Jurisdiction; and Contract a False, and
pernicious Interest in the removal of their Sovereign. And it is not all
neither, that they are Transported by the hopes of Advantage, and Preferment,
into These Undutifull Deliberations; but when they are once In* and Pinched
betwixt the Dread of Revenge from the Injured Successor, on the One hand, and
of Legal Justice from an Embroiled Government on the Other; there is no
Retreating: Nor any other way left them, then to attempt the saving of
themselves by a Common Ruin. How miserable now is the Condition of that State,
when all these Devils of Avarice, Ambition, D^spair, and Iealousy, are let
loose upon the Government.

Now there is none of these Hazzards or Difficultyes, upon the Succession of a
Prince that comes to the Crown by a Right of Descent, where the Government is
quietly Devolved upon him by the Gentle Methods of Providence, without the
Irregular, and Tumultuary favor of the People; and without any Eccentrick
Motions, or Passions, to the Peril or Detriment of the Public. Nay the very
Enquiry was looked upon by Antiquity, as a thing so Impious and Undutiful, that
the fifth Council of Toledo Punished the very Question, [who should Succed to
the Crown after the Death of the King?] with Excommunication; and that Decree
was Confirmed also by the next following Council. Not but that a man may love
the King and the Government, and yet out of a misguided Zeal Oppose the
Succession. But there is also a Designing, a Spiteful, and Seditious Mixture
even in that Composition; as appears by the Writings and Practices that are
Employed in favor of that Interest. First, as to the Designing Part, the Cause
is not managed according to the Peaceable Methods of Charity and Religion; but
in such a manner, as to Irritate and Inflame the Multitude by Arguments rather
of Terror, then of Reason. 2ly, the spite, and Malice of the Humor shows it
self manifestly in this; That they are little better then Stark mad upon the
striking of them in that Vein, and forget what they Owe to the Heir of the
Crown; the Character of an Illustrious Prince; to the Brother of their
Sovereign, to the Bravery, the Virtues, and the Services of his Person; to the
Honor, the Safety, and Tranquillity of their Country; to the Clemency,
Conscience, and Justice of a Protestant Prince; to the Dignity of their
Profession; and to the Duty of Subjects. They cast off all Respects to Modesty
and Good Manners, in their Ribaldry, and Revilings; and lay themselves so open
in these Intemperate Outages, that they might with a better Grace Expose
themselves naked in the Marketplace. He that shall compare this way of
Desending, or Propagating Religion, with the Rules and Precepts of the Gospel,
will easily satisfy himself of what Spirit they are. Lastly, the Seditious
Intent of the Libells that have been Published upon this Subject, is as Clear
as the Light; for at the same time, while they are hammering into the Peoples
Heads a dread of the Succession, they are likewise. Practicing upon the Honor
of the King, and Undermining the Monarchy. For what is the Reason of our
Scriblers Insisting so obstinately upon this Particular; but First; as a Point
which the People will most probably take fire at. And 2ly, as a thing which
they are sure beforehand his Majesty neither can, nor will ever Consent to?
And from hence, they take their Rise to a Deliberation how the Business may be
done without him: till by foft, and Insensible Degrees, they Screw the
Government off the Hinges.

The First Clamor is against the Successor, for fear of Popery; and against
the King himself upon the Rebound, for not going their way to work to Prevent
it. Their next Complaint is either for want of, or for Fruitless Parliaments,
and nothing can be more Scandalous, or Dangerous, to his Majesty, then these
two Calumnyes. So soon as they have wrought upon the People to Think ill of the
King, their next work is to Dispose them toward the Treating of him ill: And
this is done by Provocation, and Persuasion: for it is a Fair step toward the
making of a man believe it Lawful to do a thing, if he can but be brought to
have a Mind to do it. By Remonstrances, and Appeals, they Compass the Former;
and then by Positions, and False Principles Insinuate the Other. It is First
the Kings Duty, they say, to Call Annual Parliaments. 2ly. To let those
Parliaments sit till they have Redressed all Grievances. 3ly. They Infer from
hence, that the Common Hall is to Prescribe both the Time, and the Business for
these Parliaments. 4ly. That the King is made for the People, and not the
People for the King; and therefore what he will not, they may, and must. 2ly,
that Passive Obedience is a Bugbear; And Defensive Arms Lawful in the Case of
Popery, and Religion. 6ly, It is but Cares or Ianeways declaring, that the
Clapping up of the Protestant Ioyner is a Levying of War, upon the Commoners of
England, and the Business is done. To Conclude, What is the Upshot of all this
Libelling Contest, but to set up a Popular Faction, under Color of Opposing a
Popish Successor, and at the Instance of a Pragmaticall Club of Mutineeres, to
put Three Kingdoms again in a Flame, for the Rosting of their Eggs?

The End.

