THE State and Interest OF THE NATION, With respect to His Royal Highness THE
Duke of York, Discoursed at large; in a LETTER to a Member of the Honorable
House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

THE State and Interest OF THE NATION, etc.
SIR,
1. WELL were it for this poor distracted Nation, were there less ground, than
there is, for your Opinion, that it is not the particular Case of your Friend
only, but of a great many (otherwise) Worthy and Eminent Persons, to be
misled, and intoxicated, by the plausible pretense of a Free Estate, into a
passionate Fondness, and Admiration of a Popular Government: never
distinguishing betwixt the Form and Essence of a Commonwealth; the mistake
whereof (each for the other) has proved so fatal in this Age; nor calling to
mind that it was the misfortune of those that surfeited of our Kingly Regiment,
and gaped as impatiently after Novelty as any now adays can do; to lose the
substance of Liberty and Happiness, in persute of the Shadow. Nay, too too
many, I fear me, there are, that sacrificing all considerations of Conscience
and Religion to their Mammon, Interest, do labor with all the Vigor and
Artifice imaginable to create in the Multitude a loathing of their present
Manna, and a fresh longing for their late Egyptian Leeks and Garlic. So that
you are not to look upon my Endeavors to set things aright, as to this Point,
to be the pure effects of my Compliance with your Desires for the satisfaction
of your Friend, but rather of a pressing and indispensable Duty.

NEITHER your Friend, nor any other Republican will, I presume, maintain that a
Free Estate (as they call it) is subject to no Violations; because woeful
Experience will confute, and force them to confess either that a Commonwealth
may Degenerate; or, at least, that the so much cried up Model of the Late Times
was no Commonwealth: And they must not only renounce their Senses, but even the
Faith of Story also; which sufficiently proves that Republiques have been
sometimes invaded with Usurpations; sometimes debauched and embas'd with
Oligarchy; mostly (by reason of their Weakness and Divisions) subdued or
compelled to truckle under their Neighboring Princes; but always tormented
with Faction and Convulsions. Nor, in truth, has that Party as yet been able to
produce any Arguments but such as, in effect, beg the Question; by presupposing
great Unity in the Coalition, great Probity in the Intention, and great Purity
in the Exercise; which being admitted, doubtless we should so little need to
differ about Forms, that perhaps we should scarce need any Government at all.
Now for my Own part (on the other side) I abhor Bloodshed, and deem one Party
in all Wars guilty of Murder; a Crime which as it cries High for Vengeance, so
ought it to cry Loud for Unity and Moderation; into which blessed Path may This
balance us, that we be not again Balotted into a Field of Blood: I plead for
Liberty; not the Name, but the Thing; and design not to assert Tyranny, but
Kingship; (as it relates to the Laws of the Land) to whose protection I am
entitled by my Birth, for the preservation of my Freedom in Person and Estate;
and That with more assurance, then possibly can be secured under the Government
of Many; who scruple not commonly to term that Justice (and without Remedy too)
which is down right Faction. So that with these thoughts about me I shall
readily acknowledge (you may imagine) that even Monarchy it self is but as
Earthen Ware, (though of the Finest and Strongest Sort) and liable to sundry
Contingences; nothing under the Heavens being completely Perfect. And in the
Constitution of Governments, it is childish to think upon erecting Babels
against the Deluge; but the Design must be, to embank against Floods, and
enclose the best that may be against Trespassors. This being premised, I shall
proceed to handle the Matter in debate, not Metaphysically, in Notions
abstracted from their Subjects (a Pastime which our Platoniques much delight
in) but Morally, and Reasonably; and enforce such Arguments only as are plain,
sensible, and appropriate to our own Country; leaving the Notional to our
Book-men, whose Volumes, calculated for all Climates, swell big against the
Evils of the Rule of MANY, or Democracy.

2. I SHALL not here presume to insist upon such other Insuperable
Difficulties, (of a quality too High for a private person to meddle with) as
must necessarily obviate the establishing of a popular Platform amongst us; But
lay before you in the First place the present State of the Nation, so far forth
only as may carry any immediate Relation to the Subject; and then apply the
Premises to the Point in hand. This Island, now, is a large Continent,
abundantly populous; and governed (I may say) by the Subordinate Influence of
the Nobility and Gentry; who live plentifully, and at ease upon their Rents,
extracted from the Toil of their Tenants and Servants; and every one of them
Acts the Prince within the Bounds of his own Estate, where he is purely
Absolute; his Servants and Laborers are in the Nature of his Vassals, his
Tenants indeed are Free, but yet in the Nature of Subjects; whom he orders in
his Courts, draws Supplies from by his Fines, and Awes by his Power and Oaths
of Fealty, to infinite Submissions. The more his Manors are, and the more
indulgently he behaves himself (like a good Prince) the larger is his
Territory, and the more awful are his Commands. A Neighbor more Rich and
Potent gives Cheque to his Inferior Neighbor; and brings his Petty-Princeship
into awe; He again being overaw'd by one that is greater and more powerful than
himself in Estate and Friends. But none of these, with respect to his Quality
and Estate, will admit a Parity with his Inferior Neighbors, much less with
his Tenant or Dependent.

INTO the Rank of Gentry do our Officers, Citizens, and Burghers aspire to be
enrolled: So that no sooner by Arms, Office, or Trade do they acquire a
competent Stock, but forthwith for Land it is disposed; and then, disowning the
Title of Soldiers, Citizens, or Burghers, they take to themselves the Degree
and Name of Gentlemen, with Arms not improper; for England within it self, has
been so often shuffled from High to Low, that there is scarce any Artificer but
may find his Name in the Heralds-Book, though not his Pedigree, which Ingenuity
yet and Good Will may easily supply: And thus being Equipt with a Title and
Estate, they set up suitably the Dominion within their Territories; which none
can dispute, because they have no right to intermeddle with what any man has or
does within himself: For by Gentry I intend not only such as are so in Blood,
but so in Quality also; such as live easily, and like Princes, upon the Labors
of their Dependents.

OUT of This Order are constituted our Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all
that execute the Authority of a Judge; by the influence of which Powers, they
so order all Elections to Parliament, or otherwise, that the whole Countries
Commonly follow their respective Factions, and the Commonalty in their Votes
are menag'd by Them, as a Horse by his Rider. So that as the Agrarian or
Interest of Land, is principally in these Two Ranks; So is the Consequence
thereof, Dominion and Command; which emboldens them to such a Height of Spirit
(natural to our Nobility and Gentry) that they are too apt to undervalue
Persons of Inferior Quality, [Burgesses and Mechaniques,] with whom to
Inter-marry by our Old Law it was a Disparagement for a Ward; and this Spirit
of Generosity cannot be suppressed, so riveted is it in their Natures, but by the
Eradication of their Persons, or at least their Qualities; to which strange
effect I have heard some Grandees vent a Sense.

AND indeed the establishing of a Free Estate (so called) were otherwise
Desperate and Impracticable; and therefore it was the Course that the
prevailing Mechaniques, among the Swisses, were forced to take: How else shall
we be levelled to a Parity, which is of the very Essence of a Commonwealth? For
as Titles and Honors are incident to Kingship; so also are Equality in Place,
Degree, and Birth, to Democracy; unless where, in case of Office, for the Time
only they are entitled to a Precedence. Reduced you must be, Sir, to the
Condition of the Vulgar; Commoners already are you in Title, which yet is but a
Fallacy of the Name, and deludes our Statists; for indeed you are so only
Representatively, being rather the Tribunes and Leaders of the Peoples
strength, and the Governors of their purse, then purely Commons. Neither yet
will the bare obtaining of such a Parity be sufficient to do your Friends
Business; unless there be a Supreme Power established in some Body Corporate,
Compacted and Permanent; such as is That of London, where the Grandeur of That
City (but that it is never to be debauched into such a Degree of Disloyalty and
Fanaticism) might possibly erect it Self into a Free State, (could it once
overcome all opposite Interests) and by that great Magazine of Treasure and
Men, there embodied, give Law to the whole People scattered as they are in a
large Continent: Having, First, reduced some meet Cities, Forts, and Castles,
which being Garrisoned from the Head-Colony would aw the Countries, and mould
them into a Vassalage competent to make up a Free-Estate. But then our Nobility
and Gentry would neither have the Honor of the Name, nor Benefit of the Thing:
'Twill be instiled the Commonwealth of London, not of England; And our Pay must
be as They Impose, and our Liberty as They vouchsafe it; only in This it will
be the less agreeable, that we must be Subject to our Inferiors.

NOR is This Discourse to be looked upon as mere Drollery; for from This Embrio
have issued those Commonwealths which are so famed in Notions; as those of
Rome, Carthage, Athens, Lacedaemon, Corinth, Thebes, etc. Great Cities of That
Name, which having subdued their adjacent Territories, denominated the
Dominion; wherein only those of the Freedom (Citizens and Denizens) had Vote or
Power; the Nobles and Gentlemen being purely Tributary to the Chief City;
unless they transplanted themselves, renounced their Cities, and so, by degrees
advanced into the Honor of a Burgess, as we now do exercise our Junior Issue.
And little different are at this day the celebrated Commonwealths of Venice,
the United Provinces, the Swisses; not to instance in those Petty States of
Genoua, Ragusa, Geneva, etc. all of them mostly denominated from those
Principal Cities, which give the Law to the adjacent Provinces. Those indeed of
the Hollanders and Switzers, though they derive not, so directly, their Title
from One City, yet are they (in Substance) of the same Composure, being only an
United Body of Corporated Cities, combined in One, for Mutual Defense against
Invaders, but of an equal Power to impose upon the Adjacent Territories,
situate under the aw of each respective City, or Town-Garrison. It falls not
within my Memory, that there ever was, or at This Day is, a Free-Estate in the
whole World that is managed by the Gentry Inhabiting at large, or by any People
not combined within the Jurisdiction of their Walls; except the Grisons; who
are a scattered People of a mean Quality, having long since disowned their
Gentry; and are without Walled Towns or Garrison. It Is a small Territory,
possibly of extent to an Inland Country; upon Emergences, the whole People at a
set day, meet in the Open Air, where the Major Vote (as with you Knights of
the Shire) cries up the Magistrates, and Determines War. Their Confusions
makes them easy for Conquest, were their Country worth it, and not secured by
the United Cantons.

NOW to apply the Premises; can your Friend, or any other Man of the same
Stamp imagine, that our Nobility and Gentry (as now in Power) will ever be
induced to admit a Parity; will level their Degree and Domination to a
Proportion with their Copyholders? Nay, will renounce the wearing of a Sword,
and learn to make one? Will submit to become Tributary to the Neighbour-Colony?
If this can be brought about; then perhaps (and not till then) may we again
hope to aspire from our present Glorious State of King-ship, to a Free State in
Clown-ship; or at least, from the Free-giving of Subsidies, to the Majesty of a
Scepter; to the Forced-payment of Excise to the High and Mighty Burgher; such
as was that High and Mighty Butcher, who, not many years ago was commissioned
by the Swisses, as one of the Chiefs to be Godfather to the French Kings Son.
As Plato phansi'd his Community, and Sir Thomas Moor his Utopia; so are these
people bigg with hopes of a Relation; thereby to reassume their Idolized Model
of a Commonwealth, out of the scattered Gentry, in the nature of a House of
Commons. But if nothing but New Experiments will serve their Turn, I could wish
they would find other Subjects to try Conclusions upon, than the Estates,
Lives, nay, the very Souls of Christians. You well remember I Am sure, Sir,
that we once ran the Loss of Those, and the Hazard of These, upon the hopes of
a Chimaera in the Brains of some: The word Liberty deluded us into Patience,
and Patience from 1648. to 1660. brought forth not less Payments, but more
Servitude. And let them not hope to bring Countenance to their Cause, by
alleging (as they did before) that they could never be permitted to foster up
their Babe to full perfection; for that they will ever be opposed by all Wise
and Loyal men, who having once experimented the Evils of such a State, will be
as vigilant and industrious to keep it from getting footing among us again, as
those that are otherwise, can be to bring it on. Beside that, you cannot have
forgot, Sir, that from 1648 to 1653. they had it from the Nurse, and (had they
stuck to their Pretenses) might probably in five years time have set it upon
its Feet; but they found the sweet (poor Wretches) of engrossing Power to
themselves: But then it could never have been of any long Continuance, as
manifestly appeared from the great scorn and bitterness that the Supporters of
it were reproached with, when it was dissolved; there was not so much as one
Bloody Nose in the defense of that High and Mighty State; but all the persons
were held in the utmost degree of detestation, as they most justly deserved.
And though these Rumpers, it is true, came twice into play, yet were they only
made use of to serve a Turn, as being fit to be made a Property; for it was
presently seen that it was not the desire of their Rule, but of a further
change, that inspirited the People against the Army; and the Rump (as being
next at hand) had no sooner mounted the empty Saddle, but (before they were
warm in their Seat) they were again Unhors'd with a Public Leave, as appeared
by the Bonefires (upon That Occasion) that might have lighted them to the
Landsend, if they had dared to be seen among them. So that it is plain from
what has been said, that it is not the sense or Interest of a Few, that can
long sway a Nation; for if the public Spirit be averse, at the long run it
will prevail; the more Dispute there is with that spirit, the more embitter'd
it will be found: For, whatever such Enthusiasts may dream, even when the
Multitude have the Power, the Command yet rests in a Few: The most active
Spirits lead the Herd, and ingross the Place, the Profit, and the Sway: This,
in generous minds, begets Disdain, and that, Faction; for when all are equal,
thousands think themselves as deserving of Rule, as those that carry it; to
satisfy all it is impossible, to please few displeases the Most; the
Transactions of that Party from 1648. to 1660. have made this as sensible, as
they made themselves contemptible. In a word, the Nobility and Gentry of
England have Spirits pure, naturally just and generous, like Fire aspiring, as
a Pyramide, from low to high; and never resting till it contracts it self into
an Unity at top: So God is One, or he were not God, nor could he Rule the
World; and if your Friend likes not this President, but still continues to
delight in the Rule of Many, let him begin a Pattern in his own Family, and he
may there, possibly, have enough to do.

. 3. NOW my hand's in, I shall venture to set one step further, and refresh
your memory with a View of our Condition whilst this Free State kept
above-Water, the Past being the most certain Line to direct us in our
Conjectures upon Futurities. We were never free (you may remember) from the
Apprehensions of an Insurrection at Home, or an Invasion from Abroad, and lived
in continual jelousie, even of our very next Neighbors. These Fears obliged us
to maintain a considerable Force at Land and Sea, which, lying idle, corrupted,
as standing-Water in a Pool, and every moment threatened fresh Combustions, as
they were blown up this way or that way by their new Masters; but at the best
(like our old Lord-Danes) they were most insupportably burdensome and odious
to the Country, by their Quartering; and to keep them as much in action as
possibly we could, we were fain either to be perpetually amusing them with
pretended Discoveries of some new-feigned Plot or other, or else to engage them
in Foreign Wars. For the support of this Army (now) we were compelled to daily
Contributions, besides great and innumerable Customs that were exacted,
together with the Excise, (a Brat begotten in the Low Countries, with their
State, which makes them free indeed, but then it is in Purse, not in
Privilege) a Tribute which no King of England durst demand, before they
enforced us to pay it; which being ever before looked upon as Poison; we then
took as Physic; though in that Age, it was generally believed that no
Englishman would ever swallow it; and for the bare but necessary Mention
whereof, in the House of Commons, that Grand Patriote (as they called him) Mr.
Pym was by a young Spirit (not without great Applause) called to the Bar; add
hereunto the Benevolences, Sequestrations, five and twentyth parts, a Tax of
fifty Subsidies at once, (though the late King suffered so much by the demand
of twelve only) Fines and Compositions, sale of Kings, Bishops, Deans and
Chapters, and Delinquents Lands, the two parts of Papists Estates, nay a share
of our very Charities to the distressed; over and above the constant
Contributions that were levied. How was all this devoured by the Army, whose
Belly indeed was bottomless? and yet what Arrears did we owe them just before
the King's Return? three Millions at least! Reform the Army we durst not, and
our constant charge could not be less than two Millions yearly, to supply it;
In a word, we never used to be in a worse condition, than when none would
Rebel, because when the People were quiet we had no Lands either to sequester
or to sell. Our Trade fell to nothing, our Traffic was interrupted, our Gold
walked beyond Sea more freely than in our own Country; and we lost no less than
2000 Sail of Ships in two or three years time: There was no settlement, but we
were every day dancing after a new Whistle; ten Models we had in Proposal at
one time, and every Faction ready with Blood to aver his own way to be the
best. By our known Laws we could not be imprisoned, but by a Regular proceeding
in a Course of Justice; but under our free Estate (on the other side) upon the
most slight suggestions of a spiteful Neighbor in Authority, we were presently
seized by the Sergeant at Arms, with his exorbitant Fees! no Bail, no Habeas
Corpus, no regular way of Justice to do us right! but, after a Twelvemonths
stay in Goal, if we could make good Friends, and humble our selves to our
potent Adversary, we might possibly be discharged; but without amends, or
knowing of our Crime. Lo thus, while we cajoled our selves with the Name of
Freedom, we lost the thing, and became free, only to be made the most
despicable of Slaves.

BY this, Sir, you see that the Question might be decided in a few words, only
by alleging the Inclination of the People to Monarchy, as it is now
established: For as no man can well be wronged with his consent, so neither is
any man to be obliged against his will. And indeed how should a Government,
founded upon inequality and force, ever subsist without it? Or a State that
must necessarily be the mere Adjective of an Army, become a Substantive? With
as much Reason might I also object matter of Title, because the same Estate,
with a flaw in the conveyance, or clogged with Statutes and Judgments, is not
surely of like value, as if it had been descended clearly from the great
Grandfather, and were free from Claims and Encumbrances. But it shall be the
next part of my Business to show that the present established Government (as it
excellently complies with the Laws, Genius, and Interest of this Nation, so it)
comprehends all the Benefits of a Commonwealth in great perfection; and this I
shall do as briefly as I can.

TO demonstrate how it complies with our Laws and Constitutions, let it
suffice, That (Monarchy, in these Nations, being more ancient than Story or
Records more venerable than Tradition it self) our Laws were born (as it were)
under this Climate, habituated to this Diet and Air, grafted into this Stock;
and though we have (thanks be to God) forgotten our Norman, yet will it be very
hard for us to learn Greek, much less Utopian; that in the late Usurper's time,
our Lawyers, with one Voice, importuned him rather to assume the Style and
Power of a King, to which they found all our Laws were shaped, than retain that
of a Protector, unknown to the Law: That nothing rendered the late Architects
of a Commonwealth more obnoxious, than that (notwithstanding their infinite
Discords, in other things) they generally agreed in the necessity of subverting
all our Fandamental Laws, in order to their Design; which Consideration (we are
in Charity to believe) obliged the sober men of all Parties, the true
Patriotes, (nay and even the chiefest Pillars of the Parliaments-Cause too) to
unite themselves with the Royal Interest; as not enduring to hear of those
violent and dangerous Alterations which they plainly saw a Republic must
necessarily introduce.

FOR its compliance with our Genius, examine we (in the first place) the
various Revolutions that have happened to this Island; Britains, Romans,
Saxons, Danes and Normans; or (more nearly) the changes in their Descents from
the direct Line to the Collateral; or (yet nearer) the times of Insurrection
and deposing Kings, Edward and Richard, (both the Seconds of the name) and we
shall find King-ship still in fashion. Nay, that of King John is more
notorious, for when the People had in a sort dethroned him, and sworn
Allegiance to Lewis of France, yet when John died, the same People not only
Expelled the Foreigner, but having got the Power into their own hands, they
Crowned King John's Son, being then an Infant without Interest or Adherents:
Nor will all our Chronicles afford us one single Instance of any Design or
Endeavor to erect a Free Estate, (before the late unnatural times furnished
the President) no not when Wat Tyler, or Jack Straw revell'd it with their
Clowns. Nor yet is this Genius ever to be changed, for Reflect we (in the
second place) that as our English Nature is not like the French, supple to
Oppression, and apt to delight in that Pomp and Magnificence of their Lords,
which (they know) is supported with their Slavery and Hunger; Nor like the
Highland Scots, where the Honor and Interest of the Chief is the Glory of the
whole Clan: So does it as little (or less) agree with the Dutch humor,
addicted only to Traffic, Navigation, Handicrafts, and sordid Thrift, and (in
defiance of Heraldry) every man phansying his own Scutcheon. For does not every
one amongst us, that has the name of a Gentleman, labor his utmost to uphold
it? Every one that has not, to raise one? To this end, do not our very Yeomen
commonly leave their Lands to the Eldest Son, and to the other nothing but a
Flail, or a Plow? Did not every one (in the days of our late blessed Martyr)
pinch himself in his Condition, to purchase a Knighthood or small Patent? What
need further proof? You cannot but remember, Sir, how that bare glimpse and
shadow of Monarchy under Cromwell, and his Son Dick, (though persons even at
that very time hated and scorned, and that too upon a most impious and
scandalous account) was for mere resemblance-sake admitted astolerable and (in
respect of a Commonwealth) courted; which clearly evinces, how grateful the
substance must needs be to all true English Spirits.

AS to our Interest, briefly, (to wave tedious and Politic Discourses) there
is no man, but with half an Eye may foresee that a Republic (were there any
possibility of settling one) would destroy all our present Peace, and Felicity,
ruinate our Trade and Traffic, involve us in a Field of Blood, alarm all our
Neighbors, make our best Allies our bitterest Enemies; and probably draw upon
us the united force of Christendom, to crush the Embryo; which would be the
utter destruction and enslaving of this most free and prosperous Nation, (could
it but once be capable of a due sense of its own Felicity) to the Tyrannical
Damnation of a Foreigner. Beside, (at best) by what Title can we pretend to
hold Scotland and Ireland, should that of Descent be avoided; for Consent there
is none, nor can any be expected.

. 5. BUT I come now directly to assert, That the Present Government eminently
includes all the Perfections of a Free-Estate, and is the Kernel (as it were)
of a Commonwealth in the Shell of Monarchy. And, first I shall begin with the
Essential Parts of a Commonwealth, which are three, viz. the Senate proposing,
the People resolving, the Magistrate executing. For the Senate (or Parliament)
if ever there were a Free and Honorable one under the Cope of Heaven it is
here; where the Deputies of the whole Nation most freely chosen, do with like
freedom meet, propound, debate, and vote all matters of Common Interest: no
Danger escapes their representing, no Grievance their complaint, no Public
Right their claim, or Good their demand: In all which, the least breach of
Privilege is branded with Sacrilege; and though there lies no Appeal to the
dispersed Body of the people, (a Decision manifestly impracticable in
Government, and fitter indeed for Tribunes to move, then Nations to admit) yet
(Elections being so popular and conventions frequent) the same end is attained
with much more safety and convenience. The Prince may likewise (in some sense)
be said to have only an Executive Power, which he exercises by Ministers and
Officers, not only sworn, but severely accomptable; and though both He and the
Lords have their Negatives in passing of Bills, and though it be the King only,
that, by his Royal Fiat makes our Laws; yet (no Tax being imposable but by the
consent of the Commons, nor any Law (without it) of such validity, that the
Ministers of Justice dare enforce it) there is a wise and sweet necessity for
the King, and likewise for the Lords to pass all such Bills as are convenient
for the People, and not greatly hurtful to the Prince; and those that duly
weigh the Reason of things, do find a Negative in the King to be a most safe
Preservative of Peace to the People, who have as much comfort under the
protection of his Prerogative, as they have Benefit by their own Privileges:
For in truth, this Bugbear Negative (as our Republicans labor to represent
it) is an impenetrable Target, to shelter and secure the Government from being
altered at the Will of the Commons, if at any time they should prove Factious.
And this (being in reason manifest) has also been confirmed by great
Experience; our Kings having rarely obstructed any Bill which they might safely
grant; but on the otherside, passed many High Acts of mere Grace,
circumscribing their Prerogative, and clipping its Wings; nay better had it
been for us, if they had not pierced its very Bowels.

THIS is that Triple-Cord that could never yet be broken, though it has been Cut
asunder; This is our Gold seven times Refined; for every Bill being Thrice
Read, Debated, and Agreed in Either House, is at last brought to the King for
his Royal Assent; (which is the Mint of our Laws:) a Trial so exact, that
surely no Dross can escape it; since all Interests, must thereto concur: (as
truly it is but fit they should, in the Establishment of That which must Bind
all.) This is that Temperament, which purges our Humors, and (at once) indues
us with Health, Vigor, and Beauty: no Vote is Precipitated; no Act Huddled up;
as by sad Events, you saw they formerly used to be, when the Power was
engrossed by One of the Estates, purged and molded to the Interests of a
Faction; a Consequence but Natural to such Premises! Nothing was (There)
weighed, but (as in a Balance consisting of one Scale) our Laws were Mandrakes
of a Nights Growth; and our Times as Fickle as the Weather of the Multitude.

THE King indeed has the Power of making War, but then he has not the Means; so
that it signifies little more, then a Liberty to Fly if he can get Wings; or to
go Beyond Sea, provided he can waft himself over without Shipping: He has a
Sword, but Himself alone can never draw it; and the Train'd-Bands (in whom he
has the sole Right) are a Weapon which he decently wears, it is true; but the
Nation only may (in Effect) be said to have the Use and Benefit of it. He
chooses his Ministers; (as who does not his Servants?) but then they pass
through such a Test, as none but the soundest Integrity can abide: He can
hinder the stroke of Justice with his Pardon, (though still, the Jaws not being
muzzled, it will Bite terribly) but then (on the Other side) the Power of
Relieving his Wants rests in the Commons, to Balance his Will, and induce him
to a Correspondence with Parliaments.

THAT his Person should be Sacred, is most Needful, to avoid Circulation of
Accounts; Reasonable, since it carries with it the Consent of Nations; Just,
that he become not the mere Butt of Faction, and Malice, and be in a worse
Condition then the Basest of Vassals; Honorable, that the Nakedness of
Government be not daily Uncovered; Wise, in the Constitution, that so we may
not (at once) both Trust, and Provoke, by forcing him to shift for his Own
Indemnity; no danger to the Public seeming so Extreme, as the Outlawry of a
Prince; no Task (by daily Experience) so difficult, as the Arraigning of any
Power, whether Regal or Popular; and if we make Golden Bridges for Flying
Enemies, much more should we afford them to Relenting Sovereigns: (Upon which
account, in our Neighbor Kingdom of France, even Princes of the Blood are not
subjected to Capital Punishments.) Finally, very Safe it is in the Consequence;
for should a King be never so wicked and Tyrannical, yet being (by the Danger
threatening his Corrupt Ministers) stripped of Agents, his Personal Impunity might
signify something to Himself, perhaps, but nothing to the People.

A Revenue he has, for the support of his State and Family, Ample; for the
Ordinary Protection of his People, Sufficient; but for any considerable
Undertaking, Defective; and for Public Oppression so Inconsiderable, that
when Prerogative was most Rampant, our Greatest Princes (and some doubtless we
have had, the most Renowned Warriors of their Age) would never, prudently,
aspire to make themselves Absolute. The Royal Revenue is proportioned to the
Maintenance of Courts, not Camps, and Fleets: In fine, it is very Competent for
Ordinary Disbursements, and as for Extraordinary he resorts to Parliaments; the
Wiser He, and the Happier We! Now there is nothing more Demonstrative, then
that upon Examination, we may find the present Government to be (compared with
all the other Models of the Late Times) a mighty Ease to the Public Charge;
we allowed the Tyrant Cromwell no less then a constant Revenue of 1900000 l. to
support him in his Usurpation; and yet That Sum (beside all his other
intolerable Squeezings) at the years end, cleared not the Account by far. Under
the Rump a great deal more was yearly Collected out of the Bowels of the
People, to maintain the Army; and yet we could never be at quiet neither, but
were perpetually embroiled in Wars either Abroad or at Home, by our active
Spirits, some to feed their Ambition, others their Purses: And such a Spirit we
read of, working in all Free-States, Ancient and Modern. What shall we say now
of the Expenses of the Late King, (if examined by This Standard) whose Revenue
in Lands, Perquisites, and Customs, exceeded not 700000 l. a year; and yet by
the good management of that most Thristy and Temperate Prince, that petite
Annuity furnished a glorious Court, a Noble Equipage for the Honor of the
Nation, and paid off a considerable Fleet; which never was much improved
afterward by all our vast Payments, when we were so unfortunate as to fall
into Other hands. Nay and our present Charge is rather a Sport, then a Burden,
compared with Their Monthly Tax.

TRUE it is, that while we live with Men, we shall be subject to That which is
the Effect of their Nature, Sin; nor is it possible to reap the more General
Fruit of the best Established Policy, unless we submit to some possible
Inconveniences. But yet I defy your Friend, and all other Projectors of
Commonwealths, to contrive greater Freedom for their Citizens, then is provided
by Magna Charta, and The Petition of Right; or show that it is not much easier
to Violate, then to Mend them; for Thereby, our Lives, Liberties, and Estates
are, under Monarchy, secured and established (I think) as well as any thing, on
this side Heaven, can be. It is no Soloecism to say, that the Subject has his
Prerogative, as well as the King; and sure I am, he is in as good condition to
maintain it; the Dependence being less on his side. Beside that no Prince ever
attempted any Violation thereof, but that, at Long Run, he suffered in that
point of his Prerogative that let in the Opportunity. Hence it is that the
Rights of the People have grown stronger and stronger against the Prince, and
sometimes have hurried his Person to be a Sacrifice; always, his Instruments;
whereof few, in our History, can we read, that, contriving against the Law,
have died in peace. If, possibly, One Prince, (as King Harry) by his High
Spirit, swept all before him, yet his Infant Successor is forced to make amends
for his Fathers Violations: So that Liberty (we see) is no less Sacred, then
Majesty; Noli me tangere being its Motto likewise: And in case of any, the
least Infringement, (as Escapes in Government may happen, even in the most
perfect) it is resented as if the Nation had received a Box on the Ear. If it
be (as they say) the Glory of a Tree-State, to Exalt; the Scandal of Tyranny,
to Embase our Spirits; doubtless the Established Form is our Only Commonwealth;
for all that we got by the Change of it, was but the learning quietly to take
the Bastinade. Nay, and at the very worst that can be imagined, it is much more
Easy (were it Lawful) for us to dispute our Rights with a single Prince, and
his Trembling Agents; then (as it was our Case formerly) with a Knot of
Sovereigns that are backed with the Sword.

WE are now again able to distinguish (which we could never do under their
Free-Estate, for all the fair Promises they made us) the Legislative and the
Ministerial Authority: For though both of them are Inherent in the King, yet are
not both of them his own Peculiar and Personal Act. We know that the House of
Commons has not the Power of a Court Leet, to give an Oath, nor of a Justice of
the Peace, to make a Mittimus: And this Distinction, doubtless, is the most
Vital part of Freedom, and far more considerable to poor Subjects, then all
these men's pretended Rotations; as, on the contrary, the absolute Jumbling and
Confounding of them, is an Accomplishment of Servitude, for which all
Republiques, I fear, (and our late one more especially) have more to Answer,
then any Limited Sovereign can have. And certain it is, that as our Prince, in
his Personal Capacity, makes no Laws; so neither does he, by himself, Execute
or Interpret any: No Judge takes notice of his single Command, to justify any
Trespass; no not so much as the breaking of a Hedge; his Power is Circumscribed
by his Justice; he is (equally with the meanest of his Subjects) concerned in
that Honest Maxim; We may do just so much, and no more, then we have Right to
do. And it is tolerably enough said, He can do no wrong, because, if it be
wrong, he does it not; it is void in the Act, and punishable in his Agent. His
Officers, as they are alike liable, so perhaps they are more Obnoxious to
Indictments and Suits, then any other; by how much their Trespass seems to be
of a Higher Nature, and gives greater Alarm: His Private Will cannot
Countermand his Public; His Privy Seal still Buckles to his Great Seal, as
being (in a sense) the Nations, as much as His; His Order Supercedes no
Process; and His Displeasure threatens no man with an hours Imprisonment, after
the Return of HabeasCorpus: An Undersheriff is more Terrible, a Constable more
Saucy, a Bailiff more Troublesome, then He: And yet by his Gentle Authority, by
this Scabbard of Prerogative (as some in derision have lewdly Termed it) which
(if it Would) Could Scarce Oppress an Orphan; Tumults are Curbed Faction
Moderated, Usurpation Forestalled, Intervals prevented, Perpetuities Obviated,
Equity Administered, Clemency Exalted, and the People made Happy to a degree
even of Satiety and Wantonness.

TO Conclude this Point: What shall I add more? The Act enjoining the Keepers
of the Great Seal, under Pain of High Treason, to Summon a Triennial
Parliament, of Course, by Virtue of the Act, without Further Warrant; The Act
forbidding the Privy-Councell to intermeddle with Meum and Tuum; the Law
abolishing the Star Chamber, High Commission, etc. Branding all Past, and
Bridling all Future Enormities: The Statutes limiting the Kings Claims, and
relieving his Tenants from Exaction of Forfeitures; Beside many other principal
Immunities, wherewith (by the Especial Favor of God, and the Bounty of our
Princes) we are Blessed, far beyond any of our Neighbors: Above all, our
Assurance (by the Goodness and Clemency of our present Dread Sovereign) readily
to obtain such further Addition and Perfection of Liberty and Security, (if any
such there can be) as may consist with Modesty and Liberty it self, to ask:
Does not all this Proclaim aloud, that we are the Mirror of Governments, Envy
of Monarchies, and Shame of Commonwealths; who cannot but blush to see
themselves so Eclipsed and Silenced, in all their Pretenses to Freedom? And
does it not more than justify my Assertion, that with all the Ornaments of the
Noblest Kingdom, we have likewise all the Enjoyments of a Free-Estate?

. 6. AFTER all these solid Blessings and Advantages, which we Reap from the
most Excellent of Governments, and of Princes; the bare Fruition of the Tithe
whereof, would be sufficient to transport the Best to pass of our Neighbor
Nations into all the Cordial and Passionate Expressions of Joy and Gratitude
imaginable: After all these Comforts (I say) a Body would think, there should
scarce be found one single Murmuring and Disaffected Person in the whole
Kingdom. And yet so hard is our Fate; our Hearts infensible; and so Ingenious
are we in starting Fears and Jealousies; that a great part of us deprive our
selves of the Enjoyment of all our present Felicities, through a too Eager and
Pensive Solicitation for Futurities. Nay so miserably Hood-winked is our
Reason, that our Carefulness to avoid miscarryin^ upon a Scilla, hurries us
Violently into the other Extreme of splitting upon a Charybdis. Popery and
Tyranny (we cry) are breaking in upon us like a Deluge; the Presumptive Heir is
of the Red-Letter Stamp: and therefore another Sect of our Pseudo-protestants,
apprehending the Danger and the Impracticableness of a Commonwealth-Government
here amongst us, do hope to mend the matter mightily, by propounding the
setting up of a Single Person either of a Cracked Title, or of a New Line; upon
the death of his present Majesty without Legitimate Issue: Whom God preserve.

THERE is no man shall be more willing than my self to grant that the Popish
Religion (if it may deserve the Name) is little better than a Compound of mere
Secular Interest, Tyranny, Hypoc^^sie, Homicide, and Delusion; and that the
very principles of the Jesuits do inspirit and egg them on to the inflicting of
all manner of Outrageous Violences upon the Persons of those that enjoy a
greater Light and Purity of the Gospel then themselves. But yet I must averr
(on the other hand) that, since through the peculiar Mercy and Providence of
God, and the Indefatigable Industry and Vigilance of Authority; all their
Machinations have hitherto been defeated, and their Conspiracies both against
our Church and State rendered Abortive; it will become us both as Men and
Christians, to temper our Passions, and to rest satisfied with the singular
Care and Concern, that the Government vouchsafes continually to express both
for our present and future safety and preservation, in all Respects. Full well
know, that nothing is of greater Concernment then the Security of that
Religion, which by the Blood of so many blessed and Glorious Martyrs has (by
Gods immediate blessing) been so firmly Established amongst us. But then we are
to take special heed that we lend not too easy an Ear to such as cry up
Religion, and design Faction; that cry out Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, when
they intend Self-Interest; to keep up a party; an Affected way; or to be the
Ipse dixit of a County: Religion has not at all prosper'd by undue practices to
advance it. It Is Meekness, Patience, Humility, and those Graces of the Spirit,
that Convince and Convert; when Rigidness, Censuring, and the Sword Exasperate
and Harden. Has not Gods power, or truth, Evidence to secure it self? Let but
the Gospel have Free passage, and it will make its own stay: For all true
Protestants do unanimously disown the Promotion of it by the Sword, as totally
Unchristian; and bequeath it to the Pope and the Turk. Was not, now, the
maintenance of our Fundamental Laws the pretense of our late Quarrel? Found we
not the Spirit of the Nation roused up, upon the sound of the Trumpet? Popery,
was it not decry'd, and Religion, Protestant Religion, judged to be in danger?
Were we not called out to the Battle upon the account of Zeal, with Curse ye
Meroz? And yet under our Free Estate, (as they called it) our Religion (so much
of it especially as could any way be termed Protestant) turned into Wantonness;
and our Divisions became so great, that we durst not exasperate, by advancing
that Idol of the Presbyters, Discipline; nor indeed could we, if we durst; for
the most active of our Statists, (if they had any Religion at all) 'twas that
of the Sectary, which they owned as the main Supporter of their Model, whose
Interest it was to give Licentiousness to all. As for Laws, those which we
adored for Excellency and Antiquity, they were (by them) of necessity altered,
in our Freedoms of Person and Estate, wherein true Liberty is principally
concerned: For when the House of Commons (or rather the Rump of it) engrossed
the Sovereign Power, they both Imposed Taxes, and Levied them, by virtue of a
trifling Ordinance, which could never be done before, but by an Act of
Parliament, solemnly and regularly passed by the King and the Three Estates:
And having of Tribunes of the people, (as it were) and their Bulwark against
High Payments and Impressures, demanded by the King, advanced themselves into
the degree of Princes; they took upon them to assess and impress us at
pleasure; and we might complain as long as we would of the Reiterated Burden;
but there was no remedy but Patience, because no Appeal left us, themselves
being both Parties and Judges.

I COULD heartily wish there were at present no more reason, to be apprehensive
of Popery coming amongst us, then there was in those days: But yet, let his
Royal Highness's Persuasion be what it will, this I Am sure of, that Dr. Oats
has deposed upon Oath, that the Jesuits were so far from saying or acting,
Indifferently, as to his Person, that in their Hellish Plot, they had marked
him out also for Slaughter, with his most Royal, most Protestant Brother. Now
the late Marquess of Argyle was wont to lay it down as a Principle in Policy,
That it was the Character of a wise man not to let the World know what Religion
he was of: But (for my own part) I cannot in Charity but hope the best of a
Person, (till I shall be convinced of the contrary, by more certain and
positive Arguments, then any that I have yet been able to meet with) that has
been so Lectur'd and Tutored by our late Glorious Martyr, (as well as by
Experience) into a Veneration for, and a Perseverance in that Pure, Reformed
Religion, the Principles of which he sucked in with his very Milk, and in
Defense of which his ever Blessed Father laid down his most precious Life, upon
a Scaffold. You may read his words thus; I do require you, (addressing to his
present Majesty) as your Father and your King, that you never suffer your Heart
to receive the least Check against, or Dis-affection from the True Religion
established in the Church of England: I tell you I have tried it, and after
much Search, and many Disputes, have concluded it to be the best in the World,
not only in the Community, as Christian, but also in the special Notion, as
Reformed; keeping the middle way between the Pomp of Superstitious Tyranny, and
the Meanness of Fantastic Anarchy, etc. To this sense, spoke he, when he had
no more to speak. Nay, and so zealous, this way, was our English Solomon, (the
Duke's Grandfather) King James, that rather then any of his Progeny should ever
come to be tainted with the Errors and Idolatries of the Church of Rome, he
made it his Prayer to Almighty God, that they might be taken out of the World
first.

AS to the apprehensions of Tyranny, I hope, by what I have already delivered
in the Body of this Discourse, it is evident, that there is less ground to fear
it, then many people might before imagine, for that it is next to an
Impossibility to introduce it. And, upon probable grounds, I persuade my self,
that should the Duke ever have the occasion offered, yet would he be wiser then
to make trial of the Experiment, knowing so well as he must needs do, that
should the English Liberties be violated in the example but of any one single
Person, the whole Nation would take it self to be concerned upon that account,
apprehend it self ready for the Fetters, and, thereby, what with Fear, what
with Hate, such a Storm would be raised, as might shake the surest Foundations
of the Government; and so very much has Majesty already felt by the Fury of the
People, that it will be chary (doubtless) of giving occasion to encounter it
again.

BUT it is farther Objected (it seems) that there is a Vindictive and Implacable
Spirit in the Case. Now this is most manifest (indeed) that there have been
Provocations to the height; but shall we therefore continue to provoke, because
we have begun? It Is a Rule (you know) that he that does wrong, never forgives,
but he that has wrong, may. The Interest of Revenge is passionate, but the
Interest of Profit arises from a Passion that prevails more; and he is very
weak, that anteposes Rumor and vain Passion, when it stands in Competition
with his Safety. To speak home, Interest rules the whole World; and Princes (as
others) design more the security of their own Greatness, then a petty Revenge
that may hazard it: But for this search we the Experiences of past Ages. Henry
the Great of France, was so far from punishing any of the holy League, that
labored, by all means possible, to keep him from his Right, and to murder
him, that (on the contrary) he employed those very Persons that were his main
Opposites, in his Armies, in his Offices, and in his Councels. And what shall
we say of King James, who sent Messages, made Vows, menaced Revenge, and all to
prevent that fatal Stroke from falling upon his Mother, (the Queen of Scots)
under Queen Eliz. but to no effect. Observe the Issue now; Shortly Q. Eliz.
dies, and those very Lords that acted personally in the Mothers Death, were the
most forward to court the Son to the Crown, and he became established with all
Prerogatives incident to the English Scepter. What? Acts he in the way of
Revenge? No; he, like a wise Prince, feeling the Warmth of so Rich a Climate,
is so passionate to confirm his own Greatness, that he not only forgets the
Injury of his Mother, but manages his great Affairs by the hands of those very
Persons that were Contrivers of it; yet through Her Blood did he derive his
Title! Nor do we read of one of these Nobles, or their Issue, that suffered
Diminution, by any Resentment, upon that account. His wise Father also, that
had been beaten into the knowledge of the English Spirit, writes thus: Let no
Passion, (my Son) betray you to any study of Revenge upon Those whose Own Sin
and Folly will sufficiently Punish theu, in due Time: Be confident that most of
all Sides that have done Amiss, have done so, not out of Malice, but
Misinformation, or Mis-apprehension of Things. None will be more Loyal to Me
or You, then those Subjects, who, sensible of Their Errors, and Our Injuries,
will feel, in their own Souls, most Vehement Motions to Repentance, and earnest
Defires to make some Reparations for their former Desects, etc. The like said
he at his Last Hour. But what do we Doubt or Distrust? May we not have a
Protestant Parliament upon all Exigencies; and the disposal of Commands and
Offices secure to us, for a Time, in case of His Majesty's decease? Have we not
a Protestant Council, a Protestant Militia, a Protestant Clergy, and a
Protestant People; what can we (in reason) desire more?

. 7. AS to the Project of erecting a Cracht Title, or a Single Person of
another Line; (over and above the Heinousness and Impiety of the Proposition,
and to wave tedious Canvassings) That must unquestionably be the most Desperate
of all other Remedies, and infinitely worse then the Disease it self: For
Thereby we should set on Foot a personal Quarrel; and (at the Long Run) beyond
measure Disgust the Spirits of this Generous People, in that they will then be
Subjected to their Equal; who, to retain his Usurpation, will be forced to
repeat and accumulate those Violences, whereof we had most woeful Experience
under the Old Protector: Otherwise, he will soon be made the Object of our
Contempt; as was his Son, with his Easy and Gentle way of Acting; and his Name
be used only as a Cloak to cover the Avarice, and Exorbitances of a Ravenous
Faction. Nor can This Project prevent a Relapse into our former Calamities;
because our Fears will ever be Great and Continual, and, consequently, our
Charge proportionable. In a word, all the Evils and Miseries that were brought
upon us by the Army, the Rump, and by all other Architects of our Slavery in
the Late Times, will certainly be found Tolerable; compared with the Probable,
and Genuine Effects of such a Desperate and Unchristian Proceeding.

. 8. YOU will not expect from me, (I Am sure, Sir) that I should so acquit my
self of every Objection, as to leave all men satisfied; especially such as
carry a Bias of Preferment, Profit, or Faction; Men that have in Design
Exorbitances of Power, or Wealth, will hardly, with Arguments, be reclaimed:
And some there are (I know) that have so long possessed their Heads with strong
Notions, that they are not capable to take in Reason, against them; and
thereupon, run on Frantique in Error, till there be a Rotation in their Brains:
Such there are, that, with Confidence, so often have told a Lie, that, at
length, themselves believe it to be a Truth: But we shall be too wise (I Am
sure, should ever that day come) to prefer the Interest or Wilfulness of a
Few, to the Safety and Welfare of the Whole. I shall not deny, yet, that it is
easier to demonstrate what may be Evil, then positively to assert what will be
Good: but however, comparing Times with Things, (as is above represented) I
doubt not to Evidence, that to keep where we are, and to be contented with our
Lot, is a Course much rather to be embraced, as that which, in great
Probability, may be Good; then, by pushing at Incertainties, to pull down most
lamentable Confusions and Desolations upon our own Heads, which certainly will
be Evil I therefore ever was, and still am of opinion, that it is both our
Interest and our Duty to embrace, with Open Arms, the ample, generous Offers of
his most Gracious Majesty, in order to Provisions for our future Security, in
point of Freedom and Religion: As for the Rest, let us but have our Good Old
Laws duly put in Execution; and then (by Gods assistance) we shall be in a
Capacity to Defy the Pope, the Devil, and all their Works, come what will come.

9. Thus, Sir, have I run through the several Heads that you were pleased to
propound. I have, in the First place, given you my Reasons why I conceive the
Project of Fixing a Free-Estate, (as your Friend thinks fit to term it) here
amongst us, would be utterly Impracticable; I have, in the next place,
presented you with a Summary of those Mischiefs and Distractions, which were
the Consequents of a Like Attempt, from 1640. to 1660. In the Third place, you
find the Natural Bent and Inclination of the People to Monarchy, exclusively of
any other Form of Regiment whatsoever, fully demonstrated; the Royal
Prerogative Anatomized; and an Account of those great Immunities, Blessings,
and Privileges which the English do at this day enjoy under the present
Government Established, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, peculiarly, and above
any other People or Nation in the known World. The Fourth, rips up the Ground
of our Fears and Jealousies of Popery and Arbitrary Power flowing in upon us,
should the Duke of York ever come to Sway the English Scepter; and furnishes
Arguments for the moderating and lessening our Apprehensions as to the One, and
for the proving the almost Impossibility of Effecting the Other, were there
never so great a Will and Disposition that way. In the Fifth place, you have
represented the Danger and Impiety, of Erecting a Cracked Title, or a Single
Person of a New Line; together with the probable Calamitous Effects that would
inevitably ensue upon such an Attempt. And Lastly, I have presumed to offer my
own Expedient, in reference to the Security of our Religion and Freedoms, for
the Present and for the Future. Upon the Whole Matter, if, by what I have
written, I be so fortunate as to make your Friend a Convert, 'twill be an
Infinite Satisfaction to me; because, thereby I may hope to save a Soul; but,
at the worst, I may say with the Text, that I shall hide a multitude of Sins.
Now should I frame twenty Excuses to you for the Length, the Inequality, the
Insufficiency, the Incoherence, the Freedom, the Extravagant Rovings and
Impertinencies, the Unskilful Management, nay and for the Boldness and
Presumption of this Discourse: But I have neither Will nor Leisure to Trifle at
such a rate. I am conscious to my self (no man more) of my great want of
Abilities requisite for an Undertaking of such Weight and Importance; only I
was resolved to let you see, that no Considerations whatsoever were of force
(with me) to withstand the Authority of your Commands. I have unbosom'd my self
to you, Sir, (under the protection of a Private Letter) with all the Frankness
and Simplicity imaginable; not doubting but you will make such use of it, as
may not redound to the Disadvantage of,

Sir, Your most Obedient Servant.
Feb. 21. 1679/80.

