A LETTER From a Gentleman at St. GERMAINS, To his Friend in LONDON.

Printed in the Year 1697.

A LETTER From a Gentleman at St. GERMAINS, To his Friend in LONDON.
SIR,
IN the midst of our Dismal Apprehensions of a War, which had almost Unpeopl'd
this Country, laid waste its Tillage and Vineyards, put an end to its
Manufactures, (in a great measure) by transferring them to other Countries; in
a word, a War which threatened the Ruin of the French Trade both at home and
abroad, and which if the Confederates could have maintained but two years
longer, in all probability would have reduced this Monarchy to almost as low a
Condition as that of Spain; I say, in the midst of such a frightful Prospect,
you will easily believe it is a most agreeable surprise to them, to find
themselves now (by the ill Conduct of their Neighbors) already delivered from
all these impendent Mischiefs: For by the imprudent haste the Allies have made
in the Discharge of their Troops, the French King has the opportunity of
furnishing himself with the best Foot that were ever yet known in the World,
and is now at liberty to Employ his own Subjects in Tillage, Vineyards, and
Manufactures, by which means, in a small time, he may reasonably expect to
Restore his Trade to its former flourishing State: And if they are thus pleased
with the happy Change os their Condition, you will give our Court leave to be
no less Transported with the Accounts they have by the last Posts of the
present posture of Affairs in London.

I must confess, I have long promised my self, whenever a Peace should be
declared between France and England, our Court at St. Germains might by a
prudent, and careful Conduct, profit themselves very much of the inveterate
Animosities between the two contesting Parties for the Ministry there; And (tho
they neither of them intend such a Consequence of their Quarrel) that it might
at some time happen, whilst they are Playing for this Stake of Government, we
may have a fair Game to Beast 'em Both.

But I must own, I did think this would have been a Work of more time; I did
not imagine any thing like this could happen, before the French Troops were
Disbanded, the Towns delivered up, or any other part of the Peace performed:
But that part of it which has already enabled the King of France to maintain
another years War, if he should so think fit, I mean, the opening of the Trade
with him. This is so Amazing a Management, That Thinking Men can scarce believe
it other than a Dream: However, most of us are so easy to entertain every
appearance of Hope, that this News has occasioned a great Change in the
Countenances of our Court: The King himself takes other Airs upon him than he
has been seen to do of late; Is much in Whispers, with Mac -- Fitz -- and O
--, which we here call a Cabinet; And the poor Queen, who upon the first
Knowledge of the intended Peace, every Night, like King David, Watered her
Couch with her Tears, has now reassumed the pointed Glories of her Eyes;
appears all Gay, is always present at Balls, Plays, etc. Orders are given out
for us to Liquor our Jack-Boots, Masses are said day and night for our Success;
and we talk with Assurance, that we shall shortly have as quiet and uncontested
a Restoration as that in 1660: I own I cannot be Sanguine at this rate, for
tho it gives great Encouragement to see a People imposed upon so far by an
Artificial Argument, as to believe Black is White, and in a Point upon which
their All depends; yet I look-upon it only as a surprise, which will not be
able to maintain the Ground it has got, against a mature and deliberate
Consideration, the Ancient Observers have left to us as a Proverb, That nothing
Violent is Lasting: I know my Countrymen are apt to be surpised into Mistakes,
but they grow more reasonable upon thinking, as we found to our Costs about Ten
years since; and this would be so general a Ruin, that I fear there are too
many concerned to suffer it easily. And I should fancy, it is impossible for
them, (when they come soberly to Reflect upon their Danger from Le Hogue,
Calais, the several Debarkments in Ireland, and the P. of O.'s Descent, in
every of which Cases, the English were Masters of the Sea) to believe
themselves safe without a Land-Force, nor with any other Land-Force than
Disciplined Troops against Disciplined Troops, certainly they cannot. The State
of the Case, I take to be. That the old Designing K -- -- s have found this way
to make themselves Courted by the Government, and have Trump'd up these
Specious Fears and Jealousies of Liberty, to draw in a sort of Men, who wish
better to their Interest, then they Judge of it, to strengthen their Party; and
I am apt to think, the real Contest is, a Struggle between the Two Contending
Parties, which of them shall appear the most able and successful in the
Management of the present Argument on foot, For and against an Army; and
consequently which of them shall be esteemed most useful by their Masters; for
that any who are for the present Government (which I fear most of the People of
England are) can be for no Army in their present Circumstances, is Ridiculous
to believe.

However it is our part to improve this Occasion to our Service as far as we
can, and in order to this, the K. and Q. direct first, That you make all the
Compliments imaginable from them to the Author of the Argument Against a
Standing Army, etc. And (because nothing can please him so much as to be
thought Important) you are to tell him, They own all the Hopes they have of
their Restoration to His Conduct, and to the most Eloquent Persuasion of his
Book, That they shall always Treat him as their Redeemer, and that he shall not
only be the Alb -- l, but the Cl -- n too of their Government: Their Supreme
Minister both in Military and Civil Affairs, (as being equally Capable of
both.) Perhaps you will think this Ridiculous, and truly it would be so to any
other; but as to this Gentleman, believe me you cannot be too Extravagant,
neither in your Praises of him, nor Promises to him: For as nothing is so
Impossible, but that he will hope to make you believe it; so on the other hand,
nothing is so Impossible neither, but you may make him believe, when it humors
his Vanity. However his malicious Wit, and indefatigable Industry to revenge
himself of his late Friends, may be of use to us, if prudently managed. But to
that End let him write and act for us in a Mask, for I fancy his Credit is so
low on every side, that he will never be able to do our Enemies any
considerable Mischief barefaced; Flatter and Promise all his Friends too,
without measure, from the S -- ch Conjurer down to the little dirty School Boy;
make 'em all Secretaries of State, or what else they have most fancy for. It is
a cheap way of Listing Auxiliaries; and Fools are more pleased with immense
Hopes, than moderate Certainties.

Let our Friends industriously solicit in the Court of Requests, Coffee,
Chocolate Houses, etc. and by being all Things to all Men, they will gain some.

Those Whigs who are State Phanaticks, and prefer the Popular Project of being
against an Army, to the Real Safety of the People whom they pretend to Protect,
you are to praise for their Steadiness to their former Principles; clap them on
the Back, and call them Brave Englishmen, true Englishmen.

The City you are to fright with that dismal Havoc that Laced Coats and Red
Stockings will make amongst their Wives and Daughters, for Women are provoked
by the sight of the Red to Love, as Turkey Cocks are to Anges; and you are to
tell 'em, It will be too hard for these Ragamuffins in Red to run away with
their Women, whilst the D -- cb on the other hand run away with their Trade.

Make the Country Squires sensible of the most deplorable Havoc these Robbers
of Henroosts will make amongst the Poultry; how dear they will make Eggs: Tell
'em, how exactly these Disciplined Troops have learned of the French to shoot
flying; and that not a Partridge, Pheasant, Woodcock, etc. will live in quiet
for 'em, which perhaps may weigh more with some of them than a French Invasion.

Enrage the Clergy with Reminding them of the Decrease of their Dominion; tell
'em, That now the Sword of Justice walks into Conventicles, not to Correct 'em,
but to Compliment 'em. How can they bear to see all those pleasing and
profitable Laws against Dissenters laid asleep! Remember them of their old
Maxim, "That it is better to have Papists govern, than Presbyterians." And that
they may not apprehend too much, that their Part in the late Revolution will be
remembered, tell 'em, That K. James has often been heard to say, That tho
indeed the Church of E --, like St. Peter, denied their Master upon the Pr --
of O -- 's coming over; yet, like that holy Saint too, they soon repented of
it, and immediately went out and wept bitterly for it; and that some of them
had sufficiently Expiated for that Offense by Service since. Tho it proved not
to have the Success they in tended; and withal let 'em know, it is a Standing
Rule in all wise Courts, That as one Disservice shall destroy the Merit of a
Thousand past Services, so no past Injuries shall be remembered if you can serve
a present Turn.

Irritate all those who came over with the Pr -- of O --, and are unrewarded;
Remind the Whigs of their being disbanded when there was no further use of
them; It may prove a seasonable precedent for them to disband the Army; And as
Timon of Athens says, "May they confound the Army, and then --."

Endeavor to make the People impatient of their Taxes, the Spartan Politicians
jealous of their Liberties, and the Ladies sensible of the neglect of their
Beauty, and what Gallantries they may expect from us who have been Bred so long
in France. And now I name Ladies, Pray let Mrs. L -- y lay hold upon the young
M -- rs, with her Troop of Catholic kind Beauties: We are told much of the
Progress of her Arms, and that she has by a Detachement of her Troops, made
two of their Grandees Prisoners: Thank her for her young Lord's Conversion, who
Labors in our Interests more than ye all, and I hear his Labor of Love is not
in vain amongst the young Sparks of his acquaintance; but she must take Care to
manage him warily, for it is said, That he has all the K -- ve of his
Grandfather without any of his Understanding.

Let some Apostles be sent to Coffee Houses to Preach up, and Argue for the
Roman and Lacedemonian Schemes of Government; for in our Case, The furthest way
about will be the nearest way home, (according to the Proverb,) And it was upon
this Point, that the Restoration was brought about in 1660; for if you can
make my Countrymen out of their Wits one way, you may the more easily make 'em
so any other way. Let our Friends Amuse our Enemies, by not appearing violent
against any Laws which forbid Corresponding with K. J. and the return of
Jacobites from France, nay not even against an Act of Abjuration; for if we can
by these Shadows of Security, prevail with them to Disband the Army, we shall
soon be in a Condition to Disband those Laws; and if by any of these Methods
above mentioned, you find that ye gain Ground, we will then consider what is
next to be done; in the mean time I wish you good luck, and am,

Yours, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Had forgot to tell you, that since this News from England, Orders are given
out here to hasten the delivery of all the Towns, to the Confederares, and
likewise immediately to Disband a great part of the Army, hoping thereby to
take away all Jealousies from the English, and to Confirm 'em in their
Security; For the French wisely consider, That if by this means they can
Advance the present Project on Foot amongst the English, of a Militia; and that
they can surprise them, while they are in this mad Fit, the Towns (were they
twice as many) will quickly be their own again. I had forgot likewise to tell
you, That you are to Advise our Friends, that they appear not too warm in
public Discourse against Armies, it will allarm our Enemies, and awaken them
out of their Lethargy, if they are not infatuated, to see declared Jacobites so
concerned for English Liberty, and perhaps put them upon thinking that they
have some other Motive which makes them so unkind to their old Mistress, A
Standing Army.



FINIS.

