A SHORT VIEW Of some Remarkable Transactions, Leading to the happy Settlement
of these Nations under the Government of our Lawful and Gracious SOVEREIGN
CHARLES the II. whom GOD Preserve.

BY ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Qui aliquid statuit, part inaudita altera
AEquum licet statuerit, Iniquus est Iudex.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1660.

The PREFACE.
UPon the Blessed Return of his Sacred Majesty, I found my self under a Censure
of Betraying him: This put me upon the publishing of diverse scatterd Papers to
acquit my self, which (altogether) were entitled my Apology.

To make the folly the more pardonable, I shaped it like a little Story,
tracing the whole course of Affairs then in motion by the best Method I could
give it, but for the Truth of what is there contained, I dare account.

The Book lay dead a good while upon the Stationers hand; the business of that
time being not so much to enquire who deserved Reward, or who Punishment; but
some were busy to Get, others to Escape, and not a few most fortunately did
Both.

The World it seems is now at better Leisure to look about them, and among
other Trifles, this Book is called upon: The reason why I Printed it, is gone,
and so is that too why it was not minded. My Credit being at present Fairer
then it was, although my Fortune some what Worse: But till all Offices were
disposed of, it might have possibly been Inconvenient to believe any man
honest, that was poor.

Finding this composition now afresh enquired for, to do the Stationer a
kindness, I have a little altered the Title; and to oblige the Reader, I have
Exchanged a Longer Preface for a shorter: The rest continues to a Syllable the
very thing it was.

One Apology for another, methinks is False Heraldry, yet I must beg the Reader
to believe that I had no vanity to show my self to the Public in that Dress:
nor was I such a Sot, as to expect that what I framed to the Humor of the
Vulgar, should much affect the Serious. But willing to appear rather to want
Wit, then Honesty; and (to deal frankly) not without some hopes, that my good
meaning would not be ill taken, I caused to be Printed this Discourse ensuing.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
I Am here to Advertise, that as at first I entered upon This Pamphlet with
great Unwillingnesse; so I have now at Last, rather chosen to break the
Account, and Order of it, by Leaving out 34. Pages of what I intended, than
overcharge the Reader by Filling up of this ensuing Vacancy. It is too much
already, of what is Necessary; and That which I had prepared for this Place,
not being of so Absolute Necessity to my present Purpose, I shall refer to a
more proper Opportunity and Leisure.

L'ESTRANGE HIS APOLOGY, etc.
TO begin with the Beginning of the War, and of my Story. My Judgment led me
to the Kings Party, and That I Served, without any other Aim, or Benefit, than
the Discharge of my Duty. In 1644. I was Betrayed by a Brace of Villains: by
name, Leman, and Haggar) upon a Treaty to surprise Linn Regis. The former of
these had been at Oxford, and there Solicited, and obtained the Promise of a
Command at Sea; and Both of them were bound up under an Oath of Secrecy, and
Fidelity, as Rank as words could make it. Being seized; and his Majesty's
Commission found about me: I was Hurried away, first to Linn; Thence to London;
and There transmitted to the City. Court Martial for my Trial. (where Two Prime
men were a Saleman, and an Ostler) In this Extremity, nothing was left unsaid,
that might Infame me: and with so strong a Confidence too, that the best
Friends I had, were staggered at it.

The Commission was Decry'd for Counterfeit; The Design, Rash, and Foolish: --
The Instrument, as much; -- The Menage, worse; There were two that Affirmed,
that I Betrayed all, with the Formalities, How, and upon What Conditions. I was
at last brought to the Bar; and Charged, First as a Spy; then as a Traitor,
with all the Circumstances of Rudeness, and Severity Imaginable. Upon that
Hearing, the Court Inclining to acquit me, It was proposed, and Carried, under
pretense of Favor to me, that Judgment might be deferred, and two days
longer Respit given me for the advantage of my Defense. In this Interim, they
had packed a Committee, and then Condemned me as Traitor; Many persons
Contributing to this Vote, that never heard one Syllable of my Trial. My
Sentence being passed, I threw a Breviate of my Case among them, with these
very Words; That Since they would not Hear my Defense, they might Read it; That
was it. A young Red Headed Fellow, burnt it. I was then cast into Newgate;
whence I dispatched forthwith a Petitionary Appeal to the Lords; and Narratives
of the Proceedings to the Principal of Both Houses. At This Time I received a
Friendly Visit, from Mr. Therowgood, and Mr. Arrowsmith, (then of the Synod)
with an Assurance, that they would do their utmost to preserve me, if I would
but Petition to be Banished, and Take the Covenant, without which, there was no
Possibility to Save me. My Answer was, (with a Respect to their Civility) to
this effect: That if I could be so great a Knave, as soberly to Contradict my
Conscience, in order to the Saving of my Life; I was not yet so great a Fool,
as to be Hanged, with my Confession about my Neck. The time appointed for my
Execution, being the Thursday following, The Lords Ordered my Reprieve,
commanding MILLS, (the Iudge-Advocate) to bring in my Charge, upon Wednesday.
He appeared accordingly, but with an Excuse, that he wanted Time to Prepare it;
however upon Friday it should be Ready. It was then Providentially Demanded;
whether they meant to Hang me First, and then Charge me; and if they Intended
to execute me in the Interim? He told them, Yes; For the Commons had passed an
Order that no Reprieve should stand good, without the Consent of Both Houses.
Hereupon, they desired a Conference; but the Commons had Voted also, That no
Private Business should be Moved in Ten days. This notwithstanding; with
great Difficulty, it was Debated, and my Reprieve confirmed, for 14. days: and
after That, Prolonged, in Order to a further Hearing. In this Condition of
Expectancy, I lay almost 4. years, a Prisoner; and only an Order betwixt me,
and the Gallows. I am the more Particular in This, because I have so many
Honorable Witnesses, to prove the Truth of every Syllable I say: and yet in
this Extremity, I had as much to do to Preserve my Credit among my Pretending,
Friends, as to Defend my Life against the Malice of my Professed Enemies.

MY first Step out of Prison, was into Kent, and There, (God knows it) had my
Soul depended upon a strict Account for every Thought, and Moment; I could not
have employed more Care, and Zeal, in the Performance of my Duty, than I did:
Yet in the very height of our Success, being grown to a Considerable Body,
even out of Nothing, It was Suggested that L'estrange was False: But That
Opinion was soon Quieted, by a Discriminating Oath to the Commissioners at
Rochester, which made those very Persons that had privately aspersed Me, to
withdraw; and diverse of them afterward appeared openly against us. Upon the
Dissolution of the Party, I Crossed the Sea; and There I found the main
Miscariage of the Business Cast upon Me; but still by Those that Ruined it
Themselves. After a Six Month's trial, by Word of mouth, and Letter, to
Rectify Mistakes, I found my self at length obliged to a more Public way of
doing it, and then, I Printed a Formal Series, and Relation of the Story; under
the Title of my Vindication. This Discourse proved as Effectual as I wished it;
For, insisting only upon matter of Fact, with every Circumstance of Persons,
Time, and Place, Material to my Purpose, there remained no Pretense for
Contradiction; and yet I made it my great Care, as well to Disperse Copies, as
to provoke a Reply, if any Syllable of what I said would bear it. The Sum of
all amounts to This. I gave a due Account of all Employments which the Country
put upon me, nor could I reasonably be charged as Causal to any Miscariages,
when there hapened none, while I had any Interest in the Business. At last,
upon the Conjunction of the County-Forces, finding some Dangerous, and
Unseasonable disagreements, even among themselves; besides some Scruples
started against Strangers, I thought it the best Service I could do them, to
render that Command I had, to the Commissioners, and leave Them to Respond,
both for the Conduct, and the Issue of the Rest. Nor having done This, did I
quitt my Duty; but after the loss of Maidstone, I moved the Committee at
Canterbury, (although in (...)) to give another Push for it. From Thence, I went
to Sand^^^^, where finding the Town in a Tumult, and Abandoned; The Sea Before
me, and the Enemy Behind me, I took a Boat, and with much Difficulty, Escaped.

So much for KENT.

I Continued beyond Sea, from 1648. till the Army dissolved the Rump in 1653.
and then Returning, after 2 or 3. Months daily Attendance, I was Examined by a
Committee of the Counsel, and in the End discharged from that Attendance, upon
2000l. Bayl, to Appear at any time within 12. Months, upon Summons.

After that Bond given, I challenge the World to say, where ever I exchanged
Syllable either with the Protector, or his Secretary: or that ever I
Communicated, Directly, or Indirectly, with any man of the Party, upon Public
Business. Nay more: Let any man prove that I did ever disown my First
Judgment: -- That ever I took any Engagement: -- That I ever held any
Particular Converse with any person of Differing Principles: -- -- -- or, in
Fine: -- Let it appear that ever I either declined any Rational means of
serving my Prince, my self, or Diverted others from it; Nay if I am not able to
Evidence the contrary; and that I have steadily, and Positively employed all
the Faculties, and Interests I had in the World, in his behalf, I am content to
suffer, as if I had been the Murderer of his Father.

During the Rule of Cromwell, there was small Encouragement, to Form any
Design, unless upon his Person. For Betwixt diverse Renegado- Royallists, and
Mercenary Malcontents of his own Party, it was scarce possible to Act without
Discovery: beside, that he was Quick and Cruel. (Two great Advantages over a
slavish People) His Death in 1658. opened the way most certainly to a Change,
but That which entered upon it, in 1659. was of all others (I think) the Least
expected.

Several of the Old Members finding the Council of Officers at a Stand,
(having Cast off their new Protector) Solicited the Army to Invite their
Return to a Discharge of their Trust as before Apr. 20. 1653. This was done,
May 6 1659. and the next Day, (as if these Worthies had but held their Breath,
from 53, to 59) they Blurted out a Declaration against Kingship, and House of
Peers. This Insolence gave a fair Plea, and Opportunity to the People; and they
disposed themselves to a general Rising in August following: but the Issue of
all depending upon the City of London, where the Militia was placed in III
Hands; much good was not to be expected. Sir Henry Vane had Listed privately as
many Separatists as he Pleased, and the City stood in more danger of that
secret Faction, than of any visible Power that appeared to overawe it. The
Citizens were generally Hearty in the Business; and with the Allowance of
several of them, ( Lambert being upon his March toward Sir George Booth) I
caused to be Printed this ensuing Declaration under the Title of The
DECLARATION of the CITY, to the Men at Westminster.
GENTLEMEN,
WE have waited for the good you have promised us; with a ridiculous Patience:
but we find you Men of the Original, and to be read backward. We are for the
Religion of the Heart, not That of the Nose; and for the Law of the Land, not
that of the Sword; we are likewise for the Charter of the City, and for the
Liberties of Free* born Englishmen; with which we are resolved to Stand and
Fall. It is high time for us to look to our selves, when we are coming under a
Guard of your Choosing, and when we have only this Choice left us, whether we
will Adventure to destroy You to Day, or be sure to be destroyed our Selves to
Morrow. That Is the short of the Case; for, a Massacre is not only the Design,
but the Profession of the Party you have Armed against us; it is their very
Exchange-talk at noon day; But the work will be either too hot, or too heavy:
for my Masters, we are determined to suffer these affronts no longer, we are
now come to understand one another, The Ruin of the Nation is Your Interest,
the Peace and Preservation of it, Ours, and the mischief of it is; your
destruction is as Easy, as it is Necessary: for every Creature which either
Loves God, or his Country, Hates You. You have not so few as 200000 Enemies in
This Town, to dispute the Quarrel with some half a dozen of you; not to
multiply words, your Practices are such as a Generous Nature cannot Brook, and
your Power so despicable, that a Coward needs not Fear it. You have made the
City but a Cage of Broken Merchants; Tradesmen are ready to Perish for want of
Business; and their Families for want of Bread; nor have the Poor any other
Employment than to Curse you. Those few amongst you that have any thing, are
but Covered with the Spoils of the Nation, and out of the Scum of the People
you have composed your inconsiderable Rest. Well Gentlemen play your own Cards
your selves, We Will play Ours: you will have no Single Person in the State,
we will have none neither in the City; at least, we'll have no White-Hall-Major;
we will neither extend our Privileges an Inch, nor abate an Hair of them. And
in the matter of Bloodshed, so let Heaven prosper Us, as we shall proceed
tenderly: But if there be no other way left us than violence whereby to
preserve our selves in our Just Rights, what Power soever shall presume to
Invade the Privilege of a Citizen, shall find 20000 Brave Fellows in the Head
on it.

This we do Unanimously Remonstrate to You, and to the World to be our Firm,
and Final Resolution.



THis Dispute Lasted not Long; and Lambert's return put an End to any further
thoughts of stirring in the City, for that Bout.

The next Opportunity of Moving, was upon the Dispatch of the Army into the
North to oppose General Monck: The Government being then Lodged in a Committee
of 23 Officers of the Army: which gross Usurpation, together with the New
Militia which they had Imposed upon the City, ( Nov. 11.) put the Citizens upon
an Absolute Necessity of Endeavor to Free themselves: To which end, they
resolved to Petition the Common Counsel, for their Assistance toward the
obteining of a Free-Parliament, according to the Ancient Constitution of the
Nation. A Petition was accordingly Drawn, Subscribed, and Presented; but by
reason of some pretended Informality in the Address, it was laid aside. This
Repulse made the Petitioners more Eager than they would have been; especially
finding themselves Betrayed by diverse of those Persons to whom they had
committed the Care of their Protection.

Upon Monday, Dec. 5. Horse and Foot were dispatched into the City, by Violence
to hinder the Re-enforcement of the Petition, where they behaved themselves
with an Insolence, and Barbarism, not to be expressed. In this Action, had the
Magistracy been but half so careful to Vindicate the Honor of the City, as
they were to save the Enemies of it, not a soul of them had escaped.

After some 5 or 6 Days expectation what this Affront would produce; I thought
it not a miss, if I could use some means to Quicken them; and thereupon I
Printed a Paper Entitled, The Engagement and Remonstrance of the City of London.
DECEMBER 12. 1659.
ALthough, as Citizens, we are reduced to a Necessity of Violence; and as
Christians, obliged to the Exercise of it; Unless we will rather prostitute our
Lives and Liberties, Fortunes and Reputations; Nay, our very Souls and Altars,
to the Lusts of a Barbarous and sacrilegious Enemy: We have yet so great a
tenderness for Christian blood, as to leave unattempted no means of probability
to save it. This is it which has prevayl'd with us to Declare, First, to the
World, what we Propose, and Resolve, ere we proceed to further Extremities:
and to satisfy the Public, as well in the Reasons of our Undertakings, as to
Justify our selves, in the Menage and Event of them.

We find, in the Midst of us, the House of Prayer converted into a Den of
Thieves: Our Counsels Affronted by Armed Troops, our Fellow-Citizens knocked on
the head* like Dogs, at their own doors, for not so much as Barking: Nay, it is
become Death, now, to desire to Live; and Adjudg'd Treason, but to Claim the
benefit of the Law against it. Witness those Infamous Murders committed, but
Monday last, upon our unarmed friends: and the glorious Insolences of that
Rabble, toward such of the rest, as they seized, and carried away. But this is
nothing: to make us a Complete Sacrifice, we are to be Burnt too: a thing, not
only threatened, in the Passion of the Tumult, but Soberly intended; for they
have laid in their Materials for the work already: (a prodigious Quantity of
Fireballs in Paul's, and Gresham College) Briefly, We are designed for Fire,
and Sword, and Pillage: and it concerns us now, to look a little better to our
gracious Guards. (Not to insist upon the loss of Trade; how many thousand
Families have nothing now to do, but Beg, and Curse these wretches?) The
Honor and Safety of the City lies at stake: and God so bless us, as we will
fall together. We will not live to see our Wives, and Daughters rav^sh'd: our
Houses Rifled, and our Children Beggars, that shall only live to Reproach their
cowardly Fathers: and all this done too by a People, which we can as easily
destroy, as mention: by a Party, so barbarous, and so Inconsiderable together,
that, certainly, no creature can be mean enough, either to suffer the one, or
fear the other. In this Exigency of Affairs, we have found it both our Duty and
our Interests to Associate; and we desire a Blessing from Heaven upon us, no
otherwise, than as we do vigorously, and faithfully pursue what we here
Remonstrate.

First; We do engage our selves, in the presence of Almighty God* with our
lives and fortunes, to defend the Rights and Liberties of the City of LONDON;
and if any person that subscribes to this Engagement, shall be molested for so
doing; We will unanimously, and without delay, appear as one Man to his Rescue.

Next; we demand, that all such Troops and Companies, as do not properly
belong to the Guard of the City, nor receive Orders from the lawful
Magistrates thereof; -- that such Forces withdraw themselves from the
Liberties, within 12. hours after the Publication of This: upon pain of being
deemed Conspiratours, and of being Proceeded against accordingly, (for to this
extent, both of Judgment, and Execution, is every Individual qualified in his
own defense)

We are next, to demand the Enlargement of our Fellow-Citizens, which were
taken away by Force, and in a tumultuous manner, contrary to the known Laws of
the Place, and Nation.

This being performed, we shall acquiesce, in the Enjoyment of those Liberties,
which we will not lose but with our Lives. In Fine, to remove all Impediments
of the peace we desire: We do undertake, both as Men of Credit, and Justice;
that such of the Soldiers as will betake themselves to honester Employments,
shall receive their Arrieres from the City, and such a further care of their
future well-being, as is suitable to the Necessities of the One part, and the
Charity of the Other.



THis Paper was so well received, that it encouraged me to follow it with
Another, Entitled, The Final Protest, and Sense of the City.
HAving diligent'y perused two Printed Papers, bearing date, the 14th. of this
instant December: The One, in form of a proclamation* concerning the summoning
of a Parliament: The Other* as an Order of the Common Counsel, commanding the
City to acquiesce in expectation of That Parliament: We find therein
contained, matters, so contrary to the Honor of the Nation, and to the Freedom
of the City, that we stand obliged, both as Englishmen, and as Citizens, to
Protest, against the Impositions of the former, as Illegal, and the Concessions
of the Latter, as a direct Combination against us. These Two Papers are
Seconded by a Third: (for the Two are One, both in effect, and design,) and
That is, a Proclamation of Banishment, directing to the late Kings party, under
the notion of the Common Enemy: so that there is no love lost betwixt the
Committee of Safety, and the Common Counsel, when the General provides for the
Peace of the City, and the Mayor for the Safety of the Army; not to argue Acts
of Oblivion, and the violation of Public faith in the case: that they
Conditioned for their Lives and Liberties, and Compounded for their Fortunes.
This is not our Concern, what they do suffer; but what we may, if we trust
those, that Keep no Faith with them: And that we will take a care of: When They
are Gone, then We are the Common Enemy; So are the Laws of God, and of the
Nation, and such is every Man that loves them. What this Malignant party is,
these People talk of, we neither Know, nor Meddle; the Gentry it is we Live by,
and by the Laws of Gratitude, and Hospitality, we are bound to Protect them,
and resolved to do it, within our Walls, against any other Power, than that of
the Known Law. The short of the Design is This; a Danger is pretended to the
City, from the late Kings party, and to prevent the mischief, the Kind
Committee Banishes the Gentlemen; with Order to the Mayor to make strict
searches for Delinquents. Now in persuance of this precious Order, our Houses
must be forced, and we Disarmed, and then, our throats cut, to preserve the
City. Let those that would be Chronicled for Slaves, and Fools, submit to
suffer this; and after that Infamous Hour, may a Yellow Coat, and a Wooden
Dagger, be the Badge and Distinction of a Citizen. To conclude, We our selves
are That City, so much the Care and Cry of the Proclamation; and This is our
Unanimous sense, and Resolve. The Army proposes to Pillage, and Murder us, the
Mayor, and his worthy Advisers, Ireton, etc. -- are to hold our Hands, while
They give the Blow; So, that we are now to provide both against Force and
Treason; having One Enemy within our Walls, and Another in our Counsels. But
withal, we have our Swords in our Hands, and our Brains in our Heads; and only
to Strike the One, and to Disbelieve the Other, is to Subdue, and Disappoint
them Both.

We do therefore declare to the World, that we will by Violence oppose all*
Violence whatsoever, which is not warranted by the Letter of the Established
Law: and that in persuance of this Duty, both toward the Nation, and City, an
Insolent Soldier, and an Apostate Magistrate shall be to us as the same thing.
-- Not to word it much further, as we will not be Baffled, by Affronts, so
neither will we be Fooled, by Flatteries.

After the Loss of Trade and Liberty, a vast expense of Blood, and Treasure;
After many Injuries received, more threatened, and none returned, We made a
sober, and Regular Application, to the Authority of the City, for Redress. This
they Promised, and we Expected, till at last, instead of a Reparation for past
Wrongs, or a Security against worse to come; We are paid with an Expectation
of a Parliament in January. This is a Logique we understand not. It is in
English, Lie still, till we cut your throats. It would be well to commit the
disposition of our Fortunes, to those people, that are at this Instant
designing an Execution upon our Persons; and to require those Worthies, that
have already Robbed us of all we have Lost, with the Offer of that little Rest
they have Left. But this will not do our Business; we will not have our
Murderers, for our Judges: nor will we wait. That Parliament they babble of so
much, will scarce Vote up the City again out of Ashes, nor all the Saints in
that holy Assembly, bring the poor Cobbler into the world again, that was Killed
by order of his Brother Hewson. No, the Cheat is too stale, and we are
Determined to Redeem our selves; but with this Caution, We do solemnly
profess, that we will exercise all the Tenderness which possibly the Case will
bear* The Common Soldier is engaged rather out of a Heedless, than Malicious
Interest: We do therefore Protest, that such of those as shall not evidence
their Malice, by their Obstinacy, shall receive a Fair Consideration: But, for
such as Lead them, we do Resolve, not to allow Quarter to any one of them, that
draws his Sword in the Quarrel: And in Order to the Quicker, and Gentler
Dispatch of the Business: We conclude with a Text, Fight neither with Small
nor Great, but with the King of Israel. And so God give a Blessing to the
Endeavors of all Honest Men.



THis Sheet gave great offense to the Saints, and particularly to Titchborn,
who examined the Matter himself* and ordered the punishment of the Women that
sold it; after many Personal Abuses, beside the Loss of their Copies.

Dec. 18* Diverse persons of Quality were seized in the City, by the Soldiers,
and in a Barbarous, Unseemly manner, Stripped, and Driven Naked to the Mewes.

Soon after, comes Intelligence, that the Forces employed to Reduce Portsmouth,
were joined with the Fugitive Members, and upon their March for London:
whereupon I caused to be Printed as follows. The Resolve of the City.
December. 23. 1659.
OUr Respects to Peace, and Order, are too notorious to be questioned, since by
the mere Impressions of Charity and Obedience, we have thus long suspended the
Justice we owe to our Selves, together with that Vengeance, which the Blood of
our Murdered Companions requires at our hands. Nor have these Principles of
Public tenderness been less Eminent, upon our Judgments, than upon our
Passions; For, we have as well Believ^d, in Contradiction to Evidence of
Experiment, as we have Suffered, in Opposition to the very Elements, and
Dictates of Humanity. Witness that Execrable Monday (sacred to the Eternal
Infamy of this City) even Then, when we had that Enemy at our Mercy, toward
whom, by the Rights of Nature, and of Generosity, we were not bound to
exercise any; even Then, I say, in the very Heat, and Course of an Honest, and
Powerful Indignation, we returned Quietly, to our Houses, upon the first
Notice, that the Authority of the City would have it so. But it is likewise
true, that this Assurance was added to the Message, viz. That the Common
counsel was sensible of our Grievances, and would duly consider them. Since
this, we find nothing done in persuance of that Promise; but on the Contrary,
Injuries are Multiplied upon us; and those of that Day, serve but as Arguments
of Encouragement to Greater. Some of us Killed, Others Wounded, and lead in
Triumph Naked through the Streets: Two or three Hundred Thousand Persons
Looking on, to celebrate the Conquest, and the Shame. A Citizens Skull is but a
thing to try the Temper of a Soldiers Sword upon; Give us every Man a Red-coat
for a Cash-Keeper, and the work's done. They Are come within a Trifle on it
already; and all this while, an Order to be Quiet, is all our Patient Masters
will afford us. Give us an Order that may make us Safe, (although we need not
Ask, what we can Give our selves) Persuade these people to be Gone, or Bidus
Drive them out; What Law made Paul's, and Gresham College, Garrisons? If
nothing else will do, we'll do it our selves: We have Engaged, and sworn the
Vindication of the City, and nothing can Absolve us from the Oath we have
taken. This must be done betimes too, 'twill come too late else, to prevent,
either the Necessity of a Tumult, or the greater Mischief, of a Supine and
Credulous Security. A Parliament in January will do us no more good, than a
Cordial will do him that was Hanged last Sessions. Our Sense at Large, we
delivered to the world, in a Paper, Entitled, The Final Protest, and Sense of
the CITY: Which is Public enough, notwithstanding the great Design used to
suppress it, and the Insolences of diverse persons, disaffected to the good of
the City, toward those that sold them. To That we adhere. That Protest of Ours,
produced Another from the Common counsel, of the 20th. Current, to which
something ought to be said. The sum of that Order is, but in effect, the
Justification of the Lord Mayor, in the matter of Prudence and Integrity: we do
not Deny, but finding our selves abandoned to all sorts of Outrages, by the
Cold Proceeding of the Court in our behalf, we were transported to some bitter
Reflections: Involving the present Mayor, with his more Criminal Predecessor
Ireton, in the Imputation. We shall not more Gladly find it a Mistake, than
Readily Confess it one, when we reap the Effects of that Care for the Good of
the City; but so long as We are tied up from all Lawful Defense, and the
Public Enemy at liberty to practice all Unlawful Violences upon us, we
desire to be Pardoned, if we suspend in the Case.

The Cloze indeed is very Noble, and worthy of the Court* where they Declare,
For the Fundamental Laws, and the Protestant Religion, etc. -- and in fine, to
endeavor the convening of a Free Parliament, in order thereunto. But in
Contradiction to this Resolve, the Committee of Officers have yesterday
published a Paper, Entitled, The Agreement, etc. -- fairly telling us, That we
are to be Governed by People of their Choosing, and by a Model of their framing,
without any regard had to the Practice, and Reason of the Ancient Laws, or to
the Interest, and Liberty of every Freeborn Englishman. This Usurpation is to
be considered in its due place; at present it concerns us* to hinder them from
making the Slavery of the City, their first Step toward the Subjection of the
Nation. The seasonable Care of This, we do Humbly, and Earnestly recommend to
the Court of Common-counsel; Our Hopes are, that we are now fallen into Better
hands, and if our Magistrates will but Command us, they have an Hundred
Thousand Lives in readiness to Engage for them. If we should be so unhappy, as
to be still delayed; we do however wash our hands of the Consequences: And so
God Direct and Deliver Us.



OBserving how much more Unanimous the Army was to Destroy Us; than We, to Save
our Selves: and Finding nothing extant of Direction to the Necessary purpose of
an Universal Union: I presumed to Publish a Paper, containing what I judged
might Rationally Promote such an Agreement, under the Notion of a thing already
done. It runs Thus. A FREE PARLIAMENT Proposed by the CITY to the NATION.
GENTLEMEN,
HAving certain Intelligence of great Preparations against us from Abroad;
together with the daily and woeful experience, of a more Barbarous, and Ignoble
Enemy at Home: we have bethought our selves of an Expedient, which may at once,
both Secure, and Deliver the Nation from the Danger of the One, and from the
Tyranny of the Other.

In order to this effect: The City of London has constituted 4 Commissioners,
to Treat Respectively with the rest of the People of England, in the behalf of
their invaded Rights, and in such manner to Proceed, as to the said
Commissioners shall appear most convenient.

In persuance of this Appointment; We Four, (whose Names, and Authority you
shall find in a Schedule, to this annexed) do, in the Name, and by the
Commission of the City of London, earnestly and unanimously desire a General
Assistance, toward a work of a Public and Universal Benefit. The transaction
of this Affair, we have committed to Persons, eminent both for Honesty and
Fortune: and to gain Dispatch, as well as Privacy, we have at the same
Instant, and by safe hands, dispersed True and Exact Copies of These to you,
throughout England and Wales. Our Application should have been more Regular,
but for three or four false Brethren in our Counsels, whom we dare not confide
in. We find few the Honester for the Quarrel, that are the Richer for it; and
no other Enemies to the Peace of the Nation, but the Gainers by the Ruin of
it. Upon a due scanning of the whole matter, we have concluded, that nothing
can restore us but a Free Parliament: Nor can any thing compose that, but a
Free Vote, without either Force, or Faction. The most likely means to procure
this, will be a general Engagement, to endeavor it. We ask no more, than that
you will follow our Example. That Paper, which we commend to you, is already
subscribed by many Thousands of this City. If you Approve it, do as much; and
if you think Fit; choose out of every County Two Persons of a Known Integrity,
that may be still Among us, and at hand, to preserve a fair Intelligence
betwixt us. No longer since, than Yesterday, the Conservators of our Liberties;
Hewson and his Mirmidons, put an affront upon us, and with some mischief too,
upon this very Point: The very mention of a Free-Parliament enrages them, and
there is Reason for it. Their Heads are forfeited, and if the Law Lives, They
must Perish. But all this while, we are in a good condition, when the
Trangressors of the Laws must be the Judges of it. The very Boys, and Women
had destroyed the Party to a man, but that with much ado, we hindered them. The
Truth is, in such a Confusion, more honest blood might have been spilt, than
that Rabble was worth. Upon this, the City is grown so impatient of the
Soldiers, that it is to be feared they will suddenly break out into an open
violence upon them. They have already entered into a solemn Engagement to that
purpose: But we shall do our best to quiet them, till we receive your Answer.
In Fine; the End is honorable, and we desire the means that lead to it may be
so too. Let nothing be omitted that may save blood; The Army is necessitous,
and without pay, they must or Steal, or Perish. Let us consider, they are our
Contrymen, and many of them, (the necessity apart) our Friends. Let such a
course be taken, that so many of them as shall contribute to the Advantage of a
Free Election, may without either Fraud, or Delay receive their Arriers. We
shall do our part in the Contribution and in all Offices of Relation to a
Religious and Lawful Settlement, as freely engage our Lives and Fortunes with
you, as we do our Pens in this Profession to you, that we are

True English men, and your Servants.
December. 6. 1659.
THE ENGAGEMENT.
WE the Free born people of England, having for many years last past, been
subjected in our Consciences, Persons, and Estates, to the Arbitrary, and
Lawless Impositions of Ambitious, and Cruell-minded men; and finding our
selves at present, in danger to be Irrecoverably lost; partly by Invasions,
threatened us from Abroad, and partly by Factions encroaching upon us at Home,
without the seasonable mediation of a Free-Parliament: We do Declare, that we
will by all Lawful means Endeavor the Convening of it, and that we will,
afterward, Protect the Members of it as the Blood of our own Hearts. We do
further Engage, in the Presence of Almighty God, that if any person or Persons
whatsoever shall presume to Oppose us; or to impose upon us any other
Government, Inconsistent with, or Destructive to the Constitution of
Parliaments, we will prosecute him, or them, as the Betrayers of the Peoples
Rights, and Subverters of the Fundamental Laws of the English Nation.

To the Honorable the Commissioners of the City of London, for the Liberties
and Rights of the English Nation.
GENTLEMEN,
HAving already satisfied you by what Authority we Act, it concerns us next, to
acquaint you, to what purpose we are Sent, and what it is, which we have in
Charge to deliver unto you.

Your Proposals for the Settlement of the Nation, (and That, by the means of a
Free-Parliament) have been as Faithfully, and Generally communicated, as you
intended they should; as Kindly received as you could wish; and the whole
matter brought to as speedy an issue as was possible for an Affair of that
Weight, and Quality to admit. In Testimony hereof, We are to give you the
Thanks of the People of England; and to assure you, that they are not less
pleased with your Method of promoting the Public Good, than they are Obliged
by those Affections which have disposed you to endeavor it. Particularly, they
are exceeding glad to find, that the City has entrusted such Persons in the
Business, as, beside all other due Qualifications for the Employment, have
This also; that they were never Parties in the Quarrel. It has been our Care
likewise, to proceed by the same rule; and for this Reason, If Both Parties
should be taken in, there might (possibly) be some Animosities started,
sufficient to obstruct the Proceeding: And again, should Either of them be left
out, the matter would (probably) be carried by Faction.

This we are commanded to represent, rather as a Fair Expedient, than an
Absolute Necessity.

In the next place, we are to inform you, that the Engagement you sent us,
found so prone a Reception, that we reckon it, with us, a greater difficulty to
Find an Enemy to the Intent of it, than to Subdue any whatever, that shall
presume to appear against the Promoters of it. We do however hold our Selves
bound to assure you, that we are perfectly resolved to Join in the Charge, and
Hazard of the Dispute, with you: and that we are as Unanimous in This Cause, as
if the Treasure of the Nation had but one Master, and the Strength of it, were
but directed by the Same Mind. The List of the Subscribers, we have here in
Town: If you desire to see it you may: but if Otherwise, we offer to your
Prudence to consider, if it may not be of more Advantage, and Security to the
Business in hand, rather totally to conceal the Subscribers, if not also the
Commissioners themselves. For the Thing it self, we are not only Willing, but
Desirous to make That Public. It is of so Honest, and Reasonable a Nature,
that no Man Dares oppose it, who dares not be Damned; no man Will, that
deserves to Live upon English ground: and to conclude, no Man Shall, and escape
Unpunished. Parliaments are the Constitution Fundamental of the Nation, the
Safeguard, and the Honor of it: nor are we more concerned to Support them, than
to be wary lest we Mistake them. We are to Distinguish betwixt Names and
Things, that we be not governed by Delusions; Where have we a greater Cheat,
than that which styles it self the Public Faith? Greater Subverters of our
Liberties, than some that write themselves, the Conservators of them? It Is not
for 40 people to call themselves our Representative. Is It not enough that they
have Robbed us, unless they Govern us too? They Will say we Chose them, so did we
choose above 300 more; and we'll be Ruled by All, or None of them. Without more
ado, having Formally assured you of an absolute Concurrence from the Nation,
as to what they have received in Proposition from you: It remains now, only
that we recommend some Additionals to you, which we conceive may be of some
Benefit to the Common Interest of the whole.

In the First Place we Propose, That no Petition be presented to this Pretended
Parliament, from the City of London, and we Undertake as much for our Selves.

Secondly, That no Levies of Men, or Moneys, be suffered, in persuance of their
Pretended Acts; and in case of any Force attempted upon the Refusers, that we
immediately Arm our Selves, and by Violence Repel it.

Thirdly, we judge it very fit, in regard of Dangers Imminent, both Foreign, and
Domestique, That a Free Parliament, be speedily convened; the Time and Manner
of Summons instantly agreed upon, with a Salvo Jure to all Interests. -- -- (By
a Free Parliament, we understand, an Assembly of such Persons as by the Law are
Qualified to choose, without any other Restreint than what the Law imposes.) Not
that we claim to our selves the Right of Calling Parliaments; but the
Impossibility of procuring one Regularly; and the Absolute Necessity of having
something like one Suddenly: -- This is enough to acquit us before God and Men.
By these means, all Differences may be composed, all Parties reconciled; and to
These purposes we are ready to Sacrifice our Lives, and Fortunes.

GENTLEMEN, We are your faithful Servants.
January 3. 1659.


UPon the 17 of Ian. Mr. Bampfield, the Recorder of Exceter, delivered a
Leading Declaration, to the Pretended Speaker, from the Gentry of Devonshire:
Demanding the Readmission of the Secluded Members, and filling up of Void
Places: without any Previous Engagement. This Netled the Rump; and Drew from
Them, Another Declaration, ( Ian. 23.) wherein they expressed all Tenderness
possible for the Public; in a Fawning, Canting way: and especally Insisting
upon such Particulars, as might render their Design of settling in a Free State,
the more Plausible to General Monck: who was now as far as Leicester toward
London.

This Declaration, moved me to Print this Ensuing Paper. A PLAIN CASE. Ian. 24.
1659.
IT were no hard Matter to Trace the Course of Government, thorough all it is
several Forms, and Mixtures, from the very Fountain of it; and to Deduce the
Story, from it is Original in Paradise, down to this wretched Place, and
Instant. The Sanction, and Assignment of it being proved, (That the Almighty
Wisdom placed ONE RULER over the World) Enquiry might be made into the Reasons,
and Equity of those ensuing Changes, which, either Force, Craft, or Agreement
afterward produced. To come a little nearer Home: much might be added,
concerning our Religion, Parliaments, Magna Charta, etc. -- but the Press
groans under the Subject, and the Nation under the Dispute. Conviction puts an
end to Argument. The Question is no longer, Right, but Power; and our
Reasonings are only Answered with Blows. It Is true, -- in the Infancy of the
Quarrel, when Rebellion, like a Painted Whore, under the Masque of Loyalty,
and Conscience, Cheated the People into an Engagement: when only some
Mis-governments, in Church and State were to be Reformed; and that Pretense
backed with a Thousand Oaths, to strengthen the Delusion: Dominion and
Obedience, Law and Conscience, were then a Proper, and a necessary Theme, to
undeceive the Nation, but now it is out of Season. The Sword's the only Judge
of Controversies. Our business is, to Talk more Sensibly, and less Learnedly.
Alas! to tell the Simple, that which they can never understand, and the Wise,
that which they know already; Who Is the Better fort? The Injuries we suffer,
are Notorious; and Understood, as universally, as Felt. The skill would be, to
find out a Fair Remedy, for a Foul Disease. In order to that, I shall be Plain,
and short: Prove what I say, and keep my self within the Compass of my Page.
This Nation is at this instant, upon the Brink of a Reproachful, and Ridiculous
Condition of want, and slavery: Nor is the Truth of our Calamity more evident,
than the Reason of it. Half the Revenue of the Land is already shared among the
Saints, and in Reward, for robbing us of That, we are to Give the Rest, and
purchase our Bondage, dearer, than our Forefathers did their Liberties.
Indeed, a Hundred Thousand Pound a Month, when we have scarce Money left for
Bread, is a modest Proportion: and to endear the Proposition to us, it is to
maintain a war against the established Law, and consummate our Thraldom:
After this Tax is paid, they will Ask no more, but Take the rest without the
Ceremony: and we deserve to Lose All, If we Levy This. By Violence, they keep
themselves In, and their Fellows Out; By Violence, they Sit, and Vote, and
Execute. They Are not the Twentieth part of those we Chose; and then the Quality
of the Faction, is as Inconsiderable, as the Number. The Nation looks upon
them, as a Herd of Wolves; they live by Blood and Rapine, and it is the Public
Interest to Hunt them. They are too Few for us to Fear, too False to Trust, too
Wicked, and Imperious, to Obey. It Is not their Ianizaries that will do their
Business, when the whole Body of the People is united against them. The very
Soldier that has Raised them; Hates 'em; as being, at once, Instrumental to
their Guilt, and to their Punishment. They are neither to be Obliged by Oaths,
nor by Benefits. How meanly have they treated the very Officers that preserved,
and Restored them; and Perfidiously, all that ever Trusted them! Those Sums
which were designed for the Satisfaction of Public Accounts, they divide among
themselves; and Turn those Troops to Free Quarter, whose Pay is already in
their own Pockets. After all this, the Laws must be as well subdued, as the
People: no other Title left us to our Lives, and Estates, but what depends upon
the Vote of a Legislative Committee. It is already construed Sedition, to
Demand, what the Law tells us, is Treason to Oppose: and the bare mention of a
Free-Parliament puts our blessed remnant into a Sweat. There Is Violence
designed upon us, and Violence must meet it. The Axe is laid to the root: the
Commune Freedom of the English Nation lies at stake; and it is our Commune
Interest to defend it. The Just, and peaceable assertion of our Undoubted
rights, is Voted Breach of privilege: and he that draws his Sword to save his
Country, forfeits his head for it. This will not do. These worthy Squires of
the Fagg end must take their Turns too. Suppose the City should refuse the Tax:
(the Countries are resolved upon it) How Certain, and Inevitable, is their
Ruin? The very first attempt of Force, sets the whole Nation in a Flame. They
Rise together, and the Work is done. It Is not the stifling of the Press, can
break their Correspondence: nor the Old Cheat of Creating New Plots, that will
divert them. These Iugglers have showed all their Tricks, and the whole World's
Convinced of their Intentions. The Design walks barefaced. It is now evident,
that they purpose to make us perpetual Slaves; and to enure us to no other Law,
than the Imperious Will of our hard Masters. Their very best Friends and
Assistants, are now discarded by these Thanklesse Wretches: the Scrupulous, and
Congregationall Party being cast into the Balance with the Commune Enemy: and
both alike Excluded from the Government they promise us: (to show, that their
Ambition is as well Insociable as Boundless.)

To Finish All; what Security or Quiet, can that Faction expect, which never
Requited a Friend* or Spared an Enemy? What Comfort can that Nation look for,
that subjects it self to the Faith and Mercy, of such a Faction?



UPon the 25 of Ian. Sir Robert Pie, and Major Fincher, were Ordered to the
Tower, for Presenting and Subscribing a Declaration from Berkshire, for a Free
and Full Parliament: It being Voted; A Breach of the PRIVILEGE of PARLIAMENT:
SEDITIOUS, and tending to the Raising of a New War. The Squires of the Rump;
Scot, and Robinson were, by this Time, doing their Complements to his
Excellency; and the City Commissioners upon their way toward him: In which
Juncture, came forth a Paper Entitled

A Letter of General George Monck's; Dated at Leicester 23. Jan. and Directed
to Mr. Roll, to be communicated unto the rest of the Gentry of Devon: --
Occasioned by a Late Letter from the Gentry of Devon: dated at Exceter 14 Ian.
and sent by Mr. Bampfield to the Speaker, to be communicated unto the
Parliament.

Read in Parliament, Jan. 26.

To this Letter, I took the Liberty to Draw what follows in Answer. Addressed
To His Excellency, GENERAL MONCK. A Letter from the Gentlemen of Devon in
Answer to his Lordships of January 23. to them directed from Leicester.
My Lord,
THere is a Letter which has passed the Press under your Name, dated at
Leicester 23. Ian. and directed unto Mr. Roll, to be communicated to the rest
of the Gentry of Devon: etc. -- Whether this be your Excellencies Actor not, is
the question. If so it be, we receive it as a noble Respect from General Monk
to his Friends and Country men; if Otherwise, we look upon it as the Artifice
of an Anti-Parliamentary Faction, under the pretense of your Concurrence and
Aid, to Delude and Enslave the Nation.

It is one thing for a Person of Honor freely to communicate his Thoughts and
Reasonings, (although in favor of a possible mistake) still refering the Issue
to the determinations of Divinity, and Reason: and it is another thing, for a
Confederate Party to charge such a Person with failings properly their own.

To hasten the dispatch of that little we have to say, the Authors of this, are
of that number to whom your Letter directs. We shall proceed according to our
Duties, and Instructions, and briefly acquaint your Excellency with the sense
of those that have entrusted us.

We shall begin (my Lord) with the Concession of what we much Suspect; and
take for Granted, that the Letter so inscribed, is really Yours.

We are next to return you the Thanks of your Country men, for the expressions
of your Piety and Care, therein contained; and particularly, -- that in the
head of your Army, you have rather chosen Arguments of Reason, than of Force.
-- That you propose the word of God, for your Rule; and the Settlement of the
Nation, for your End. -- That you take notice of many Factions, and Interests
introduced, and yet profess a service to None of them. -- That you so
earnestly desire to Compose Old Differences at Home, and to Prevent New
Mischiefs from Abroad. -- And finally; That you submit the Result of all, to a
Fair, and Rational Examination.

To profess, and to pursue all this, is but like your self; and to these
purposes, we shall not stick to live and dye at your Feet. If upon Discussion
of the Reasons you allege, we assume the Liberty which your Candor allows us,
of declaring wherein we differ, we beg to be understood with all tenderness
toward your Excellency; to whom, as a stranger to our late Oppressions and
Calamities, the state of our Affairs, and Affections, may probably be
misrepresented.

To observe your own Method; our Letter to the Speaker, importing the recalling
of the Secluded Members was the occasion of Yours to Us; which says, that;
Before these Wars our Government, was Monarchical, both in Church, and State;
but (as the case now stands) Monarchy cannot possibly be admitted for the
future, in these Nations; because it is incompatible with the several,
Interests which have ensued upon the Quarrel: viz* the Presbyterian,
Independent, Anabaptists, etc. (as to Ecclesiastics) and the Purchasers of
Crown, and Bishops Lands, Forfeited Estates, etc. (as to Civils) by which
means, the support it self is taken away; so that the Constitution, qualified
to fix all Interests, must be that of a Republique: To which, the Secluded
Members of 1648. will never agree, many of them being Assertours of Monarchy,
and Disclaimers to all Laws made since their Seclusion: Over and above, that
the Army also will never endure it. The Conclusion, This; that it were better
for us to desist from that Paper, and rely upon the Promises of this
Parliament, for a due Representative: -- a Provision for succeeding
Parliaments, and a Peaceable Settlement; than by an unseasonable Impatience to
embroil the Nation in a fresh Engagement.

From hence is appears, that we might be allowed a Free Parliament, but for
Four Reasons.

First, The Major Part Inclines to Monarchy, and they that have swallowed the
Revenues of the Crown, declare against it. Secondly, The Entangled Interests of
this Nation can never be United, but under a Republique. Thirdly, The Army will
never endure it. Lastly, It would beget a new War, whereas this Parliament
promises to settle us in a lasting Peace.
To all which, in Order, and First, concerning Monarchy; (not as the thing
which we contend for) we (only) wonder why it is Prejudged, and particularly,
by those Persons who have sworn to defend it. But, my Lord, you have hit the
Reason; they have Gained by Dissolving it, and they are afraid to Lose by
Restoring it. Having put the Father to Death, whom they Covenanted to Preserve;
they Abjure the Son, whom they Fear to Trust. By Force they would Maintain,
what by Force they have Gotten. In effect, the Question, is not so much, what
Government, as what Governors: A Single Person will down well enough, with the
fiercest of them, when it lies fair for any of Themselves. Witness the late
Protector, and the Later Lambert. Briefly, since the Death of the late King,
we have been Governed by Tumult; Bandy'd from One Faction to the Other: This
Party up to day, That to Morrow; but still the Nation Under, and a Prey to the
Strongest. It is a feeble Argument against Monarchy, that we never have been
happy since we lost it: and yet nothing has appeared to obstruct our Quiet,
but the Division of the Booty. What Has been, Shall be, so long as this
Violence continues over us: nor can any other Government Settle the Nation,
than that which pleases the Universality of it. And in that, we pretend not to
direct our Representatives: but which way soever they incline, we shall with
our Lives and Fortunes Justify, and Obey their Appointments.

Whether we have Reason, or not, in this Particular, let your Excellency Judge.

The Second Objection against a Free Parliament, is drawn from the Necessity of
a Republique, to reconcile all Interests. To This, we offer, First, that it is
not Necessary; next, that it is not so much as Effectual, to that purpose; and
Lastly, that a Free Parliament ought to Introduce it, if it were both the One
and the Other.

The First we prove thus, It is not the Form of Government, but the Consent of
the People, that must Settle the Nation: The Public Debt, must be secured out
of the Public Stock: and That disposed of by an Engagement of the Public
Faith, to such Ends, and purposes, as the Representative of the Nation shall
deem expedient for the Good of it. In like manner may all other Interests be
secured; whether of Opinion, or Property, under what Form of Government soever
a Free Parliament shall think fit to unite us. That it is not Necessary, enough
is said. We are now to deduce from your Lordships Text, that a Free State would
be as little effectual also, as to our concerns. You are pleased to intimate
the Dangerous Inclination of the People to Monarchy: and to Balance the
Satisfaction, the Right, and the Universal Vote of the Nation, with the
Interests of some Few persons, that would Rule us Themselves, (for that is the
English of the Settlement they propose.) By this Argument, a Republique,
excludes the Negative, and more Considerable Interest, in favor of a Small,
and a Partial one: and if it be granted, that a Free Parliament will never
agree upon a Free State, it follows necessarily, that That Form will never do
our Business. Lastly, what Government soever is forced upon us, must certainly
expire with the Force that imposes it; and the Voice of the People (in this
case) is the Declaratory Voice of Providence.

The Third Difficulty is. The Army will never endure it. This is to say, You
are to be Governed by the Sword.

To Conclude; The Fear of a New War, and the Promise of a speedy Composure, are
the last Suggestions of Disswasion to us.

Alas, my Lord, do we not see that Parties are uniting against us, Abroad, and
we conspiring against our selves at Home? How certainly shall we be Attempted,
and how easily Overcome; without such a Medium to Reconcile us All, as may
Please us All! but we are promised fair. We beseech you Lordship to consider
the Promisers. Are not These the People that vowed to make our Last, a Glorious
King? Just such a Glorious Nation will they make of Us. Did they not next
Abjure a Single Person; and yet after that, set up ANOTHER, with Another Oath?
Not to pursue this Subject further: These Men we dare not Trust, nor any other
of that Leaven; we have have no thoughts but of Justice to all Interests; and
in order to that Settlement and Good we wish the Nation, we shall empower our
Representatives with the Command of all we are worth, and most remarkably
evidence our selves, My Lord,

Your Excellencies Servants.
Ian. 28. 1659.


THe General was plied with Addesses for a Free-Parliament throughout his
whole Passage, and the Nation entirely Concurred to the same Effect. Upon
Tuesday (Feb. 2.) a Considerable Party of the Red-Coates, Tumulted for Pay;
Cast off their Officers, and Formally Engarrison'd themselves in
Somerset House: Publicly Reproaching the Rump, and Declaring for the City,
and a Free-Parliament. Finding the Citizens well enough disposed to improve the
Mutiny: I appointed Immediately the Printing of Two papers, directing them to
Associate; and in These Terms. The SENSE of the ARMY.
WHereas the Calamities of this Unhappy Nation, are charged upon those that
have ventured their Bloods for the preservation of it; We hold it necessary, to
acquit our selves, both to God and Men, by declaring to these following
Particulars:

First, That we will engage our Lives against all opposers of a
Free-Parliament. Secondly, That we will, according to the best of our
Knowledge, observe, and cause to be observed, the Known Laws of the Land.
Thirdly, That we will practice no violence, but what we are obliged to, by the
Laws of Honesty, and Nature. Lastly, That we will not leave our Quarters
unsatisfied, nor lay down our Arms, without our Pay.
Somerset House, Feb. 2. 1659.
The Citizens DECLARATION for a FREE PARLIAMENT
We the Young Men in and about London, do unanimously Declare, That we will
Assist, and protect, to our uttermost, what Party soever we shall find oppressed,
for desiring a FREE-PARLIAMENT; And that such of the Soldiery, as shall join
with us in so necessary and just an Undertaking, shall receive half their
Arrieres upon the first Rendezvous, and the Rest upon the Accomplishment of the
Work.

Feb. 2. 1659.


LAte at night, The Apprentices drew into a Party in the City, and were
scattered by the Army Horse; whereas, had they rather drawn down into the
Strand, and joined themselves with Those in Somerset House, it was believed by
sober Persons, that they might have carried it. About One, in the Morning, the
Revolted Party was False-Alarmed and persuaded out of their security, upon
Pretense, that if they were not Instantly Posted, to hinder Monks Entrance into
the Town, they would have all their Throats cut in their Quarters. This Device
brought them out, and so That morning, they were Commanded away; Leaving the
Town Quiet, and in Condition to entertain Honester Guests. Upon Friday
Afternoon ( Feb. 3.) his Excellency marched in the Head of his Army to his
Quarters at White Hall: and the Day following, I took the Liberty to shoot
another Bolt; under the Title, and Form here-ensuing. For his EXCELLENCY
General MONCK.
MY LORD,
YOu are too Wise, and Noble, to need either a Direction, or a Spur, where your
Judgment, or Honor lies at Stake: And to tell you, that to make your self the
Happiest Person in Nature, you must Deliver us from being the most Miserable
People, is but to speak your own Thoughts, and Purposes. Yet such is the
Passion I have for your Personal, and for the Public Good, that a Burden
lies upon my Soul, ^ill I have given some Testimony of my Respects* and
Tenderness both for the One, and the Other, howsuperfluous-soever, toward a
Judgment, and Inclination, so well Qualified for the Knowledge and Practice,
of what is Honorable.

My Lord, We are a wretched people, and Providence has put it in your power,
to finish all our Troubles. The Eyes of Men and Angels are upon You, and the
whole Nation courts You as their Tutelary Spirit. Never was any Action so
easy, and so Glorious at once, as our Deliverance. It Is wrought without the
hazard, or expense either of Blood, Time, or Treasure. The Hearts, the Hands,
and Fortunes of the People, are all at Your Devotion. Nay, lest You should
submit to be misled by Popular Applause, Ambition, or any other Frailty; Heaven
has annexed Your Interest to Your Duty, (forgive the Language) You must be Mad
too, to be wicked, and Quit all other Principles of Beneficial Prudence, with
those of commune Honesty and Conscience. Balance (my Lord) the main Account.
Heaven and Hell, are the Difference. One way, You are sure to be as Great and
Safe, as Love, and Gratitude can make You; whereas all other Acquisitions are
deceitful. A word now of the means to effect our Quiet; and that with all due
respect to better Reason.

First, In the Case of differing Persuasions, be pleased to form such an
Expedient, that all may quietly enjoy, and exercise their opinions, so far as
they Consist with the Word of God, and with the public Peace.

Secondly, Appoint an Act of Oblivion to be drawn (if you please) as
Comprehensive of all Interests, as care, and skill can make it; and after this,
let a Free-Parliament be called (with this previous Engagement imposed upon
them) That they shall first secure these two Particulars of Conscienee and
Property, according to the true Intention of the Parties therein Concerned, ere
they proceed further; and that they may then apply themselves to other Debates
at Liberty, and settle what Government they shall think fit. This I presume not
to deliver as the Arrogant Imposition of a single Person; but I do offer it
humbly, as the sense of a Numerous, and Sober party. Some Mutinous and Peevish
Spirits there are, whom nothing can please, but what displeases all the World
beside. It were pity, to alter the whole Frame of the Law, to gratify the
humor of so Inconsiderable a part of the People. Changes are Slow, and
Dangerous; God and Truth, are Invariable; We were Well, till We shifted, and
never since; having tried all other Postures in vain; were it not better to
attempt That once again, than thus expose our selves to be Restless for ever?

My Lord, the Author of this is very much Your EXCELLENCIE's Servant.
Feb. 4. 1659.


THe City of London, having of late behaved themselves a little Cross,
disturbed the self-created Representative exceedingly. The Common-Counsel was
too Stout, and Honest, for their purpose. The Aldermen; but an Untoward
Mixture: yet those among them that were Right, were Eminently so, and there
were not a few that were so. A very Worthy, and Particular Instrument in the
Frank carriage of the Business, was the Recorder. But Equal to them All was
the brave General.

The Rump was now come to a Forced Put. Moneys must be Raised, and the City
Subdued, or the Good Old Cause is Lost. In Order to Both; Out comes the Long
look*d for 100000* Tax, upon Tuesday; (Feb. 7.) which was Followed with a
Negative Resolve of Common Counsel, upon Wednesday: but Thursday was the Bloody
Day Designed, both to his Excellence, and to the Town. (witness the Resolves
it produced, as to the City, and the Orders Imposed upon the General.)

His Excellence having drawn his Forces into the City, so far Complied with his
respects even to the least Image of Authority, as to Secure diverse Persons, by
virtue of an Order, to that express purpose. But to Destroy Their Gales, and
Portcullices, he was very Loath; and signified as much to the Members, in a
Letter from Guild Hall, to which, he received in Answer, only a more peremptory
Command to Proceed, which accordingly he Executed, the day following, and so
returned to his Quarters.

The Resolves (of Feb. 9.) I must not Omit, for they deserve to be Transmitted
to Posterity. Thursday 9. Feb.
THe House received a Report from the Council of State, of some Resolutions
taken by the Council, in relation to the City of London.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State has
done, in ordering, That the Commissioners for Government of the Army, do
appoint Forces to be and continue in the City of London, for preserving the
Peace thereof, and of the Commonwealth, and for Reducing of the City to the
obedience of the Parliament.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State have
done, in ordering that the Commissioners for the Army, do take order that the
Posts and Chains in the City of London, be taken away.

Resolved, That the Gates of the City of London, and the Portcullices there, be
forthwith destroyed.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State, and
Commissioners of the Army have done, in Seizing and Apprehending of Mr.
Vincent, Merchant in Bishopsgate-Street, And Thomas Brown, Grocer in
Wood-Street, Daniel Spencer, in Friday Street, Laurence Brompfield, in
Tower-Street, Major Chamberlain, Mr. Bludworth, and Richard Ford, in
Seething-Lane, Major Cox, at the Swan in Dowgate, Mr. Penning, in Fanchurch
Street, and Lieutenant Colonel Iackson.

Resolved, That the present Common Council of the City of London, Elected for
this Year, be discontinued, and be and are hereby declared to be Null and Void,
and that the Lord Mayor of London have notice hereof.

Ordered, That it be referred to a Committee to bring in a Bill for the Choice
of another Common-Counsel, with such Qualifications as the Parliament shall
think fit, with ordet to meet at 8. of the Clock in the Speakers Chamber to
morrow morning.

The House likewise read the Bill for settling the Militia of the City of
London, and the Liberties thereof, the first time, and referred it to the
Council of State, to present names of Commissioners for the Militia of the City
of London to the House to morrow morning.

The Parliament taking Notice of the discreet carriage of the Lord Mayor of the
City of London, in the Late transactions of the Common Council,

Ordered, That the Lord Mayor have the thanks of this House, and that Alderman
Atkins do give him the thanks of the Parliament accordingly.



THis day produced likewise a remarkable Petition, Presented by Praise-God
Barebones; Pressing, that no man might be Admitted into any place of Trust,
except such as should ABJURE A SINGLE PERSON; and further Praying; that it
might be Enacted HIGH TREASON, for any man to MOVE, OFFER, or PROPOUND, in
PARLIAMENT, COUNSEL, COURT, or PUBLIC MEETING, any thing in order to CHARLES
STEVVART, etc. -- -- and that after such a LAW ENACTED, it might be deemed
HIGH TREASON, for any man to move, or Propose the REVOCATION of it.

A man would have thought, these people should have had enough already of the
Oath of ABJURATION; for nothing did more expose them, than the eagerness they
had formerly used in the promoting of it: which served, only to Enrage the
Opposers* and to set up for a Marque, the Infamous Abetters of it. But all this
was not sufficient to divert the Gracious Members from a most Particular Order
of Thanks to the Petitioners.

Upon Saturday (the memorable 11th. of Feb.) the General, finding himself a
little more at Liberty, Removed his Quarters into the City, and there Declared
himself, to the Universal Satisfaction of the Nation. (Desiring Particularly,
by Letter, the men of Westminster to bethink themselves of their Dissolution)

In the transaction of this Affair, there were so many untoward Circumstances,
that to Prevent Mistakes, I dispersed Several Copies of this ensuing Narrative.
IN October. last, when Lambert scattered the Committee of Westminster his
Unluckie Excellency thought it then a fit time to set up for himself; and in
the Head of a Phanatique Party, to bid Defiance to all the Sober Interests, and
Judgments of the Nation. His Principal assistant in the work was Sir Henry
Vane, the Prophet of that Inspired Rabble. The Faction was grown Bold, and
Formidable; when, to divert the Course, or meet the Fury of it, the General was
Invited to draw a Force from Scotland into the North: and In he came, but to a
Nobler purpose, than ever they Intended. They Called him in to save Themselves,
he Came to save the Nation. Upon the first notice of his Advance, Lambert was
sent with a considerable Army to meet him, and London left almost without a
Public Guard, (such was the Confidence they had in the Anabaptistique Party,
which was privately Armed, and Listed in and about the town.) In fine, after
diverse Affronts upon, and Tumults in the City, the Soldiery Revolted; the
Fugitive Members Returned; Lambert's Army Mouldered away; and his Excellency
vanished. Thus far without a Blow; but the more difficult part was still
behind, (for Treacherous friends, are much more dangerous than professed
Enemies) The General, resolves next, for London: and makes it his design, both
in his Passage, and after his Arrive, by all means possible, to avoid
bloodshed; His March speaks him a Soldier, and a Gentleman, for it was
Regular, and Inoffensive. The Country courted him upon the way as their
Deliverer, and he deserved it; For he has proved himself no less. The strict
reserve he used, was but what best became his Dignity and Prudence, he was too
Generous, to betray Another, and too Wise to be betrayed, Himself. Under this
Guard of Honor, and of Cauti^n, he past his Journey; not to trouble you with
long stories, how the ways were thronged with Cries and Addresses of the
Nation, for a Free-Parliament; what Conference he had with the good Aldermen,
what Complements were made him, by the Other men of Westminster, etc. -- -- --
To come to the Point, upon Friday afternoon, (the third of this Instant
February) General Monck took up his Lodgings in Whitehall. On the Monday
following, his Excellency was conducted by Scot and Robinson, (with the
formality of a Mace carried before them,) in o a place commonly called the
Parliament* House, where he delivered himself according to good Discretion, and
soon after returned to his Lodgings: Laden with the Thanks of the House.
Tuesday and Wednesday were the General's days of rest: but not so to the City:
for, upon Tuesday the 100000l. Tax came out, which Netled the Citizens
shrewdly; and the day following, they met in Common-Counsell, to advise upon
it. Where they resolved, to adhere to a former Vote of the Court in the
Negative. At the same sitting was communicated a Declaration from Warwick
shire, for a Free-Parliament; it was of a fair signification, and Authority;
the Gentlemen that brought it, received the Thanks of the Court; (not to
mention the peevishness of 2 or 3 Dissenters) ' it is hoped they may be wiser,
and honester hereafter; This was a Day of Business in London, and produced a
Busier Night at Westminster: for the Counsel of State, after a tedious Puzzle
and Debate, Issued out Orders to General Monck, for the Reducing of the City,
directing him to proceed, in such a Method, as they had prescribed him. In
persuance thereof, his Excellency marched early upon Thursday the Ninth current
Horse and Foot, into the City; by that means frustrating a Respect which the
Court had designed him the Day before; Having appointed four Aldermen, and
eight Commoners to attend him the next Morning. His entrance into the Town,
brought all the Horror and Satisfaction with it, Imaginable: nor did the People
understand for a long while, whether they should Curse or Adore him: at last in
compliance with his Orders, he seized diverse eminent Citizens, and sent them to
the Tower, and took up his Quarters that Night in the City; By this time, the
People, beyond all doubt, pronounced him the most execrable Creature that ever
came within their Walls, not understanding that the Mischief he did them, was
but Jest, and the Good he Intended them, was Earnest. That in consideration of
a weeks Imprisonment, he would reward them, and their Posterity, with
Perpetual Liberty. This however carried an appearance of severity, which was
in effect, but a point of Military Honor; For his Inclination, and Duty in this
Action, Led him several ways: as a Soldier he obeyed a Barbarous Order; as an
Englishman he made it his care, to take off the edge on it; and he was bound to
do That, this day by Commission, Which he resolved to undo two days after
upon a Nobler Principle; upon Friday, (the 10th. of the Month, and the last of
his Commission,) the General demanded the Cities last Resolve, from the
Aldermen; who still adhered to their former Judgment. His Excellency, hereupon
gave command to demolish the City Gates, and so Returned to Whitehall.
(Observe, that his Displeasure, and Commission died together,) For the next
Morning, ( Saturday,) he made the Town a large Amends: Declaring Solemnly to
join with them, and their Associates for a Free Parliament; (but having fairly
first discharged himself to those at Westminster, by a Letter in commune with
his Officers; who have behaved themselves as men of Honor in the Business. The
Truth is, had not the General been nimble with them, they had undermined him;
for, contrary to Faith and Honesty, to their express Agreement, they had not
only entered into a secret combination with the Sectaries, but publicly
encouraged their Assemblings and Petitions; and more particularly, contrived
the direct Ruin of that Person, who had so lately preserved them. This is a
Theme transports me; The Bloody Votes were passed that Dismal Night: Let
Nedham tell you; but never was a Joy so Universal; wise men grew mad upon it,
and mad men sober. The Cries, the Bonfires, and the fume of Roasted Rumps, did
quite take down the Legislative Stomach; It Is thought the Thing at Westminster
is vanished. In fine, the Hand of God is in it, his Name be praised.

Feb. 12. 1659.


THis was not yet enough, to put the Rump out of Countenance. The blessed
Members met again as Formally as ever, and Acted with a Confidence that might
exuse the Common peoples Jealousy over the General. He was too Wise, to walk
too Open: and They not Wise enough to comprehend the Policy of his Reserve.
And yet they wanted not a Will to Understand him. They studied nothing else but
his Intentions. That which most puzzled them, was a Conference at Alderman
Wale's, betwixt Several of the Secluded Members, and of the Rump: Joining to
That, His Excellencies Answer to a Proposal of Raising Forces to secure
themselves; which was, That He himself would Interpose betwixt the City, and
all Danger.

Observing how prejudicial these Mistakes were to the Public Interest of
Settlement; and with what Art, and Industry, they were Assisted, by the Adverse
Party: I took it for a Seasonable, and Good Office to do something that might
Create a better Understanding: Or, at the worst, Excite the Citizens, to Act by
Tichborn's President, and of Themselves, in Case of any further Baffle or
Delay, in settling their Militia. For these Reasons, I Published this Ensuing
Paper. A Word in Season, to General MONK, (with his Officers, etc.) To the
CITY, and To the NATION.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
YOu are, at present, in the Heart of the Nation, and in the Arms of your
Friends: where you are Safe, and Beloved. You have the Strength and Affections
of the City, at your Devotion, and it is your Commune Interest, to unite in a
Concurence both of Power and Kindness. You stand and fall together. You are
all of the same Stock; Born to the same Freedom; Subjected to the same Laws;
Nursed up in the same Religion: And in fine, Obliged by the same Rules of Duty
and Wisdom, to promote the same Ends. I might add, that you are likewise
exposed to the same Danger, and from the same Enemy: by whose Hypocrisy* and
Skill, should you be Deluded into a Belief, of such who never kept Faith,
(forgive me) your Reputation is lost, with your Security; and you Fall, without
either Redress or Pity. In this very Instant, while you Treat, the Mine is
working. The Instruments and Means of your Destruction are already agreed upon.
Some are employed to Infect your Councils, and Alienate your Soldiers: Others
sit among you, to Betray you. What by Open Force cannot be Effected, must be
assisted, by a Dagger or Poison. (You have the Substance of this, already, upon
Evidence, and Experiment.) Next to this Caution toward your Professed
Adversaries, allow me to propose a more Ingenuous, and Open Clearness toward
your Useful Friends. (if it were but to prevent Mis-understandings: Beside,
that the very Doubt is both Injurious, and Painful) Offices of Respect, and
Comfort, ought to be performed with Liberty, and Chearfullness, without any the
least mixture of Scruple, or Reserve. These Frank, and Mutual Enterchanges of
Succor, and Advice, beget a Trust, and Kindness; And That Is the true
Foundation of a happy, and Lasting Union. -- That Friendship which admits a
Jealousy, wavers.

When You, (My Lord) your Officers, and Army, are become One with this City,
you have then but Contracted a nearer Alliance with the Nation: whose several
Counties, and Divisions, (how remote soever) are (with this Town) but Parts
still of the same Body. By a Consent of Interest, and Sense, they Prosper, or
they Wither, they Grieve, or Joy, they Live, or Dye. Nor are they more united
in their Interests, than in their Votes, and Resolutions; for they have
unanimously engaged with the City, to maintain their Rights, and Liberties, the
Reformed Religion, and the Freedom of Parliaments, against all Hazzards, and
Oppositions whatsoever. I need not tell your Lordship by what Audacious and
Illegal Violences, this Declaration and Remonstrance was extorted from them.
The Nation stood condemned to Servitude, and Beggary, even by those, whom they
themselves had Raised from that Condition, to aggravate the Bondage, by the
more Intolerable Authors of it. It Is now become a Crime, to name a Full, Free
Parliament, and Treason to appeal to any other Law, than the Insipid Vote of a
Legislative Conventicle. The Gaols are full of Prisoners upon that very score.

Was it not time, (My Lord) to bid these People hold their Hands, after the
expense of so much Blood, and of so many Milions; and all this only to
perpetuate a dearer, and a more Infamous Thralldom? The Pulpits were enured to
Blasphemy, and Non sense, and the Government prostituted for money, to Persons
able to disgrace a Bawdy House. -- These, and the like Indignities, put the
Nation upon their Just, and necessary Defense; And in that Posture they now
stand Ready, and Resolved.

Your Excellency has been tender hitherto of Blood, but if a speedy Order be
not taken, to Regulate those straggling Troops, that Act still in the Countries,
in Opposition to a Settlement, It will come yet to Blows: For questionless, in
case of a Necessity, the People will not stand still, and suffer themselves to
be picked out, man by man, till they be all Destroyed.

The Gentry and Nobility, are Slaves to every pedling Pursuivant. It Is but a
Warrant from our Masters, and all is Fish that comes to Net: No matter for a
Crime, if there be Booty. All that the People ask, all they design, is but the
Benefit of the Law. Will any Englishman deny it us? First, They have sworn to
defend it; Next We have sworn, rather to dye, than lose it. This Faction has
cost the Nation more than 60. Millions, besides the Blood they have Lapp'd: and
yet 100000. l. a Month, and not a farthing less, will do their Business, that
is, 5000. l. a Man, or some such Trifle: For that, the Iunto shares; perhaps
the Soldier, once in a year, or 2. may get his Mornings draught, and then be
turned to Graze upon Free Quarter; and hanged for Mutiny, if he but talks of
Money. Its the trick they served all that have served them. Who ever strikes,
or pays on their behalf, fights but for Bondage, and contributes to his own
Chains. If they had any Faith, they might be Trusted. But Oaths go down with
them like Pills of Butter, they are dissolved, as soon as taken. That Perjury
which would poison a good Christian, is but their Nutriment. Nay worse than
Wolves, they are False to their own Kind, and enter-worry one another. I should
be endless, to pursue this Subject till I want Matter. In brief, My Lord, look
to your self, and to your Friends; Life and Death are before you, Choose. May
Heaven direct and bless your Counsels and Endeavors, so far, as you proceed
with Piety and Honor. To prevent Mistakes, I do declare, that there are
diverse moderate and sober Persons, in the Mixture, for whom I have a fair
Respect, and that the tartness of my Language, only concerns the Furious and
Phanatique of them.

A word now to the CITY; and that a short one.] Gentlemen, upon your fair
compliance with the General, depends much of your safety: that is, so far as he
comports himself with terms of Prudence, Equity, and Honor; (and he is too
Noble, to go Less) next, to himself, you find his Officers, of an Ingenuous,
and clear Conversation; and worth your Friendships, their Commands apart; you
likewise find the body of the Army Civil, and well disciplined, you do
exceeding well to pay them all due respects: and to join Interests, and
Councils, with them; -- you have done Wisely, Honestly, and Bravely too, to
oppose Taxes: that is, Taxes imposed without a Law, -- to be employed against
your selves; -- and such, as had you granted them, your President would have
extended to enslave your Posterity. -- Your care next, to disarm the
Sectaries, was very seasonable, Your City had probably been in Ashes else by
this time. Consider, they bear the same mind still, and where they had those
weapons they can quickly have more. You cannot be secure without your Militia,
nor can any thing fairly obstruct your Procurement of it: In Tichburn's Case,
it was by the Commons ordered, that any six of the Common-Counsell (upon
emergent occasions) might send for the Lord Mayor to call a Common-Counsell,
and in case of default, call it themselves, and any 40. of them, to have power
to act as a Common Council, without the Lord Mayor, any thing in their Charter
to the contrary Notwithstanding: See the Hist. of Independency, part 2. p 83.
Not to exceed my limits, Forget not your suffering Friends, and stand firm to
your Associates, and Allies. He that tamely suffers One Injury, Provokes
Another.

Now to the NATION, for a Farewell.] I need not press my Countrymen with many
Cautions, your Freedom of Elections, that is your Birthright* It Is that you all
declare, to Live and Dye for, you are too wise, to be cheated with Restrictions
and Qualifications: as if the Question were the Number, rather than the Choice,
at this rate, you may have a full House, indeed; but How? That is, full of the
Brats, the Kindred, and the Partisans of those that fit already; and then, they
that have gulled you all this while, shall govern you for ever, your very
Declarations against the Present Tyranny, have brought you to that Point, that
there is no safety left you, but in violence; for while you talk, you dye, your
scattered Friends are gathered up, one by one; whereas, your SEASONABLE UNION
MAKES ALL SURE.

As your Intentions are Honorable, so let your Actions be. How far the Law
extends, in case of Brutish, and Illegal cruelty, see St. John's Argument
against the Earl of Strafford; and with That I conclude: He that would not have
had others to have Law, why should he have any himself? Why should not that be
done to him, that himself would have done to others? It is true, we give Law to
Hares and Deers* because they be Beasts of Chase; it was never accounted either
cruelty, or fowl play, to Knock Foxes and Wolves on the head, as they can be
found, because these be Beasts of Prey: The Warrener sets traps for Powlcats
and other Vermin, for Preservation of the Warren.

Feb. 18. 1659.


ABout This time, the Schifmatiques had all their Instruments at work to
disappoint the General Design, and Hope of a Free Parliament. The Bolder, and
the more Ingenious sort of Honest men were Gathered up, by Flying Troops, that
they had every where Dispersed to hinder a Conjunction: nay, they were come to
That Degree of Impudence, to threaten Banishment, and Sequestration to the
whole Party of Declarers. Nor did they Act these Outrages upon the Gentry,
without a due regard of Popular, and specious Application to the Vulgar. The
House should be Immediately Filled: -- The Form of the Writ was already
Published: -- -- -- The Qualifications, Agreed upon; -- -- -- and in Fine; --
-- They would Instantly proceed to a Settlement of Church and State: -- --
(what would they more?) In the mean while; The Presses are at Work; by Libells
against the King; -- -- By Arguments of Interest; and by False Intelligence, to
Corrupt, and Deceive the People. No Stone is left unturned. The
Common-wealthmen* They Are a Birding too; and Tell their Little Tales of Rome,
and Venice. Nor does the General himself escape their wild Attempts; either
upon his Honesty, by Large and Insignificant Donations; or else by Plots
against his Person. The Party had their Friends too in the City; either, by
Tedious Speeches, From the Point, to make their Meetings Fruitless: or upon
Frivolous Pretenses to Delay the very Calling of a Counsel; Retarding the
Militia by that means, to the great Hazard of the whole Affair.

This was the Face of Things, when the Brave General Cleared the way for the
Return of the Secluded Members, who being Entered (Feb. 21.) fell Instantly upon
the Nulling of those Spurious Orders, which Related to their First Seclusion in
Dec. 1648. Proceeding Thence, to the Enlarging, and Confirming of the
Generall's Commission: and the disabling of the Rump's Commissioners for the
Government of the Army. -- -- -- -- The Discharging of Prisoners, Illegally
Committed: -- -- -- -- and the Appointment of a new Convention, (Apr. 25. --
1660.) -- In Fine; they had enough to do for one while, to Vacate the mis
doings of their Predecessors: which thing it self they did, with all convenient
Modesty, and Tenderness. As their Business was only to Settle the Nation,
without Perpetuating Themselves; so did they make all Haste was Possible, to
Finish it. The Militia's, they Placed in Good Hands: and Empowred a Counsel of
State to Govern in the next Intervall, which being done, and Provision made for
a New Election; (March 16.) they Dissolved Themselves.

The Independent Gang were struggling now for Life; and Labored by a Thousand
Shifts, and Cheats to make a Party in the new Militia. During That Transaction;
I caused this Following Paper to be Published. A Seasonable Word.
I Do not write out of an itch of Scribbling, or to support a Faction; my Duty
bids me write. -- Nor do I love Hard words, or Many, Plain, and Few, suit all
Capacities and Leisures. I would be Ready by all, and Understood by all: for my
Business extends to all. -- Not to spend time in Complement, or Apology; The
Readers Wisdom, or the Authors Weakness, is not the Question. The Nation is in
Distress, and every Englishman must lend his hand to save it. Nay, That must be
done Quickly too, and Vigorously; Delay is Mortal. Can any thing be more
Ridiculous, then to stand Formalizing, in a Case, where it is impossible to be
too early, or too zealous? The event of things takes up our thoughts, more then
the Reason of them; what News, more than what Remedy; As if it concerned us
rather to know, whose Fools and Slaves we shall be next, then to be such no
longer. That which completes the Wonder, and the Overfight, is, That the
Miseries we suffer, were before hand, as easily, to be Foreseen and Prevented,
as they are now to be Felt: and we are only to look Backward, to take a perfect
measure of the Future; so obvious, and formal is the Method, that leads to our
destruction. If we are not in love with Beggary, and Bondage; let us at last
bethink our selves of Freedom, and from a due inquiry into the Rise, and
Growth, and present State of our Calamities, learn to be wise, and Happy, for
the time to come.

It may be observed, that since Churchmen dabled in Politiques, and Statesmen
in Divinity, Law and Religion have been still subjected to the Sword: and in
effect, those same Excursions, and Adulterate mixtures, are but the workings of
a Party already in motion toward that End. He that designs a Change of
Government, must begin by imposing a Delusion upon the People: and whatsoever
is Necessary to his Purpose, must be Accomodate to their Humor. -- The Pulpet,
by false glosses, and Puzzling distinctions, under the Doctrine of Conditionate
Obedience, suggesting Liberty, cousens the Multitude into a Rebellion. Oaths
and Covenants, are but like Iugglers knots, Fast or Loose, as the Priest
pleases. -- The Weaker sort being thus prepared, and poisoned, by a Seditious
Clergy; it is then the Statesman's part to push those Mutinous Inclinations into
Action: and to divide the Cause betwixt Conscience, and Property, the better to
involve all Interests in the Quarrel. -- Under the Masque of Piety, and
Publiqueness of Spirit; of Holy men, and Patriots; the Crafty cheat the Simple;
engaging by those specious pretenses, the Rash, mis-judging People, (with good
Intentions; but wanting Care and Skill) in Sacrilege, and Treason.

This was the very Root, and this has been the Process of our Evils. Under
the notion of Gods glory, the Safety, and the Honor of the King: -- the
Fundamental Laws, and Freedoms of the People: -- the Privilege of
Parliaments, etc. the Kingdom was gulled into a Compliance with an Ambitious,
and Schismatic Faction. The main Pretense, was the Assertion of the Subjects
Legal Rights, against the grand Prerogative; and That, -- directed only to the
Limitation of an Intended, Arbitrary Power: -- the Regulation of such and such
Mis-Governments, etc. -- and all this -- Saving their Allegiance to His Sacred
Majesty; whose Person, Crown, and Dignity, they had so often, and so deeply
sworn to maintain -- This was a Bait so Popular, it could not fail of drawing
in a Party; and That produced a War, -- The Formal Story of the Quarrel, is
little to my purpose: the Logique of it, Less, -- -- How, by the same Authority
of Text, and Law, both King and People, could be Justified, one aganst the
other; I meddle not. Let it suffice; that after 6. Years Conflict, -- a vast
profusion of Blood and Treasure, -- The King, a Prisoner, -- and his whole
party scattered, and disarmed: the Commons found themselves disposed to end our
Troubles; and passed a Vote to Treat with His Majesty in Dr^er to a Settlement.
This met with little opposition, except from those, who having Gorged
themselves already, upon the public ruin, were not yet satisfied without
their Sovereigns Blood -- The death of Monarchy it s^^^; -- and the subjecting
of a Tame, and Slavish People to a Conventicle of Regicides. There were not
many of so deep a Tincture; but what these few could not effect by Number, they
did by Force. For, upon the 6th. of December. 1648. Sir Hardresse Waller, Pride,
and Hewson, -- Seized and Emprisoned 41. of the Commons House; -- Clapped
Guards upon all passes leading to it; -- Some 160 more, were given in upon a
List to those that kept the Door, with an express direction from several
Leading Members to oppose their Entrance; -- a matter of 40 more withdrew, for
fear of violence. Their Crime was only the carrying of a Vote for Peace
(already mentioned) the day before. This action was so Enormous, that the very
Contrivers of it were ashamed to own it: transferring That upon the
Army Officers which was done by their own appointment. They passed however a
Formal disallowance of the violence, and ordered their discharge; which yet
the Officers refused (upon a Combination now most evident) -- Observe this,

That which in 48. they told us was an act of the Army Officers, in 59. they
call a Judgment of Parliament; and they justify and continue That very
Seclusion, by a Vote of Ian. 5. 59. -- Which they Themselves Condemned and
Discharged by several Orders in Dec. 48. The Particulars of these
Transactions, are excellently delivered by Mr. Prynne, (the Honor of the age)
in his true and perfect Narrative, as also, in the Declaration of the true
state of the Secluded members, and in the History of Independency.

Return we now to the great Test of the Spirits, and Designs of the several
Parties, and Members of the House, and from that Judgment, and Discrimination
of Persons, and Humors, we may learn seasonably to provide against
After-claps. This Blow* brake the House of Commons into Three Pieces: -- One
Party, adhered to the Vote, -- opposed the Violence; -- Declared against it, --
Claimed from time to time, their own and the Peoples Rights, -- Pleaded the
Covenant, and their Declarations, and stood it out. The Second sort, was not so
well prepared for Martyrdom; a kind of Barnacle, neither Fish nor, Flesh. This
was a Party, that Flew off at first, but soon retracted; -- Herded again, and
went along for Company; my Charity persuades me well, of diverse of them, and
that they mixed, rather in hopes to moderate the Rest, then in Design to
strengthen them: A Party rather Weak, and Passive, than Malicious. But nothing
can excuse those sons of Belial, the perjured Remnant; no, nor express them --
Beside their Oaths and Covenant, they have above a hundred times, in Printed
Declarations, renounced the very Thought of what they since have executed. Read
the Exact Collections, We are (say they) so far from altering the Fundamental
Constitution, and Government of this Kingdom by King, Lords and Commons. That
we have only desired, that with the consent of the King, such Powers may be
settled in the Two Houses, without which, we can have no Assurance, etc. These
are the very words of their Declaration, April 17. 1646 published by the House
of Commons, alone, toward the end of the war, and most remarquably entitled,
-- A Declaration of their true Intentions, concerning the Ancient Government of
the Nation and securing the People against all Arbitrary Government. -- Let
this Quotation serve for All, lest I exceed my Limits. Nor to insist upon
things known, and public. -- How faithfully these People have managed their
Original Trust, - how strictly they have kept their Oaths and Promises, -- how
tenderly they have observed the Laws, and asserted our Freedoms; -- how poor
they have made themselves, to make us Rich; -- how Gracioussly they have
assumed the Legislative power; and then; how modestly they have exercised it:
-- In fine; -- How Free, and happily we lived under their Government; till
Oliver played Rex among them and threw them out by a Trick of their own
Teaching. This was in April 1653. It were worth the while, to enquire into the
good they did us, during that 6 years Session, but that I leave to Needham. Nor
shall I far examine the Protectors Reign; by whose advice; -- by what
assistance; -- or by what Laws he ruled? -- how many of our late Republicans
forga^e themselves, and swear Allegiance, to a single Person. How many things
like Parliaments, he dispersed.) -- It is enough; at last, he died. Died, -- in
despite of Priests, and Poets; Goodwin, etc. The former telling him from
Heaven, that he should escape that Fit, the Other telling us, -- (so needlessly.)
--

His Highness, having other things to think on, left his successor doubtful,
till (as they say) His Secretary, (Then, one of Ours, now) with Goodwin, (His
Prophetique Confessor) Swore his son Richard into the Protectorship. But he
(Good Gentleman) did not much hurt, but peaceably resigned to Fleetwood, and
Disborough; and They, quite at a Loss for want of Brains and Courage, called in
the Fag-end of the old House, to their assistance: So that those Members, which
Dived, in April 53. came up again, upon the 7th. of May, 59. and acted as
impetuously as ever: Till they were once again unseated, by the Army; the 13.
of October. last, and then, the Commit of Walling fordhouse was invested with
the Supreme Authority: ('It Is but a slippery Title that of the Sword) This
change, gave General Monk occasion to show his Charity to his Native Country;
by whose Generosity, and Conduct, the Honest and Suffering Party was relieved,
and the Phanatique Army dispersed, without Blood. Hereupon, the Souldjery
tacked about once again; -- Lamented their backslidings; and on the 26th. of
December. following the Good-Old-Cause-men, re-enthron'd themselves: more eager
now, than formerly, against the Readmission of the secluded Members. This
barbarous, and Arbitrary proceeding, put the whole Nation upon a necessity of
procuring a Free and Full Representative: to which end, they proposed Modestly,
and Fairly, the Restoring of the Excluded Members, and Filling up the House; or
else, the Liberty of a New, and Legal choice. For bringing Letters to this
purpose, Sir Robert Pie, and Major Fincher were imprisoned. This was an
Insolence too gross, to do much Mischief, but to Themselves. Are these the
men, (the People cried) that put the King to death, only upon Pretense of a
Design, to Erect and Uphold in himself, an Un^^^^ted, and Tyrannical Power, to
Rule according to his Will, and to overthrow the Rights, and Liberties of the
People, Yea, to Take away and make Uoid the Foundations thereof, and of all
Redress and Remedy of mis-Government, which by the Fundamental Constitutions of
this Kingdom, were reserved on the Peoples behalf, in the Right and Power of
FREQUENT AND SUCCESSIVE PARLIAMENTS? ( these are the words of the charge) --
That which was Treason in our Lawful Prince, how comes it to be Law, now with
these Fellows? They took away the Kings Life, for but Intending, the very
thing they Act; and we are to be Hanged, for Asking only That, they swear they
Fought for. No; -- they are a Pack of cheats; They Murdered Him, that they
might Rule, Themselves. The Plot was grown so Rank, the Commune* People smelt
it; and without more ado, associated to free themselves, from an infamous and
perpetual bondage. Witness that Union, (in their Declarations) both of Demand
and Resolution; against the Equity whereof, no man has hitherto pretended the
least Objection. --

The Supreme Trifle; perceiving, an Universal Application to the General, in
his passage; and all, speaking the same Sense; Finding withal, that his
Excellence suspended, till he might hear Both Parties; and Conscious to
Themselves, of no imaginable Reason to Oppose: Beside: -- Seeing themselves
Declined, and Hated; -- Nay, and Endangered by a Peremptory Agreement of the
Nation; -- They did, at last, most graciously descend to promise us a full
Representative; but no Secluded Members, to be admitted, nor, in effect, any
other then Phanatiques.

His Excellency, well weighing, what was Reasoned pro and con: made way for the
Return of the Secluded Members. This Justice, brake the neck of a Design, just
then on Foot. This is the short on it, -- The People were to be held at Gaze, in
expectation of a further satisfaction; till those Troops which the Backside had
ordered to that purpose, should have seized all the considerable Persons of the
Kingdom. Nay, they were impudent enough, to tempt the General himself into a
Complication with them: But he was too discreet, not to distinguish where to
observe, and where to Leave them. In fine, That providence, which stills the
raging of the Sea, and the madness of the People, has put a check to their
Impetuous, and, brutish fury.

Next to our Gratitude to Heaven, let us have a care, not to be wanting in point
of prudence to our Selves. Nothing undoes us but Security. We see, who are our
Friends, and who our Enemies; whom we may trust, and whom we must not. We have
paid dear for our Experience, and, sure, we have a Title to the Benefit of it.
Let us look Back, and learn, from Thence, the menage of the Future.

It is a tedious while, this Nation has been tossed betwixt Two Factions; One
in the Army, the Other in the Counsel; Both, well enough Agreed to destroy Us,
but Jealous still, One of the Other, as Don says of Ignatius, concerning his
Competitor in Hell, He was content he should be Damned, but loath he should
Govern. That Is all the Quarrel: the Vizor of Religion, is thrown aside long
since. The Conventicle cheats the Soldier this day; and he falls upon the
Rump, the next: in short; they do but watch one the other, at the public
charge; they may saarle where they please, but they bite none but us, and at
the worst, forgive their fellow-Theeves for robbing Honest Men. This has been
their practice near these dozen years. Are we not yet convinced, that it is
impossible it should be otherwise, while the same people Govern us, with the
same aim, and bound up by no other Laws, than their Own Wills? I do not press
any resistance, Now; but, certainly, a readiness to protect Honester men, in
Case of an Attempt, were not amiss. We see, how dirtily they have used the
General, and how unworthily their Instruments have labored the Army into a
direct Tumult; and all this in order to a New Violence upon the House. We see,
what Iuggling is used in the MILITIA: as foysting in false Lists, to cast the
strength of the Nation into the hands of mean, and Factious persons. What
industry, to hold us still unsettled, by throwing in impertinent, and dangerous
ScruPles, to delay (at the Fairest) if not disturb the long desired Peace we
pray for. -- He that has either Honor in his Blood, or Honesty in his Heart,
is Reproached with a King in his Belly. -- Then, for the Qualifications, these
goodly Squires would have thrust upon us, are they not pleasant? One man of
Forty shall be allowed to Vote, or Sit, and the other 39. must call That a
Free-Parliament, and swear, it Represents the People. -- We are not so Blind
yet, nor so Forgetful, as not to see, and know, some Toxes and some Asses, in
the Medly; All are not Saints we call so. -- We do remember, who they were that
ruled in 48. and we are sensible, what they would do still, if they had Power.
-- We know, who brought in, who; but the Markets raised; our Heads will not off
now at Fifty shillings a Hundred, as formerly. In fine, let the General, the
Secluded Members, and the Honest Souldjers, live Long, Happily, and Beloved;
and let the Rest take their Fortune. I could only wish his Excellency had been
a little civiller to Mr. Milton; for, just as he had finished his Model of a
Commonwealth, directing in these very Terms, the Choice; -- men not addicted
to a Single Person, or House of Lords, and the Work is done. In come the
Secluded Members, and spoil his Project. To this admirable discovery, he
subjoynes a suitable Proposition in favor of the late sitting Members, and This
is it, having premised the Abilities and Honesty, desirable in Ministers of
State, he recommends the Rumpers to us as so Qualified; advises us to quit that
fond Opinion of successive Parliament; and suffer the Persons then in Power, to
perpetuate themselves under the name of a Grand or General Counsel, and to
rule us, and our Heirs for ever. -- It were great pity these Gentlemen should
lose their longings: One word, and I have done. We live in daily expectation of
Writs for another Session, if they Leave us as free, as they Found us, it is
Well: if Not; it is but to Turn the Tables, and try Their menage of a Losing
Game.



THe Great Design was now, to Disappoint the Hopes we had of Good from the
Next Convention, by Continuing Themselves; or at the least, to Fool the People
into an Expectation of the same Benefit from the Rump; which we promised our
Selves from a Free Parliament, and that way to Procure an Interest in the Next
Session. In order to this pitiful purpose, comes forth a wretched Pamphlet,
Entit'led No New Parliament. OR Some Quaeres or Considerations humbly offered
to The Present PARLIAMENT MEMBERS.

The Occasion rather, then the thing it self, drew from me This Answer. Quaere
for Quaere, etc.
ALthough That Pamplet, which Occasions This, considered in it self, is not
Worth a Reply: Yet in regard of the Contrivers, and of the End it tends to, it
may Deserve one. I look upon it as nothing else, but the Phanatiques late
Petition sliced into Quaeres, by some unskilful hand; and with a Harmless kind
of Simple Malice, directed to elude the Justice and Necessity of their great
Patrons Dissolution.

I shall not much insist upon the business, beyond the Obligation of a Formal
Answer: but I shall take such heed to That, as to leave little place for a
Return; and in the rest, make the old saying good, that One Fool may ask more
Questions, than Twenty Wise men can Answer.

His Quaere's are as follows.

1. Whether this be not the Parliament, and these the Persons, who began the
War with the late King? And if so, whether it does not highly and nearly
concern them oven for their own sakes, to be the Parliament that shall take up,
and Cloze the Quarrel, and not leave it to others, especially, if as the
general voice goes, the Kings Son must be brought in?

ANSWER.
THis is not the Original Parliament; That was composed of Three Estates; King,
Lords, and Commons. Further; These very Persons now sitting, Declared the King,
a Party with them in the Quarrel; beginning the War in the Kings Name; -- For
Him, not With (that is, as it lies here Against) Him. If Thus; the House must
be Divided as well now in the Question, as formerly it was so in the War. The
Parliament (even in the Querists sense) were those that (suitably to their
Duties and Engagements) Voted a Peace, in order to the Preservation of his
Majesty, but there was a Faction too, that contrary to Honor, Faith, and
Conscience, did forcibly seclude their Honester Fellows, (by much the Major
Part) and Prosecute, and put to Death the King; Those that have been Honest,
are Safe: nay and so, should those be too, that will at last be so, by my
Consent: but I Demand,

What Equity or Reason is there, that those Persons who Murdered the Father,
and are still professed Enemies to the Son, should have an Equal Benefit with
Others, that were Affronted for their Loyalty to the Former, and are at present
upbraided (as if 'twere Criminal) for their Affection to the Latter? If the
Kings Son must be brought in, whether they will or no, what have we to do
further with those people, that Declare they will keep him Out, if they Can?

2. Whether this Parliaments first undertaking and prosecuting the War with the
late King were Just, and upon good and Warrantable Grounds? If it were (as no
doubt it was) and God having by his Providence, after a long Interruption of
some of them, and a longer Seclusion of the rest, restored them to their trust,
whether they ought not now to stand to their first Good principles, maintain
their first Good Cause, and secure all the good people that have been engaged
with them, and by them?

ANSWER.
THe War was Just, in that part of the Parliament, which Declared for the King,
and Acted accordingly, but Unjust in th^se that Swore to Preserve him, and
Intended to Murder him. That the Parliament ought to stand to their first Good
Principles; we are Agreed. In so doing; they are to bring to condign
punishment, -- the Infringers of their Privileges, -- the Introducers of
Arbitrary power, the Obstructors of Successive Parliaments; The Murderers of
the late King -- the Subverters of the Established Government, etc.

I grant you further, that they are obliged to secure all the good people that
engaged With them and by them; but not consequently all those that acted
violently Against and Without them, -- now my Question.

How is it possible for those that Began upon Principles of Contradiction, (as
the Saving and Destroying of the King, etc.) to stand to their First principles?

3. Whether this be not that Parliament, and these the very persons, who by the
good esteem they had among the people of their Integrity, Faithfulness and
Constancy; whether I say, this be not the Parliament, who by these and other
means engaged the Honest, and well Affected of the Land in the aforesaid War?
And if so, whether this Parliament having now power in their hands, are not
obliged in Duty and Good Conscience to secure all the said Honest and well
affected people for this their Engaging and Acting under them, and not leave
them as a prey to their professed enemies, nor their terms of piece to be made
by they know not whom? Another Parliament, which there is too great cause to
fear, will be too much made up of such as neither have been nor are friends to
the Parliaments cause, nor to those that engaged in it.

ANSWER.
It Is not the Gaining of a good Esteem, but it is the practice of Integrity,
that recommends a Worthy person. I may believe well of a Cheat, and have my
pocket picked. But after that; I should deserve a Yellow Coat, ever to trust
that fellow Again, though he should plead, he had my good opinion formerly. --
Some I confess are yet in Being, of those whose Interest raised the War, but
these are not the men our Quaerist means: (and beside; the most considerable of
that number, are in their Graves.) For the rest; (to wave this Argument from
Power to Conscience. --) Those people that dare not abide the test of a Free,
Legal Parliament, must not presume to act themselves, as an Authority without
Law, or Limit. In fine; -- If this be the Same Parliament, that first engaged
-- then --

Why should the Secluders, and their Adherents; -- Those which by Force of arms
Baffled this very Parliament, in 48. 'scape better then the Cavaliers that
fought against it, in 42?

4. Whether this be not the Parliament, who by many Declarations and
Remonstrances, by Protestation and Vow, by Solemn League and Covenant have
declared and engaged themselves before God, Angels, and Men, and have thereby
drawn in, and therewith engaged all Honest people to assert and defend their
just undertaking, and one another therein? Whether as things now stand, (when
this just Cause, which through Gods assistance could not be won from us in the
field, is in great danger to be stolen from us by the dark contrivances of its
and our adversaries) if this Parliament should dissolve at such a time as this,
and leave all, both Cause and all engaged by them in it to another Parliament,
the greatest part whereof may be no friends but enemies, or at least strangers,
or but little concerned in the first undertaking; whether this would not be
exceeding contrary to all those Former Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestation, Vow, and Solemn League and Covenant?

ANSWER.
I Do allow -- the Members of this present Session, are those persons that
stand engaged by Oath and Covenant: and to that OATH and COVENANT, we appeal.
-- For Granted; they stand bound to protect all the HONEST people they have
engaged; but not the KNAVES, -- the Covenant-Breakers; I desire only this. --

Whether or Not, are they that took the Covenant, bound to protect the
Violaters of it? -- Nay, can they purge themselves of manifest Perjury and
Complication, should they not prosecute the obstinate Opposers of it?

5. Whether it be not more then sufficiently manifest what will be the carriage
of these Enemies to the Parliaments Cause, and its Adherents, when they get
power into their hands, since they are so forward already in their discourses
to charge the Parliament with Treason and Rebellion in their first Undertaking
the War, and look on all their Friends as Rebels and Traitors for assisting
them in the prosecution of it, and who are now in all places contriving and
promoting the electing of such into the New Parliament as are Enemies to the
present Parliament, their Friends and Cause, wherein if they prevail (as it is
too likely) their work is done? How absolutely necessary is it then for the
present Parliament to continue their Session, for prevention of these
Mischiefs, which otherwise will ensue.

Upon these and many other very weighty considerations, it can by no means be
accounted either honorable, or just, or safe or prudent, for the present
Parliament to dissolve themselves, till first they have fully asserted and
vindicated their own just Undertaking, and the faithful adherents to it and
them, and not to leave both themselves and their Friends to the Malice and
Revenge of a vanquished Enemy.

If this should be, we may bid adieu to the Honor and Renown of English
Parliaments, and to all future hopes of assistance from the People, whatever
the Necessity may be: And let English men bid farewell both to their Civil and
Religious Liberties, if after so high a Conflict for them, with the expense of
so much Blood and Treasure, and having by Gods blessing subdued their Opposers,
yet after all to be exposed to a far worse Condition then before, which O God
forbid: We hope for better things from our present Parliament: All that we add,
is only this, If the King must come, none so fit to bring him as our present
Parliament.

ANSWER.
It Is not the Parliament is charged with Treason, but that Rebellious Faction;
-- that, by an Insolence, praevious to the Murder of his Sacred Majesty.
threw out the Major Party of their Fellow Members, which interposed to save him
-- and it is in their behalfs, this pitiful, half-witted Pamphleter engages.
Should these Gentlemen sit, till they found a Free Parliament their Friends,
they would hardly Rise betwixt This, and the Day of Judgment: and that's all they
desire. Alas! a Trifle. -- The care they take of our Religion, and Civil
Rights, in truth, is a great favor from them, that never understood their Own.
-- -- If the more sober, conscientious Persons at the Helm, think not fit to
dissolve so soon; the IONASSES, however must be thrown overboard, to save the
Vessel. -- He that dissents, let him produce his Reasons: and in Particulars,
but show what Good, they have either Done, or Meant us; to Balance the
Calamities they have engaged us in. I should be Glad to see these Men Repent;
Hardly, to see them Govern. -- These Folks are Ruined, if they do not Rule;
the Nation. if they do. -- The Question then is but --

Whether is more prudential; by saving of some half a score Secluders, that We
should Perish; or by their SPEEDY DISSOLUTION, that we should save our selves?



A Free Course of Success against the Rump, had put the People upon a Iollier
Pin; Their Humor was quite changed; They thought the Danger Over, and it was
now become a Thing Unseasonable to be Serious.

Accounting it expedient however, through all Forms to Follow them, and Fool
for Company, I was content to play the Mimique; as you may see in that which
follows, Entit'led No Fool to the Old Fool.
Hark ye my Masters; -- for one half quarter of an hour now, let us be as Wise
as Woodcocks; and talk a little Treason. Why should not We thrive in the World
as well as our Neighbors? Had not other people Heads and Souls to lose as well
as We? If men will be Damned, they had better Damn Rich than Poor; as Bradshaw
and the Attorney General Damned. -- Believe me, -- three or fourscore thousand
pound is a convenient Plaster for a Broken Head; there is something to bear
Charges yet. Beside, There Is Power and Plenty. -- They Cosen whom they please:
-- Hang and Draw at Will; -- they keep their Lacquays and their Whores: and at
the last they go to Hell in Triumph. They have their Blacks and Elegies, and
leave the State to pay the Draper and the Poet. Twould make a man be-pisse
himself, to see the soft and tenderhearted Needham, weeping (like Niobe, till
he turns Stone) over the Tomb of Bradshaw, -- to see him Cry with one Eye, and
laugh with the other, and yet the Tragicomical Puppy keep his Countenance. The
Tears of such a Saint cannot but fall, like Drops of Lambeth Ale, upon the
Tongue of Dives, -- how great a Consolation was it (think ye) to the late
Protector to find himself placed at the right hand of God by Sterry? (that
Blasphemous, bold Phanatique) of whose Condition, Charity it self can scarce
admit a comfortable thought. For, after a long Course. Of Treason, Murder,
Sacrilege, Perjury, Rapine, etc. he finished his accursed Life, in Agony, and
Fury; and without any mark of true Repentance. You Will say, he was the Braver
Villain for it. -- Crimes of this large Extent have indeed something that is
Masculine to allay them. But to be Damned for Sneaking; To purchase Hell at the
price of all that is pleasant Here: -- to contract Sin and Beggary, in the same
Act and Moment; This is the most Imprudent and Ridiculous wickedness that may
be. He that Indents with the Devil, has a merry Bargain, compared with Us;
There Is Time, and Pleasure. Here; the Vengeance treads upon the Heels of the
Offense; and the Punishment of our Misdoings is the next immediate Effect of
them* In Paying Taxes, to an Usurped Power; There Is a Defection from the Right,
and a Compliance with the Wrong, which renders us doubly Criminal, -- and in
this case we do but Buy our Chains, and the next Consequent of our
Disobedience, is Slavery. It comes all to a Point, in what concerns Subjection
to Unlawful Powers. Under a Force, -- is a Brutish Argument. Vice is the
Obliquity of the Will: That Is Free. The same Plea lies in the Case of
Martyrdom: and by the same Rule we may renounce our Maker.

If Wicked, we are Resolved to be, -- Lets go a nobler way to work -- let us get
a matter of Half a Dozen Crafty Knaves together; take in some Thirty or Forty
silly Rascals into the Gang, and call our selves a Parliament. Why Gentlemen?
This is no impossible thing, Our Title is as good as Theirs, that have done the
same thing before us; but then be sure of the Proportion. Seven parts of Eight
must have neither Wit nor Honesty: yet Look as wise as Judges, and in the very
middle of their Pater-Nosters, pick their Neighbors pockets. These are to be
directed by the Rooks, and by them Both, the Nation, which would be
over-stocked with Cheats, were any more admitted into the Grand Conspiracy
against the People. To Personal abuses, the rest are likewise Qualified: They
may Imprison, When, Where, and Whom they please, without Cause showed, their
Will is a sufficient Warrant for the Well-affected. In fine, they are the
Peoples voice, and That Is the voice of Heaven.

Why now should we despair of the same Events, from the same Means,
considering* what a Drowsy, Patient, and Phlegmatic people we have to deal
with? Shall's Fool a Little? Lets Vote down Magna Charta, and the Petition of
Right! Settle a Preaching Militia, and a Fighting Ministry? -- Out with our
Whinyards, and off with the Names, instead of the Heads of the Kings Tryers; as
Okey did upon the Change. Take away Monk's Commission; Petition the Soldiery
to Petition Us, to declare our selves Perpetual; -- Bind up the Nation under
Limitations for the next Session, and exclude all but our own party from the
Choice. No matter for the Law or Conscience of the business -- ARTICLES OF
SURRENDER; and Public ACTS of INDEMNITY, amount to nothing, -- OATHS and
COVENANTS, are but occasional Submissions to Convenience; not Binding any man,
that in the very act of Taking them, resolves to Break them. Let things come to
the Worst; when we have Overturned the Government; -- Polluted the very Altar,
with our MASTERS BLOOD -- Cheated the Public, etc. It Is but to Whine and
Snivel to the People; tell them we were misled, by Cardinal Appetites; --
cloth all our Rogueries in Scripture Phrase -- Humble our selves before the
Lord (But not a Syllable concerning Restitution) and they will Forgive us: Nay,
perhaps, Trust us too: Think us their Friends, For doing them no more than all
the Harm we could. -- It Is a good natured sort of Beast, *the Common People,
if it be Pleased; and it is the Easiest thing in nature, for Fools and Knaves to
Please it. They have not been gulled half long enough yet, -- what will you say
now, to a New-Parliament made of an Old one? As There Is no Fool to the Old one,
so there is no Knave to the Old one.

What do ye think of your Episcopal Cole-marchant Sir Arthur, for Durham: and
let him bring in his Fellow Laborer Sir Harry Vane for Newcastle? In the City
of London, you cannot choose amiss, provided, that Ireton or Titchburn, be One;
and that he choose his Fellows. -- For Kent, no Man like Sir Michael Livesy,
For Norfolk there is Miles Corbet, and if the House does not like him, they may
send him to the Red-Bull, for he personates a Fool or a Devil without the
Charge either of a Habit or a Vizor. If the Nation be so Charitably disposed,
as to erect an Hospital, in favor of the Lame, the Rotten. and the Blind, let
'um take in Limping Luke Robinson; Rheumatique Mounson, Bobtail'd Scot; and the
Blinking Cobbler. -- But why do I pretend to direct in Particular? -- Among the
Kings Tryers, Excise-men, Sequestrators, Close-Committee-men, Major-Generalls,
Buyers and Sellers of the Crown and Church Lands, etc. -- they may wink and
choose. Alas, they are all Converted. I Am sure he is Right, cries one; he Told me
so. Dull Sotts let Us be Right our Selves; and then, what need we care who is
Wrong? I Will put a Case to you: suppose, upon the Dissolution of this Session,
six or seven thousand of the Phanatique Souldjery, that knows a Settlement
destroys their Trade. should try a Blow for it yet; and by the help of some of
their Confederates, yet in appearance of Authority, should put a Force upon the
Honest Party: ('It Is but to suppose, what many of that Gang are bold enough in
Public to declare) I have a Phansy you will look on still, and betake your
selves to your Old senseless Plea, -- They have the Power. -- Which, if you do
-- -- No no; you cannot be so Tame, and witless.

Be careful whom you Trust, either in your Militia, or Counsels; Choose Persons
of Estates Honestly gotten; Such, whom the Law Preserves, will Preserve the
Law. Whereas, If you choose such as have an interest of their Own, that th'warts
the Public; you're yery Charitable to believe that those people, who all this
while, have Cheat You to benefit them Selves, should, at the last, adventure
All to preserve You.

March 16. 1659.


UPon the Dissolution of the House, the Phanatick party betook themselves to
their wonted Insolence. Declaring publicly (diverse of them) that they were not
Dissolved: Offering to sit again; and protesting against the Choice of the next
Convention. They tampered the Army into a Combination; and proceeded to that
point of Boldness, that the Common-Counsel found it proper to entreat the
Counsel of State, and the General to retire into the City, during that Interval
of Parliament; for their greater Security.

March 19.

Observing the Lewd Practices of the Faction; and desirous to give the world
some notice of Particulars, in Order to the better Knowledge of them, I printed
this ensuing Paper. THat this Nation has been long miserable, under the power
of a violent and Restless Faction, is clear to all such as are endued with
Memory, and Reason: nor is it more superfluous, to reflect upon their passed
Miscariages than Necessary to take some notice of their Later Cheats, and
Insolences. Their Design was, to fix themselves in a Perpetual Counsel;
contrary to Oath, and Law; and to cut off successive Parliaments. To carry on
which Project, they had Armed all sorts of Libertines, throughout the Nation;
particularly, threatening London with Fire and Sword, if they should not comply.
Their barbarous purposes were Disappointed, by the General's Re-introduction of
the Secluded Members: Together, with the united rage of the People against
them. In this hopeless and Deserted condition. what they could not effect by
open Force, they attempted by Treachery, and Corruption. They used all Art, and
Diligence, during the Session, both to gain Opportunities, and to Improve them;
but being over-voted in the Main, They fell upon a more direct, and shameless
method of Villainy. -- They falsified the Lists of the Militia: -- solicited
Petitions from the City, for their Continuance: -- Iuggled the Army Officers
into a Tumult, -- Employed their Instruments to Destroy the General; --
Mutinyed the Army, and the City; and Finally, they engaged a great part of the
Souldjery to Remonstrate against the rest of the Nation. But all too little, to
prevent their Dissolution; or to Disturb our Hopes of Settlement.

The General has approved himself, in the calm, steady menage of this wild
Affair, a Person worthy of all the Honor we can give him. These Brutish
Libertines, -- finding all their Plots Bubbled, -- their Mines vented, -- their
Party, Weak and Heartless, -- themselves Friendless Abroad, and Comfortless at
Home, -- as Guilty, and as Desperate as Cain; after the sad despair of any the
least Benefit to themselves, they are yet pleased in the Contrivance of our
Mischief; They Are not Dissolved, they tell us, -- and attempt to meet again;
That's in vain; and now they come to their last shifts, These Senseless
Cox-combs offer the Honest General the Instrument of Government; as if, that
Noble, Generous Soul, were to be wrought upon, to prostitute his Honor, and
his safety; and all this, to preserve a Kennel of such Reprobated, and
Ridiculous Puppies. I wonder seriously, how these Pimps, and Knights o'th Post,
-- Scot and his Fellows, escape the fury of the People: That Rabbet-sucking
Rascal, with his Fellow Cheats, and Pandars; these are the Youths: Gentlemen,
that offer you like Dogs, to any Master, that will bestow the Haltering of
you. For shame, bethink your selves.

To be as short as possible, thus far you're safe: but yet these Tumblers have
not showed all their Tricks: their last Recourse, is to the Forgery of Letters;
(but so ridiculously framed, they are rather argument of Sport, than Anger: for
the Brewer is much better at a Cheat, than at a Stratagem) There are diverse
Scandalous Papers dispersed, in the Name of the King; and as the sense of the
Royal Party. You shall do well, to take notice, that nothing of that Quality,
proceeds either from Himself, or his Friends. The Project is Phanatique, and
tends only to hinder our Expected, and Approaching Settlement. To mention One
for All; there is a Phamphlet of yesterday, Entitled -- -- News from Brussels,
in a Letter from a near attendant on his Majesty's Person, to a Person of
Honor Here -- Which Casually became thus Public.

Do but observe this Formal Noddy, how he Boggles upon the very Title Page. --
How Casually, Good Man Sense-lesse? Did it Drop into a Printing House, and
Publish it self? -- his Title is followed, with a Suitable Text; of so Pityfull
an Air, and Fashion, I am ashamed to confess the reading of it. Indeed I
would advise the Secretary, rather to return to his Placket-Politiques, for he
is not half so good at State, as Bawdery. To deliver his aim in other terms,
for fear of giving the Reader a Vomit. The principal drift of his discourse is
to Personate a Royalist, Charging the Presbyterians with the murder of the
King, and professing an Implacable Animosity against the whole party. -- Not to
employ more subtilty than needs upon so Frivolous a Subject. Let this suffice.

Who Murdered the King, the Nation knows; and who interposed to Save him; --
who they are, that at this instant, Oppose a Settlement, and who Desire it; Nay
More; we know, who cannot Live Under a Peaceable Government, and who cannot
Live Without it: And it is fit to show all honest people to distinguish.

Those, that have designed Us for Slavery, it is but reason to mark them out
for Justice: yet I should advise tenderness; whereby saving a Few, Infamous
Malefactors, we do not hazard a more Considerable Loss. He that Forgives
them, extends his Charity, but he that Trusts a man of them, Betrays his
Country.

March. 24. 1659.


THe Agitators were now grown so Busy in the Army, that the Counsel of State
put forth a Proclamation against them; and had not the singular prudence of the
General checked the Malice of that Confederacy, It would have proved of
dangerous Consequence. Finding themselves thus disappointed of those early
hopes they had as to the Army: Their next Trick was to procure Elections for
their purpose: and this they labored to effect, by Tampering with the
Sheriffs, where they found any capable of a Practice: and by their Interest in
some pedling Factious Boroughs, to get Themselves and their Friends chosen.

This being the present Danger, I Dispersed some Hundreds of Papers, the Title
and Copy whereof follows. A Necessary and Seasonable Caution, Concerning
Elections.
THe miserable dissettlement of this Nation, arising principally from Abuse of
Trust, practiced by those Persons, whom we chose to Represent the People; it
concerns us now at last, to provide warily against future Inconveniences, by a
more diligent Examination, and Knowledge of those we elect for the time to come.
We find the Nation Impoverished; the Government both of Church and State
dissolved; and all the Supports of a Puplick Magistracy devoured, by those
very people, who instead of Freeing us from Small and few miscariages,
(themselves) notoriously exercised over us the greatest oppressions Imaginable.
For prevention of the like evils hereafter, we are to be very wary how we choose;

1. Such persons as Preach without a Call, and deliver the Delusions of Satan,
for the Inspirations of the Holy Spirit; (We may know the Tree by its Fruit.)
2. Such as either out of Fear, or Interest, Sacrifice the Public Good to
Passion, or Benefit, shifting from Party to Party; This Day for the King and
Parliamen; the next, Pensioners to the Protector, the Third for the Rump; the
Fourth for any thing that comes next. Under this notion, I comprise such as
make use of a Parliament-Priviledge, to Elude Creditors, to Detain illgotten
Possessions, and to put themselves out of the Reach of the Law; thereby
hindering the due course of Proceedings against them. 3. And Lastly, take heed
of choosing any Persons that have already Falsified their Trust, -- by engaging
in Illegal Close-Committees* -- In any Relation whatsoever of Malice toward
the Late King, in Purchasers, of Sellers of the Public Revenues: -- In
Usurped Impositions upon the People. In Short; such, as have at the price of an
Universal Ruin, enriched Themselves; and laid the Foundations of their New
Babel, in Sacrilege, Perjury, Murder and Treason.
This may suffice for a Caution to all such, as are not resolved upon Beggary,
and Bondage.

THe Phanaticks had at this time many Irons in the Fire, and not without
Reason, for they had many Difficulties to Encounter. Their Instant and most
pressing Concern was to Nip the Militia in the Bud; and either totally to
hinder the next appointed Choice, or so to Qualify and Overawe it, that we
should only be subjected still to the same Faction, with somewhat more Pretense
of Equity and Form. They knew the Vote and Strength of the whole Nation would
be against them. And they set all their Heads and Hands at work to disappoint
it. Briefly; they had their Firebrands in the City; their bold and public
Agents in the Country: but their great Trust was in the Army; where they had
poisoned a Considerable party; And by whose Aid they made no doubt of Lambert,
(tho then a Prisoner) to head them, so soon as the Design were Ripe enough to
need him.

Upon this point of Exigence (that nothing might be wanting to procure another
War) they cast abroad in Swarms, Seditious Pamphlets; tending not only to
Disgrace the Person, and the Office of the King, his Fathers Memory, his
Friends, and Cause, but likewise to provoke the Weaker, and the less
Considerate men of his own Party, by an Unseasonable and Mistaking Zeal to
blast the Business. The Rise and Course of the whole war is searched into, for
Matter to involve the Murderers of the King with those that would have Saved
him, in the same Hazard, Interest, Crime, and Quarrel.

One of the Modestest of these Discourses was put into my hand, with an Express
Desire that I would print an Answer to it, which accordingly I did: but rather
for my promise sake, then that I thought it worth the while; -- and This was it.

A Sober Answer to a Juggling Pamphlet, Entitled, a LETTER INTERCEPTED, etc.
I Have heard of one that has made himself a Cuckold, -- that has picked his
own pocket, -- and it is possible, a man may Design upon himself, and Intercept
his own Letters. The Miscariage, I confess, is a little odd,, where the
Courted party, -- the Contriver, -- and the Intercepter, are all One, and the
same Person. The Plot is Borrowed from the Story of Narcissus; but by what
Enemy both to the Author, and Reader, this Discourse is made Public, were an
Enquiry fitter for Authority, than a Private hand. Since so it is, lets make
the best of a bad Market: what the Composer has sold Cheap, -- We have Bought
Dear, and Both must Lose by the Bargain. Without further Prologue -- Here Is SIR
POLITIC himself, and we will take the measure of the man from his Title Page.

A LETTER INTERCEPTED, -- Printed for the Use and Benefit of the Ingenuous
Reader -- -- in which the Two Different Forms of MONARCHY, and POPULAR
COVERNMENT, are briefly Controverted. --

( The Commonwealth Party are advised not to Buy this. by N. D. Gent.)

EXUNGUE LEONEM. The VOICE is JACOB'S, but the HANDS are ESAU'S. Popular
Arguments are of late become such a Drugg, the Author dares not own his
Inclination, for fear the Pamphlet should not off: but rather chooses, under the
color of a Philosophical Debate, to advance a Seditious Design; and instead of
delivering a sober Opinion, to excite a turbulent Faction. This will appear in
its due place; but in the Front, 'twas not so proper to disclose himself. The
Title is but a more formal kind of Bo-peep, -- a cousenage of the Reader into a
Two-penny expense, upon a thing not worth Three-ha'pence.

In the next page, you will find him more composed, and Magisterial. He
complements himself, Kisses his own fair Hand, -- Promises us an Honest, Plain,
Rational Discourse, not clogged with Maxims, or Examples; and then he falls to
the work upon the Question.

Whether Monarchy, or the Popular Form of Government, be in Reason more safe
and profitable for the People? [pag. 2.]

He proceeds thence, to Distinguish Monarchy into Absolute, and Mixed or
Regulated, [ibid.] (though, by his Favor, Mixed, implies a contradiction.)

The Absolute (he says) is Absolutely Unlawful; and disconsonant both to the
Laws of God and Nature

If either One, or the Other: How comes it then, that God himself, styles
NEBUCHADNEZZAR (the King of Babylon) HIS SERVANT: upon the most express, and
severe penalties imaginable, commanding an Obedience to him? What means the
Prophet David when he says -- The Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my
Master, THE LORDS ANOINTED? That Tyrants Life, which pursued his, was then at
his Mercy; and a Phanatique Counsel, at his Elbow, advising him, to improve the
Providential Opportunity of taking it away; (but our Common-Wealth's-men are
Wiser, possibly, and Honester, than David.) This might suffice; but He goes on,
and so shall I, to bear him Company. --

It is against the Moral Law, (he tells us) for me to dispose of my own life;
since that Law, which Commands me, not to kill; does certainly require me, not
to kill my self, and the Law of Nature and Nations, does warrant any man to
kill, rather than to be killed. But He, that willingly and of Choice, lives
under a monarchy absolute, must, and does submit all that he has, Life not
excepted, to be at the will of the Monarch, etc. [pag.]

What pains this worthy Gentleman takes, to prove himself as good a Statesman,
as he is a Casuist; Is not my Life as well exposed to any Government? Since
wheresoever you place the Rule, the last appeal lies There; and There Is the
power of Life and Death, by the Agreement of all Nations. Again, An absolute
Monarch must be wicked, to destroy a Loyal Subject* and if a Limited, will be
so Impious too, there is no Relief, but Flight. The right of self preservation,
which our Author Intimates; concerns but Individuals, at Liberty; -- Grotius
his Dissociatam Multitudinem. There, Every man is every Bodies Enemy: but when
we come to find, that safety, better secured by social Compact; and by
reducing all the several, and Dis-agreeing Particulars, under the Regiment of
some certain Laws directing to the Common benefit of all: In this Case, we
part with our Original Right, for the obtaining of a Nobler Good; -- Society,
and Order; without which, there is no Peace. I might here mind our Prevaricating
Author, of a Morality which he forgets, and that is Obedience. Rebellion is a
Blacker Crime, than Murder; for it is That, and More; but I would first
convince him, that Killing is not always Murder and that in many cases, a man
must rather choose to be Killed, than Kill. The Law strikes with the Sword of
Justice; and sure it is not Murder, by a Legal process, to destroy a
Malefactor. 'Twere That at least in me, to Kill the Judge, to save my self.
(But I suppose, our Author speaks his Interest, rather than his Opinion) In
fine, I cannot justify the Commission of a sin to save my Life. To draw my
Sword against my Prince although to save my self, in me, is Treason* but if I
lose my Life, by not opposing Him, it is He alone that is Criminal, I am
Innocent. Nor does the choice alter the Case one jot; if I may Obey an Absolute
Monarch, I am as free to choose One, where I am at Liberty to choose the Form I
would be governed by. It is the Rulers part, not to command amiss, and it is the
Subjects Duty to Obey; (modo nihil Imperet, Naturali Iuri, aut Divinis
praeceptis Contrarium) and at the worst; refuse, without Resisting.

Nay, but our Author tells us; -- A Free People, that have it in their choice,
and Power (as England now) to do otherwise, and shall submit their Lives to the
will, and dispose of an absolute Monarch, are most evidently thereby, in danger
of becoming guilty of self-Murther] [pag. 3]

Go thy ways N. D. for a profound Head piece! -- They are in more danger of
self-murder, in submitting to a Limited Monarch that is, of Hanging
themselves, if the King should come. Was there ever a more exorbitant Tyrant
than Cromwell? Our Freemen were content enough with him. Come: -- out wit, Our
modeller would speak, if he had a spoon, but the man is modest; I Will do it for
him. It Is this he would be at.

That we are now at Liberty to choose our Government; and that the King would
play the Tyrant, should he return. If his own Head does not sit sure. He may
thank himself. I would fain learn, from whence we date our Freedom. Who has
ABSOLVED us, of our OATHS, and DUTIES of ALLEGIANCE? Did we not swear to the
late King, and to his Heirs? And can a Government be altered, but by Consent of
all the Parties to it? This is too much said, upon a subject not properly my
Business. I Will proceed and wait upon him to his next Enquiry; and that is
concerning Regulated Monarchy; but so Embroyled, it is infinitely harder to
Understand than to confute. Of Regulated Monarchies, Ours here in England is
beholden to him, he likes that best, and gives his Reason, Thus; The Excellency
of that Monarchy, WAS, that the Monarch without his Counsel could do no
considerable thing.] [pag. 3.]

By his fair leave, the Excellency of the GOVERNMENT, he would have said: for
it is the Imperfection of the Monarchy. But why WAS? IS it not, de Iure, still
the same?

He prosecutes this Train of Errors, yet with more;

All things were to be done in conjunction with his Counsel; either that Grand
one, his Parliament, consisting of Nobles, and Commons; or his Lesser Counsel,
consisting of Nobles chiefly, etc.]

Our Author, I perceive, is willing to confound Counsel, and Authority:
Whereas to represent, is one thing; it is another thing to Judge. It is the
Counsell's duty to propose, and advise, according to their Reason, but still it
is the Monarch's part to Act according to his own: without that Freedom, the
Prince is bound to Act in many Cases against his Conscience; and his Assistants
are become his Governors. Not to insist upon the Gentleman's mistake, in
asserting All things to be done in conjunction with his Counsel. This is too
evident, to need a refutation. He spends his two next Pages, in dilating upon
the Desire of absolute Power in the Monarch; and the Reserves, or acquisitions
of the People; were he dashes the Kings Prerogative, and the Privileges of
Parliament, the One against the Other. Whereas the King has some Prerogatives
without a Parliament, but the Parliament has not so much as any Being, without
the King: (he being an essential of it.)

To pass over his False-fires, I shall come now to his main strength: And thus
it runs --

The Monarch cannot Rationally be thought to have other Business, or Study,
than to confirm, and establish the Monarchy to himself. [pag. 5.]

To this: First, He Is Entitled to the Government: (That, pro concesso) Next;
he is Entrusted, in Order to the Public Welfare, to Uphold it; and That, not
only in the Form, but to Himself: 'Twere to Betray his Trust, should he do less.

As to the appetite of Rule, which (as our Popular Champion will have it)
transports the Monarch, into a dangerous elevation above the People: -- That
Restless Impotency, is much more Hazzardous, in any other Government, than in
that of Monarchy. For, the Monarch's upper-most already: and rationally.
Ambition seeks rather to Raise it self above all others, than when it is at that
Height, still to exceed it self. It Is but a glorious envy, which aspires till
it be highest, and there determines.

As there is less temptation from without, so must the inclination, be much
calmer. Greatness is native and familiar to the Monarch: or, in case any
eagerness of Spirit should inflame him; It spends it self upon his Neighbors
liberties, rather than upon his Peoples: and it is extent of Empire abroad, not
enlargement of Prerogative at home, he covets.

This is not to exempt the Person of a Prince, from the frailties of a Man: he
may be vicious. But that too with less mischief to the public than to
Himself. He has no private aims, but what proceed from Principles nearer
allied to Kindness; then to Malice.

Now, to examine the likely Incidences to popular Government, and to proceed
upon his Postulatum, That in all men there is an inbred appetency of Power. That
granted, what can we expect from Persons of mean Fortunes, and extraction,
(invested with a title to Dominion) but Bondage, and Oppression? The short is,
there are many men, -- earnestly intent upon the same end; spurred on by keen
and craving Desires, to make themselves Rich, Great; and these design to raise
their Fortunes, and Reputations upon the public stock of blood and treasure.
At last when they have skrewed themselves up to that pitch of Power, by force,
and craft, where divine providence, by birth, had placed the single Person: --
when after a sharp, long, and chargeable contest, they have brought us within
view but of the counterfeit of what we quietly enjoyed before: Ready to seize
the sum of their own wishes; and the dearpurchas'd Fruit of all their Labors:
-- they find that point, which supports Sovereignty, too narrow for them all;
too large for any one of them; -- and, as they climbed together, so they fall;
-- crushed by those Hands, and Principles that raised them. We need not look
far Back for instances. What has obstructed our long look'd-for Settlement,
but Competitours for a personal rule; even among the Salus-populi-men
themselves? It Is nobler at the worst, to yield our selves to prey to a single
Lion, than to a Herd of Wolves: and that is the Difference, upon experiment,
betwixt the tyranny of One, and of a Hundred? ( -- old Oliver, and the Rump.)
Methinks it is a strange Confidence, to Argue for a Cause, confuted by the loss
so many Lives and Millions. For these twelve years last past, we have been
Slaves to Tyrants; Divided, in design to supplant one another, but still
United, to destroy the Nation, under the gay amusement of a Free State. But I
grow tedious.

The next thing I take notice of, is very remarkable (i. e.) Our Author's in
the right -- he says that From the Sovereignty, there lies no appeal. But then
he follows; that where a People will be ruled by a King they must give that
King absolute power to Govern.] [pag. 6.]

No need of that sure neither, -- the Sovereignty is in the King, though in a
Limited Monarchy: which so attemper'd; as that the People may not Rule in any
Case, nor the King, (singly by himself) in All; secures all Interests. I must
fix one note here, before I pass.

Although our Author tellsus, [ page 7.] that Absolute Monarchy is unlawful;
and Regulated, Dangerous: nevertheless, he rather advises the former than the
latter; -- That, which he terms Disconsonant to the Laws of God, than the
Other, which he pronounces only Dangerous, as related to the civil Good, and
Utillity of the People.

This is the Method of the whole party; they decry, first, the Form it self, as
being too Tyrannical; yet they condemn, the Limited of Insufficience, as to the
Exercise of Government; and the absolute, of Exorbitancy, as to the End of it.
One has too much Liberty the Other too Little. What is it they offer in
Exchange? a Free State; -- Of a Model, ten times more Arbitrary and Pernicious.
When they have spent their Powder upon the Government; (for it is but Powder)
their Shot is still directed to the Person. Hinc illae Lachrymae. How have they
courted the General, (whose Honesty, is as Invincible as his Courage) to
Accept of what these Paper-Kites so much disclaim against? Our Grave,
Philosophising Mounsieur, he makes one too, and tells us, -- that Providence
has cast the Lot upon the Peoples side, and the Monarch has lost, if the
People will exclude him. --

Alas Good man! the Congregation's Holy everyone of them -- Precious Beagles!
to ascribe that to Providence, which they owe to Perjury, and Sacrilege.
Where Is your Prescription? Where Is your Title? Enform the People, by what power
they are absolved from all their ties of Conscience: Honor, Thankfulness, and
Piety. Show them the Laws their Fathers purchased with their Bloods. Preach to
them out of Magna Charta. There Is the Foundation of the Peoples Freedoms. But
Sir I ask you pardon; The Kings a Woolf you say, and all the abjuring Saints
are Lambs, I warrant ye. But by your leave once more; you are absolutely of
Opinion then, not to admit the King by any manner of means? -- Indeed you
should do well, not to Anticipate the Parliament, it spoils the project, to
play the Tyrant, while you argue for the People. Pray let the King come in if
the next Parliament pleases. --

I must be now a little serious; for your next Paragraph has a spice of
Conscience in it (the Word I mean) you will persuade the World, that if the King
comes in; it is neither Faith, nor Honor, nor Humanity, nor all together, can
tie up his Revenge. It would become you to tell the People, where ere he brake
his Faith; Nay, Ill content my self, if youll but show me, where ever your
Phanatiques Kept an Oath, or Promise, if they might gain (the least) by
Breaking of it. The Conversation of the Person you inveigh against is beyound
all Exception, Honorable: and it is in vain to mis-enform, against an evident
and contrary assurance. Many of those very men that fought against him, will
witness for him: both for his Courage, and his Clemency. His Prudence, and his
Piety, are manifest, in This: that in despite of all Distresses, and
Temptations, he stands Firm, to his Temper, and to his Conscience. A Better
Friend, there lives not; nor a Better Nature. And this is Heat last, our Guilty
Pamphletter bestows his Gall upon. I am no stickler for Prerogative: my
Patience, will hold out till the next Session: but to see Majesty invaded by a
private Hand, -- the People Poisoned, by the same instruments that destroyed
the Prince, -- all I can say is, we are tame Fools, to suffer it. But though
his passion may be Troublesome, our Author gives us some Diversion in his
Argument, and (Kinder still) he proves best Company at last. Kingly Government
if not absolute, (he says) is Lame; if Absolute, -- Destructive to the People.
Very good: Help the Defect, (if that be all) of the One; or at least, do not
impose upon us, in another shape, the possible Mischiefs of the Other -- pray
what is the Difference, as to our Security; the Supreme Authority under a Popular
Form, or the same power under a Monarchique? You Will have your Popular Assembly,
the Judge Unquestionable of all Expediences, and Dangers: why not a Single
Person as well? You say, He may abuse that power; and I say so may They. For
instance, suppose they judge it fit to change the very Form, what Hinders them?
or if they rather choose, to entayl the Government upon their own Families, and
to perpetuate themselves, what Remedy? If any, they are not Absolute: if none,
we are worse Here, than Before. The King cannot Betray the Peoples Trust; these
may.

What signifies your telling us, that the King absolute, is not bound to the
Laws he shall make? [pag. 9.] And by and by, -- that contrary to the Monarchy,
this, (meaning Democracy) makes not any one Law, to which every individual
person in the Assembly, is not subject? (the whole Assembly indeed, as it is
the Sovereign power, is unquestionable, you say.) It Is not the Persons, but the
Power, we are to consider; Conjunctim, they are as little subject as the single
Tyrant; and possibly they will never dis-joyn, they that can make what Laws they
please, will doubtless make this one of the number, -- that their own Members
shall be only tryable by their Peers: and by that device, they make themselves
both Parties and Judges.

To grant more then is needful; -- be it -- that in a State of Quiet, and
Universal liberty, such a Form might be admitted, as our Contriver thrusts upon
us; but to attempt to force a Government, that excludes nineteen parts of
twenty of the people, from the exercise of it; and this upon a Nation
pre-engaged by Oath, and (by a sad experience) interessed against it. -- -- How
practicable, or how prudent, such a proposal may appear to others, I cannot
say: To me it wears the Face of a Design, promoted by a Factious, guilty Party,
to sacrifice the Nation, to their private interests, and despayres.

And yet such is the charity of our Author, he reckons all the miscarriages of
these late years in Government, but as foul way upon a Journey: and bids us not
conclude against our Inn at Night because the passage was dirty. (This is
according to his wonted tenderness.)

Now to my Phansy, it looks rather thus. We have been hitherto misled; our
very Guides have robbed us, and yet they bid us follow them still, they will
bring us to Paradise at last, -- Whither they will carry us, we know not; -- we
are in the Briars at present; -- we know the way home again; -- what have we
then to do, but to return?

Our Authors little Reasonings concerning Trade, are trivial; I shall refer
him to the Merchants for his Answer. They are the fittest Judges in the Case.
They have tried war, and peace, Monarchy, and Popular Government; let them say
which they like best. -- -- His Pen begins to run a little muddy: and what I do
not understand, I Am not obliged to answer. Something he talks of Peace abroad,
and of the motives to it; which he pronounces to be Advantage and no Body
denies it.

This does not hinder, -- because the Reasons of the Peace betwixt the Crowns
of France and Spain, might properly result from a Particular Convenience of
State betwixt them, that therefore the effects of that Agreement cannot referr
to Us. They Are more at Leisure now: nay there is a high necessity incumbent upon
them, to send abroad those Forces, which otherwise would be both Expensive, and
Dangerous at Home (Not to press other arguments, of themselves obvious, to
hasten our Composure, even for that very Cause; that they are Agreed.)

I presume not to direct, as our Imperious Commonwealths-man does; but as one
Private Person, I pretend to Reason the Opinions of another, submitting still
my Judgment to any Legal determination, or Rational Conviction.

Touching the King of Spains Design to Propagate the Romish Religion [Ibid.] --
we are the securer for that very design, if we unite upon the Basis of the
English Law: The mere Antiperistasis preserves us: whereas, If we compel that
Person, who by Divine Assignment, and Civil right, is our undoubted Sovereign;
to employ Foreign Succors to recover his Dominions; It may be feared, (and
it is but Reason) that Spain will Article for some concessions, in favor of the
Catholics, more then otherwise would, possibly, be granted to them: where the
Fault lies, in case of this extremity, let the People Judge. --

Bless us, -- what a Fit of Piety has taken our Friend, now of a sudden! He
calls in the Ministers, for his Compurgators, and desires them to declare --
what Government. (He Will feed their Flocks in the mean while.) Indeed, these
Pulpit-Politiques are not amiss. The Priests shall tell us what Government
fits their Reformation. Pray Sir, let me help you out; -- a Gloss upon the
Covenant, does your Business: it is but to tell the people, that in the Holy
Tongue, KING, signifies COMMONWEALTH, and the work is done.

The Gentleman, begins now to Fumble, and Talk Idle; and, in effect, he is
drawing home. But first he recommends the Nurcery and Education of his
Brat-project, even unto any Kind and Powerful hand that will promote it. From
hence he passes into a Quaint Resemblance of the state of the Nation, to a man
in a feavour, and the People in Gross, to a Restive Horse with a Galled Back:
and so committing the issue to the Lord, the man Departs.

His thoughts, and mine do not agree; what ere the matter is. His Conceit is
this, The Nation's mad; and Promoted by false appetite, covets things
Mischievous; (that is, Monarchy) the wise and Charitatable Physician, (that is
the Commonwealths man,) he forces upon it what he knows to be more proper for
the Cure, (and this is a Free State) -- Now here is our difference.

I Am of opinion, that the Physicians are mad; the Nation sober, we have tried
their Physic, for some dozen years together; and every day we are worse then
other upon it; we find upon Experiment, that they prescribe us Poison, instead
of Remedies, and that they are but Mountebanks; they Live by Killing us. Our
Former Diet agreed much better with our Constitution, so that we have no way
left but to fall to That again.

But to conclude; -- his conceit of a Iadish People with a Galled Back, That Is
his Masterpiece. He tells us, it will neither suffer a Rider, nor a Dressing,
till it be overcome by Force, and then a Child may up, and Ride it.

These are somewhat broad signs. Now by your favor, Sir, the Faults not in the
Horse; but rather in the Rider, and the Saddle. The Nation has been Ridden
these dozen years together, at Switch, and Spur, in a Commonwealth Saddle; That
must needs pinch the Back of a Monarchique People. -- Nor is it yet so tame, as
you imagine; Change but the SADDLE, and the RIDER, and you shall see the Nation
will do well, without a Horsleech.

March. 27. 1660.


UPon the neck of this, came out Two sharper Pamphlets; written, (as I am of
late Informed) by a Renegado Parson; but as then, I took them to be either
Nedham's, or Miltons, (a Couple of Currs of the same Pack) They were Printed by
Livewell Chapman, and a Proclamation from the Counsel was issued out against
him for it, to which he never appeared. I was by many Reasons moved to Answer
these; as well to lay them Open, and Confute them, as to prevent the Possible
exception that might arise from a Reply by some less wary, though more skillful
pen.

The malice of these Pamphlets was Double-edged; and the Blow made at the Kings
Party over the Presbyterians Shoulder: Directed to persuade the World that
'twas the Presbyterian did the Mischief; and to engage the Presbyter himself
under an Apprehension of Revenge. The scope will better appear upon the
Reading, and whether I did Well, or Ill, to write these following Answers.
Plain English, TO HIS EXCELLENCY The LORD GENERAL MONK, AND The OFFICERS of
the ARMY under his COMMAND.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
IT is written, The prudent shall keep silence in an evil time; and it is like,
we also might hold our peace, but that we fear a knife is at the very throat,
not only of our and your Liberties, but of our persons too. In this condition,
we hope it will be no offense, if we cry out to you for help, you that (through
Gods goodness) have helped us so often, and strenuously maintained the same
Cause with us, against the return of that Family which pretends to the
Government of these Nations. It is the pulick interest and yours, that we
hitherto fought for, and for which we now plead; therefore we insist upon it
with the greater confidence before you, because we are all equally concerned in
the good or ill of your transactions: We cannot yet be persuaded, though our
fears and jealousies are strong, and the grounds of them many, that you can so
lull asleep your Consciences, or forget the public Interest, and your own, as
to be returning back with the multitude to Egypt, or that you should with them
be hankering after the Lecks and Onions of our old bondage. Though it were
possible you should forget, yet certainly God will not, all the injuries and
oppressions done by that family to his Church and people in these and other
Nations: Though the Inscription [Exit Tyrannus] which was fixed over the place
where the Statue of the late King formerly stood at the Exchange, has been
blotted out by the Rabble, yet it is written with the Pen of a Diamond in the
hearts of many thousands, and will be so hereafter in the adamantine Rolls of
Fame and History. No matter then, though the profane Vulgar take a liberty to
proclaim him both Saint and Martyr in the midst of their Bon-fires, and their
Tipple. All the good fellows were ever at his Devotion, because he was for
theirs, and commanded it to be observed upon the Sundaies. But to the end it
may be better known how good a King, and how great a Saint he was, we have
taken the boldness at this instant to offer you an account of some part of the
transactions during his Reign: and because there are too many in the City who
wait the good time to re-erect his Statue, we desire in the first place to
present you his Picture, as it was drawn by a good hand, the Parliament, in the
year 1647. at which time it was resolved upon the Question jointly by the Lords
and Commons in Parliament Assembled. That they would make no further Addresses
or Applications to the King, or receive any Message from him.

ANSWER.
SOme two days since, came to my view, a Bold, Sharp Pamphlet, called PLAIN
ENGLISH -- directed to the GENERAL, and his OFFICERS, etc. --

It is a Piece drawn by no fool, and it deserves a serious Answer. -- By the
Design; -- the Subject; -- Malice, and the Style; I should suspect it for a
Blot of the same Pen that wrote ICONOCLASTES. It runs foul; -- tends to Tumult;
-- and, not content Barely to Applaud the Murder of the King, the execrable
Author of it vomits upon his Ashes; with a Pedantique, and Envenomed scorn,
persuing still his sacred Memory. Betwixt Him, and his Brother Rabshakeh, I
think a man may venture to divide the glory of it; it relishes the mixture of
their united faculties, and wickedness. As yet, it is true; the Hand is somewhat
doubtful to us; but the Drift, -- Certain, and it is as Clear from whence it
first moved, as to what end it tends, it speaks the Rancour, and the interest
of the Rump; be the contrivance whose it will; and, beyond doubt, it was
written by some Mercenary to the Faction; and That, by their direction, and
appointment. It Is too Malicious, for a private Passion; and too Dangerous, for
one that writes not, either for Bread, or Life. Take it in gross; it is an Alarm
to all the Phanatiques in England; couched under the specious notion of an
Appeal to the General, and his Army, asserting to all purposes, the interests;
and Justifying the horrid Practices of the Regicide-Party. --

It Remonstrates; -- Expostulates; -- Tempts; -- Threatens; -- Flatters; --
Begs; -- Prevaricates: and by all Artifices, toward all Humors, it moulds it
self into an application suitable: -- only upon the Blood, and Family of the
late King; it lashes out into an Impious, and Inhumane fury, sufficient to
Disgrace, the Sober (in comparison) promoters of his Death; and to Startle
their very Consciences, that spilt his Blood with Pleasure.

Nor does the Brutish Rebel only quit the Man, in point of Tenderness; his rage
against the Royal Line, disturbs his Reason too. (otherwise smooth enough to
delude such as are not very well aware of him) Whether it be the Agony, and
Horror of a Wounded Soul, which thus transports him; or that, in these
excesses, he only Personates the last Convulsions of a Heart-broken Faction; --
It matters not: Thus much we may collect from his distempers; That Rabble is,
at this instant, upon a Combination, to Tumultuate the Army, and the People,
and such as will not share the Guilt of their Conspiracy, they labor to engage
within the Reach and Danger of it. That we may better understand what they
Design, we will see a little what they Say.

This Phamphlet speaks the sense of the whole Gang; and thoroughly Examined,
will discover the frame, and the extent of of their lewd Purposes.

I look upon it as an Affront to Christianity, and to Reasonable Nature; so
scandalous; I vow to God, in Favor merely of Humanity, I would suppress it,
were no more Copies extant of it: but it is too late for that. The Countries are
already furnished; and the Town yet full of them; (the singular, and carely
care of the Public Magistrate to hinder it notwithstanding) so that it rests
now, only to lay open the vile interests of this bloody Faction, and Antidote
the People against the danger of their Pestilent Infusions. Let Time produce
the Author; (if it be lawful to Profane the Light with such a Monster) The
Matter only of this Licentious Paper must be my Subject.

IF we must never be quiet, til these People think themselves Safe, we must
stay till divine Justice is dissolved; -- till they believe the word, and Power
of God, a Fable; -- till they can Lay that Devil, Conscience; -- and Blot out
of the Table of their Memories, all their Presumptuous outrages, both against
Heaven and Earth; -- till they can Quench those raging Horrors that Exagitate
their Souls; -- Remove those hideous Fantomes, (that whereso'ere they fly)
pursue them, with the images of those that they have murdered, Bleeding
afresh* and when they think to Turn away their Looks from the Dire object, to
the other side, they meet with a Remembrancer, that minds them of their
Sacrilege, and Treason, and then they start again, another way; and there they
meet with a Sword drawn, to revenge their Perjuries. In fine, their Injuries
are of a large extent, and such, by consequence, must be their fears (while
they persist in their Impenitence.

In this distress, rather of Thought, than Danger; of Terror from within,
rather than Violence, without; They do well, to implore the Generals help, to
save their Lives, that would have taken His: especially, obliging him (in
Surplus) with this additional respect: That they have made him Free of the
Phanatiques; -- Embarked him in the same Bottom with themselves; -- and
Finally, Involved the Honor, and the Saver of his Country, in common, with
the Blemish, and the Pest of all mankind.

Say, -- MILTON; NEDHAM; either, or both, of you (or whosoever else) -- Say
where this Worthy Person, ever mixed with you? (That is; You, -- or those that
Employ you, and allow you wages) more, then in order to those very purposes, to
which he still adheres, and from whence, you recede.

The return of that Family, which Pretends [as this Tumbler phrases it] to
Govern us, nor was nor is the Question. The public interest, that he fought
for, and you swore to: -- was the Preserving of our BIRTHRIGHTS: -- the good
old LAWS: -- his MAJESTY'S LEGAL AUTHORITY: -- the PRIVILEGES of PARLIAMENT,
etc. -- ( Read the Old Declarations) not to maintain a Canting Faction in the
Army; -- a Py-bald Ministry: -- or, which amounts to all: -- the Residence: --
the Errata's of an Honest Parliament.

Again, to comply fairly with an Universal Votes; -- That, does our Scribler
call forgetting of a public Interest; and keeping of the Covenant, or an
Oath, is, with him lulling of a Man's conscience asleep. A desire to be well
again, after a Cursed fit of the Spleen (and plied with steel too) of well-nigh
Twenty years continuance, -- our Demy-Levite, -- terms it a Hankering after our
old Leeks and Onions. For that, -- Every man as he likes: you're for a Rump, it
maybe. -- I Am for somewhat else. Believe me, I had rather Live poor, and
Honest; than Hang Rich; and Treacherous: -- then give my self a turn in one of
the King's old Houses. But -- De Gustibus, non est Disputandum. I Am sorry my
first Page is Printed. -- I shall be thought a Fool now, for suspecting our
Plain-English-man, of Wit. Something there is in his vein, like bottle Ale. Stir
it; -- It Tumults, Sputters and at last it spends it self in Foam, -- but
Nourishment, or Comfort there is none in it. -- The Fellows Jadish, Dull, -- out
of his Beaten and Known Rode; but when he comes to rail against the King, he is
in his Element. There, he is a Thorough-pac'd, Egregious villain: and yet a
Stumbler; but a false step or two may be allowed him.

This Formal Devil, -- how great an honor does he to the Royal Family, in his
reviling of it! -- The Injuries and Oppressions it has done to Church, and
People, trouble him sore. The Blotting out of -- EXITTYRANNUS, sticks in his
stomach too, but, though the Statues gone, the story shall stand firm, there
lies his Consolation.

Audacious Brute, (the Blot, and the Deformity of Humane Race.) During the
War, the Nation lay oppressed under the Common fate of an Intestine Broyl. The
Quarrel was disputed both with Pens and weapons, doubtfully, as to the Vulgar;
-- among the wiser sort, some steered their course by Interest, or Passion;
others resigned themselves, (abstracted from all other thoughts) to what they
reckoned Piety, and reason. (Thus far the Burden seems divided. After this the
King is made a Prisoner, and his Party sunk, now I Demand; Who has oppressed us
since, but those that Swore till then, they fought to save us? If we look back
beyond the War, our Mischief there was, that we were better fed than taught.
We were Rich, Wanton, and Rebellious.

But I begin to waver in my undertaking, -- I find I have a Wolf to deal with,
not a Man; That preys upon the Dead. A Devil! -- whose Business is to break the
Bonds of Unity and Order, and to Calumniate Virtue. Nor does it serve him; the
bare Murder of his Master, [as it does other beasts of Rapine, that leave the
Carcass, when they have sucked the Blood] This wretch must descant, and
Rhetoricate upon his Ashes, with an Audacious Petulancy: -- Make Providence it
self a Complicate; and with a Comique sawcyness, Place or Displace; -- in
Heaven, or Hell as his Luxuriant Humor pleases.

BRADSHAW, these Villains rank among the Heroes; (and he deserves a Saints
place in their Calendar) -- a man, of whom we dare not barely hope well, so
enormous was his life, and so Conform, his Obstination in that lewdness to his
Death.

Whereas, that glorious Creature, that Dyed the object of this Monsters
insolence, and Rage, that innocently suffered, what that Pageant-President as
vilely acted: -- that with a Primitive patience, Piety, Constancy, and
Resignation, endured the scorns, the injuries, and persecutions of his own
Subjects, and at the the last, received his Death, from their very hands, in
whose behalf he Dyed.

This Saint and Martyr, [BOTH; beyond Controversy, so far as we can Judge] is
by our Charitable intelligencer Enrolled in the Black List, -- Charged with
Indevotion and Intemperance; so as was our Savior a Wine-bibber, a haunter too
of Publicans and Sinners: -- to whose Inimitable example, [ I speak with
Reverence, to God and Truth] both in his life, and suffering, I do believe, the
story of our Late Sovereign, bears the nearest proportion of all others. -- But
it is amid their Bon-fires, and their Tipple [this Miscreant tells us] that he is
Canonized; -- and that his Majesty commanded Drinking as a Sunday exercise. The
World that knew the King, knows this to be a Lie, [but it is our Mercuries Trade;
-- it is his Diana to amplyfie a little for the Public good] it is true, there
were some Liberties upon the Sabbath, which being mis-employed, were
counter-manded. (How does this scandal both of Providence, and Society, escape
Thunder, or a Dagger!

We shall now have the story of our King and Saint: (he says) and to usher in
the erection of his Statue, his Picture first, -- drawn by the PARLIAMENT in
1647. (as our libellous Pamphletter would persuade us) when the Vote passed
both by Lords and Commons, concerning Non-Addresses. I should be tedious to
reply upon every particular in the Declaration he talks of: But as to what
concerns the needful, and the proper Vindication of his Majesty; together with
those worthy Members, whom this seditious Rump-whelp labors to involve in the
same desperate and exorbitant proceedings with his ungracious Masters, -- In
what concerns, I say, their Vindication, I shall be clear and punctual;
leaving the Judgment of the Controversy, to the Impartial Reader.

WE revive this the rather, (says he) because the memory of Men being frail,
cannot retain all particulars; which is the reason (we fear) why so many
formerly engaged against him as high as any, upon conscientious accounts, both
Religious and Civil, are staggering and backsliding, and have need of some
quick and faithful Monitor to mind them of things past, and make them beware
of the present, lest they return with the Rout, and cry, Let us make our selves
a King again of that Family; that Family which so cruelly persecuted us and our
Brethren, and which still remains engaged by reason of State, and ancient
Principles of Enmity and Interest, to plow up the old Furrows upon our backs,
and re-deliver our persons and consciences into the hands of our old
Tormenters; and our Men of might, and our Counselors, to become sacrifices to
the revenge of an implacable party. March on then, (my Lord and Gentlemen,) for
believe it, there is in point of Safety no possibility of retreat, and much
less in point of Conscience or Honor; For, if you respect Conscience, (as we
hope you do) lay your hands upon your hearts, and tell us what hope you or we
can have, that the reformed Religion and Cause will be protected and maintained
by the Son, which was so irreligiously betrayed both at home and abroad by the
Father. It may be you do not readily remember these things, nor how much blood
was spilt by royal treachery, nor the manifold usurpations and designs by him
projected and acted upon our liberty, the like never done by any Prince before:
and for Blood, the Scottish Ministers employed hither Anno 1644. proclaimed and
published in Print, That the Late King had spilt more blood than was shed in
the ten Heathen Persecutions of the Christians: and the Ministers of London,
(as we can show you by several Prints of theirs) declared, That satisfaction
ought to be had for blood; that he was a Man of blood, and not capable of
accommodation with the Parliament. We mention not this to upbraid them; for, we
reverence their ancient Zeal in this particular, and humbly entreat them, as
well as your Excellency, and the Officers, and all the good people of these
Nations, to observe the forementioned Resolves of the Lords and Commons, which
were introductory to that most noble Act of Justice afterward executed upon
the King.

And that it may appear to be such; in despite of Ignorance and envy, we have
been bold here to present you in Print that most remarkable Declaration of the
Commons assembled in Parliament, in pursuance of the said Resolve of both
Houses, wherein they declare the Grounds and Reasons why they passed the
Resolves of no further Address, and therein you will see also, how well he
deserved to lose his head, and his Family the Kingdom; whose corrupt and
irreconcilable interest had been the head and fountain of those Rivers of blood
and misery which had flowed so many years about these Nations.



TO help the memories of some, that may very well forget the things they never
thought of; and to reproach to others, their inconstancy, who, out of good
intent at first engaged, and after That, convinced of their Original mistake,
upon a better Light, relinquished; there needs no better Monitor, than such a
Person, whose Guilt and Desperation, transport him beyond all hopes of mercy;
-- This Man sollicites for his Head, when under the pretext of Conscience, he
labors for a Party: and yet methinks he should not need. Alas! he is but the
Rump's Solicitor, he pleads their Cause, takes their Fee, and vanishes.
Impudent Creature, to presume to be afraid; as if a Hangman would disgrace
himself to meddle with him! O'h that Family That Family, puzzles our Men of
Might, [as the Droll words it!] our Counselors wonderfully.

Now do I fancy the Fellow, this Bout, extremely: to see the Little Agitatour
fall upon his Politiques, betwixt flattery, and sawcyness, Half-Tutor, and
Half-Parasite, with one eye up, and the other down, accost the General. --

My Lord, and Gentiemen, march on; [the word of Command; a Noble Rogue] for
believe it, etc. -- their's no retreat, he tells them, either in point of
safety, conscience, or honout, -- and then the Whelp takes another snap at the
King: as shamelesly, as senselesly, affirming, that the Reformed Religion,
[that is, [as I suppose he means] the Protestant] and Cause, [that is, the
Peoples Laws and Liberties] was irreligiously betrayed by our late Sovereign.
[Who lost his head in defense of one, and th'other] the Caution he puts in
against the Son is of the same allay, a Person, so indulgent to his People,
that out of his particular Necessities, he yet relieved the English prisoners
that were taken in Flanders; although his Enemies; and, in point of Conscience,
further, so tender, that he preserves the Church of England in the Dominions of
the King of Spain: and still, his Honor, with his Religion. But let us a
little examine his Instances, for he pretends now to proceed to proofs.

The Scotich Ministers (as he tells us) proclaimed, and published in 1644. That
the late King had spilt more blood than was shed in the Ten Persecutions of the
Christians, -- and the Ministers of London declared him a Man of blood, etc. --
(That is, the High Priests, and Officers, cried out, saying, Crucify him,
Crucify him.) [That's the Original.] But to come closer to the Business, the
Scotich, and the Scotch Ministers, are a clear different thing. Scotich,
denotes the Ancient Faction of the Nation, [No Favorers of Kings,] and Scotch,
relates to their Nativity alone, abstracted from the Party.

First, they were Arglyes Creatures, selected to promote Arglyes designs: So,
not the Ministry of Scotland, but a Pack of Scottish Ministers.

Next, of no more Authority to the Rump, against the King, than to the Nation,
against the Rump, [in which they are as much unsatisfied.]

The Ministers of London, did as much, he says. That Is something truly; till
we consider what those Ministers were, and by whom, placed, and molded, for
that purpose.

Mrashall was the prime person in the Agency betwixt the two Nations; -- He,
that cursed MEROZ; He, that was sent Commissioner into Scotland; taught them
their Lesson there, and then returning, taught some of our reputative Divines
to fing the same Tune, Here. -- This is the Man, that closed with Nigh, when
Presbytery went down; and carried the 4. Bills to the King, at
Carisbrock-Castle, for which, they had 500l. apiece. I could tell you of some
more of the Gang, that, under question for confederacy with Love, after a due
formality of seeking God, delivered, as upon account of Inspiration, that
Oliver Protector was the person; and his the Government, of all that ever
were, or should be, the most agreeable to God.

This is not, to lessen the esteem of Holy Orders; neither to fix a rash,
irreverend Censure upon the Ministry: No Man reveres the Character of a
Churchman more than my self. But it is to show the World, how much our
Pamphlet-Merchand is steered, by Interest, and Passion, and how little, by
Reason, and Truth.

The grinning Whelp, now, betwixt snarling, and fawning, would fain persuade
the General, and his Officers, and all the world beside] that the Resolve of
Non-Addresses, by the Lords and Commons, was introductive to the MURDER of the
King. Murder, I say, that is the Plain English of what he styles -- A MOST
NOBLE ACT OF JUSTICE; His Method lies through direct Contradictions to the
Universal Rules, of Logique, Truthand Honesty.

By this Insinuation, he charges that Exorbitance upon the two Houses, and
draws an inference, from the Impardonable Quality of that Action, to the
Necessity and Reason of pursuing it. This, he pretends to make appear, in
spite of Ignorance, and Envy, from the Commons Declaration, in persuance of
the resolve of Both Houses, containing the Reasons, why no further Address; and
thence, proceeds to a Determination upon the Fathers Life, and the Son's
Inheritance; -- as positively fixing upon the Kings Account, those Plagues this
Nation has endured; as if the Graceless Villain were of Counsel with the
Eternal Wisdom.

I shall observe in order, and First, I Will prove that the vote of Non-Address,
was not properly an Act of the two Houses; or if it were so, that it did not
rationally direct to the Kings Life.

Secondly. That Declaration of the Commons, (SINGLY) declaring the Reasons of
the resolve of Both Houses (Jointly) does not amount eitheir to a
justification, or intention of taking the Kings life, -- No not though I should
grant the Members Free, -- which I cannot; and the Authority Full: which I do
not. -- To the First. --

They were under a Force. -- Upon a Debate in the Commons House, concerning the
Answer to the 4. Bills, presented to him Dec. 24. 1647. and debated, Ian. 3.
Commissary Ireton delivered himself after this manner.

The King has denied safety, and protection to his People by denying the 4.
Bills, that subjection to him, was but in lieu of his protection to his People;
this being denied, they might well deny any more subjection to him, and settle
the Kingdom without him: That it was now expected, after so long patience, they
should show their Resolution, and not desert those valiant men who had engaged
for them, beyond all possibility of retreat, and would never forsake the
Parliament, unless the Parliament forfook them first.

From hence naturally results the menace of the Army, in case the Parliament
should forsake them; and Ireton understood the Souldjery too well to mistake
them. --

As yet; here is nothing Capital pretended against the King.

After some more debate CROMWELL urged, -- that it was now expected, the
Parliament should govern and defend the Kingdom, by their Own Power and
Resolutions; and not teach the People any longer, to expect safety and
Government from an Obstinate man, whose heart God had hardened: That those men,
who had defended the Parliament, from so many dangers, with the expense of
their Blood; would defend them herein with Fidelity, and Courage, against all
Opposition. Teach them not by neglecting your Own, and the Kingdoms safety, in
which their own is involved, to think themselves betrayed, and left hereafter
to the Rage, and malice of an irreconcilable enemy, whom they have subdued for
your sake; and therefore are likely to find his future Government of them
insupportable; and fuller of Revenge then Justice: Nota -- lest Despayr Teach
them to seek their safety by some other means than adhearing to you, -- who
will not stick to your selves; how destructive such a Resolution in them will
be to you all, I tremble to think and leave you to Judge.

This Speech, concluded the debate; and the better to Impress his meaning, he
laid his hand upon his sword, at the end of it. If this be not a Force, what
is? The Power and Inclination of the Army, being the only moving Arguments to
obtain the Vote. The Question was then put, and Carried for no more Addresses.
-- But no pretense still that extends to Life.

I shall appeal now to the Declaration it self; to which our Regicidall Babbler
refers the world for satisfaction.

First, the Sectarians had stolen a Vote, Ian. 4. to Engarrison Whitehall, and
the Mews: (the Lords not mentioned in the case) their manner of obtaining it,
was this. 'Twas Noon, and the Independent party called to Rise. The
Presbyterians went their ways to Dinner: the Independents staid and did their
business.

The Lords opposed the vote for Non-Addresse; (10. to 10.) but the Engagement
of the Army, cast it, who sent a Declararation to the Commons of thanks for
their 4. Votes against the King, engaging to defend them with their Lives, etc.
-- Is this a Force yet?

Soon after this; comes forth a Declaration, and Reasons, etc. Drawn by a
Committee apppointed, by the Independents, etc. So that even That too, was a
piece, Contrived by the Designers of our Mischief, and by a Force, Extorted
from the Sober rest, that would have saved us. This appears, from the interpose
of the Presbyterians, to moderate the Eagerness of it, upon the debate. The
last 4. lines of the said Declaration will be sufficient to stop the mouth of
any Reasonable person, as to the point of life; (even without the Violence;
which undenyably produced the rest.) After an Enumeration of diverse
particulars objected against the King, The Declaration concludes thus.

These are some few, of the many Reasons why we cannot repose any more Trust in
him, and have made those former Resolutions; (meaning the 4. Votes concerning
Non-Addresses) yet we shall use our utmost Endeavors, to settle the present
Government, as may best stand with the Peace, and Happiness of this Kingdom.

This very Declaration touches not his life; it is not said, settle A present
Govenment, but THE --; (relating properly to an Amendment, not an Abolition)

Considering the Grammar of it; I do not wonder much, at a Compliance; in some
Measure, to an indecency, in order to prevent a greater Ill, that threatened
Them, and Us: and That, was their design; for when it came at Last to the
Result of Life, and Death, (as then 'twas evident, it amounted to no less)
those Gentlemen, whom the Author of Plain English would willingly engage, as
Complicates, -- those Gentlemen, I say, did then oppose themselves, against the
Murtherous Faction, and voted for a Treaty, Dec. 4. Upon the 6. they were
Imprisoned, and Affronted by the Army for their pains. -- When the more
moderate Party, was removed, the Rest were left at Liberty to consummate the
Kingdoms Ruin, and their own Damnation.

Come I Will go further with the angry man; -- put case, these Gentlemen had gone
yet forward; and dipped as deep as he could wish they had. Frailty is an
inseparable from our nature. It Is Humane to Transgress; -- It Is Christian to
forgive, and it is our Interest to Repent. He that Delivers me by Design, though
but from that misfortune which he himself engaged me in upon Mistake; -- he is
so far from any Reason to apprehend my Revenge, he has a Title to my Kindness:
but our incorrigible MONITOR, sets up his Rest upon a Final, Reprobated,
Impenitence.

I have been Tedious, out of a desire to be Clear: but I shall hasten and
contract as much as possible.

Having already proved the Declaration (of the Reasons why no more Addresses)
to have been an evident contrivance of the Independent Faction, in the very
frame of it; and published, while the Army stood to dare, and Overawe the
Sober Party, that was likely to oppose it; I do not hold my self concerned, in
any further notice of the Particulars therein Contained; and which our
Challenger produces, as an unanswerable eviction, that the Late King and his
Family, deserved Death, and extirpation (as by and by, he tells you) -- Yet
something shall be said, even to his Queries, thence extracted, (in due place;)
but I must first unvail him to the people; and that, by laying open the Dilemna
he proceeds upon. -- He reasons Thus,

My business (says he to himself) must be to hinder an Agreement with the
King. The Presbyterian party (I Am afraid) enclines to it. If he return, we are
Lost: My own Soul tells me, we have sinned without Remission, and yet I see no
way to hinder it neither. The nation is United against us; the Presbyterian
abhorrs us, as much as the Royal party does; and the Army it self, begins to
declare it self our Enemy. What Is to be done, must be both Quick, and Home.
These Six ways lie before us.

First, the Army must be wrought into a Tumult.

Secondly, The Presbyterian must be Right or Wrong, involved with us in Guilt,
and consequently in danger. They must be made to share in the Blood of the
Father, and in the Detestation of the Son, and be possessed, that there can be
no safety to Them, but in a common interest with our selves. To this end, we
may forge Letters from Brussels, Suborn Witnesses to swear the King a Papist,
etc.

Thirdly, The Cavalier must be persuaded, that the Presbyter only designs, to
set up for himself; and Arguments drawn from bypast, and mistaken Failings
upon promise, to beget a Jealousy. The inconsistency of Episcopal, with
Presbyterian Principles must be objected, etc.

Fourthly, All Persons interessed in Estates, got by the War, must be engaged,
for fear of losing them.

Fifthly, The General himself, must be solicited to take the Government upon
him; Promises urged; no matter whether real or false: If this will not do, advise
him, as a Friend, to have a care of the City; and bid the City look to him.
Perplex them both; We'll confound all the World, rather then perish.

Lastly, We may publish the Declaration, of the Reasons, for no further
Addresses: and try, if that way, we can either make a Party among themselves,
or with the People. We may so bring it in, it shall be dangerous to reply upon,
for fear of disobliging, and as unsafe to let alone, for fear of seducing.
Here Is the Dilemma; It will be answered, or it will not; if it be 'twill
startle the Presbyterian; if otherwise, 'twill puzzle the People. [I wish our
Common Enemy would go this open way to work.]

Here Is the true State and Method of our Adversaries Thoughts, and Actions. Now
to his Quaeres, wherein I shall be tender, how I revive Disputes, either
unkind, or unseasonable; and yet not wanting to my undertaking, that is, my
undertaking to make Evident, that his Foundation is Sandy, and the Entire
Structure composed of Rotten Materials. I Will take his -- (what shall I call
them?) Suppositions, -- Objections, Questions, -- (or call them what you will)
one by one, and reply upon them in his own Order. Here he begins, WOuld you see
how and by whom the Irish Rebellion began, and upon whose score those
unparalled barbarous Massacres of hundreds of thousands of the Protestants in
Ireband, do lie?



NO, we would not see How. We question not, but you would be kind enough to show
us; and cut our Throats here just as those Rebels did their Fellow subjects
there. (For an Irish Rebel, is but the Anagram of an English Phanatique.)

By whom now, is another Question, and a Harder. Beshrew me, it is a Peevish
point. Why -- the Irish Rebellion, began, by the Irish Rebels: as the English
Rebellion, did by the English Rebels. I hope Commotions in Ireland are no
Miracles; nor is it needful to assign them any other reason, than the Humor
of the People? -- Yet I Will be civil to you. I speak my Soul, I do believe, the
Irish Catholics in that Rebellion which you point at, took flame at the
Severity they apprehended, from some extraordinary Declarations against them
here, previous to their Rebellion.

This I must add further, the King, (for'tis at Him, our Author's malice
strikes) at his return from Scotland, did earnestly, and particularly recommend
the care of Ireland to both Houses, in his speech, Dec, 2d. 1641. upon the
14th. he pressed them once again, to the same purpose; Adding, the great
Necessity of Dispatch; -- the daily Cries, and Importunites of the Irish
Protestants, and offering all his Power and Interest toward their Relief, in
these very Terms, See the exact Collections, the 1. and 2. Speeches in the
book.)

That nothing may be omitted on my part, I must here take notice of the Bill
for pressing of Soldiers, now depending among you my Lords, concerning which I
here declare, that in case it come so to me, as it may not infringe or diminish
my Prerogative, I will pass it.

And further, seeing there is a Dispute raised (I being little beholding to him
whosoever at this time began it) concerning the bounds of this ancient and
undoubted. Prerogative, to avoid further debate at this time, I offer, that the
Bill may pass with a Salvo jure, both for King and People, leaving such Debates
to a time that may better bear it, etc.

To conclude, I conjure you by all that is, or can be dear to you or me, that,
laying away all Disputes, you go on cheerfully and speedily for the reducing of
Ireland.

By whom, Ireland was tumulted, I do not know; but that it was not by his
Majesty, is most evident. Nor is there any Question, but the Massacres there
committed, must lie upon the score both of the Actors, and Promoters of those
cruelties: who they are, when I know, I Will tell you. Would you know who it was
that interposed betwixt the Parliament and the Duke of Buckingham, and would
not permit the proofs to be made against him concerning the death of his own
Father?



THis I shall satisfy you in.

A Letter was presented to the house from Thomas Haslerigg ( Brother to Sir
Arthur) which was read; to this purpose. That there was one Mr. Smalling, a
Committeeman of Leicester- shire, who had been a Deputy-examiner in the
Star Chamber, and affirmed, that above twenty years since, there being a suit
in Star Chamber, between the Earl of Bristol, Complainant, and the Duke of
Buckingham, Defendant; Concerning Physic, presumptuously administered by the
said Duke, to King James; the said Smalling took many Depositions therein, and
was further proceeding in the Examinations, until a Warrant, signed by the
King, was brought him, Commanding him to surcease, and to send him the
Depositions already taken; which Smalling did; yet kept notes by him of the
principal passages, doubting what further proceedings might be hereafter in a
business of such importance.

Sir Henry Mildmay moved that Smalling be sent for, and examined upon Oath by
the COMMITTEE that penned the said Declaration; but upon motion of the
Presbyterians he was ordered to be examined at the COMMONS-BAR. Smalling came,
produced the Warrant, but no notes, so this Chimera vanished.

Tertio Caroli, this business had been ventilated, and examined against the
Duke, and no mention made of Poisoning, or Killing King James, It was then only
called, an Act of high Presumption, and Dangerous Consequence in the Duke, nor
was there the least Reflection upon KING CHARLES. (See the History of
Independency par. 1. p. 74.) Would you hear who it was that made so light of
Parliaments, killing them as soon as born, and making them a scorn by
dissolution at pleasure; and at length designed, and in fine drew sword against
the very Parliamentary Constitution, after he had by imprisonments destroyed
several eminent Patriots for their freedom of speech in the Parliament on the
behalf of the Public, and in particular, touching the death of his Father?



NO; it needs not, I can tell you that. 'Twas Cromwell, and the secluding
Members. The RUMP, That drew Sword against the very Parliamentary Constitution.
They clapped up Sir Robert Pie, and Major Fincher for but desiring a
Free-Parliament; on the behalf of the Public: sending their troops abroad to
seize, and Threatening (themselves) to sequester all the Declarers. (That which
concerns his Majesty's Father, is spoken to already.) WOuld the Scots know who
it was that designed them to be the first Subjects of Slavery in spirituals and
Civils, who hated their very Nation, though the Land of his Nativity; who made
a Pacification with them, with a treacherous intent to break every Article; and
manifested it as soon as he returned from Edinburg to London, giving special
command to burn the said Articles by the hand of a Common Hangman, and it was
publicly done?



I Will tell you that too: 'Twas the old Arglye. -- But hold you Sir. Touching
the Treacherous intent, did he tell you his mind? But I confess, you are
quick-sighted; you could not see things else that have no Being; -- as your own
Piety, and public Tenderness; -- You have approved your selves, Searchers of
Hearts indeed; witness your Sacrifices to your MOLOCH (the good old cause) your
Butcheries by Quartering, and Embowelling poor Wretches, only upon Frivolous,
and Incongruous Circumstances: senselesly patched together by your Ridiculous,
and Suborned sons of Belial.

Because that your own Party, did resolve, at first to break all Oaths; and has
been only True, in a fidelity to Hell, and Wickedness; you make no difficulty
to measure others by your Impious selves; -- you Talk, and Act at such a Rate;
-- as if the Word of God were a Delusion; Divinity an old wive's Tale; and
(seriously) not half so much Respect, is paid to the Two Tables of the
Decalogue as to the Orders of your Coffehouse. I shall not ravel the
Transaction, sequent upon the Pacification you speak of. -- But to your next.
WOuld you hear the Cries of the blood of Rochel, and of his own people
sacrificed in that Expedition to a Foreign interest, and of all the
Protestants in France, for his Barbarous betraying of them.



THe Rochel Expedition I Am a stranger to; so I suppose are you, that make the
Challenge. But if you had told me of Jamaica; or the Sound; I should have
understood you. WOuld you cast your eye on past miseries, and recollect the
manifold intolerable Oppressions of People both in matter of Estate and
Conscience, and compare them with the indulgencies at the same time toward
Papists, yea and the designs laid to make use of Papists, to destroy both
Parliaments and godly people together?



NOw you say something, surely The manifold intolerable oppression of People
in matter of Estate, and Conscience, etc. This I remember perfectly.

Your Major-General-Archy was an admirable Form of Government: So was your
Rump-archy. Clap a man up, and never let him know his crime, nor his Accuser,
-- declare a Man incapable of serving in Parliament, for having Bays in his
Windows, or a Minced Pie in Christmas, sequester half the Nation, because they
will not swear back and forward; sell Freeborn Men by Thousands into
Plantations; and in fine, beside Excise and other Impositions Arbitrary, lay on
the comfortable Load of 100000l. a Month upon a Beggered Nation, and at the
latter end of the day. (Is this the Oppression your wise Worship intends?)

Now for the matter of Conscience, I can help you out there too. To shorten,
let the Oath of Abjuration serve for all. You follow this with a sharp charge
for making use of Papists. I could retort this, if I thought it valuable; but
frankly, in a War, the subject of the Question is not Religion, but Assistance.
Nor do I (though I might as well) condemn your Party, (that is, the Rump-men) for
the same practice. WOuld you understand the correspondencies maintained with,
and the encouragements given to, the bloody Irish Rebels, for the Effecting
his design; together with the correspondencies and Solicitations settled in
Foreign Countries, to the same purpose, with all the circumstances evincing
the truth?



THis is the same thing again, shake Hands and to the next. WOuld you be
informed how often, and with how much solicitude the Parliament,
notwithstanding all these things, did for peace sake, in a manner prostitute
themselves, and hazard the whole cause, by appointing Treaty after Treaty,
which he never entertained but with intent of Treachery, and thereby frustrated
all their good intentions and endeavors, before ever they passed the Votes of
Non-Address.

Then, we beseech you, read the following Declaration, and be satisfied to the
full, whether or no the late King, and his Family deserved death and
extirpation.



I Pr'ethee do not choke us with the venerable sound of Parliament: I talk to
You, and of that Mungrel-mixture you plead for. A Parliament cannot do amiss,
(be not too quick now) they may have done Amiss, and the next Session may
repeal or mend it. What they did, I don't Question: but what you say, will (as
I humbly conceive) admit a Castigation. Look back upon your self; These are
your words -- Which he never enterteyn'd (Treaty, that is,) but with intent of
Treachery and, thereby frustrated their good Intentions, and endeavors, before
ever they passed the Votes of Non Addresses.) At this rate, you ground the Non
Addresses, upon the Kings Intention of Treachery. A Positive disclaim of your
Obedience, upon a possible Dis-ingenuity in your Prince. Come, to cut short.
Dare you say, that he promised, and failed? That Is Treachery, to betray a
Trust: By this Rule of Proceeding, had you required his Life, and he refused,
you might have taken it: his crime was only the Non-Concession of what you
demanded; and he gave his Reasons too for that refusal. Well but let us come up
to the Vote it self. I have already proved, that it concerns not the secluded
Members; and now I shall entreat you to Back my opinion, with a slip of your
own Pen. Their honest strictness in the Negative, afterward, and their Adhesion
to it, through all extremities, speaks manifestly the intention of the party,
and that acquits them. It Is your own Argument in your fourth expostulation. You
charge his Majesty with a treacherous Intent, which you infer from a subsequent
manifestation of himself by Action. But to dispatch, should I Grant all you
Claim, yet did not the late King and his family, deserve death and extirpation;
The premises will not amount to it.

Now if you please go on. AS for our parts, we very well recount the Series of
past transactions, and do remember that in February 1647. when the two Houses
of Parliament passed their Resolves of making no further Address, but
determined to lay him wholly aside, they never were in a greater state of
security and freedom, never passed any thing with greater deliberation; and
never the least disturbance or alteration arose in either of the Houses against
those Resolves, until some Persons in the Commons House otherwise affected,
and who by procuring Elections of Persons fit for their turn to serve in
Parliament in vacant places, brought in new men of the Cavalier stamp (as is
known) like themselves; and thereby out-balancing the old Patriots, gained the
Major Vote of the House; and so with heat, and by design; obtained a revoking
of those resolves which had been passed by both Houses in a time of temper,
upon most serious Consideration so that though we shall not take upon us ex
absoluto to justify the interposure of the Soldiery afterward, and their
Exclusion of the Adverse Members, (it being a transcendent Act, not to be
measured by ordinary Rule, and which nothing can justify but Supreme
necessity) yet This we can truly say in their defense: In Judgment and
Conscience there was so indispensable a necessity, that had they not
interposed, those Principles and the Concernments of the Commonwealth, upon
which the aforesaid Resolves of both Houses were founded, had been utterly
shipwrackt, and the whole Cause and its Defenders most inevitably have sunk
together, seeing the same heady confidence in treaty was then given to the
Father, which too many now incline to allow unto the Son, who were first
engaged against them in the War, and held out to the time of the last treaty:
whom (of all other Men) his party do hate upon that account; and, if they had
an opportunity, would be sure to make them fall the severest Sacrifices to the
Revenge and Memory of his Father.



THis is already Sifted, and a little Picking will serve the Turn here. A
Cavalier, I find, is only an Honest man that crosses a Fantan; but the Old
Patriots it seems, were the Minor part of the House; and That Is enough to
entitle the Nation to the Benefit of the Treaty resolved upon. For Sir (if
you will give us leave) we will be governed by the Major part. It Is true, your
Supreme necessity, is a pretty popular Sophism. But,

As necessity has no Law, so is it none; nor in any case pleadable against
Law, but by the Judges of the Law, which at all hands, is confessed to be the
Parliament, and the Major part of the Two Houses in conjunction with the King
have ever denominated That.

I must needs take a little pains to correct the Gentleman, in his next Fleere
upon the Presbyterians. He hangs like a Cock-sparrow upon the aforesaid
Resolves of both Houses (which is but an old Trick of laying a Knaves Bastard
at an Honest man's door) and then he preaches most Infallible Destruction to the
first engagers, whom the King will be sure to sacrifice to the Revenge and
memory of his Father.

This opinion or rather suggestion of his, opposes all Principles of Honesty,
Generosity, and prudence, which fall within the latitude of the case. Nay,
Taking for granted, the very entrance upon the War Justifiable.

There might be then a Question, Now there is none, They intended only a
Reformation, here is a Dissolution. A Liberty was there Designed, here is an
Intolerable Slavery Imposed, Those quitted, when they saw their error; These,
for that very Reason, proceed. There is, in fine, This difference; One side
would Destroy the King, the Other would Preserve him; These, would Govern
Without Law, and the Other would be governed by Law. After all this peremptory
rudeness at large; he bethinks himself at last of an Apology to the General;
and now the Pageant moves. WE urge not these things, with an intent to make the
least reflection upon your Excellency, and our Brethren the Officers under
your Command, as if we suspected your sincerity and constancy, after so many
plain and positive Declarations against returning to our old Bondage under that
Family which God so wonderfully cast out before us, and wherein we are
confident he, for his own name and peoples sake, will never more take pleasure:
but in regard the Old Adversaries behave themselves insolently and proudly, and
publicly give out, the time is coming wherein they shall satisfy their lusts
upon us, we thought it convenient to whet your Spirits with a repetition of
these things, as we have done our own, that the world may see we yet own our
Cause; and do believe, that what we have done as Instruments in driving out
that Family, we have done in judgment and Conscience; and that you take a
convenient time to let men understand plainly that you also will continue of
the same persuasion with us, for as much as there are none of the particulars
charged upon the late King in the following Declaration, which would not, with
many more, have been proved to his face by a Cloud of witnesses, if he would
have put himself upon trial, when he was called to answer for his actions.



ALas, good Gentleman; you suspect the General? No body can have such a Thought
sure: you do but mind him of his Duty now and then, Refresh his Memory, and
whet his Spirits. He has declared himself against returning to our old BONDAGE,
under that Family which God so wonderfully cast out before you; but not against
the Liberty, and Title of that Person whom God may, no less wonderfully, bring
in before you: and I suppose my confidence is better grounded, that the people
will never more take pleasure in you; then yours is, that God will take no
pleasure in Him; the Nation will as little endure the Rump, as you the King.
But all this while, you Beg the Question, How comes the King to be mentioned?
The Young man (as your gravity descends to call him) he is poor, and his
Friends, Beggarly; You have the Balance of Propriety on your side too my
Masters; you're safe enough then. I would advise you now to wait, and not
prejudge Authority. You're to Obey, not to impose a Government. If you proceed
to Murmr, and show your Teeth, when you cannot Bite, 'twill be the worse for
you. Indeed, your Good old Patriots will be the Minor Vote again of the next
Parliament, if you behave not your selves more modestly, the people will
suspect you; for Mutinous Servants prove but Untoward Masters. Monopolies, and
some misgovernments were the True Cause, that engaged the well meaning people,
in the quarrel, not extirpation of both Laws and Governors. But if your
Adversaries, do (as you say) grow proud and insolent; in such a case, you may
be allowed to whet your Spirits (as you express your selves, any thing but your
knives; you were at that sport once) your judgment and your conscience we are
satisfied in; alas, the difference betwixt yours and ours, is but a Trifle.
What we take to be slavery, you call Freedom. -- A Rebel in our Judgment, is a
Patriot in yours. -- Murder, a Sacrifice; Robbing of Churches, in your soft
Opinion, is but unclothing of the Whore; (a thing the Rump's a little given to)
we term that Sacrilege. One frailty I must needs take notice of among you, for
all your talk of Providence, I find, the Arm of Flesh strikes a great stroke
in your spiritual conflicts; and when you are worsted; you will take eggs for your
money; and acquiesce, as well as your neighbors. This I observe to be one
Article of your Faith, you argue from Divine Omnipotency, that providence is
ever on the stronger side. Suppose the Gentlemen of the Backside, should look
on for a fit now; the Royal Family (you say) God cast out before us: Who casts
out these? But to make all sure, you press the General, and his Officers to
Declare, that they will continue of the same persuasion with you. (This
perseverance, I confess, is a main point) you should do well to leave a note,
where they may find you; for you're a little variable, and they are a little shy
of meddling with those that are given to change. You're possibly, this day,
resolved for a Republic; the next, for a Protector; by and by, a Counsel of
Officers, and then, a Committee of Safety. Come, come, Gentlemen, the General
will be just, without your Counsels; and steady, in despite of all your
Arguments. Speak on. GIve us leave (we beseech you) to add one thing more,
which we had almost forgotten, to show the madness of those men that cancelled
the votes of Non-Address, and would have brought back the late King by the Isle
of Wight-Treaty, and would now (if they might have their wills) bring in his
Son by the like, viz. that at the very time when that Treaty was on foot,
though this young man, who was then at Sea in the revolted Ships, declared all
to be null which should be agreed on by his Father; yet, hand over head, in
they would have had him, as others would now restore the Son upon the very same
terms which he so positively declared himself an enemy to in his Fathers
days. Good God! what a spirit of slumber has seized such men, who were once
deeply engaged with us in the Common Cause.

As for your Excellency, far be it from us to entertain any suspicion
concerning you, supposing you must needs have upon your heart the true interest
of Religion, and your Own too; and how much it is concerned in keeping Out of
that Family, whose restitution we believe God will not now permit unto any
designers, seeing he has from time to time so signally blasted all former
undertakings. As to what concerns Religion, you know what has been their
Education and Dependency abroad, and should they return, it is Obvious, all
Other parties would be put upon their Guard to defend themselves against him
and his Clergy at home; and so all sorts of Religious Parties, being
constrained to combine for mutual preservation and liberty, the War will soon
be renewed upon the point where it at first began.



WHat pity 'twould have been, this Gentleman should have forgot a thing that
never was, the King (indeed) sent an express to the City, the copy whereof was
carried to the House, by the Sheriffs, and some of the Common-Counsell: 3. Aug.
1647. But not a syllable of what he mentions in it; nor any thing that way
tending, yet was it eagerly debated, in Terminis, that the Prince should be
declared a Rebel and a Traitor. Among Other Reasons, why it was laid by, One
was, -- the Covenant; a Second, was This, It would not do well; to vote the
Prince a Traitor, the same day, that Messengers were sent to invite The King
his Father to a Treaty. The clamorous puppy might bethink himself of better
Language; especially Addressing to an Eminent Person. The madness of those men
(he calls it) that cancelled the votes of non-Addresses, and would have saved
the King, etc -- If all were mad that would have saved That King, or that love
This, we should, not find many sober Persons, in the Kingdom.

This Fellow keeps so much stir to clear his Party of any jealousy, upon his
Excellency, that he most evidently creates, and discovers one. How comes
Religon now, To trouble our Atheistique Saints! These Reprobates have violently
taken the Father's Life, and thrown the Son out of his Right and Dominions;
exposing him to the charity of Foreign Princes for a subsistence: and after
this; his Education abroad, is made an Argument by this Brute, against his
Return, where will he be next now? AS to your own interest in the station where
God has placed you, it is well known what the private sense and opinion of that
Party is concerning your Excellency, because you have been an Instrument, in
keeping Scotland many years with so great a vigilance and prudence free from
the attempts of that irreconcilable Enemy. Admit such a thing were possible,
which some fancy, that you should be the man that would put the Crown again
upon the h^ad of that Family; is it not plain what fate (setting aside all
other Considerations) you might expect from a seeming reconciled Enemy, and a
King too? It being the guise of Kings (as the Historians from enumerable
Examples do Observe) ever to recompense with hate their most meritorious
Servants; making no difference to return, betwixt the highest Obligation, and
the greatest Injury. The examples are so frequent in our own Chronicles, as
well as foreign, that he who runs may read it; and it is not proper here to
recite them.



INdeed he is hard put to it, to make the danger out from the King, to the
General, in case he should restore him. If there were nothing else in it,
'twere enough, to make him Dear to the King, and to his party, that he Hates
you. Do not deceive your selves: He Will be a scourge to the Phanatiques, and
every soul that loves either Piety, or Peace will assist him. Do not mistake me
neither. God forbid that all such as have either been misled by cunning
practices; or else transported by necessities, to seek a livelihood by
unlawful means. God forbid (I say) that all without distinction, should be
marked with that Infamous Brand: No I intend it only of that Frantique crew,
that preclude mercy, by despising it: and persecute the Truth with a
Determinate Malevolence and spite: But Note, the man begins to soften. ALas,
(Sirs) it is not an Army that shall secure you, nor the power of the Militia
that can secure our Ancient Senators, (if any who have been engaged can be so
fond as to think of security) for, let the Young man come in with freedom to
encounter both Army and Militia with the bare title of King, and actual
possession of the Throne, the eyes of Army and Militia will soon be dazeled
with the splendor of that Gay Thing, and fall down and worship at the sight
and hope of the Kingdoms of this world, and the glory of them; and then all
Bonds of agreement (if any be) will prove but Rushes.

Oh, for God and his peoples sake, yea, and for the City of Londons sake, whom
Charles the Father branded in his papers with the Character of Disloyal and
Rebellious City, (though at that time most renowned in her actings, set an end
to the expectations of malicious enemies, and staggering Friends, by clearing
up your selves, that we may see you in the light, vigorously asserting the good
Cause of these Nations: yea, for the sake of Parliaments we ask it: and we
doubt it not at your hand, seeing the people are not like to be brought to
contend any more for Parliaments, if after so long a contest he should gain an
Opportunity of improving a possession of the Crewn to an usurpation over the
Privileges of Parliaments.



THis Thing, I Will lay my life, belongs to the Rump; it is so much concerned in
the behalf of our Ancient Senators. Truly I Am half of his mind, in what he
says last. That is, I do believe, his Majesty would be made welcome; But for
Faithless; nothing but an Abjuring Perjured Villain would suspect him.

See how the Supple slave, is come about now: how Arrantly the Rogue Beggs: Oh!
for God and his Peoples sake, and for the City of Londens sake. (I am in
earnest; I must laugh before I can write on.) Might not this fellow be laid
hold of, upon the statute against sturdy Beggars, and Lashed? He has absolutely
turned a piece of one of the Rump-Ballads into Prose. Nay my Lord; (cries the
Brewers Clerk) good my Lord for the love of God;
Consider your self, Us; this poor Nation, and that Tyrant Abroad;
Don't leave us: but George gives him a Shurg, instead of a Nod.


Come, hang your self, Beg right; here is your true method of begging. -- Oh for
Tom Scot's sake; for Haslerig's; for Robinson, Holland, Mildmay, Mounson,
Corbet, Atkins, Vane, Livesey, Skippon, Milton, Tichbourn, Ireton, Gourden,
Lechmore, Blagrave, Barebones, Nedham's sake: and to conclude, for all the rest
of our Impenitent Brethrens sakes, Help a company of poor Rebellious Devils,
that only for murdering their Prince, destroying three glorious Nations,
breaking the bonds of Faith both with God and Men, trampling upon Religion and
Laws; exercising an absolute Tyranny over their fellow Subjects -- Endeavoring
yet once more to engage their native Country in Blood; -- to alienate the
honest Soldiery from their Obedience; and in fine, for playing the Devil in
Gods Name; are now in danger to Lose the Reward of all their Virtues; -- The
Possessions which they have acquired by violence, by a Malignant and desperate
design of Peace and Settlement.

This is the State of your Condition, and this should be the form of your
Application.

Once more, and he bids you farewell. BUt (my Lord and Gentlemen) leaving these
things which touch only upon your worldly Interests and Concernments, we are
bold to say, (though the jealousies of weaker Brethren be great and many) we
believe our selves to be sure of you, because we have your Souls, as well as
your personal Interests at pawn for your fidelity to the Public. We remember
your Declaration sent from Scotland to the Churches, and other Declarations at
the same time. We might mind you, if it were needful, how you have called God
to witness, That the ground of your late undertaking in Scotland was, The
Vindication of the Liberties of the People, with the protection and
encouragement of the Godly and the Faithful therein, etc. and that you have no
intention or purposes to return to our old Bondage; but that the providence of
God having made us free at the cost of so much blood, you will never be found
so unfaithful to God and his People, as to lose so glorious a Cause; but to
resolve, with God's assistance, to endeavor a maintaining of our
dear-purchased Liberties both Spiritual and Civil. But seeing these
Declarations made before God, Angels and Men, (as your selves have said) do so
much concern your Souls in the observation of them, that they cannot but be
much upon your hearts; therefore we mention them not, as doubting you, or
endeavoring to persuade you, but to ease our own minds, and to comfort the
hearts of our Brethren, who have need to be comforted; and do wait for a good
time when your Excellency shall break forth, and more visibly appear (through
all the Clouds of Fear and Jealousy) a Defense and Protection (through the
goodness of God) to all his people that fear him in these Nations; and so their
hearts universally will return unto you: in assurance whereof, and that you
will be very much confirmed and encouraged after the reading of the
Declaration, We remain,

(My LORD) Your Excellencies most faithful Friends and Servants in the Common
Cause.
March 22. 1659.
STill I perceive you're sure; and yet for your weak Brethrens sake, you mind
His Excellency of a Pawn he has engaged for his Fidelity to the Public (only
his Soul) in a Declaration before God, Angels, and Men, that he has no intent
to return to his old Bondage.

Why you Impudent Sots, does a Confederacy with a Pedling, Little, Sniv'ling
Faction, that would subvert Order and Government, amount to a Fidelity to the
Public? or does the avoiding the Old Bondage you keep such a Coil with, Imply
the setting up a New and more Tyrannical Imposition.

In fine; the mention of the King, proceeds from your own Guilt, and Fears,
that have so much abused him. The General meddles not at all to impose upon us;
but only stands betwixt Authority, and Violence. His Excellency refers all to
the Appointment of such Persons as the People shall choose, to Act in their
behalf, and cannot in Honor side with a Party of Juglers, that only call
themselves our Representatives, and we disclaim.

This is enough said to convince you and the World, where the Abuse lies.

Now, having eased your minds (in your own Language) you may go ease your
bodies too; for I dismiss you: and all is but giving of the Rump a Purge.

Cursed is he that removes his Neighbors Landmark. April 2. 1660.


UPon this pinch of Time the Good Old Cause was hard put to it; as appears by
their more than ordinary earnestness toward all Parties: but chiefly, they
solicited the Army, in an Audacious Pamphlet, Entitled, An ALARM to the
ARMIES of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND; the substance whereof may be
collected from this ensuing Answer to it. THis last Week, has brought to light,
two Pamphlets, so exquisitely impious, as if they had been framed in Hell, by
OLIVER and BRADSHAW. They speak the Language of the Damned, Horror, Despairs,
and Desolation. These goodly pieces are Christened, PLAIN ENGLISH, -- and AN
ALARM. I suppose they are Twins, the Issue of the same Brain, as they are
related to the same main End. I had nigh finished a Reply upon the former, when
the latter came to my hand: comparing which with the other, I find they
correspond so aptly, and so universally, to the same seditious Purpose, that
there is not any Interest escapes their Malice and Attempt. They advance their
Dispute, and March, together; that what they cannot gain by force of Argument,
they may be ready to Essay by dint of Sword. PLAIN ENGLISH is a reasoning of
the case: first with the General, claiming, from his Engaging for the Public
Liberty, a title to his aid* in favor of a private and enslaving Faction. It
labors then, to puzzle the Presbyterian into a jealousy of the Kings faith
and honor, and consequently into a doubt of his own safety, should His Majesty
be restored: Nay, not content to blaspheme the Kings Integrity by a bold
censure of his secret thoughts; the shameless Beast (the Author of it) proceeds
to charge the secluded Members with the guilt of the Kings blood, upon a
senceless inference drawn from the Declaration of both Houses in 1647, touching
the Reasons of the Votes for non-Address. His aim is here, to persuade them to
accuse themselves.

How those Votes were obtained, I have showed at large, (in answer to PLAIN
ENGLISH) and it suffices: the whole Nation knows, that though the Plague was in
both Houses then, yet All were not infected; the Rumpers only had the Tokens,
(nor all these neither:) so that at last, the seclusion of so many as opposed
the Capital prosecution of the King, amounts to a clear Act of discrimination;
a separation of the clean from the unclean.

Having there set the Presbyterians at work, upon the Question of Interest, and
safety; and (after many a lame complement to his Excellency) he cuts out worse
employment for the Phanatick Soldiery: and at the same time, breathing Hot and
Cold -- Reason and Mutiny, he solicites the General into a Compliance, and the
Army into a Tumult.

To disabuse the multitude, (if any should be mad enough to be deluded by so
gross a cheat) I Will lay the juggle open, in as few and familiar words as
posssible.

The Title speaks the business of the Pamphlet: ('It Is AN ALARM;) and the
Application -- ( To the OFFICERS and SOLDIERY, etc.) the malice; there is
Treason in the very Face on it. If the first two words cost not the Nation a
hundred thousand lives, it is not the Authors fault.

His second page places the Legislative power in the Army, challenging their
promise; That before they would SUFFER themselves to be disbanded, or divided,
they would see the Government of these Nations established upon the just and
secure fundamentals, and constitutions of Freedom and Safety to the People, in
relation as Men, and Christians, and that in the way of a Commonwealth, or
Free-state-Government, without a King, single Person, or House of Lords.

These Gentlemen, I see, resolve to be their own Carvers; not SUFFER themselves
to be disbanded? This RUMP would be a perpetual ARMY, as well as a perpetual
PARLIAMENT. Let the Nation observe now the Quality of this suggestion.

First, By the Law of Arms, it is Death, that which these Fellows would engage
the Army in; that mutiny against their General: (for they give him for lost.)

Next, It Is TREASON, by the Law of the Land; the USURPATION.

Thirdly, It Is MURDER, Murder intentional, in the bare conception of it; and
actual, sure enough, so soon as that intention is but known. Now let us weigh
the Benefits it brings, against the Crimes and dangers that attend it. FREEDOM
and SAFETY to the People, both as MEN and CHRISTIANS; there is the Proposition.

FREEDOM, there can be none to the People, where a Particular and Little party
pretends to impose upon a number forty times greater, and enslave them.

Nor SAFETY, where in that Disproportion the Nation is engaged against a
Faction: and every Sword that is raised against it, carries damnation upon the
point on it.

Neither do they act as Men. Man is a Reasonable and Sociable Creature. Here Is
a Design that breaks the Bond of Order: and betrays a manifest Folly, by a
contrivance so impracticable and mischievous at once; Idly to labor the saving
of a few guilty persons, at the price of an universal Desolation.

For Christianity; either my Bible's false, or their Opinion, that shall
pretend to raise a Christian Government upon a Basis of Rebellion and Bloodshed.

From hence the terible Trifle proceeds to the distribution of his Design into
three Heads.

First, what the CAVALIER says. Secondly, what the PRESBYTERIAN thinks.
Thirdly, what the Armies best Friends (scornfully called COMMON-WEALTHMEN and
PHANATICKS) do foresee, concerning the present transactions in the three
Nations. And lastly, his own Observations, and seasonable Advice.

He tells us, The CAVALIER's OPINION, that the Generals intention is to bring in
the King: and grounded upon these Reasons.

First, That upon the 11th. of February last, he sent an imposing Letter to the
Parliament, (in scorn called the RUMP) and thereupon, without any Order from
them, marched with their Army into LONDON, then esteemed and made by Him ( in
destroying their Gates, etc.) their implacable enemies; and at night suffered
so many Bonfires, and ringing of Bells, and publicly drinking healths to the
KING, and a FREE-PARLIAMENT; Roasting and burning of Rumps; hearing and seeing
his MASTERS in open Street declared MURDERERS and TRAITORS, etc. -- Feasted
and associated with the Kings Friends, etc.

This is a grievous charge, assuredly; and by the license of our Observator,
This I Reply.

The General's Commission expired upon the Tenth of February, so he was free
the Eleventh. Again, it was the design of the Rump to make the General odious,
and therefore they imposed on him such barbarous Orders, as probably might
leave him to retreat. While he professed to Act by any Derivation from Them:
malice it self cannot but say His Excellency stood firm to every point of
Military obedience: at last, when they proceeded so severely against the City,
he interposed; but his Mediation was rejected, and more imperious commands sent
to him: this is enough to prove, 'twas not the General that made London the
Rumps implacable Enemies; but 'twas the sordid Insolences of the Members that
made the Conventicle hateful to the whole Kingdom; and this appeared by the
Universal Joy that followed upon their disappointment. If the Rump at
Westminster did by a Sympathy fellow-feel the suffering Rumps in the City, the
Case indeed was hard; but for the rest, the Murderers and Rebels they were
called, -- methinks it should not trouble folks to be called by their Names;
(that is only Liberty of Conscience; and I dare say, the people spoke as they
thought) Are these Gentlemen's Ears so tender, and their Hearts so hard? Is the
Sound of Treason and Murder so dreadful, and the Exercise of it so Trivial? --
I must confess, to stay away Ten days together, (from the 11th. of Feb. til
the 21th. as that his Masters charge him with) was something a long Errand. But
seriously Gentlemen, considering 'twas his first fault, forgive him.

The second motive to the Cavaliers Discourse (that his Excellency will restore
the King;) is, that notwithstanding his engagement by Letter, and Verbal
promise to His MASTERS (that had ventured their All, to secure him from being
ruined by Lamberts Army, he yet admits the Secluded Members to sit, (most of
whom he absolutely knew to be for the Restoration of CHARLES STUART,) etc.

To this; it is notorious, that Designs were laid to murder the General; That
the Rump Received, and Kept in Members impeached: That they promoted, and gave
Thanks for BAREBONES Petition, containing matters of direct contradiction to
their Professions. In the next place; instead of the Rumpers saving the General
from being ruined by Lambert, the General saved them; and touching their
Opinions concerning ( CHARLES STUART, as this Villain prates) the King. The
Noble General regarded their Trust, not their Opinions, nor did he enquire what
they were.

Thirdly, (say they) the General will bring the King in; for he has suffered
the secluded Members to release Sir GEORGE BOOTH, and his Party, etc. -- Again,
they have (de novo) voted the COVENANT to be Printed, Read, and set up, etc. --
acknowledging the late King's Posterity: -- as likewise suffering to be
maintained in the House, that none but Jesuits and Priests are for Free-Sate
Government. -- Observe yet further, (says the CAVALIER) that he imprisons
Commonwealth-men, and releases Royalists, etc.

These Rumpers have gotten such a trick of breaking Parliaments, that it is
their public Profession now become to enforce them to the bent of the ARMY.
SUFFER, still is the word. The General SUFFERED the secluded Members to Release
Sir GEORGE BOOTH. -- The next point is yet more remarkable: These very
COVENANTERS ABJURE the COVENANT. -- As for the SUFFERING (there it is again) to
be maintained, that only Jesuits, etc. -- the General is not properly to take
cognizance of what passes in the House; (the King was chidden for it, see Exact
Collections, the Petition of both Houses December. 14. 1641.) -- now for
imprisoning and releasing. If it so happen that some Commonwealth-men deserve
to be laid up, and some Royalists to be enlarged (not as such) it is but
justice to do the one, and the other; for at the rate of this subtle Argument,
Free-state-men shall be Protected against the Law, and Royalists so Persecuted
likewise.

Lastly, the Cavaliers conclude as much from the Generals countenancing the
Militia; being raised and formed to murder, and destroy the Army -- and that
the same thing was done long since in Scotland: -- besides, the Irish Army have
proceeded answerable to himself. -- And diverse Officers that served the late
King have had fair promises from him, -- and several of the Kings friends are
peaceably returned from exile, etc. -- and again, there is a Proviso in the ACT
of DISSOLUTION, concerning the LORDS being a part of the PARLIAMENT, etc.

To be short, -- the General encourages the Militia to Save the Countries, not
to Ruin the Army, -- next, if long since done in Scotland, the better done,
the sooner; for England has been only Rump-ridden, for want of it. To this,
the conform motion of Ireland proceeds from their Commune Concern with England
in delivering themselves from the Tyranny of the Rump; for the Generals
promises; I am glad to hear it, but truly I know nothing of it. In truth, it is
a sad business, Alderman Bunce his return: and the Proviso in the Act of
dissolution, (for certainly, by the known Law, the Lords are no part of the
Parliament.) To speak my thoughts freely; I am very glad to hear that the
Cavaliers are of Opinion that the King will come in, but I believe it never the
more for your saying it.

Now to the SOBER PRESBYTERIANS: they (says our Phanatick) begin to suspect
the General: for the Cavaliers are at this instant arming themselves in all the
three Nations, and if CHARLES STUART comes, he will bring with him Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. -- and then in comes his Mother -- with her Jesuits, Priests,
etc. -- and this will make little difference betwixt us and the Sectaries.

Now do I dote upon the sincerity of this Bubble; had he pretended to Religion
himself, h'ad been ridiculous; but putting that scruple upon the Sober
Presbyterian, it is well enough. The story of the Cavaliers Arming themselves,
is a Phanatick, not a Presbyterian conceit. As to the Queens bringing in
Jesuits, etc. It needs not, the Independents have enough for her Majesty and
themselves too. (How the changeable Butterfly flutters from Party to Party, and
wherever he seizes, he stains.) As to his concluding Opinion, that the King
will put no difference, he may live yet to change that opinion.

He comes next to the Armies BEST FRIENDS, (as he terms them) and they preach
nothing but Fire and Sword, if ever the King come. Oh this pestilent MILITIA!
Alas poor Wretch! Away with your Improbable Lies: The Secluded Members threaten
the Army, Yes, it is a likely matter. Come Gentlemen, you are safe, if you
continue honest, and lost without it. Do not you know, that these very persons
that now Flatter you, are the people that have taken your meat out of your
mouths; that have received sufficient for six Armies from the Nation, and yet
have left you monilesse, and ready to perish for want of Bread? Nay, suppose
their Arguments were more rational than they are, and that the King were a
Person as famous for Cruelty, as he is for Clemency, you were still safe. You
are below the stroke of Revenge. They are fearful for their own Heads, and
pretend to concern themselves for you. They talk of Treachery, in case you
should recede from their Designs: They tell you of Engagements, Promises, etc.
-- and so do I. Remember but your Oaths and Covenants; and if you do, you will
not mix with them; they promise you the glory of after-Ages: yes, you shall be
Renown^d, if you engage with these Desperadoes.

Look back into old Stories; enquire into the different reputation of the Brave
Mayor that killed the Rebel-Patriot, and of the Libertine himself that fell; (a
MARTYR your hot headed Council or would call him) Are you ambitious to be
Chronicled with JACK OF LEYDEN, KNIPPERDOLLING, CADE, TYLER, RAVILLAC, BALTAZAR
GERARD* etc. Desire your brainsick Illuminates to tell you Muncer's Story, go
to, beware of separating. Remember them that cried, You take too much upon you
ye Sons of Levi, the Congregation is holy every one of them, and the Lord is
among them. To come a little nearer home. Reflect upon the deceased Patrons of
their Frantic Zeal; their very flesh is not more putrid than their memories.
Come nearer yet, and look impartially among your living Partisans, (I speak of
such as our Pamphleter styles Patriots) do not you find them clothed with the
Spoils of Widows, and of Orphans? Nay, look into their Morals, even toward
those, that with the loss of Blood and Peace, have raised them: how Thanklesse
and how Avaricious are they? Examine now their Principles of Courage, and their
Military Virtues: do they not sneak into Committees, and there dispose of all
the Advantages of your Unchristian Hazzards? YOU kill the HEIR, but THEY divide
the INHERITANCE.

Having abundantly perplexed the minds of his weak Brethren, he is as intent,
now, how to entangle the Interests of the Nation. The man is willing to do any
thing that may help on the work of undoing All; and here he is ballancing
Accounts: -- casting up how many millions will pay the Court-debts, and repair
the Losses of His Majesty's Friends. For that I think the next Parliament may
as well compose the Difference, as either he or I: this only I may say, it is
not the care of the Public which imploys him so much. His sins are greater
than he can bear.

All this is nothing, compared with what he has yet to tell you. Observe him
well, and ask him, how he looks when he lies? Upon his knowledge, the Militiaes
are resolved to cut the Soldiers throats in their beds. Why does he not
discover who they are? Still the bloody 11th. and 21th. of Febr. runs in his
Head; The Villainies of that night, how hardly does he digest them! and then the
Catalogue of Saints (the Holy-ones of the Rump) that nettles the Bum terribly.
That marks them out for a Massacre, he says. The Worthies have behaved
themselves well the mean while, that call themselves the People. Why, at the
worst, if the People have a mind to destroy themselves, they cannot begin
better than at the Breech; that is a good way from the Heart.

The Story of your Governor is every bodies tale. I Will only take the Applicable
part; We love the TREASON, but we hate the TRAITOR. 'Twas you Betrayed your
Countrey's trust to the Army. They love the Treason, but they hate the Traitor.
('It Is as fit as if it had been made for you.)

Now your Advice, which is scarce worth a Fee; for -- you propose things
Impossible: Rendezvous first, you say: why you Fancy, sure, that the General
is of the Plot; and that his Officers are all mad; and then you propose a
Confederacy, as 'twas at NEW MARKET: your little Agitators, etc. -- Fie, Fie!
Gentlemen, here is the difference of the Case; the Nation then was with the
revolted Party against the Great ones: Now, they are Unanimously against you, in
any such Design. Your General is a Gentleman and a Soldier; and every Man that
is either, (in the Kingdom) will die at's Feet: His Officers are Persons that
understand Honor, and the Discipline of War. There Is not a man among them, but
when he comes to pass a Sober Thought upon so base an action as a Mutiny,
would rather Perish than promote it.

Beside, you are discovered with the first breath that utters the least
Syllable, tending to Conspiracy* Could I believe, the Conscience of that
Traitor that advises you to this, would let him Sleep, I should believe his
Council but a Dream, it is so remote from any due Coherence of right Reason.
Come, shall I Counsel you a little? Be obedient to your Superiors;
Compassionate to your Country; Just to your Equals: In fine, serve God, and
honor those whom he has set over you for your Good.

It Is not the Fool's Reviling of his Betters, that mends your Cause, or makes
ours worse. There are (as he says) Ropes twisting, I believed, but they are
for such Imps as himself. He tells you, Gallows are setting up for the
executions of your friends; (and he accounts himself one of your friends) who
knows what may come on it? He concludes with a Proverb; Men ARMED are seldom
HARMED. Take mine too, and so shall I conclude: Save a THIEF from the Gallows,
and he will CUT your THROAT.

April 4. 1660.
Libido Dominandi, Causa Belli.


THe Militia of the Nation, being at present in good forwardness toward a
settlement, was yet quickened by Lambert's escape out of the Tower, which was
understood to signify more than his particular Freedom and Safety, by reason
that he had already refused Liberty upon engagement to be quiet. Hereupon the
General placed four Companies of his own Regiment in the Tower; and the Council
of State issued forth a Proclamation against Lambert and his Accomplices,
requiring all persons whatsoever to be assistant to the Suppression of them.
The Citizens repaired their Posts and Chains, strengthened their Guards; and
(in short) the whole Nation was as vigilant as possible to disappoint the Grand
Conspiracy of the Phanaticks. About this time they made several Attempts in
order to a general rising; but by the care and Conduct of the Council, the
General, and the Militia, all came to nothing; the heart of the Design was
almost broken: and yet they would not leave their Pamphleting. Particularly
Milton put forth a bawling piece against Dr. Griffith and somebody else another
scurrilous Libel, entitled, EYE SALVE: I did not think it much material to
reply upon these, the people being already convinced of the Right; but however,
being excited to it by a private Friend, I returned these following Answers.


