THE PARALLEL OR, AN An ACCOUNT OF THE GROWTH OF KNAVERY, Under the PRETEXT OF
Arbitrary Government AND POPERY. With Some Observations upon a PAMPHLET
ENTITLED, An ACCOUNT OF THE Growth of Popery, etc.

London, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

TO THE READER.
THere came forth about two years since, a Couple of Seditious Pamphlets in
quarto; The one, just upon the heel of the other: The former was entitled, An
Account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government in England, etc. which
was followed by A Seasonable Argument to persuade all the Grand Juries in
England, etc. the latter being only an abstract and explication of the design
of the other. This Parallel was in the same Year Printed and Published by way
of reflection upon the aforesaid Libles, with references to the Pages of that
Edition; and the Controversy should have rested there, if the Author had not
found himself honestly obliged to reprint the Reply; the other side having
revived the occasion of it, since the death of Andrew Marvel, by a Posthumous
Impression, with his name at length to it.

There was at that time no mention or thought of the PLOT; and a man may see
with half an eye that his buzzing so much about the matter of Religion, was
only to make the sedition go down the better. For the main drift and bent of
his Discourse is only the paring of the Kings nails, clipping the wings of his
Prerogative, advancing a pretended Sovereignty in the people, and cutting his
Majesty off from the most essential privileges of all Government, defaming his
Administration, and furnishing the world with Cases and Expedients how a
Subject may kill his Prince with a good Conscience.

Now if a body should speculate upon the Reasons of Re-publishing Mr. Marvells
Pamphlet at this time, it would make the Preface longer then the Book, to
recount them. First, there is money to be got by it, and that is five and fifty
reasons in one. Secondly, the Writing or Publishing of a Libell, is looked upon
by some to be the highway to preferment, as a prickear'd Anabaptist said to
other day, about the Appeal from the Country to the City; It Is a National
quarrel (says he) and the Nation will stand by me in it. Thirdly, as the design
gets ground, so it gathers confidence; and that which in 77. would have been
worth two or three hundred pound to the Discoverer, may be worth twice as much
now in 79. to the Publisher and Printer. There may be a fourth end in it, to
Canonize Mr. Marvel (now in his grave) if not for a Saint, yet for a Prophet,
in showing how pat the Popish Plot falls out to his conjecture; and that he
sees further into a millstone then another man: and why may not the Replicant
as well be taken for a Prophet, that foretold the Growth of Fanaticism, as well
as he did the Growth of Popery, and upon as good grounds too? Dr. Don in his
Ignatius's Conclave, makes Ignatius to be so indu'd with the devil, that he was
able to possess the very devil himself. Now whether the Fanatics bring on the
Jesuits Plot, or the Jesuits the Fanatics, by counterpossessing one another,
is not a farthing matter: But that the devil and his dam are now at work in the
shape of Angels of light, to destroy our Sacred Sovereign, the Church of
England, and the Civil Government, there is no more doubt to be made, then that
if it were not for the hope of another world, a man had better be hanged out of
the way, then be Honest in this.

If the malevolent intent of the Book it self were not so gross and manifest,
that a man may run and read it, we could produce several other Instances of
the same temper that fell from the same pen, and spoke the man as much an Enemy
to the Monarchy of England as to the Ministers: And it is no wonder, that the
Secretary to a Commonwealth should write with the Spirit of a Re-publican: But
we shall spare his memory in that particular, and only tell the Reader in one
word more, that though the many turns of State that have happened since Mr.
Marvells Account of the Growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government came first
abroad; have laid the book open to further confutation and censure; we shall
yet take no advantage of those Events, but leave this following discourse to
shift for it self, naked and unlick'd, as it came first into the world.

THE PARALLEL, OR AN ACCOUNT OF THE GROWTH of KNAVERY, etc.
SIR,
TO give you my Opinion freely of the two Libels that you sent me, methinks the
Design of them lies too open to do much Mischief; for I never saw so barefaced
an Araignment of the Government, and all the Parts of it: King, Lords, Commons,
Judges, Ministers of State; they are all of them made Conspirators, against the
Sovereign Multitude, forsooth; and when the Libeller has done with the Body of
the Commons, he gives you a Defamatory List of betwixt two and three hundred of
their Members, provoking and abusing all Sober Interests; Insomuch, that he has
left himself nothing to trust to, but the contemplation of a General Tumult,
which is the very Point he drives at in his Appeal to the Rabble.

The Man, I confess, is a great Master of Words; but then his Talent is that
which the Lord St. Albans calls Matter of Wonder without Worthiness; being
rather the Suppleness and Address of a Tumbler, than the Force and Vigor of a
Man of Business. And you cannot but observe too, that his Excursions, many of
them, are unmannerly and Vulgar, and fitter for the Stage of a Merry-Andrew, or
a Iack-Pudding, than for a Paper of State.

You would have me guess at the Author; and you might as well bid me tell you
the right Father of a Child by a common Strumpet: But I think I may call him
Legion, for they are MANY; and there is a Club to his Pen, as well as to his
Pocket. This I dare assure you, that the Author of A Letter from a
Parliament Man to his Friend in the Country, concerning the Proceedings of the
House of Commons, etc. in 75. is very particularly acquainted with the Author
of An Account of the Growth of Popery, and Arbitrary Government, etc. and the
Seasonable Argument, etc. that followed it, in 77.

The Pretense of the former Pamphlet is exhibited in the Title of it: viz, An
Account of the Growth of Popery, and Arbitrary Government in England: And more
particularly from November 1675, to July 1677. Upon these Nineteen Months the
Composer has bestowed precisely Nineteen Sheets of Paper, and laid himself out
most wonderfully in his Politics and Conceits, for the better Grace and Relish
of the Discourse: But the Malignity of it is so rank, that there is scarce a
Page where the Poison has not eaten quite thorough the Vernish, and discovered
the Spring and Malice of the Design. View it narrowly, and you shall find the
Pique to be as well Personal as Seditious, and the Work only of some Mercenary
Pen to serve his principall's Animosity, as well as his Ambition. For a Man may
see with half an Eye, how he aggravates, or extenuates; disparages or commends,
reflects upon, or passes over, as well Actions, as Men, according to the
various Aspects of Affections or Parties; and without any regard to the Pulse
or Truth of Public Proceedings. By his Vein of improving the Invective Humor,
it looks in some places as if he were Transprosing the First Painter; only he
has changed his Battery, which is a Property peculiar to his Party, constantly
to hate those that are uppermost.

I was once a thinking to write a Just Reply upon the whole Relation, and to
lay open the falsehood of many Passage in it, in matter of Fact; the Partiality
of it in others; how perverted, and misapplied it is throughout; and to show
what Gapp^, and Maimes the Compiler of it has left in the Story, purposely to
divert the Reader from minding the Coherence of Actions, and the reasonable
Congruity of Counsels, and Affairs: What uncharitable and illogical inferences
he has drawn from matters as remote as Tenterdon Steeple from being the cause
of Goodwin Sands. This was the Method I had propounded to my self, but upon
second Thoughts I quitted it, for these Reasons. First, It would have been 'too
tedious; for I must in Honesty have printed the Libel as well as the Reply,
which in Proportion would have amounted to near forty sheets of Paper.
Secondly, It would have been superfluous; for part of my Business being the
Vindication of Truth from Calumny: I find the thing already done to my Hand, in
the common Sentence that is passed upon it for a lewd and shameless Imposture.
And Thirdly, The Author himself, you see, has upon better consideration reduced
his Pamphlet of 19 Sheets, into another of Three, as a more compendious
Exposition of his Meaning: I speak of that Libel which you sent me, under the
Name of A Seasonal le Argument to persuade all the Grand Iuries in England to
Petition for a New Parliament; or a List of the Principal Laborers in the
great Design of Popery, and Arbitrary Power, etc. So that my Task is only to
make good in my Discourse the Parallel that I promised you in my Title, and then
to pass some Remarks upon the Scope, and Venom of the Pamphlets themselves.

Now to the end that you may not take the Libels here in question for
Originals, let me assure you that these Notable Pieces are neither better, nor
worse, than the Old Declarations of 40, and 41 only Turned, and New trimmed; The
Contrivance, the Positions, and the Drift the very same; and upon the whole
Matter, there is so near a resemblance betwixt them, that one Egg is not liker
another. If you would have a full History of the Faction, you may read it at
large in Bancroft's Dangerous Positions or H^ylin's AERIUS REDIVIVUS. But my
purpose is principally to compare the Project of 77. with that of 40. and 41.
and by tracing the Footsteps of that Rebellion, from the Undeniable Fact of
things passed, to gather some probable conjecture at things to come.

To begin my Parallel with the Alarm of Popery, and Arbitrary Government in
1677, take notice that it was likewise the Pretext and the very Foundation of
the Rebellion in 41. A Malignant and Pernicious Design (says the Remonstrance
of December 15. 1641.) of subverting the fundamental Laws, and Principles of
Government, upon which the Religion and Justice of this Kingdom is firmly
established. Husband's Collections, p. 4, and in the same Page he tells us of
Such Counselors and Courtiers, as for Private Ends have engaged themselves to
further the Interest of some Foreign Princes or States, to the Prejudice of His
Majesty and the State at home, Which Counselors, and Courtiers of those days,
are now translated into French Pensioners and Conspirators in 1677. But if you
would see the Reformers in their Colors, read the Declaration, and
Protestation of the Lords and Commons in Parliament (as they style it) to the
Kingdom, and to the whole World, where, beside the Horrid Invocation of
Almighty God to Countenance the Juggle, the whole stress of the Quarrel is laid
upon the Kings being Popishly Inclined; and the War founded upon that Execrable
Cheat. The Kings Counsels, and Resolutions (Say they) are so engaged to the
Popish Party, for the Suppression and Extirpation of the true Religion, that
all hopes of Peace and Protection are excluded; and that it is fully intended
to give Satisfaction to the Papists, by Alteration of Religion etc. And a
little further they say that the King endeavored to keep off all Iealousies
and Suspicions, by many fearful Oaths and Imprecations of maintaining the
Protestant Religion. But what were all their Stories of Popish Plots,
Intercepted Letters, Dark Conspiracies, but only Artifices to gull the
Credulous and Silly Vulgar? For the King was so far from being Popishly
affected, that never any Prince purged himself of an Imputation, by two more
Credible and Dreadful Solemnities: The First, Publicly upon the Sacrament in
Christ-Church Oxon. 1643; and afterward, at his Death upon the Scaffold. Now
see the Harmony betwixt Those Remonstrants, and Our Libeller in his Growth of
Popery. There has now for diverse Years, says he, a Design been carried on to
change the Lawful Government of England into an absolute Tyranny, and to
convert the established Protestant Religion into downright Popery. p. 3. He
begins in the Method of the Remonstrants with a General Charge upon Ill
Ministers, and he shall Advance with them too, next step, to an Attaque upon
the King himself. And not a Pin matter what is said on either side to the
Contrary.

It is true, (says the Growth of Popery p. 155.) that by his Majesty and the
Churches Care, under God's special Providence, the Conspiracy has received
frequent disappointments, etc. And do not the Remonstrants on the other side
say as much for the Late King? That His Majesty indeed had past more Bills to
the* Advantage of the Subject, than had been in many Ages, page 16. But how
comes our Libeller to be so kind to the Church all on a sudden? From whose Pen
there never fell any thing yet but poison upon that Subject. Can any thing be
kinder than the Remonstrants were to the late King (page 2*) where they
promised to Support His Royal Estate with Honor, and Plenty at Home; with
Power, and Reputation Abroad: and by their Loyal Affections, Obedience, and
Service, to lay a sure and lasting Foundation of the Greatness and Prosperity
of his Majesty and his Royal Posterity after him. But what do you think rather
of the pretended Loyalty of these People afterward, even in the state of an
Actual Rebellion? p. 663. We the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, do in the presence of Almighty God, for the satisfaction of our
Consciences, and the Discharge of that great Trust which lies upon us, make
this Protestation and Declaration to this Kingdom and Nation, and to the Whole
World, that no private Passion, or Respect, no evil Intention to his Majesty's
Person, no Design to the prejudice of his just Honor, and Authority, engaged
us to raise Forces, and take up Arms against the Authors of this War, wherewith
the Kingdom is now enflamed. And does not our Libeller follow the Remonstrants
in their Hypocrisy too? This Book (says he, p. 156.) though of an extraordinary
Nature, as the Case required, and however it may be calumniated by interressed
Persons, was written with no other Intent, than of mere Fidelity, and Service
to his Majesty; and God forbid that it should have any other Effect, than that
the mouth of all Iniquity, and Flatterers may be stopped, and that his Majesty
having discerned the Disease, may with his healing Touch apply the Remedy: For
so far is the Relator himself from any sinister Surmize against his Majesty, or
from suggesting it to others, etc. The Pamphlet, I confess, is, as he calls it,
A Book of an Extraordinary Nature; but why does he say, As the Case required?
Where Is the Importance of it; unless he means, that it was the very Nick of
Time for him to embroyl the Nation: And for the Interessed Persons, who (he
says) may Calumniate it; they are only the King and His Ministers, who are all
of them the subject of his Scoptical and Malevolent Satyr. Of his Intent, we
shall speak hereafter.

This is not the first time that we have heard of Words smoother than Oil,
which yet are very Swords. It is the very Style that brought the Late King to
the Block; and the Savior of the World was betrayed by a Hail Master, and a
/kiss. It is the very Crown of the Parallel betwixt 77, and 41. Now to proceed:
What was the Old Remonstrance, but a Spiteful and Invidious Misrepresentation
of the State of the Kingdom, under the Notion of Declaring Common Grievances?
(For His Majesty's Healing Touch too no doubt) and is not that also the very
Aim, and Profession of these two Libels? What is the Publication of This same
Scandalous List, but the Old Trick over again, of Posting those Members for
Staffordians, that would not consent to the Death of the Earl of Strafford? And
is not their Tampering of the Grand juries to Petition for a New Parliament,
the Old Practice revived of drawing and folliciting Petitions against
Grievances of their own framing; and menaging Affairs of State by Tumults?
Would not our Remonstratour of 77, rather than his Life, be at the Old Sport
again, with a Kennel of Brutes at his Heels, in full Cry, with No Bishops, No
Popish Lords, No Evil Counselors, No Rotten Members, No Porters Lodge; and at
last, No King too, which was the very Fact in Consequence, upon this Method.

So soon as the Remonstrants (those Sons of (...)) had laid open their Father's
nakedness, with a Malicious Aggravation of all Errors and Misfortunes, (beside
Falsehoods innumerable) to Irritate the Multitude against their Superiors;
their next Art was to draw that Party to themselves, which they had now
detached from the Government; with an Oh! That we were made Judges in Israel!
Boasting what wonderful things they had the^ upon the Anvil for the Public
Good; and not forgetting to arrogate all those Acts to themselves, which his
Majesty had passed of his proper Grace and Bounty. Other things (say they, p.
15.) of main Importance for the Good of this Kingdom, are in Proposition; as
the Establishing and Ordering the King's Revenues, that so the Abuse of
Officers, and Superfluity of Expenses may be cut off, and the necessary
Disbursements for his Majesty's Honor, the Defense and Government of the
Kingdom, may be more certainly provided for: the Regulating of Courts of
Justice, and Abridging both the Delays and Charges of Lawsuits, etc. See now
if our Reformer of 77. does not fish with the very same Bait. The House of
Commons) says he, p. 63.) took up again such Public Bills as they had on foot
in their former sitting, and others that might either remedy present, or
prevent future Mischief: As the Bill for Habeas Corpus; That against sending
Men prisoners beyond Seas; That against Raising of Many without the Consent of
Parliament; That against Papists sitting in either House, etc. The Libels in
sine of 77, are so exact a Counterpart of the others of 41, that two Tallies do
not strike truer: and undoubtedly such a Correspondence in Method, cannot be
without some Conformity also of Design.

There needs no other Argument to prove the Late Rebellion to have been
originally a Conspiracy against the Government, than the Proportion that
appears betwixt the Means, and the End; and the orderly Connection of proper
Causes and Regular Effects. For it was a Perfect Train of Artifice, Hypocrisy
and Imposture, from one end of it to the other. The Confederacy was formed in a
Cabal of Scotch and English Presbyterians; as appears not only from their
Correspondent Practices in both Nations; but from his late Majesty's Charge
against the Five Members; and likewise from the Care that was taken upon his
Majesty's Restoration to date the English Act of Indemnity from the beginning
of the Scotch Tumults (Jan. 1. 1637.) which was three Years before the Meeting
of the Long Parliament in November 1640. The two Ministers that stood in the
Gap betwixt the Conspiracy, and the Government, (and who were only cut off, as
appeared by the Sequel, to clear the passage to the King himself) were the Earl
of Strafford, and Archbishop Laud: So that their First Attaque was upon the
Earl, and their next upon the Archbishop, under the Notion of Evil Counselors;
and upon the Common Charge of Popery, and Arbitrary Proceeding, their
Impeachments were carried on by Tumults, and these Brave Men were rather baited
to Death by Beasts, than Sentenced with any Color of Law, or Justice: And as
they lived, so they died, the Resolute Assertors of the English Monarchy and
Religion: The Earl of Strafford in May 41; But the Archbishop was kept
languishing in the Tower, till Ian. 44. And their Crime was not in Truth, their
being Men of Arbitrary Principles themselves, but for being the Opposers of
those Principles in Others.

As the Remonstrants in 4^, for want of Papists, in Practice, and Profession,
directed their Spleen against the Kings Ministers, only as Persons Popishly
affected, (which in time came to be most Injuriously applied to his Majesty,
and his whole Party) Just so does our Libeller in 1677. Were these Conspirators
(says he) but avowed Papists, they were the more Honest, the less dangerous,
and their Religion were Answerable for the Errors they might commit in Order
to promote it: But these are Men (says he, in the next page.) Obliged by all the
most Sacred Ties of Malice and Ambition, to advance the ruin of the King and
Kingdom; and qualified much better than Others, under the Name of Good
Protestants, to effect it. As who shauld say; Popery is to be brought in by
some that pass for Good Protestants. (As Rebellion and Tyranny were brought in
by the Remonstrants, under the Profession of Loyalty and Duty to their
Country.) A very Compendious way of making every Man, that will not be a
Traitor, a Papist. For who can say what any Man is, or what he is not, in his
Heart?

From his Majesty's Yielding in the Business of the Earl of Strafford, the
Faction took their Measures how to deal with him in Other Cases; and never
left, till by gradual Encroachments, and Approaches, they first stripped him of
his Friends; Secondly, of his Royal Authority; Thirdly, of his Revenue; and
Lastly, of his Life. Whereas, had but this Pious and Unfortunate King followed
the Advice of his Royal Father to Prince Henry, he might upon cheaper Terms
have preserved himself, and his Three Kingdoms. Take heed, (says King James) to
such Puritans; very Pests in the Church, and Commonweal, whom no Deserts can
Oblige; neither Oaths, or Promises Bind. Breathing nothing but Sedition, and
Calumnies, and making their own Imaginations (without any warrant of the Word)
the square of their Conscience. I protest before the Great God, (and since I am
here as upon my Testament, it is no place for me to ly in) that ye shall never
find with any Highlands or Border-Thieves, greater Ingratitude, and more Lies,
and vile Perjuries than with these Phanatick Spirits. King James his Works, p.
305, and 160.

Upon the Ripping up of Public Grievances, it was but matter of Course to
follow their Complaints with Petitions for Redress; and the Good King, on the
other hand, to heap Coals of fire upon their Heads, denied them nothing: But
the Two First Bills that his Majesty passed were Fatal to him: That for the
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, and the other for the Continuance of the
Parliament. They complained of the Star Chamber; High Commission Court;
Ship-Moneys; Forrest-Laws; Stannary-Courts; Tonnage, and Poundage, etc. and had
every Point for the Asking: Nay and as'an instance of his good Faith and
Meaning, his Majesty took some of their Principals even into his very Council.
But so soon as he had parted with so much, as almost put it into their Power to
take the Rest, they began then to think of setting up for themselves (see his
Majesty's Declaration of August 12. 1642.) and nothing but a thorough
Reformation they said would ever do the Work. Now see the Gradation. First, The
People must be Alarmed with the Noise of Tyranny, and Popery; and the Evil
Counselors must be Removed that are Said, not Proved, to stand that was
inclined. His Majesty must be humbly Petitioned by Both Houses to Employ such
Counselors, Ambassadors, and other Ministers, in managing his Business at
Home, and Abroad, as the Parliament may have Cause to conside in, etc. Nay, It
may often fall out, they say, that the Commons may have just Cause to take
Exceptions at some Men for being Counselors, and yet not charge those Men with
Crimes; for there be grounds of Diffidence, which lie not in Proof; there are
Others which though they may be proved yet are not legally Criminal; to be a
Known Favourer of Papists, or to have been very Forward in defending or
Countenancing some great Offenders questioned in Parliament, etc. So that at
first Dash all the King's Officers are but Tenants at the Will of the Faction.
The next Step is, To fill the Places of those whom they cast out, with
Ministers, and Officers of their Own Choosing; as well Privy Counselors, as
Judges. As in the 19 Propositions of Ian. 2. 42. Wherein they demand, The
Translation of the Power of Choosing Great Officers, and Ministers of State,
from the King to the Two Houses. Secondly, All matters of Sat in the Interval
of Parliaments to be debated, and concluded by a Council so chosen, and in
Number not above 25, nor under 15; and no Public Act esteemed of any validity,
as proceeding from the Royal Authority, unless it be done by the Advice and
Consent of the Major Part of that Council; attested under their Hands, and
these also sworn to the Sense of Both Houses. Thirdly The Lords, and Commons
must be entrusted with the Militia. Fourthly, His Majesty may appoint, but the
Two Houses, or the Council (in such manner as aforesaid) must approve of all
Governors of Forts and Castles. Lastly, No Peers hereafter made, must sit, or
vote in Parliament, unless admitted thereunto by the Consent of Both Bouses.

By this time the Plot is Ripe for a Rebellion; they Levy War, Impose Oaths,
Seize the Revenues of the Church and Crown; Kill, Plunder, and Emprison, their
Fellow Subjects; Depose and Murder their Sovereign, under a Form of Public
Justice; by these Means advancing themselves into That Arbitrary Power which
they pretended to Fear; Over-Turning the Government, under the Color of a Zeal
to Support it: and instead of Setting us Right in our Religious and Civil
Liberties, they left us neither Church nor Law, nor King, nor Parliament, nor
Properties, nor Freedoms. Behold the Blessed reformation; and Remember that the
Outcries against Tyranny, Popery, and Evil Counselors, were the Foundation of
it. What was their Covenant, but a Blind to their Designs? A Popular Sacrament
of Religious Disobedience; and only a Mark of Discrimination who were against
the King, and who for him? Nay, in the very Contemplation of their Purpose,
they knew beforehand, That there was no gaining of their Point, but by Rapine,
Sacrilege, Perjury, Treason, and Blood

After these Notorious Violations of Faith, Honor, Humanity, and Religion; to
the Common destruction of Prince, Government, and People, and All upon the same
Bottom with our Late Libels; what can this Underminer of Parliamenns, What can
our Geneva-Faux find to say for himself? Is not Mercury as good Poison in 77,
as it was in 41? Do we not strike Fire the same way Now, that we did Then? And
may not a Spark in the Gun-Room do as much Mischief This Year, as it did
Thirty, or Forty Years ago? Are not the People as much Tinder now as they were
Formerly? and as apt to take Ill Impressions? What if the same Method should
work the same Confusion over again? or in Truth, what is there else to be
expected? For the same Cause acting at Liberty, must eternally produce the same
Effect. There Is no Chance-medley, or Misadventure in the Case; but the Thing is
manifestly done with Prepense Malice and on set Purpose to embroyl the State:
As upon Examination of the Matter will undeniably appear.

You cannot but take Notice, That the Author of The Growth of Popery, does upon
the Main, principally labor these Two things. First, To insinuate that the
King is in some Cases Accomptable to his People. (of which hereafter) And
Secondly, To provoke the People, by suggesting that their Souls, and their
Liberties are at stake, to make use of that Power. From the former Proposition
he passes into a Florid and Elaborate Declamation againg Pop^ery; and when he
has wrought up the Figure to a height, to make it Terrible and Odious, his next
Business is to tell the People, That this Gobling is coming in among them, and
to possess the Multitude with the Apprehension of a Formed Conspiracy against
our Religion and Government: And this too, under the Countenance of an
Historical Deduction of Affairs; but with the Faith of a Iesuitical Legend;
wherein all the Kings Ministers are in General Terms branded for Conspirators.

His Hand being now in, he is resolved to go thorough-stitch, and nothing
scapes him that falls in his way: He makes the House of Lords (p. 72.) to be
Felon of it self; and (p. 82.) Non Compos; Arraigning their Proceedings in
several Cases with Boldness and Contempt. But he makes a great deal bolder yet
with the House of Commons; he divides them into Three Parts. It is too
notorious to be concealed (says he, p. 73.) that near a Third part of the
House, have Beneficial Offices under his Majesty in the Privy Council, the
Army, the Navy, the Law, the Household, the Revenue both in England, and
Ireland, or in Attendance upon his Majesty's person. Upon this Exception, he
expounds himself, that ' It Is to be feared, their Gratitude to their Master,
with their own Interest, may tempt them beyond their Obligation to the Public.
What can be more Audacious than this Charge upon King, Lords, and Commons, in
the Face of a Sitting Parliament? He says that It is too Notorious to be
concealed etc. And where is the Crime, or the Shame, I beseech you, for an
Officer of the Kings, to be a Member of the House of Commons? As if he that has
an Office, and he that has none, had not Both of them the same Master; or that
a Man might not as well be a Knave without an Office, as with it. This was the
Complaint also of 41, against Officers, till the Complainants had gotten those
Offices themselves, and then all was quiet. This is only a slyer way of
declaring the King's Servants Enemies to the Kingdom, and Erecting an
Opposition betwixt the Common and Inseparable Interests of his Majesty, and his
Subjects. Beside that, the same Reason would reach to the Excluding of the
King's Servants from any other Trust in the Government, as well as from That of
a Member in the House of Commons; and his Majesty's Favor should at that rate
Incapacitate any Man for Public Business. If the Libeller had opened his mouth
a little Wider, he would have told us in Plain English, that there are three,
or four of Oliver's Old Servants out of Office, and that the King is strangely
over-seen to bestow his Boons upon a Company of Fellows that never had any hand
in the bringing of him to the Crown, by the Murder of his Father, as they did.
But yet he is content upon some Terms, that they may be admitted, provided that
they do not crowd into the House in numbers beyond Modesty, (page 74.) which
may seem to be some amends for the Rascals he made of them the very Page
before. Suppose (says he) that the Question concerning this Prorogation, were
by the Custom of Parliaments to be justified, (which has not been done
hitherto) yet who that desires to maintain the Reputation of an Honest Man,
would not have laid hold upon so plausible an Occasion, to break Company, when
it was grown so scandalous? And then he assigns the matter of Scandal. For it
is too notorious (says he) to be concealed, that near a Third Part of the House
have Beneficial Offices under his Majesty, etc. Here Is a great deal of Business
done in one Period. First, He pronounces this Parliament void, and consequently
all their Proceedings to be Nullities. Secondly; He will not allow any Man to
be Honest, that right or wrong would not improve the Opportunity of Breaking
This Parliament. Thirdly, He makes the House of Commons to be scandalous
Company, and scandalous for having Beneficial Offices under his Majesty. The
first time that ever I heard the King's Bounty was a Scandal to any Man. But to
my Point.

And yet (says he, p. 77.) These Gentleman being full, and already in
Employment, are more good Natured, and less dangerous to the Public, than
those that are Hungry, and out of Office, who may by probable Computation make
another Third Part of this House of Commons. And a while after, They are all of
them, he says to be bought, and sold. And then he goes on; (p. 78.) There is a
Third Part still remaining, but as contrary in themselves, as Light and
Darkness. These are either the Worst, or the Best of Men; The first are most
profligate Persons, etc. Concluding (p. 79.) That it is less difficult to
conceive how Fire was first brought to Light in the World, than how any thing
Good could ever be produced out of a House of Commons so Constituted. And (p.
149.) he calls them this House, or BARN of Commons; treating the Members
accordingly. They list themselves (says he) into some Court Faction, and it is
as well known among them to what Lord each of them retain, as when formerly
they wore Coats and Badges.

And he has not done with them yet neither; for nothing will do his Jobb, but a
Final Dissolution; Considering (says he, page 81.) how doubtful a Foot this
long Parliament now stood upon by this long Prorogation there could not have
been a more Legal, or however, no more Wise, and Honest a thing done, than for
Both the Lords and Commons to have Separated Themselves, etc. I could wish that
he had not appealed from the Legality of the thing, to the Wisdom, and Honesty
of it: But however Legal, or not Legal, the thing is to be done: For he knows
very well that so long as this House of Commons continues in Being, Rebellion
can never turn up Trump again. But it was otherwise ordered, he says, and so he
betakes himself to an Experiment of Tampering, all the Grand Iuries in England,
to Petition for a New Parliament, upon the Credit of his Story concerning the
Corruptions of this. Wherein by the Foul Reflections he has past upon many
Persons of Known, and Eminent Example, for Piety, Integrity, and Moderation, he
has utterly disappointed the Malice of his Scandal upon the Rest. It was well
enough said, methought, by a Worthy Member of the House of Commons; Do not you
see- says he, how they have Libelled me in that damned List of the
Parliament Men? One told him that he was mistaken, for his name was not in it.
Why, that is the Business, says he, for it is only a Libel upon those that are
left out. Nay, rather then fail, he does as good as Advise a downright
Insurrection, (in these Words, p. 155.) It is now come to the fourth Act (says
he) and the next Scene that opens may be Rome, or Paris, (by the Plot, it
should be rather Geneva, or Edinburgh) yet Men sit by, like Idle Spectators,
and still give money toward their own Tragedy. And why does he blame them for
Sitting by? And like Idle SPECTATORS? unless he would have them enter into
Tumult, and Action, A very fair Encouragement to make Men bestir themselves,
and without more Ceremony, lay violent Hands upon the Public. Good God! That
ever such a Creature as this should propound to himself by the Dash of a Pen,
to move the Foundations of the English Government.

From the Parliament, he descends to the Judges. Alas! (says he) the Wisdom and
Probity of the Law went off, for the most Part, with Good Sir Matthew Hales, and
Justice is made a mere Property. And then he raves upon The Constant
Irregularities, and Injustice from Term to Term, of those that administer the
Judicature betwixt his Majesty, and his People (p. 154.) This Poisonous Arrow
(meaning the Choice of the Judges) strikes to the very Heart of Government, and
could come from no Quiver, but that of the Conspirators. What French Council,
what Standing Forces, what Parliamentary Bribes, what National Oaths, and all
the other Machinations of Wicked Men have not yet been able to effect, may be
more compendiously Acted by Twelve Judges in Scarlet (p. 66.) And is not this
directly 41 again? When no Judges would serve the Turn, but those that betrayed
the People to Slavery, and His Sacred Majesty to the Scaffold? He has another
Fling at the Sheriffs. If any Worthy Person (says he, p. 80.) chance to carry
the Election, some Mercenary or Corrupt Sheriff makes a double Return; and so
the Cause is handed to the Committee of Elections, etc. And truly he does not
give either the King, or the Monarchy of England, much better Quarter than he
allows the rest; as you shall see by and by: So that nothing less than the
Thorough Reformation of 41 will do the Work of 77. And the whole Frame of the
Government must be unhinged, to gratify the Caprice of a Pragmatical
Mal-content.

The Passion, and Malice of the Libeller is so evident, that he does half
confess it himself, by an Anticipation of the Charge. The Relator, (says he,
page 155.) foresees that he shall on both hands be blamed for pursuing this
Method. Some on the One side will expect that the very Persons should have been
Named: whereas he only gives Evidence to the Fact, and leaves the Malefactors
to those that have Power of Enquiry. If he can but acquit himself on the Other
hand for Writing the Libel, as well as on This for not Naming the Persons, he
will do well enough. For first; It is not his Business to Prove, but to Defame.
Secondly, The Naming of Particulars would have restrein'd the Calumny: whereas
his work is to wound All the Kings Ministers that Faithfully adhere to their
Master in the Generality of the Scandal. Thirdly; He judges it sufer, and more
expedient to amuse the Multitude with Iealousies that cannot be Disproved, than
point blank to fasten upon Particulars an Accusation that cannot be Proved.
What does he mean by saying that he gives Evidence to Fact? It is the first
Libel certainly that ever was given in Evidence. But where is the Relator
himself all this while, upon whose bare word, Parliaments are to be-Dissolv'd;
Ministers of State Arraigned; Judges Displaced; and the whole Government new
Modeled? What if he should appear, and be found at last to have been one of
Oliver's Cabal? Would any Man desire a more Competent Witness for Charles the
Second, than the Martherer of Charles the Frst? But he has been so used to call
the King himself Traitor, that he may be allowed to call his Friends
Conspirators.

On the other hand (says he page 155.) some will represent this Discourse (as
they do all Books that tend to detect their Conspiracy against his Majesty, and
Kingdom) as if It too were written against the Government. For now of late, as
soon as any Man is gotten into Public Employment by ill Acts, and by worse
continues it; he, if it please the Fates, is thenceforward the Government, and
by being Criminal, pretends to be Sacred. This is only crying Whore first, to
call those People Conspirators, who are likely to censure him for a Libeller:
which with his Learned Leave, is but a Course Figure neither; and runs much
better in the Common Billinsgate of You are a Knave your self to say that I am
one: Which in few words is all that is in it. For he does not offer so much as
one Syllable in his Justification, but with another Lash or two at the King's
Ministers, winds up his Period. Now of late, says, he, (he means I suppose,
since Oliver went out of Play) as soon as any Man is got into Public
Employment by ill Acts, etc. He should do well to consider who Governs, before
he says that Villainy is the ready way to Preferment; He if it please the Fates,
is thenceforward the Government, and by being Criminal, pretends to be Sacred.
I answer That in the Case of a Public, and Legal Accusation, the Minister is
not the Government; for the Charge terminates in, and operates no further than
his Person; but in the Affront of a Nameless, and Indefinite Libel, the King
himself is wounded in a General Reflection upon his Ministers; for it is his
Choice, and Commission, not the Officers Misdemeanour, that is there in
Question: Nor does he pretend to be Sacred because he is Criminal; but the
Libeller (who still writes after the Remonstrance) makes every thing Criminal
that is Sacred, and gives the Construction of Rebellion to Loyalty, and of
Loyalty to Rebellion.

But if there be not Mischief in the very Project of this Libel, there is
nothing at all in it; for I cannot frame to my self the least Color or
Possibility of any other End. He says, It was his Design indeed to give
Information, but not to turn Informer. That is to say, He would set the People
together by the Ears, and no body should know who did it. Now see the End he
propounds. That those (says the Relator) to whom he as only a Public Enmity,
no Private Animosity, might have the Privilege of Statesmen to Repent at the
last hour, and by one single Action to expiate all their former misdemeanors.
Which is even as Civil a way as a body would wish, of Recommending a Public
Minister to his last Prayer. It remains now to speak a word to the Timing of
his Enterprise, which, in a wicked Sense, is in Truth the Glory of it.

I shall not need to speculate upon the Power, and Designs of France, the
deplorable State of Flanders, or the Consequences that must inevitably reflect
upon England in the Loss of the Spanish Neitherlands: the matter being agreed
upon at all hands, that an Union of Affections, Counsels, and Interests, was
never more necessary to this Nation than at this Instant it is; and that Delay
is Death to us. This being given for granted, it is likewise as certain, that
nothing under Heaven, but the Credit of this Sitting Parliament, and the
Blessing of a Fair Unnderstanding betwixt his Majesty, and his Two Houses can
preserve this Kingdom, (Morally speaking) from Irreparable Ruin. And yet this
is the Critical Juncture that the Libeller has made choice of, for the blasting
both of the Government, and the Administration of it; for the Violent
Dissolution even of this most necessary Parliament; for the sowing of
Jealousies, and alienating the Peoples Hearts from their Duty to their
Sovereign. Let the World now judge betwixt the Libeller, and the pretended
Conspiratours; who are more probably the Pensioners of France; those that are
only Calumniated in the Dark, and without any Proof, or the least Color of it,
or the Calumniators themselves, (I mean, the Libeller and his Adherents) who
are doing all that is possible toward the Facilitating of the Work of France,
and the Putting of England out of Condition to defend it self. What is it, I
beseech you, that can now support us in this Exigent, but the Wisdom, and
Reputation of a Parliament? which they are at this very Instant, laboring to
defame and dissolve: Distracting and Dividing the Nation, at a Time when our
best Union is little enough to preserve us; and obstructing those Parliamentary
supplys, without which we must unavoidably perish: For it is to this Session,
that the Libeller directs the Mock of Still giving Money toward their own
Tragedy. But sure we are not so mad yet, as to take the Subverters of our
Church and State, for the Advocates of our Religion and Freedom. I would know
in the next place, What any Man can say to excuse his Growth of Popery, from
being a Daring, and a Spightful Libel against the King, and his Government. And
I shall begin with the Liberties he takes with his Majesty, sometime in direct
Terms, and otherwhile under the Blind of the Conspirators.

Speaking of the Shutting up of the Exchequer (page 31.) The Crown (says he)
made Prize of the Subject, and broke all Faith, and Contract at Home, in order
to the breaking of them Abroad with more Advantage. The Copy has in This Point
outdone the Original; for the Remonstrants were in Arms, before they presumed
to word it at this Audacious height. Take it in the Insolent Representation of
the Fact; the Malicious Construction and Presumption of the Inteut; and to Both
these, add the Sordid Manner of Reflecting upon an Extraordinary thing done
upon an Extraordinary Occasion, and wherein the Subject has since received so
Ample, and Generous Satisfaction; the Clamor is so foul, as if an Egyptian
Plague were broken in upon us, and the Frogs of Geneva crept into the King's
Chambers. And it is much at the same Rate that he treats the King about his
Declaration of Indulgence, (page 33.) Hereby (says he,) all the Penal Laws
against Papists, for which former Parliaments had given so many Supplies, and
against Non-conformists, for which this Parliament had paid more largely, were
at one Instant suspended, in order to defrand the Nation of all that Religion,
which they had so dearly purchased, etc. Observe here how ungratefully he
charges the Design of this Declaration to be The defrauding the Nation of their
Religion; which, on the contrary, was a Manifest Concession, only to gratify
the restless Importunities of his own Gang. And see what Sport he makes, but
five or six Lines further, with the very Reason of that Law which he takes here
so hainously to be suspended. It appears (says he) at the first Sight, that Men
ought to enjoy the same Propriety, and Protection in their Consciences, which
they have in their Lives, Liberties, and Estates: But that to take away these
in Penalty for the other, is merely a more Legal, and Gentile way of Padding
upon the Road of Heaven; and that it is only for want of Money, and for want
of Religion, that men take these desperate courses. Now, by his Favor, there
is a great Disparity betwixt a Pretense to Propriety, and Protection in
Consciences, and a Pretense to them, in Lives, Liberties, and Estates; for the
Latter are liable to Violence, and may be taken away, but the Other cannot. And
now he talks of Padding upon this Road; the Remonstrants (as I remember) were
very good at it, that drove away from their Churches, 85. Ministers of 97.
within the Walls of London. We'll agree in the Matter with him, That want of
Money, and want of Religion will put Men upon desperate Courses; for my Charity
persuades me, he would never have written these Libels else. He is a little
positive, methinks, in Averring that a Great Lord lost his Place for defending
the Protestant Religion, (page 44.) But he has forgotten the Statute of his own
Citing ( page 15.) that makes it Incapacity, for saying That the King is a
Papist, or an Introducer of Popery, and that it was the King himself that
removed his Lordship. And what do you think of his Irony, (page 43.) where he
says, that The Parliament, by the Conspirators good Leave; was admitted to sit
again at the day appointed? He tells us of another Affair too, page 51; which
being transmitted to his Majesty was easily changed into a Court intrigue; And
(page 63.) That the Conspiratours might so represent things to his Majesty, as
to incense him against the Parliament, and distrusting all Parliamentary
Advice, to take Counsel from Themselves, from France, and from Necessity.

In this Disloyal and Irreverent License, he drops you a word or two now and
then, before he is aware, against the King himself; and other whiles,
Discharges his Malice to the Government, upon the Heads of Public Ministers.
The Subject Matter of his Complaint is a Tendency of Counfels, and Actions
toward Tyranny, and Popery. But the King (says he, page 4. ( can do no wrong;
and so goes on, nor can he receive wrong. What is this, but a Justification of
all the Violences that were acted upon the late King; even to the very Murder
of him; under that Mortal, and Treasonous Distinction betwixt his AUTHORITY,
and his PERSON? And an Allowance, that the same Course may be taken with his
Royal Successors; The King can receive no wrong; (he says) What does he mean by
this? Is not his Majesty's Breath in his Nostrils? Is he not Flesh and Blood?
Is not his Body liable to Wounds, Distempers, Emprisonment, and Death? He Will
tell you, Yes; but This is not the KING, but the Man, the PERSON: But the KING,
all this while, that is to say, the Authority, is Sacred, and Invulnerable.

Now for Peace, and Brevity sake, let us suppose that this Charge of a Popish,
and Arbitrary Design, does neither Intend nor Reflect any Imputation upon his
Majesty; (his Religion, and his Tenderness of Nature being Unquestionable) It
is yet a worse Libel another way. Worse (I say) both as to the Drift, and to
the Scandal of it, by how much Contempt is more dangerous to a Prince, than
Hatred: For he employs his Utmost Skill to represent his Majesty only Passive
in all his Administrations, and so to lessen the Indubitable Fame of his Royal
Prudence, and Courage among his People.

You see, Sir, the Freedom he takes with the King, and his Ministers; the next
Point will be to enquire how he stands affected to the Government it self. The
Subjects (says he, page 3.) retain their Proportion in the Legislature. In
which saying, he makes them Partners of the Sovereignty, and turns the Monarchy
of England into a Tripartite and Coordinate Government; which is as well
Destructive of Parliaments, on the one hand, as of Royalty, on the other. Upon
the Admittance of this Coordination, any Two of the Three may destroy the
Third: the Two Houses may destroy the King, and the King, with Either of the
Houses, may destroy the Other. Which, if it be so, what Prince that is Imperial
in the Intervals, would ever hazard the Dethroning of himself by a Session? The
making of Laws is a Peculiar, and Incommunicable Privilege of the Supreme
Power, and the Office of the Two Houses in this Case is only Consultive, or
Preparatory; but the Character of Power rests in the Final Sanction, which is
in the King: And Effectually, the Passing of a Bill, is but the granting of a
Request: The Two Houses make the Bill, it is true, but the King makes the Law;
and it is the Stamp, not the Matter, that makes it Current: Nor does the Subject
any otherwise make Laws, than the Petitioner makes Orders of Council.

It is a Suspicious, and Ill-looking Passage that he has, Page 14. As to matter
of Government, says he, If to murder the King, be (as certainly it is) a Fact
so horrid, (he does not say how horrid) how much more Heinous is it to
Assassinate the Kingdom? Here is First involved in this Clause, the Deposing
Position of 41, that the King is Singulis major, Universis minor: For it is
clear that the Comparison was only made to draw on the Preference, and to
possess the People that they have a greater Prize at Stake in the hazard of
their Religion, than in the Tie of their Civil Obedience. (the very Translation
still of 41.) And for their further Encouragement, he tells them (page 4.) that
We have the same Right (modestly understood) in our Propriety, that the Prince
has in his Regality: which carries with it an Innuendo, that the King may as
well Forfeit his Crown, as the Subject his Freehold. It cannot be imagined
that all these Leading and Desperate Hints should fall from a Man of Brains and
sense, by Chance; and you see the whole Tract takes the same Biass.

No King of England (says he, page 58.) had ever so great a Treasure of his
peoples Affections, except what those ill men have (as they have done all the
rest) consumed; whom, but out of an Excess of Love to his Person, the Kingdom
would never (for it never did formerly) so long have suffered. Here Is still the
Crocodile of 41; nothing but Love and Reverence to his late Majesty too, till
his Head was off. But let us Reason the Matter in a word. These Ill men have no
Names, it seems; so that any Man that is near the King, is by this Libeller set
up for a Mark to the Outrage of the People. And then he says, The Kingdom would
never have suffered them. Who are they, I pray, that he calls the Kingdom, but
the Rabble still of 41; the Execrable Instruments of That Rebellion, and the
Hopes of Another? But if the Kingdom would not suffer it, what would he have
them do to help themselves? The Law is open, in Case of any Legal Impeachment,
and it is too Early Days yet for a Tumult,

In his Descant upon the Test, he is wonderfully free of his Figures. Never
(says he page, 59) was so much sense contained in so few words; no Conveyancer
could ever in more Compendious, or Binding Terms have drawn a Dissetlement of
the whole Birthright of England. This Test has made a great Noise, and it will
be worth the while to examine what is said against it. The Form of it is as
follows,

I, A B. do declare that it is not lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever to take
up Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traiterous Position of
taking Arms by his Authority, against his Person or against those that are
Commissioned by him in Pursuance of such Commission. And I do swear that I will
not at any time Endeavor the Alteration of the Government, either in Church or
State. So help me God.

He says, page 57. That it was thrown out of the House in the Plague-year at
Oxford, for fear of a general Infection of the Vitals of this Kingdom; whereas
in truth it was, brought into the House as an Antidote against that Poison
which had seized the Vitals of this Kingdom already; and amounts to no more
than the Unswearing of That on the Behalf of the Government, which had been
formerly sworn for the Destruction of it. The Author of A Letter from a Person
of Quality, etc. calls it, p. 1. A STATE-MASTER-PIECE, and designed to these
Ends. First, To make a Distinct Party, from the rest of the Nation, of the High
Episcopal Man, and the Old Cavalier. Now I took it rather to be a Design of
Uniting All Parties, under one Common Bond of Duty, and Obedience to the
Government: And where That could not be obtained, to distinguish who were for
the Government, and who against it; for the Late King was murdered upon this
very Distinction betwixt his Authority and his Person. Nor is there any
Government upon the Face of the Earth, without some Obligation upon the
Subject, Equivalent to this Test.

Next, says he, they design to have the Government of the Church sworn to as
Unalterable, and so Tacitly owned to be of Divine Right. This, under favor,
is a Fallacy. The Test does not concern it self whether the Government be
Changeable, or not, but only provides that the State may be served with
Magistrates and Officers, that stand well Affected to the Establishment. Those
that do so, will never scruple the Oath; and for those that do not, it is the
very Intent of it to discriminate, and to exclude them: And to encounter the
Covenant, by Virtue of which they dissolved the Late Government, with an Oath
never to endeavor any further Alteration in This. And certainly, a Man may
better swear the Maintaining of a Government According to the Law, than the
Alteration of it Against Law.

Thirdly, says the Author of the Letter, In Requital to the Crown, they declare
the Government Absolute, and Arbitrary, and allow Monarchy, as well as
Episcopacy, to be Jure Divino, and not to be bounded, or limited by Humane Laws.

How This Test does either Declare, or Pretend the Government to be Absolute,
and Arbitrary, I cannot imagine: But on the Contrary, every Man is tied by it
from Endeavoring to make it so, if it be not so already, in Swearing that he
will not at any time endeavor the Alteration of it. And then in his
Explication of the meaning of Church, and State in the Test, by Monarchy, and
Episcopacy in his Reflection upon it, he has done us a greater Kindness than he
was aware of; for he has wholly Disappointed the Spite, and the Intent of his
next Clause. And (as he goes on) to secure all this, they resolve to take away
the Power, and Oppertunity of Parliaments, to alter any thing in Church or
State, only leave them as an Instrument to raise Money, and to pass such Laws,
as the Court, and Church shall have a mind to: The Attempt of any other, how
Necessary soever, must be no less a Crime than Perjury.

See now whether or no this be fair dealing. It is, by his own Confession, the
Form of Monarchy, and the Order of Episcopacy, the Government it self, and not
the Administration of it, that is here in Question. He would have it believed,
That by this Test, Parliaments are barred upon Pain of Perjury from Attempting
any Alteration IN Church or State: whereas they are left at Liberty to debate
what Alterations they please in the Parts of the Government provided, they do
not strike at the Root of the Government it self. And the Deliberation and
Result of the whole Matter, is no more than This. Many of the People (and all
the Principles) are yet Living, that destroyed the King, and the Bishops in the
last Rebellion; Let us have a Care of the same Hands again, and trust none of
them in the Government but under an Oath, not to endeavor the Alteration of
it. That is to say, of the Monarchy into a Republique or of Episcopacy into
Presbytery; as they did before. And this was the Clear Scope of the Test.

The Author of the Growth of Popery, discoursing upon this Subject; There is
nothing (says he, p. 57.) more Portentous and of worse Omen, than when such an
Oath hangs over a Nation like a New Comet, foreboding the Alteration of
Religion or Government.

A word first to the Oath, which, for want of an Epithete to express the
hainousness of it; the Libeller so Emphatically calls SUCH an Oath. It is an
Oath founded upon the same Consideration with the Oath of Allegience, and
directed to the same End; and every jot as Necessary under This King, as That
was under his Grandfather. The Iesuited Papists had invited the Spaniard to
Invade England: The Iesuited Protestants in the late Rebellion, did, in like
manner, apply themselves to the French. The Former laid a Plot for the Blowing
up of the Parliament: The Other executed the Plot of Destroying Parliaments,
Changing the Government, and murdering the King. The People were misted in the
One Case, upon the Iesuitical Principle that a Prince being Excommunicate by
the Pope, the Subject is discharged of his Duty to him; and they were seduced
in the Other, by a Persuasion that the Sacred Character of a King rests in the
Authority, and is separable from the Person; which Authority they lodged in the
Two Houses, and so did their Business. This Practice of the Jesuits occasioned
the Oath of Allegience in the Statute 30 Iacobi, entitled An Act for the
Discovering, and Repressing of Popish Recusants. In which Oath you have this
Clause. And I do further swear that I do from my Heart detest and abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine, and Position, That Princes which
be Excommunicated, or Deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed, or Murdered by
their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. Here was an Act for the Discovering
and Repressing of Popish Recusants, with an Oath, under a Penalty, and a
Declaration against, and an Abhorrence of that Impious Position, whereupon the
Treasons of those Times were founded: And why not a Provision as well against
those People that with premeditated Malice, as well as Ambition, over-turn'd
the Late Government; and against That Principle, of Dividing his Majesty's
Authority from his Person, which was the Countenance and Support of the late
Rebellion? Take it in short, and the Test is but a Supplement to the Oath of
Allegiance. The Scottish Faction Imposed upon the People that they might be
true to the King, though they Levied Arms against his Person: and the end of
this Oath is only to expound That Position to be Treasonous, and to Secure the
Government for the Future against Men of such Principles: According to Equity
and Conscience, and to the Common Practice, and according to the Prudence of
all well Ordered States.

Is this the Oath now that he calls SUCH an Oath? The Oath, than which there is
nothing more Portentous, and of worse Omen to a Nation? He has forgotten the
Fore-boding, and Portentous Omens of Forty One, and the Dire Events of those
Presages What do you think of a deliberate Design, to spoil the Crown, the
Church, and the Subject: And all this in the Name of God, for the Honor of the
King, and the Good of the People? And then the Entitling of Providence to all
the Advantages that the Faction got by the Ruin of Three Kingdoms? Here Is the
unrepented Guilt of Sacrilege, Treason, and Blood, to the Highest Degree, and
so Transcendent an Ingratitude, that some of the very Men that were Pardoned
for One Rebellion, are now the Advocates for Another. If these Practices should
be suffered, there would be no need to consult the Stars for a Prognostic of
Change of Government.

The Oaths (says he, page 58.) in our Late King's time taught the Phanaticks,
because they could not swear, yet to Covenant. His Memory fails him, I
perceive, for the Covenant was a Foot in Scotland before any Oaths complained
of here; by the Token that the Assembly at Glasgow, in 1638, came to this
Resolution upon the Point. It is lawful for Subjects to Covenant and Combine,
without the King, and enter into a Bond of mutual Defense against him. Take
notice next that the Oath commplain'd of, was the Oath ex Officio, which Oath
was Abolished, before any Covenanting in England: And he is so much out again,
in saying that the Phanaticks Covenanted, etc. because they could not swear,
that in Truth, they Covenanted because they cared not what they swore. Witness
their Covenants, Negative Oaths, and Oath of Abjuration, in Opposition to their
Oaths of Allegiance, and Canonical Obedience: There was no Compounding, no
Living in their Quarters, without Swearing. There was an Oath, given at a
Communion at Fife, obliging People not to take the King's Covenant; And it was
one Condition upon the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, that his Majesty himself
should give Assurance by Solemn Oath under his Hand, and Seal, for settling
Religion according to the Covenant. So that they made no Conscience (you see)
either of Swearing, or Forfwearing; either of taking Oaths Themselves, or of
Forcing them upon Others for the Advancement of their Design.

He takes exception (page 59.) to the Two Declaratory Points of the Test. First
That it is not lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms against the
King. And he reasons the Matter in these Words: It were difficult to instance a
Law, either in This, or Other Country, but that a Private Man, if any King in
Christendom Assault him, may, having Retreated to the Wall, stand upon his
Guard. That is to say, A Private Man may kill his Prince in his own Defense.
For he puts this Case in Opposition to the Declaration; Only translating the
Taking up of Arms against the King, into a Man's Standing upon his Guard. All
that is Honest, in it is This, That he refuses to declare That to be Unlawful,
which he holds to be Lawful..

His second Scruple is, The Abhorrence of that Traitorous Position of taking
Arms by his Authority, against his Person; or against those that are
Commissioned by him, in pursuance of such Commission. Here (says he) is neither
Tenor, or Rule of any such Commission specified, nor the Qualification of
those which shall be Armed with such Commissions, expressed, or Limited.

The Author of this Frivolous Shift, knows very well, that the Rules, and
Measures of Commissions vary according to the Circumstances of Time, Place,
Fact, Person; that the Qualification of the Commissioner does not at all
operate upon the Authority of the Commission: and that if the Bill were drawn
out to the length of the Book of Martyrs, there would not yet be room enough to
obviate all Cavils, and Objections. But in the next Page, he speaks his Mind a
little plainer.

As to the Commission, (says he) if it be to take away a Man's Estate, or his
Life, by Force, yet it is the King's Commission: Or if the Person
Commissionated be under never so many Disabilities by Acts of Parliament; yet
his taking this Oath, re^oves all those Incapacities, or his Commission makes
it not disputable.

This Seditious Hint, (for I cannot call it an Argument) lies open so many
ways, that I am only at a Loss where to begin with it. First, Let the
Commission, and Commissioner be what they will, no Man is to be Judge in his own
Cause; but the Law must be the Judge both of the Legality of the One, and the
Capacity of the Other. Secondly, If upon this Ground an injured Person may take
Arms, in One Case; so may a Criminal, upon the bare Pretense of it in any
Other: For it is but saying that the Commission is Unwarrantable, or that the
Officer is a Rascal, and there is his Justification. Thirdly, Suppose a Double
Abuse in Manner, as ^s here suggested; That Abuse does not yet void the
Authority, to which the Law on the One side requires Obedience, or at least
Submission; and there is no Law, on the Other side, that allows Resistance.
Fourthly, The End and Prospect of all Laws is Public Convenience, and there
was never any Law invented, so Profitable to a Community, but it was in some
Respect or other, to the Detriment of some Particulars: So that the very
Admittance of his Suppositions, does not at all affect the Reason of the Test,
if the Benefit be General on the One hand, and the Mischief only Particular on
the Other. How many Men are sworn out of their Lives, and Fortunes by
False-Witnesses? Shall we therefore quarrel the Method of Proceeding Secundum
Allegata, and Probata? A Man is Arrested upon a Fobb'd Action, for a sum of
Money, knowing First, that he ows not a Penny, Secondly, that the Consequence of
it will be his Ruin; Thirdly, that the Action is merely Malicious; And
Fourthly, (to make it strong enough) that the Officer that serves the Writ is
Consederate with his Adversary, and that they have Both complotted his
Destruction: All this will not yet Authorize a Resistance; but if an Officer
that has the King's Writ, or any other Lawful Warrant, though Erroneous, shall
be slain in the Execution of it, This is MURDER A word now as to the Occasion
of it.

The People of 41, when they had forced his Majesty from his Palace, by
Affronts and Armed Tumults, Published this Doctrine to the Nation, that though
his Person was gone, his Authority resided in the Two Houses: under which
Color they imposed Ordinances upon the People, for Laws, and by Degrees
proceeded to an Exercise of all the Acts of Sovereignty; making War against the
Person of the King, and those that were Commissioned by him, under the Pretense
before said: as Rebellious, Traitors, and Conspirators. Now to prevent the same
Mischief again, from the same Principles, it was thought fit to propose this
Declaration of Abhorrence. The Objections against it are, That the King may
grant a Commission to take away a Man's Life, or Estate, and Employ any Man at a
venture to execute it: which is First, The Supposal of an Unjust, and
Tyrannical Commission: Secondly, A Case so Rare, that it would be a hard matter
to produce a President for it, without a Reference to a Trial at Law: And
Thirdly, What would be the Fruit of such a Resistance, but the turning of an
Oppression on the One side, into a Rebellion on the other; and the Forfeiting
of that Life, and Estate To the Law, which was otherwise invaded Contrary to
the Law? For it is a Thousand to one that the Power that Issued the Commission,
will find Assistants to Execute it, So that the Resistance pleaded for in this
Case, is First, of a very remote Supposition: Secondly, of dangerous
Consequence to the Resistent: And Thirdly, of no Avail to him at all.

If we may not Resist (says the Faction) under these Circumstances, our Lives,
Liberties, and Estates are at the King's Mercy; for that which may be one Man's
Case, may be any Man's: And so because of This Possibility of Wrong to
Particulars, we judge it Reasonable, that every Particular Man should be Allowed
to Defend himself. See now the Inconvenience, which, upon the Allowance of this
Liberty in Favor of Particulars, will redound to the Public.

An Honest Man is charged with Treason in the King's Name, and by his Majesty's
Order to be taken into Custody, and by an Officer too, under what Disabilities
you please. Here Is the whole Case. An Innocent Person; Life, Liberty, and
Estate at stake, and an Unqualifi'd Commissioner. If One Man may Resist,
because he is Innocent, Another upon the same Pretense may Resist too, although
he be Guilty. For no Man under a Charge, is either Guilty, or Innocent in the
Eye of the Law, till he be Legally, either Convicted, or Acquitted. So that the
Innocent, and the Guilty, are to be tried indifferently by the same Law, and so
are the Pretended Errors either in the Commission. or Commissioner Take
matters once out of the Channel of Trial by our Peers, There Is an end of Magna
Charta; and the Government it self is become Passive, and Precarious Will you
have the true Reason now, why this Abhorrence goes so much against the hair
with some People? The Position is to be Cherished, and kept in Countenance,
till the time comes for putting it in Practice.

No Man can be so blind, as not to discern by the correspondent Motions of the
Consistorians in Scotland, and the Scottish English, that they Act already by
Concert, and it is as plain by this Bold and Adventurous way of Libels all on
the soddain, that they depend upon France for a Second: Which is no more than
was done in the Late Rebellion, by the fame Faction, as appeared by a Letter of
the Lord Lowdens to the French King, for his Protection and Assistance, for
which he was committed to the Tower, and it was also confirmed by the Fourth
Article against the Five Members, Accusing them to have Traytero^sly invited
and encouraged a Foreign Power to invade his Majesty's Kingdom of England.
Husband's Collections, p. 35. These are the French Pensioners, and the
Betrayers of our Religion and Freedom, under Oaths, and Covenants to Preserve
them. Were not our Divines Pillaged, Sequestered, Imprisoned, either for praying
for his Majesty, or for Refusing to Abjure him, How many Reverend Divines were
poisoned in Peter-House, I could give you the History of their Spiriting away
several Persons of Honor for Slaves, their Sale of three or four score
Gentlemen to the Barbados. Their Sequ^strations, Decimations, Exclusion from
all Offices, Plunders, Banishments, Confinements, Prohibition of Correspondence
with the King, upon Pain of Death. The Juggles of the Irish Adventures, Money,
and Plate upon the Propositions, Confiscated Estates, Twentieth Parts, Weekly
Assessments, and a Hundred other Pecuniary, and Arbitrary Stratagems, till they
finished the Ruin of the Nation, in the Dissolution of the Government, and in
the Blood of their Sov^reign. It is not less certain that This is in Sum the
Design of their Second Reformation, than that it was the Effect of their
Former: and they are Fools that take Men of these Practices to be of any
Religion.

FINIS.

