A LETTER From a Country Minister to some Neighbouring-Clergy concerning the
usual resort of his Parishioners to other Churches in contempt of their own.
March the 27th. 1684 SIR,
I Understand there are several of my Parishioners, who, because they are not
suffered to have their humor to meet in their forbidden Conventicles, are
resolved, if they can Shift it, not to come to their own Parish Church; And
therefore in Contempt thereof, and their own Minister, do commonly take
Sanctuary in your Parish, and many of them resort to your Church for shelter
and protection against the Laws: And not only so, but, as I am told, intend
further, (if you will be so easy as to admit them) to receive the Communion at
your hands this next Easter: And thereupon obtain your Certificate to evade the
Penalties justly inflicted upon them for their obstinate, wilful refusing to
come to their own Parish Church. Possibly you may not be aware of this, and
therefore I give you this friendly Caution, and request you by no means to
admit any of my Parishioners to Communion, nor so much as suffer them to come
customarily to your Church, but warn them home to their own Parish Church and
Minister, whose Charge they are, and to whose inspection they are Committed.
For give me leave to tell you, that their usual resort to any other Church but
their own, and any Ministers allowance and encouragement thereof, is quite
contrary to the Orders, Canons and Constitutions of our Church, which permits
none to neglect their Parish Church, unless by sickness or other most urgent
causes they be let therefrom. And this with great reason to avoid
unspeakable Confusion, the natural result of all Independency. And therefore
you will find in Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, both to the Clergy and Laity of
this Realm, 1559.. 33. That it is expressly Commanded, That no Person shall,
neglecting their own Parish Church, resort to any other Church in time of
Common Prayer and Preaching, except it be by the occasion of some extraordinary
Sermon in some Parish of the same Town. And in the Articles for enquiry in the
first year of her Reign, one was, whether you know any that in contempt of
their own Parish Church, resort to any other Church. And to the same purpose
does the Homily of the Right use of the Church, speak. And in the Statute of
the first of Elizabeth, being her Act for Uniformity, it is enjoined, That all
and every Person and Persons inhabiting within this Realm, shall diligently and
faithfully, having no Lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent, resort to their
ParishChurch or Chapel accustomed; or upon reasonable Let thereof, to some
usual place where Common Prayer and such Service of God shall be used in such
time of Let, upon every Sunday and Holy Day, etc. And the like is observable
in Stat. 5 and 6. Ed. 6. c. i. All which make it plain, that unless there be a
reasonable Let or Lawful impediment to keep them from coming to their own
Parish Church, they are not allowed to go to any other. Pursuant to which
Orders, Injunctions and Statutes, it is Ordained in the 28 th. Canon (which our
Oath of Canonical Obedience obliges us all to take notice of) that both
Minister and Churchwardens, etc. of every Parish, shall mark whether any
strangers come often and commonly from other Parishes to their Church, left
perhaps they be admitted to the Lords Table among others, which they shall
forbid, and remit such home to their own Parish-Churches and Minister, there to
receive the Communion with the rest of their own Neighbors. And moreover the
57 th. Canon, to obviate the ill practices of such as refuse the Sacraments at
the hands of unpreaching Ministers, permits none to leave their own
Parish-Churches, and to Communicate, or cause their children to be Baptized in
other Parishes abroad, under pain of suspension, and, after a Months obstinacy,
Excommunication, if they do the contrary: And expressly says, That if any
Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall either receive to the Communion any such
Persons which are not of their own Parish, or shall Baptize any of their
Children, let him be Suspended, and not be released thereof, until he does
faithfully promise that he will not afterward Offend therein.

Now it being my design to Cure my Parish of Independency, which in a great
measure owes its rise to this vagrant and loose practice of running from one
Church to another, and which has been the great and long disease thereof (it
having been so late and Common a practice among them to gather Churches out of
other Churches, and draw other men's Parishioners to their Conventicles) I
cannot so easily, readily, and effectually do it, without the Concurrence and
assistance of the Neighbor Clergy, to whose Churches in contempt of their own,
they usually repair for refuge. And therefore, Sir, among others, I must
Entreat you not to harbor, countenance, or abet them in this Licentious
practice of theirs, by admitting them ordinarily to your Church, where they
have nothing to do but to fill up the seats of your own Parishioners, who by
their ill example (especially seeing their own places taken up by strangers)
may be tempted to straggle abroad to other Parishes, to your great grief and
disappointment, if you have any regard to their Souls, and be concerned to give
an account of them. Should I observe any of your Parishioners to resort
commonly to my Church, I should think my self obliged to give them public
warning to forbear coming, and openly declare, that in case of Prosecution for
their neglect of their own Parish Church, I would grant them no Certificates to
baffle and defeat it, and elude their obligation to resort thereunto; And the
same thing I would have you do to mine, if you see they make it their common
practice to leave their own Parish Church to come to yours. And this will
effectually cut off all expectances and hopes of Protection any where but at
their own Church; And then seeing themselves under a necessity, they will be
the more ready to comply, and submit in a more orderly way to regular
Instruction and Government. There are many Lawful occasions that at one time or
other unavoidably happen to gratify peoples curiosity of going to other
Churches (which they ought to rest contented with) as when they are upon a
journey; when there is nothing to do at their own Parishes by reason of their
Ministers sickness or absence; when they are requested to be Sureties for a
friends Child in another Parish, and the like; but for people ordinarily and
customarily to forsake their own Parish Church to go to others, when there is
no such urgent occasion and pressing necessity, perhaps out of prejudice or
wantonness, when the humor takes them; or they have some little pet or private
grudge at their own Minister; or causelessly dislike his regular Administration;
or are ashamed to appear at that place which they had so long before abandoned;
or out of a disrelish to the public Service it self, which they know they may
be present at in some places in any fashion, and in such a manner as rather
shows their dislike and disrespect, then any kindness or reverence they have
for it, without any notice taken of their behavior: This is Factiously,
Schismatically, or Wantonly to desert their own Parish Church. For the Law
grounded upon great reason and prudence has put them under the Care and
Inspection of their own proper Guides, who are responsible for them both to God
and Man, and how is it possible either for you or me to give a comfortable and
satisfactory account of our respective Flocks committed to our Charge, if we
suffer them to stray from their own Folds without remanding them home, and
taking a particular care of them. It Is the part of a good Shepherd to keep his
Sheep together, and not suffer them to endanger their own safety and his
Credit, by straggling from their own proper Fold, or unseasonably intermixing
with others that belong not to them, and you know the Analogy holds good as to
us, for we have the same Relation to our respective people. When one Man's Sheep
or Cattle break Pasture and ramble into anoher Man's Ground, the Owner has
Commonly notice thereof, and if he do not thereupon take them out, they are put
into the Pound. And should many of my straggling Parishioners be so dealt with
by those upon whom they trespass, and into whose Enclosures they break, they
would quickly learn to know and keep their own bounds, and I should be
abundantly the more satisfied therewith. For, besides that Briefs, and other
such like occasions of Charity, and Public businesses are great losers by
their absence from their own Churches, there are many other great evils and
Mischiefs attending it, for under pretense of going to other Parish-Churches
many loose people take occasion to run into private Conventicles, or haunt
blind Tipling-houses, to say nothing worse; or idle and loyter away their time
in the Fields, or are watching an opportunity to do their Neighbor a Mischief;
and we have no security to the contrary while we suffer them to straggle; but
when they appear at their own Parish Church (where there are those that are
obliged to take notice of them) we are sure that they are out of harms way.
Such Ramblers therefore and Vagrants in Religion, as gad up and down from
Parish to Parish, under color of going to other Churches to Truck for
Spiritual Wares, are no more to be endured in the Church, than Scotch-Pedlers,
Gypsies, or other idle Vagabonds in the State, that pretend business when they
design Mischief; against which, and the harbourers of them, you know there are
several severe Statutes. And therefore, good Sir, If you find any such
belonging to my Parish, let me entreat you to disown and discourage them for
the future, and send them home to their own Parish, where Care shall be taken
that they do those things that are sitting for them, and which Authority at
this time especially does exact and oblige them and us to look after and
perform. The thing is so reasonable and of that importance to my Parish, That I
verily believe you will concur with me in it, and make it your own Case. I have
used the kindness and freedom of a Friend and Brother in representing it to
you, and I am confident you will not take it ill from him who upon all honest
and just occasions will be ready to approve himself,

Sir, Your Faithful Friend, and Affectionate Brother.

London: Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684


