A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN AT New Market, Giving a Full and True ACCOUNT Of the
Dreadful FIRE That began there on Thursday the 2^d of this Instant March, about
Nine of the Clock in the Evening.
Entered according to ORDER.
SIR,
I Am very sorry that for the kind News you sent me last Week, I should make so
lamentable a return, as the Relation of the Fire which happened last Night: I
have endeavored, as much as the shortness of the time would permit, to inquire
into the particulars thereof; and partly by what I saw my self, and partly by
what I heard from those that were concerned, I think I am able to give you a
faithful and satisfactory Account of it, which take as follows:

Last Night, about Eight of the Clock, one of the Black-Guard that lay in a
Lords Stable (near that House where the Morrocco Ambassador lay when here) went
to Bed, and not taking care of his Candle, it took hold of the Straw, so that
about Nine of the Clock the Flames broak out and appeared abroad, and the Wind
blowing very hard at South West, it burned so very furiously upwards in the
Town, that at this present the better half of the Town is Burned down. That
side of the Town where the Kings House stands, is not touched. Most of the
chief Inns (as the George, the King's Head, and the Sword and Hand, where His
Majesty's Guards lay) are consumed: And notwithstanding the great endeavors
that were used for the suppression of it, it is judged there are upwards of One
Hundred Houses Burned down. Three or Four Children are missing, which are
supposed to be burnt; and several Men are Killed, and many Wounded in
endeavoring to put a stop to it. Many of the Horses are turned loose upon the
Heath, and great is the confusion here upon this dismal Accident. The Gentlemen
Harbingers are gone to Cambridge, to provide Lodgings for the Court, which will
be there this day, where His Majesty will make a short stay, till his Coaches
be got in readiness, and then intends for London, where I shall be glad to see
you, and tell you how much I am yours,

New Market, Friday Morning three of the Clock, 23d. of March, 1683, J. S.

LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham, 1683.


