A LETTER from a General Officer to a Colonel, and several Officers and Soldier
under King of JAMES, now in the pesent Service.
I Must own (noble Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers) that I was one of those who
were misled as well as you by the Apprehensions that our Religion was in
danger, had not the Prince of O. come opportunely to redeem (...) But I can
upon my Salvation say (and I hope so may many of us) I had no other Design in
closing with his Troops, but only to have obtained a free Parliament, and such
Laws as would have secured our Religion and Property, which was pretended then
to be invaded. It never entered into my Thoughts, neither had I the least
Suspicion, that the Prince aimed to dethrone his Father, or to embroil us in
such) an Expensive War, to the utter impoverishment of our Country. It Is true,
we Soldiers are not usually Politicians, and therefore could not so easily
pierce into the hidden Intentions of ambitions Men but we have so much Sense as
to remember how kind a Master K. James was to us, how duly he paid us, and yet
never sought a Penny from the Country for it: Whereas now, though in all our
Quarters we hear nothing but Complaints, of want of Trade, scarcity of Money,
and execessive Taxes, yet you know how ill We are paid. We, who have undergone
as much Fateague in Ireland as ever Army did: We, who with the Expense of so
much Blood, Poverty, Hunger, Fateague and Sickness, have reduced that Kingdom;
find now so little Regard had for us, that instead of a Recompenc^ we can
neither get Clothes, nor Money, nor Horses, for those that we lost in Service;
and are forced to oppress our native Country for mere Subsistence. It repents
me at my Soul, that we took so much Pains there to expel so good a King and
Master, from a Country which was only left him for his Shelter; which shows we
fought for Fighting-sake, without reflecting on the Justice of the Cause, or
the Consequences of such a Victory.

Now, methinks, our Eyes ought to beopened; for my part I can foresee nothing
but an inevitable Ruin to our Country, if we persevere to resist our gracious,
indulgent Master. The Scene of War must be translated from Flanders hither, and
then my heart will bleed to think what Miseries our poor Country must endure.
We have seen, felt, and contributed to the Fate of poor di^^ressed, desolate
Ireland; but alas! your Pampered Island, as it is less used to Sufferings,
will find smaller Sufferings n^re intolerable, and yet must suffer much more
than they have done, if we repent not in time, and welcome back our Sovereign.
It seems he has taken a Resolution to come with a considerable Force of his own
Subjects, intermixed with Strangers, to recover his Right; It behooves us then to
consider seriously, Why We should oppose him? can We expect any pay from our
present Riders (I call them so, who make us like so many tame Asses bear every
Bu^then) when most of the Nations Money is sent to support the Confederates?
Have We not found, by woeful Experince that none are looked upon, preferred, or
paid, but Danes, Brandenburghers, and our Hogen Mogen Dutch, and that We
English men can get no Advancement, unless by the Interest of these Foreigners?
You see how far We are from being ^rusted in our native Country, where We might
be merciful in our defense of it, and spare the Stores, the Weals, and Blood of
our Friends and Relations; when We must all be driven on Ship-bo^^d (though
it is contrary to the Lavs of England, there being now no Martial Law in (...))
which occasioned many of our Fellow Soldiers to shoot to Death their own
Comrades for only desiring their Pay, and sent to fight the Confederates
Quarrel in Flanders, to make ^^om for Twenty thousand Foreigners, who are now
about to be purchased with our very Pay, at no less (...) than Three hundred
and fifty thousand Pound; to come and harras our Country, and destroy and burn
what they cannot defend, that if they cannot, their Enemies also may not be
better for it, but the Country desolate. Whereas we know K. James h^s a true
English Soul, and a true compassionate Tenderness for his Country. All he
desires is Liberty to All, that All ^ay live in Peace and Plenty; whilst K. W.
sets his whole mind to support the Dutch, to make them our Masters, and give
away our Bread and Traffic from us.

Let us then at last be Englishmen, Lovers of our Country, and of our lawful,
kind, and bountiful King, and nothing will be wanting to us. We shall have
Honor, Peace, and Plenty, but above all a Quiet Conscience, if we return to
our Duty, and save our nat^^e Country from ruin and desolation. You cannot but
see the Country desires, and justly deserves it at our hands. Th^^ expect, that
as we were the first who gave the Prince of O. this Advantage to rule us with a
Rod of Iron, and la^ away our Gold and Silver amongst his Foreigners; so we
should be the first to assist K. James to return without a^^ Bloodshed. He has
many Friends, and every Day gains him more; and however we may fool our selves
wi^^ the vain hopes of K. W. carrying us into the heart of France, and keeping
up the Consederacy, neither the one, n^^ the other, can succeed. France is too
strong for us to attaque it; and the Confederacy too weak to subsist much
l^^ger. It must break, and if now we should be so Barbarous to oppose our old
Master, then he will be able to come with much more Force than we can resist;
and we shall neither have the Credit, nor the Comfort of being instrum^^^al to
such a Blessing.

Let us there there^^^e at his first Appearance show our selves true
Englishmen, own our King, own our Law, own our Country and K^, and not fight
Dutch Quarrels to make our selves the Laughing Stock of all Nations; or as so
many Fools, ^^o in the midst of so clear a Light, could not see our own, and
our Nations Interest.

I write no^^ (...) ^^is out of any Discontent. I have had as much Favor from
K. W. as any other Officer. I have not been dealt w^^^ as my Lord Marlborough,
or my Lord Torrington, or any of those other English Officers who were lately
Seize^ and Imprisoned (we are certain) for no other Reasons, but to prefer
Strangers to their Commands, and it may ^^^rtly be our Fate: But I have a true
Sense and Feeling of the Miseries our Country must suffer, if we oppose ou^
^^wful King, which must cause more and more Supplies to be sent on both sides,
and so make our Country an Acelde^ or Field of Blood; whereas we now of the
Soldiery, if we have honest English Hearts, may turn the Scale, make ou^^^lves
and all our Posterity happy, and restore Peace and Plenty to old England and
have all our Arrears paid us ^or K. James truly loves his Country, and its
Peace and Welfare, and ever was the best Master to his Soldiers of any ^ce in
Europe; and we may be assured that whatever Foreigners our true and lawful king
brings in (if we show o^^selves Just and Loyal) will soon be honorably
Dismissed, and We employed to regain our Trade, and repair t^^ Losses this
Dutch Stratagem has brougth upon us. K. W. is wholly theirs, and they for
themselves: Why shou^^ ^ot We be for our selves, as our King is for us. If we
join as Brethren and honest Englishmen, we need not fe^r ^mbitious of
Self-ended Courtiers, nor Dutch Councils. We have the Countries Hearts and
Wishes, and they will fully (...) for freeing them from endless Taxes, and
still growing Miseries.

N^ble Friends, Fellow Soldiers in Arms; I write not this but upon most serious
Deliberation, not only with my self, but with the best of our Companions, and
the most Eminent amongst the Nobility and Gentry of England, wh^ hea^tily
concur with me in their Wishes, and will also concur with us with their Lives
and Fortunes, if we acquit ^ur sel^es like honest true Englishmen, and Lovers
of our Country. Which with them, and (I hope) with you, I ^^solve to do, to the
utmost of my Power, who am, Noble Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers, Yours in all
Sincerity.


