THE Shammer Shamm'd: In a Plain DISCOVERY, Under Young TONG'S Own Hand, OF A
Design to Trepann L'ESTRANGE Into a Pretended Subornation against the POPISH
PLOT.

By Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brom at the Sign of the Gun in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.

The Shammer Shamm'd. etc.
IT is no new thing for L'Estrange to be Baited by the Mercenary Agents of a
Seditious, and Schismatic Faction; and it is hard to say, whether the
Scurrilous Libells, or the Obscure Authors of them be the more Contemptible:
But yet this is a Case, wherein I cannot; either with Honor, Safety, or with
Good Discretion be Silent. In short; There is a Knot of Little Fellows (but
under the Government of better Heads) that are now at work to Revive the Old
Story of my Tampering with Young Tongue, to Invalidate Oates's Evidence; and
Several Lies and Scandalls are Printed in favor of that Imposture. My Purpose
in these Papers is, in the first place, to lay open, the Notorious Falsehood,
and Malice of this Practice. And 2 ly, to prove that very Design, which is
charged UPON me, to be managed AGAINST me.

It will not be amiss to Enform the Reader by the way, that in October, 1680.
Upon two full hearings before his Majesty and Council (in despite of all that
Oats could say, and Tongue Swear against me) I had the Honor to be twice
acquitted by the Unanimous Judgment of the whole Board: The Particulars of
which Proceedings may be seen in a Dialogue under the Title of L'Estranges
Case, etc. which I caused to be Published upon that occasion. I shall now, as
briefly as I can, set forth how the same Calumny comes to be started again.

On the Third of January last past, The Loyal Protestant-News-Paper had this
following Passage in it concerning Tongue, but mistaking Samuel, for Simson.

Whereas Mr. Samuel Tongue, Son to Dr. Tongue deceased, has formerly Sworn, That
his own Father was the Chief Contriver of the Popish Plot; Discovered by a Man
who then went under the name of Dr. O --; Now the Religious good party, seemed
at that time to be much dissatisfied, that an Intrigue so well laid, and so
effectually managed, (tho never so ill Contrived,) should be thus miscarried,
and then fell upon young Tongue, and declared that he was an ill Man for
offering to charge his Father with such horrid Crimes, after so many Men
suffered upon the account of the said Plot, and though that it were but a
Contrivance of his Father and Dr. O -- (so called then) that it was an
advancement to all Protestant Dissenters in England, Ireland, and Scotland, and
used many moderate Reasons with the said Tongue, that at last Mr. Tongue Complied
with the Request and Prayer of the good party; and when he was sent for again
to come before the King and Council, utterly Denying all that he had sworn
before; but since being touched with Remorse of conscience, offers to justify
what he had Sworn unto by his own Testimony alone; but by such Papers,
circumstances and witnesses, as he is now able to produce, without hopes of
favor or Reward, but as a penitent Sinner, that expects mercy from God
Almighty.

Young Tongue was so hot upon this Publication, that the very next day, he
directed a Paper to Mr Thompson by way of an Advertisement under his own hand,
in Confirmation of what was there published: though it was not Notified by
Thompson till Jan. 19. and in the words following.

Mr Thompson,
I have read your Intelligence of the Third of this Instant, and do acknowledge
that all you write concerning Me is very True, and I will Justify it to my
death; and I do believe that the Great Poverty and Misery that I lie under, is
fallen on me, by the Just Judgment of God, because I was Seduced by the
Enticements of my Uncle, and Others, to deny the Truth; but you mistake my
name; for I am not Samuel but

Simson Tongue.


He speaks Truth as to his Miserable Condition; for there was not a Poorer
Creature in the Prison; and Cutting of Pegs for shoes; (and working hard too)
for Three-half-pence a day, was the best part of his Entertainment.

It was Thompson's Paper of Jan. 3. that gave the Alarm, and stirred up the
Charity of some of the Well-affected Brethren to hearken a little after him. He
was taken one day out of the Prison (as he said) by a Printer; and at his
Return talked of something to be Published toward the Middle of the next Week
concerning L'Estrange. This Visit put him presently into Clothes, and Money in
his Pocket, by a Providence, which must be left to Time and Further Scrutiny to
Un-riddle.

Upon Thomson's First Publication of Jan. 3. Out comes the Buffoon-Courant, of
Jan. 6. with these words in it. [ Has not this very Young Tongue set forth at
large how he was at first trepanned so suggest that Story against his Father,
in a Book Printed by Mr C -- in the New Exchange; but for I know not what
Reasons stifled, and never suffered to be Published? Has not this Young Tongue a
hundred and a hundred times with tears in his Eyes, bewayl'd, and repented of
that Unnatural Villainy? Nay but a fortnight ago, he Voluntarily declared that
the Sense thereof lay so heavy upon him, that if ever he got out of Prison
(where he was like to starve, and had scarce Clothes to cover his Nakedness) he
would forthwith Transport himself to the West Indies; for his shame for that
False and Wicked Accusation was so great, that he should not be able to walk in
the streets. And is this Pitiful Fool Furbish'd up to make a New Attacque?
But on the Contrary; What if this be only a Contrivance of the Popish Traitors,
and their Implement Not? What if herein he most in pudently abuses, both Old
Tongue, and Young Tongue and the Public? Then no doubt his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, the Judges, and all Inferior Magistrates, and every
Protestant Englishman will think it Necessary to Punish Exemplarily the
Villain that in Print has Broached such a Horrid Scandal on the Honor,
Justice, Prudence and Safety of the Nation.] [Truly I do hope, and wish, with
all my heart, that the Government may, and will proceed against all Cheats of
this Kind, with the most Severity Imaginable: But how comes Care to know more
of Tongs Doings then Tongue does of his own? for Every syllable which Thompson
says of Tongue, Tongue says of himself: And the Question is not here, whether it
be True, or False; but whether or no Tongue said it.

The matter rested here till Jan. 19. Upon which day, came forth Tong's
Advertisement in Justification of Thomson, and Tong's Pretended Vindication, in
Contradiction to that Advertisement. 't was published by Curtis; and the Author
of it may be as well known by his Paw, as by his Face: The Packet, and the
Vindication bearing all together the same Style, and Design, and, in many
Particulars, the very same words. So that the Courantier, the Vindicator, and
Simson Tongue are all one and the same person. It carries the Title of [Mr.
Tongs Vindication, in answer to the Malicious and Lying Aspersions thrown upon
him by Thomson, and the Observator.]

As to what concerns the Observator [ Being deeply Sensible (says Tong's
Deputy-Vindicator) of what Evil Consequence this Notorious Lie may be; I do
Solemnly declare that what was Printed by Thomson, was done without my
knowledge, or Consent, having some time since given a True, and Full account of
those Persons (that would have trepan'd, and Endeavored to make me Swear, that
my Father and Dr. Oats were the Contrivers of the Popish Plot) in my Case,
which was Printed by Mr. C -- in the New Exchange in the Strand; but by some
Indirect means or other, was stifled, and never suffered to come abroad: In
which Narrative, I have discovered nothing but the Naked Truth, with the
several Arguments and Inducements they made use of, to make me accuse my
deceased Parent, and yet notwithstanding all this, Thomson and the Observator
have the Impudence to affirm the Contrary, etc.

Observe first, that the Printing of it [ without his Knowledge or Consent] is
no denial of the thing said.

2 ly, Neither Tongue, nor Care or Curtis, in His name says One word in
Opposition to the Truth of Tong's Advertisement, in Affirmation of what Thomson
delivered.

3 ly, Take notice, that the Case or Narrative which Curtis'es Libell says, was
Printed by Mr C -- and Stifled; was laid up in Lavender, for the Opportunity of
Imposing an Abuse upon the Oxford-Parliament, as appears by the Title Page, and
the appointment for the Printing of it, bearing date, Feb. 2. 1681. And I am
likewise Enform'd, that Several Copies of it were dispersed to diverse Members
of that Convention.

4 ly. That Pretended Narrative and Case was Printed for Langley Curtis, with
this Express Authority for the Printing of it.

I do Appoint Langly Curtis, to Print This my Narrative, and Case: Witness my
hand, this Second of February, 1681.

Simson Tongue.

5 ly. Beside that, the Narrative is False, and Libellous, it is Undoubtedly
the same hand with the Packet, and the Vindication; and three Cheats put upon
the Public, by One and the same Person.

6 ly. It is remarkable, that there is a New Title Page clapped upon the Old
Book, (which is just now made Public) Pretending to be Printed for C.W.
Instead of Langly Curtis; the better to Disguise, or Conceal Curtis and Cares
Confederacy and Interest, in the Pamphlet.

Lastly, The very Title Page it self is a Juggle. As for Example, [ The
Narrative and Case of Simson Tongue, Gent. being a True Account delivered upon
Oath, before Mr. Justice Bridgeman, in the presence of Dr. Titus Oats;
relating to Capt. Sam. Ely, Mr. Choqueux, etc. and my self, Who would have
Induced me to Swear that my Father and Dr. Oats, were the Contrivers of the
Horrid Popish Plot; with Other Material Passages Omitted in the Affidavit.
Together with some Short Reflections upon Mr L'Estrange's Dialogue between
Zekiel, and Ephraim.]

Who knows how far This [etc.] and his [ OTHER Material Passages OMITTED in
the Affidavit] may Extend, Especially from the Mouth of Prostitute Falsifyers?
and under the Manage of an Ignoramus-Iury? And it is a Fair Hint in Janeways
History of Popish Sham-Plots from the same hand again, P. 139. where he says,
that [Simson made a Considerable Confession of this Conspiracy, upon Oath,
before Mr Justice Bridgeman, though HAPPILY he has reserved many more
particulars to another Opportunity.] At which rate, it is but rubbing up his
Memory at any time, to call to mind things that never had a Being, and to lay
the Plot at whose Door he pleases. But to return to his Vindication.

[ Having now Sufficiently Vindicated my self (says he) from the Malicious, and
Lying Aspersions cast upon me by Thomson and the Observator; I return to the
Pacquetier, (that is to say, to himself again, for there is not one word of the
Pacquetier before) who amongst them all is the only Person that has done me
that Justice, Heartily to represent my Condition to the world, performing the
part of an Honest man, in declaring the Great sorrow wherewith my spirits have
been oppressed for the Unnatural Villainy I was persuaded to perpetrate against
my Deceased Parent, etc.] And what is all this, but an Exchange of Civility
betwixt Harry in the Vindication, and Care in the Courant?

[ I Bless God (says he again) I have not so seared a Conscience, as to Justify
so False and Villainous a thing as is cast upon me. -- I did not verify or
assert any thing by dreadful Imprecations. -- It behooves me to stand upon my
Guard, and by the force of Truth repel these Vicious Calumnies, which I hope
is here performed to the Content and satisfaction of all True, Unbiased
Protestants; And now having fully discharged a Good Conscience, the main End of
the Vindication, etc.] To pass over now the most Daring and Blasphemous
Hypocrisy that ever called upon Almighty God for the Grace of a
Mock-Repentance, see how Dreadfully this Personated Penitent Concludes his
Paper. [ I do solemnly protest (says he) in the presence of the Great Jehova)
it is nothing but Truth. Witness my Hand, Simson Tongue.] (Alias Henry Care had
Nicked it.)

I shall proceed now to Janeways Popish Sham-Plots, which is only the same
Jack-Pudding still in another dress. [Choqueux (says he P. 138.) brings Mr.
L'Estrange into Simson's Chamber, where among other discourse, Honest Roger had
these Words: That he heard Mr. Simson Tongue was upon a very Good Design for the
Good of the Nation, to find out the Truth and Contrivance of this Plot, and
prayed he might have Good Success in it, Adding, he would give Mr. Tongue what
Furtherance and Encouragement lay in his Power.]

[He has another snap at me in the Courant of Jan. 27. where he says, That
Friend Hodge, etc. lately renewed their Acquaintance with Mr. Tongue, and
endeavored a fresh Intrigue of the Old Stamp; but finding upon recollection,
that he would not Correspond further with them; and fearing all their Roguery
would come out, the Reverend Clergy-Guide found himself obliged to Cry Whore
first.]

I am coming now to his Narrative; where in the First Page he has these words.
[ Hearing that it is commonly reported, that I should Swear against my Father,
to take away his Life, it is as False as God is True.] This is no Denial of his
Swearing against his Father; but of his Swearing against him to take away his
Life. And he declares a little lower, That he was all along very tender of his
Fathers Safety; with which shuffle he thinks to come off.

He tells a Story, Page 11. Of my refusing to License a Book of his Fathers,
called The Royal Martyr, unless I might Model it to my own Capricious Humor;
and that his Father was much troubled at my sawciness, and sent for his Book
again. The Word Sawciness is an Expression that fits no bodies Mouth but
Care's. But to his Story now.

A Book under that Title was brought to me to License; which upon the Perusal,
I refused to do: and the Bookseller that brought it, gave me to understand who
was the Author of it; and a Fair Hint in his very Countenance, what might come
on it in case I would not Pass it. Upon This, for fear of After-Claps, I went to
Whitehall, and discoursed the matter with Dr. Tongue himself, in words to this
Effect. Doctor (said I) You must Excuse me if I dare not License your Book; for
there are Reflections in it upon the Com't: Where you say, That the Bedchamber
men Pick the King's Pockets; and not without a Mixture of Reproaches upon the
King Himself. Beside, that you are mistaken in your Annals; There Is matter of
Fact misplaced, mis-tim'd, and misapplied; and from thence we proceeded to a
Reasoning upon some Passages in his Preface. Doctor (said I) It Is well that
both you your self, and Dr. Oats (in those days a Dr.) have so absolutely
purged your selves to the World, that there can be no longer any doubt of your
Integrity; for otherwise, there are two or three Passages in your Preface, that
people would go near to stumble at. As to the Business of the Bed-Chamber-men,
I Will Justify it ( says the Doctor) and if there be any slips in the Story, we
can set them Right. But what is your Exception to the Preface? So I told him,
that in Substance the Matter was thus: [ You tell the World, that you have,
with Great Care, drawn up the History of the Old Popish Plot ( the business of
Habernsfelt, etc.) And that showing it to Dr. Oats, ( who very much approved
of the Draught) you told him, Titus, It were worth the while to know if this
Plot does not go on still. Go you, and put your self among the Jesuits, and
enform your self whether it does, or no. You say further, That Dr. Oats did go
among them, pretending to be One of them; and that when he came back, he told
you that the Business went on, and that it was no New Plot, but the Old One
continued.] Well! ( says the Dr.) All this is True, and where is the Offense? So
I told him, that it might be looked upon as a strange Council, either to Give
or to Take. The Advice Given is This, Go you over, Titus, and pretend to be a
Papist: Take all their Oaths and Tests; join with them in an Idolatrous
Worship, and swear your self to the Devil through Thick and Thin, only to see
whether it be Cross or Pile. This seems to be the Advice Given: And the
following of this Advice, upon Forethought, and Consideration, may be taken
for a Resolution very Extraordinary. The Doctor's Answer was to this Purpose,
God Almighty will do his own Work, by his own Ways and Methods.

I have been the more Punctual in this Relation, to show as well the Reasons
why I would not License that Book, in respect of my self, as the Tenderness I
had for the Credit of the Doctor, and for the Common Cause; by not consenting
to Expose any thing to the Public, that might be liable either to a Censure,
or a Mistake.

He says further in his Narrative, P. 1. [ That L'Estrange in his abusive Lying
Dialogue, makes Choqueux to speak of L'Estrange' s refusing to License The
Royal Martyr; which Tongue took very ill at L'Estrange' s hands, -- but Choqueux
knew nothing of it.] The Truth of these Things shall be made appear in their
Proper Place.

And again in the same Page. [Mr. Choqueux (says he) recommended me to
L'Estrange, as a Person very worthy of my acquaintance, and told him* I had
drawn up several Papers, as Objections against the Plot; and he did presume, I
should be very glad of his Assistance therein. L'Estrange told me he would to
his power assist me what he could, and asked me where my Papers were; for he
would gladly peruse them: for he was informed, those Papers had very material
things in them against the Plot. That he was a great admirer of all such
things, as he did not question he had demonstrated to the World by his
Collections he had made concerning the Popish Plot, where Dr. Oats was pleased
to be silent, and said that for his part, he found the whole Plot was
replenished with nothing else, but Improbabilities, and Ridiculous Absurdities,
etc. And then Choqueux, and L'Estrange discoursed concerning the late Wars,
etc. Ibid.] Take notice, that Tongue had drawn up some Objections against the
Plot; and L'Estrange desired a sight of 'em, and yet no Papers showed him, nor
any Answer returned him to that Question; but thereupon he went his way. Now
see forward [ Going out with L'Estrange (says the Narrative, Page 12.) I asked
him when I should wait upon him, and if he had any writing, I would transcribe
any thing for him which he had to Print, but he said he had no such business,
but that any Evening he should be glad to see me, and Mr. Choqueux at his House
in Holborn, and went away from us.

Here Is Tongue pinning himself upon L'Estrange, and L'Estrange shuffling him
off, as far as decently could be done in such a Case. But see now how Tongue
plies him yet with Importunities.

[The next day after (says he Ibid.) Mr. Choqueux went to L'Estrange's House,
and told me he was newly gone out, but he said to morrow in the Evening I
should go along with him to L'Estrange.] You will see by and by that I went out
of the way on purpose to avoid him; and that Tongue wrote me a Letter next
Morning, desiring me in regard that he missed me last night, to appoint him
some other time, for he had something to say to me, whereupon I appointed him
at seven that Evening. And see how he proceeds. [ Crawley (says he Ibid.)
coming to the Savoy before we (Choqueux and Tongue) were gone, went along with
us, whom I suppose L'Estrange had no acquaintance with. But Crawley went,
thinking he might have something to say to him in relation to his Papers. So
soon as we came into the Room where L'Estrange was, he desired Mr. Choqueux and
Crawley, to withdraw; (for he said it looked too much like a Consultation) who
went out and expected my coming out into the street.]

It is false, that Choqueux and Crawley were desired to with draw; but Mr.
Crawley, and a fourth person that came with them in Company, were fairly hinted
to withdraw, because (as I said) it would look like a consult. And they did
withdraw; but Choqueux stayed a while after them.

[Then being together ( says the Narrative, Ibid.) meaning Tongue and
L'Estrange) he asked me whether I had a Copy of that Enformation which was
delivered to the King, I told him I had not, only some loose Papers relating to
it; but I could recite several Material Passages of it. Then L'Estrange writ
them down, and asked me whether I had no more to say, I told him I had not, and
said when he had more leisure, and had all my Enformations, he would swear me
to them. I told him, I did not care to be sworn to any of my Papers, etc.] This
point shall be cleared hereafter, where it will fall more naturally in my way.
I shall not need to amplify upon the Particulars abovementioned any further in
this place, then to recommend it to the Reader's Observation. First, that the
Persons Visibly concerned in these Scandalous Libells, are only Tongue, (as a
Fool for the Faction to make use of) Curtis, (the Publisher of the Narrative,
the Packet, and the Vindication) Janeway, (the Publisher of the Popish
Sham-plots) and Care, the Presumptive Author of these four Pamphlets: of whose
Character and Credit, the World is sufficiently sensible already, without need
of any further Enformation.

Now though as it is the Common business of these Fellows to Bespatter the
Government, and all degrees of Men, as well as Particular Persons, that
Interpose toward the Vindication of the King and the Laws. Their spleen and
Forgeries are yet so Peculiarly bent at me, that I dare be answerable to
produce at least three hundred Scandalous, Rank and Notorious Lies, that these
servile wretches, (taking in Baldwin for another) have published barefaced
against my single self; and I do verily believe, I may safely say, as many
several Libels: But having already made an Express Application to the
Magistracy of the City, for Justice, Public, and Private upon the Infamous
Authors of these Defamatory Papers: I make no question, but the Generous, and
Loyal Governors of this City, having both the Crimes and the Criminals openly
laid before them, and the matter, in both respects falling expressly under
their Cognizance and Jurisdiction; I make no doubt, I say, but my Lord Mayor
and the Court of Aldermen will exert their Authority to the uttermost, in
calling these Flagitious Incendiaries to a strict account. So that I shall now
pass forward to my main business.

That is to say, First, To show that there is a Conspiracy, by Hook or by
Crook, to make me a Suborner.

Secondly, To Discharge my self of that Impudent, and Senseless Calummy, by
Clear and Undeniable Proofs, Inferences, and Presumptions to the contrary.

Thirdly, To make it out, beyond all dispute, that the Project has been, from
First to Last, to Trepan me, by trying how far I might be prevailed upon to
entertain any Propositions of discrediting, shamming, or Ridiculing the
damnable Hellish Popish Plot; which has been Attested, and Confirmed, by the
Authority and Declaration of so many Parliaments.

There needs no more for the making out of the First Point, than what is said
already; which for Order sake, I shall briefly sum up yet once again: Care in
his Courant of the 27 th of Jan. 1681, Charges me with Renewing my Acquaintance
with Mr. Tongue, and endeavoring a Fresh Intrigue of the Old Stamp. Care again
in Tonge's Pretended Narrative, has hooked me into the [ etc.] in the Title
Page, and his other material Passages Omitted in the Affidavit, [etc.] -- by
drawing my Name into the Book, within the compass of that, [ etc.] and the
Supplemental Reserve. The same Care again, in Janeway's Sham Plots, gives an
account Page 139. That over and above Tonge's Oath to Mr. Justice Bridgeman, he
has reserved many more Particulars to another Opportunity; which gives him
Liberty till the Day of Judgment, to supply his Evidence. It is a farther
Presumption of a Design; First, the Calculating of their Narrative, for the
Oxford Parliament, to take me Unprovided, and by Surprise. Secondly, By the
keeping it so Close ever since, for fear of having the Villainy of it Detected,
and Exposed; And then the Publishing of it now at last, under a False Name, is
a further Confirmation of the Foulness of that Practice.

It might suffice to the Second Point, that I was Honorably Discharged by the
King and Council; Oats and Tongue being present, and not having One word to say
in Contradiction to my Defense: But it is not a likely matter, over and above,
that I should have a Design upon Tongue, and at the same time shake him off from
fastening himself upon me. That I should enter into that Liberty of Discourse:
of Censuring the Plot, Drawing him in to raise Objections against it, and to
represent it as the Invention of his Father, and Oats; and yet at the same
time, Caution both Captain Ely, and Mr. Choqueux, to have a Care of him, for he
would lay hold of any thing to Ruin them. Is it not a likely matter again,
that I should ask him for his Papers, and he should give me no Answer; and that
I should so Greedily Interest my self in a Zeal and Curiosity to be dabbling
with him, and yet at the same time, refuse any Information from him, but under
his own hand: And with this Condition Annexed, That he should declare it to be
his own Voluntary Act, and neither Directly, or Indirectly drawn from him at my
Instance, or Procurement? Now all This will be laid as open as the Day in That
which follows.

It will be Objected perhaps, that though this Plea may serve well enough for
what is past, or at least for what has been produced against me upon Legal
Testimony: But what if he should come upon second Thoughts, (as other People
have done) to refresh his Memory, and Reinforce his Evidence, or Charge me (as
Care calls it) with [a Fresh Intrigue of the Old Stamp] till I found (as the
Pacquetier has it) that Tongue would Correspond no further with me? I would ask
no more for my Acquittal, then that Curtis might be strictly Examined, who was
the Author of those Three Insolent Impostures; The Pacque^; Tonge's
Vindication; and Tonge's Narrative and Case; which were All Published by him;
and that Janeway might be Interrogated, Who was the Author of his Popish
Sham-Plots; not but that any Man may know whence they all came, they are so
like the Father. I would ask this, for the Publiques sake, as well as my Own;
for it is Impossible for any State to Live at Peace, or any Community or Person
to escape Untainted, where These Pests of Humane Society are suffered in a
Commonwealth.

I shall say nothing now to the Many, Gross, Virulent, and Scandalous Falsehoods
that are scattered Up and Down these Venomous Papers; but refer the Reader to
what I have to say upon the Third Head, wherein I shall set forth the Naked
Truth of the Matter; and make it Evident, that the Shamming and Tampering has
been on the other side; and that instead of my Wheedling of Tongue into a
Complication against his Father; it has been the Business of Young Tongue, his
Fellows, and Directors, from One End to the other of this affair, to draw
L'Estrange into the Toil. This is the Third and the Last Point, and I shall
Handle it at large.

The Design of Tonge's putting a Sham upon me (by the Order and Instruction, I
suppose, of his Superiors) must bear Date a good while before I ever so much as
saw the Face of him; As appears by his Propounding me (though an Absolute
Stranger to him) as a fit Person for him to Advise withal, about the Menage,
and Government of his Design: and making twenty sleeveless Pretenses for
getting into my Acquaintance; besides the Visible Importunities of Pressing
upon me, after I knew him; and the Use he made of the most Frivolous Accidents,
to Improve all Circumstances to my Disadvantage. And then the whole Story is
Far^'d with Lies, from one end to the other; as the Reader will Observe upon
comparing the several parts of this Relation.

The first time that ever he saw me, (as himself confesses) or that I ever saw
him, was at Monsieur Choqueux's, by the occasion of my going thither to Enquire
about some Memorials of the late War. This was some Months after his Impious
Swearing, and Counter-Swearing, Backward and Forward, at Windsor; so that there
could be no pretense for my tampering of him in a matter, where he had so
Perjuriously Contradicted himself already; Neither did Choqueux bring me to
him, (as he suggests) but the Servant, upon my Enquiry for her Master, desired
me to Walk into a low Room ^till she called him down; and there I found a
Person to me unknown, which, it seems, was Young Tongue, as I was afterward
Enform'd by the Master of the Lodgings when he came down. I found the Fopp to
be Talkative, and so I let him run on in a Nonsensical Story of the Privacies
that had passed betwixt Oats, and his Father, certain Papers concerning the
Plot that were Written in Greek Characters, and hid behind the Wainscout; and a
Foolery of one Green, a Weaver, that meeting his Father in the Court of
Requests, told him for News (and without any knowledge of him too) that E've
long, there would be a Popish Massacre: Whereupon, (says Young Tongue) my Father
made an acquaintance with him, and out came the Plot. He showed me likewise an
Abuse upon some of the King's Evidence, in a kind of a Disguise like a Romance,
which he said was of his own Composing, and I found he had a mind to Unriddle
it to me; but I stopped him short; Adviz'd him against it; and made what haste
Civilly I could, to get quit of his Company, and to deliver my self from the
Nauscousness, as well as the Danger of so Impertinent, and Suspicious an
Acquaintance. This was before I had ever seen the Eyes of Capt. Ely; but coming
soon after to the knowledge of him, it was my Lesson both to him, and Mr.
Choqueux, to have a Care of that Young Fellow for fear of having a Trick put
upon them: So far was I from making that Fool my Confident, that I did not
think it safe to have any thing at all to do with him; The Incredibility of his
Evidence being the best Security that any Man can have that keeps him Company.

Soon after This, Capt. Ely returns from Windsor, (where he had been it seems
upon Tonge's Errand) and my having some Inkling of his Business there, made me
a little curious to find him one, and learn from him the Truth of the Matter.
Presently upon This there, was Bruited a Report about the Town, that Oats had
Exh^bited a ^omplaint to the Council against Ely and Choqueux, and that
L'Estrange was brought in for a Third Man. This Alarm put me to bethink my
self, and to provide for the worst that Malice and Perjury could pretend
against me: For I could easily see thorough Tongue; and Oats had already
pronounced me, in all his Haunts and Gangs, as deep in the Practice, as the
most Confident and Shameless Asseveration of any thing; short of a Verbum
Sacerdotis could make me.

Hereupon I applied my Self to Captain Ely, and Monsieur Choqueux, (being both
Clear of the Council) to make Oath before some Master of the Chancery to the
Truth of certain Particulars, wherein I might possibly come to be Concerned, if
there should happen to be any Combination carried on against me. They did me
the Right to Comply with my Desire, and the Affidavits are as follows.

The Affidavit of Samuel Ely, etc.
SAmuel Ely of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the Country of
Middlesex, Gent. makes Oath, that he This Deponent has not known the Person
of Roger L'Estrange in the County of Middlesex, Esquire till about a fortnight
before the Date hereof: And that He this Deponent never saw the said L'Estrange
and Mr. Simpson Tongue together, nor ever heard of any Correspondence between
them, more then that Mr. Choqueux told this Deponent that he had brought the
said Tongue to Mr. L'Estrange to desire him to take Tonge's Enformation upon
Oath, as a thing that might much justify Us; This being before we heard of any
Order to attend the Council.

This Deponent further Enformeth, that the said Tongue made mention of Mr.
L'Estrange in a certain Paper about the latter end of July last, (to this
Deponents best Remembrance) as a person that might be a very good Evidence
against his Father, for some seditious Passages in a Book of Dr. Tonge's
called, The Royal Martyr; which the said Mr. L'Estrange refused to License, and
D. Tongue took it very ill at his hands; Tongue the younger declaring, that he
had a great mind to be acquainted with the said Mr. L'Estrange.

This Deponent moreover says, That being at Windsor about the middle of August
last, He this Deponent^ was told, That young Tongue had denied the Enformation
given in by him to his Majesty, and declared, that he was set on by the
Papists; whereupon this Deponent went immediately to young Tongue, being then in
Windsor, and told him what he had heard. Who there in the presence of Two other
persons, did presently take Pen, Ink, and Paper, and drew up a short
Declaration to this following Effect.

Being informed that my Uncle, Captain Tongue, has maliciously aspersed me,
that I have made a Recantation, and disowned my former Enformation given in to
his Majesty; As I hope to be saved; I never did make any such Recantation,
though I was mightily urged thereunto by my Uncle, and to lay it upon the
Papists. But the Enformation was all true, and in the Discharge of my Duty and
Conscience; And that it was my own spontaneous Act, without the Expectation of
any Advantage, Benefit, or Reward; or by the Procurement, Direction or Abetting
of any Person whatsoever.

This Declaration being by him the said Sympson Tongue Written in the presence
of two other Persons, and this Deponent, of his own proper motion, and without
any advice thereunto; and it was likewise attested by this Deponent and the two
Persons abovementioned. And all this was done in the space of one half hour,
(as this Deponent verily believes) from the time after this Deponent's first
hearing the Report.

And finally, This Deponent says further, That he heard Mr. L'Estrange (being
in Discourse with Mr. Choqueux) caution the said Mr. Choqueux to have a care
what he said to that Fellow (meaning Young Tongue) for he would lay hold of any
thing to ruin you. This was the effect of Mr. L'Estrange's Caveat to Mr.
Choqueux, who returned this Answer, That he had nothing to do with him in the
World, but in relation to his Cure; and this Deponent heard Mr. L'Estrange say
further at the same time. Remember Mr. Choqueux, what I told young Tongue and
You together, I do declare, I will not Receive any Enformation from Tongue, but
under his own hand; and I will have a Clause in it too, wherein he shall acquit
me upon the same Oath, of having any thing to do with him by way of Advice or
Encouragement; That I did not directly or indirectly move him to it, but that
it was all at his own Motion, and at his own Request: And more this Deponent
has not to say,

SAM. ELY.
Jurat. coram me.

JO. COELL.
4 die Octobris Anno xxxii. Car. II. R. An. Dom. 1680.


Upon the perusal of This Affidavit, the Reader will be able to satisfy
himself what Tonge's Donyals of any Imprecations; His Invocating the Great
Jehovah to the Truth of what he said; His Profane manner of Obtruding upon
Almighty God, His Mimical Forms of Contrition and Remorse, for the Ardent
Affections of a True Repentance; The Oppression of his Spirits for his Villainy
against his Father: What all this (I say) amounts to upon the Comparing of the
Gross, and Scandalous Contradictions: And yet the Testimony of This Prostigate
Wretch is made use of by the Managers of this Infamous Cause, as an Authority
sufficient to Obliege the World into a Belief of any thing against L'Estrange;
just according to the Measures of their Proceedings in other Cases, where the
Credit of the Witnesses, is rated by the Malice, and Interest of the Faction;
and None, either so Fair, or so Foul, as not to be Blasted or Justified, in
order to the Common End of serving a Party. I shall go forward now to the
Second Affidavit.

Anthony Choqueux of the Savoy, Chyrurgeon, this 4th Day of October. 1680. makes
Oath, as follows, Viz. Impr.

I. THat about the Beginning of September. last, Mr. Tho. Neucomb brought Mr.
L'Estrange to his House to enquire about some Memorials of Prince Rupert's
Actions in the late War, and in Flanders: but because it was somewhat late,
they drank a Bottle of Wine, and put off farther discourse upon that Business
to another Meeting.

II. That some few days after this, Mr. L'Estrange came to his House a second
time; and after some discourse with him, the Deponent, before Mr. Tongue, (whom
he had then under Cure) about the Memorials, and Papers concerning the Prince,
he told him that the Person there present was young Mr. Tongue; whereupon Mr.
L'Estrange took notice of him, and asked him if he had ever seen him at his
Father's Chamber, who answered no, he had never seen him before, or words to
the same effect.

III. That at the same time, Mr. Tongue said he remembered that he had been told,
Mr. L'Estrange refused to License a Book of his Fathers, (called the Royal
Martyr) which Refusal, Dr. Tongue took very ill, he said. And so he went on in
several Discourses of div^rs Meetings betwixt his Father and Dr. Oats, and how
many Clerks his Father kept constantly a Writing; and such kind of Talk; Mr.
L'Estrange only giving him the Hearing, without any encouragement, or asking
him any questions, but slightly telling him that all this signified nothing; or
to that purpose.

IV. That finding Mr. L'Estrange to wave the Discourse, he whispered the
Deponent in the Ear, to desire him to acquaint Mr. L'Estrange, that if he had
any thing to Transcribe, he was ready to do it for him; and should take it for
a great kindness. After this; That there passed nothing but common Talk: Only,
at parting, that Mr. Tongue desired of Mr. L'Estrange that he might wait upon
him at his House, setting the day and hour himself, to which Mr. L'Estrange
seemed to agree.

V. That at the time appointed, Tongue went, (as he afterward told this
Deponent) but Mr. L'Estrange was not at home; so that he sent him a Letter next
morning, desiring him to appoint some other time; which Letter this Deponent
saw, and likewise Mr. L'Estrange's Answer to it, which he conveyed to Mr.
Tongue. Before the writing of the said Letter, Mr. L'Estrange said (by way of
caution) unto this Deponent, A Man had need have a care what he says to such
Fellows, for they will lay hold of anything; or to the sam^ purpose. That the
substance of the Answer (to the Deponent's best memory) was this; That if Mr.
Tongue had any thing to say to him, he should be within at Seven in the Evening.

VI. That at seven in the Evening, (or there abouts) upon the earnest desire of
Mr. Tongue, This Deponent went into Holbourn with him to Mr. L'Estrange's; and
told him how great a desire Mr. Tongue had expressed to be better acquainted with
him; and how ready he was to serve him, in Transcribing any thing for him: to
whom Mr. L'Estrange answered, that he should be glad (upon occasion) to do him
a kindness.

VII. That hereupon, this Deponent told Mr. L'Estrange (upon Mr. Tonge's
desiring it) that Mr. Tongue offered to inform him of what he had delivered to
the King; and that Mr. L'Estrange replied, If he has any thing material to
present to me, as a Justice of Peace, for the King's Service, I Will give him his
Oath and receive it; upon condition that he declare it to be his own Act,
without any motive to it from my self; otherwise I will not meddle in it; or
Words to the same import: And that Mr. Tongue said this was reasonable, but that
he had not such an Information ready drawn: That so this Deponent went away to
a place hard by, and about a quarter of an hour after, returning that way, saw
Mr. Tongue come out of Mr. L'Estrange's House with two or three little Printed
Books in his hand, which he said Mr. L'Estrange had given him.

VIII. And Lastly, That after this the Deponent heard Tongue speak no more of
Mr. L'Estrange or of any Papers given unto him.

A. Choqueux.
Jur' 4. die October. 1680. coram me

Magist. Cancel. Adam Ottley.



Here Is the Occasion set down in the First Paragraph that brought me first to
the Savoy; where I did not so much as see Tongue, that night, though the
Libellers would have it thought, that my Design upon Tongue was the Thing
Expressly that carried me thither.

It may be noted upon the fifth Clause, That Tongue came to my House at the time
appointed, (according to the Tenor of the foregoing) and afterward, told
Choqueux that I was not at home: So that it is plain, that he pressed upon me,
and I avoided him; beside that his Secretary Reports it, as if Mr. Choqueux had
only told him so, and he had not been there himself. Neither does he take any
notice at all of his soliciting me by Letter to set him a Time of Meeting, or
of my Answer in return to that Letter. And it appears also in the next
Paragraph, that Monsieur Choqueux did not bring Tongue to me, but upon the
Earnest desire of Tongue, Monsieur Choqueux coming along with him.

Upon the whole matter here is more then enough said to this point, and to prove
that it was thus far an Intrigue carried on in a direct Train for the
Inveighling of me into a share. I shall now proceed to the laying open of a
Continuation, or rather a Repetition of the same Project, under the
Countenance, and Assistance of the same Prosligate Agents. I shall here Publish
the whole truth of the matter, in hope that the Government will proceed for the
securing of honest men, in their Lives and Reputations, against a Band of
Sanguinary Libellers, and Prostitute Knights of the Post; and not suffer the
Popish Plot to be Shamm'd, and Exposed to the Highest degree of Contempt and
Discredit imaginable, only in the Contemplation of drawing in some
Conscientious Protestant or other, that has a true Veneration for the King, and
the Church, barely to the hearing of the Story; for that is sufficient to the
Case here in question. The First Contriver, and Promoter of the Villainy, brings
himself off by setting up for the Informer.

In the First business of Tongue, I kept my self upon such a Guard, as in
Honesty and Prudence, I thought my self obliged to do, and it was well I did
so, for a much wiser man then my self might have ventured further, perhaps,
then in that Case I thought it convenient to do. I do not speak as to the
entering into any Unlawful Act, or Consultation; but to the keeping of my self
clear from any Reasonable Ground for the least Jealousy, or Suspicion. And yet
all this Pre-caution notwithstanding; how did the Weekly Newspapers Publish me
over the Three Kingdoms for the Greatest Villain in Nature! For a matter of six
weeks or two months together, without either Truth or Control; and no more in
the whole matter, than the Impudence of Two or Three Mercenary Rascals to raise
all this Scandal and Clamor. This experience taught me so much wit, (though
to my cost) as for the future, never to have any thing to do with this sort of
Catell again, but upon Terms of stricter Reserve; so that I took up a
Resolution; if ever any further attempt of the same kind should be made upon
me, I would fairly endeavor to spoil the jest, and set the Saddle upon the
Right Horse. And this is my present Case, wherein I shall Govern my self by the
Rules of a Good ChristJan, a Good Subject, and an Honest Man.

There was a Whisper about a Quarter of a Year ago, of Tonge's being touched in
Conscience for a False Oath, about the business of his Father, and the late Dr.
Oats. This coming to my Ear, and a Paper of his to my hand, with strange
Circumstances in it, I sent him a Letter by my servant, which I thought might
very well become me in several Respects: and especially for so much as the
matter of it did particularly relate to my self. The Copy of it follows.

For Mr. Simson Tongue, etc.
SIR,
YOU will wonder at this Letter, perhaps, from a Person that has neither
Directly nor Indirectly had any thing to do with you, either by Word, Writing,
or Message, since October last was Twelvemonth, when, upon your Enformation, I
was questioned, and wrongfully accused in many particulars before the King and
Council.

I look upon it as my duty, to forgive ye; and at this Good time, to tell ye
so; and I have the Charity to believe, if it had come into your thought, you
would have found it your part to have desired it. I know very well, that Oats
and College had the handling of ye before you gave your Evidence; and I have
reason to believe it should not have stopped there if they might have had their
Will. But however, I had kept my self upon such a Guard, and so Clear, that I
was acquitted without the least doubt of my Innocence. I ask ye no Questions,
nor do I desire any thing from ye; though I should be glad to find any Instance
of your Conversion, and that the Truth of the whole matter might appear. I do
wish you (in sine) such a sense of what you owe both to God and Man, as may
lead ye to a Just, and a Conscientious Discharge of your Duty. After all, I am

December. 27. 1681. Your Loving Friend, R. L'Estrange.


I thought I could not do less in Honor and Religion, (especially upon this
Festival Occasion^) than to mind him of His Duty by the Discharge of my Own;
but my Charity was not so well Requited, it seems, as it deserved: for instead
of keeping himself to the Subject of the Wrong he had done me, he presently
falls to his Old Play again, of throwing out Baits upon the Question of the
Plot, to try if he could get any better hold of me This Bout than he did the
last. Upon December 30. I received a Letter from him, in acknowledgment of mine
of the 27th, in the Terms and Date following. Directed, For his Ever Honored
Friend, ROGER L'ESTRANGE, etc.

Ever Honored SIR,
I Humbly thank you for your Charity, in Forgiving the Wrong I did you, in
October was Twelve Month; And I assure you, it has been a Great trouble to me;
and if I could have hoped for Pardon, I should have begged it of you long
since; but I am Confident, if you had known how I was used by my Uncle first,
and afterward by College and Oats, to force me to Accuse you Falsely, you would
sooner have Pitied my weakness, and forgiven me what I have done against you:
But this Generous Charity which you have now showed, in giving me that Pardon,
which I durst not ask for, has encouraged me to Entreat you to Intercede with
His Majesty, to Grant me His Gracious Pardon, for the Great Offenses which I
have Committed against him. And that he would be pleased to let me be brought
to my Trial, and have the Perusal of my Father's Papers, to help to make my
Defense. And I hope to make out the Truth, to the satisfaction of all Honest
Men, and Discharge the Conscience of, ^ings Bench, the Common-side, Dec. 28.
1681. Honored Sir, Your veriest commandable Servant, Simson Tongue.


This Letter came accompanied with the Draught of a Petition; and Both in his
own hand. There needed no Great Sagacity to Chop Right upon This Train, being
the very Trick over again, that he had so lately served me before: so that I
was even resolved to look to my self, and to let Nature work; Clapping this
Endorsement immediately upon the Letter for a Memorial.

The Endorsement.
The Letter whereupon this is Endorsed, was delivered to the Person, who has
hereunder subscribed the Two First Letters of her Name. It was delivered to her
Yesterday being the 29 th of December, 1681. with an acknowledgment that he had
done the Person to whom it is Directed, a great deal of Wrong; That he was
sorry for it, and would have acknowledged it sooner had he had Opportunity: But
that he was put on by his Uncle, and Others, to do what he did; and desired the
Bearer hereof to deliver the Letter, together with the Contents above written.
All which he did of his own accord. December. 30. 1681.

In the Presence of, etc.

The Petition that came in company with this Letter, is Word for Word as
follows. Those Names only Excepted, that are Inseparable from the Matter in
Question. For my Business is only to Expose the Falsehood of this miserable
Wretch, without Involving others in the Consequences of his Calumnies.

To His Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of Simson Tongue Prisoner in the King's Bench.
Shows,
THat after your Petitioner had Declared the Truth to your Majesty, concerning
the Contrivance of his Father, and Mr. Titus Oats; Your Petitioner being in
great Want of Necessaries, his Uncle Captain Tongue having sent for him, was
compelled to go to him for Relief, and Captain Tongue made your Petitioner
Drunk, and then threatened and forced him to deny the Truth, and to Sign a Paper
which the said Captain Tongue had written, your Petitioner not knowing what he
did; and afterward when your Petitioner was committed to Newgate, College came
to him, and by Threats and Promises, forced your Petitioner to deny the Truth;
for the which your Petitioner has been ever since under great trouble of Mind,
for his great Wickedness and Cowardice to deny the Truth. But your Petitioner
does Protest, in the Presence of Almighty God; that it is very true, that the
Plot was Contrived by my Father, and Titus Oats, when he returned the second
time beyond the Seas: my Father and he writ much of it out of [ Houselife]
Queen Elizabeth, ( That Word Houselife I could not make out.) and out of the
Book writ by Hooper or Hocker that came from Rome, and swore against CampJan,
and the other Jesuits; as will appear both by the said Books, and by my
Father's Papers' if your Majesty please to cause them to be searched into: They
first Writ at -- where the Plot was Written by Oats in Greek Letters; and
afterward went to Fox-Hall, and one of the Jesuits Letters is in my Father's
Hand. Wherefore your Petitioner does most Humbly Pray and beseech Your Sacred
Majesty, to Pity the sad Condition of Your Petitioner, and to Pardon his Great
Crime of going from the Truth: And to let him be brought to his Trial, and to
have his Father's Papers delivered to him, to make his Defense: And Your
Petitioner hopes to make what he has Written, so Clear; that Your Majesty will
think Him more fit for Your Pity, than Your Anger: And forgive the Great
Wickedness of Your Petitioner, for the which he is truly Penitent; and will
rather perish here in Prison, than ever be Guilty of the like: As he has
showed to those that have been with him, since his Great Poverty, to pervert
Him farther from the Truth; but Your Petitioner would not: Therefore Your
Petitioner does most Humbly Beseech Your Majesty, to Pity the sad and miserable
Condition of Your Petitioner, and not to let him lie here and starve for want
of Cloth and Bread.

And Your Petitioner [as in Duty bound] shall ever pray, etc. Simson Tongue.


This Petition made it as Clear as the Day, that he was Entering anew upon the
Old Haunt; and that he lay upon the Catch for an Opportunity to do me a Good
Turn: So I thought it but reasonable to keep my self out of his Reach, and
returned him for Answer this Following Letter: Addressed, For Mr. Simson Tongue,
etc.

Mr. Tongue,
YOurs of the 28 th Instant, came Yesterday to my hand, with the Draught of a
Penitent Petition, which you desire may be presented to His Majesty. You must
be more Particular and Clear, before I presume to undertake the Office. As for
Instance.

1. You say that you were pressed by your Uncle first, and afterward by College
and Oats, to Accuse me falsely.

But you say nothing what they would have had you to Accuse me of, more than
you did: What means they used to bring you to it; whether there was any Money,
or Reward, either given or promised: By whom? What? or how much? How? or in
what manner this was done? ( If any thing of this kind) Or if any man can prove
This besides your self?

2. That Captain Tongue made you Drunk; and sign a Paper of his writing, when
you knew not what you did.

But you do not say, either where; what Liquor; what quantity; at what time;
who saw you together; or afterward saw you Drunk.

3. That the Captain sent for you; And that you were Compelled by your
Necessities to go to him for Relief.

But you do not say how often he sent for you: by whom: to what place, or
places: whether by word of mouth, or by Letter: Or if upon your going, when
sent for, he made you Drunk at the same time: who can prove his sending for
you: nor what Relief you had from him; either in Money, or otherwise: Or what
Promises: what Conditions: or what Discourses toward, or concerning all this,
passed betwixt you.

4. You say, that your Uncle threatened, and forced you to deny the Truth.

But you do not say, what those Menaces were: what Truth you were to deny: what
Arguments, or Discourses he made use of to prevail upon you: or if any
Conditions were offered ye, in case of your ComplJance.

5. You say, that College came to ye in Newgate. and Threatened and Forced you
also to deny the Truth,

But you say nothing to the Queries upon Number. 1.

6. You say the Plot was Contrived by your Father, and Oats, upon Oate's
second Return from beyond the Seas: and name some Books (the Names of them you
cannot make out) upon the Subject of Queen Eliz. Out of which they have a good
part of the Contrivance; and refer to those Books for the Agreement of the
Matter.

But you do not speak to Particulars; what that Contrivance was; how managed;
who privy, or assistant to it: Or what Discourses past upon it. So that here is
no matter of Fact set forth: Neither do I understand what Books you mean.

7. You say that Oats wrote the Plot, first, at -- in Greek Characters; and
that afterward they went Both to Fox-Hall.

But you do not say, why in Greek; what became of the Copy; what Discourse upon
it; what Assistants, or Advisers; what was done afterward at Fox-Hall; how
they came to go thither.

8. You say that One of the Jesuits Letters is in your Fathers hand.

But not which of them: Nor ( in one word) How you come to know all this; Or
who can speak to all these Particulars?

9. You desire the Sight of your Father's Papers; but say not in whose Custody
they are.

You Protest the Truth of all you say, as in the Presence of Almighty God: And
in the Name of that Almighty God, I Adjure you, and Entreat you, to say nothing
but Truth; if you shall think sit to make me any Return to this Letter: And if
you shall by such an Explanation as the Matter requires, furnish me with a
Reasonable Ground to proceed upon; I will plainly and honestly represent the
state of the Case, as you lay it before me: and do as may become,

From my House in Holbo^n, Dec. 31. 1681. Your kind Friend, R. L'S.


P. S. This is my Second to you, in Answer to your First, and Only Letter to
me, since One in September was Twelve Month. Pray keep an account of what you
Send, and Receive; for I Will do every thing Above-board (...)

To take the Matter in Order as it rises* The next I received from Tongue, was,
That which follows, being Dated Jan. 2. and received the Day following,

Mr. L'Estrange,
I Received yours, and am very desirous of the Truth, being very confident that
a great deal of Roguery and Villainy lies still undiscovered at the bottom of
the Plot. But I am no ways able to answer those Questions you Propose to me,
so as to give you any tolerable satisfaction, unless that I were in Possession
of my Fathers Papers, which would best clear what you desire. After my Fathers
Death, I was enform'd, that those Papers he left at Colleges House, were seized
by the Counceil, and my Uncle, under pretense of Administering for me has seized
on the rest. This I am certain of, that if those Papers ever come to light they
will discover very strange things. I have been now confined upwards of a
Twelvemonth; and am now in a very Indigent Condition on the Common-side of the
King's Bench, having no other Subsistence then the Basket: and the place I am in
is no ways suitable for writing, or any thing of serious thoughts. I Question
not your Zeal for his Majesty, and the Royal Family; and I think you could not
do a greater service than to enquire, if you can any ways know which way my
Fathers Papers were disposed. Until that be found out, I shall be in the dark,
and no way able to give ye any tolerable result to any Questions: For the
Popish Plot, by reason of the several Persons concerned in it, is so Intricate
a thing, that to unravell it from first to last, and give you a Particular
account of all the several Transactions, is more then I dare Assume upon me;
and by reason of my confinement, I have forgot many material things, which
before would have occurred to my memory: and therefore of necessity must have
some assistance of my Fathers writings e're I can proceed. I am

Your Loving Friend, and Servant, Simson Tongue.
King's Bench the Common-side, Jan. 2. 1681.

P. S. I Request a Word of Answer from you to this Letter.

Any man with half an Eye may see the Drist of this Paper. The Charity of a
Single six pence would have passed for a Subornation. My bare Enquiry after his
Fathers Papers would have been a Tampering, to Invalidate the Kings Evidence.
And such an Answer as he desires in his Postscript, to this Letter, would have
ruined me to all Intents and Purposes. At the same time with the former of the
second, I received from him also this following Letter. Superscribed, For his
Honored Friend Roger L'Estrange.

Honored Sir,
I Received yours of the last Instant, (mistaken for Dec. 31.) and do briefly
return you this Answer, until I can better recollect my memory.

1. As to your first Question, what means was used to bring me to accuse you,
when I was examind'd before Mr. Bridgman, at Captain Richardson's House, Oats
asked me if you were not concerned with me, I told him I had seen you once, but
could not accuse you of any thing; then he replied he knew the contrary, and if
I would not discover it, it should be the worse for me, and threatened me very
much, but proferred me no money; and none were present with me, but Mr.
Bridgman, his Clerk and Oats.

2. The first Message I had, from my Uncle Captain Tongue, was by a young man
that waited on him; who brough me a letter, and desired me to come to him to
the Golden Anchor in the Strand, whether I came, and having drunk several
Bottles of Canary with him, I desired to take my leave of him; who importuned
me to stay, and then called for several Bottles more: and said he had a Paper
that I must sign, and sinding me unwilling, he drunk me to such a pitch that I
was quite drunk, and then I signed the Paper.

He sent likewise twice for me to the Half Moon in the Strand, where he
likewise drunk me very high, and said he would give me some allowance toward
my relief, and sent one Mrs. Lamb to me with half a Crown, and promised that
hence forwards he would send me three shillings and six pence a week, which I
constantly had sent me till of late.

The arguments he made use of were, that though I were imprisoned, I should be
supplied with what necessaries I wanted, and that he would endeavor to
purchase me my liberty, and discharge my Chamber Rent, and Fees on the
Master-side of the King's Bench.

My Father used to take Notes out of a great Book, it was a Suppliment after
Hollinshed left off, and was joined to his, and was writ as I have heard him
say by one How, or Hows, and there were other little Books written by Hocker or
Hopper, that was the Witness, and Prosecuted the Jesuits.

I do not very well remember which, but it may be found by comparing the
Letters with Oats and my Fathers Hand.

One E -- knows much, for he helped to write some of the Papers which my Father
left were taken at College's House, and my Uncle sent one Mr. H- to me, in the
King's Bench, and brought one who was a stranger to me, with a Paper, to
Administer on my behalf, and signed it, and under pretense of Administering for
me has seized on the rest of my Fathers Papers.

That Mr. H -- studies Physic, and lives not far from C -- but I cannot
remember the Court, but the Person he Lodges near, is High-Constable.

Sir, I can make no better Answer at present, because I have no place to
recollect my self: In the mean time I desire you would accept of this, which is
no other then the Truth, from

Your Humble Servant, Simson Tongue.


Here follows my Answer, Jan. 3. to Two from Tongue received together.

Mr. Tongue,
Mrs. -- has brought me a Letter from you this Morning of Jan. 2. 1681. and
another Enclosed in it without Date. The Account you pretend to give of your
Affairs, is very Imperfect; and you mistake your self, in seeming to understand
me, as if I had put any Questions to you: I only told you, that your Relation
concerning the Matter, whereupon you propounded to Petition the King, fell
short in many Particulars. I know very well how Liable Words are to
misconstruction, and I will not meddle in any thing which is not as Clear as
the Sun. I know nothing of your Father's Papers: If you have any thing to offer
me, you must either Declare in the same Paper, that it is your own voluntary
Act, or else I Will not meddle in it. But wherein soever I can do you a Civility,
that I may Honestly justify, I am ready to show my self,

Your Loving Friend, To. L'Estrange.
Jan. 3. 1681.

Here follows another Letter of Tongue, of Jan. 5.

King's Bench, the Common-side, Jan. 5. 1681. Mr. L'Estrange,
FInding that my Two last Letters to you were Imperfect, I send you this Third,
and Request you would be pleased to send me the largest Letter, that I may take
a Copy of it. The Contrivance was thus: That under the pretense of a Popish
Plot, (which my Father first Imagined was on foot, and afterward Oats at his
Second Return, swore to be true) Their main and principal Design was to
Disinherit His Royal Highness. The First persons that managed the Plot, and
were privy to it, were my Father Oats, etc. The last time I was with B --, he
told me he had something to write, that was not sit to be named, but he had
burnt it; and said, he was afraid those Papers would make him mad, should he
write any longer; and that my Father would trust none but him to Transcribe
them, and he could not deny him, because he had no other Livelihood.

My Father advised Oats to write the Plot in Greek Letters, because that none
but themselves might be privy to what was dove.

The Copy which was in Greek Letters was burnt by Oats.

When they came to Fox-Hall, Mr. -- was taken in for an Assistant, after he had
been sworn to Secrecy.

They went to Fox-Hall by my Father's advice, to the end they might be the more
private, where those Papers they wrote at -- were put into Form, and delivered
into the Council.

After they all Three removed from Fox-Hall, and Nailed up the Chamber Door,
having left several Papers behind; and my Father understanding by Mr. Lambert,
that the Door was broken up by the Landlord, and the Papers like to be seized
on, was much troubled at it, and sent away the Rent that was due by his Man
Richard -- now living at -- who brought back the Papers with him, and can
Testify the same.

Sir, I have no Chamber nor Convenience to write, and besides have a very great
Cold upon me; but request you would be pleased to accept of this, which is upon
a second Recollection of my Thoughts, which is my own voluntary Act; and I have
been under great Trouble of Conscience ever since I went from my Evidence, ana
many times ready to Despair, but that Mrs. -- coming to see a Prisoner, I
desired her to look out some Papers I had left at her House; and I sent to you,
being you were the Person I had wronged, and therefore thought it my Duty to
acknowledge my Fault, which I do now again, and Protest, that what I have done
is neither in hope of Favor, nor Reward, but to discharge a good Conscience,
and to show that I am truly Penitent. And am

Your veriest Commandable Servant, Simson Tongue.


In Answer to this as follows.

Jan. 6. 1682. Mr. Tongue,
ALthough you have so exceedingly forfeited your Credit in the former Abuses
you put upon the King; and others that believed you, that you cannot expect
much weight to be laid upon your single word, for any thing, yet having dealt
so openly, and so particularly, (and all on your own accord too) in a Letter to
me of Yesterday, I cannot but hope that you are a true Convert.

You have named several Persons that were Privy to the matter of Fact there in
Question. You shall do well to bethink your self both where they may be found,
and what particulars they can speak to. And what you say, let it be in the Awe
of Devine Justice, and Eternal Damnation if you belly any Creature. I will
endeavor to do you good some honest way or other: but I dare not venture to
see you, or speak with you, for fear of Mis-construction. This is all I can say
at present.

Your Loving Friend, R. L'Estrange.


This was followed by another, from Tongue, Jan. 6. 10.

Jan. 10. 1682. Mr. L'Estrange,
I Am very sensible that my single word will be but of small moment. However as
I declare nothing but the Truth, yet if by declaring what others can Testify,
I can be anyways Instrumental to the further discovery of it, I should not a
little r^joyce. [ -- having writ all the Papers which related to the History of
the Plot, can give account of the whole contrivance, and the several meetings
that my Father, Oats, etc. had. He is the only man in Town, could he be found
out, etc.]

I have a great cold with sitting on the ground to make Pegg^, as I do all the
week, and must work very hard for three-half pence a day, which is all I have,
etc. -- I am barefooted, and almost naked. I must confess, I have deserved far
worse than this; but God that has promised that at what time soever a Sinner
does truly Repent, he will have mercy, will, I hope, look upon my unfeigned
Repentance, and incline His Majesty's Royal Heart to pity and pardon me, if
you please to impart my sorrowful Estate unto the King; and to let His
Gracious Majesty know how I was Trepanned by my Uncle; for the which I am very
sorrowful, and am still.

Pray Sir consider the sad Condition of

Your Poor Servant, Simson Tongue


There never was such a Penitent certainly to all manner of purposes; but I
began now to have enough of him, and in a short Letter of the Day following put
an end to the Correspondence.

Jan. 11. 1682. Mr. Tongue.
I Dare not presume to trouble the King in your Affair. But I will do you all
the good I can in what Case soever the matter will Honestly bear it.

Your Loving Friend, R. L'Estrange.


By this time, Tongue, and his Advisers, finding that they could not Compass
their End; and Mr. Thompson's News-Paper having given Vent to the Design, they
laid their Heads together to make the best Retreat they could; and to Face a
Shamm upon the World, as if L'Estrange had been already up to the Ears in a New
Plot: But they were so Thankful however as to Cover the Backside of the Poor
Fellow for his Good Will, put some few Pence in his Pocket, and preserve him
from Starving this bout, in hope of a more favorable Opportunity. But this
shall not serve their Turn, if there be any Reverence left for the Memory of
the Popish Plot; or any Justice to be obtained upon Those Miscreants that make
it their business to tear up the very Foundation of it by the Roots; For the
worst is yet to come, and under Tonge's Hand, and by him Attested, as well as
all the rest.

When I came from the University ( says he) in the Year 77. I found Oats with
my Father, in a very poor Condition, who complained he knew not what to do to
get Bread; who went under the Name of Ambrose. My Father took him home, and
gave him Clothes, Lodging, and Diet, saying he would put him into a way.

And then he persuaded him to get acquainted among the Papists; and when he had
done so, then my Father told him, there had been many Plots in England to bring
in Popery, and if he would go over among the Jesuits, and Observe their ways,
it was possible it might be One now; and if he could make it out, it would be
his Preferment for ever. But however, if he could get their Names, and a little
Acquaintance from the Papists, it would be an Easy matter to stir up the
people to fear Popery.] And again, My Father and He (Dr. Oats) went and Lodged
at Fox-Hall, at One Lamberts, a Bell-Founder, (which House was called by the
Neighbors the Plot-House; And there Oates's Narrative was Written; whereof
several Copies were Written, very Different, the One from the Other; and the
Four Jesuits Letters (wherein Oats pretended was the whole Discovery) were
Counterfeits, etc.

All this I have to show under Tonge's Hand, and I Appeal to Men and Angels,
if, it be not the Boldest Attempt that ever was yet made upon the Credit of the
Popish Conspiracy: And sufficient to shake any Man's Faith, as to That Point,
that were not Proof against the Utmost Effects of Malice, Impudence, and
Imposture. So many Particulars, so Boldly, and Openly Attested; in the Face of
so many Witnesses, Trials, Convictions, Sentences, and Executions! And all
this, Expressly Levelled at the Honor of our Parliaments, and the Dignity of
Public Justice with only the Profligate, and Faithless Practices of the
Instrument to Weigh against the Impious Design, and the Desperate Effects and
Consequences of so Daring a Scandal. But let the suggestions be never so
Incredible and Ridiculous; It is a thing of great Mischief yet to suffer the
Authors of these B^^its and Rumors to pass Unpunished: for Malevolent Spirits
will be apt to say; If there were not something into, how is it, that the
Reporters of these Fables come to escape? The Best thing he has to say for
himself, will be, perhaps, that he has not so much published* These Shamms by
way of Affront to the Plot, as thrown them out for a Bait for L'Estrange to
Chop at: So that the Credit of the Protestant Religion, and the English
Government must, at this rate, be Exposed, upon the Experiment of Trying to
Engage, and Hamper L'Estrange in the Intrigue. But alas! I am so thoroughly
satisfied in the Business of the Plot; and the whole Scheme of it is so
Perfectly, and Distinctly in my Head, that I have not the least Curiosity in
the World to know more on it; Beside; That In vain is the Net spread in the
sight of the Bird. I have not Concerned my self to Hunt after his Fathers
Papers, to Trace out his Fathers Agents; nor Directly, or Indirectly made any
sort of Applications Pursuant to his Purpose, and Desire; but Innocently held
him in play with Letter for Letter, to keep up the Rest.

The Only Thing that stuck with me upon the thought of this Publication, was
the Nicety of Committing those Papers to a Public View, which might seem
perhaps to be deposited in my Hands under some sort of Confidence, and Trust:
But when I considered, on (...) other hand, that These Letters were meant only
as Snares to me under the Semblance of That Confidence, I was my own Confessor
in the Case, and easily discharged my self of That Scruple: And not without a
Further Sense neither of Duty to the Government.

In Conclusion; I have here made a Fair Discovery of a Foul Practice, both upon
the Public, and upon my Self; I was to have been Trappan'd the One way, and
Tongue is Detected the Other. I shall remit the rest to the Wisdom of my
Superiors, how far it may be either Safe, or Expedient to Encourage this way of
Proceeding; Even to the Violation of Common-Faith, and Society. The Plot's a
Sham (says Tongue;) If L'Estrange says so too, it is almost as much as his Neck's
worth: Why should not This Scandalous Affront now, be as Dangerous to Tongue for
the Starting of it, as it would have been to L'Estrange if he had Joined in it?
Trapanning will become a Trade, (Nay, and Forswearing too) if Men shall find it
their Interest, First to play the Knaves, or the Cheats, and then (as I said
before) come off for the Discovery, and set up for Enformers. This is the Case;
and if I had done less, I had been wanting both to the Public, and to My Self.

FINIS.

