TO The Right Honorable, EDWARD EARL OF CLARENDEN, Lord High CHANCELLOR OF
ENGLAND: The Humble APOLOGY OF ROGER L'ESTRANGE

Verbera, sed Audi. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
M.DC.LXI.

MY LORD,
I Am delivered from all other Care then of my Duty and my Honor; and This
Tranquillity of Thought, I am to thank the Malice of my Fortune for; which has
left me neither worse to Fear, nor much better to hope for.

In This Estate of Freedom and Security, I must presume to Dedicate this Paper
to your Lordship: which is no more then a fair offer of a supposed Criminal to
a Public Trial.

Be pleased to know (my Lord) that upon Friday Morning last, in
Westminster Hall, a Gentleman took me aside: L'Estrange (says he) I am glad to
meet you: for I Am unquiet till I have told you something, which both in Honor,
and in Conscience, I think my self obliged to acquaint you with. Continuing
Thus,

I am the Person that gave Intelligence to my Lord Chancellor, that You
betrayed the King's Designs; but with such Caution, and Deliberation as you
your self in my place would have done no less.

My Lord; he told me the whole matter, with so obliging and so Frank a
Cleerness, that truly when I weigh one Office against the other; (that is,
according to their true Intention) his Justice and his Kindness here, compared
with his former mistake, I reckon that I have an Obligation to him.

This Gentleman was further pleased to give me a view of your Lordships Answer
to him; which I confess, was Charitable, considering the Suggestion, but as
related to my Innocence, 'twas sharp and Cruel.

I do not wonder now (my Lord) at some Discourses I have heard of late; as if
your Lordship were my Enemy; (having such Reason for it) nor at his Sacred
Majesty's Displeasure, toward a Person under so Black a Character. To clear my
self to You my Lord, and to the World, must be the Business of This Paper.

Waiving the Parties mediate to this Notice; the Ground of all is fixed upon
Mr. James Whitlock: a Captain of Horse, and a Knight of Cromwell's. He (as this
Gentleman my Friend undertakes to prove) declared, that L'Estrange WAS A
TRAITOR; AND TO HIS KNOWLEDGE HAD RECEIVED six hundred Pounds In Gold, from
CROMWELL. -- Hinc Illae Lachrymae.

I shall not pass good manners so far, as to call This Scandal by the right
Name: but This I humbly Beg, and Offer that I may put my Life upon the Trial;
which I profess I had rather lose, than in the case of Treason, Wear it as a
Mercy.

Further my Lord, I shall be bold to add, that These ensuing Particulars are
Truths.

1. I never took Protestation, Covenant, Oath, or any Engagement of That
Quality from them.

2. I never Complied with the Party in any thing whatsoever, related to the
Public.

3. I never spoke to Cromwell, save four times in my Life. First, being his
Prisoner at Chambridge. Twice more, while I was a Prisoner in Newgate, I went
to him (under a Guard) to move for an Exchange. The Fourth and Last time was in
1653. when being tied by a Restreyning Order to attend an Examination, and my
Father lying then upon his Death-sickness, I moved Cromwell that I might go
down and receive my Fathers Blessing.

4. I did never communicate Directly or Indirectly (as I have said elsewhere)
with any man of the Party upon Public Business.

5. I never made a Particular Acquaintance with any man of that Side, that had
not first disowned the Cause, and Actually served the King.

6. I did never decline either Hazard, Labor, or (to my little Power)
Expense, in order to his Majesty's Service: nor did I ever let slip any
Opportunity of doing my Duty.

Now (with your Leave my Lord) I challenge the whole World to contradict me:
and by your Lordships favor yet a little further.

I was engaged in the First Scotch Expedition: after which, when the Broyls
began in England, I was Confederate with diverse Gentlemen to endeavor the
Securing of Lin Regis for his Majesty. That failing, I betook my self to
Oxford, and Served in Prince Rupert's Troup.

My next remove was to Newark (then Governed hy the now-Lord Byron:) where,
after a while, I reciev'd an Invitation out of Norfolk to attempt something
upon Lin.

The Motives to the Enterprise were These. Walton the Governor was before
Crowland; (a place of Consequence and Strength.) And Lin left almost without a
Guard; and a considerable number of Gallant Gentlemen, that had been taken at
Lincoln, and Gainsborough, then Prisoners in the Town.

This Occasion called me to Oxford, where I received his late-Majesties
Commission, to endeavor the Surprizal of the Place. It was signed, and
delivered to me, by the now-Earl of Bristol.

I was Betrayed in the Attempt by one Leman, formerly of the Kings Party, and
tied up by an Oath of Faith, and Secrecy, as binding as Syllables could make
it.

Thence, I was carried to London, and there adjudg'd to Dye; under These
Solaecismes.

First; I conditioned for my Life when I was taken.

Next; It was contrary to Articles betwixt the Earl of Manchester, and the
Governor of Newark; to which Garrison I belonged.

Thirdly; The Committee by their own Law were not empowr'd to try me.

Fourthly; They jugled up a Court almost at Midnight, and Sentenced Me to Death
without a Hearing.

Lastly; I was adjug'd to Dye by a Court Martial as a Traitor, yet they
themselves confessed that I never received any Trust: D. MILLS the now
Chancellor of Norwich was my Iudge-Advocate.

Betwixt my Doom, and my appointed Execution, Mr. Thorowgood, and Mr.
Arrowsmith, (then of the Synod) gave me a Visit; and very friendly tendered me
the utmost of their Interest to save me; if I would but Petition for Mercy, and
offer to take the Covenant. These Gentlemen will acquit me (my Lord) that I
refused it.

At length by the Interest and Kindness, particularly of the Earls of
Northumberland, Essex, Stamford with others, I was Reprieved; First, for a
Fortnight, and till further Order; and then, under Color of a further Hearing:
which in almost four years I could not obtain, although I pressed it earnestly.
With the same Faith and Openness have I proceeded to this Instant.

Out of Newgate, I slipped into Kent in 1648, and of that Action I presented
your Lordship with a Printed Account in Flanders: to which I dare refer the
most unsatisfied of my Enemies. After that Defeat I crossed the Seas, and
returned in 1653, fixing in London, as the most proper place, in Relation both
to my Public Duty, and particular Safety. Since which time my Lord, let my
Soul answer for it, if (according to the best of my own memory) I ever
exchanged one Syllable with Cromwell.

During the Cheshire Motion, I can appeal to a hundred several persons in
London, and to a Declaration now Extant in my Apology, that at that time I was
not Idle. And touching those succeeding Broils which more immediately led to
his Sacred Majesty's Return. I dare remit my self to half the honest Part of
the City; who Then were of opinion that Those Remonstrances, Protests,
Resolves, Engagements, Declarations, etc. however drawn by my unlucky hand,
were no Ill office toward his Majesty: They will at least acquit me, of Ill
meaning.

At last my Lord, having escaped all these Rocks and Storms, I meet new dangers
in the Harbor: I find my self crushed under fresh mistakes. But I shall be too
Bold. --

Briefly; I have spent Twenty years now in his Majesty's Service according to
my Duty; and after all, I only beg not to be thought a Villein.

MY LORD, December. 3. 1661. I am Your Lordships most obedient Servant. Roger
L'Estrange.


