A LETTER From a GENTLEMAN in the COUNTRY To some of his Familiar Friends AT
LONDON, Showing from the PRINCIPLES of the JESUITS That their Protestations at
their Death Is no Argument of their INNOCENCE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

A LETTER From a Gentleman in the Country to some of his Familiar Friends at
London, etc.
My worthy Friends,
AMong the manifold Occurrences which this time does fruitfully minister for
exercising of men's thoughts, and which gave me with you, while at London,
plentiful occasion of Discoursing together; That concerning the Plot may justly
challenge a chief place. The pleasant entertainment your friendly and kind
Converse did afford me, while I was among you, does easily engage me to
adventure to transmit unto you my more serious and retired thoughts upon that
Subject, being more able, both composedly to perpend, and sedately to digest
them, when I am removed from the hurry and confused and contradictory noises of
that place; which labor of mine, however Impolite, yet, as being plain and
from your Friend, I hope will not prove troublesome, but rather acceptable unto
You.

You need not my Information to know, that there has scarce any thing fallen out
in this Age, of Matter of Fact, concerning which the Judgments of Men do more
vastly differ, than about this Plot; for many do look upon it as a thing so
plain and evident, that it is to do manifest violence to our understandings and
sense, to make the least question of it; besides, That they judge it to be a
most abusive accusing of the Justice of our English Nation, to make any doubt
thereof; since, not only the Common Juries have found the Evidences sufficient,
but the Great Council of the Nation, always commended for their Solidity and
Sobriety, have, as with one Voice, declared their full Convincement thereof.

Others there are, who scruple not to affirm that there never was any such
thing as a Plot, and that there is as yet no sufficient Evidence produced, to
convince any impartial, unprejudiced man thereof, in respect there is little or
nothing for Proof, save the mere Affirmation of the Witnesses, who being
Persons under such Circumstances, until the very time they pretend to make this
Discovery, as ought not by their bare Testimony to have such weight in a matter
of this Consequence, especially being flatly contradicted by other Witnesses.
To this is objected, as Evidences of Fact, Colemans Letters, that of Pedre, and
the Death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. To which they make Answer, That as for
Colemans Letters, they have nothing relating to the Kings Murder, which was
the great Hinge upon which the success of the Plot depended. That of Pedre is
only suspicious by reason of other concurring Circumstances, for of it self it
could not have proved a sufficient Evidence. And as to Godfrey's Death, it is
Answered, That although that Matter of Fact be undeniable, that he was
Murdered, yet it is not so manifest by whom; since the chief Witness did once
solemnly deny, what he before and since has affirmed, and there have been no
improbable insinuations published, attributing it to the Contrivance of the
Earl of Danby. These things I thought meet only to mention, and not to insist
upon, leaving to every one to judge of the weight of the respective Reasons, as
they shall see most cause: and because I do not find that in any of these, such
as seek to disprove the Plot, place the greatest weight, but chiefly in the
Speeches and Protestations of the Five Jesuits at their Death, therefore that
is the matter I purpose chiefly to consider: which as I have seriously weighed
in my self, so I will commit the same to writing with that candor, as I may
avoid the least occasion of deceiving either my self or others. I love not to
force my self unto the belief of a lie out of prejudice to any, nor yet refrain
to believe a Truth, however it may prove to the disadvantage of those I may
love: as I would not have blind charity to my greatest Friends, so I would not
deny true charity to my greatest Enemies, knowing the one to be no less hurtful
than the other.

Abstracting then from the probability or not probability of the Plot, upon the
nature of the Evidence, or other concurring Circumstances, or how far it may be
made manifest to be a very natural consequence of Popish Principles, of which
much and well has been said by others; The great Question here to be enquired
into, is, Whether it be probable, that if such a thing had been true, and these
Persons guilty of it, they would or could have denied it, in such positive,
express and solemn terms, as they did at the very instant of their Death? or
what temptation could be strong enough to persuade men to do that which
themseves declared they did abhor, (to wit, all Equivocation or formal
Prolocution whatsoever) in ipso mortis articulo? Since whatever may be the
absurdities of their Religion otherwise, it is known they believe a God, a
Heaven, and a Hell, and the Immortality of the Soul, and rewards and
punishments for men's actions, especially the men being confessed to have been
of sober and serious Conversations, according to their own Principles, and in
Morals supposed far to have exceeded some men of the Reformed Religion.

I hope now I have as fully and advantageously expressed the matter, as any
Roman Catholic could desire, in so few words; and I must also ingenuously
acknowledge, that I cannot agree to their sentiment, who endeavor to get over
this difficulty, by apprehending there was some secret falacy in the Prisoners
Expressions at their Execution: for I cannot judge the men would place their
Eternal happiness upon so mean a quibble; nor do I incline to the judgment of
such as are apt to believe, that either with respect to Absolution before
received, they did affirm themselves to be as innocent as the Child unborn, or
that they trusted to the Absolution they might have or did receive from one
another, after they ended their Speeches, as reckoning thereby, all guilt they
might by such denying have incurred, would be cleansed and removed from them;
for that seems to me improbable for the former Reason, in respect it is a
received Doctrine of the Church of Rome, That no Absolution can prove
effectual, but where the Party confessing does truly repent of and detest the
evil committed, resolving to amend, which could not be in this Case.

And yet nevertheless, I think it no hard matter to conceive, that these men
might in such solemn manner affirm themselves to be innocent, though really
guilty, and that not only to preserve and advance the Interest of their Cause;
but as seriously and deliberately believing that to do so; was the way to
please God, and to advantage their own Souls: and this seems to me not at all
strange, but easily imaginable, and that without the least breach of Charity or
injury to those dying men, for making which appear, let it be considered.

That a true and solid Judgment of men's actions, with respect to their future
and Eternal Condition, is not to be made according to our Principles, who make
the Judgment, but according to theirs whose actions are to be Judged of. That
may seem very hurtful and pernicious to the Soul in the Judgment of one man,
which is believed to be most beneficial and advantageous by another; therefore
they are like to mistake this case, who in charity judge hard to believe that
to be true of the Papists, because our Principles would reckon it abominable.
If their plain acknowledgment did not put it beyond doubts, perhaps it might be
reckoned as great a breach of Charity, to believe that these men could think,
that the words of a Priest could convert Bread and Wine to the Flesh and Blood
of Christ, and not only so, but unto the very Godhead; so that what was
formerly real Bread, does become in an instant, by the Breath of a Priest,
(though the most debauched profligate Villain living) that true and omnipotent
God who created all things, and that blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
great Mediator; and that therefore to that Wafer, which both Reason and Sense
assures us is still the same, is due all the Worship, Adoration, Reverence and
Subjection we owe to Almighty God. Now if we may suppose, and that without
breach of Charity, as surely we can, that Wise men, that men who (in a sense)
may be called good men, such as believe there is a God, such as really labor
for the Salvation of their Souls, seek to avoid many sins, yea, all they Judge
such, for that end, and study earnestly to mortify themselves: I say, If such
can believe this, and for this end, as judging thereby to please God and go to
Heaven, firmly persuading themselves, they should offend God and endanger the
Salvation of their Souls, if they did otherways; I would willingly know of
sober men, what thing can be so strange, but the Wisest men may be supposed to
do it for this end, having once drunk in a Principle, that in so doing God will
be well pleased with them. If then it can be demonstrated, that these Jesuits,
upon Principles received, and from their very entering into that Profession,
drunk in by them, might really, and even as Wise men so circumstantiated,
believe, that such their Protestations at their Death, though contrary to the
Truth of matter of Fact, was pleasing to God, and the way to advantage their
Souls, then it will be no strange thing to conceive, nor no harsh thing to
judge this might be done by them.

To make this then appear, I shall propose some few things out of their great
Father Ignatius Loyola his Instructions and Rules to them: in his Epistle to
his Brethren at Portugal, He recomends to them to excel not in Fastings and
Watchings, as the other Monks, but in the renowned simplicity of a blind
obedience, which obliged them to subscribe without condition to the Orders of
their Superior, albeit he should have but little Counsel or Prudence to defend
these his Orders: Moreover, to offer themselves by this obedience altogether in
Sacrifice, renounce willingly to all their own right, for to enslave themselves
and give themselves up to the Conduct of the same Superior, as they would do to
that of Divine Providence, from whence he Concludes that it cannot be denied,
but such an Obedience comprehends not only the execution to do that which is
enjoined, and the will to do it cheerfully, but the judgment to make appear
right and true (so far as the will can by its force bow the understanding)
Injunctions and Sentiments of the Superior, adding moreover, That this renowned
simplicity of blind Obedience is lost, if we move this Question to our selves,
(viz.) Whether they command right or not; and therefore we must confirm our
selves in this resolution, that whatsoever the Superior Commands, is the
Ordinance of God himself; And as they ought to apply themselves with all their
courage and affection to believe what the Catholic Faith proposes, so also
they ought to be carried by a certain impetuous blindness of the will, to do
whatsoever the Superior says, being desirous to obey without any disquisition
or search whatsoever, believing it was thus that Abraham carried himself, when
he received the Commandment to offer up his Son. In short, That they force and
subject their Will and Judgment.

And in the 6th. part of his Constitutions there are the same precepts: he
wills, That they obey when they have but a sign of the will of their Superior
without any express Commandment; that they ought to persuade themselves, that
those who live under obedience ought to suffer themselves to be carried and
governed in the Divine Providence by their Superiors, as if they were a Cadaver
which is transported any ways, or in any manner as men please, and as the Staff
of an Old Man, which serves him to hold in his hand every where, and in what
thing or manner he pleases to use it, and that they be persuaded, that
whatsoever the Superior has Commanded is just, rejecting and overcoming (as by
force) by a blind obedience all their own Opinion and Judgment, that may be to
the contrary, that in service they resign up their own Will and Judgment, and
have no Judgment of their own.

Having thus shown in the express words of Ignatius, the Constitution of the
Jesuits, which by Oath they do oblige themselves to fulfill; I will in charity
suppose, that these Jesuits who Suffered at Tyburn did honestly and sincerely
enter into this Society, as being greatly persuaded in their minds, that
thereby they would glorify God and advantage their own Souls; and that
accordingly, they looked upon such Rules, as the most effectual means for
accomplishing that end, their judgment and understanding being no less fully
possessed with the Faith thereof, than with the Faith of Transubstantiation,
Infalabillity, or the Supremacy of the Sea and Bishop of Rome, which all
understanding men know to be firmly believed by all real Roman Catholics, as
that which is a Faith necessary to lead to Heaven; and that many both Wise and
Serious men among them, have and do live and die in this Persuasion. The case
being then thus, may it not rationally be judged that upon Discovery of the
Plot, the Superiors of these Jesuits, as well for preserving the Interest and
Honor of their Religion, as for delivering themselves from the imputation of so
odious a Fact, did command these Jesuits, or at leastwise give them some sign
by which they might understand, it was their mind they should solemnly declare
in as full and ample words as could be conceived, that they were as innocent as
Children unborn, of all they were charged with: for the more full and
expressive the words were, there lay the greater mystery both of concealing the
Plot, and jumbling men's minds concerning it; in which case is it any wonder,
that these men did very readily and cheerfully herein comply with the command
of their Superiors? yea, as on the one hand, it were madness to think the
Jesuits such fools as not to use this knack to preserve their Religion in
general, and their Profession in particular, from so great a scandal which was
of that consequence, that the doing otherwise would have frustrated the whole
endeavors and end of that Society; (those that have read the Casuists among
the Romanists, will find them dispense with greater Evils than a lie sometimes
to save a man's life, or a house from being burned) What may be then done to
keep the Religion from Ruin? So on the other hand, it is most rational to
judge, that these Jesuits would rather esteem themselves favored, than wronged
by their Superiors, in imposing upon them a necessity thus to assert their
Innocence; for since (as is above shown) their Principles did engage them to
believe themselves safe, as to God and Heavenward, by their Obedience, surely
it could not but be far more acceptable for them to dye as Innocent Men and
Martyrs, than as Traitors and Murderers. If it be thought strange that men at
their Death should hold such Principles, it may be also thought strange men
should dye believing Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. Did not Papists dye
rather than renounce the Popes Supremacy in Henry the 8ths. days? so this will
not seem strange to any who consider the power and influence of once receiving
or believing any Opinion in matters Religious, for its being placed upon that
foot overcomes all reasoning, until the mind be overpowred by something that
can more fully persuade it. Did not Christ put this thing out of doubt when he
said, In killing you they shall think they do God good Service? and we read
that a certain Indian made a pile of Wood, and burned himself before Alexander
the Great, and another afterward did the like at Athens; hence that Proverb of
the Ancients Tantum Religio potuit. If it be then no wonder to see a Papist dye
believing Transubstantiation, it is no wonder to see a Jesuit dye obeying and
answering the Rules of his Order; yea, less, since men are usually more Zealous
for the performance of those extraordinary Ties, than for the common Rules of
their Religion. As for example, no understanding Papist that will be ingenuous,
can deny, but it is esteemed by them a greater sin for a Priest to marry than
to commit Adultery with another man's Wife, although the one be to sin against
the positive Law of God, and the other only to transgress a human Constitution.
So that if we will suppose these Jesuits to have been true, honest and sincere
in their own Profession, we may with great charity suppose, yea, we cannot
without breach of charity think otherwise, than that, albeit they were guilty
of the things charged upon them, yet they both might and ought to have denied
them, and that in such manner as they did; and that they could not have done
otherwise, unless they had been false and dishonest to their own Principles,
and have utterly forsaken them, which we know, and on all hands is confessed,
they did not. This I shall evince by one or two Syllogisms deduced from the
Maxims abovementioned.

Whoever ought in Obedience to his Superior, become blind, renounce all his own
right Judgment and Will, subject himself unto the Conduct of the same Superior,
as to the Providence of God, do all that he Commands, Will all that he Wills,
Judge as he Judges, and persuade himself (with the same disposition that the
Articles of Faith are believed, or that Abraham believed God) that all his
Commandments are the Commandments of God himself: ought to obey without
exception, and cannot without renouncing his Religion do otherwise.

And again, whoever swears to obey his Superior, without making any
disquisition or search of his Commandments, whatever they are, and without
calling in question whether he commands right or not, ought to obey without
reserve or exception, and cannot do otherwise.

And again, whoever ought to suffer himself, ( as if he were a Cadaver or a
Staff) to be transported where and to what use the Superior pleases, and hold
certainly that whatever he commands is jast, ought to obey simply, and without
any respect of the thing commanded.

This is so plain, that nothing can be said more evident, so that the only
question is, Whether the Jesuits Superiors would or did so command? the
probability whereof I leave to your Judgment: and I would desire herein to be
understood, only to show how these dying Jesuits might have so done according
to their own Principles, to take away from such as understand not, all occasion
of wondering at that, or questioning the truth of the Plot upon that head, not
that I determine these did so, defacto. That I leave every one to judge as they
shall see most cause, supposing other evidence sufficient; the manner of their
dying need not stagger any. Much more might be enlarged upon these things I
have hinted, but I resolve not to exceed the limits of a Post Letter, hoping
hitherto I have not been tedious unto you, and that you will let me know your
kindly acceptance of this, by transmitting to me some of those daily Essays,
whereof this Season seems to be very fruitful, in doing whereof you will oblige
your real Friend to serve you,

N. N.
From my Closet the 6 th of October, 1679.
FINIS.

