A LETTER FROM General Ludlow TO Dr. Hollingworth, Their Majesty's Chaplain AT
St. Botolph-Aldgate.

Defending his former Letter to Sir E. S. which compared the Tyranny of the
first Four Years of King Charles the Martyr, with the Tyranny of the Four Years
of the late Abdicated King.

And vindicating the Parliament which began in November. 1640. Occasioned by the
Lies and Scandals of many bad Men of this Age.

Veritas emerget Victrix.

I acknowledge it were better if we could have Job's Wish, That this Day should
perish, that Darkness and the Shadow of Death should cover it, that it should
not see the dawning of the Day, nor should the Light shine upon it: It were
better to strike it out of our Calendar, and to make our January determine at
the 29th, and add these remaining Days to February. Dr. Burnet, Bishop of
Salisbury, his Sermon at St. Laurence Church, London, January 30, 1680.

AMSTERDAM, Printed Anno Dom. 1692.

To all sincere Lovers of OLD ENGLAND, Inhabiting in the Parish of St.
Botolph-Aldgate, London.
Dear Countrymen;
'TWas a great Man's Saying, That EVERY CLERGYMAN is not qualified to sustain
the Dignity of the Church's Jester. That therefore before Men be admitted to so
important an Employment, it were fit that they underwent a severe Examination;
and that it might appear,

1. Whether they have ANY SENSE; for without that how can they pretend, and yet
they do, to be Ingenuous? Then, Whether they have ANY MODESTY, for without that
they can only be SCURRILOUS and IMPUDENT? Next, Whether ANY TRUTH, for true
Jests are those that do the greatest Execution? And, lastly, 'Twere not amiss
that they gave some Account too of their CHRISTIANITY; For the World has always
hitherto been so uncivil, as to expect something of that from the CLERGY, in
the Design and Style even of their lightest and most uncanonical Writings. But,

With very little regard to these, two dull Books have been lately obtruded
upon the World, by one and the same Author, as I am assured; The one, under the
Title of A DEFENSE of King Charles the First, OCCASIONED by the Lies and
Scandals of many bad Men of this Age, By RICHARD HOLLINGWORTH, D. D. THEIR
MAJESTY'S CHAPLAIN, at St. Botolph-Aldgate. The other called, A VINDICATION of
their Majesty's Wisdom, in the late nomination of some Reverend Persons to the
vacant Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics, OCCASIONED by the scandalous
Reflections of unreasonable Men, By A MINISTER of London. Now,

This Author having sought these OCCASIONS to be troublesome, and declaring a
doughty Resolution that he will be further so, rather than lose the Lechery of
his Scribbling, and the vain Glory of his Pedantry, it is fit that such an
arrogant Levite, who seats himself in Epistle Dedicatory to the Defense.
a Juncto with their Majesty's, to consult wisely how to preserve them from a
People who mean them no Harm, should be a little animadverted upon; which task
I undertook, after I found that Persons of better Ability, would not trouble
themselves with such contemptible Pamphlets.

I had prepared, and did purpose to have sent with this, some Remarks upon the
pretended Vindication of their Majesty's Wisdom; but finding that my Notes upon
the Doctor's Defense of King Charles the First, are swelled beyond the Bulk
which I intended, I have laid aside those Remarks, till I have occasion to
write again to this mighty Vindicator.

When I wrote to Sir E. S. this time Twelvemonth, I only discoursed of the
King's first Four Years; and did intend, if ever I wrote further upon that
Subject, to have proceeded regularly with the succeding Years of his Tyranny;
but having engaged my self to follow the Doctor in his Ramblings, I could not
at present pursue my Intention, but may hereafter do it.

Having resolved to make this Address to you, my honored Countrymen, I will
take the liberty to observe two or three things, which are omitted in my Letter
to the Doctor; He says, page 3. That great Numbers call this King a Tyrant and
A PAPIST too, though he so stronuously asserted and pleaded the Protestant
Cause, as it is professed by THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, [That means THEIR PARTY.]

Now, that he highly favored POPERY, is most evident; and to what I have
already offered to evince the Truth of that Charge, I do add these Instances.

I have told the Aldgate-Chaplain, that this King, by a Letter to the Pope,
saluted Antichrist with the Title of Most holy Father. That Letter from the
beginning to the end savours of Popery. For, 1. He professes therein, that
nothing could affect him so much, as AN ALLIANCE with a Prince that had the
same apprehensions of THE TRUE RELIGION with himself, [That was the KING of
SPAIN, A NOTABLE PROTESTANT.] 2. He calls Popery THE CATHOLIC, APOSTOLIC,
Roman RELIGION, all other NOVELTY and FACTION. 3. He protests he did not esteem
it a Matter of greater Honor, to be descended from great Princes, than to
imitate them in the Zeal of their Piety, who had often exposed their Estate and
LIVES for THE EXALTATION OF THE HOLY CROSS. 4. He solemnly engaged to the Pope,
to spare nothing in the World, and to suffer all manner of Discommodities, even
TO THE HAZARDING OF ESTATE AND LIFE, for to settle a thing so pleasing to God,
as UNITY WITH ROME.


Behold, what a good Sign of PROTESTANTISM here hangs at the King's Door.
Moreover, when the Pope's Nuncio delivered a Letter to him from the Pope,
wherein PROTESTANTS are called MONSTERS of HERESIES, and the King was invited
to return the Possession of these most noble Isles to the PRINCE OF THE
APOSTLES. He expressed himself in these words; I KISS HIS HOLINESS FEET for the
Favor and Honor he does me; so much the more esteemed, by how much the less
deserved of me HITHERTO. And HIS HOLINESS SHALL SEE WHAT I DO HEREAFTER. So that
his Holiness shall not repent him of what he has done.

He was as good as his word here passed to the Pope, as all the World
afterward saw. Tho that most horrid IRISH REBELLION broke out the 23d of
October, 1641. the Lords and Commons, who complained that it was framed and
cherished in England, could not obtain a Proclamation to declare those blcody
Miscreants, Traitors, till January ensuing; and then the following Warrant went
to the King's Printer from his Secretary of State.

IT is his Majesty's Pleasure, that you forthwith print in very good Paper, and
send unto me for his Majesty's Service, forty Copies of the Proclamation
enclosed; leaving convenient space for his Majesty to sign above, and to affix
the Privy Signet underneath: And HIS MAJESTY'S EXPRESS COMMAND IS, THAT YOU
PRINT NOT ABOVE THE SAID NUMBER OF FORTY COPIES, and forbear to make any
further Publication of them, till his Pleasure be further signified; for which
this shall be your Warrant. Whitehall, January 2, 164^. Edw. Nicholas.


See here what special care was taken, that a few only should come to the
knowledge of this Proclamation, which was at that time more observable, by the
late contrary Practice against the Scots, who were in a very quick and sharp
manner proclaimed, and those Proclamations Forthwith dispersed with all
imaginable diligence throughout the whole Kingdom, and ordered to be read in
all Churches, accompanied with Public Prayers and Execrations. But his
Aversion to the proclaiming and proceeding against the Irish Rebels, is not to
be much admired at; for they called themselves THE QUEEN'S ARMY, and declared
that they rose to maintain the KING'S PREROGATIVE, and the QUEEN'S RELIGION
against the PARLIAMENT: And he had no sooner yielded to issue this
Proclamation, than (to obstruct the quelling these Rebels, and give them time
to increase and strengthen themselves) the King withdrew from the Parliament,
and began Domestic Dissentions.

Having given these slight Touches at the King's favoring Popery, and at his
Accession to the Irish Rebellion; I do now leave it to you to make a Judgment,
whether he were so STRENUOUS AN ASSERTER OF THE PROTESTANT CAUSE, as your
DOCTOR insituates; and I care not if once for all, I do acknowledge, that THE
CLERGY may with good pretense to Reason say, that HE DIED THEIR MARTYR; for his
being wrought upon by JESUITICAL COUNSELS, to impose a Liturgy upon the Scots,
who had no such thing before, did very much contribute to the bringing him to
the FATAL BLOCK.

I shall now for my own Vindication, entreat you do remember, that I never call
this King A PAPIST, and I have ever esteemed it a piece of Artifice in OUR
PRIESTS, to amuse the People with the Suggestion, that he is falsely charged
with Popery, thereby to Induct them to disbelieve or forget his Crime, which
was most visible to all Men, the Violation of the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom; I have therefore chosen to decline the Dispute about his Religion; and
am sire 'twill be found that I have not unjustly taxed him with the Crimes of
his Misgovernment, which did so plainly and inexcusably appear to all. And why
should we not think that such things were cause enough to be stood upon by the
Parliament and to justify their Quarrel before God? As if the Almighty did not
abhor INJUSTICE, OPPRESSION AND TYRANNY, unless Profession of Religion were
also depraved Nay, be abhori it more in that place where the purest of
Profession is.

That this King intended to bow or break us, to persuade or force us to
Slavery, is so clear by the whole course of his Reign, that it is amazing that
Men (even of the highest stamp of TORYISM) should have Front enough to deny it.
The Parasitical Court-Priests did then preach, That we were bound to obey
whatsoever the King commanded, without questioning the Lawfulness. And why did
they vent such stuff, but to flutter and please the King? And how could he be
delighted with it, unless he thought it true and agreeable to his Designs? And
that he honored those false Teachers, above the Prophets of the Lord, is
evin^^ both by his advancing them, and suffering those Sons of Chenaariah to
smite those Michaiahs, and to push them with Horus of Iron that they might
consume them.

The great Philosopher Themistius, did say with equal Truth and Wit, that
Flattering Clergymen did not worship God, but the Imperial Purple; and it is a
sad Truth, that in our day, they have been SETTING THE PEOPLE ON MADDING; and
the low Dejection and baseness of Mind in too many of this Generation, is to be
ascribed to their PULPITSTUFF, which has been the Doctrine and perpetual
Infusion of Servility and Wretchedness to their Hearers.

The Case being thus, it becomes necessary to expose such Men as these; for
it is intolerable that your Doctor in his dull way of Calumniating, should (as
he does) censure, reproach, and blacken the Actions and Memories of so many
excellent Persons, both Lords and Gentlemen, and also very learned and pious
Divines. And on the other hand, a Reputation is to be won for King Charles the
First, of Wisdom, by Wilfulness and subtle Shifts; of Goodness, by multiplying
Evil; of Piety, by endeavoring to root out true Religion; I have therefore in
the ensuing Letter, taken some little pains in comparing his fair-spoken Words,
with his far-differing Deeds; for it is most certain, that the World ever looks
more at real Actions than verbal Protestations.

I am sensible, my good Friends, that I now write to Men endued with Reason;
let not the Goose quill of a Chaplain at Aldgate make you all Ganders, and a
sound of Words bewitch you; his Tracts which I have mentioned look like pieces
of Flattery compiled by A HUNGRY LEVITE, gaping after a Deanary, or
Chaplainship at Whitehall. He, by his Counterfeit Colors, sets off a deformed
Cause to gull you. Have you read this King in his Actions, and shall
experimental Knowledge be confuted by this Doctor's bare Assertions? Should we
esteem Truth by Words, how many Romances would be accounted as Authentic as
our Bibles? It Is Truth only which conquers the wise; to be captivated by ought
else, argues Folly.

My last Request to you is, that I may be rightly understood; I protest that no
intent in trample on the Dead, or dishonor his Dust, but a Desire to vindicate
the Liberties of my Country, moved me to this undertaking; this unhappy King's
Miscarriages and Crimes, should have lain buried in Oblivion, if ECCLESIASTICAL
MAKE-BATES did not rake all up again into fresh Remembrance whether we will or
no. I am not conscious to my self, that by what I have wrote, I have loaded his
Memory with other than Matter of Fact and Truth, which will be too hard for the
greatest Doctor of them all. I am,

Gentlemen, Your affectionate Countryman and Servant, Edmund Ludlow.

A LETTER from General LUDLOW, to Dr. HOLLINGWORTH, their Majesty's Chaplain,
etc.
MIne to Sir E. S. (most Eximious Sir) bore date upon your last MADDING DAY:
Another being now come, I esteem my self obliged to justify what I asserted in
my last Year's Letter: To the end that I may keep my Countrymen, and in
particular those of your Coat, right in their Senses; and inculcate into the
Men of this Generation, a due abhorrence of Tyranny, and a just Veneration for
English Parliaments. Having come to this Resolution, and that upon the reading
your Jewel of a Book, which you style, A Defense of King Charles the First,
(occasioned by the Lies and Scandals of many bad Men of this Age) which came to
me as a New Year's Gift, from an endeared Friend in London; I suppose you will
readily allow me to pretend to a title to an Acquaintance and Correspondence
with you: For though in the conclusion of my last to Sir E. S. I gave a
Challenge to DOCTOR P. (who occasioned that) to Tho I neither have, nor do
think that I ever can be convicted of one Falsehood in my former Letter, (or in
this which I am writing) yet I will confess one Error committed this time
twelvemonth; 'twas this, I following a very faithful Historian, whose Printer,
by an unhappy omission of one Letter, ran him and me by consequence into a
great mistake; and I, relying upon that Print, said, That the noble Lord Conway
had avowed in Parliament, that he never hated Popery; whereas his words in
truth were, that he ever hated it.
convict me of Falsehood in any one Particular there charged upon his
incomparable Prince; yet I have not had one Word, either from him or Sir E. S.
Therefore, in good Manners, I dismiss them from further trouble, as I might
have done my self, had you not fallen foul upon me: But seeing you must be
scribbling, and have taken up the Cudgels, we must come to A TRIAL OF SKILL.

To begin;

You appear very warm at first, and therefore not so civil as a Man might hope
you would be found, who profess so much Candor and Temper, as you sometimes
do. You say, It Is A LEWD PAMPHLET, which goes under the Name of LUDLOW. Why
Lewd, dear Sir? It Is a received Opinion amongst your Acquaintance at
Billingsgate, that to call a Woman, Whore, and say you will prove her so, will
bear an Action, otherwise not: I shall not therefore prosecute you for that,
because it is only your say so; you neither undertake nor offer one word to
prove it: And indeed, should I implead you upon it, I perceive you have
expressed your self with that Caution, that I should be Nonsuited; For you
add, that it goes under the Name of Ludlow; by consequence it may not be his.
Why thus unmerciful, Doctor? You will not allow me to be Author of my own Book
or Letter; and yet you declare it a barbarous Act in a certain Essex Doctor,
(his Name I understand is Walker) and his Virtues and Piety will, I doubt not,
find a room in future Annals and Records, ('it is your own delicate Expression)
when yours will be forgotten. I say, you allow him not to deny that your Martyr
was the Author of Eicon Basilice.

I meet, Sir, in the next place, with a taste of your healing Spirit. You treat
me, and those who believe the Truth, that you are no way able to gainsay, in a
highly obliging, and most endearing manner, Page 2, 3.
A vile Brood, a factious Crew, etc; We are, say you: I may not now betray my
own Innocence so far, as to suffer any thing of this to pass upon me without a
Vindication. I have asserted, that your SAINT was a NOTORIOVS TYRANT, and for
ought you tell me to the contrary, very fairly proved it, and that by abundance
of Instances. Am I Unjust therein? Why then do not you refute me? Am I in the
Right? Why then will you set your self to outface the Truth? That you do so, I
shall demonstrate, after I have minded you, out of my former Letter, what
things you are either to falsify or justify (for you must know, that Railing,
no more than Persecution, can ever make a Convert) when you scrible again, if
you intend to convince any Man of an Error, who believes that King Charles the
First was a Tyrant: And I must tell you, that I am induced to make the
Repetition which ensues, because I cannot perceive, by the reading your Tract,
that you have looked beyond my Title Page; for there you find the only thing
you mention of mine, and that with Indignation; THE VILE BROOD, you say, call
this Day, THE MADDING-DAY. I am most sure that you do not answer, nor so much
as cast a look toward any one Paragraph or Sentence of my Letter. Therefore,

This informs you, that (amongst many others) the following Acts of Tyranny,
are there enumerated, and placed to your Martyr's Account. I shall (to oblige
you) begin with the Church, for I know 'twill please you to see that precede
the State.

1. THE KING we are talking of, in a Letter which he wrote to the Pope, saluted
Antichrist with the Title of Sanctissime Pater, Most holy Father; HE procured
the Pope's Dispensation for his Marriage, which was solemnized according to the
Ceremonies of the Romish Church. HE agreed to Articles upon his Marriage, that
Papists should be no more molested for their Religion. HE built Somerset House
Chapel, with convenience for Friars; and permitted them to walk abroad in
their Habits. HE assumed to himself a Power to dispense with the Laws, in
favor of Popery; particularly the 21th and 27th of Queen Elizabeth, by
granting Pardons to Jesuits and Papists, which passed by immediate Warrant. HE
inhibited and restrained both Ecclesiastical and Temporal Officers to
intermeddle with Papists; which amounted to a Toleration. Popish Jurisdiction
was exercised and avowed in Ireland; Monasteries and Nunneries were erected
there, and filled with Men and Women of several Orders. HE made above an
hundred Popish Lords and Gentlemen, Lot as Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Justices of the Peace, etc. And his LORD TREASURER (Weston) died a Papist. Are
these, my good Doctor, any of the VERTVES and GRACES which King William and
Queen Mary (as you tell them in your Dedication) do daily imitate?

2. (To pass on to the State of the Church of England in his Reign: Well might
Men cry in that day, The Church! O THE CHVRCH!) This King's Bishops, generally
speaking, were unsound in their Principles; they laid new Paintings on the Face
of the old Whore of Babylon to make her show lovely: They countenanced and
cherished Papists, and depressed Orthodox Preachers, how conformable soever; in
particular Archbishop Land (whom you Doctor will have to be a tolerably good
Man) allowed Books which favored Popery, but denied to license Books that were
written against it.

This King's CHAPLAINS endeavored to reconcile England to Rome, and scoffed at
Preaching, Bibles, and all show of Religion. MOVNTAGVE, one of his Chaplains,
being prosecuted in Parliament for Crimes of this nature, your Martyr was
incensed thereat, granted him a Pardon, and made him Bishop of Chichester. [
And now Doctor, pray tell me, have our most Excellent King and Queen made any
such Bishops, or Chaplains as these?]

3. THIS KING in his first Year, lent eight SHIPS (which he equipped with
Moneys given for the Relief of his distressed Protestant Sister, the Electress
Palatine, and the oppressed Protestants of the Palatinate) TO THE FRENCH KING,
to fight against the distressed Protestants of Rochel: These Ships were
employed against the Rochellers; and the French boasted, that they mowed the
Heretics down like Grass. [Pray Sir, your Opinion in the case; Can you think
their present Majesty's will ever imitate their ROYAL GRANDFATHER in this
Point?]

4. King Charles the First in the very beginning of his Reign, took our Goods
from us against our Wills, and our Liberties against the Laws; he raised an
Army, and required the Countries to furnish Coat and Conduct-Mony; and against
the known Laws put several to Death by Martial Law; HE levied Money upon the
Subject by way of Loan, and menaced the City of London, that if they would not
advance him Money, HE WOULD FRAME HIS COUNSELS AS APPERTAINED TO A KING. [ That
surely, dear Doctor, could intend no other than such a one as France is now
plagued with; it may signify King in that Language, In our plain English, it is
downright Tyrant.]

When it was urged that his requiring SHIP MONEY was unprecedented; His haughty
Answer was, That Precedents were not wanting for the Punishment of those that
disobey the King's Commands; and that State-Occasions were not to be guided by
ordinary Precedents. Those that refused to subscribe to the Loan, were put out
of the Commissions of the Lieutenancy and the Peace, and also imprisoned; and
the Refusers of the meaner Rank were bound to appear, and be enrolled for
Soldiers to be sent for Denmark; or were impressed to serve in the King's
Ships. [ Here now is a ready way not only for the raising of Money, but also an
Army for Flanders, and Sailers for our Fleet. But all your Rhetoric, Reverend
Sir, will not work upon their Majesty's to imitate your good and great Man in
these things neither.]

5. YOUR MARTYR suspended Dr. ABBOT, Archbishop of Canterbury ( who was a Man
that wholly followed the true Interest of England, and that of the Reformed
Churches in Europe, so far, as that in his time the CLERGY was not much envied
here in England, nor the Government of Episcopacy much disfavoured by
Protestants beyond the Seas.) I say, HE SUSPENDED this Excellent Person, and
also CONFINED him, because (to use his own words) HE REFUSED TO MAKE THAT GOOD
BY Divinity WHICH THE King HAD DONE AGAINST THE LAWS. HE also thrust Dr.
WILLIAMS Bishop of Lincoln from the place of Lord Keeper, and his Presence, and
the Council Table, for appearing in Parliament against the Kingdom's great
Grievance, the Duke of Buckingham; and afterward he imprisoned him in the
Tower for speaking against the Loan, for refusing to allow Proceedings against
Puritans, and prophesying that the Puritans would carry all at last. [I doubt,
Doctor, that should the King and Queen imitate their Grandfather in these
Practices, you would find your self AS IT WERE overwhelmed with Sorrow, and
that such Actions would swell your Grief above its usual Banks, if not stir
your Indignation.]

6. THE TYRANT, resolving to subvert the Liberties and Estates of the Subjects
to his Will and Pleasure, removed that grave and learned Judge Sir Randolph
Crew, from the place of Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, because he had
declared himself against the Loan, and would not serve his turn in declaring
that the King might legally imprison Men, durante beneplacito. [ My Life for
yours, Doctor, their present Majesty's will never follow this Example of your
PATTERN FOR PRINCES.]

7. HE upon the 30th of JANVARY (of all the days in the Year) 1627, sent a
Privy Seal to the Treasury, for the remitting 30000 l. into Holland to
Burlemark, a Merchant, to be employed for levying Horse and Men to be brought
into England to support his Tyranny. [And can you think their Majesty's will
ever write after this Copy?]

8. HE had no sooner passed the PETITION OF RIGHT into a Law, than he was found
to violate it, by billeting of Soldiers, and levying the Subsidies of Tonnage
and Poundage, which determined by his Father's Death; and were never payable to
any his Ancestors, but only by special Act of Parliament. [ And what Opinion
have you of King. William and Queen Mary, in reference as this Point, my good
Doctor?]

9. HE kept the Earl of Bristol under Confinement, near two Years, without
being charged with any Accusation, or brought to Trial: And HE committed the
Earl of Arundel to the Tower in the time of Parliament, without expressing any
Cause of his Commitment, in Violation of the Privileges of the Peers. [ Ple
warrant you, Sir, you will never find their present Majesty's at this Work.]

10. HE upheld and sheltered the Grand Enemies of the Commonwealth. When the
Duke of Buckingham was prosecuted in Parliament, as the principal Patron and
Supporter of a Popish Faction, set on Foot to the danger of the CHURCH and
STATE, THE KING interposed to rescue him: When the Commons impeached him, and
by one of their Articles charged him (in effect) WITH THE MURDER OF KING JAMES;
THE KING told the House of Lords, That to aprove Buckingham's Innocence, HE
could be a Witness to clear him in every one of the Articles. HE told the House
of Commons, That he would not allow any of his Servants to be questioned
amongst them, much less such as were near him. That he saw they aimed at the
Duke; but assured them, he had not intermedied, nor done any thing concerning
the Public, but by his special Directions. He added, That he wondered at the
FOOLISH IMPUDENCE of any Man, to think that he should be drawn to offer such a
Sacrifice. HE dissolved three Parliaments, when they were intent upon the
prosecution of the Duke. [We are still at a loss, good Doctor, this will not
pass with our King and Queen; we shall never hear them speak or act at this
rate.]

11. HE imprisoned several Members of the House of Commons, (during the
Parliament) for refusing to answer out of Parliament, what was said and done in
Parliament. HE imprisoned others for managing a Conference with the Lords, upon
their impeaching the Duke. HE, in the time of Parliament, sent Warrants for
sealing up the Studies of other Members; and he caused the imprisoned Members
to be shifted and tossed from Goal to Goal, to deprive them, by that wicked
Artifice, of the Fruit of their Habeas Corpus; and of the Benefit of Freeborn
Subjects for the obtaining their Liberty; thus were they long detained in
Prison. The brave Sir John E^ios ended his days in the Tower, not without
suspicion of foul play. [ I am sure, Sir, you will not recommend these virtuous
Practices to the imitation of their Majesty's.]

12. HE struck at the very Being of Parliaments; he sent a threatening Message
to the Commons, that if he had not a timely Supply, he would betake himself to
NEW COUNSELS. At another time he said to the Lords and Commons, REMEMBER THAT
PARLIAMENTS ARE ALTOGETHER IN MY POWER; THEREFORE, as I find the Fruits of
them, Good or Evil, THEY ARE TO CONTINVE, OR NOT TO BE. HE told the Parliment,
the 17th of March 1627, That if they should not contribute what the State
needed, he must use OTHER MEANS; And his Lord Keeper added, That if the King
found the Readiness of their Supplies, be might the better forbear the use of
his Prerogative; That the King those that way of Parliament, not as the only
way, but as firtest; not as destitute of others, but AS MOST AGREE ABLE TO HIS
DISPOSITIon. [ You will readily agree with me, dear Sir, that King William has
not learned this way of speaking to Parliaments.]

I have now, Reverend Sir, briefly run over my former Letter, and thence
presented you with a Bone to pick, indeed a dozen, as luck will have it; and I
could have doubled the number, but for the present I conclude these may stay
your Stomach, this being a Fasting-Day.

I must now tell you, that I am as much to seek as ever, for the Virtues of the
Martyr, which deserve their Majesty's imitation. But methinks I hear you reply
to me, So you will eternally be, if you read such lewd Pamphlets as Ludlow
converses with; you must apply your self to the impartial, learned and
infallibly convincing Works of the most candid Dr. Holling worth, if you will
be enlightened in this great Point: He, good Man, jogs steadily on in the way of
Truth, sparing no Party, you may take his Word for it. May I so? He Is then the
Man for my Money; and casting off my Strumpet of a Pamphlet, I will READ, TRY
and JUDGE, according as another Doctor advises the Lewd Folks. And,

I proceed (Sir) to the Examination of your Defense of King Charles the First.
You tell us, that in looking into and considering his Life, you found your self
equally affected with Joy and Grief. Now I shall attempt to assuage your Grief,
but in doing is shall abate so much of your conceived Joy, that, with the late
Eloquent Recorder, I doubt I shall bring you to a handful of Grief and a
handful of Sorrow.

You ground your Joy upon your meeting with a Person so admirably tempered, so
greatly condescending, so ready to comply with whatever was presented to him
for the good of his Subjects, of so great Constancy to the Religious
Persuasions of his own Mind, that he would not forsake them.

To begin with the last; because you will have the Church to take place of the
State. Are not we made happy at this day by the Hereditary Stubbornness of your
Martyr's Son? he was so constant to the Religious Persuasions of his own Mind;
that rather than forsake them, he very fairly abdicated the Throne: He
sacrificed his Crown to FATHER PETRE'S IDOLATRY; his Father, to FATHER LAUD'S
SVPERSTITION.

HIS TEMPER will be seen hereafter: I shall therefore in this place only
enquire, whether it appeared so admirably good as you insinuate, when he struck
the Noble Earl of Denbigh. A BOX ON THE EAR, for only walking in the Privy
Gallery at Whitehal. We are anon to examine his Condescension and Compliance
for the Good of the People; and in doing it shall evince, how little you
understand the History of his Life, and what reason there is to mortify a
Chaplain of their present Majesty's, for recommending this KING as a Pattern to
future Princes.

I come now (Sir) to your Melancholy Part, which you thus express; Page 2.
I have been often overwhelmed, AS IT WERE, with Sorrow and a lodding Grief.
That, AS IT WERE, secures some hope in your case, for which there had been no
room, had you been in earnest overwhelmed. But pray what brings you, Doctor,
into this unhappy case? Why, this Prince, so every ways great and good, is
libelled by every saucy Scribler. A factions number of Men never speak of him
but as a TYRANT, Page 3.
A ROGVE, A RASCAL: They call the Day on which he was murdered, and which is
appointed by the Supreme Power of the Nation to be religiously observed, THE
MADDING DAY.

There Is no remedy (Sir) but Patience; there will ever be found some saucy
Scribler or other upon this Subject, whilst the World is troubled with any
silly Defender of this TYRANT; as such I shall continue to talk of him, and
that with Demonstration; but I much suspect that you have learned the rude
Terms of ROGUE AND RASCAL, from your own factions Crew, (you know whom I mean)
when they are speaking of his present Majesty.

Now (dear Doctor) as to your MADDING-DAY, allow me to present you with the
Opinion of a Person tolerably wise and thoughtful, I mean Dr. Burnet, now Lord
Bishop of Salisbury, in his Sermon before the Aldermen of London (the Lord
Mayor being sick, and therefore absent) at St. Lawrence Church, upon the 30th
of January 1680, he did express himself in these words; I acknowledge it were
better if we could have Job 's Wish, That that Day should perish, that Darkness
and the shadow of Death should cover it, that it should not see the dawning of
the Day, nor should the Light shine upon it: It were better to strike it out of
our Calendar, and to make our January determine at the 29th, and add these
remaining days to February.

In hope (Sir) that I have here offered something to cool your red-hot Zeal for
the Observation of this Day; upon which you, and many of your high-stown
Brethren, have too long spouted out most fulsome Flattery upon your Royal
Martyr, and been infusing Principles of Slavery into the freeborn People of
ENGLAND. I now proceed upon your Defense: You say, that your Grief swells above
its usual Bank, and stirs your Indignation against a VILE BROOD. Why? in
earnest Doctor, it is time to look out for Cure; it is not above two or three
Minutes since you appeared only, AS IT WERE, overwhelmed with Sorrow: Now the
overflowing of your Grief, and raising your Choler, speaks your case, AS IT
WERE, desperate; and I doubt you will run mad before your next MADDING-DAY: But
I have undertaken the drudgery of reading you through, and must take what
follows, and so must you.

You go on telling me, That from these two Passions of Grief and Anger, you are
resolved to vindicate this great Prince; and IF POSSIBLE, to shame those who do
show by what they vent, that they have neither Knowledge, Wisdom, nor good
Manners; nor indeed any thing else, that belongs to the Human as well as
Christian Nature.

I found (Sir) by your staring and soaming at the Mouth, what you would come
to, and it is now with you as I foretold; Would any Man in his Wits set himself
not only to put a Herd of Wild Beasts to shame, but also to teach them Letters
and Breeding? But an angry Doctor thinks himself fit for any thing, when at the
same time I esteem him capable of nothing; for no Man that falls into a Passion
can argue well; and you (Sir) have undertaken a much more difficult Task than
you are aware of. For I have read in the forementioned Sermon of the Learned
Bishop of Salisbury, an Expression to this effect; That it might be expected
that he should enlarge on the Virtues, the Piety, the Magnanimity and Constancy
of Mind, of this your Martyr; but he confessed the performing this to be a Task
above his strength: But what will not an aspiring Chaplain essay? I have now
(Sir) reached to what you resolve upon.

You tell me, Page 4.
That you intend only to run through the last eight Years of his Reign. Do you
so, Sir? here is a Snake in the Grass, Doctor, or else, why do you skip his
first sixteen Years? I wish, that instead of running through (which argues you
in haste) I do not find you flying over the Years you pitch upon; if you do, I
shall endeavor to lure you back again; which that I may the more certainly do,
I determine to keep pace with, or sight of you.

Proceeding, you say, that you are certain, that from the beginning of the Long
Parliament, November. 4. to the day of his Death, he did every thing ALMOST that
deserved a better Reception than it met withal; and made such various Offers
and Condescontions, as would have pleased any sort of Men but those who were
resolved to be Masters of his whole Crown and Dignity, etc.

It Is something unhappy, good Doctor! when you seem to speak with assurance,
that you dare not adventure to do it without a Reserve; your ALMOST in this
place, abates much of the Glory of this Paragraph: He did every thing ALMOST;
he made Offers and Condescentions; what those were, I suppose, you intend to
inform me by and by; when I see them, we will talk about them; and then, should
it be found that they were such as were not satisfactory to the Lords and
Commons in that great Parliament, you will deserve to be TOPHAMIZ'D for
slandering the Representative Body of the English Nation: and truly I think you
merit something beyond that Punishment, for saying that their most Excellent
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, do daily imitate the Virtues and Graces
of a King, who y^ ^^gree might have committed some Mistakes in his Government
in his first sixteen Year's Reign, and yet did every thing (with an unlucky)
ALMOST to redress such things as his Maladministration had put out of order,
SO FAR AS HE COVLD BE SATISFIED THEY WERE OVT OF ORDER: For to the eternal
Honor of their present Majesty's, and to the unspeakable Comfort of all good
Englishmen, we see them daily acquiescing in the Wisdom of their great Council,
and redressing, not only ALMOST, but ALTOGETHER, the Disorders and Grievances
of two or three unhappy Reigns.

In the next place you affirm, That when the Parliament sat down in 1640, the
King purposed and resolved to consent to every thing they could offer, which
might be really for the good of his Kingdom: You are, Sir, too general herein
for my Conversation; you talk as tho you had been one of his Privy Council, or
at least a Chaplain to Archbishop Land. I cannot say what his Purposes or
Resolutions were, but when we come to Particulars, shall endeavor to weigh
them by his Actions.

Pursuant to what he purposed and resolved, Page 5.
(say you) he tells them frankly in his first Speech, that he was resolved to
put himself freely and clearly on the Love and Affection of his ENGLISH
SVBJECTS; and withal, promises them to concur so heartily with them, that all
the World may see, that his Intentions HAVE EVER BEEN, and shall be to make
THIS a glorious Kingdom. Having said this, you are running on, Doctor, but with
too much speed for me; you instantly add, I think, etc. Well, so you may, and I
intend to hear what that is anon; for now, and not till now, you have cut me
out Work, and I must entreat you to pause a little, and hear what I observe
upon what you but now declared: He told them he resolved to put himself freely
and clearly on the LOVE AND AFFECTION of his ENGLISH SVBJECTS. Can this be
true, Doctor? Did he in earnest say so? Why, he was born at Dumferling, how
then can you represent him abdicating his Ancient Kingdom, and renouncing the
Love and Affection of the Scottish Nation? Seeing you are silent in this matter,
I must it seems take the pains to examine it; and I promise to supply your
Omission with Impartiality, and all imaginable regard to Truth. And in doing
it, shall show, with what brevity I can, not only the reason why your Martyr
did, at this Juncture, caress and cajole an English Parliament; but how our
Nation became so happy as to see one assembled, when our Fathers had almost
forgot the Name of a Parliament. The Story is this.

The Reformation of England had never abrogated, nor scarce shaken the
Prelatical Dignity in any Parliament; but in Scotland it was quite rooted out
by Law, that Church having been ever much addicted to the Reformation of
Geneva: By degrees it was restored, by the extraordinary Interposition of the
Power of King James the first, yet not without many Difficulties, not without
great Reluctance of the Nobility, Gentry, and most of the Ministers of that
Nation. They suffered a great Diminution of their Temporal Liberties by the
Introduction of Episcopal Jurisdiction, the Bishops using rigorous Proceedings
against Gentlemen of Quality, by Fines, Imprisonments, etc. And the whole
structure of Ecclesiastical Policy, so long used in Scotland, and established
by so many Acts of Parliament, was at one blow thrown down, their Consistories,
Classes, and Presbyteries were held in the nature of Conventicles, and all
Decision of Ecclesiastical Controversies confined to the Tribunal of a Bishop.

Dr. Hollingworth in his Tract called, A Vindication of their Majesty's Wisdom,
etc. p. 9. says, that Laud was A VERY GOOD MAN, the Book of Sports excepted:
for ought I know he meant this Scotch Book, for it made Sport with a witness;
if he did not, I am sure this deserved an Exception also. I am sensible of the
Doctor's Infirmities, that he is addicted to rash and inconsiderate Railing;
therefore, tho I will not humor him, in reciting the Authority which I have
for this black Story of his otherways very good Man, because I have in his
Works no more than his bare word for what he asserts: my good Nature prompts me
to advise him, not to give me the Lie in this matter, for I know those who have
been at Rome, and I can produce a most reputable Member of the Church of
England, for what I here charge upon that very ill Man Laud. After this
friendly Caution, the Doctor may deny it if he dares.


That fierce, cruel, insolent and Popishly-affected Archbishop Laud, was the
main Instrument in this fatal Work: He in the Year 1637, composed a
Common Prayer Book for Scotland, and desiring, to demonstrate his great
Affection to the Court of Rome, sent it thither to be approved by the Pope and
Cardinals; they returned it with Thanks for his Respect to them, but sent him
word, that they thought it not fit for Scotland. The GOOD MAN thereupon,
further to ingratiate himself with his ELDER BROTHER, altered some things in
it, and made it more harsh and unreasonable; and then instigated the King to
send it to the Scots, with an express Command to have it read in their
Churches: It varied from the English Common Prayer Book, but the Alterations
were for the worse, especially in the Lord's Supper; it was expressly commanded
that the Altar (so called) should be situate to the Eastern Wall, together with
many Postures of the Minister, whilst he officiated. And in the consecrating
Prayer, those words which in the English Liturgy, are directly against
Transubstantiation, were quite left out in that Book, and instead of them such
other words as in plain sense agreed with the Roman Mass Book, viz. Hear us, O
most merciful Father, and of thy Omnipotent Goodness grant, so to bless and
sanctify by thy Word and Spirit, these Creatures of Bread and Wine, that they
may be to us THE BODY AND BLOOD of thy beloved Son. In a word, the Scots
affirmed, that all the material Parts of the Mass Book were seminally in this,
and they could not relish it, that Laud and his Set of English Bishops, should
urge them to a Liturgy more Popish than their own; and observed, that, for
Unity, they were content to meet Rome, rather than Scotland.

The Book being read by a Bishop, in the City of Edinburgh; the People
expressed great detestation thereof; and the Bishop who read it, had probably
been slain coming out of the Church, had not a Nobleman rescued him. The
Nobility, Gentry and Ministers, petitioned against it. The King threatened to
prosecute them as Rebels, and commanded the Council to receive no more
Petitions: Thereupon several of the Nobility, in the Name of the Petitioners,
made a Protestation, that the Service Book was full of Superstition and
Idolatry, and ought not to be obtruded upon them, without consent of a National
Synod, which in such Cases should judge: That it was unjust to deny them Liberty
to accuse the Bishops being guilty of High Crimes; of which till they were
cleared, they did reject them as Judges or Governors of them: They justified
their own Meetings, and subscribing to Petitions, as being to defend the Glory
of God, the King's Honor, and Liberties of the Realm.

The Scots concluded to renew the COVENANT which had been made and sealed under
King James 's Hand, in the Year 1580; afterward confirmed by all the Estates
of the Kingdom, and Decree of the National Synod in 1581; THIS COVENANT was for
the Defense of the PVRITY OF RELIGION, and the King's Person and Rights,
against the Church of Rome. This was begun in February 1638, and was so fast
subscribed throughout the Kingdom, that before the end of April, he was scarce
accounted one of the Reformed Religion, that had not subscribed the Covenant.
The Non Covenanters were Papists, not exceeding 600 in number throughout the
Kingdom; Statesmen in Office and Favor at that time; and some few Protestants
who were affected to the Ceremonies of England, and Book of Common Prayer.

The King sent the Marquess of Hamilton to deal with the Scots to renounce
their Covenant: but they affirmed, It could not be done without manifest
Perjury and Profanation of God's Name; and insisted to have the Service Book
utterly abolished, it being obtruded against all Law upon them. That their
Meetings were lawful, and such as they would not forsake, until the Purity of
Religion and Peace might be fully settled, by a free and National Synod: And
they declared, THAT THE POWER OF CALLING A SYNOD, IN CASE THE PRINCE BE AN
ENEMY TO THE TRVTH, OR NEGLIGENT IN PROMOTING THE CHVRCHES GOOD, IS IN THE
CHVRCH IT SELF: And that the State of the Church at that time necessitated such
a course.

The King at length, fearing lest the Covenanters, if he delayed, would do it
themselves, called a National Synod, to begin at Glasgow the 21st of November
1638; but within seven days it was dissolved by the Marquess of Hamilton, in
the King's Name, and they commanded to sit no more. But they protested against
that Dissolution, and continued the Synod when the Marquess of Hamilton was
gone, and deposed all the Bishops; condemned the Liturgy, took away the
High Commission Court, and whatsoever had crept into the Church since the Year
1580; when the NATIONAL COVENANT was first established. When they themselves
broke up the Synod, they wrote a Letter of Thanks to the King, and published a
Declaration, Feb. 4. 1638, directed to all the sincere and good Christians in
England, to vindicate their Actions and Intentions, from those Aspersions which
Enemies might throw upon them.

This Declaration was welcome to the People of England in general, and
especially to those who stood best affected to the Reformed Religion, and the
Laws and Liberties of their Country. In fine; the Scots are declared Rebels,
and the King in Person, with an English Army, resolved to chastise them. But,

The generality of the Nation detested the War, knowing that the Scots were
innocent, and wronged by the same Hand that they were oppressed; and they
concluded, that the same Sword which subdued the Scots, must destroy their own
Liberties: Yet glad they seemed to be, that such an Occasion happened, which
might in reason necessitate the King to call an English Parliament; but whilst
he could make any other shift, how low and dishonorable soever, he would not
endure to think of a Parliament. He borrowed great Sums of Money of the
Nobility, and required Loans of others; and the CLERGY contributed liberally to
this War, which was called BELLVM EPISCOPALE, THE BISHOPS WAR.

The King being animated to the War by the Bishops, both of England and
Scotland; the last persuading him, that the COVENANTERS were in no sort able to
resist him; that scarce any English Army at all would be needful to fight, but
only to appear; and his MAJESTY would find a Party great enough in SCOTLAND to
do the Work. He thereupon raised a gallant Army, which rendezvouzed at York.

The Scots likewise (to render the King unwilling or unable to be a Tyrant)
levied a brave Army, which advanced forward under the Command of General
Lesley: They nevertheless continued their first course of Petitioning the King;
which being favored by almost all the Nobility of England; at last, by the
happy Mediation of those Wife and Noble Counselors, a PACIFICATION, to the
great Joy of all good Men, was solemnly concluded on, the 18th of June 1639,
and the King granted them a free National Synod, to be holden August 6, and a
Parliament to begin the 20th, to ratify what the Synod should decree. Hereupon
the English and Scots returned home, praising God; who, without any effusion of
Blood, had compounded this Difference, and prevented a War so wickedly
designed. But,

Shortly after the King's return to London, his Heart was again estranged from
the Scots, and thoughts of Peace; and he commanded the PACIFICATION to be burnt
by the Hands of the common Hangman: An Act than which, nothing could more
blemish his Reputation, as rendering him not to be believed for any thing: For
what Tie would hold him, when the Engagement of his Word, his Royal Word,
given in sight of God and Man, could not bind? And having, upon the 18th of
December, broke up the Scotch Parliament, he began to prepare for a new War.
The Scots complained, that it was a Breach of their Liberties, not heard of
before in twenty Ages, That a Parliament should be dissolved without their
Consent, whilst Business of Moment was depending; That whatsoever Kings in
other Kingdoms might do, it concerned not them to enquire; but it was
absolutely against their Laws.

They hereupon sent four Earls, as their Commissioners, to the King, to
complain, that nothing was performed which he had promised at the PACIFICATION;
and to entreat redress of those Injuries which had been offered them since the
Pacification. But to add to the Grievances of that oppressed Nation, the King
committed two of their Commissioners to Prison.

In April 1640, the King called a Parliament in England; not to seek Counsel
and Advice of them, but to draw Countenance and Supply from them; resolving,
either to make the Parliament pliant to his Will, and to establish Mischief by
a Law, or else to break it. The Scots wrote a Justification of their
Proceedings to this Parliament; and advised them, to be wary in vindicating
their own Laws and Liberties; this Parliament being procured to no other End,
but to arm the King against his Scottish Subjects, and by that War to enslave
both the Nations; That after so many Violations and Dissolutions of Parliaments
in England, this was not called to redress Grievances; but to be so
over-reached, (if they were not careful) that no possibility should be left for
the future, of redressing any. That some dangerous Practice might be well
suspected, when at the same time a Parliament was denied to Scotland, tho
promised by the WORD OF A KING; granted to England when not expected, and
obtruded upon Ireland when not desired.

The Parliament met the 13th of April, when the King required a Supply to carry
on his War against the Scots, with a Promise that he would afterward redress
the Kingdom's Grievances. To which it was answered by many, That redress of
Grievances was the chief End of assembling Parliaments, and ought to precede
granting of Subsidies: That the People had no reason to pay for that which they
neither caused nor desired; and which could not prove to their Good, but quite
contrary, to the great detriment of the whole Kingdom; That they would more
willingly pay, to prevent that unhappy War: That the War would make the
Breach wider, and the Remedy desperate: That THE BEST JUSTICE VVOVLD BE, TO
FILL UP THE PITS WHICH WERE MADE TO ENTRAP OTHERS, WITH THE BODIES OF THOSE
THAT DUG THEM.

Upon the 5th of May, the King, to the great grief of both Kingdoms, Upon the
News of the Dissolution of this Parliament, Cardinal Barberini, entitled, The
Protector of England, though he greatly affected Archbishop Laud, declared,
That he feared he would cause some great Disturbance in England; and that
certainly, for his sake, and by his means, the King had dissolved this
Parliament, which he feared Scotland, and most part of England, would take very
ill.
dissolved this Parliament, finding them no way disposed to countenance the
War: But he PROTESTED, HE WOULD GOVERN ACCORDING TO LAW, as if the Parliament
were constantly sitting: And yet the very next day, to the extreme Grief of the
People, he was seen to break his Word; for he commanded the Lord BROOKS, Study
and Pockets to be searched; and Mr. Bellasis, (Father of the present Earl of
Fanomberg) Sir John H^^ha^, and Mr. Crew, Members of the House of Commons, were
imprisoned: And the King published a false and scandalous Declaration against
the Commons. He then betook himself to other Courses to carry on this War: The
CLERGY contributed freely to it, and Collections were made among the PAPISTS.
Great Loans were attempted to be drawn from the City; and for not complying
therein, Sir Nicholas Rainton, Sir Stephan Soum^, and other eminent Citizens
were imprisoned: Nay, he went further, and had it under consideration to ^oin
400000 l. of BRASS MONEY. [ A Precedent for what the late King James did in
Ireland.]

The Scots taking Alarm at the Breach of the English Parliament, and at the
King's Preparations, and finding themselves bereaved of all possibility of
satisfying him by any naked Supplication, they provided for their own Safety,
and resolved to enter England, with a Sword in one hand, and a Petition in the
other. The King marches his Army Northwards; but the Common Soldiers were
found sensible of Public Interest and Religion, though many Commanders and
Gentleman seemed not to be so: They declared their aversion to the War, and
questioned whether their Captains were not Papists.

Upon the 28th of August 1640, the Scots marching toward Nowcastle, the
English Army encamped to intercept their Passage; but many of the Soldiers,
not liking the Cause, forsook their Commanders: However; the Horse engaged the
Scots, but received a Repulse, some on both sides being slain; and Colonel
VVilmot, with Sir John Digby and Oniale, both Captains of Horse and PAPISTS,
were made Prisoners. Hereupon the Scots became Masters of Newcastle and Durham.

The King, by Proclamation, summoned all the English Nobility, with their
Followers and Foroes, to attend his Standard at York, upon the 20th of
September, against the Scots. But about twenty Peers, considering the great
Calamity into which the King's rash Proceedings had thrown the Kingdom, framed,
and sent his Majesty an humble Letter, representing the Mischiefs attending his
wicked War; the Rapines committed by his Army, wherein Papists were armed,
though the Laws permit them not to have Arms in their Houses, etc. and they
humbly entreated him to summon a Parliament. The King thereupon summoned all
the Lords to appear at York upon the 24th of September, and then declared to
them, that OF HIS OWN FREE ACCORD, he had determined to call a Parliament and
sixteen Lords were agreed upon to treat with the like number of the Scots, and
at length a Cessation of Arms, till the 16th of December, was agreed upon; and
that during that time the Scots should be paid 850 l. a day; and they allowed
Winter Quarters in England.

Both Nations hereupon rested in assured Confidence, that the Parliament would
put a Period to this War; which could never have been begun, but for want of a
Parliament. They were also confident, that the Freedom which the Fundamental
Laws allow to Parliaments, could not be denied to this; to which the King WAS
NECESSITATED, and upon which THE PEOPLE had set their utmost Hope, whom it
seemed not safe, after so many and often repeated Oppressions, to provoke any
further. So much for the Scottish Affairs.

Now it may be thought that I have too long digressed; therefore to return to
you, Reverend Doctor Hollingworth, We will try what Inferences may be raised
from this Melancholy History, to render it useful to the English Reader; I have
declared that King Charles the First was an insufferable Tyrant; you affirm him
to have set a Pattern for the best of future Princes, and that King William and
Queen Mary are daily imitating him: And the last thing you said was, That when
the Parliament met in November 1640, He frankly told them, that he was resolved
to put himself freely and clearly on the LOVE AND AFFECTION OF HIS ENGLISH
SUBJECTS. Now I have been taking a great deal of pains to set this Matter in
its true Light; and to show whence this sudden. Fit of Love to our Nation, with
an exclusion of Scotland arose. And (with your leave, Sir) here are two or
three Uses of Information or Instruction from what has been said.

1. That this Declaration of your Martyr's, that he would put himself on the
Love and Affection of his English Subjects, was to draw them in, to support him
in his wicked War against the Scottish Nation; whom at the same time he called
Rebels, and urged their Expulsion; tho he was under an Agreement for a
Cessation of Arms, and to allow them 850 l. per diem, and Quarters in England,
till their Complaints might be weighed in this Parliament.

2. Information; That he appeared an exorbitant and outrageous Tyrant, in his
Attempts upon that People.

This appears in many Particular, to recount some of them briefly.

1. In overturning their Church Government, established by many Acts of
Parliament; and obtruding upon them Laud's Liturgy, and Popish Ceremonies. 2.
In denying them (the undoubted Right of all Subjects) to petition for Redress
of their Grievances. 3. In dissolving their Synod and Parliament; burning the
Pacification made with them, by the Hangman's Hands; and imprisoning the Lords
sent by them to petition him to perform his solemn Promises, and redress their
Grievances. 4. In levying Armies against them, and raising a Civil War, to
justify himself in the violation of their Laws. A CIVIL WAR it was, said the
great Lord Digby, seeing we are of the same Religion, and under the same King.
And, 5. In the very thing for which you, Doctor, are now magnifying him; I mean
in attempting to make use of the Love and Affection of the English, to enslave
and ruin the Scottish Nation.
3. Information; That the Scottish Covenant was not a new Invention or
Innovation, but established by the Law of Scotland, and taken by King James the
First, seventy Years before King Charles the Second took it.

4. Information, That Bishops and Clergymen in Conjunction with Papists,
abetted and assisted this Tyrant in the Violation of the Laws, when the bulk of
the Nobility, Gentry, and People of England, appeared undauntedly in defense of
the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

5. Information, That Popery has greatly spread in Scotland over since Land 's
Superstition was introduced there; their number then not exceeding 600, and
therefore Presbytery being now restored there by Law, it may be reasonably
hoped, that it will reduce many who have been deluded into that Idolatry.

6. Information, That PRINCES ARE NOT ALWAYS TO TRUST TO THE Insinuations and
Suggestions of Scottish Bishops; seeing that when they instigated King Charles
the First to dissolve the Synod and Parliament, he was seduced by them into a
Belief, that the Scottish Covenanters were a contemptible number; and that THEIR
PARTY in Scotland was sufficient to deal with them.

7. Information, That the Scots were not Rebels in taking Arms to assert their
Rights, and vindicate the Laws and Liberties of their Country. For my Noble
Lord Russel (the Honor of our Age) was most undoubtedly in the right, when,
the day before his Murder, he wrote in his Paper left behind him, the following
words: I cannot deny but that I have been of Opinion, that a free Nation, like
this, might defend their Religion and Liberties when invaded and taken from
them, the under pretense and color of Law. I do ^^firm this was his Orthodox
Opinion, and these the words he wrote, tho they were left out of the Print, and
in that day there might be reason to omit them.

But to bethink my self (Reverend Sir) and to return to what we were upon, I
lest you thinking at our last parting, I will now hear what your Head run upon.
I think (say you) he that rends the first half Year's Transactions betwixt King
Charles and this Parliament, Page 5.
will find he made his Word good to a tittle; for whatsoever they offered to
him by way of Bill, which the Nation groaned under before, as a real, nay, but
as a fancied Burden, he PRESENTLY posses it. To show that, Against Experience
you believe,
And argue against Demonstration;
Pleased that you can your self deceive,
And set your Judgment by your Passion.


We must have a little Chat about this half Year, which has exercised your
Thoughts; and I shall show you the Reasons wherefore I dissent from your
Opinion, That your Martyr READILY PASSED whatsoever Bills the Parliament
affored for the Redress of the Nation's Grievances. Now a cannot remember one
Instance in the whole History of his Reign of a willing and ready Compliance
with his People, in any one Act of Grace or Justice. Every thing of that kind
in the whole course of his Life, was wrested from him by the universal Outory
of the Kingdom against his high Oppressions, which did never avail, but when
the extremity of his Affairs wrought his stubborn Mind to a Compliance. And
most sure I am, that you are mistaken in the sew Instances you bring: You say,
That he PRESENTLY passed the Bills for putting down the Stan-Chamber and
High-Commission-Coures: But I affirm the contrary, and do thus prove it. The
Parliament could never bring him to make a fair Bargain with them, they bought
every thing at a very dear rate, and when they had come to his Price, they were
ever in danger of being wick'd. They came to a Contract with him to yield up
those two accursed Courts of Oppression and Tyranny, and agreed to a POLL BILL,
wherein every Duke was assessed at 100 l. a Marquese at 80 l. Earls 60 l.
Viscounts and Barons 40 l. Knights of the Bath, and Baronets 30 l. another
Knights 20 l. Esquires 10 l. every Genduriam dispending 100 l. per Annum, 5 l.
and all others of Ability to pay a competent proportion; and the meanest Head
in the whole Kingdom was not excused. [I hear there is now a Poll-Bill on foot
in this present Parliament; and therefore, from the high Affection and Duty
which I hear and shall ever pay to those excellent Princes who do so happily
fill their Grandfathers and Fathers Throne, I do here remember my Country men
at what rate, and for what they were thus assessed in 1640. Then they were
forced to buy off the Encroachments of a TYRANT, who had sworn to maint ain
their Laws and Liberties: but now they at lower rates, are only to enable the
hest Princes that ever swayed the English Scepter, to vanquish the worst of
Tyrants.] Well,

This Bargain was struck, and the Parliament resolving very honestly to stand
to it, they prepared the Bills, but finding the King begin to falter, declaring
that he would take their Money, but would not at that time pass the Bills to
put down the Star Chamber and High-Commission-Courts; They voted, that he
should pass all the three Bills, or none at all. However,

Neither the Contract nor their Vote could hold him, he tricked them here; and
upon the 2d of July passed the Poll-Money Bill, but demurred upon the other
two. The afterward, finding that the matter was very ill taken, and that it
was not seasonable to displease the Kingdom at that time, he passed the other
two Bills. And now hope that you are convinced, that he did not, so PRESENTLY
pass Bills for Redrese of Grievances, as you inconsiderately suggested.

To proceed (Sir) you say, Page 5.
That THE STAR CHAMBER had been complained of as a Grievance, and therefore he
signs the Bills to take it away: The HIGH COMMISSION was a Court that most Men's
Moths were opened against and he consents to take that away two.

Very good! We have settled the Fact, these Courts were taken away, I have told
you in what manner, and for what, Consideration: I will now take leave to
inform you, what great Reasons there were to put them down Archbishop Land, and
diverse of his Brethren, had cast off all Humanity, and were metamorphos'd into
ravenous Wolves, and these Courts were under their management. The
Star Chamber, had abounded in extravagant Censures, whereby the Subjects were
oppressed by grievous Fines, Imprisonments, Stigmatizings, Mutilations,
Whippings, Pillories, Gags, Banishments, etc. And the High Commission, was
grown to such excess of Sharpness and Severity, as was not much less than the
Spanish, Inquisition. To repeat two or three of the many Instances of the
horrid Oppression, and barbarous Cruelty exercised in these Tyrannical Courts.

Upon the 17th of February 1629, Dr. LEIGHTON coming out of Black-friars Church
(it seems then he was no Conventicler) was seized by a Warrant from the
HIGH-COMMISSION-COURT, and dragged to Bp LAVD's HOUSE; from thence, without any
Examination, he was carried to Newgate, and there clapped into Irons, and thrust
into a nasty Hole, where he continued from Tuesday night till Thursday noon
without Meat or Drink: They kept him in that loathsome place where Snow and Rain
beat in upon him fifteen Weeks, not permitting his Wife or any Friend to come
near him, and denied to give him a Copy of his Commitment; then they brought
him into the STAR-CHAMBER-COURT, where an Information was exhibited against
him, for publishing a Book called, SION'S PLEA AGAINST THE PRELATES.

By his Answer he confessed, that when the Parliament was sitting in the Year
1628, he drew up the Heads of that Book; and having the Approbation of five
hundred Persons inter their Hands, whereof some were Members of Parliament, he
went into Holland to get is printed. That he printed but between five and six
hundred only, for the use of the Parliament, but they being dissolved, he
returned home, not bringing any of them into the Land, but made it his special
Cate to suppress them.

The Doctor, being charged by the Information with these words in the said
Book; We do not read of greater Persecution of God's People in any Nation
professing the Gospel, than in this our Island, especially SINCE THE DEATH OF
QVEEN ELIZABETH. He confessed the words, and answered. That the thing was too
too true, as appeared by the Prelates taking away Life and Livelihood from many
Ministers and private Men's of whom many were pined to death in Prison, and many
wandered up and down, their Families being left desolate and helpless: That
besides this, the Blood of Souls had been endangered by the remoul of the
faithful Shepherds from the Flock. This was a cutting Truth. And,

LAVD being enraged, desired the Court to put the highest Censure that could be
put upon him: That they did to his Content, condemning him to have his Ears
cut, his Nose slit, to be branded in the Face, whipped at a Post, to stand on
the Pillory, to pay 10000 l. Fine (tho they knew he was not worth so much) and
to be perpetually imprisoned. The grateful Sentence being past, Laud pulled of
his Cap, and holding up his Hands, gave Thanks to God, who had given him
Victory over his Enemies. A Knight moved one of the Lords about the
dreadfulness of the Censure, intimating that it opened a Gap to the PRELATES,
to inflict such disgraceful Punishments and Tortures, upon Men of Quality; That
Lord replied, That it was but in terrorem, and that he would not have any one
think that the Sentence should ever he executed. Nevertheless.

Laud had his design; for upon the 26th of November 1630 the Censure was
executed in a most cruel mamner, his Ears were out, his Nose slit, his Face
branded with burning Irons, he was tied to a Post, and whipped with a treble
Cord, to that cruel degree, that he himself writing the History thereof ten
Years after, affirmed, that every Lash brought away the Flesh, and that he
should feel it to his dying day. He (...), lastly, put in the Pillory, and kept
there near two (...) in Frost and Snow: And then, after this most barbarous
Usage, not permitted to return to his Quarters in the (...), in a Couch
provided to carry him; but compelled, In that sad Condition and severe Season,
to go by Water.

After this, was kept ten weeks in Dirt and Mire, not being sheltered from Rain
and Snow. They shut him up, most closely, 22 Months, and he remained a Prisoner
ten or eleven Years, not suffered to breath in the open Air, until the
Parliament of November 1640, most happily delivered him; When he came abroad,
to prosecute his Petition in that Parliament, he could neither go, see, nor
hear.

Now surely, Dr. Hollingworth, (for I do not forget to whom I and writing) this
dismal Story had flip'd your Memory, when you said, Vindication of their
Majesty's Wisdom, p. 9.
The Bishop Laud was a very good Man, save in the Matter of the Book of Sports,
and some other, as you fancy (for, you say, you are tender of judging)
unnecessary. Innovations. But you must put on Patience, to hear something more
of this bloody Villain's Barbarity.

Upon the 1st of February 1632, Laud procured Mr. Pryn to be sent close
Prisoner to the Tower: There he lay till the 21st of June 1633, when an
Information was exhibited against him in the Star Chamber; for publishing a
Book concerning Interludes, entitled, Note, that no particular Passages in the
Book were mentioned in the Information.
Histriomastix, WHICH WAS LICENSED BY A Chaplain of Dr. Abbot's, Archbishop of
Canterbury. Upon the 17th of Feb. 1633. he had this heavy Sentence passed upon
him; To be imprisoned for Life, pay 5000 l. Fine; be expelled Lincoln's Inn;
disabled to exercise the Profession of a Barrister; degraded by the University
of Oxford of his Degree there taken: and that done, to be set in the Pillory at
Westminister, and have one of h^s Ears there cut off; and at another time to be
set in the Pillory in Cheap^ide, and there have his other Ear cut off.

Tho many of the Lords never dreamt of the Execution of this horrid Judgment;
Nay, tho Queen Henrietta Maria, (which deserves an honorable mention, and she
shall have it, for fire was their present Majesty's Royal Grandmother)
earnestly interceded with the bigoted, cruel and merciless King, (he shall
have that too, with your leave, Doctor, for he was a Tyrant) to remit its
execution; yet on the 7th and 10th of May, it was fully executed with great
rigor.

Mr. Pryn remained sundry Years in the Tower upon this Censure; and in that
time Dr. Bastmick (in the Year 1635) was brought into the High Commission
Inquisition, and imprisoned in the Gatehouse, Westminster.

In the Year 1636, Mr. Burton preached a Sermon upon the 5th of November, at
his Church in Friday-street, London, wherein he laid open the Innovations, in
Doctrine, Worship and Ceremonies, which had lately crept into the Church; and
wished the People to beware of them. For this, LAVD caused Articles to be drawn
against him in the High Commission Court, and suspended him: Then, causing his
House to be broken open, took and committed him to the Fleet close Prisoner;
and he was shut up there diverse Weeks from his Wife and Friends.

Upon the 11th of March 1636, they exhibited an Information against Dr.
Bastwick, Mr. Pryn, and Mr. Burton, in the Star Chamber. And upon the 14th of
June 1637, they passed this Sentence on them, viz. To lose their Ears in the
Palace-yard, Westminster: To pay a Fine of 5000 l. a Man; and be perpetually
imprisoned in three remote Places of the Kingdom, viz. the Castles of
Carnarvan, Cornwall, and Lancaster; and Mr. Pryn to be stigmatized in the Cheeks
with two Letters, (S. and L.) for a seditious Libeller.

Upon the 30th of June, 1637, to the great regret of the People, who strowed
their way with Herbs, these Confessors for the English Liberties, were brought
to the Place appointed for the Execution of the accursed Sentence; which was
done in a manner extraordinarily cruel.

Dr. Bastwick being upon the Pillory, spoke thus to the lamenting People, I
wrote a Book against the Pope, and the POPE OF CANTERBURY said I wrote against
him. -- So far am I from base Fear, that had I as much Blood as would swell the
Thames, I would shed it every drop in this Cause: Had I as many Lives as I have
Hairs on my Head, I would give them all for this Cause. Being let out of the
Pillory, he took the Sponge from one of his Ears, which was all bloody, and
waving it over his Head, said, Blessed be my God, who has counted me worthy,
and of his mighty Power has enabled me to suffer any thing for his sake. And
as I have now lost some of my Blood, so am I ready and willing to spill every
drop in my Veins in this Cause for which I have now suffered; which is, for
maintaining the Truth of God, and the Honor of my King, against Popish
Usurpations. LET GOD BE GLORIFIED, AND LET THE KING LIVE FOR EVER. [These were
not Expressions of a COMMONWEALTH'S MAN, or a Rebel; Were they good Doctor-
Chaplain at Aldgate?]

Mr. Pryn's turn being next; he expressed himself thus, We are accounted
FACTIOVS FELLOWS, Heretics and REBELS, for Discoverers of Plots against the
Protestant Religion, and English Liberties, have been ever used at the rate
which Mr. Pryn was, ever since Laud's Faction got up in the Church.
DICOVERING A PLOT OF POPERY: Alas, POOR ENGLAND! What will become of thee and
thy Religion, if thou maintainest not thy own ESTABLISHED FAITH [ you see,
Doctor, Mr. Pryn was for the Church as established by Law] AND LAWFVL
LIBERTIES? [Ay, that spoils all, for it renders him a Commonwealth's man no
doubt; yet it is but such a one as the late King Charles the second, frankly
told the Duke of Buckingham he would have been, had he not been a King.]
Christian People, (proceeded Mr. Pryn) I beseech you all stand firm, and be
zealous for the Cause of God and his true Religion, to the shedding of your
dearest Blood, otherwise you will bring your selves and your Posterities INTO
PERPETUAL BONDAGE AND SLAVERY, etc.

The Executioner coming to ^ear and cut his Ears, he said, Come Friend, Come,
burn me, cut me, I fear not; I have learned to fear the Fire of Hell, and not
what Man can do unto me: Come, s^ar me, sear me, I shall bear in my Body the
Marks of the Lord Jesus. The Executioner having done his part, and that with
the utmost Cruelty; Mr. Pryn, with a smiling Countenance said; Now, blessed be
God, I have conquered and triumphed over the Bishop's Malice; and returning to
the Tower, he made these Verses by the way.

S. L. STIGMATA LAUDIS. Stigmata Maxillis referens insignia Laudis,
Exultans remeo, victima grata Deo.
Triumphant I return: My Face descries;
Laud's scorching Scars, God's grateful Sacrifice.
Next follows Reverend Mr. Burton; he being in the Pillory, said, I was never
in such a Pulpit before; but little do you know what Fruit God is able to
produce from this dry Tree; MARK MY WORDS; I say, through these Holes God can
bring Light to his Church. Moreover, he said, My Conscience in the discharge of
my Ministerial Duty, in admonishing my People to beware of the CREEPING IN OF
POPERY, and exhorting of them to stick close to God and the King, in Duties of
Obedience, was that which first occasioned my Sufferings. For the Truth I have
preached, I am ready to seal it with my Blood; for this is my Crown both here
and hereafter.

After this Execution done, they were banished to the remote parts of the
Kingdom, and there kept several Years in close and solitary Confinement, not
allowed Pen, Ink and Paper, nor the sight of any Friend; and in this most
deplorable case did the Parliament in November 1640, find these three
distressed Gentlemen, of several Professions, the noblest in the Kingdom,
Divinity, Law, and Physic, but they were soon sent for from their Exile, and
brought into London by many thousands of rejoicing Gentlemen and Citizens, who
went out on Horseback to meet and congratulate their Deliverance. And the
Parliament taking their Case into Consideration, voted, THAT THE JUDGMENTS
GIVEN against them were illegal, unjust, and against the LIBERTY OF THE
SUBJECT. Now good Doctor, was not here reason with a witness, to open every
Man's Mouth with Complaints, against these most arbitrary and pernicious
Courts, and to induce the Parliament to remove these Forges of Misery,
Oppression and Violence? Nevertheless the KING, with a very unwilling Mind, as
I have showed, yielded therein: but as he lost much of the Thanks, which so
great a Grace, freely and forwardly expressed, might have deserved; so I doubt
it will be some diminution to your Credit, dear Doctor, that, contrary to what
you affirm, HE DELAYED, and did not presently comply in this matter. Well! what
follows now? The King is still on the giving hand no doubt of it.

THE SHIP MONEY (you add) tho great and very learned Lawyers had given their
Opinion, Page 5.
that the exacting of it in some Cases was according to Law; yet he, GOOD MAN,
gives up that also.

Here, good Doctor; you speak like A MERE CLERGYMAN, and I begin to suspect
that you never read any other than Dr. NALSON's HISTORY, and are tainted with
the Principles of those famous Gentlemen of the Cassock, SIBTHORP and
MANWARING, who as well as some designing Lawyers, told your Martyr, That
Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising Aids and Subsidies.
That all Antiquity is absolutely, for absolute Obedience to Princes in all
Civil and Temporal Things. You make the yielding up the Claim of Ship Money to
be an Act of pure Grace; for very able Lawyers gave their Opinion that the King
might exact it by Law, and so I have told you, did as able and no less knavish
Divines. But hearken, I beseech you, what the Wisdom of Parliament told him.
They declared it a new and unheard of Tax; they voted it a most illegal
Taxation, and unsufferable Grievance; they looked into the Carriage of those
Judges who advised the King in this matter, and found that Sir JOHN FINCH (a
Gentleman of good Birth, of an high and imperious Spirit, ELOQUENT IN SPEECH;
tho in the knowledge of the Law not very deep) in the Year 1636, when Ship Money
was first plotted and set on foot, was made Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and it appeared that by his Brokage and Solicitation, and that
with Threats and Promises, several of the Judges were wrought upon to give it
under their hand, that the King might by Law exact Ship Money: Thereupon an
Impeachment of High Treason was drawn up against him; and the great Lord
FAVLKLAND (tho an Admirer of the Church, as you tell me) presented it to the
Lords, with a very pithy and sharp Oration against Finch; but he (being at this
time Lord Keeper) not daring to abide the Test, took his Wings, and fled in a
disguise to Holland. In Conclusion, the Arbitrary Power, pretended to be in the
King, of taxing the Subject without Consent in Parliament, was not only
declared to be against Law by the Judgment of both Houses, but also by Act of
Parliament. Thus we rid our Hands of SHIP MONEY. And,

Now indeed, Sir, you come to that which might well raise your Choler, and stir
your Indignation: The King passed a Bill to remove the Bishops out of the House
of Lords; he also passed a Bill for attainting the great Earl of Strafford,
which offered Violence to the Peace and Quiet of his Mind all the days of his
Life.

To tell you the Truth, Doctor, the Parliament found the Bishops of that day,
to be the Troublers of the State, and that it was by consequence become most
necessary to abridg their immoderate Power usurped over the Clergy, and other
good Subjects, which they had most maliciously abused to the hazard of
Religion, and great Prejudice and Oppression of the Laws of the Kingdom, and
just Liberty of the Subject: They had cherished Formality and Superstition as
the probable Supports of their own Ecclesiastical Tyranny and Usurpation; they
had multiplied and enlarged the Differences between the common Protestants, and
those whom they called Puritans, under which Name they included all those that
desired to preserve the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and to maintain the
true Protestant Religion. They had been designing a Conjunction between Papists
and Protestants in Doctrine, Discipline and Ceremonies, only it must not yet be
called Popery. They had triumphed in the Suspensions, Excommunications,
Deprivations and Degradations of diverse learned and pious Ministers, in the
Vexation and grievous Oppression of great numbers of the People, whereby many
thousands were impoverished, and others were so afflicted and troubled by them,
that great numbers departed into New England, and other parts of America,
others into Holland. The most of the Preaching that was allowed, was degenerate
into railing against Parliaments and Puritans, (because they were tenacious of
just Liberty and true Religion) crying up Absolute Authority, Passive
Obedience, etc. Streins of Wit, fitter for a Stage than a Pulpit. After the
Dissolution of the Parliament in May 1640, They continued the Convocation, and
by unheard of Presumption, they made Canons contrary to the King's Prerogative,
to the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, to the Right of Parliaments, to the
Property and Liberty of the Subject, thereby establishing their own
Usurpations, justifying their Altar-Worship, and other Superstitious
Innovations, which they had formerly introduced without Warrant of Law; they
imposed a new Oath on the Subjects for maintenance of their own Tyranny, and
laid a great Tax upon the Clergy. And now, to sill up the measure of their
Iniquity, the House of Lords upon the 30th of December 1641, at a Conference
with the Commons, told them, that the Bishops, by a Protestation which they
made to the King and Lords, had deeply entrenched upon the Fundamental
Privileges and Being of Parliament; whereupon the Commons impeached twelve of
them of High Treason, in endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the
Realm, and the very Being of Parliaments; and they were by the House of Peers
sequestered from Parliament, committed to the Tower, and shortly. after, by Act
of Parliament, most deservedly deprived of voting in the House of Peers.

I hope, good Doctor, you will acquiesce in the Reasons which I have here
offered for the passing this Bill of Exclusion; but the other Bill for
attainting the great Earl of Strafford, you say, offered Violence to the Peace
and Quiet of the King's Mind, all the days of his Life.

This great Man who had long run on in a full Career to establish Tyranny,
trampling down the Peoples Liberties, leaping the Hedges of the Laws, or making
Gaps through them, was impeached by the Commons in many Articles, some whereof
were for ruling Ireland (or which he had been Lord Lieutenant) in an Arbitrary
way, against the Fundamental Laws, which he had endeavored to subvert. For
abusing his Power to the increase and encouragement of Papists; for maliciously
endeavoring to stir up Hostility between England and Scotland; for laboring
to subvert Parliaments, and incense the King against them; for levying Money by
force of Arms; for imposing an Oath upon the Subjects, That they should not
protest against any of the King's Commands: for telling the King, That he had
an Army in Ireland, which his Majesty might employ to reduce this Kingdom to
Obedience.

Upon this Impeachment the Earl was brought to Trial before the Lords, which
lasted from the 22d of March, (with but few days intermission) till the midst
of April. After this long Trial, the Commons voted him guilty of High Treason,
in diverse Particulars, and drew up and passed a Bill of Attainder against him,
but 59 dissenting. This Bill being carried to the Lords, the King's Solicitor
General made it good by Law, to the satisfaction of almost all that heard him:
The Judges also delivered their Opinions, That the Matters proved against him
amounted to Treason; and so the Lords passed the Bill. The King, having after
this, called all the Judges to deliver their Opinions before him; and also sent
for FOUR BISHOPS TO RESOLVE HIM UPON SCRUPLE OF CONSCIENCE; He, at length, gave
the Royal Assent to this Bill.

Prithee, now Doctor, tell me, what ailed your Martyr's Conscience at this
time? There must be something extraordinary, and not commonly taken notice of
in this Matter, that must (as you affirm) offer Violence to the Peace and Quiet
of his Mind, all the Days of his Life. You know, he exacted the Ship Money
without scruple of Conscience, upon the Advice of some Lawyers. And though they
retracted their Opinions, both Houses of Parliament voted, and his Majesty at
length acknowledged it to be an illegal and unjust Exaction: Yet that Guilt
soon were off, and we never heard that thereby, or by any other of the almost
innumerable Oppressions of his People; no, nor by his destroying the poor
Protestants of Rochel; the Quiet of his Mind was any way disturbed. Now, in the
Case we are upon, here was a fair and most solemn Trial; The Lords and Commons
voted the Crimes, Treason; The King's Counsel and Judges avowed the same; The
Bishops (MARK THAT, DOCTOR) picked the Thorn out of his Conscience
Nevertheless, his passing this Bill, violated the Peace of his Mind all the
days of his Life. To offer something toward the enlightening you in this
Matter, allow me to remind you what you have before read: When the Duke of
Buckingham was impeached for Treason, this same King told the Parliament, THAT
BVCKINGHAM HAD NOT INTERMEDLED, NOR DONE ANY THING CONCERNING THE PURBLICK, BUT
BY HIS SPECIAL DIRECTIONS. Now, I have a strong fancy, that the unhappy Earl of
Strafford' s Case, was the same with the Duke's; It Is a mischievous Conscience
with whom one good Deed is so hard to pass down, as to endanger almost a
choking; and bad Deeds without number, tho as big and as bulky as the Buin of
three Kingdoms, go down currently without straining.
and that it disturbed the Quiet of the King's Mind, that he could not preserve
this, as he had done his other Servant, in the execution of his own Commands.
And no marvel it stung his Conscience to adjudg to death those Misdeeds whereof
himself had been the chief Author.

In the next place, good Doctor, you inform us, That the King signed a Bill for
a Triennial Parliament; which certainly was as great a condescension as was
ever made by a Prince, I Why now, it is very unlucky, Doctor, that when you
think your self certainly in the right, you are most undoubtedly in the wrong;
for this Act for a TRIENNIAL PARLIAMENT, did not extend to so much as by Law
the Parliament ought to have required, there being at that time two Statutes of
Edward 3d in force for a Parliament to be holden once a Year.

But now you bring me to an Act of superabundant Grace; Page 6.
you say, That he passed an Act for the Parliament to sit during pleasure. This
was something indeed; we must therefore examine what Reasons the Parliament had
to insist upon this Bill, and what the Motives were that brought the King to
comply herein.

It appeared most evidently to both Houses, by the Examinations and Confessions
of several of the Criminals, that sometime before the passing of the Bill for
the continuance of the Parliament, (which was upon the 10th of May 1641.) The
KING had been tampering with the Army which he had raised against the Scots,
and which lay undisbanded in the North, to bring them up to curb the
Parliament, and subdue them to his Will. Many great Men were found to be
engaged in this Conspiracy, viz. Mr. Piercy, Brother to the Earl of
Northumberland; Mr. Henry Jermin the Queen's Favorite, (afterward Earl of St.
Albans); Mr. Goring, eldest Son to the Lord Goring; Mr. Wilmot, the Lord
Wilmot's eldest Son; Sir John Suckling; Colonel Ashburnham; Pollard; Oneal, an
Irish Papist; and many others: these had taken an Oath of Secrecy among
themselves. To join with this Army, and strengthen the Plot, a French Army was
to be landed at Portsmouth, which Town, for that purpose, was to be put into
Mr. Jermyn's hands; and the The Parliament had addressed the King to disband
this Army; but he answered, That he would not allow of the disbanding the Irish
Army, for diverse Reasons best known to himself.
Irish Army, consisting of 8000, almost all Papists, was to be brought over.

Upon the Discovery of this horrid Plot, Piercy, Jermin, after this Discovery,
went off with a Pass under the King's own Hand; which commanded the Governor
of Portsmouth to provide, with all speed, a Ship to carry him to any Port of
France.
Jermin and Suckling fled into France; Goring being taken, made an ingenuous
Confession, and so was discharged: Oneal, Wilmot, Ashburnham, and others, were
committed to the Tower, from whence Oneal was permitted to make his Escape.

Mr. Piercy, by a Letter from beyond the Seas, to his Brother the Earl of
Northumberland, dated the 14th of June, confessed much of this Conspiracy; in
particular, the taking the Oath of Secrecy; And that they had agreed to engage
the Army to stand by the King against the Parliament, in The preserving the
Bishops Functions and Votes.
The not disbanding the Irish Army till the Scots were disbanded.
The endeavoring to settle his Revenue to that proportion it was formerly.


That he imparted all this to the King, and perceived, that he had been treated
with by others, concerning something of the Army; which did not agree with
those Proposals, BUT INCLINED A WAY MORE HIGH AND SHARP, NOT HAVING LIMITS
EITHER OF HONOR OR LAW. That Goring and Jermin were acquainted with the other
Proceedings; and that the King pressed Mr. Piercy to admit them to
consultation: To which he having yielded, and sworn them to Secrecy, acquainted
them what he had proposed; but HE FOUND THEIR PROPOSALS DIFFERED FROM HIS, IN
VIOLENCE AND HEIGHT.

Colonel Goring confessed, upon his Examination, that Jermin carried him to the
King, who asked him, If he was engaged in any CABAL concerning the Army? To
which Goring answering, That he was not: The King said, I command you then to
join your self with Piercy, and some others whom you will find with him at his
Lodgings. That he thereupon went, and found with Mr. Piercy; Wilmot, Oneal, and
others: That he and Jermin having first taken the Oath of Secrecy, which the
others had taken before: Mr. Piercy made his Propositions, viz. That the Army
should presently be put into a posture to serve the King, and then should send
up a Declaration to the Parliament of these Particulars: That nothing should be
done in Parliament, contrary to any former Act of Parliament; and the King's
Revenne be established: That Jermin propounded, that the Army should be
immediately brought to London; and they SHOULD MAKE SVRE OF THE TOWER. and he
confessed, that he himself urged these things, to show the Vanity and Danger of
the other Propositions, without undertaking these.

Lieutenant Colonel Ballard and Capt. Chudleigh confessed, that the French that
were about London, were to be mounted and would join with the Army; and that
the Clergy would raise 1000 Horse to assist them, And Chudleigh added, that the
Queen had sent down Money to fortify PORTSMOUTH: Further, that Mr. Jermin asked
him, if he thought the Army would stick to their Officers, in case the King and
Parliament should not agree?

It further appeared by the Confessions of Sir Jacob Ashley, Sir John Conniers,
and Capt. Leg, eminent Commanders in the King's Army; that Oneal the Papist
was a principal Agent in carrying on their Intrigue of working upon the Army to
engage them against the Parliament; That THE KING sent Instructions under his
Hand, for a Petition to be presented from the Army: In which was a Clause to
this effect; That, whereas all Men ought to give God thanks, for putting it
into the King's Heart, to condescend to the Desires of the Parliament, to do
many things, which none of his Ancestors would have consented unto, as giving
way to the Triennial Parliament, and granting many other things for the Good of
his Subjects; yet notwithstanding, some turbudent Spirits seemed not to be
satisfied, but WOULD HAVE THE TOTAL SVBVERSION OF THE GOVERNMENT: That
therefore, the Army, being of good Comportment, though ill Paid, might be
called up to attend the Person of the King and Parliament for their Security.

That the Design was, that the Army should move toward London, and spoil the
Country all along as they went, to hinder the Scots from following them. That
Oneal proposed to Sir Jacob Ashley, the making the Scots Neutral; but Sir Jacob
said, that they would lay him by the Heels, if he should come to move such a
thing, for they would never break with the Parliament.

Upon this Discovery, I must tell you, Doctor, the Hearts of honest Men were
highly grieved to find the King in this Conspiracy; and they began to despair
of that Happiness which they had hoped for by this Parliament: And the two
Houses doubting ( as they well might) the King's sincere Affection to them, and
considering what great Disturbance they had, and were like to meet with, in
settling the State; and what great Disbursments of Money were to be made for
payment of the English and Scottish Armies: They unanimously moved the King to
sign a Bill for continuance of this present Parliament: That it should never be
dissolved till both Houses did Consent and agree, that Public Grievances were
fully Redressed; and his Plot made it unsafe for him to deny it: Besides, as
his extreme Wants had forced him to call this Parliament, so the same
necessitated him to comply with them. For, this great Parliament (taught by
woeful experience, that he used Parliaments but to serve his Turn; and so when
he had attained his Ends, their End ensued in a sudden Dissolution) would grant
no Supply to relieve his Necessities, until, by his Concession, they had
obtained this Continuance, to redress the Peoples many and great Grievances:
And they themselves declared, That though there were in it some seeming
Restraint of the Regal Power in dissolving Parliaments; yet it was no taking
that Power from the Crown, but suspending the Execution of it for this Time and
Occasion only: Which was so necessary for the Public Peace, that without it
they could not have undertaken any of those great Charges, but must have left
both the Armies to Disorder and Confusion, and the whole Kingdom to Blood and
Ruin; For to pay the Armies, Money was to be borrowed upon the Public Faith,
which had been nothing worth, if that Parliament could have been dissolved at
the King's Pleasure.

And whereas (Sir) you express your self as astonished at this gracious
Compliance, and say, that no King ever granted the like before. I answer, 'Twas
most evident, that no King before ever made so great a Necessity for a
Parliament to insist upon it. And besides, in the Constitution of ENGLAND 's
GOVERNMENT, it was never the meaning of the LAWGIVERS, that the King should
dissolve Parliaments, whilst the Great Affairs of the Kingdom were depending:
And though Kings have used to do so, it was never the more lawful.

Well, Doctor, I agree with you, that the King passed these Bills, very
advantageous for the Subject; yet in none of them was he bereaved of any just,
necessary or profitable Prerogative of the Crown. And I must tell you, because
you are silent, and for ought I know, ignorant in the Point, All this was not
done for naught; for the King had out of the Subjects Purse, in the first Year
of this Parliament, ONE MILLION AND AN HALF OF MONEY: And yet some Men have the
impudence to suggest, That the Parliament did nothing for him.

To proceed;

What Is the next Article in the Impeachment against this Parliament? Page 7
These Men, to show their Gratitude for what was done before, drew up a
Remonstrance, wherein they made the most bitter Reflections upon the King's
former Government. -- And which was so unmannerly, as well as false, that when
it came to be debated in the whole House, 'twas carried only by eleven Voices.

You are out again, most unlusky Doctor! My Authentic Flistorian tells me a
Tale quite contrary to yours; The Remonstrance, or Declaration of the State of
the Kingdom, was carried but by eight Voices, says he; yet it contained plain
(which I will allow you to call Unmannerly, but must not yield to be false)
Truths, reciting the chief Grievances and Oppressions which the Nation had
groaned under since the beginning of this King's Reign until that time, but
with as much tendernefs of Expression, and respect to his Person, as so much
Truth could possibly be uttered. Many of the Members who opposed this
Remonstrance, were of the same Opinion with those who voted for it; but urged,
that no Cure could be hoped for by it: That instead of directing a stubborn
King for the future, it would teach him only to hate the Makers of it, as
Upbraiders of his Crimes: And they held it fitter to win him by the sweeter way
of concealing his Errors, rather than by publishing them, to hazard the
provoking him. And now, Sir, not to contend it with you, whether the little
Majority, or great Minority, were the best Politicians, and most in the right;
you are certainly in the wrong, when you insist, that this Remonstrance was so
strennously opposed, bocause the Matter thereof was unmannerly and false.

You add, Page 8.
That the King fairly answered this Remonstrance, and vindicated himself from
those horrid Aspersions wherewith they loaded him.

Not to be transported, Reverend Sir, to such an indecency of replying, as is
usual in such a Case as this; I barely tell you, that you talk loosly, and with
no regard to Truth in what you now say, for I have the Royal Answer and
Vindication now under my Eye, and do find that the King does fairly answer the
Remonstrance, which sets forth the many Grievances and high Oppressions of the
People; in these only words, We shall IN FEW WORDS PASS over that part of the
Narrative, wherein the Misfortunes of this Kingdom, from our first entering to
the Crown, to the beginning of this Parliament, are remembered in so sensible
Expressions. And to this he adds not one word in vindication of himself from
those Miscarriages enumerated in the Parliament's Romonstrance, which you call
HORRID ASPERSIONS; but his Majesty knew to be sad Truths.

What follows next?

The King (you say) through TVMVLTS, Ibid.
and too-much countenanced RIOTS, withdrew from Whitehall, being under
apprehensions of Affronts designed to be offered to his Person, if not
something worse.

The Story of these pretended Tumults and Riots, (dear Doctor) is so intermixed
with another, relating to the greatest Violation of the Privileges of
Parliament that ever was committed, that it is most necessary to talk of both
together.

About the beginning of January 1641, the King sought nothing more than to
begin a Quarrel; and to support himself therein, he employed Emissaries to
cajole the young Gentlemen of the Inns of Courts, to make offer of their
Service to him, as a Guard of Defense; and diverse of them to ingratiate
themselves, repaired to the Court, and were highly caressed by the King and
Queen: He at the same time ordered Canoneers and other Assistants, into the
Tower, and removed the Lieutenant thereof: He fortified White Hall with Men and
Munition in an unusual manner. And about the same time, Colonel Lunsford and
others gathered Troops of Horse at Kingston upon Thames, where the Magazine of
Arms for that part of the County of Surrey lay. Matters on his part being thus
prepared, upon the third of January (not only against the Privilege of
Parliament, but the common Liberty of every Subject) he commanded the Chambers,
Studies and Trunks of the Lord Mandeville, a Member of the House of Lords, (
Grandfather to the present Noble Earl of Manchester, who inherits as well the
Vertnes as Honors of that great Patriot) and of Denzel Holles,Esquire; (since
known by the name of the great Lord Holles) Sir Arthur Hasterig, Mr. J. Pym,
Mr. John Hambden ( Grandfather to that highly deserving Gentleman, who at this
day bears his Name, and in whom his Virtues do live and flourish) and Mr.
William Strode, Members of Parliament, These were all Gentlemen of great Esteem
and Reputation in the House. Two of them, Mr. Holles, and Mr. Strode, having
before suffered many Years of sharp and harsh Imprisonment from the King, after
the Dissolution of the Parliament in the fourth Year of his Reign, for Matters
done in Parliament, contrary to the Privileges of that high Court.
to be sealed up. Upon the next day the King came with about 300 Soldiers,
Papists and others to the House of Commons, armed with Swords, Pistols and
other Weapons; and there demanded the said five Members to be delivered to him,
upon a pretended Charge of High Treason. His Followers at the same time
thrusting away the Door-keepers and Attendants of the House, held up their
Swords, and some their Pistols ready cocked, saying, I am a good Marks-man, I
can hit right I warrant you: Others of them said, A Pox take the House of
Commons; a Pox of God confound them, and violently assaulted and by Force
disarmed some of the Servants of the Members, and said, WHEN COMES THE WORD?
and afterward declared, that questionless, if the Word had been given, they
should have fallen upon the House of Commons, and HAVE CUT ALL THEIR THROATS;
which Doings the Commons declared, were A TRAITOROUS DESIGN against the King
and Parliament, and that they could not sit any longer without a sufficient
They petitioned the King to allow them a Guard to be commanded by the Lord
Chamberlain of his Household, but could not obtain it.
Guard, wherein they might confide; wherefore they adjourned to the Tuesday
following, having appinted a Committee to sit in the mean time at Guildhall
London, to consider of all things that might concern the Good and Safety of the
Kingdom, and the Relief of Ireland. [And I am to tell you, Doctor, that the
great Lord Falkland was the fourth Person named to this great Committee.]

The Commons further declared, That they were so far from protecting any of
their Members that should in a due manner be prosecuted according to the Laws
of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, for Treason, or
any other Misdemeanors, that none should be more ready and willing than
themselves to bring them to a speedy and due Trial. And upon the 15th of
January, they ordered the Attonrny-General, who had preferred the Articles of
Treason against the Members, to bring in his Proof, and make them good, if he
could: Whereupon the King sent a Message, that HE NOW FOUND CAUSE wholly to
dosist from proceeding against them; and had commanded his Attourny-General to
proceed no further therein, nor to produce nor discover any Proof concerning
the matter. Also BOTH HOUSES petitioned the King for the speedy proceeding
against the accused Members IN A LEGAL WAY, whereby they might be brought to
condign Punishment, if guilty; or discharged from so heavy an Accusation, if
innocent. The King giving an evasive Answer to this Petition, the Lords and
Commons apply to him again, by a second Petition, praying that the Parliament
might be informed before Friday then next ensuing, what Proof there is against
them, that they may be called to a Legal Trial.

A Petition of about two thousand Freeholders of Backinghamshirs was presented
to the King, setting forth that Mr. Hambden, Knight of their Shire, (a
Gentleman in high Esteem with them and the whole Kingdom) was accused of
Treason; that they believed it to be the Malice which his Zeal to his Majesty's
Service and the State had contracted in the Enemies to the King, the Church and
the Commonwealth, had occasioned this foul Accusation; and they prayed that he
and the other Members might enjoy the Privilege of Parliament. The City of
London also petitioned, that the Lord Mandeville and the five Members might not
be restrained of Liberty, or proceeded against otherwise than according to the
Privileges of Parliament.


To which Petition the King answered, that, AS HE ONCE CONCEIVED, he had ground
enough to accuse them; so now, his Majesty finds as good Cause wholly to desert
any Prosecution of them. Do you hear this, DOCTOR? If you ever had till now,
you would not surely have assumed the Confidence to have said as you do, ( Pa.
11, 12.) That nothing less would satisfy the Parliament, than that he must be
obliged, AS IT WERE, and IN EFFECT, to beg the Members Pardon for wronging
them, with what he thought and COVLD BY GOOD EVIDENCE PROVE MATTER OF TRVTH.
Now I do (AS IT WERE) think that you ought (not only IN EFFECT, but in earnest)
to humble your self to the Descendents of these honorable and never to be
forgotten PATRIOTS, for the horrid Slander which you here lay on their great
Names and Families: For, tho the King gave up the Cause, saying, that HE FOUND
GOOD REASON wholly to desist from proceeding against them; and at another time,
that he found GOOD CAUSE wholly to desert any Prosecution of them: Yet, you
forsooth, must keep up the wicked Clamor, and falsely inform this Generation,
that his Majesty, GOOD MAN, had pregnant Evidence to prove them guilty of
Treason. But, to put you to shame if possible ('it is what you threatened me with,
Reverend Sir!) I shall add a few words more upon this occasion. The Lords and
Commons told the King in a third Petition, that notwithstanding his Majesty
found good cause wholly to desert any further Prosecution of the accused
Members; yet they remained still under that heavy Charge so imputed unto them.
And that by two Acts of Parliament, viz. 37 and 38 Edw. 3. it was enacted, That
if any Person whatsoever make Suggestion to THE KING HIMSELF of any Crime
committed by another, the same Person ought to be sent with the Suggestion
before the Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal, Treasurer, or the great
Countil; there to find Surety to pursue his Suggestion, which if he cann^t
prove, he is to be imprisoned till he satisfy the Party accused of his Damages
and Slander, and made Fine and Ransom to the King. Wherefore the Lords and
Commons beseeched the King, that he would be pleased to send the Person or
Persons, that in this Case made the Suggestions or Informations to him, against
the said Members; together with the Suggestions or Informations to the
Parliament; that so such Fruits of the said good Laws may be had, as was
intended by them; and the Rights and Privileges of Parliament may be
vindicated, WHICH OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE OUGHT NOT TO BE DENIED.

Notwithstanding this Petition, no Authors nor Witnesses were ever produced, to
avow the heavy Charge and Accusation of the noble Lord Mandeville and the five
Members, till now, that fifty Years are elapsed; You, unhappy Doctor, are
trumping up good Evidence, though for want of just Matter, which yet never came
to light; the King let the Business fall of his own accord. And see now how
neatly you have noos'd your self; for, by your idle Dedication to their
Majesty's, you have made this false Suggestion TO THE KING HIMSELF, and so are
fallen into the Mercy of the noble Earl of Manchester, and become liable to the
severe Penalties in the Statutes of King Edward the Third.

To dispatch this Head; Was it not a Crime against the Law of Nature, against
the Rules of Justice; that innocent Men should be charged with so great an
Offense as Treason, in the Face of the highest Judicature in the Kingdom,
without Witness, without any possibility of Reparation, even in point of
Innocence? Such was the Case of these great Men; for the King denied to
discover their Accusers, and yet would not pass a Bill for their Discharge,
unless in the Narration they would desert the avowing their own Innocence. Nay,
was it not an Act of Tyranny beyond Parallel? He accused them, and yet would
produce no Witness: he confessed them clear in his own Judgment, yet they must
not profess their own Innocence, for fear of wounding his Honor.

We will proceed now, Reverend Doctor, to what remains to be said, about the
terrifying Tumults and Riots which frighted his Majesty from White Hall. You
said, that he withdrew from thence through Tumults, and too much countenanced
Riots, being under apprehension of Affronts, designed to be offered to his
Person, IF NOT SOMETHING WORSE. When you return me an Answer to this Letter,
dear Sir, you will infinitely oblige me, if you will tell me, in plain English,
what you intend by SOMETHING WORSE, than that the Mob would affront his
Majesty's Royal Person? For, according to my present Apprehension, you seem to
insinuate, that HE ABDICATED WHITEHALL, under a dread, that these wicked
Rioters would have forced his COMFORTABLE IMPORTANCE, or perpretrated some Act
so highly Villainous, that you could not find a Name for it. For the present,
till I have better Light herein, I will lay before you my Thoughts in this
Case: In the doing whereof, we must examine how things stood at that time,
whereby 'twill be seen, whether there were any such Tumules; and if there were,
whether the King himself did not cause them?

He had tempted the ENGLISH ARMY, with no less Reward than the Spoil of the
City of LONDON, to come up and destroy the PARLIAMENT; He had, in an
unexcusable and hostile manner, made a most high Invasion upon the Privileges
of BOTH HOUSES: Hereupon many Citizens, unarmed, resorted to Westminster to
present their Petitions, and express their stedfastness to the Parliament,
whose Lives and Safeties, by more than slight Rumors, they doubted to be in
Danger; the King having fortified White Hall, and entertained Armed Men, not a
few, planted them at the The first Blood that was drawn in this Cause, was in
that very place where the King's own Blood was afterward shed.
Gate of his Palace, where they reviled, menaced, and with drawn Swords
actually wounded many of the Citizens, as they passed by in a peaceable manner,
whereof some died. Nay, they went farther, and were come to that height of
Boldness, as to give out insolent and menacing Speeches against the Parliament
it self, and to imbrue their Hands in the Blood of the King's Subjects in
Westminster Hall, and at the Doors of the Parliament, as well as at his own
Gate. And when the Parliament and People complained, and demanded Justice for
those Assaults, 1 K. 21, 19.
he justified and abetted his own Crew in what they did.

Now, the passing by of a multitude of the King's Subjects, armed with no other
Weapons than Petitions, could neither be justly called Tumults, nor could the
Parliament have forbid them, without breach of the Peoples Freedom: Unarmed
Petitioners surely could not be formidable to any: And I must remember you,
Doctor, that a very short time before his Majesty pretended to dread these
tumultuary Citizens, The City entertained, feasted, and conducted him to
Whitehall, with at pompous Solemnity, and costly Expressions of Love and Duty,
as ever had been known. Nay, did he not the very next day, after his irruption
in the House of Commons, than which nothing had more exasperated the People, go
in his Coach unguarded into the City? Did he receive the least Affront, much
less Violence in any of the Streets, but rather humble Demeanours and
Supplications? He knew the People so full of Awe and Reverence to his Person,
as to commit himself single amongst the thickest of them, at a time when he had
most provoked them: This shows, beyond doubting, that all his fear of Tumults,
was but a mere Pretense and Occasion taken, of his resolved absence from the
Parliament, that he might turn his Slashing at the Court-gate, to Slaughtering
in the Field. Well,

The King retires first to Hampton Court, commanding his Servants, who were
Members of Parliament, to leave their Service there, and to give their
Attendance upon his Person. Shortly after, the QVEEN passes into Holland,
carrying with her all, or the greatest part of the Crown-Jewels; which she
immediately pawned, and with the Money bought Arms and Ammunition for the War,
which was not yet begun.

But I had almost forgot my self, Reverend Sir, I must attend to what you say
in the Case; Page 8.
It Is this, I see; The King, though withdrawn, yet ceases not to call upon the
Parliament to consider the Nation's Good, and the settling it upon such
Foundations, as neither the Monarch might invade the just Rights of the People,
nor the People incroach upon the Rights of his Crown and Dignity. Having said
this, you intimate that he told them something upon their presenting Petitions
to him at Theobalds and New Market. Then it seems that they called upon him
likewise, and it is fit my Countrymen should know for what, seeing you do
maliciously withhold it.

Upon the 1st of March 1641, BOTH HOUSES CALLED UPON HIS MAJESTY, by their
Petition presented at Theobalds; That for the dispatch of the great Affairs of
the Kingdom, the Safety of his Person, the Protection and Comfort of his
Subjects, he would be pleased to continue his Abode near the Parliament, and
not to withdraw himself to any the remoter Parts; which if he should do, must
needs be a cause of great Danger and Distraction: And they prayed him to accept
this humble Counsel, as the Effect of that Duty and Allegiance which they owed
unto him, and which would not suffer them to admit of any Thoughts, Intentions
or Endeavors, but such as were necessary and advantageous for his Majesty's
Greatness and Honor, and the Safety and Prosperity of the Kingdom: Expressions
surely, that do not in the least savor of that Sedition and Rebellion, with
which at this time, by you, Doctor, and many other WICKED Clergymen, the
Memory of this great Parliament is charged.

The King being deaf to the importunate Supplication of the Lords and Commons
for his Return: They again called upon him more earnestly, sending after him a
Declaration to Newmarket, by the Earls of Pembroke and Holland, and a
Committee of the Commons, wherein they laid before him the Causes of their own
Fears and Jealousies in these Particulars.

1. That the design of altering Religion had been potently carried on by those
in greatest Authority about him; the Queen's Agent at Rome, the Pope's Nuncio
here, are not only Evidences of this Design, but have been great Actors in it.
2. That the War with Scotland was procured to make way for this Intent, and
chiefly fomented by the Papists, and other Popishly affected, whereof we have
many Evidences. 3. That the Rebellion in Ireland was framed and contrived here
in England; and that the English Papists should have risen about the same time,
we have several Testimonies, etc. The Irish Rebels affirm, that they do nothing
but by Authority from the King; they call themselves the Queen's Army: The
Booty which they take from the English, they mark with the Queen's mark; and it
is proved that their purpose was to come to England, after they had done in
Ireland. 4. The laboring to infuse into your Majesty's Subjects an evil
Opinion of the Parliament, and other Symptoms of a Disposition of raising Arms,
and dividing your People by a Civil War, in which Combustion Ireland must needs
be lost, and this Kingdom miserably wasted and consumed, if not wholly ruined
and destroyed. 5. That your Majesty sent away the Lord Digby by your own
Warrant beyond the Sea, after a Vote had passed in the House of Commons,
declaring, that he had appeared in a Warlike manner at Kingston upon Thames, to
the Terror of your Majesty's good Subjects; that he being so got beyond Sea, he
vented his traitorous Conceptions, That your Majesty should declare your self,
and retire to a place of Strength; and intimated some Service which he might do
in those Parts; whereby in probability, he intended the procuring of some
Foreign Force to strengthen your Majesty, in that Condition into which he would
have brought you; which malicious Counsel we have great Cause to doubt, made
too deep an Impression in your Majesty, CONSIDERING THE COURSE YOU ARE PLEASED
TO TAKE, OF ABSENTING YOUR SELF FROM YOUR PARLIAMENT, and carrying the Prince
with you, which seems to express a purpose in your Majesty to keep your self in
a readiness for the acting of it. 6. The manifold Advertisements which we have
had from Rome, Venice, Paris, and other parts, that they still expect that your
Majesty has some great Design in hand, for the altering of Religion, the
breaking the Neck of your Parliament, and that you will yet find means to
compass that Design: That the Pope's Nuncio has solicited the Kings of France
and Spain to lend your Majesty 4000 Men apiece, to help to maintain your
Royalty against the Parliament.
These are some of the grounds of our Fears and Jealousies, which made us so
earnestly to implore your Royal Authority and Protection for our Defense and
Security in all the ways of Humility and Submission, which being denied by your
Majesty, We do with Sorrow apply our selves to the use of that The Militia.
Power, which, by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, resides in us; yet
still resolving to keep our selves within the Bounds of Faithfulness and
Allegiance to your Sacred Person and your Crown.

And as to the Fears and Jealousies which his Majesty seemed to have
entertained of them; The Lords and Commons thus answered:

We have, according to your Majesty's Desires, laid our Hands upon our Hearts;
we have asked our selves in the strictest Examination of our Consciences, we
have searched our Affections, our Thoughts; considered our Actions, and can
find none that can give your Majesty and just occasion to absent your self from
Whitehall and the Parliament; but that you may with more Honor and Safety
continue there, than in any other place.

Your Majesty lays a general Charge upon us: if you will be graciously pleased
to let us know the Particulars, we shall give a clear and satisfactory Answer.
But what hope can we have of ever giving your Majesty Satisfaction, when those
Particulars which you have been made believe were true; yet being produced and
made known to us, appeared to be false; and your Majesty notwithstanding, will
neither punish nor produce the Authors; but go on to contract new Jealousies
and Fears, upon general and uncertain grounds, affording us no means or
possibility of particular Answer, to the clearing of our selves?

WE BESEECH YOUR MAJESTY TO CONSIDER IN WHAT STATE YOU ARE, how easy and fair a
way you have to Happiness, Honor and Greatness, Plenty and Security; if you
will join with the Parliament in the Defense of the Religion and public Good
of the Kingdom; THIS IS ALL WE EXPECT FROM YOU; and for this we return to you
our Lives, Fortunes and utmost Eadeavours to support your Majesty, your just
Sovereignty and Power over us; but IT IS NOT WORDS THAT CAN SECURE US in these
our humble Desires: We cannot but too well and sorrowfully remember what
GRACIOUS MESSAGES we had from you this Summer, when WITH YOUR PRIVITY, the
bringing up the Army was in Agitation: We cannot but with the like Affections,
recall to our Minds, how not two days before your own coming to the Commons
House, you sent a GRACIOUS MESSAGE, that you would always have care of their
Privileges, as of your own Prerogative; of the Safety of their Persons, as of
your own Children; that which we expect, which will give us assurance, that you
have no thought but of Peace and Justice to your People, must be some real
Effect of your Goodness to them, in granting those things which the present
Necessity of the Kingdom do enforce us to desire: And that you will be
graciously pleased to put from you those mischievous Counselors, which have
caused all these Dangers and Distractions, and to continue your own Residence
and the Princes, near London and the Parliament, which we hope will be a happy
beginning of Contentment and Confidence betwixt your Majesty and your People;
and be followed with many succeeding Blessings of Honor and Greatness to your
Majesty, and of Security and Prosperity to them.

These are brief Heads, good Doctor, of the Declaration which you mention to be
read to the King at Newmarket; and you, with very little regard to his
Majesty's Honor, do affirm, that after the hearing this Declaration read, he
expostulated in these words: What would you have? Have I violated your Laws?
Page 8.
Were you so well read in the History of that Day, as you pretend to be, this
his strong Expostulation with the Lords and Commons would never have found room
in your Defense of the King; for his high violation of the Laws were too well
known to the whole World, to be denied; and you, his Majesty's Defender, would
never have revived the thing, had you remembered the short, but most pertinent
Reply which both Houses made thereto, in these words; We are heartily sorry we
have such plentiful matter of an Answer to that Question, HAVE I VIOLATED YOUR
LAWS?

You proceed, Page 9.
Sir, saying, That the Applications from the two Houses at this time, were for
NOTHING LESS than the MILITIA. You are out again, Doctor, and would I use the
Royal Language, wherewith the Earl of Holland was intterrupted by the King in
reading the Declaration to him at New Market, I might, with more Truth than he
did say, THAT IS FALSE, THAT IS A LIE: For in recounting some Particulars of the
Declaration I have demonstrated, that their Application was also for other and
less Matters than the Militia; they humbly petitioned him to put away his
wicked Counselors, and to return to his Parliament.

You add; That the King continuing steadfast to his Resolution, and DEAF TO ALL
THEIR IMPORIVNITIES, [The want of Ears, I must tell you, Reverend Sir, cost him
his Head at last] telling them, That he would nor part with his Militia for an
Hour. I must help you a little in this part of the Story too; The Earl of
Pembrook asked him, Whether the Militia might not be granted, as was desired by
the Parliament for a time? HIS MAJESTY SWORE, BY GOD, NOT FOR AN HOUR. This
shows him a little more stubbornly steadfast than you would tell the World;
however, you told too much in this place, or his Majesty resolved and swore too
fast; for afterward you say, That at the Treaty at Vxbridg, Page 20.
He consented that the Militia, for three Years, should be in the Hands of
twenty Commissioners, the one half to be nominated by the two Houses.

Your next words are these, THE MILITIA THEY MUST HAVE, Page 9.
OR THE NATION IS UNDONE.

The State of the Kingdom at that Day considered, there never fell from your
Pen a greater Truth than what you have here delivered; for, besides the
particular Instances which I have already given you of the King's Invasion of
the Privileges of the Parliament, of the Rights of the People, and of his
Pr^^^^ations for War against them; I must here inform you, that in the
beginning of the Year 1641, a time when the King was, in appearance,
transacting Matters amicably with the two Houses; and we seemed to be in a deep
Peace; a time when he declared, that he had received no other carriage from his
Parliament, than what he professed himself satisfied with; and that if the
Bills he had past, were again to be offered, he should cheerfully and readily
assent unto them; even then he dispatched away Letters, and an Agent to the
King of Denmark, complaining of the Parliament, and asking Supplies from
thence, AD PROPVLSANDOS HOSTS, you know the English of that is, to subdue his
Enemies; and declared himself in these words,
ad alia Consilia Animum convertendum duximus; We resolve to betake our self
to new Counsels; the very words he used to the Parliament in the Year 1628.

Further, upon the Discovery of his Plot to bring up the English Army against
the Parliament, he turned to the Scottish Army, then at Newcastle, and baited
his Temptation with a rich Reward, not only to have 300000 l. in hand, and the
Spoil of London, but four Northern Counties to be made Scottish. Moreover, to
encourage them to join with him, he declared to them, that he was to have Money
and Horse from Denmark, and that he would made York the place of his Residence,
for the better Accommodation of both Nations, or fuller Revenge upon London: He
also gathered Men in London, under pretense of raising Forces for Portugal, who
were to possess themselves of the Tower. The Queen in Holland was buying Arms,
and his Majesty had actually raised Forces in diverse Counties: The Parliament
was all this time petitioning in Peace: And for the Reasons now assigned,
amongst many others, They humbly besought him, that he would be pleased to put
the Tower of London and the Militia into the hands of such Persons as should be
recommended to him by both Houses of Parliament. The King seemed to comply
herein, and by his Answer promised them, that the Militia should be put into
such hands as they should approve of, or recommend to him: hereupon both Houses
nominated Persons of the greatest Honor, as fit for that Trust; to give you
the Names of some of them, the Earls of Holland, Rutland, Bedford,
Bullingbrook, Salisbury, Warwick, Pembrook, Leicester, Stamford, Essex, Clare,
Northumberland, Lincoln, Suffolk, etc. Lords, Paget, North, Strange, Roberts,
Gray of Werk, Chandois, Dacres, Mandeville, Wharton, Spencer, Brook, Herbert,
Fielding, Littleton, Lord Keeper, etc. Men eminent in all Quallifications of
Honor and Sufficiency were recommended for several Counties, and the King was
desired to agree thereunto, as he had promised; upon his delaying to give a
satisfactory Answer, they again petition him to give such an Answer as might
raise in them a Confidence that they should not be exposed to the Practices of
those who thirst after the Ruin of the Kingdom, and the kindling that
Combustion in England which they had effected in Ireland: That nothing could
enable them to suppress THE REBELLION IN IRELAND, and secure England, but the
granting of their humble Petition; which they find so absolutely necessary for
the preservation of the King and Commonwealth, that the Laws of God and Man
enjoin them to see it put in Execution. They again by a Petition presented at
Theobalds, March 1, 1641. entreated him, that he would at last be pleased to
grant their necessary Petition concerning the Militia, and declared, that if he
refused to do it in these times of Distraction, they must be enforced to
dispose of it for the Safety of the Kingdom, in such manner as had been
propounded to his Majesty. They followed him with the same humble Supplication,
in his several Removes to York; but HE HAVING ABDICATED the Parliament, and
BEING DEAF (as you most ingenuously confess) TO ALL THEIR IMPORTUNITIES; they
declared, that there had been of late a most desperate Design upon the House of
Commons, which they had just cause to believe was an Effect of the BLOODY
COVNSELS of PAPISTS, and other ill-affected Persons, who had already raised A
REBELLION IN IRELAND, and by reason of many Discoveries, they could not but
fear they would proceed, not only to stir up the like REBELLION AND
INSVRRECTION in this Kingdom, but also to back them with Forces from abroad;
and thereupon both Houses made an Ordinance for the ordering the Militia of
England and Wales; there appearing an urgent and inevitable Necessity for
putting his Majesty's Subjects in a Posture of Defense for the Safeguard of
both his Majesty and the People. And they RESOLVED, that in this case of
extreme Danger, and of his Majesty's refusal, the Ordinance agreed to by both
Houses for the Militia, does oblige the People, and OUGHT TO BE OBEYED by the
Fundamental Eaws of this Kingdom. They further about that time, RESOLVED, That
the King's Absence so far remote from his Parliament, was not only an
Obstruction, but MIGHT BE A DESTRVCTION to the Affairs of Ireland.

And now, Sir, having laid before you the Grounds of the Parliament's
proceeding as they did, in the business of the Militia: I will show you how
much higher our Forefathers went than we did in 1641. They were of that
Courage and Severity of Zeal to Justice, and their Native Liberty, against the
proud Contempt and Mis-rule of their Kings; that when RICHARD the Second
departed but from a Committee of Lords, who sat preparing Matters for the
Parliament, they required the King, then withdrawn no further off than the
Tower, to come to Westminster, WHICH HE REFUSING, THEY FLATLY TOLD HIM, THAT
UNLESS HE CAME, THEY WOULD CHOOSE ANOTHER KING. So high a Crime it was
accounted then, for a King to absent himself; much less would they have
suffered, that a King should leave his Regal Station, and the whole Kingdom,
bleeding to Death of those Wounds which his own unskilful and perverse
Government had made. Yet, WE IN OUR DAY went not their length; THE KING HAD
ABDICATED; our Religion, Lives and Liberties were threatened with most imminent
Danger, from intestine Enemies and Foreign Force; WE only made a most necessary
Provision, that our own Swords should not be employed to the Destruction of all
that was dear unto us. And pray, what harm, what Rebellion was there in all
this?

The next thing we meet with in your Defense, Page 10.
REVEREND DOCTOR, is this; Before the War actually broke out, the King was gone
to York, hoping thereby to COOL THE HEATS that were AT LONDON, and in some
little time TO BE INVITED thither, to live with more Honor and Safety than he
did before.

The King in truth went to York in a high Chafe, hoping for something beyond
and contrary to what you intimate; 'twas in hopes that to enable himself the
better for that dismal War, which he had resolved upon, he might possess
himself of Hull, a Town of great Strength, and most advantagiously situated,
both for Sea and Land Affairs; and which was at that time the Magazine of all
the Arms which he had bought with Money most illegally extorted from his
Subjects, to use in a causless and most unjust Civil War against his Subjects
of Scotland: Did he hope for an Invitation back to London? Why, he had that
very often made to him, in a most humble and earnest manner; in particular, by
a Petition of the Lords and Commons, presented to him at York, the 26th of
March, 1642. They humbly advised and beseeched him, that FOR THE RECOVERY OF
IRELAND, and securing this Kingdom, he would be graciously pleased, with all
convenient speed, to return to London, and to close with the Counsel of his
Parliament; where he should find their dutiful Affections and Endeavors ready
to attend him, with such Entertainment, as should not only give him just cause
of Security in their Faithfulness; but other manifold Evidences of their
Intentions and Endeavors to advance his Majesty's Service, Honor, and
Contentment, and to establish it upon the sure Foundation of the Peace and
Prosperity of his Kingdoms. EXPRESSIONS, surely Doctor, THAT DO NOT IN THE
LEAST SAVOR OF REBELLION AND TREASON. The deaf King, instead of harkening to
this dutiful Petition and Invitation, summoned the Gentry of that County to
attend him at York, where he made the most bitter Invectives against the
Parliament, and stirred them up to raise Horse and Foot for his Service: His
Majesty found but six Gentlemen to comply with his Demand of raising Men, tho
made under the pretense of a Guard. The greater part of the Gentlemen, and
diverse thousands of Freeholders, gave him an Answer under their hands to this
effect, We humbly beseech your Majesty to impart the grounds of your Fears and
Jealousies to your High Court of Parliament (OF WHOSE MOST LOYAL CARE AND
AFFECTION TO YOUR MAJESTY'S HONOR AND SAFETY WE ARE MOST CONFIDENT) and
WHATSOEVER SHALL BE ADVISED BY YOUR GREAT COUNCIL, we shall most willingly
embrace, and give our Concurrence and Assistance to it, as shall become us. --
And WE ARE MOST ASSVRED, that your Royal Person shall be secure in the general
Fidelity of your Subjects of this County without any extraordinary GUARD.

The King was presented the next day with a Petition from many thousands, who
justly styled themselves peaceably affected Subjects in the County of York, in
which they speak thus:

That many of them in their late Desires of petitioning your Majesty, were
denied Access, kept back with Violence, and affronted by some who had
Dependence on your Majesty; and were threatened, that WHEN YOUR MAJESTY'S ARMY
SHOULD BE ON FOOT, those should be first pillaged that refused to subscribe to
the raising of Forces; which we humbly conceive are POSITIVELY CONTRARY TO YOUR
MAJESTY'S OWN EXPRESSIONS, etc.

We humbly supplicate your Majesty, to cast your Eye upon the present State of
this your Kingdom. -- We are confident that no so absolute and hearty
Observance to your Majesty's just Commands can be demostrated, as what your
Majesty in Parliament shall declare; which IF IT BECOME DIVIDED, (as God
forbid) our Hearts even tremble to consider the Dangers and Diminution of the
Honor and Safety your Majesty's Posterity and Kingdoms will unavoidably be put
upon: Since it is clear to every Understanding, that IT IS NOT A DIVIDED PART
OF ONE OR SEVERAL COUNTIES THAT can afford that Honor and Safety to your
Majesty, AS THE WHOLE KINGDOM, WHICH YOU MAT COMMAND, no ground of Fear or
Danger remaining, if a good Confidence were begot betwixt your Majesty and your
Parliament; whose grave and loyal Counsels are, we humbly conceive, the visible
way, under God, to put a speedy end to the Troubles of Ireland, and establish
your Throne in Righteousness.

We most humbly supplicate, that we may represent our Unfitness to become
Judges betwixt your Majesty and Parliament, in any thing, or dispute the
Authority of either; which we humbly conceive do fortify each other -- We shall
be ready to maintain your Majesty's just Rights, the Privileges and Power of
Parliaments, and the lawful Liberties of the Subjects.

I have now shown you, Doctor, that the King wanted not Invitations to return
and live in Honor and Safety at London: The Parliament importunately pressed
it, the Gentlemen and Freeholders of Yorkshire, humbly supplicated it: But
nothing is more certain, than that instead of hoping to cool the Heats at
London, by retiring to York; 'twas his sole purpose and intention to put that
Country and the whole Kingdom into a Flame, as he quickly did; and pursuant to
that Design, having rejected with Scorn, the Petitions I have mentioned, he
persisted in his former way of raising Forces, and made Proclamation, requiring
all Gentlemen and others of that County to attend him in Arms.

The Lords and Commons wisely foreseeing the impending Mischief, and observing
the Clouds to gather so fast, and threaten a Storm, they as wisely endeavored
to prevent it; and therefore passed a Vote, May 20, 1642, That it appears the
King (seduced by wicked Counsel) intends to make War against the Parliament;
who in all their Consultations and Actions, have proposed no other end unto
themselves, but the Care of his Kingdom, and the performance of all Duty and
Loyalty to his Person.

2. That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a Breach of
the Trust reposed in him by his People, contrary to his Oath, and tending to
the Dissolution of the Government.

3. That whosoever shall serve, or assist him in such War, are Traitors by the
Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged by two Acts of
Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traitors, 11 Rich. 2. 1 Hen. 4.

But I must hear you, Page 10.
Sir, upon this Point of the first beginning of the unnatural and bloody War;
you suggest that he was forced to raise an Army, which was after the Parliament
had voted a Necessity of a War with him.

Will you never leave your L -- Doctor? The Parliament did not vote a necessity
of a War: They indeed voted, as I told you but now, That it appeared that the
King intended to make War against them; and it was near two Months afterward,
viz. the 12th of July 1642, that the Lords and Commons (finding his Majesty to
persist in that Intention) voted, that an Army should be forthwith raised for
the Safety of the King's Person, Defense of both Houses of Parliament, and
preserving of the true Religion, the Laws, Liberty, and the Peace of the
Kingdom. That the Earl of Essex should be General, and that they will live and
die with him in this Cause; and that the Earl of Bedford should be General of
the Horse. Nevertheless, they resolved that a Petition should be presented to
his Majesty, by the Earl of Holland, Sir John Holland, and Sir Philip
Stapleton, to move the King to a good Accord with his Parliament, to prevent a
Civil War, which was to the effect following.

Although, We your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, have been very unhappy in many former
Petitions to your Majesty; and with much Sorrow do perceive that your Majesty,
incensed by many false Calumnies and Slanders, does continue to raise Forces
against us, and to make great Preparations for War, both in the Kingdom and
from beyond the Seas; yet such is our earnest desire of discharging our Duty to
your Majesty and the Kingdom, to preserve the Peace thereof, and to prevent the
Miseries of Civil War: That notwithstanding we hold our selves bound to use all
the Means and Power, which by the Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom we are
trusted with, for Defense and Protection thereof, and of the Subjects from
Force and Violence; We do in this our humble and loyal Petition, prostrate our
selves at your Majesty's Feet, beseeching that you will forbear and remove all
Preparations and Actions of War. -- That you will come nearer to your
Parliament, and hearken to their faithful Advice and humble Petitions, which
shall only tend to the Defense and Advancement of Religion, your own Royal
Honor and Safety, the preservation of our Laws and Liberties: And we have
been, and ever shall be careful to prevent and punish all Tumults and seditious
Actings, Speeches and Writings, which may give your Majesty just cause of
Distaste, or apprehension of Danger.

And we, for our Parts, shall be ready to lay down all those Preparations which
we have been forced to make for our Defense. And for the Town of Hull, and the
Ordinance concerning the Militia, as we have in both these Particulars, only
sought the preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Defense of the
Parliament from Force and Violence; so we shall most willingly leave the Town
of Hull in the state it was before Sir John Hotham drew any Forces into it,
delivering your Majesty's Magazine into the Tower of London: We shall be ready
to settle the Militia by a Bill, in such a way as shall be honorable and safe
for your Majesty, most agreeable to the Duty of Parliament, and effectual for
the Good of the Kingdom, that the Strength thereof be not employed against it
self; and that which ought to be for our Security, applied to our Destruction.
And that the Parliament, and those who profess and desire still to preserve the
Protestant Religion, both in this Realm, and in Ireland, may not be left naked
and indefensible, to the mischievous Designs and cruel Attempts of those who
are the professed and confederate Enemies thereof, in your Majesty's Dominions,
and other Neighbor Nations: To which, if your Majesty's Courses and Counsels
shall from henceforth concur; We doubt not but we shall quickly make it appear
to the World, by the most eminent Effects of Love and Duty, That your Majesty's
personal Safety your Royal Honor and Greatness, are much dearer to us than our
own Lives and Fortunes, which we do most heartily dedicate, and shall most
willingly employ for the support and maintenance thereof.

And now, Sir, I appeal to you, and to all the World, Whether these Men talked
here, as though they were resolved to make War, and engross all into their own
Hands, let what would become of the King? as a certain Aldgate Doctor of
Divinity falsely accuses the Lords and Commons. Thanks be to God, Sir John
Holland (as well as Sir John Prattle) is yet alive in Norfolk, in perfect
Health and Understanding; and is ready to give the same account I have here
given you, to any Man that asks him about it.

What say you next, Page 10.
Mr. Chaplain at Aldgate? Why, To let the World see what the King aimed at, He
does assure the Gentlemen, whose Loyalty engaged them early on his Side; and
does promise them, in the Presence of Almighty God, and as he hopes for his
Blessing and Protection, that he would, to the utmost of his Power, defend and
maintain the true Protestant Religion established in the Church of England.

You almost provoke me, Doctor, to draw up a Petition to your Right Honorable
and Right Reverend Diocesan, to suspend you from writing DEFENSES, till you
swear to do them honestly; then, and not till then, we may hope for the Truth,
the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth: I am credibly informed, that there
was something more in this Speech, than you are willing to acknowledge; It Is the
same, I take it for granted, that his Majesty made at the Head of his Army,
between Stafford and Wellington, the 19th of September 1642. He then had these
Expressions also; The time cannot be long before we come to Action -- You shall
meet with no Enemies, but TRAITORS, MOST OF THEM ^ROWNISTS, ANABAPTISTS AND
ATHEISTS. These were the Words of a King, I shall not therefore reflect further
upon them, than to ask you, upon the Oath which you are to take, Whether you do
in your Conscience believe, that the Great, the Good, the pious King, spoke
Truth here? Whether he had not more Atheists and Papists in his Army, than the
Parliament had Brownists and Anabaptists in theirs?

Your next Effort is this; Page 12.
You fall upon the Consideration of the Steps his Majesty made toward Peace,
and thus express your self; Truly, I think, ACCORDING TO MY POOR JVDGMENT, he
now Acts according to what he always pretended, and solemnly avowed; to wit, as
a true Father of his Country; for be proposes, That HIS REVENVE, MAGAZINES,
TOWNS, SHIPS AND FORTS may be restored to him, and all should be well.

Now I will readily agree, that there is here and there found a Doctor, nay a
Chaplain too, of a poor Judgment; but one would think, that he that is
conscious of his own Weakness and Incapacity, should not assume the Arrogance
to judge in Matters of Right between Princes and their People. And I will here
tell you, what better Heads than you or I ever wore, said upon this Point; The
Opinion of the Parliament was, That his Majesty's Towns were no more his own,
than his Kingdom is his own; and his Kingdom is no more his own, than his
People are his own: And if the King had a Propriety in all his Towns, what
would become of the Subjects Property in their Houses therein? And if he had a
Propriety in his Kingdom, what would become of the Subjects Property in their
Lands throughout the Kingdom, or of their Liberties, if his Majesty had the
same Right in their Persons, that every Subject has in his Lands? This
ERRONEOVS MAXIM being infused into Princes, THAT THEIR KINGDOMS ARE THEIR OWN;
and that they may do with them what they will, (AS IF THEIR KINGDOMS were for
them, and not they for their Kingdoms) is the Root of all the Subjects Misery,
and of the invading of their just Rights and Liberties; whereas INDEED THEY ARE
ONLY INTRVSTED with their Kingdoms, and with their Towns, and with their
People, and with the Public Treasures of the Commonwealth, and whatsoever is
bought therewith; and by the known Law of the Kingdom, the VERY JEWELS OF THE
CROWN are not the King's PROPER Goods, but are only entrusted unto him for the
Use and Ornament thereof; as the Towns, Forts, Treasure, Magazines, Offices and
the People of the Kingdom; and the whole Kingdom it self is entrusted unto him,
for the Good, Safety, and best Advantage thereof. And AS THIS TRUST IS FOR THE
USE OF THE KINGDOM, SO IT OUGHT TO BE MANAGED BY THE ADVICE OF THE HOUSES OF
PARLIAMENT, whom the Kingdom has trusted for that purpose, it being their Duty
to see it be discharged, according to the condition and true indent thereof,
and as much as in them lies, by all possible means to prevent the contrary.

Not to enquire what you, Sir, in your poor Judgment do think of this high
Principle, I will move, with what speed I can, to a Conclusion: I told you, not
long since, That the Lords and Commons voted the raising an Army to be
commanded by the Earl of Essex; and at the same time humbly (but in vain)
supplicated: the King for Peace, and to return to his Parliament. When the
General marched with his Forces toward the Army raised against the Parliament
and Kingdom: He was instructed to fight at such Time and Place as he should
judge most to conduce to the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom, but was also
commanded to cause a Petition of both Hous^s to be presented to his Majesty;
wherein they thus expressed themselves.

We cannot, without great grief and tenderness of Compassion, behold the
pressing Miseries, the imminent Dangers, the devouring Calamities which do
extremely threaten the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, by the practice of a
Party prevailing with your Majesty, who by many wicked Plots and Conspiracies,
have attempted the alteration of the true Religion, and the ancient Government
of this Kingdom, and the introducing of POPISH IDOLATRY AND SVPERSTITION in the
CHVRCH, and TYRANNY and CONFVSION in the STATE. And for the compassing thereof,
have long corrupted your Majesty's Counsels, abused your Power, and by sudden
and untimely dissolving of the former Parliaments, have often hindered the
Reformation and Prevention of those Mischiefs; and being now disabled to avoid
the Endeavors of this Parliament, by any such Means, have TRAITEROVSLY
attempted to overawe the same by Force: And in prosecution of their wicked
Designs, have EXCITED, ENCOVRAGED AND FOSTERED an unnatural REBELLION in
IRELAND; and have drawn your MAJESTY to make War against your Parliament, as if
you intended, by CONQVEST, to establish an ABSOLVTE ILLIMITED I OWER over them.

And by YOUR POWER, and the countenance of your Presence, have SPOILED,
IMPRISONED, MVRDERED diverse of your People. And for their better assistance in
these wicked Designs, do seek to bring over the Rebels of Ireland to join with
them. WE HAVE, for the just and necessary Defense of the Protestant Religion,
of your Majesty's Person, of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the
Privilege and Power of Parliament; TAKEN UP ARMS, and appointed Robert Earl of
Essex to be Captain General of all the Forces by us raised; and to head and
conduct the same, against these REBELS and TRAITORS, and them to subdue and
bring to condign Punishment.

And do most humbly beseech your Majesty to withdraw your Royal Presence and
Countenance from these wicked Persons; and THAT YOUR MAJESTY WILL NOT MIX YOUR
OWN DANGER WITH THEIRS; but, in Peace and Safety, forthwith return to your
Parliament, and by their faithful Counsel and Advice, compose the present
Distempers and Confusions abounding in both your Kingdoms, and provide for the
Security and Honor of your Royal Posterity, and the prosperous Estate of all
your Subjects: And we do, in the presence of Almighty God, profess, That we
will receive your Majesty with all Honor, yield you all due Obedience and
Subjection, and faithfully endeavor to secure your Person and Estate from all
Danger; and to the uttermost of our Power, to procure and establish to your
Self, and to your People, all the Blessings of a glorious and happy Reign.

You see, Sir, the LORDS AND COMMONS TALKED LIKE CHRISTIANS; They were grieved
at the Miseries of the Kingdoms; They detested the Romish Idolatry: When they
sent their Army against the Enemies of the King and Kingdom, they supplicate
his Majesty not to mix his Danger with theirs, but to return in Peace to his
Parliament, and compose the Distempers of his Kingdoms, and provide for the
Security and Honor of his Posterity: They IN THE PRESENCE OF GOD PROFESS, that
they would receive him with all Honor, yield him all due Subjection, endeavor
to secure him from Danger, and make his Reign Glorious and Happy; WHICH WORDS
CERTAINLY ARE NOT THE WORDS OF TRAITORS. But all this would not do, for he
resolved to answer their Petitions in Blood, and proclaimed the Earl of Essex,
Rebel. Yet, to blind the Eyes of the Multitude, and disguise his pernicious and
cruel Intentions, under the semblance of Peace and Justice, he made (as you,
Doctor, have observed) diverse solemn Protestations, with fearful Imprecations
upon himself, and invocation of God's Holy Name, That he intended nothing but
the Peace and Welfare of his People, the maintenance of Religion, and the Laws
of the Kingdom; and for his own security only, to raise a Guard for his Person;
and that he did from his Soul abhor the thought of making War against the
Parliament, or to put the Kingdom into a Combustion: Nevertheless, his contrary
intentions were at that very instant manifested, by these ensuing Actions and
Proceedings, before the Parliament voted the raising of their Army.

He put a Garrison of Soldiers into Newcastle.

The Upon the 27th of September. 1642 he not only allowed, but required the
Papists of Lancashire to provide Arms for themselves, their Servants and
Tenants; and all without doubt for the Service of the Church of England.
Papists, in a peremptory manner, in the King's Name, demanded their Arms,
taken from them according to the Laws, to be again restored to them.

He caused the Mouth of the River Tine to be fortified, whereby the whole Trade
of Newcastle for Coals, was subject to be interrupted whenever he should
please.

A Ship laden with Cannon for Battery, Powder and Ammunition, was brought for
him into the River of Humber; which also brought several Commanders from
Foreign Parts: Also diverse other large Preparations of Warlike Provisions were
made beyond the Sea, and shortly expected; besides, great Numbers of Gentlemen,
Horses and Arms, were drawn from all parts of the Kingdom; and all the
Gentlemen of Yorkshire required to bring in their Horses for the King's Service.

Commissions for raising Horse were granted, and diverse Officers for his Army
were appointed.

Upon the 4th of July, the King rendezvouzed an Army of a considerable number
of Horse and Foot and Beverly; amongst whom there were diverse Papists, and
other Persons of desperate Fortune and Condition, ready to execute any
Violence, Rapine and Oppression.

He sent some Troops of Horse into Lincolnshire, to the great Terror of the
People: They began to take away Men's Horses by force, and to commit Acts of
Hostility.

These are sad Truths, Reverend Doctor; and the King having thus, contrary to
his solemn Protestation, begun the War; the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, held themselves bound in Conscience to raise Forces for the
preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom, and Protection of the People in their
Persons and Estates, according to Law; and for the Defense and Security of the
Parliament: and accordingly upon the 12th of July, 1642, and not before (as I
have already told you) they voted the raising an Army for these purposes.

Now in regard, as I understand, you were before your Dotage, a Presbyterian
Minister of Essex; I would gladly set your poor Judgment right in this great
Point, of as well the Necessity as Justice of the Parliament War; and in regard
that I find you prejudiced against Dr. Seaman and Mr. Calamy, I will not offer
their Opinion to you; but pray see what the learned and pious Mr. Daniel Rogers
of Wethersfield, Mr. Matthew Newcomen of Dedham, and above sixty eminent
Ministers of so many several Towns in Essex: left under their hands, in
relation to this Controversy between you and me.

We (say they) call the God of Heaven and Earth to witness upon our Souls, that
it was not hatred to any Party or Person, much less to the Person of OUR KING,
that first drew ^^s to engage with and for the PARLIAMENT; but clearly this,
some Years before the assembling of this Parliament, we evidently saw the
Affairs of Church and State in imminent and apparent hazard^ many and great
Alterations made in Doctrine, Innovations in Worship, the Power of Godliness
disgraced, true Religion undermined, the faithful and conscientious Professors
of it persecuted, even to Bonds, Flight and Imprisonment, POPERY CONNIVED AT,
COUNTENANCED, COURTED; besides many grievous Oppressions of the Subjects in
their Liberties and Properties. These things we saw and signed for, but had no
thoughts of inviting any to make Resistance, (tho against the abused Name and
Power of a misguided King, whom, we much pitied in his Miscarriages) until it
pleased God to bless us with A PARLIAMENT, THE ORDINARY MEANS WHICH HE HAS
APPOINTED IN THIS NATION FOR THE REDRESSING OF SUCH GROWING EVILS.

The Parliament meet, declare their Apprehensions of the Danger of CHURCH AND
STATE, apply themselves to all humble and submiss ways, by PETITIONS, See the
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom. December. 15. 1641.
REMONSTRANCES, etc. speak nothing but honorably of the King; lay the blame of
all Miscarriages upon Evil Counselors; require them to Trial: But God, for our
Sins and his, shuts up his Majesty's Heart against these Addresses: instead of
yielding up those whom the Parliament demands, he demands some of their
Members, seconds his Demand with a. Face of Violence: And HERE BEGAN THAT MOST
UNHAPPY BREACH: the Parliament upon this desire a Guard; the King apprehended
OR PRETENDED Terror, he leaves his Parliament upon it, and UNDER SHADOW OF A
GUARD for his Person, RAISES AN ARMY, sets up his STANDARD, etc. The Story is
too long and sad for us to relate; but hence arose that Fire, which since has
burnt almost to the very Foundation, and who knows when it will be quenched?

The Parliament seeing which way the Counsels of the King steered, apprehend a
necessity of raising Arms FOR THE DEFENSE OF THEMSELVES AND THE KINGDOM. --
When the War was first commenced, their Army carried a Petition in the one
hand, as well as a Sword in the other, in which the Lords and Commons do, IN
THE PRESENCE OF ALMIGHTY GOD, profess, That if his Majesty will forthwith
return to his Parliament, etc. they will receive him with all Honor, yield him
all due Subjection and Obedience, and faithfully endeavor to secure his Person
and Estate from all Danger, and do the utmost of their Power, to procure and
establish to himself and his People all the Blessings of a glorious and happy
Reign. WE DID THEN VERILY BELIEVE, AND YET DO, that these were the sincere and
cordial Intentions of the Lords and Commons; and although the King was so unhappy
as to reject that Petition, yet they persisted still in the same Loyalty of
Intentions and Affections toward him, as appears in their many Messages to
himself, and Declarations to the Kingdom.

Upon these Grounds we engaged in this CAUSE, being called to it by a lawful
Authority; The TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, BEING THE ORDINANCE OF GOD UNTO THIS
NATION, FOR THE PREVENTING OF TYRANNY, AND THE REGVLATING OF THE EXORBITANCIES
OF REGAL POWER; and being convinced in our Judgments both of the Equity and
Necessity of THE PARLIAMENT'S DEFENSIVE ARMS, etc.

WE APPEAL TO GOD the Searcher of all Hearts, to whom we must give an Account
of all our Ways, THAT THESE WERE THE GROUNDS OF OUR FIRST ENGAGEMENT.

Now, Sir, to look back to your Defense of the King; I find you frequently
glorying in his Majesty's oft-repeated Gracious Messages, Offers, Proposals and
Condescentions for Peace; and in relation to the Deportment of the Parliament,
you thus express your poor Judgment. I cannot but persuade my self, Page 17.
they were resolved to continue the War, and engross all into their own hands,
let what would become of the King: But yet that they might pacify the Minds of
a great number of the Nation, who groaned under the Miseries of the War, and
began to see too much of a private Spirit under public Pretenses; they consent
to a Treaty at Uxbridg; they did so, and you declare that two Heads were agreed
to be there debated, viz.

1. Of Religion and Church Government. 2. Of the Militia.
Now in reading the History of that Treaty, I find that a third great thing was
agreed to be also debated, viz. The business of Ireland; but that being a Point
which you care not to touch, I must not allow you to hide it.

To discourse a little about this Treaty; notwithstanding the King for his
Credit-sake, and to satisfy his own Party, weary of War, yielded to a Treaty; I
cannot persuade my self but he was resolved to continue the War; and if you
appear not a Man of resolved Prejudices, or else of profound and stupid
Ignorance, I do half think that I may bring you over to my Opinion in this
matter. For to let you see what disposed him to hearken to this Treaty, take
his own words in his Letter to the Queen in December 1644. I shall show thee
upon what Grounds I came to a Treaty, to the end thou may the better
understand and APPROVE of my Ways: Then know (as A CERTAIN TRVTH) that all,
EVEN MY PARTY, are strongly impatient for Peace; which obliged me so much the
more (at all occasions) to show my real Intentions to Peace. -- NO DANGER OF
DEATH SHALL MAKE ME DO ANY THING UNWORTHY OF THY LOVE.

At the very instant of this Treaty, which was had in February 1644, the King
used all imaginable means to bring not only FOREIGN FORCES, but the Irish
CUTTHROATS against the Parliament, to clear up this Point, and also to evince
how insincere he was in his pretended Intentions of Peace. I will briefly
present to your view his underhand Transactions, as well with Foreign Princes
as those Rebels: and in the first place, I shall mind you of some Passages
between Him and the Queen in relation to this and other Treaties.

In a Letter to her of January 9, 1644, he writes thus. The Scots Commissioners
have sent to me to send a Commission to their General Assembly, WHICH I AM
RESOLVED NOT TO DO; but to the end of making some use of this occasion, by
sending an honest Man to London, and that I may have the more time for the
making A HANDSOME NEGATIVE, I have demanded a Passport for Phil. Warwick, by
whom to return my Answer.

At another time in the same Month he tells her, that as for my my calling
those at London He had agreed to treat with them as a Parliament, the Queen
upbraided him for so doing, and he thus vindicates himself.
A PARLIAMENT, IF THERE, HAD BEEN BUT TWO OF MY OPINION. I had not done it, THE
CALLING DID NO WAYS ACKNOWLEDGE THEM TO BE A PARLIAMENT, upon which Condition
and Construction I did it, and accordingly it is registered in the Council-Books.

Nothing is more evident than that the King was steered by the Queen's Counsel
in the Management of this Uxbridg- Treaty, and that which you call the Church
of England [THE BISHOPS] was greatly her Care. By Letter in January 1644,
before the beginning of that Treaty, She instructs him not to abandon those who
have served him lest they for sake him in his need; that SHE hopes he will have
a care of her and HER RELIGION: That in her Majesty's Opinion, RELIGION SHOULD
BE THE LAST THING UPON WHICH HE SHOULD TREAT; for if he do agree upon
Strictness against the Catholics, it would discourage them to serve him; and
if afterward there should be no Peace, he could never expect Succors either
FROM IRELAND, or any other CATHOLIC PRINCE.

In another of her Letters we find her writing thus, Jan. 17, 1644. It comforts
me much to see the Treaty shall be at Uxbridg. -- I RECEIVED YESTERDAY LETTERS
FROM THE DUKE OF LORRAIN, WHO SENDS ME WORD, IF HIS SERVICE BE AGREEABLE TO
YOU, HE WILL BRING YOU 10000 MEN -- ABOVE ALL have a care not to ABANDON those
who have served you, AS WELL THE BISHOPS AS THE POOR CATHOLICS.

By the King's Letters to the Queen in February, when the Treaty at Vxbridg was
depending, he styles the Parliament UNREASONBLE, STUBBORN, PERFIDIOUS REBELS;
presses her to hasten all possible Assistance to him, particularly that of the
Duke of Lorrain. He tells her, that the limited days for treating are now
almost expired, without the least Agreement upon any one Article; wherefore I
have sent for enlargement of Days, THAT THE WHOLE TREATY MAY BE LAID OPEN TO
THE WORLD; and I ASSURE THEE THOU NEED NOT DOUBT THE ISSUE OF THIS TREATY;
for MY COMMISSIONERS ARE SO WELL CHOSEN, (tho I say it) that they will neither
be threatened nor disputed from the Grounds I have given them, which (upon my
word) IS ACCORDING TO THE LITTLE NOTE THOU SO WELL REMEMBERS. -- Be confident
that in making Peace I shall ever show my CONSTANCY IN ADHERING TO BISHOPS, AND
ALL OUR FRIENDS, and not forget to put a short Period to this perpetual
Parliament.

We find him in another Letter dated the 5th of March, expressing himself in
these words: I have thought of one means more to furnish thee with for my
Assistance, than hitherto thou have had; it is, that I GIVE THEE POWER TO
PROMISE IN MY NAME, THAT I will If this were so good a King, Why so much
Clamor against K. James the Second for designing the same thing?
take away all the Penal Laws against the Roman Catholics in England, as soon
as God shall enable me to do it.

Another Letter to her of the 20th of March, has this Expression, I find that
Thou much mistakes Me concerning Ireland; I DESIRE NOTHING MORE THAN A PEACE
there, and never forbad thy Commerce there.

In relation to Ireland, he wrote to the Marquess of Ormond to this effect,
Jan. 7.

THE REBELS HERE have agreed to TREAT, AND MOST ASSUREDLY ONE OF THE FIRST and
chief ARTICLES they will insist on will be, TO CONTINUE THE IRISH WAR, WHICH IS
A POINT NOT POPULAR FOR ME TO BREAK ON; of which you are to make a double use:
First, TO HASTEN WITH ALL POSSIBLE DILIGENCE THE PEACE THERE; the timely
conclusion of which, will take off that Inconvenience which otherwise I may be
subject to, by the refusal of that Article, upon any other Reason. Secondly, By
dexterous conveying to the Irish, the Danger there may be of their total and
perpetual EXCLUSION FROM THOSE FAVORS I INTEND THEM, in case THE REBELS here
elap up a Peace with me.

NOT DOUBTING OF A PEACE, I must again remember you, TO PRESS THE IRISH for
their speedy Assistance to me here, and their Friends in Scotland. -- I DESIRE
that THE IRISH would send as great a Body as they can, to land about
Cumberland, WHICH WILL PUT THOSE NORTHERN COUNTIES IN A BRAVE CONDITION.

Upon the 14th of January, he writes thus to the Queen; As for the Peace of
Ireland, to show thee the Care I have had of it, and the Fruits I hope to
receive from it, I have sent thee the last Dispatches I have sent concerning
it. -- FOR GOD'S SAKE LET NONE KNOW THE PARTICULARS OF MY DISPATCHES.

By another Letter, he commanded Ormond, To dispatch the Irish Peace out of
hand; and thereby promises that the PENAL LAWS against Roman Catholics SHALL
NOT BE PUT IN EXECUTION, the Peace being made; and that when the Irish give him
that Assistance which they have promised for the suppression of THIS REBELLION,
then he would consent to the Repeal of them by a Law: and concludes,
RECOMMENDING TO HIM AGAIN, THE SPEEDY DISPATCH OF THE PEACE OF IRELAND.

Another Letter to Ormond, upon the 27th of Feb. 1644, was, That HE THOUGHT
HIMSELF BOUND IN CONSCIENCE not to lose that Assistance which he might hope
from his IRISH SUBJECTS, for such Scruples as in a less pressing condition
might reasonably be stuck at by him, and therefore commanded him to conclude a
Peace with the Irish, WHATSOEVER IT COST, so that his Protestant Subjects there
might be secured, and his Regal Authority preserved. -- If the present taking
away of the Penal Laws against Papists will do it, (said he) I shall not think
it a hard Bargain, so that freely and vigorously they engage themselves in my
Assistance against MY REBELS of England and Scotland; FOR WHICH NO CONDITIONS
CAN BE TOO HARD, not being aginst Conscience or Honor.

By another Letter to the Marquess of Ormond, in the same Month, he writes
thus; Now again I cannot but mention the Necessity of hastening the Irish
Peace, for which I hope you are already furnished by me with Materials
sufficient. But in case (against all Expectation and Reason) PEACE CANNOT BE
HAD UPON THOSE TERMS, YOU MUST NOT BY ANY MEANS FALL TO A NEW RUPTURE with
them, but continue THE CESSATION.

He wrote to the Duke of Richmond, one of his Commissioners for the Vxbridg
Treaty; There was at this time high Division in London, between the
Presbyterians and Independents; therefore to ruin both, by somenti^^
Misunderstandings between them, the Independents are to be cajoled: A thing
worthy remembrance in all times.
TO REMEMBER TO CAJOLE WELL THE INDEPENDENTS AND THE SCOTS; Nay, he instructed
Secretary Nicholas to bribe the Commissioners for the Parliament, with the
promise of Security, Rewards, and Places.

Well, now upon the whole Matter, pray tell me ingenuously, good Doctor,
Whether did the King or the Parliament more sincerely aim at the desired Peace
in this Treaty? I am clearly of opinion, that he frustrated the Hopes of a
happy Composure at this time, for whatever you alledg, had he used the same
moderation here, and granted those things he offered to yield to afterward,
(as I may have occasion to show you hereafter) the unhappy War had then been
ended: But though he pretended to listen to Overtures of Peace, because his own
Party were weary of the War; yet he was found to use Tricks of Legerdemain; and
by this, and his other Treaties, aimed only at the getting some Advantage by
secret Treacheries and underhand Dealings.

I have told you, that one of the three main Heads to be treated upon, was
Ireland; That was to be anticipated and forestalled, by a Peace at any Rate to
be huddled up with the Irish Rebels, e're the Treaty could begin; that he might
pretend his Word and Honor past, against the popular Arguments which the
Parliament might urge upon him, for the continuance of that just War. The
English, during the Treaty, were called perfidious Rebels, the IRISH GOOD AND
CATHOLIC SUBJECTS. He contrived how to make handsome Negatives: For
fashion-sake he called the Parliament a PARLIAMENT, yet by a Jesuitical Slight,
he did not acknowledge, tho call them so. He pressed earnestly for Ten thousand
Lorrainers to be transported hither; and that a Body of the bloody Irish Rebels
might be landed in Cumberland, delighting himself, that they would put the
Northern Counties into A BRAVE CONDITION; for he well knew that they had
destroyed above One hundred and forty thousand Protestants in their own
Kingdom; and were therefore, without doubt, very fit Men to assist him in the
maintaining THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. He boasted of his choice of Commissioners
for the Treaty, and that they would stick close to the NOTE OF INSTRUCTIONS
which he and the Queen had concerted; and assured her that HE WOULD EVER SHOW
HIS CONSTANCY IN ADHERING TO BISHOPS AND PAPISTS. He empowered the Queen to
treat with the Irish, and to give assurance, that he would take away THE PENAL
LAWS against Papists in England. In fine; Nothing is more evident, than that he
used Treaties pretending Peace, to no other End, than to gain Advantages that
might enable him to carry on War. And methinks it should not offend you to hear
that Opinion, not only a Minister, but a Martyr for Mon^^^oy had of this King;
the famous Mr. Christopher Love, (...) lost his Head upon Tower Hill, (which I
am confident you w^^^ never do for any Cause, tho you live near it) preaching
before the Parliament Commissioners at this Vxbridg Treaty, expres^^^ himself
thus; It would search to the quick to find out WHETHER KING JAMES AND PRINCE
HENRY HIS SON CAME TO A TIMELY DEATH, YEA OR NO; Some Parliaments have been but
short-lived, when, there was but a muttering, that enquiry should be made of
their Deaths. It would search to the quick, to know WHETHER ROCHEL, and all THE
PROTESTANTS in it, were not betrayed into the hands of their Enemies, AND BY
WHOM. It would go to the quick to find out WHETHER THE IRISH REBELLION was not
plotted, promoted, countenanced and contrived in England, AND BY WHOM.

Now, I hope, Reverend Sir, that you will not have the face to deny, but Mr.
Love was a Conscientious and Pious. Divine; and I will finish this Head in
telling you, (though a little out of course) that the Earls of Northumberland,
Pembroke, Salisbury and Denbigh; with the Lord Wainman, Sir Henry Vane, Mr.
Pierepont, Mr. Holles, Mr. Prideaux, Mr. St. John, Mr. Whitlock and Mr. C^^w,
Commissioners for the Parliament, in the Treaty we have been talking of, were
(as well as you boast the King's Comnissioners to have been) Men of Honor and
Honesty, Men of Fortunes and Estates; Men of great Parts and Endowments, who
understood the Business they went about, and were very fond of healing the
Nations Breaches, and putting things into such a posture as might settle the
King upon his just Rights, and the People upon their ancient Privileges.

Well, Sir, for my own Comfort, if not for yours, I purpose to trouble my self
(at least at this present) with but one thing more in your Tract, You say, That
the Scots, notwithstanding all their Promises and Obligations, SELL THE KING TO
THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. It Is a Divine Truth, Men are not only ignorant because
they cannot, but because they will not know the Truth: And I cannot conceive
that you believe what you here assert; Therefore, that my Countrymen may be
undeceived, and our Brethren of Scotland vindicated, I will set this Matter in
its true Light: The King had fled to the Scottish Army at Newcastle, then in the
Parliament's Service and Pay; there Propositions for Peace were made unto him,
which he rejected. The War being happily ended, the Parliament were in arrear
to the Scots for their assistance in it, Four hundred thousand Pounds: It was
agreed, that half that Sum should be presently paid; upon receipt whereof, the
Scots were to deliver up (not the King, but) Berwick, Newcastle, and Carlisle
to the Parliament. It Is far from Truth, that this was the Price of the King,
for the Parliament freely granted to the Scots, that they might carry him (if
they pleased) to Edinburgh: But they refused it, affirming, that by his
Presence, in an unsettled Nation, new Commotions might arise; They rather
desired (which was also the King's desire) that he might be carried into the
Southern parts of England, and live in some of his Palaces near London, which
they thought more convenient for treating of a Peace: So that in all the whole
Debate, they seemed to contend, not who should have the King, but who should
not have him. Nevertheless, to cast a slander upon both Nations; for certainly
it is as wicked a thing to buy, as to sell such Merchandise; You, Sir, will have
it, that the Scots sold him, the English bought him; but WILFULNESS EVER WAS
THE GREATEST BLINDNESS.

Reverend Sir, I shall for the present discharge you and my self from further
trouble. You think, I suppose, that you make me a very merciful Offer, That if
I will repent, and do so no more, I may hope to live in Peace, and you will not
further lash me with any more such Scourges, as I have been but now tortured
with; but if I shall persist, and appear incorrigible, you have more Rods in
Piss, and will pay me off. You have much more to say in the behalf of King
Charles the First, ['tis well if you have, for I am sure it is very little that
you have hitherto said] and you assure me I shall have it; and resolve, That as
long as you can hold a Pen in your Hand, you will not drop his Cause. There Is
no Remedy then, but I must abide your Fury, for I resolve never to ask
Forgiveness, and promise to do so no more: But on the contrary, to write on, as
I have leisure, and you give me occasion, in the defense of the Laws and
Liberties of my Country. Upon which Subject I have much more to say, and if you
will not be quiet, you shall have it; I love the Cause too well to drop it, and
will wear my Steell Pen to the stumps in its defense. And,

Now seeing we are eternally to differ in this Point, I desire to settle two
things with you, for the more orderly Prosecution of this dreadful War.

1. That we (as Duellists agree the length of their Weapons) may resolve how
often to trouble the World with our Impertinencies; I think once, or if you
will have it so, twice (because there are TWO MADDING-DAYS) in a Year, may
suffice.

2. That after you have fairly answered this and my former Letter, by
falsifying (which as a Preliminary I shall expect from you) the many particular
Instances I have brought to show that your admired Prince was a Tyrant; or else
to prove that they are not Acts or Evidences of Tyranny, you would then (in the
further Prosecution of that Defense which you have undertaken, and indeed of
Criminating one of the greatest and best deserving Parliaments that even
England saw) lay aside your loose and general way of discoursing, and come to
Particulars; when you shall so proceed, and are failed of a clear Answer, then
and not till then, the day will be your own. For tho, throughout your whole
Discourse, which I have been examining, you Rebellize the Lords and Commons,
and fly in the Face of the Parliament, with the King's gracious MESSAGES,
SAYINGS, etc. Oth^^s may, upon better grounds, sum up the humble,
condescending, convincing PETITIONS, MESSAGES, DECLARATIONS, etc. of the
Parliament, and dash them all into your Face, than you can those Messages and
Sayings of the King into the Faces of all who declare that he was a proud
Nimrod, a hardened Pharaoh; in plain English, A MERCILESS TYRANT.

Lastly; To encourage you to further Conversation with me; the some Men are so
impudent as to say that it is not Day when the Sun it self does shire, you
shall see that I am not resolved against Conviction; but that being under the
Command of good Manners. I rest not satisfied in the Confession which I made in
the beginning of this Letter, of an Error committed in my former, in relation
to the Noble Lord Conway, sometime Secretary of State to King Charles the
First, but shall more fully do it in this place.

Being misguided by the Printer's Mistake in Rushworth's first Collections,
from whence I took it, I was led to say in my last Year's Letter, page 7. That
the Lord Conway said in Parliament that he never hated Popery; whereas his
words were, that he ever hared it: and I have now certain ground to say, that
those words were not only consonant to his Speech then made in Parliament, but
agreeable to the constant Tenor of his whole Life, even unto the last Period.
His Father and Mother lived and died pious Protestants; such was his Religious
Lady, and such are his Grandchildren at this day.

This Lord Conway was Knighted at the taking of Cadiz in Spain, in the time of
Queen Elizabeth; he was afterward for many Years Governor of the Brill in
Holland, where he and his Family lived as became zealous Protestants, and
greatly beloved and esteemed by the Protestant Magistrates and Ministers of
that Town.

He was greatly favored by the never to be forgotten MOST PIOUS PRINCE HENRY.

When the Brill and other Cautionary Towns were delivered to the Dutch; upon
his return into England, he was employed to Jersey to compose some Differences
there, which he performed to so much Satisfaction, that the good Protestants of
that Place always mentioned him with Honor.

He was then sent Ambassador to Germany in behalf of the King and Queen of
Bohemia, and was very acceptable to those UNHAPPILY DESERTED Protestant
Princes. Upon his return to England the Spanish-Match was warmly pressed;
against which he spoke with so much Reason and Courage, that the Duke of
Buckingham (who for particular ends, resolved to ruin that Project) introduced
him as a proper Instrument for that purpose, to be Principal Secretary of State.

In that Station he refused many great Gifts tendered to him by particular
Persons, and 10000 l. Sterling offered and pressed upon him by the Spanish
Ambassador.

In the beginning of King Charles I. Reign, at the opening of one of those
Parliaments, and according to the Custom then, the Holy Communion being to be
received by both Houses of Parliament, by the Contrivance of some LAUDEANS, the
SACRAMENT was offered to the Lords in Henry the Seventh's Chapel, NOT IN
BREAD, BUT IN WAFERS: This Lord Conway was one of the Lords who refused the
Wafers, and caused them to be taken away, and Bread to be brought.

He that would not make the necessary Advances to Rome, was to be neither
Secretary, nor Minister of State to King Charles I.
Not long after K. Charles I. sent for the Seals of the Secretary's Office from
him; which (as the Lord employed in that Message would often say) the Lord
Conway delivered with an admirable Generosity, becoming indeed one that in that
Ministry of State, had served the Public with extraordinary Ability and
Integrity; had performed many noble Offices to particular Persons, without
Injury to any, and left that Place and some others of great Profit, without one
Farthing advantage to the State of his Family.

When he was upon his Deathbed, a Lady of great Wit, who was turned Papist,
and was the Widow of a near Relation of his Lordship, very subtly and
earnestly pressed upon him concerning his Religion; whereupon he strengthened
himself, and made full Profession of his firm Stedfastness in the Reformed
Protestant Religion, caused the Servants to convey this Lady out of his House,
and commanded them not to suffer any of that Religion to come to him.

And now, Doctor, I assure you at parting, That as fast as you shall convince
me of any Error or Mistake, committed in my Scriblings about your Martyr; I
shall as openly and frankly retract it, as I have now done this, which relates
to my Lord Conway. Might I be made so happy as to find a suitable return from
you; and that you would give a free and impartial Liberty to the use of your
own Reason, I would yet hope, that we might mutually conclude, as I now do,

Your Friend in and for the Truth, Edmund Ludlow.
Amsterdam, Jan. 30, 1691/2.
FINIS.
A Table of some remarkable Things in this Book.
KIng Charles I. favoring Popery, and dispensing with the Laws, etc. Page 3
His Bishops cherished Popery, and discountenanced conformable Orthodox
Ministers. Page 3 Montague one of his Chaplains, endeavored to reconcile
England to Rome, made a Bishop. Page 4 The King's lending Ships to the French
to destroy the Protestants of Rochel. Page 4 Ship Money, Loan, Coat and
Conduct-Money required, and the Refusers imprisoned and impressed to serve at
Sea. Page 4 Archbishop Abbot suspended and confined, By Williams disgraced and
imprisoned. Page 5 Sir Randolph Crew Lord Chief Justice displas'd. Page 5
Tonnage and Poundage levied against Law. Page 5 Earl of Bristol confined. Page
6 Earl of Arundel imprisoned. Page 6 Duke of Buckingham protected against the
Parliament. Page 6 Members of Parliament imprisoned. Page 6 Sir John Elliot's
Death in the Tower. Page 7 The King's threatening Speeches in Parliament. Page 7
His Speech at the Meeting of the Parliament, Nov. 1640. Page 11 Bishops
obtruded upon Scotland against their Laws. Page 12 Laud framed a Common Prayer
for Scotland, and sent it to be approved by the Pope. Page 12 The Scots protest
against it. Page 13 King James I. took the Scottish Covenant in the Year 1580.
Page 13 The Scots renewed that Covenant in the Year 1638. Page 13, 14 The Scots
require to have the Liturgy abolished, and to have a National Synod. Page 14 A
Synod called and dissolved by the King; the Scots protest against the
Dissolution, and continue it. Page 14 The King resolves upon a War against
Scotland. Page 14 That War called Bellum Episcopale. Page 15 The Scots raise an
Army. Page 15 A Pacification concluded, the King soon after burns it by the
Hangman's hands. Page 15 Scottish Commissioners sent to the King, imprisoned.
Page 16 A Parliament called in April 1640, and dissolved. Page 16 Members
imprisoned. Page 17 Clergy and Bapists contribute to a second War against
Scotland. Page 17 Sir Nicholas Rainton, Sir Stephen Soame, and other eminent
Citizens. imprisoned for refusing a Loan. Page 17 The Scots possess themselves
of Newcastle and Durham. Page 17 The Lords at York petition for a Parliament.
Page 18 Cessation of Arms with the Scots. Page 18 Star Chamber and
High-Commission-Courts suppressed by Act of Parliament. Page 21 Poll-money
granted. Page 21 Dr. Leighton's Censure in the Star Chamber. Page 22 Mr.
Pryn's, Dr. Bastwick's and. Mr. Burton's Censures and horrid Oppressions by
Archbishop Laud. Page 24, 25 Those Sentences declared illegal in Parliament.
Page 27 Ship Money illegal. Page 27 Lord Keeper Finch impeached of High Treason
about Ship Money, and flies. Page 28 The many Exorbitances and Oppressions of
the Bishops. Page 28 Twelve of them impeached of Treason, and all remov^^ from
the Lords House. Page 29 The Earl of Strafford impeached and att^inted of
Treason. Page 30 Bills for Triennial Parliaments, and for continuing the
present Parliament, passed. Page 31 Conspiracy to bring the Army against the
Parliament discovered. Page 32 The King had a Million and half of Money in the
first Year of the Parliament 1640. Page 35 The Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom, Dec. 1641. Page 35 The Tumults and Riots in 1641. Page 37 An Account
of the occasion of those Tumults. Page 41 The King accuses the Lord Mandeville
and five Members of Treason. Page 37 He goes to the House of Commons with an
armed Force, and demands the five Members. Page 37 The Commons demand a Guard.
Page 38 The Case of the five Members discussed. Page 38 The King leaves
White Hall. Page 42 The Parliament petitions him at Theobalds to return. Page
42 They send a Declaration to him to Newmarket, praying his return, and the
putting the Militia into safe hands. Page 43 His Answer about the Militia. Page
46 His sending to the King of Denmark for Aid against the Parliament. Page 47
He invited the Scots against them. Page 47 The Queen buys Arms in Holland. Page
47 Names of the Peers recommended by the Parliament to be entrusted with the
Militia. Page 47 The Lords and Commons petition about the Militia. Page 48
Their Ordinance for ordering the Militia. Page 48 The Proceedings of the
Parliament with King Richard the Second. Page 49 The Lords and Commons petition
the King at York to return. Page 50 The King summons the Gentry to York, and
requires them to raise him a Guard. Page 50 They petition him to return to the
Parliament. Page 50 Petition of many thousand Freeholders of Yorkshire. Page 50
The King requires the Gentlemen, etc. of Yorkshire to attend him in Arms. Page
51 The Lords and Commons vote, that the King Intends to raise War, and that it
is a Breach of his Trust, and that such as assist him in that War are Traitors.
Page 52 They vote the raising an Army to be commanded by the Earl of Essex.
Page 52 Their Petition to the King to return. Page 52 The King's Speech at the
head of his Army. Page 54 The Petition of the Parliament sent by the Earl of
Essex. Page 56 The Preparations made by the King for War. Page 58 The Opinion
of above sixty Essex Ministers of the Parliament War. Page 59 The
Uxbridg-Treaty. Page 61 Heads of Letters between the King, Queen and Marquess
of Ormond, about the Uxbridg-Treaty, and for procuring a Peace with the Irish
Rebels to bring them against the Parliament. Page 63 The vulgar Error of the
Scots selling the King refuted. Page 67 A Vindication of the Lord Conway. Page
69

