A LETTER From on Board the YORK-FRIGAT Now with Admiral Herbert.
Dated from Cape-Cleare the Fourth of this instant May. Giving a true and large
Account of the great Fight between the English and the French, at Bantry-Bay
near Crouck-Haven in the West of Ireland.
I Having the opportunity, I would not omit giving you a true Narrative of our
Fight with the French. The 29th. of April, we being cruising at Kingsale at
nine at night, our Scouts made the signal of the Enemy, about 13 Sail; but the
night coming on, and we not knowing which way they lay, we kept the Wind all
night. On the 30th. in the Morning, our Scouts made the Signal, as before(...)
8 in the morning we bore up Westward; our Scouts chasing that way, at three in
the afternoon one of our Scouts brought a small Bastabes Vessel into our Fleet,
come from Virginia, who gave us an account, That he had been with the French
Fleet the night before of the Cape, consisting of 30 Sail small and great. Upon
which Advice, we gave chase at 6, and we came in sight of Ten Sail going head
of Meinhead, but we doubting the main Body had got into Crouck haven, we
brought to, and stood off all the Night. May the 1st. we finding they had not
gone in there, we bare away to Loeward of the Meinhead, where we saw some of
them at Anchor in the Bantry; at 7 we found them to be 27 Sail of great Ships,
and we but 18; the Wind at E. N. E. a moderate Gale. Upon sight of us, they got
under Sail; and instead of coming out before the Wind to us, they gave us the
trouble to run in a great way to them, which we could not do before 12 at Noon:
At which time Captain Ashei leading the Van of our Fleet, came up within Shot;
upon whom they fired some Guns, but he immediately answered with what he could,
and they all answered with what they could, being to the Windward, and would
not come near. The most of them firing at the Arse; but at last most of our
Ships got up, but could not draw in a line as we intended, by reason of the
narrowness of the place. And thus we continued till six at night; we thinking
to draw them out to fire, though notwithstanding they had ninety per Cent, the
advantage, they tackt, and stood into the Bay. I do assure, if they had but had
Courage, as they had Number and Strength, they might have spoiled most of us;
but I do protest, I never saw so much Cowardice by Men. I do believe without
all hands, put their hands to the Plough, they will hardly be put out of
Ireland. I suppose we have not lost aboveOne hundred Men killed in the Fleet;
our rigging suffered the most. In fine, the Admiral did what could be expected.
I will omit, till please God we meet; we are now about 14 Leagues from
Cape-Clear at this time; my Service to all my Friends, etc. From

York-Frigat, May 4 1689. Yours C. FEVD.


