A LETTER from a True Dutchman to his Friend; Exhibiting the Reasons why the
Confederates ought to refuse the Peace, which is now offered to them by France.
Done out of French.
SIR,
IT was about this time Twelvemonth that I wrote concerning the Peace which the
French King did then offer to the Allies. You know the Reasons which I then
brought to demonstrate the danger of accepting the same, viz. That the Design
of that Crown was first to break the Union amongst the Princes, who had Leagued
themselves against France for their own Preservation; and then to accomplish
the entire ruin of all the States in Christendom, And now that at present the
French King insists more than ever upon demanding a Peace, which he could never
obtain since the present War; which I hope never shall, upon any other
Conditions, than those of the Treaties of Munster, and the Pyrenees. I find my
self obliged to entertain you again with this Subject, and to discover the
Fatal Snare which the French King lays for us.

I shall not trouble you, Sir, with the Reasons that I formerly hinted, for I
have others of greater Weight to Communicate, which will effectually prove that
the Dishonorable Peace which the French King does now offer, is not a Real
Peace, and that if the same be accepted, it will certainly issue in the Ruin
of this State, the Emperor, Princes of the Empire, and other Sovereigns; and
in a word, will Terminate in the Desolation of Christendom and the Slavery of
all Europe.

To set this Truth in its full Light, we must consider in the first place, what
it is that the French King proposed to himself by Attacking his Neighbors
unjustly, and the pernicious Method which he made use of for that end. And in
the next place, Let us consider the Motives which prevailed with the
Confederates, to enter into such a strick, Alliance against France: And then
let us Examine whether those Motives have not the same Reason now which they had
then, both as to the one and the other, that is to say, whether the French King
has changed his Conduct and Designs? And whether the Allies have as yet put
him out of a Condition to disturb the Repose of Europe, or Re-attempt the
breach of Treaties.

As to the first, It is evident that the Ultimate end of all the French Designs
is the Universal Monarchy to which their boundless Ambition has made them
aspire now for some time: This needs no proof, the matter speaks of it self,
and every body is fully convinced of it; Only we shall observe here, that this
great Project was formed during the Ministry of Cardinal Richlieu, and we shall
now take a short view of all the Infamous Methods which have been made use of
by the French, to accomplish their design from that time to this very day.

It was then that famous Minister who (while he applied himself to weaken the
House of Austria, by the bloody Wars which he industriously fomented in the
Empire) did lay the Foundation of this Important Design, by the taking of
Rochelle and other places then Possessed by the Protestants. After the Death of
this Cardinal, Mazarin his Successor carried on the Design, by depriving the
People of their Liberty, the Parliament of their Rights and Privileges, and
the Nobility and Gentry of their Credit and Authority. The French King by this
means being raised above the Law, he became Absolute Master of the Lives and
Estates of all his Subjects, so that without any Obstacle he imposed what Taxes
he pleased upon them, and rendered himself Master of vast Sums, which he has
employed since in the Execution of his Ambitious Designs.

All Letts and Impediments being removed out of the way at Home, his business
was not to surmount the Difficulties from abroad, and to compass his design, he
found it necessary to divide those Potentates whom he intended to subdue, and
to bring some of them over to his side, while he should swallow up others: Part
of this he did effectuate by his Leu^s d'ors, and the rest he brought about by
his Unfaithfulness, Cunning and Treachery; but let us particularly take a view
of the Operation, which these different Methods have had since the Coronation
of Charles II. King of England. That Prince was hardly well seated on his
Throne, when France prevailed with him to make War against Holland, with a
design not only to weaken the Dutch, but also the English. This War was
followed by that betwixt the French and Spainard, the Former taking away many
places from the Latter in the Netherlands, under the unjust pretense of the
Queen of Frances Right of Succession.

Those Troubles were no sooner appeased by the Mediation of other Potentates,
and especially that of the States General; when the French Kings Ambition
raised up new ones, by the Rupture of the Treaty of Aix La Chapelle, and the
War of 1672. It was chiefly upon the Dutch that France had an evil Eye; looking
upon them as the greatest Obstacle of their unjust designs, and having Sworn
their Ruin: The French K. was so dexterous to bring over the K. England and
the Bishop of Munster to his Party, after he had Corrupted by his Gold, those
who were in chief trust in Holland, and found powerful Factions against the
Family of Orange. The Hollanders were at that time secure; reposing themselves
upon the Public Faith of the Treaty, and were wholly taken up with their
Commerce, when on a sudden those Three Powers did fall in upon them* and
without the particular Assistance of Heaven they had been infallibly ruined.
But seeing you know what were the Consequences of that dangerous War; it is
needless to repeat them: only I shall observe that it was the Cause of the
Prince of Oranges being Restored to the Dignity of his Ancestors against the
mind of the French King, who would have had him brought under, and that this
happy Restoration was also the safety of the State. And here I cannot omit to
make you sensible of the great mistake which the Dutch made, they knew the ill
design which France had upon them, and had just smarted under the Effects of
it, they were not ignorant of the French Kings Unfaithfulness, his Tricks, and
his Cabals. Yet, nevertheless though they were but just delivered from the Brink
of Ruin, by the Valor and Safe Conduct of the Prince; they were cheated with
false appearances, and clapped up a Peace against the Mind of their Illustrious
Stadholder, who very well foresaw the Consequences of it, and that also at such
a time when the French had abandoned all the places which they had taken from
them, and when they found themselves supported by their Allies, and accordingly
they found cause to Repent, for scarcely was that unhappy Peace concluded when
it was violated by France, who immediately fell' upon the Spanish Netherlands,
and the Palatinat, with all manner of Injustice, Violence, Depredations,
Military Executions, by Fire and all sorts of Crueltys: Then they Established
Sovereign Chambers, or Courts at Metz, whereby the Prince and other Members of
the Empire were Summond and Despoiled of their Territories and Sovereignty,
under the Pretext of Dependancies had Re-unions: Complaints hereof were made
but to no purpose, and then Conferences were held to Regulate Differences, to
which Issued in Converting the Peace into a 20 Tears Truce. Which tho it left
the French in Possession of Strasburg and many other places which they had made
themselves Master of in time of profound Peace: Yet it did not stop the Career
of their Violence and Usurpations; but on the contrary, it: hightned them,
until, in fine, they entirely ruined their own Protestants, and by the secret
League which the French King made with King James, put himself in a Condition
to bring England under his Yoke; and Immerse the United Provinces in
Irrecoverable Ruin. But the Prince of Orange was the Glorious Instrument whom
God made use of on this occasion to Ward off: the fatal blow, and it is to his
Prudence and Valor that the English owe their Liberty, and his Elevation to
the British Throne, did as effectually save Holland then, as his Restoration
to the Office of Stadholder did deliver that Republic before.

After this deduction of the infamous Method by which the French King subjected
the Princes and States of Europe; it is to conceive the Reasons which obliged
those Powers to unite themselves in such a great and mighty League against that
Crown. It was not merely for their own Defense, and to prevent their being
forthwith enslaved; nor was it to lay down Arms as soon as France should
propose a Peace and promise to observe the same, since Experience may teach
them that she makes no scruple of breaking her Word and Oath; but the Cause of
their League was to restore Europe to its former Tranquillity, by reducing
France to such a Condition, as to render her incapable of troubling their Quiet
any more. Otherwise what profit should they have by this Alliance. What fruit
should they reap of all the Care they have taken, all the trouble which they
have been at, and the vast Treasures which they have expended? Can Persons of
the lowest degree of Sense be guilty of such a piece of Conduct; and don't we
know that to begin a Work and not bring it to Perfection, is the way to lose
all our Labor? It is certain then that the Allies proposed to themselves the
continuance of the War until such time as France should give solid Proof of her
Conversion, by a faithful Restitution of all that she has usurped since the
Peace of Munster, and the Treaty of the Pyrenees, or be compelled thereunto by
an indispensible Necessity. Those were the true Motives which prevailed with
the Allies to unite for their own Preservation: Then let us see whether the
Reasons of them be ceased, and if the Peace now offered by France can restore
the Peace of Europe, and secure it against the horrible Attempts of that
Ambitious Crown:

For as to what concerns the French King's Designs, We need do no more but
examine his Conduct, and we shall quickly find that they are still the same;
The Masterpiece of his Politics is to re-establish his Affairs by Treaties of
Peace, which he can break when he pleases. Did he not impudently violate that
of Aix la Chappelle, that of Nimeguen, and the Twenty Years Truce, and who can
be Guarantee, that he will not also break that which he now offers, if we be so
imprudent as to accept it; Can we trust his Word? Can we rely upon his Oath or
his Fidelity? Does not Experience convince us, that he avowedly breaks the most
sacred Ties, that he mocks at all Laws Humane and Divine, and that he despises
Religion, and prophanes our Altars? Can Christian Princes put Confidence in a
Crown which has made an Alliance with the Turk, solicited the Sworn Enemy of
Christendom, to break the Truce with the Emperor; and has since furnished the
Infidels with Men and Money to carry on their unjust Enterprises?

Let us once, at least, learn to be wise at our own Cost. We found that the
Peace of Nimeguen set Europe upon the brink of Destruction, unto which she must
have undoubtedly fallen, had not Heaven it self prevented it. In effect, had it
not been for the Wonderful Revolution in England, that Kingdom had been ere now
at the Devotion of France, and Holland lost beyond recovery; and seeing it was
so, I leave it to those who have nothing left them but the very shadow of
Reason to judge what would have been the Destiny of the other Princes and
States of Europe; and if France concluded the Peace at Nimeguen, that she might
the more assuredly effectual the Destruction of all the Potentates of Europe.
It is certain, that her design in offering Peace now, is only to accomplish it
with the more Facility. This is evident from her Maxims and Conduct. We cannot
say that she has sincerely resolved to change them, seeing she mentions
nothing of Restitution, at least, of that which she is obliged to make, but
designs to maintain her self in a Condition to renew her Infractions when she
pleases, or rather when she has made up the great Expense of her Men and Money,
which her prodigious Efforts have engaged her in.

But suppose that France means honestly at this time, must we grant Peace as
soon as she demands it; and must she not give Satisfaction to those Powers upon
whom she has dared to commit the most cruel and disgraceful Outrages? She has
treated them all with an unsupportable Pride. The Pope has felt the Effects of
it as well as others, his quality of Head of the Church not being sufficient to
guard him against the Insults of France: The Emperor and K. of Spain, the
Princes and States of the Empire and Italy, as well as England and Holland have
received Affronts from France which cannot be forgotten. Not to insist on it,
that in Justice she ought to pay all the Charges of that Vexatious War; in
which she has engaged the Confederates. Has she not treated Sovereignty it
self, with the utmost disdain: what Insolence can be named that is not to be
found in the Devices and Inscriptions which are to be seen at Paris, and what
Indignity is there with which she has not Treated, the Dutch in the
Inscription upon the Gate of St. Denis. Those People who are the Principal
object or the hatred and malice of France are particulary concerned to prevent
the Peace, being obliged to oppose it for their own safety, seeing they must
unavoidably be the first who fall under the French Tyranny, after the
dissolution of the Confederacy by this Peace, and then what will become of
their Religion, Liberty and Trade, sh'ant they be brought under an Ignominious
Slavery deprived of the Liberty of their Consciences, and Subjected to a
Tyranny, beyond all that ever was heard of; and can only be represented by that
which the French Protestants and New Converts did, and do groan under, being
Slavery, Barbarous, that it has been condemned by a Pope, as it is at this day
by all men of honesty, either Papists or Protestants.

It is evident by these reasons which I have alleged, that the French King
has neither changed his design nor conduct, and that the Peace which he offers
to the Allies, is only to deceive them after he has divided them, and to
destroy them one after another; but whether he be in Condition to do this, or
whether the Allies have rendered him incapable of renewing his Infractions, is
that which we are now to Examine, to compare then the French King now with what
he was, when he broke the Treatys of Aix la Chapelle and Nimeguen: He is much
Stronger in one respect, and weaker in another. He is much stronger because he
has extended his Conquests since, and rendered himself Master of many strong
places, both in Flanders and Germany, but he is much weaker because of the
Extreme Misery which reigns throughout his Kingdom, and the Consumption of his
Treasures. If the Allies accept the Peace, they have hitherto done nothing, and
France will remain more Powerful than ever. If on the Contrary they continue
the War, they will have the satisfaction to see France fall under its own
weight. We must then conclude, that in respect of the first, the French King
instead of being humbled, will reap great Advantage, and that in respect of the
Second, he is in such Circumstances that we may justly, hope to see him fall of
a sudden. He knows this well enough, and being sensible that he will gain all
by a Peace, and on the contrary lose all by the Continuation of the War: We
must not wonder if he tuake such pressing Instances to obtain the Former, and
Ward off the Latter. This is the Motive which obliges him to make such
Prodigious Efforts to draw the Allies into Peace, which will be as prejudicial
to them as advantageous to him. But what Method shall we take, say some, to
oppose the French Torrent. That Crown has every day new advantages, and we the
misfortune of considerable losses, if that continue, France will still be in a
condition to prescribe Laws to us, and we shall at last be constrained to
receive Peace on much harder terms than those which are now offered. This way
of Reasoning is a mere Illusion. Affairs are not so desperate, nor is it so
difficult to put a stop to the Progress of France. That Crown has carried some
Places of strength, and occasioned us some Losses at Sea this year, it is true;
but the French King has exhausted himself for that end, and he is no more in a
Condition to continue the War with that same Vigor. Whereas on the contrary
the Allies, who have almost made no Efforts, are still possessed of Ressources,
whereof France has none. So that that there wants nothing but a good will to
obtain what we desire, and if every one do their part, we shall see such Armies
on foot next year, as will force our great Enemy to abandon his prize. In fine,
there are only two things to choose, viz. Slavery or Liberty, if we make Peace,
we cannot escape falling into the one, and if we continue the War with Vigor,
we shall infallibly preserve the other.

Shall we who are Dutchmen, lose by a Cowardly Imprudence that dear Liberty
which our Fathers purchased by shedding their Blood with so much Generosity,
which the Princes of Orange procured us by an admirable Valor; and which the
King of Great Britain, the worthy Representative of that Illustrious Family,
Defends still, by exposing his Sacred Person to the greatest of Dangers. It is
by his wise Conduct and singular Courage that we have been many times delivered
from the brink of Destruction; Let Us not then be so void of Sense as to put our
selves again in danger of falling into it without hopes of Retrieve. Let Us Back
his Majesty*s good Intentions, who always gave us wise Counsels. Let Us
Generously employ our Estates, our Persons, and our Lives for the preservation
of our Religion, our Liberty, our Wives and our Children. We have no occasion
to doubt of good Success, provided that we acquit our selves as we ought. Our
Cause is Just. and that of our Enemy every way Impious. Soon or Late, Heaven
will humble his Pride, and we shall enjoy the advantage and Sat^^^action of
having, by God's assistance, defended that which is most dear, and which we
should never abandon but with our Lives.

These Sir, are the Reasons which I had to Communicate to make it evident that
a Peace must needs be Fatal to us, I may perhaps enlarge upon them when
occasion offers, and also furnish you with new ones. In the mean time I am,

SIR,


