A LETTER From no far COUNTRY, BEING A Judgment upon the present posture of
Affairs in ENGLAND, etc.

WRITTEN TO, And made public at the request of a Worthy Person elected to
serve in the approaching PARLIAMENT.

As worth the serious consideration of his Fellow Members.

Printed in the Year, 1660.

A LETTER From no far COUNTRY,
SIR,
I thank you for your news and the news-books you sent me, which neither of
them by any art of mine are to be reconciled with themselves, for you tell me
while a Commonwealth seems to be declared for, Common-wealths-men are as it
were kicked out of all employment, civil or military. Much has been said
heretofore of a threefold cord, but I like not your Statesmen, that work like
Ropers, nor see, how a slippery trick should be the cause of a steady
Government. But however your Commonwealths-men may do, by your news, their
principles by your books, I mean the Votes, and Acts of Parliament, will shift
well enough for themselves. It is true that the whip and the bell, the scourges
of the RUMP, with the sound of a lash, so fatal unto themselves, have
influenced this Nation in such manner, that the genius, as some, or the spirit,
as others call it, of the same people, who in time of the Court would rather
have chosen a Tapster then a Courtier, now under the name of a Commonwealth,
but in the dregs of confusion, would rather elect a ballad-singer then a
Commonwealth-man; Nevertheless, while the next Parliament is summoned, as it
were in the name of the people, and without regal authority, while the full
power and free choice of the Government to succeed is wholly devolved upon the
Deputies of the people, the present Acts and Votes run in style, and every way
else unto a Commonwealth, nay pitch and settle, (to the best of my
understanding) upon no other principles or foundations, then such, whence no
other superstructures or frame of Government, (without violence) can arise but
that of an equal Commonwealth or perfect democracy, for what clearer testimony
of this can be afforded by Art or nature then is expressed in the present act
for the Militia? By this Act you have the Earl of Northumberland, where he
weighes most, joined with John Hudson Esquire. and some thirty more of the Commons
of that County, the like respectively for some forty more Earls, Viscounts and
Barons, holding fat less proportion unto the Commons with whom they are
indifferently joined, without any advantage in Vote or otherwise. Nor, should a
man add the whole Peerage of this Nation to the whole Comminalty, were it to be
doubted but they would hold yet less: Sir, all the rest is but superstructure,
how it is at the root (though perhaps unseen) is unavoydably felt. The sword is
in the people, and not (without moving propriety) to be wrenched out of their
hands. Whereas the people were anciently arraied by the Nobility, the Nobility
(you see) are now arraied by the people; whereas a King could not anciently be
brought in but by the Lords, now the King (you will confess) cannot be brought
in but by the Commons. Let them come with you to the next Parliament that may,
let them go whether they can; if Government be not to be preserved by any other
means then the same by which it was acquired, the King can no more be
sustained, as heretofore by the Lords, but must hereafter (whatover in
alteration of the form it may cost) be sustained by the Commons.

Sir I beseech you, was this our old Government? or if (through time as well
the innovator as devourer of things) it be of it self become a new one, must it
be still (as in the reigns of learned predecessors) an Vtopia or Chymera?
There is much daring of Larks, but Sir I am upon good grounds, I go (you see)
upon an act of Parliament let them answer to this. Are foundations in England
altered or not altered? for such as the Government is in the root or
foundation, such of necessity must it be in the branch or superstructure. If
the sword in the hand of the Lords made an Aristocracy, then the sword in the
hands of the Commons must make a Democracy, or there will be more windfals, for
where foundations come to be altered or stand one way, and superstructures are
left hanging another way, it can tend to nothing but ruin. Hence that which
has fallen, hence that (if not prevented) which is falling upon this Nation.
And what prevention: what remedy! If the Militia be not in the Commons, what
means this Act? if the Militia be in the Commons what power have the Lords? if
the Lords have no power where is the old Government? if the old Government be
gone, what remains but coufusion or to introduce a new one?

To remove unto a new house, though from a worse unto a better, is one of the
most troublesome, one of the impatient affairs, a business in which, how
necessary soever, the family to be well ordered must be as it were totally
disordered. The case of a people necessitated unto change of government is of
like nature. And as the genius or humor of a family may be one thing in it
self, and upon this occasion seem another, so the humor or genius of a people,
be it that they were never so weary or impatient of the incurable
inconveniences of their last house or Government, yet upon question of removal
unto a new one, they conceive a kind of abhorrency, they bemoan themselves as
it were of exile from their native soil. Thus it ever was, thus it will ever be
in like revolutions, wherein to set much by the Genious of a people, is to
comply with them unto their own destruction. Leave them in a form under which
they know whom to quarrel with, or what to quarrel for, and this sickly
genious, this quarrelsome humor of theirs is incurable, but bring them under a
form in which they can never find whom to quarrel with, nor what to quarrel
for, (which or none is the proper work) and this sickly genius, this
quarrelsome humor of theirs is perfectly cured. There is no looking back for a
people advanced by so apparent steps, by so many years travail upon such a
journey as the people of England now are; to think by a calm of popular
impatience to be at home again, is as if a man near the Indies,should think to
be in England again by a turn upon the toe. The foundation of the old
government is sunk, it is fallen it is fallen, when an house is fallen it is
not grief, not rage, not any obstinacy in the owner can make him live there as
he did, it must be new built.

Nor is newness of Government alone (in which case our felicity were certain)
sufficient to make it secure or lasting, without such prudence in formation of
the same, as may exactly shape and sit it unto the subject matter. To rise
otherwise (as has been abundantly seen and felt) unto the greatest height, is
but to fall lowest. With such as are in power and under a necessity to
introduce a new form, there is no mean between the greatest security and the
greatest danger, the highest glory, and the basest infamy.

This by pollititians has been pronounced universally, but now in England is
more holding then elsewhere it has ever been, for whereas other governments
which have suffered like changes, for example that of Rome anciently, and that
of la^er times in Holland, were such from the very beginning, as to become more
perfect Commonwealths, needed but to remove or change their topstones, as a
King into Consuls, or a Prince for a Stateholder, in which case an oath of
abjuration was sufficient: the ancient Government of England being ruined in
the very foundation, that is in the Aristocracy, requires a renovation or
reordering of the whole superstructures, in which an oath of abjuration can
come but to little, for that whether the King be restored or not restored it is
equally necessary the building be such as may stand; and that the building of a
Government now in England be such as may stand, engages unto the greatest
prudence in hitting, or the vastest danger in missing. The greatest prudence in
hitting, because not a topstone, or some part is to be altered, but the whole
frame to be renewed: the vastest danger in missing because to work otherwise is
to work against the only foundation which is now the whole people, and for the
interest of someparty.

The parties now in England are three, the Royalist, the Presbiterian, and the
Sectary. Nor appears it by what the Sectary has done, the Presbiterian is
doing, or the Royalist prepares to do, that there is any thought amongst them
of union or of a Government, but of tyrannizing one over another. If the King
therefore be restored by some one of these, it amounts, (if unto any Government
at all) unto one, as new as any, and cantend neither unto the safety of the
King, nor of the people, but must introduce, a Royal, a Presbiterian, or a
Sectarian Oligarchy: whereof, which ever reigns must keep down the other two,
by unnatural force, in the head of which the King must be perpetually exposed,
and if any other then the King be advanced unto the head of any one of these
parties it must be with the greatest scandal, and tend but unto the worse
effect, the vaster discontent, disunion and danger of the people.

The Salus Populi, the safety of the people, if ever they attain to it, must
consist in such a form of Government, as may apparently and effectually take
in and hold them and all parties of them united.

To attain unto such a form in England, (the Aristocracy being irreparably
broken) there is no other way whatsoever but by introduction of a well ordered
Democracy, to which end, the game would easily play it self in any hand, but
for the parties that are still snatching the cards one out of another.

That the Aristocracy is broken the act cited makes not plain confession, but
proof. That it is not to be repaired, as some meditate, by the resumption of
such estates, as since the later war have been demolished, is plain in that the
war began by the sword in the hand of the people, and ended accordingly; nor,
as others, by the recruting of the decayed Nobility with some of the richest of
the Gentry, in that, all such as hold above two thousand pound a year in this
Nation, are not above three hundred persons, nor, all that which is holden by
these three hundred persons, above one tenth of the whole territory. The other
nine parts, and so by consequence the whole, being holden by the Democracy, the
Government able to hold the whole people united, can be no other then an equal
Commonwealth.

In Democracy or in an equal Commonwealth, a Nobility or a Gentry usurping the
leading, never hold it, and not usurping the leading, never lose it. The reason
whereof, throughout ancient experience is not clearer, then at this present
amongst us, where no man can imagine, but the Lords in a distinct house, must
follow the Commons, and not in a distinct house, no^ otherwise preferred then
by election of the people must lead them, to give any peculiar privileges,
under the name of well affected or the like, unto some of the Lords in the
Senate, were to allow the like claim unto some of the Commons in the popular
assembly, either of which, infects the Commonwealth with inequality, and a
Commonwealth infected with inequality is so apt to break out into war or
discord, that it never failed of this effect, where the people have not been
the sole donors of all Magistracies and honors by their votes or elections.
Certainly it must be confessed, that elections regularly and freely made, were
as easy and efficatious, as confusedly and partially, and elections regularly
and freely made, would amount unto an equal Commonwealth. But be it as it
will, let the annimosities now broken loose, elect into the Parliament, elect
into the Militia, of the most averse unto Democracy, so much the better, it
reduces the whole controversy unto a point; for here it lies, If they can so
patch up the Aristocracy, that is, the Lords house as to make it sustain the
ancient weight, the old Government is recovered, and they have confuted the
Commonwealths-men; but, let them fail in this one, whatever else they hit, the
old Government is irrecoverable, and they have confuted themselves, in which
case apparently, there must be a new form.

For the introduction of a new form, it is not sufficient that Acts or
Declarations be exclusive of the old, unless they be positive of some new one
thet is practicable, there being no certain way of barring any one form, though
such an one as cannot stand, but by introduction of another, and such an one as
can stand. If it have been said that a Commonwealth is a Government without a
King or Lords, it implies two absurdities; first, that our ancient Government
under a King, well balanced by his Lords, the assertors and vindicators of
ancient Liberty, was no Commonwealth, and secondly, that our later Governments
consisting of some two or three hundred of the Commons sitting as long, and
doing whatsoever they pleased was a Commonwealth, whereas in truth the former
Government was much more a Commonwealth (though an unequal one) then the
latter. From these two absurdities have arisen two like effects, one the
mistaken genius of the people, which under the name of a Monarchy, drives at a
Commonwealth; the other the destruction of that form, which under the name of
a Commonwealth, being no form of a Commonwealth, nor indeed of a Government,
durst take upon it self such weight, as now in England is in no wise to be
supported but by the best form of Government even the full and perfect form of
an equal Commonwealth.

To the introducing of the full and perfect form of an equal Commonwealth in
England, there goes no more, but, without other qualifications then such as
have been anciently in use, to call a free Parliament in the form of an equal
Commonwealth. For, (Formis dat esse, dat operari) the form gives the being and
the natural or necessary operation or working to every thing.

To the calling of a free Parliament in form of an equal Commonwealth, there
goes no more of charge, or trouble, then, that the territory, (to the end the
Commonwealth may find no rubs in her bowling or rotation) be first more
equally divided.

The territory once equally divided, and the people in every division, electing
annually, equally and freely, two assemblies, or (more particularly) into each
house of Parliament one third part of the Members for three years to act there,
(as they must whether they will or no) according to the nature of their form,
they by this means perpetuate, not one assembly in the same men, the certain
end whereof is, dividing and subdividing, till it come to nothing, but, two
assemblies, changeable in the persons, and duly qualified for the whole matter
of Government, as not consisting of any party, but of the wisdom and interest
of the whole Nation, and cast not themselves upon trust in men, nor upon the
faction incident to a single assembly, but, upon the strongest security in
nature, even that whence the operation of each creature proceeds, and which the
operation of no creature can exceed, I mean, of form, of such form as
transformeth the genius of a people, and rightly ordered, is that only which
in a popular State can, and of necessity must hold all parties united.

It must be confessed how unseasonably soever, that Common-wealths-men, such I
mean as are principled, cannot be with the forwardest, where it is arbitrary,
to advise that in such a form as this, there (...) be any Prince or single
person: nevertheless it neither has been nor can be denied by them, but a like
form may ( regno laconico or veneto) admit of a King with royal dignity, and
revenue: Which kind of reign (like that of Evander in Livy, magis authoritate
quam imperio) is that which the ancients (particularly Aristotle) call Heroic,
and oppose to the Eastern, which they call barbarous. And indeed if you observe
the praises and pleadings that are now in men's mouths for our old Government,
they run all upon this that the power of the Kings in that was no more. All
which practice and pleadings are therefore the Stronger arguments against the
old Government, in that such being the intention of it, the form was not
sufficient to secure that intention, witness the many bloody wars made formerly
by the Nobility, and of later times by the Commons, for nothing else but to
hold Kings to the true intention of that form; nor is this (were there no
other) less then good and sufficient reason, to change that form which never
made good the true intention of the Government, for such a Government, as must
at all points secure unto us for the future the true and full intention of that
form: And to hold the King in fruition of his royal dignity and revenue, from
invading the rights and liberties of the people.

Of the royal dignity there is nothing imbezeld; and for the revenue. Putting
the case that the public debts amount to three Millions, if the excise and
custom amount annually to one, this with the Regalia yet remaining, might in a
matter of twelve years pay off the public debts, maintaining the Court in due
splendour, and raise a royal revenue in new lands. Whereas resumption of the
old, they being for the greater part in the hands of Soldiers, and in
themselves but small, would be obstructive and not effectual.

It is not insinuation but an apparent truth, that the King thus restored would
have these not conveniences, but felicities. He would have the whole honor of
the Commonwealth without any of the burden. He would bring in his party,
otherwise in danger to be loft out, and by equal participation of such a
Government repair them. He would have his hands fairly rid for him of the
Scotch Presbytery, a Fanaticisme neither consistent with a Monarchy nor with a
Commonwealth, the basest kind of bondage, a Pedantisme, which they who press
most to have imposed, by the rod, or by power, are lest able to defend by
reason. He would look down upon other Kings, as being armed with, or followed
(without Hyperbole) by the most potent Militia in Christendom both at land and
Sea. Had Queen Elizabeth or King James been founder of the like Government in
England, how little had the Crown lost? How much had the people saved in blood
and Treasure? Queen Elizabeth who it is known had good advise, surcesed
courting of her Lords, for God bless you my good people: it is true since that,
different courses with what success I leave to your judgment, have been taken.
But other means of Empire than what have been shown, were they definable, are
not now attainable in the present state of England, where, a King henceforth
either can have no power at all, or must have such power as cannot be limited;
for all the ways whereby any King can have any power are but two, either a
potent Nobility, or a standing Army. Where a King is founded upon a Nobility,
they are the limits of his power, but where he is founded upon an Army his
power can have no limit. Where the Nobility then are gone wholly to decay,
there is no limiting the power, by which a King shall reign, seeing it is
without a standing Army impossible to give him any such power whereby a King
may reign.

But England seems to have a reach, I cannot say beyond, but beside all ages
and all Nations. Whether she have an Army or no Army, she is still running upon
an invention of her own. A Parliament with a Council in the intervals, this if
she have no King must be the Government, this if she have a King, unless he get
an Army: and this Parliament must have both the debate and the result too, that
is, be a single Counsel without any check at all and so be a Government and no
Government, but a tumult as the faction or humor hits, sometimes popular,
sometimes Oligarchical, sometimes a Divan. For all the kinds of Government that
have been or can be are but three. That is a Counsel with a monarch for the
check, in which the Counsel debates as the Senate of Rome after the
Commonwealth, or the Turkish Divan, and a Monarch resolves as the Roman
Emperor, or the great Turk. Or a counsel with an Aristocracy for the check; in
which the people debate as anciently in the house of Commons and the Lords
resolve, or are such without which there can be no result, as the ancient house
of Peers, in which case the Peers will have a King, and this comes to the
Government of King Lords and Commons. Or a council with a Democracy so the
check as the Senate of Rome in time of the Commonwealth, debating and the
assembly of the people resolving, which the Senate o^ popular assembly being
rightly ordered, amounts unto an equal Commonwealth. Nor are these cheeks such
as may be arbitrary, but to be holding must each of them sufficiently
preponderate in riches or territory, that is the King, in the absolute
Monarchy, the Lords in the mixed Monarchy, and the people in the equal
Commonwealth, must hold the perfect overballance in wealth or freehold; but if
these be all the kinds of Government that are in Art or Nature, then a single
assembly as I said before, can be none at all; which were it otherwise to be
doubted is sufficiently acknowledged by it self; In that, a single assembly
debating and resolving sayleth not to fall immediately into faction, and in
factions the stronger party kicking out the weaker,.divides and subdivides till
the whole come to nothing, as we have had sufficient experience in England,
where such an assembly having a King, will be thinking to mend it self by
pulling him down, and having no King, by setting one up. Nor can I conceive
which way this in our case should be curable, but as has been shown already,
that is, by assembling a free Parliament in the true form of an equal
Commonwealth. An equal Commonwealth is the most certain root of the most
prudent and righteous Laws, because in this form no law can be passed but by
the wisdom of the nation, and the true test of the public interest.

An equal Commonwealth is the mother of the most potent and lest chargeable
Militia, because in this form the whole body of the people is one disciplined
Army, taking equally and methodically their turns, as there shall be occasion
upon the Guard or in Arms.

An equal Commonwealth is of all other the most proper soil for the
plantation and preservation of true Religion. For whereas the causes of
corruption in matter of Religion are but two, ambition in a Clergy vying for
rule with the state, or ignorance. In this form all hope of propagating any by
interest of their own, is entirely cut off from a Clergy, in regard that no
Clergy without a co-ercive power in matters of Religion, can betake themselves
unto any such design: now civil and spiritual liberty being inseparable, or
imperfect, it follows that for the maintenance of civil liberty (without which
this Government is none) an equal Commonwealth must also assert and maintain
the liberty of conscience, which wholly frustrates a Clergy of co-ercive power
in matter of Religion, and yet defends Religion from the other corruption or
that which might redownd from ignorance, by a known rule and exercise of the
same, or by the prudent institution of a National religion.

National Religion as to the form, is arbitrary, and therefore in different
Countries, or different times, according as a people shall grow up in light* or
increase in knowledge of divine truth, may be different. But in England through
the education of the people, and as their judgment now stands, ought, in my
mind, to consist of the Articles of the Church, and the Common Prayer Book
mutatis mutandis. For if education amount unto matter of confidence, and
liberty of conscience be (as the Sectaries now feel) not to be secured unto our
selves, but by giving it unto others, this is that w^y of worship, which the
Sectaries (their liberty being safe) had as leif as any, and the people rather.
Nay, whereof the people of England are not to be debarred, without conceiving
themselves to be under a force, and resolving to revenge it as soon as they are
able.

In sum of all, and for a fuller answer to your main query, whether a
Commonwealth taking in all other interests may not be brought to take in that
also of the King? I say whether the King be restored or not restored, the form
of Government in England must be new and democratical, which that it be also
rightly ordered is of great concernment: for there is no firm State of peace
or security, save only under a proper form of Government. Absence or
imperfection of form produces a State of War, or of tumult. Whence apparently
to restore the King upon security of the form, is to provide for the safety of
the King and the people, but to restore him upon any other conditions then
security in the form, is to cast both the safety of the King and of the people
upon the faith of men, nay upon the faith of men, in matters, wherein men
cannot keep that faith, and so a crime against God and man, exposing a Nation
unto ruin.

Sir, you are obeyed, I have given you my judgment upon the point proposed, in
order unto the Feast for which you prepare. Never tell me that I observe not
the manner of your invitation, or that those proceedings which I assert to be
from the necessity of things, are therein excused upon the necessity of the
times, it moves not me that I reckon without your Host, seeing by his means,
you and your Fellow Members go up resolved to eat Venison, where you will find
nothing but Beeve.

But I am (like the Monky) at Chests with my Masters, if you make any further
use of this Paper, I beseech you to lay a cushion upon my head, by tearing out
the name of,

Sir, Your humble Servant
April 6th. 1660.
FINIS.

