A LETTER FROM A Person of Quality, TO A Principal PEER of the REALM, Now
Sitting in PARLIAMENT. Occasioned by the present DEBATE UPON THE Penal Laws.

Viva la Liberte. LONDON, Printed in the Year M.DC.XI.

A LETTER from a Person of Quality, to a principal Peer of the REALM, etc.
MY LORD,
AMongst the weighty Affairs of this Nation, which your Lordship like another
Atlas, has hitherto so happily set your Shoulder to; the indulgent care you
have always had, to favor tender consciences, has always been most Glorious
and Remarkable. From thence, My Lord, I have taken confidence, amidst the Crowd
of those many other cares that oppress you, to offer to your Lordship
something, though it be but the poor oblation of Virgils Shepherd, Mitia Poma
and Castaneas Nuces, in the behalf of that poor, distressed, and almost
deplored Party amongst us, who have for these last hundred years, layn under a
more bloody and inhumane persecution, than ever before was heard of amongst
Christians. And because that building is perpetual, where the Lord lays the
Foundation, your Lordship cannot do a more Charitable and Heroical Act, then to
be in some sort, a Mecaenas to that Religion, and to Solicit his Sacred
Majesty, and the present Parliament, for a fair Liberty at least, if not
privilege for it; and that His Majesty like another Cyrus, may be pleased to
procure that Israel may return, and build up their Temple; so shall they be
obliged to pray for the Life of our Cyrus, aad to write His Majesty's name,
upon their Altars and Church Doors, and that Deus illis haec Otia fecit.

It is not a more common than true Rule, I Am sure it seldom fails, that Malus
Custos diuturnitatis Metus, and therefore Tacitus could not describe the
Tyranny of Tiberius, but he must declare the Marks and properties thereof, Vbi
Delatorum Autoritas magna, laesae Majestatis crimen frequens objicitur, ac boni
cujusque viri invadendi ac tollendi praetextus est; and he adds, frequens
accusatio, and in quovis crimine adjuncta de laesa Majestate Principis. Nothing
shows more evidently when Authority inclines toward Tyranny, then the
multitude of Promoters, Pursuivants, Catchpoles, continual informations, and
the name of Treason made as a Livery to put upon all offenses, and tot esse
delatores in Repub. he makes as a certain Symptom, of a diseased and a
decaying State. In former ages, I am sure, those were ever held to be the best,
and most Godly Laws, that were least Sanguinary, and yet maintained order, all
others were accounted but mere Phalarismes, and to be le ges Draconis. Seneca
who lived under a Terrible Tyrant, found by experience, that frequens Vindicta
paucorum odium reprimit, omnium irritat, often punishments provoke more ill
blood then they suppress: which may be an Error, so as a general Rule, to which
there may be too much exception; but this I am sure is notorious, and an
undoubted Solecisme in State, to punish most crimes with the penalty of
Treason. Vltima supplicia suppliciis ultimis ponat, ut nemo pereat, nisi quem
perire etiam pereuntis intersit, in a good Government indeed, none should be
put to death, 2 Samuel 2.26.
but such whose own very interest it is, so to be put to death. The Speech of
Abner to Joab is hugely remarkable to this purpose; Number usque ad internecionem
hujus Mucro desaeviet? an ignoras quod periculosa est desperatio? usper quo non
dicis populo ut omittat persequi fratres suos? Shall the Sword devour for ever?
Know thou not, that it is not a little dangerous to force a desperation? How
long shall it be then ere thou bid the people return from persecuting of their
Brethren? It is both good counsel and good example. Germanicus is noted to have
wept when he saw the slaughter of the Soldiers of the Legions that mutiny'd,
non Medicinam illam, sed Cladem appellavit, and called it not a Medicine but a
Massacre. Nor can I think that all pity died with Germanicus, or that there are
not many, nay most in England moved with the Butchery of some persons here
merely for their Faith, and Profession, though barbarously couched under the
name of Treason. I know it is the property of Commiseration, to be touched
rather with the Calamity it sees, than to examine the Cause which it sees
not. Yet my only comfort is, that your Lordship will offer the consideration of
these things, to a far greater Emperor than Germanicus, and a Prince of much
more eminently tender bowels of compassion. So I shall be bold to urge one
argument more for commiseration, from the example of a Pagan Prince Marcus
Aurelius; though the old Law was still in force, and strictly observed at Rome,
Deos peregrinos we colunto, that no strange Gods should be worshipped, yet he
permitted always Toleration to Christians, as Tertullian assures us. Then
Theodosius and Gratian, Tertull. in Apol. cap. 5.
the most Christian Emperors, were content to tolerate the Arrians, known to
be the most real Enemies of Christ. And Josephus a Jew notes of Omias
Megalita, the same Permission, Joseph. Antiq. l. 14. c. 13.
to continue Brotherhood, for the Peace of the State. The Venetians suffer the
Jews to live amongst them, as the King of Spain did the Moors, till necessity
forced him to expel them. How much more reasonable will it appear, to Tolerate
our Brethren of the Roman Catholic Religion, who are undeniably Filii Christi,
Sons of Christ by the Mother Church, which we in England use to call the surer
side. For it is a verity undoubtable, so far as ever I could find, that that
Church was formerly the Reverend Mother of all Christianisme, and the most
ancient Lawmakers, and Judge heretofore of all Religions.

It is a most false Proposition, and proceeded doubtless from Gall and Spleen,
that Roman Catholics are altogether unsociable, and that they cannot live with
us, nor any sort of Protestants, in one Kingdom or Commonwealth, without Jars
and Tumults; and lastly, which is given out only to breed an exulceration in
the hearts of the people, against those of that Religion, they affirm, that to
give the least connivance to them, is a sin no less than damnable. This I know
is blown daily from the mad, turbulent, presumptuous Pulpits of some
Presbyterians; who indeed, if any Christians are justly to fall under that
censure, should not themselves have Toleration any where; whose Phrenetical,
giddy zeal, will be confined within no circle of order, but ever contemning all
Law and Lawgivers, endeavor to domineer, and rule as Transcendents over all
Kings, States, Princes and People in the world. But I hope these few
Considerations following, may qualify a little, if not cool the extravagant
heat of such indiscreet and hair-brained zelots, and confute their weak, and
truly unchristian supposition of incompatibility.

And first, if we look back to former ages, we shall find, that from the Saxons
to King Edward the Sixth, to be a Roman Catholic was never any Bar to Loyalty,
or Obedience to Civil Government. Nor can any man deny, but that France, Spain,
Italy, the Empire and Poland, have ever accounted, and do still, him as the
best affected Subject, and least dangerous to the Civil State, who is the best
affected to that Religion; and certainly, if to be a Roman Catholic, did ever
breed or engender any such ill blood in the Body Politic, or secret infection
of Disloyalty, as these men would fain persuade the world it does; and so must
be in regard of the State, malum aliquod in se, and naturally; then upon the
general trial of so many Nations, and in so many Ages, it would have been sure
discovered, and detected of that noxious imperfection, which it never has
before stood charged withal, neither in all those foreign Countries, not as
heretofore, so not at any time since, in England. Nay, to the eternal glory of
that truly Noble and Honorable Party, and confusion of all their Adversaries, I
dare say, that there is not one person of consideration amongst them all to be
found out, that was at the same time a Roman Catholic, and in arms against His
Majesty that now is, or His most glorious Father. But on the contrary, it is
plain, that they did all expose themselves, their lives, fortunes, and families
in His Majesty's Service, to as much hazard as any whosoere they were in
England; nay, for the preservation of those very Laws, by the force of which,
they were to suffer a most savage persecution.

But yet the Antagonists of this most Rational and Christian Liberty desired
for those excellent persons, I fear will hardly yet rest satisfied; for they
stand so high in their own consistories, and yet higher in their own opinions,
that nothing but miracle can be thought capable to abate the Edge of their most
phrenetick fury. However they may please to remember, chacun a son Tour, nor
can they I am sure forget, how that from the Time of King Henry the Eighth, and
since him, Religion has had its changes, and what God pleases to determine,
man must obey: they that are now in Gloria Patri, may be hereafter sicut erat
in Principio: they ought therefore to live, and to continue with all men in
Christian charity and amity, and not forget, that the bonds of religious Unity,
are so to be strenghtned, as that the bonds of humane Society be not dissolved.
At Jerusalem in the time of our Savior Christ, there were two Sects much
different in Religion, and yet did live sociably together, and without offense
to Church or State, which were the Pharisaei and the Sadducaei: and they were
not only, not men of one Religion, and so differing only in Rites and Orders,
but they were men of very opposite persuasions, and in main fundamentals too.
No man I believe will doubt, but that the Saduces were notorious Heretics, for
they denied the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Immortality of the Soul (an
Article of our Belief, and the Foundation of all our Hope and Faith:) that
there was a fierce opposition between them and the Pharisees, is evident by that
in the Acts, Act. 5.
Exurgens Pontifex and omnes Saducaei qui cum eo erant, etc. Then the High
Priest rose up, and all they that were with him, which is the Sect of the
Saduces, etc. and again, Sciens Paulus quod una pars esset Saducaeorum, Act. 23.
altera Pharisaeorum exclamavit, etc. But when Paul perceived that the one part
were Saduces, and the other Pharisees, etc. Thus it is plain, that these
parties were sufficiently opposite, and did often contradict one another; the
Saduces maintained the Temple of Gerizim, and agreed with the Samaritans to
sacrifice there, contrary to the Law, and to the prejudice of the Temple at
Jerusalem. The people followed the Pharisees, the Scribes and Elders applauded
the Saduces, Segon. de Republic. Hebraea. p. 538. Epiphan. l. 5. c. 11. Joseph.
l. 18. Antiq.
and both were Heresies, as Sigonius and Epiphanius do most clearly testify,
and yet all that City was divided into these two Sects, in the time of Herodes
Antippus, as Josephus assures us, and yet did they live very quietly together
as to the Civil Government, without Discord, Riots, or Tumults. To come home to
our later Times, we may begin with Swisserland; and though Zuinglius was a
rough, violent, and seditious fellow, and by arms sought to compel the five
Pages to the Religion of Bern and Zurich, yet by agreement all was pacified,
and to this day they have their particular Churches in their several Towns, and
maintain their mutual Liberties, the Commonwealth of the Cantons, all
Contributions, Confederations, Traffic, and Society together, and sometime
preach, nay communicate like good fellows, in the same Churches and Pulpits. To
pass over Suevia, and the Lower Provinces of Germany (where though Lutheranisme
before and Calvinisme since has very much prevailed) those Roman Catholics
yet that are, remain undisturbed. The famous Kingdom of Poland, and the Empire
of Musco, have thought it necessary to suffer the Religious Vried in their
Dominions and Countries, both to take away all Domestical quarrels, and by a
general unity (as a brazen wall) to fortify themselves against the common
Enemy of Christendom, the Turk. And shall England now so far degenerate from
its ancient glory and virtue, as to go to school for civility to a rude Swiss,
or Swinish debauched Dutchman? Show more Barbarism than a Muscovite, or more
unnaturalness than a Polonian? who reserve the blood of their Neighbors, to be
shed with Honor in the Field against their common Enemies, rather then by
Tyranny at home, to weaken their own body; Germany also may be a sufficient
example, that such a toleration is most expedient, and that it is both possible
and faisible, that two, or more different religions, may live together in
peace. Let these Consistorians call to mind, how quietly the Roman Catholics
have suffered, and converst with the Lutherans, and themselves lately sprung up
there (for above a hundred years together) till they with the Swedes were
pleased to disturb their own peace, and the Tranquillity of that most beautiful
Empire. And sure Charles the Fifth, and Ferdinand who indulged so much liberty
to those Religions, as they were great and wise Princes, so were they as
provident likewise, and merciful. Their ground too was the same with ours,
Salus Populi supremae lex esto, the peoples Safety ought to be the Supreme Law,
and therefore they ordered, that Caveret utraque pars, ne in suis dominiis
quemquam ad suae religionis professionem cogat, aut revocet, aut depellat
contra ipsius conscientiam, a religione quam profitetur. Dresserus.
So says Dresserus, that both sides should beware of forcing any man to his
Religion, of recalling, or driving any man against his conscience from the
Religion that he professes: and afterward confidently adds against those that
are so precisely scrupulous, Nec hic metuo eorum reprehensionem, qui putant non
nisi unam Religionem tolerandam, Nor fear I at all their displeasure, who will
think that there ought to be but one Religion tolerated, for conscience cannot
be compelled, it may be persuaded. But that I may not be tedious, I shall
conclude all my Instances with the fair and flourishing Kingdom of France. How
often and how mercifully did the French Kings grant their Edicts of
Pacification? and to what conditions were they contented to descend, only to
preserve Life and avoid Bloodshed of their people? Witness the old Articles of
Peace granted for the Liberty of conscience, La Val. l. 3. fol. 141. Pig. l. 6.
c. 7. Poploneir l. 18.
set down by La Vall and diverse others, wherein they have a general freedom to
preach in all parts of France, etc. and yet these were Huguenots; men of the
Consistorian Religion, Factious, Boutefeus, and in truth, the very shame of
Protestant Religion. Yet would the poor Roman Catholics of England, be right
glad to participate a share of such Graces, as they enjoy there, though there
is no wise man sure, but must think that they deserve them much better. They
poor Souls, with prayers and tears do supplicate daily to His Majesty and the
Parliament for such a Liberty: Those in France were always striving to wrest it
by Force, and the bloody violence of a Presbyterian Spirit. They again had a
Rochel, a Montanban, or a Montpelier for their refuge; these in England, had no
other retreat but the Gatehouse, the Fleet, or Newgate. For these in England,
all Princes and States have long interceded, and do still; They in France had
never any other Intercessour, but their own Arms for them. Now to conclude all,
seeing the great Turk permits Christians to live freely in his Dominions,
seeing the President and Example of the greatest Princes and States in Europe
does set it forward, the poor Roman Catholics in England, hope they shall not
far, the worse, for their patience and obedience, which deserves more. Their
only ambition is to be accounted good Servants to God, and Loyal Subjects to
His Majesty, and their only humble Suit to His Majesty now is, Hanc animam
concede mihi, tua caetera sunto. Give them their Souls, great Sir, take you the
rest.

Thus far under your Lordships favor, I have been bold to proceed in the
behalf of the tender Consciences of those, who have suffered most in that kind
of any Christians in the World; but now two Objections seem to obstruct all
that has been hitherto spoken in the argument. And methinks at this Instant, I
hear a wellmouth'd Presbyterian to open against the Romish and Spanish
Inquisition, where only this liberty is denied; and why should they have
Liberty themselves, who will give none to others? To this I shall be bold to
obviate, that there are but two sorts of good Policy, in order to Religion. The
one is to keep firm and fast to one Religion, where there is but one, nor ever
has been more; and with all care to keep out all others, be they good or bad,
this I say in order to the Civil State, is a most necessary piece of Policy.
For nothing embroyles a Kingdom or State sooner, than the Diversities of
Religions, especially if some particular ones be forbidden. For the Prohibition
of some, creates faction in the hearts of the suppressed, unless hindered by
very extraordinary grace, and faction ever pretends zeal of Spirit, which if it
become Conqueror shows no mercy, if subdued, no patience: however mutinous and
a boutefeu, which joined with the other two, called curiosity and singularity,
are the three furyes, that torment the World at this instant, that Triceps
Cerberus, that sets open Hell gates, to fill the World with Impostors,
Seducers, and Calumniation. Now to Faction and her adherents, Sedition is an
unseparable Companion, which streightways marryes it self to Schism, and
thereupon it is, that all Magistrates and Laws are resisted, and that with
violence, for there is no War so passionate, as the War of Conscience. The
Inquisition therefore is politickly to be commended, for keeping strict Watch
and Ward, yea with fire and Sword to keep out all other Religions from thence,
where there never was any other, then what they still profess. The second good
Policy in relation to Religion is, where by the negligence of Governors, or
some other unhappiness, several Religions have got footing, to give an equal
liberty to all, as at present in the Low Countries, France, Germany, etc. Now
this equality of liberty takes away all heart-burning, which otherwise would
burst forth into faction, and that into sedition, to the public disturbance.
So it is plain, that it is the prohibition and persecution of some one or two
Religions, not the persecution of all but one; or a universal Toleration of all
indifferently, that can offend a Kingdom; and such a Policy of a general
liberty, were to be wished here amongst us, since we cannot have the other: For
in very deed, it is altogether as impossible to root out any one Religion by a
persecution, as to put out a fire by blowing of it.

The next and greatest objection, that I must be bold under your Lordships
Conduct, to encounter, looks very big upon me indeed, that it is not for their
Religion, that Priests and their Entertainers die, but plain matter of Treason.
I must here beseech the Objectors to let us know, how it comes to pass, that it
should be Treason to be a Priest, or Capital for a Gentleman to entertain such
a one in his house, to serve the necessities of his Conscience? or who made it
ever to be so, either in this, or any other Country in the world, before the
time of Queen Elizabeth? Whereby it is apparent that it is not malum in se, but
quia prohibitum it must be so. And then to the amazement of the whole world,
that Vocation must be made Treason, which was only wont here in England to sit
in the Chair of Government, and by whose Oracles and Decrees, the people of
this Land, were only wont to be directed both in Chancery, Rolls, and all
Ecclesiastical Courts. It would be thought, I am confident, a very strange
thing, that any Parliament, should make it to be Treason, for any man to wear a
Barre-gown, or to be known to be a Graduate in that Profession: Will it not be
a more incredible thing to posterity, that so wise a Nation as this, should run
counter to themselves, all Law and Reason, upon such a sudden, as to make that
Treason by Act of Parliament, which so generally, so perpetually, and so
anciently, has been honored, and approved by all Laws. Was not Priesthood
used and exercised by the Patriarchs under the Law of Nature? Established by
Moses, and the Law of God? Continued yet in Christ, who was himself a Priest
for ever, after the order of Melchizedek? and never apparently repealed by him,
or any new Decree under his Grace and the Gospel. Was there ever any Nation
that had a Worship of a Deity, and acknowledged a God, without their Priest? By
the Wisdom of former Ages we find that Religion and Priesthood were ever taken
to be like Hippocrates Twins, born and bred, laughing and weeping, beginning
and ending together, etc. And must this sacred Function now, that is
acknowledged and reverenced over all the world, by our Laws, that are unknown
to all the World besides, be made a piece of Treason, here? It is no wonder
indeed, if such new made Treasons, as has been before cited out of Tacitus, did
presage a fall, or diminution of that Power, which made them to be so: and it
is to be conceived, that the Auspicious repealing of such, will forespeak
as well the growing up of a most flourishing Empire. Over and above all this, it
h^s been ever held against the Wisdom and Policy of this Nation, to fetter
themselves with too many shackles of Treason; and therefore as 25. Edw. 3. at
the petition of the Subjects, the King did declare and determine what should be
taken and judged for Treason, by the Common Laws of the Realm, so 1. Hen. 4. c.
10. it was confirmed and established, that nothing hereafter should be judged
Treason, otherwise than was expressed by that of Edw. 3. and though diverse
Actions were strained up to Treason for a time, which indeed were not so, nor
within the list of the 15. of Edw. 3. as that of Hen. 6. the taking and
surprising of persons and goods in Wales, so to stand for the spae of seven
yeras only, and 8. of H. 6. burning of houses, and 22. of Hen. 8. poisoning,
etc. which of their own nature, and simply were not Treason, and therefore had
a limitation of time annexed to them: Yet prudently all such former Acts were
repealed and made void, 1. Edw. 6. for a more merciful and indifferent
proceeding with Subjects, that the Remedy might not prove more dangerous than
the Disease. And now must an eternal Treason be branded upon the sacred'st of
Functions? and no less than the most infamous and dismal word invented, like a
Medusa's face to terrify poor Christians from their Consciences, Faith and
Profession? Sed satius est pertransire Calamitatem publicam. And yet the great
and Christian magnmimity, that all the noble persons of this persuasion, have
always expressed, especially in these late most calamitous times of fiery trial
indeed, is not a little remarkable: when no day presented them less then most
dismal horrors, destructions of themselves, wives, children and families, and
on every side, most terrible images of death, yet they always stood steadfast
to, and unmovable from their Principles of Religion; a very inconsiderable
number of them starting aside like a broken bow; in lieu of every one of whom
too, they got into their Church, then in the midst of all their miseries, more
than a thousand; so mightily does the barbarous and inhumane persecution of any
one party, increase its number. Nor was their integrity to God, and loyalty to
Religion more observable, than their fidelity to His Majesty, amidst all the
artifices, as well as menaces, of the most subtle and mischievous Tyrants, that
ever the earth bore. And why then should not these most honorable Persons
receive some Acts of Grace and favor now, and with as much reason, as those
penalties were exercised upon them then in those times, or imposed upon them at
first? For it is plain, that there was nothing but fears and jelousies that
were the occasions of their first infliction: Queen Elizabeth having been
declared, by three Popes successively, and our own Acts of Parliament to be
illegitimate; and that great and most incomparable person, His Majesty's great
Grandmother, Mary Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France, standing at that time
in competition with her in the eye of the world, as the just Heir of the Crown,
who (by the way, was entirely a Roman Catholic, and so all that party then in
England, fell into suspicion of an adherence too much to her interest; which to
avoid, was the grand reason, why this persecution of Roman Catholics here in
England was first invented, and the suppression of the whole party endeavored
by the Cecilian policy of those times, and yet we never find that the Roman
Catholics did then, or since knit themselves upon any account of disturbance
here; but on the contrary we know that they have been always ready to assert
His Majesty's Interest, not only against Rebels and Traitors at home (though to
the support of those Laws, as aforesaid, which have hitherto proved their
particular ruin) but all enemies whatsoever abroad, even against the Pope
himself or King of Spain, when His Majesty shall so please to command them, and
so much Loyalty they have been always ready to swear to likewise, and still
are, and that the Pope himself shall never be able to withdraw them from their
Allegiance to His sacred Majesty.

Now seeing that by His Majesty's, and the Parliaments great care and prudence,
there is a debate admitted for the regulation of those scandalous Laws, and
since it is manifestly necessary, that as Sails, so Laws are to be turned, and
as occasion, time, circumstance, and reason of State shall direct, either to be
altered or revoked, and forasmuch as it is plain, that upon worldly respects,
those Acts have passed in former Parliaments, to try what operation and cure
they would work in the State, and if they prove fruitless Medicines, or as
most emperical purgations, too violent (and fitter to kill then to cure) then
to be repealed; for as they were made for the fears and jealousies of those
times, so by the grace and mercy of these times, (when they are both proved to
have been causeless) they may with honor be cancelled, if His Majesty and the
Parliament shall so please; to whose gracious consideration, I most humbly
beseech Your Lordship, to offer these few Lines, and as Petitions rather then
reasons, nor so much to arrogate justice, as to implore mercy, and seeing also
that the Case of Q. Eliz. and His Majesty that now is, is far different, your
Lordship would be pleased to Petition His Majesty for these poor trouble Souls,
and procure a grace for them, that was never denied by any Christian Kings or
States to their Subjects, for occasions of State, and to stop that unnatural
issue of blood, flowing from those cruel Laws, and stay a little those
passionate humors, and malicious oppositions of such, as are adversaries to
that Grace, and the Lord Almighty, who has raised you, to enable you for so
great a work. Your Lordship and the Parliament, cannot but out of your great
Wisdoms have observed, that too severe a persecution makes men desperate, non
coercet sed provocat Violentia, and too heavy a hand upon those whom the Law
casts down, shows a will rather to oppress the offender, then to cure the
offense. It is the greatest Honor to Kings, that their mercy like that of the
Almighty, is more eminent then their justice, and that their Benches and
Courts, can witness more compassion then Severity. For he that sets open the
Prison Doors, in so wise and gracious a manner, means not to conquer the
hearts and consciences of his people by torments, but to win them by mercy and
sweetness. If the ancient Aphorism of State be to be respected, it has been
ever in such cases, the Wisdom of the greatest Princes, Punire raro to punish
but seldom, it was ascribed as a Title of Honor to Augustus Caesar, nunquam
civilem sanguinem fudisse, never to have shed his peoples blood. Clemency is a
Virtue, sometimes of as great policy as piety, because it begets Love, and Love
breeds Loyalty, commands the very Soul, and lays the body at the Feet of the
obliger; Mercy kindles Fire and Zeal in the hearts of Subjects. Pity and
Toleration as they make the Obligation of the offenders greater, so it makes
them repent to have offended him, who has so obliged them, the reason is
infallible in all noble Spirits, Fidelem si putaveris, facies, believe and you
make a faithful friend, for the true Gallant Soul ever accounts it the greatest
injury to be distrusted.

The poor Roman Catholics upon these grounds, hope that their ancient and
tried patience and fidelity, shall so move His Majesty, and those that he has
set at the Stern to govern affairs, that they shall be now refresht and eased,
as they may with a breath, and that they may find at last the warmth and
comfort of the Sunshine again in England, and that their humble supplications
shall be granted, subscribed with the services of so many honorable persons,
and signed with the blood of so many of their Martyrs: That though we meet them
not in Churches, we may yet meet them cheerfully in our Markets; for though
they differ from us in Religion, they will agree well with us in Obedience;
their bodies will be ever at His Majesty's command, if we do but leave their
souls of God: and all this happiness both to them and us, I can no way despair
of, if your Lordship please to become their Intercessor, in whose great Breast,
compassion ever kept the highest seat, as it became it best: and be confident
my Lord, that the obtaining of this lawful favor and Tolleration for these
poor afflicted Souls, will be a work equal in glory, to any of your Lordships
most illustrious Actions, and will raise you up, by your Charity, so many
degrees higher toward heaven, as erect eternal Trophies to your Honor upon
earth, and those as great, as ever were, or can be written in the Records of
Fame. And so as His Majesty came unto the Helm, and ascended the Throne of
these Kingdoms with Triumph, Glory and Applause, He shall end the Catastrophe
of his days, with the general Plaudite of the whole world: Nay, all this will
follow besides, as the fruits and effects of His Majesty's goodness toward the
poor Roman Catholics, Peace within, and Honor without; Love at home, Respect
abroad; and so shall be made a concord of discords, an union of divisions, and
a religious contention on all sides, for devotion and a good life; for
peaceable conversation, obedience to Magistrates, excellency of Learning, who
shall do most good in the State, and deserve the prize; and such an Eutopia can
only His Majesty make in England, who will deserve the Olive branches for
Mercy, Peace and Goodness, as well as the Laurel, for Victory, Wisdom,
Government and Constancy (the Crown of all:) so I beseech your Lordship to
accept and pardon this presumption, and continue your favors to

(MY LORD) Your Lordships most obedient Servant, J. H.
June 17. 1661.
POSTSCRIPT.
MY LORD,
MY have had almost made me overpass one very considerable scruple, that I have
heard frequently injected, to the prejudice of that poor oppressed Party; which
is, that they did only serve His Majesty in the late War, in their own defense,
and caeme to the King with a Cum nemini, etc. as they say. On the contrary, I
can say on my own knowledge, that they were extremely courted by that
Presbyterian Parliament, and proffered the perfect abolition of the Penal Laws,
so they would side with them, and effectively prosecute their Rebellion. It was
not therefore Interest but Conscience, that engaged them in His Majesty's
Cause. And truly upon the matter, it may be said, that they served His Majesty,
whether he would or no, for they could obtain no Commission at all from him,
till a Commission granted to one of them, by name Sir Arth. Ashton, from the
Rebel Party, was produced: And then His Majesty thought fit, not to scruple
the commissionating of any of them; all this, my Lord, is known truth, which
your Lordship may please to accept likewise from

(MY LORD) Your Lordships most Devoted Humble Servant, J. H.


