A LETTER FROM THE LADY CRESWELL TO Madam C. the Midwife, ON The Publishing her
late VINDICATION, etc.
ALSO A Whip for Impudence: OR, A Lashing Repartee to the Snarling Midwifes
MATCHLESS ROGUE: BEING AN ANSWER to that RAILING LIBEL.
Dear Daughter,
I Was strangely surpised the other Morning, when being awakened out of my
first Morning-sleep, (for you know our Concerns are most in the Night-watches;)
I heard one of the ragged Regiment, or a Bookseller in Masquerade, bawling out,
Madam Cellier's Vindication, etc. I then immediately concluded to have it, cost
what it would; ay, and read it too: though I have but two usual Books for my
Library which have layen in the Dining-room-window these 30 years untoucht by
me, or by any of my Children; yet I was now resolved to make an Addition to 'um.

And now having read it over in a full Assembly of my Children, (for I have
some that are Plaguey Jades at State Politics, and Sham Plots; but to say
truth, it is only to get an honorable and a handsome Livelihood, or supply the
Defects of a weak Husband, or so:) I must needs tell you, I did admire which
way 'twas possible you should arrive to that prodigious knowledge in the
Intrigues of Plots and Treasons, and such like Matters: Surely I have known you
many years, and I never thought you such a parlous Woman; well, the World is
well amended with you. But how, in the Name of Aretine, came you to light upon
such a Don Quixot as Dangerfield, to carry on the honorable Designs which you
were engaged in? Surely had you consulted the Westminster Augury, you would
have been better informed; but in that case it seems you did not, and so you
brought your self into a very dangerous Condition. Yet now I think on it, it is
well you did meet with such a person, for had he not been an abominable
overgrown Rogue, for all your Vindication, I am afraid the Justice of the Law
would have sent you after those Innocont Babes, that were Sledg'd up
Holborn-hill not long since, for the Testimony of your Holy Church. And thanks
to the Clerk that drew up the Parden, for omitting the most material Facts he
had been guilty of; or truly Daughter, you could not have escaped as I think.
For when I consider how first you engaged in the Concern, and the Reasons that
persuaded you thereto, and what Advances you made therein; I declare to you, I
cannot see overmuch Innocence in you, but a confounded deal of Impudence. Pray
Forsooth good Madam, where was your Modesty in Answering the Lord Chancellor,
as if he had been your Companion? And if Susan would have spoke all, where was
your Modesty, or at least what might you do, when your Husband was at Church in
a Chamber with a man alone? Why, truly we must give you our Judgment, that Deep
Mysteries of State must be secret, and private Refreshments must be kept for
the Eye of the World. You know I am a Woman of Experience, and can guess
shrewdly in such Affairs. But pray Daughter tell me, what persuaded you to
leave your honorable Calling off, for these Political Concerns; surely you
have a desire after Glory, and to be esteemed one of the Eldest Daughters of
the Whore of Babylon. Alas! what was S. Coleman or S. Ireland, etc. to you,
Madam, mere Children in Politics; you have not only been as deep in the Mire
as ever they were, but you have vanquished all that rise up against you. No
doubt but ere now, our Sisters of the Seraglio of Rome have heard of your Fame,
and are singing there Io Paeans, for Joy that they have got so valiant a
She-Champion on the side of the Great Harlot. Well, Daughter go on and prosper,
for I account if the Romish Cause takes, we shall have a more fixed and
established Trade than ever we had; though the truth is, I cannot complain of
late years, since Justices of Peace instead of punishing Offenders in our way,
are Sinners themselves in the same --. However, we are liable to the Law, and
so we shall not, when we have License and Tolleration to follow our Profession
with quietness, and without any disturbance. But then again I consider, as to
the Point of your Religion, it is the best in the World for us, for we can Whore
and whore again, and Confess and fess, and obtain Pardon, and be pardoned to
all intents and purposes, and go out of the World after a whole life of
sinning, as Innocent as Children unborn. So that I say, it is much to our
comfort that you are driving on such a Design, though for my part it is all one
to me what Religion goes up, I am old, and hope to live and die honestly in my
Calling. One thing Daughter I am resolved on, never to concern my self with
State Matters, as you have done, and am afraid was much out of your way: You
have an honest Calling, and though I say it, a very ancient one, and was of
great esteem in all Ages of the World; I admire who bewitched you to this Trade
of Sham-plotting? It could not be my Lord of S -- nor his Servants, for he is
too wise, and his Servants too wary sure, to concern themselves in such Afairs;
we have had Experience enough of his Wisdom and Policy, and In Troth he has
lived to a fair Age, if a Newgate Bird and a Midwife shall out-wit him at
Politics. I protest seriously, Daughter, I am afraid you have taken in a Club
of S. Omers Saints to help you out at this dead lift: For to say truth. I
believe you lost abundance of Reputation by being in Newgate, and Tried for
your Life; and consequently your Trade, and that is able to vex any Woman in
England, especially one of your lofty Spirit. But I would fain know, Daughter,
why you parted with you Money so freely to Capt. Dangerfield in getting him out
of Prison, and Clothing him; was it to get in your Husbands debts only or no,
or was it for some other private Intrigues? truly I am afraid so. And so would
I have all Tradeing Frenchmen served, that know not how to get in their own
Debts, without employing Felons, and such sort of men to do it. I hope in the
next Edition of your Book, we shall have a true account of it, for I am not
satisfied, that that was the only reason of your kindness to him.

And then again, I protest I am not satisfied (nor any of my Children, who are
hugely concerned for you) that the Presbyterians should contrive a Plot against
the present Government at this time when your Friends are so hard at work to do
it; surely they will not join hand in hand with you; their Principles are
Diametrically Opposite, and besides, they have got nothing by former Practices
of that Nature, which yet were contrived and carried on by the Cunning-men of
your Church, as my Old Friend and Son Harry Martin has often in private told me
in those days, and though I say it, he was able to judge as well as the best
of 'um all.

Now methinks its strange, that this great Meal-Tub-Plot should have so few
heads and hands concerned in it, and after all the Consultations you and your
Friend Dangerfield had about it, you should discover no more; truly Daughter, I
should be glad (and so would a great many more) to have the whole truth out, of
the several Conferences with the Lord P. and some other your great
acquaintances: that would be worth the while, but you will not be so Candid.
'Twould satisfy abundance of People that cannot find in their Hearts to
believe all you have Writ, nor indeed hardly any part of it. Well! I find
Company coming in, and must conclude with some Grave and Motherly advice.
Beware what you do, and repent what you have done, lest Capt. Richardson gets
you into his Clutches again. For I am afraid, you will find my Lord S. and his
Servants, Sir R. P. and Sir W. W. Mr. Prannce, and a great many more
Substantial Evidences will come against you for the Political lies you have
told in your Book; And for endeavoring to Invalidate the Kings Evidence, and
representing your Popish Plot as a thing of no consequence. And yet in Charity
to you as of the weaker Sex, I believe some Wild House Chaplains have foisted
in a great many things into your Narrative, that you were not the Author of
your self. But let it pass: I pity you with all my heart, and I make it my
earnest request, you would mind only your Lawful and Honorable calling, and
getting in your Husbands Debts, and be useful to all good Men, in an honest
and civil way: and don't trouble your self any farther with Plotters, and
Plots, and Treasons. I have a kindness for you, and what further I have to say
(for Trading begins to come in apace) I will tell you, if you will Oblige me
with your Company, at my House at any time, and will have a Bottle of Rhenish
or two at your Service.

Daughter, In much have I conclude, Your loving Monitor, CRESWELL.
From the Ancient Place of my Habitation, Sept. 1680.
I may seem as Mad as this Snarling Midwife, to go about to answer madness it
self; for by her Rage and Fury one would think the Gentlewoman fit Company for
the Pewterers Wife in Bethlem, who run mad through Pride: so the Pride and vain
Glory of this Woman's mind makes her self believe, that she is a brave She
Championess, and able to Cope with all the World: otherwise she would have
desisted after her first Essay, seeing so many Pens levelled against her. But I
perceive her branded with Impudence, which as it still accompanies Madness,
usually also goes hand in hand with Folly. Therefore, let this Woman be either
Fool or Mad, we will endeavor to cure her of the Last by Lashing; and Soloman
says, That sometimes it is requisite to answer a Fool according to his Folly,
that he may not appear wise in his own Conceit.

But indeed I shall be at a loss for apt Words and Expressions, to set forth
this She-Donna Quixot, for she encounters with many Wind-mills, and is armed
Cap-a-Pe with Impudence and Lying: she smells rank of Rome, and stinks of Plots
and Conspiracies; she is armed with a Jesuits Lance and a Sword for the Cause,
which she furiously brandishes, and would at least Cut off the Head off Poor
Thomaso, the chiefest Object of her Anger, for betraying her hopes, and for
over-throwing all her wicked designs, and Malicious Projects. But it seems
strange to me, that she who so lately escaped the Halter, should so soon run
her self in danger of wearing the Wooden Ruff, and to be pelted to death with
Rotten Eggs and Apples. But she defies Scandalum Magnatum, and all the
Statutes, and all the Persons of Honor she has abused and defamed; but unless
the World will be so charitable as to believe her Mad, and that all her railing
is her Barking and Howling against the Moon, the employ of an Irrational
Animal, I know what will betide her.

Well, but this learned Gentlewoman, for so she would seem to be by her
Similes, had many reflections and imaginations crept into her Head, as she
says in her Paper, but these were Worms and Maggots, which trouble her Brain,
and set her again to Writing, and would make you believe her whole Book was
made up of Irrefragable Truths: but worthy Madam, it will not do, for all the
World believes, nay your selves know, whose Nodles Composed it, that it is made
up of nothing almost but Lies and untruths, and is indeed from the beginning to
the end a Grand Libel, endeavoring to bespatter and belie a whole Nation, and
therefore may well be confuted with that one Word, not Bellarmine, but Madam
Celliers thou lie.

The Lady is desparately angry at the Title of Captain given to Dangerfield,
but methinks he is not so fond of it, and may as well deserve it as she of the
Title of Madam, which affects her much: But if it be his Fortitude of Suffering
that makes him deserving of the Title, perhaps e're long you may also be worthy
of that of Madam: in the mean time Mistress is too good for you, for the Old
English Word Goody or Goodwife Celliers may serve your turn, though you give a
Dove and an Anchor with a Rope for your Arms. Though now Captain be a Name too
good for Dangerfield, he has often enough been entitled so by your self when
time was, and had he stuck close to you and your Intrigues, he should have been
a Colonel at least before this, and all his Blew Stigma's been forgot.

Though the Living Captain be the Object of your Spleen, yet the Dead Captain
might lie quiet in his Grave, and it becomes not a Woman of your profession to
wear Long Nails, to scratch the Dead out of their Tombs, and to abuse their
Names, which the very Heathen abhorred. But Madam Celliers is one that neither
fears God nor Man, for she defies all, even Captain Richardson himself. Have a
care, Madam, you come not within his Enchanted Castle again, lest you want a
Knight Errant to release you, for he is a Fell Giant as you have made him.

It is but just and requisite the Jesuitical Crew should stick close to this
Mother-Midnight, for they will never be able to find again so laborious and
Skillful a Woman; and therefore she was chose out to bring the Plot to Bed of
its Twins: but the Birth of the First, proving Monstrous, she miscarried in the
delivery of the Latter, and smothered it in the Meal Tub. The next Work she is
to do, being so very Dexterous, will be to bring the Whore of Babylon to Bed of
her Litter; and had she been alive in the time of Pope Joan, she had not so
publicly miscarried in her Procession. It is therefore but fitting that the
Memory of this Memorable Madam, be preserved, which that it may be, we have
endervoured here among the rest to make known her Worth and excellent Parts,
which has employed so many Pens, that after Ages will admire the Monster.

FINIS.

