A LETTER from Scotland: Written Occasionally upon the SPEECH made by a Noble
Peer of this Realm.
By a better Protestant than the Author of it, (though a Servant to His R. H.)
I Have heard much of the sad state and condition we are in, and I am convinced
of it, since I see such Reflections made with impunity upon the Kings Person
and Government. I shall say little to the President of our Henry the IV,
unbridled Violence, and mean Condescensions, are the unhappy necessities of an
Usurper; but a good and a lawful King is obliged to maintain His Own
Prerogative, as well as the Rights of His Subjects. But is it possible, that
the supposed Author of the Printed Speech, should already forget, how lately
the King (after a great Retrenchment of His Family) did at once, and (as it is
said) by his Lordships advice, change almost His whole Council? and yet the
People (or those that still make use of their Names) never were, nor will yet
be satisfied. I will not put his Lordship in mind of the Court Ladies, since he
does not remember he spoke of them: But unless he make himself a Samuel, I do
not know what authority he has to examine Saul, about the bleating of the
Cattle? I cannot believe his Lordship could have the heart, to sacrifice the
fairest of them; his Lordship may read in the same place, that Obedience is
better than Sacrifice; but if a Sacrifice must be made, It is not to the
People, but to God and Justice. I would fain understand what is meant by the
People? For now every man calls himself the People* and when one man calls for
one Thing, and another for Something, directly opposite, both cry out, that if
This, or That be not done, the People is betrayed; that is to say, they will
endeavor to persuade them so. But the People in this Speech, has a strange
Dialect, such as I hope no Englishman understands; Must, was never the language
of a good Subject, nor Submission the part of a King; ( We must, etc. and no
new Converts,) I am sorry, that with all our Zeal, we are so unkind to
Proselytes, we had a greater value for them not long since; for though L. B.
was accused of the Plot, his Conversion secured him without a Pardon, though
either his Lordship was deeply guilty, or the Kings Evidence grossly perjured.
Till the Author discover who he means by Sempronia, I shall not tell him who I
believe to be as bad as Catiline. But it is prodigious, that while we are
frighted with Bug-bears of invisible Dispensations from the Pope, his Lordship
with his Arbitrary Must, should dispense at once, with the Law of God, as to
the Queen; with the Law of Nations, as to Foreign Ministers; with the Laws of
Hospitality, as to Strangers, and all that part of the Oath of Allegiance, that
concerns the Heir of the Crown, which is equally binding with the rest, to all
whose suspected honesty cannot accept of such an Arbitrary Dispensation. His
Lordship seems much concerned to hear of a Bargain between the King and the
House of Commons; and so am I, for things are too ripe for mischief, when
Subjects are permitted to capitulate with their Sovereign. The Kings Subjects
(by His permission) have made Capitulations with Foreign Princes; but his
Lordship would not have the King so far trusted, as that His own Subjects may
Capitulate with him, because as his Lordship says, he has so often deceived
(that hard word) the People. And I beg leave to use the same expression of His
Majesty's patience, which his Lordship uses of his little care of his Person,
That no Story affords a parallel of him. The actings of the Duke are indeed
admirable to all, but incomprehensible to such as have not the true Principles
of Loyalty rooted in them. But his Lordship (who in Cromwell's time was much
better acquainted with what passed at London, then at Bruxels) avers, That the
Duke had an early aim at the Crown, before the Kings Restoration; this is a
high Charge, and ought to be better proved than by a bare assertion: Has his
Lordship any Letters to produce from His Royal Highness to Himself, or any
other chief Minister of the Usurpers? or to what Crown could the Duke pretend,
when they had robbed the King of His own? The Duke can show undeniable proofs
of his Allegiance, even in those days; For what could an exiled Prince do more,
than leave the great Commands, and Pensions that he had abroad, and all the
advantages that his Birth, his Courage and his Reputation promised him, to
follow the Fortune, and the Wants of His Majesty? But how will his Lordship
make out, that after the Match with a Portugal Lady, (for that is the only
Title his Lordship allows the Queen) the Duke and his Party made Proclamation
to the World, that We were like to have no Children, and he must be the Certain
Heir: where is the World? and where is the Proclamation? He says the Duke took
his Seat in Parliament, as Prince of Wales; but his Lordship knows, that the
Seat on the Right Hand of the State, was, and is reserved for the Prince of
Wales, the Duke took that on the Left Hand; the Printed Pictures of the House
of Peers, sitting upon the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, show, that this is
no Innovation; and His Royal Highness had the same Seat, when the King his
Father called the Parliament at Oxford. He urges, that the Duke had his Guards
about him, upon the same Floor with the King, and so the King was every Night
in his Power: It was a timorous ambition that lost so many opportunities. But
what an Impudence is this? The Duke never had Guards; they are the Kings, the
King pays them, they wait in their turn upon the King, and have but the Name of
the Duke, as the Foot-Regiments have of Colonel Russel, and my Lord Craven; so
the Duke was every Night in the Kings Power. Next he fires his greatest Guns,
The Duke is plainly the Head of the Plot; By whose evidence? Long before the
Duke was named, Mr. Oats declared to the Lords, that he had no more to accuse;
if he accuse him now, and Oats be divided against Oats, how can his Testimony
stand good? Bedloe said as much; and here appears no Evidence, where the
greatest would be little enough I say nothing of a Presbyterian Plot; but (with
his Lordships leave) what has been, may be. The Calling, the Proroguing, and
the Dissolving of Parliaments, are so absolutely in the King, that they ought
to be Riddles to a Subject. When the Duke was Commanded to leave the Kingdom, I
appeal to all the World, how readily, how Submissively he obeyed; and comparing
his immediate Obedience, with the obstinate Refusal of others, who still stay
in opposition to the Kings Command, let any Impartial man of Sense decide,
which has showed most Loyalty and Duty. His Lordship and his Party (for he
says, We) expect every hour, that the Court should join with the Duke, against
them; But I find, the Court is as hard a Word, as the People, and as boldly,
and as odly used; If by that Word, he means the King, all his Lordships
Rhetoric will scarce persuade us, that the King should Conspire with the Duke,
against His own Crown, and His own Life; If not, what can the Court do without
the King, and against the Nation? Besides, his Lordship has too many Friends
among the Courtiers, to suspect them; and the Duke has met with too much
Ingratitude, to trust them. His Lordship avers as truly* that the King has
declared the Duke to be Dangerous; as, That His Royal Highness is now raising
men in Scotland, that whole Council, that whole Kingdom, will disprove Him; And
by the apparent falsehood of his Assertion, let all men judge of the Truth of
the rest. If the Arms, the Garrisons, etc. be in such hands as the King thinks
safe, We are safe too; But if not, it concerns His Mujesty to secure them,
since his Lordship declares, the King is to be trusted with nothing, till he
has Resigned himself Himself to his Lordship, and his Party, and is wholly
theirs; and yet then too, He must trust their good Nature, and Surrender upon
Discretion; They will allow Him no other Terms, no, not to be Himself, and have
His Senses, unless they can fright Him out of them. I will yet charitably hope,
that the pretended Author is abused; It concerns him to vindicate himself, by
wishing, as I do, That the true Author may have the same Fate, that his Speech
had, by Order of the House of Peers.

FINIS.

