A LETTER FROM THE COMMANDERS AND OFFICERS OF THE FLEET Of this COMMONWEALTH,
Unto General MONCK in SCOTLAND. Dated the 4th. of November 1659.

LONDON, Printed by Sarah Griffin for Thomas Hewer, and are to be sold at her
house in Eliots Court in the little Old Baily, 1659.

A LETTER FROM THE COMMANDERS AND OFFICERS of the FLEET of this COMMONWEALTH,
un to General Monck in SCOTLAND
THE deep sense we have of the duty incumbent on us in this day of Englands
fears, trials and temptations, puts us upon this Application to your Honor
unto whom not long since most of us had a more immediate relation, and the
experience we had then of your readiness to receive and grant our just desires,
gives us encouragement to believe this present tender will have the like
Resentment.

As private Members of this Commonwealth, we cannot but take notice of, and in
secret bewail before the Lord, the intestine divisions that are amongst us at
this day; and the dreadful consequence likely to ensue thereupon, when duly
pondered, do exceedingly afflict, and even break our hearts.

All the force, that the common Enemy, (whilst in his strength) were able to
muster up against the good people of this Nation, either at home or from
abroad, could never raise such clouds of fears, nor impresse those terrors on
our hearts, as we nowly under from the apprehension of that evil which attends
that distance, which is between you, and the Army in England, which being
manifested to us by a declaration lately sent from Scotland, and published by
your Command and resolutions therein expressed, of your vindicaing the late
Parliament in opposition to the general proceeding of the General Councils of
Officers here. We have taken the boldness not only as private Christians, but
in our public capacity as Officers of the Fleet to beseech you (in the bowels
of mercy and compassion to this your native Country, and especially to all the
Lords people therein, whose interest we remember has formerly been precitious
to you.) seriously to consider.

1. Whether the undertaking you are engaged in, will not make the hearts of the
righteous in these Nations sad, whom the Lord has not made sad, and strengthen
the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way; It
being obvious to us where ever we come, that few or none take pleasure in your
proceedings but the Cavaleers, who make their boast of you, and place their
confidence in you, which as it is irksome to us to hear, so we trust, and
shall pray, that the Lord will preserve you from such a defection, as knowing
that never any prospered that helped them.

2. Whether this sudden Resolution against your Brethren of the Army on account
of their late transactions, have not some proportion with what the Israelites
intended against the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, and half tribe of Manasseth, when
they had built an Altar of Memorial on this side Jordan, and whether the same
means, (if used by you for information of matter of fact as by them) might not
through the Lords blessing have the same effect, and thereby not only bloodshed
be prevented, but the work of Reformation carried on.

And truly though we shall not undertake to justify the Army in their late
Action, as being very unable to judge of such important affairs, (not having
been of their Council (yet we hope that in the integrity of their heart, and
innocence of their hands, they have done this thing which we apprehend to be
the ground of your dissatisfaction; And on this occasion we crave leave to
remind you, that as you were satisfied with the former dissolution of this very
Parliament in the year 1653. and were pleased to continue your command at Sea
in that Juncture, (when as the undertaking of the late Lord General Cromwell
was not so clear to others) and through the blessing of God obtained two signal
Victories against the Dutch, even in that Interregnum, so we earnestly desire
you will hearken unto, and receive satisfaction from, the Officers of the Army,
in what they have to offer in this particular.

3. We humbly offer to consideration, whether in your own Observation, it be
not apparent, that this Army have in their actings hitherto Cordially designed
the advancement of Gods glory, and the promoting and incoragement of godliness
and virtue though in persons of different judgments, and persuasions, and
whether the cause of God, and his people has not hereby been preserved, and
maintained against all opposition.

4. Whether by such an undertaking (if prosecuted,) the Common Enemy in
Scotland will not soon recover strength, and become as obnoxious to England, as
in former times, though of late through your singular prudence industry and
care they have been kept under.

And whether the espousing of an interest (distinct from your brethren of the
Army in England as is reported) contrary to those righteous principles, that
have hitherto been contended for, will not (instead of purchasing our desired
Liberties) render the good people of these Nations to a condition of perfect
thraldom, and bondage.

The state of Affairs being such in our weak apprehensions we have taken this
freedom to unbosom our hearts to your Honor, and shall earnestly pray they may
take some place with you, in order to the begetting of a good Understanding,
and agreement between your self, and your brethren here, that both you and
they, as also our selves in our several stations by Land and Sea, may with one
heart, and consent be found doing the Lords Work in this present Generation, in
opposition to all Corrupt interests whatsoever; In attending whereunto, a
blessing may be expected from the Lord; In him we are

Nov. 4th. 1655. Your Honors humble Servants Rich. Stayner. John Lambert. Tho.
Lunn. John Bourne. Robert Clark Tho. Sparling. Bartho. Ketcher Charles Wager.
Rich. Newbery. Henry Fenn. Fran. Allen. Nath Brown. Peter Bowen. William
Go^^^an Ju^^ Stoakes. Anth. ^^vning. Robert Story. Henry Pack. Ja^ Grove. Edw..
Witheridge. Rich. H^lb^^k. Christoph. Myngs.



