A LETTER from IRELAND, giving an Account of a Bloody Engagement between the
Protestants at Londonderry, and the Irish Papists near that Place; with the
Particulars of the Routing of the whole Popish Army, etc.
A Letter Yesterday arrived from Dublin, which says, That several Wagons of
wounded Officers, were come to that City, and that those of Londonderry in a
late Sally with the greatest part of the Garrison had routed the Popish Army,
killing several Thousands, raised the Seige, and retook the Fort of Kilmore,
and returned with a Vast Booty; and that the Flower of their Army was killed
and taken; and that those of Dublin were so exasperated at the News, they were
much ado restrained from doing Violence to the Protestants. And the Letters
Yesterday from Liverpoole are to the same effect, That the Garrison of
Londonderry had in a late Sally killed an incredible Number of Papists, and
raised the Siege: That the Marquis de Pusigan, and the French Bombardeer were
both dead of the Wounds they received in the Sallies. And those from Whitehaven
give an Account of about an Hundred Irish Protestant Gentlemen, who had been in
those Parts for some time, having spent what Moneys they brought over, would
try an Exploit at Sea; and accordingly, well Arming themselves with two Ships,
Steered for Ireland, and Sailed to a place, Called, Dunhalady, wherein were Two
Irish Companies, who upon the Approach of the Ships, thinking the English Fleet
was not far off, ran away; so the Gentlemen landing, opened the Prison, and set
free Three Hundred Protestants, and Plundering the Town, brought away a great
Booty, with an Hundred Papists, the Chief of the Town.

London, Printed for A. R. 1689.


