A LETTER FROM JACK the COBBLER, To any Body.
ENvy and Malice, two Twins of the old Seducer, never appeared in any Age so
visible as in ours. I suppose there are very few but his Disciples will deny,
when it shall be considered how many there are, that Act as if the fullness of
the Devil dwelt in them Bodily; a sort of Creatures who value no more the Act
of Oblivion, than the deserting of their Master, when their own Interest comes
to the Stake; and yet in all places these Men roar 41, etc. Good God shall we
never be rid of Jesuitical Knaves, Fools and Fanatics; but that is a Mercy our
sins will not permit; and we must still see them Reign great in the popular
Vogue. What a dainty thing is a List of the once intended Council of State, in
some men's gusto; and no doubt the little fellow the Transcriber hopes one day
for a better preferment for his happy hit, than what stands in the way to
Paddington; which some are ready to say he merits, for having not only broke
the Laws of the Land, but of Christianity it self; how maliciously (not to say
foolishly) has he foisted his Paper upon the World, telling a Story at all
Adventures, without any Explanation, and so he may spit a little Venom at an
imaginary Enemy, cares not how much he bespatters one of the greatest of the
English Hero's as well as others of a lower Sphere; for by his scurrilous
Pamphlet he has reduced them into the Rank of the greatest Enemies to our
glorious Monarchy; but I leave him to his pleasing Ideas of having been an
Author, and pass on to another Gentleman or two with their Letters of Advice
to, etc. What an Age is this, when all Men are or would be thought Polititions
which I believe these Gentlemen have as much reason to Triumph in, as their
pretended Friendships. And one of them would do well to consider what himself
tells us, viz. That before Government was settled in the first Ages of the
World, that eternal Rule of Justice of doing to all men as they would they
should do unto them, was an Obligation even to the very Heathens themselves.

As for that to the E. of S. who has deserved so well of the Nation, I think it
not fit to be spoke of, when his Lordship's named, it being a mess of such
Tarpolling stuff, as shows the Author sailed with a brisk Gale, when he fetched
it from the Antipodes of Sense. But now to the Judicious Philo-Patris with his
Expedients. Come Sirs here is your Famoso have we not (says he) been often
deluded with the subleties and contrivances of the buisy Jesuits: True who
doubts it, but the stings behind for this had been nothing: if he had not
joined the Sons of Corah to 'um an excellent way of Late. The Citizens cannot
readily agree who shall be chosen Sheriff's, strait the Murder of an excellent
Prince is brought upon the Stage, a brave man at Parallels (no doubt he has
heard of Aristotle, but you will say, what has the Cobbler to do with the
Stagerite or his Art of Reasoning, but of that he intends an account when
Philo-Patris appears to back hi^ Arguments to the Ld. M.) shall we still be
deluded with such ratiocinators, have we not enough smarted by fooleries, but
must we still be Cursing of Meroz, do not we see those who do not understand
Principles themselves make a noise at others, and loose time in their shops,
presuming to instruct Governors. Yes, we have an eminent Instance of it, a
Letter to my Lord Major, etc. But my Lord, why shall we permit our Adversaries
to triumph over us, with their Noise and Nonsense? How afraid of a sudden the
poor Man is, and yet how unreasonable, you may judge, when himself with so
strong a Guard, maintained that Post; but considering that presently after he
has to do both with Rome and Geneva, I cannot blame him for being almost in a
Frenzy at the sight of so many Popes. But well, since Righteousness is the
Glory of a Nation, let us choose them for Magistrates, who never committed any
Sin; for why should Lying have any privilege above Oaths? In doing which, we
shall show a gallant Testimony for Truth; and how ready we are to maintain the
true Interest of our King and the Reformed Religion; let us render to Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, and not sell
our Birthrights for humor, or a Mess of Pottage. Praised be God we have a
good King, and may those that follow after him, endeavor to imitate his
kindness to so famous a place; and may we not I pray God, run into the
mischiefs we fear, by pressing upon ill Mediums, under the pretense of wholesome
Councils. Let us hate less, and show it by forbearing to speak or write things
which create Heats and Feuds which I dare to say, has spoiled some, but never
made one good Man. Let us consider the different Circumstances of men in their
Education, and what Sentiments of things that gives, and how that morally it is
impossible, that either blind or dim sighted Men should run as readily in the
same Ring as those whose Eyes are in their prime; and never had any mists
before 'um. This is the way in part, that must make us if ever, a happy people,
and a flourishing City. Let Us not only in our Talk, but in our Lives, Convince
men of the Excellency of our Religion. So prays a true Son of the Church, an
humble Subject, and a Lover of his Country.

JACK the COBBLER.
July the 20th. 1680.
What would this Cobbler have, cry now our Men of Wit,
In Faith he cannot tell: and therefore he has writ.

FINIS.

