A LETTER From a GENTLEMAN to his FRIEND. Concerning the Second Edition of the
DECLARATION AGAINST Antinomian Errors, etc. Lately published by Geo. Griffith,
Matthew Mead, Step. Lobb, Richard Tailor, John Nesbitt.


He that is first in his own Cause ((...) in his own Quarrel) seems just, but
(or till) his Neighbor comes and searches him, Pro. 18. 17. LONDON: Printed
in the Year, 1699.

A LETTER From a Gentleman in the City to his Friend.
SIR,
SINCE you will not admit of my excuses, I can no longer resist the importunity
you express, that I would give you my thoughts about the present state of
Affairs, amongst the Ministers of the Congregational persuasion: more
especially of what relates to the Declaration lately Published by some of them.
You're not insensible how dangerous a task it is to unravel the mysteries of
the Leaders of the People, without drawing the Odium of a whole Party of upon
the bold undertaker, though the charge be never so Just and Righteous: This is
owing to a fundamental Maxim instilled into us from our infancy, That to expose
the Preachers is to ridicule and banter Religion out of the World, to introduce
Atheism and all impiety, as if the virtues, or depravities of that sort of Men
did add or diminish, from the vital Power and Energy of true Religion, which
stands upon so sure a Foundation, that even the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against it. But so far has this Poison diffused it self into the hearts
of most Men, that the discoveries God has made unto us in his Word how he will
be worshipped, and what he expects from us, are not fully believed, except they
be confirmed by those we commonly call Divines, whom to set in a clear light
before the Generality of People, is to rob them of the better half of their
worship; who thereupon are apt to cry out, with Micah, ye have taken away my
Gods which I made, and the Priest, and what have I more? And for my part I must
frankly own, that this Poison had so far infected me, that all the Antidotes I
ever took could not effectually eradicate the malignity of it, 'till by
continued observation I found our Ecclesiastical Donns so far from being
elevated above those failings common to mankind, that in many of them those
very corruptions discovered themselves more predominate than in others: But
whether the station wherein they are placed magnifies every Peccadillo in them,
or whether their degeneracy be really so great (with which subject I may
possibly hereafter entertain you) is not at present my intention to enquire:
But I shall proceed to lay before you my Thoughts upon a half sheet, a few Days
since emitted into the World, and affixed to the Declaration you wot of, by
five Congregational Ministers, as they style themselves: And the matters of
fact I shall faithfully represent to you as they came to my knowledge, to the
relation of which you will the more readily give Credit, when you consider, I
cannot Justly be supposed to be biased in my Judgment to this or the other
Party, whether Presbyterian or Independent, having never actually joined with
either of them, and therefore am under no temptation to espouse one cause more
than another; but as Friend to Truth, and in detestation of that gross
Legerdemain lately imposed upon the World, I shall give you a short Narrative
of their Advertisement published with the Second Edition (as they call it) of
their Declaration, and then sum up the whole in a succinct description of what
part each of the five Subscribers acted in it.

For their Advertisement then, you shall know that the first part of it runs in
the following strain.

It having been reported and industriously spread abroad, that the Declaration
against Antinomian Errors, etc. was not considered, and approved of by the
Congregational Ministers in and about this City. (Which is in manifest
contradiction to the title Page and Preface.)

I shall not examine the ingenious style this passage is couched in, nor take
notice of the Parenthesis, aptly placed, as they may think, after a full
Period, the supposed Learning of the Amanuensis to that Reverend Society
shrowding him from censure of incorrectness: But I shall lead you directly into
the understanding of this intricate matter.

You must know, that some time since a party of the Congregational Ministers
held a Consistory at the Amsterdam Coffee-house, and other places, to draw up
something to satisfy the World that they did not any way warp toward a hateful
busieness called Antinomianism, and having their fancies quickn'd by the name
of the place they were in, after many debates, they picked up some Errors from
Amsterdam, or hard by, held some hundred years ago, and strenuously confuted
them by Dr. Goodwyn, Dr. Owen, and the Assemblies Catechism, with the help of
Dr. South. This their composition crept into the World in so clandestine a
manner, that many who were adherers to them, and their interest, could scarcely
be persuaded to believe they were the Authors of that Elaborate piece; which
gave birth to an Anomymous Pamphlet, intitul'd Considerations upon the
Congregational Ministers Declaration: this some conceive to have been wrote by
a Presbyterian; therein he endeavors to demonstrate by many Arguments, that it
was not probable the Congregational Ministers were the Authors of that
Declaration, and in a severe passage toward the Conclusion, seems to throw it
upon the Celebrated Lunatic, Trepidantium Malleus, who boasts that he has
highly merited of the World by so happily exploding Mr. Baxter's Errors and his
Followers, and who really engaged in a work of the like design with this
Declaration some Months ago. But whoever was the Author of that Pamphlet, it is
certain it had this effect, that those Reverend Sirs, who before had foisted
into the World that, supposed spurious, Declaration, being now touched to the
quick, do boldly own it to be the legitimate product of their strict scrutiny
into the Records of the Dead, by prefixing five Names to it, viz.

Geo. Griffith, Mat. Mead, Steph. Lobb, Richard Tailor, John Nesbitt.


Now upon this goodly Proceeding of theirs we may justly make the following
Reflections.

1. Hereby we see unto what miserable Subterfuges Men are forced to betake, to
palliate that Pride and Arrogance which their aspiring after a Power they had
no right to, had involved them in. It is clear to every one who knows any thing
of the Congregational Principles, that, without the consent of their Churches,
the Ministers have no Authority to engage in such a Work, and in all
Probability the thoughts of this made them ashamed at first to own it for
theirs. But as one Error is introductive of another, so through a fatal Mistake
(which is an evident Demonstration they were conscious they had transgressed,
by publishing this Declaration upon their own Heads) they have egregiously
exposed one of the Brethren of the Conclave, though not of the number of the five
Subscribers; who to palliate (according to Instruction no doubt) the
Publication of their First Edition, without their Names, gave out that those
Errors were of such Consequence, that except they had more fully weighed their
Collection of Answers to them, their Design would have proved abortive: And
they must then have inevitably exposed that Learning and Zeal (poor and blind
as it is) wherewith they have for some time amused ignorant, well disposed
People. Add to this, another short Remark, which will yet expose their
Combination somewhat more, They call it a Second Edition, whereas, in Truth, it
is very much questioned, whether many of the first Impression found vent; and
it is generally thought, that the Advertisement, to which these five Names are
affixed, is stich'd by the Bookseller to their Declaration; which, with a new
Title Page, is all the Alteration it has undergone.

2. We cannot but note, that they have hereby obliged the World with a taste of
that Learning, which they account sufficient for themselves, and their Churches
too* For being thoroughly convinced of the Ignorance and Inability of their
respective Flocks to assert their own Principles (as the last Subscriber of the
Five, very sagaciously has asserted) they, like true Champions, by their single
Prowess have defended that Cause which none opposed, and confuted those Errors
which no body holds, or charges them with.

3. Hereby they demonstrate to the World, how happy the present Constitution of
their Churches is; since the Pastors can so easily ravish from the People, that
Authority, Order and Discipline, which all of them, when first they were called
to their Charge, found them in, and place it alone in themselves; which makes
me judge, without any breach of Charity, that they have found their Lording
over God's Heritage so sweet, and so profitable, that they would not be very
much averse, upon the first Overtures of a Treaty, to attempt to make the two
Sticks one again: And then they may exercise Despotick Power without control,
beating their People with a heavy Hand.

But it is high time to come to the other part of their Advertisement, which
shuts up in these goodly Phrases.

We, whose Names are hereunto subscribed, to the and the truth of Matter of
Fact may appear, to the Conviction of every Reader, do declare, that (excepting
two or three Ministers, who go under the same Denomination with us, to whom we
thought not fit to communicate the said Declaration) all the Pastors of
Congregational Churches, in and about this City, did consider, and unanimously
express their Approbation of it.

And here, Sir, for brevity sake, I shall slightly pass over the awakard Style,
this Sentence, (as well as the former) is expressed in. Have these great
would-be-Representatives of all the Congregational Churches in and about
London, with all their Academick Literature, attained to no more Judgment in
their Mother Tongue, than scarce to be able to write true English? This indeed
would be a diverting Subject to paraphrase upon, had I not matters of greater
Moment to communicate to you, which will expose their Honesty somewhat more
than their harsh English does their Accuracy. I will not, in what I shall say,
take the method most of them do in their Pulpits, when they either force a Text
to speak what it never intended, by their impertinent Glosses and Distinctions,
or constrain it to go with them much longer than the Subject will bear; but I
will give you, in short, my Division of the above quoted Advertisement,
according to the Genuine Interpretation of the Words, which will unfold to us,
what Doctrine is contained in them.

Then let us see how Magisterially these Donns open themselves.

We, whose Names are hereunto subscribed, to the end the Truth of matter of
Fact may appear, to the Conviction of every Reader, do declare, etc.

It will not be impertinent to spend a few thoughts upon the Consideration of
who these We are, that so presumptuously take upon them, to be universal
Dictators; and from the vain supposition of their own Merit and Renown, to
convince every Reader of the Truth of matter of Fact. Little Scrutiny made into
the Merit of these Rabbis, will easily show how much Credit we ought to give
to what they assert, and what Influence it will have upon all Men of Sense.

The Two first Subscribers then, as we find them ranked in order, are G. G. and
M. M. whom I put together, not for any Resemblance they bear to each other,
(for they are in some Respects as opposite as the two Poles) but because the
first of them was, by a piece of Policy natural (to the second) decoyed to
affix his Name to this Narrative, though he has since confessed he did not
understand the Intreague, and therefore I shall have nothing more to say of
him: And the rather, because I Am credibly informed Mr. M. gave Directions, that
unless Mr. G. signed the Paper first, his Hand should be blotted out; by which
Stratagem, the good old Gentleman was ensnared, and the odium of his being
found in such Company falls entirely upon his Betrayer; whose design herein I
shall not pretend to unriddle, but leave it to be guessed by you, and others,
who have a clear insight into this Man of Design: only I must add, that I Am
apprehensive his engaging to support himself and others, in Practices no way
warrantable, will revive a Report which has been whispered about the Town of a
certain House and Garden surreptitiously obtained from the true Proprietors.

Step. Lobb, Richard Tailor, and John Nesbit, bring up the Rear, and are the
Persons whom I shall next entertain you with. Mr. T. I must in Justice defend
from Censure, and acquit him from any sinister Dealings in this Affair, he
being probably influenced by the Persuasions of Crafty Men, to whose Wiles the
Easiness of his Temper leaves him exposed; to his own great Disadvantage, and
the Encouragement of their Insults.

Mr. L. you have heard much of in the last Reign, and not a little in this,
though upon other Accounts. Then a Politian and a mighty Courtier, being a
Secretioribus to the late Tyrant: Now a rough and surly Divine, fighting his
betters with his Pen; the common Scribler of what the Synod, meeting at Pinners
Hall, alias Amsterdam Coffee-house, alias a House in Moor-Fields, please to
employ him in: One while drawing his Dagger in secret, another while fighting
the whole Synagogue at St. Hellen's with his Brandished Sword in public. This
Man of Contention, with his Friend Mr. N. were the great Promoters and Inditers
of this Pamphlet, these two are intimately acquainted with all the steps
relating to this quarrelsome Declaration. This poor Wretch Mr. N. is least of
all to be excused, for that he discovers his want of Common Civility, which
should teach him to be thankful to a Nation, that has put Money in his Pocket,
and set the Beggar on Horseback, who now in requital would ride over the Necks
of his Benefactors; but possibly he may have found some Encouragement for what
he has done, in one of the Fathers, which he delights so much to quote, though
with as little Pertinency as ever was sung the Ballad of Chevy Chase.

But I shall not spend my time in discovering that to you, concerning the two
last mentioned, which you are no Stranger to; since the Spirit with which they
were acted, will be best seen, when you understand the Methods they took, to
persuade the World, that the publishing their Declaration was by the unanimous
Consent of all the Congregational Ministers in and about this City. I will not
question but the Conclave at Pinners Hall had sounded the Minds of their
Brethren of the same Denomination, as they call it, with themselves, how far
they would join with them in the Publication of their elaborate Piece; what
Resentment the Majority had of it shall not now be told, though it is reported Dr.
Chauncy, Mr. Ness, Dr. Singleton, Mr. Short, Mr. Harris, Mr. Meidell, etc.
cared not to intermeddle in a Case that concerned them not. This Last, was
formerly a Lutheran, but some Years ago brought over to the knowledge of the
Truth, and is now Pastor to a Congregational Church, his Assent therefore they
most earnestly desired, he being a faithful Confessor of Jesus Christ, and a
great Sufferer for him; to obtain which, Mr. L. the Scribe, by order of Mr. N.
the Dictator, writes him a Letter, which whether more full of Pride, or
Ignorance, is difficult to define, wherein he tells him how Harmonious the
Ministers all were to usher the second Edition of their Declaration into the
World, with an Attestatation to it under their hands, that there was but One
more besides himself, of whose Consent they at all doubted, and that One had
been spoke to, and therefore in trust* (as he says) requested him not to
obstruct so good a Work, lest they should be obliged to let the World know, by
exposing Mr. Meidell's Name in Print, that he was the only Man amongst them,
who refused to join with them.

But perhaps you are as tired as I am, in tracing the hidden By-ways of these
assuming (...), I shall therefore sum up all I am minded at this time to
communicate, in a few Queries, which I leave to your serious Consideration.

Query, 1. Whether by publishing, a shameless half-side, to vindicate the
Reputation of their former title Page and Preface, which, they say, met with a
manifest Contradiction; these men do not at the same time discover an
overweening conceit of their own title Page and Preface, and a measure of
Insolence beyond what is common, when they take it in such Dudgeon, that the
Authority of a nameless title Page and Preface is called into Question?

Que. 2. Whether these Men by insinuating, that all to whom they thought fit to
communicate their Declaration approved of it, become not Guilty at least of a
very gross fallacy? since Mr. Meidell, to whom they did think fit to
communicate it (if S. L --, and J. N --, may be credited) openly declared his
dislike of it to them at Pinners-Hall. Surely such sly and untrue Insinuations
ill become Ministers of Christ, who should renounce all hidden things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, etc.

Que. 3. Whether by saying, that their Declaration was approved by all the
Congregational Ministers in and about London, but by two or three, to whom they
thought not fit to communicate it, these Men do not manifestly contradict what
S. L. wrote Mr. C. M. when he tells him that all had approved of it but One,
and that One had been spoke to about it. How these things can hang together
they should best tell, but 'till I better understand their minds in this
matter, I must apply our old Proverb to them. Liars need good Memories.

Que. 4. Whether S. L. when he wrote to Mr. C. M. and assured him that what he
did communicate to him was in trust (emplying his being entrusted by all the
Ministers) when indeed but one or two could be found to have set him on work,
did therein act the part of a trusty Scribe to his Masters all, or like an
upright Christian, and faithful Minister, fit to be put in trust with the
Gospel? This Query I leave with the Conscience of that busy Emperick.

Que. 5. Whether these Men have not evidently run beyond the tedder of
Independent Principles, in publishing this Declaration without the Knowledge of
their respective Churches, and in unwarrantably concerning themselves with
Pastors of other Churches? But alas! it is to be feared, many that go under the
name of Independents, affect and exercise as much Tyranny and Usurpation, over
their own Churches and fellow Servants, as any of other denominations, that
pretend to no such purity; Witness their counterfeit Agreement, first
clandestinely patcht up by Clubbs of Preachers, without the Knowledge of their
Churches, and afterward as arbitrarily imposed upon them.

Que. 6. Whether, by mustering up a Cargo of Antinomian Errors, espoused by no
Party of Men, or single Preacher in England at this day, these Men have
discovered, most of a vain Itch of Pride to show their reading, or of an angry
humor of contention, to be quarrelling, though they know not at what, or of a
weak air of impertinence, to bring somewhat on the Stage, nothing to the
purpose, or of a malicious Design against Souls, to infect our air with some
German Antinomianism, which they have raked out of the Grave of Oblivion, where
they have lain now this hundred years, (as a Poet of their own said) and
against the venom of which their poor Antidotes, scraped from Dr. etc. are much
too weak.

Que. 7. Whether the insolent Methods these Preachers have taken to terrify men
more conscientious than themselves, into a compliance with their base
proceedings, do not discover them to be acted rather by the Spirit of Belial
then of Jesus? Certainly it is not according to Christ's rule, to Stigmatize
others with the Title of Antinomians, etc. that cannot run our length, nor does
it savor of true Christian humility for any to be perking above their Brethren
with such a Phrase of contempt, as We thought them not fit. It is to be feared,
these Men that think others not fit for their notice, in a way of respect,
would think them very fit to be degraded, and delivered over to the Secular
Power, why else should one of their number say, we want a little more of the
Magistrate on our side. And what other meaning can be given of that passage,
wherein they tell us, they Judge themselves obliged, to bear with and exercise
compassion and tenderness to their fellow Servants, chiefly because our
Governors have by a Law tolerated us, and partly because the Savoy Confession
has taught them so to do. But for any Scripture or Grace produced by them for
Lenity, Quere, Where it is?

Que. 8. Lastly, Whether upon the whole (to set the Saddle upon the right
Horse) this Stratagem was not contrived, and promoted principally by one or two
wily Men, that stand conv^ct of Demi Arminianism in Principle, and true
Antinomianism and Intrusion in Practice, in order to the raising a Dust of
forged Antinomianism and Intrusion on others, so to hinder the persuit of
themselves, for their Scandalous Lives, Ignorance of the Gospel, Invasions,
etc. And here, Sir, you must needs take notice how craftily they labor, to
bring into black Suspicion, by base Innuendoes, the Persons and Ministry of
such whom they most dread, treating them in Print, as the Chieftain at Stepney,
formerly served good old Mr. Lawrence in the Pulpit; endeavoring to load them
with Calumnies sufficient, that some may stick upon them, and themselves may be
accounte^ Innocent.

A true Resolution of this Query, would serve at once to clear up the
Reputation of several; that in all appearance were decoyed into this
Subscription, by the Craft of others, and that followed the^ Steps, as the
innocent Men did Absalom in their Simplicity, not knowing any thing; and at the
same time hereby we should see, a little of that great Guilt that lies on some
Men's Consciences, who though they would be thought Reverend Men, are ever afraid
of having themselves laid open: But let such consider that the Secrets of their
Hearts will one Day be discovered, then it will be known with what Spirit and
Aims this scandalous Pamphlet was published. In the mean time, I profess to
you, Sir, (and you that know my Disposition, will believe me, whatever others
think) that nothing but the highest concern for abused Truth, would have drawn
me to say all this, and thus to have exposed Men whom, but for the undeceiving
of the World, I would rather have been unconcerned with, as well knowing he
that touches upon the failings of the Priest, is like to have the barking of
all the Dogs in the Parish. But I must be of the same Mind with Luther, quoted
in their Preface, To think Truth to be of so inestimable a Value, that it is
better Heaven and Earth be blended together in Confusion, than that the least
Dust thereof should perish.

FINIS.

