A LETTER FROM A LAWYER in the COUNTRY TO A Member of Parliament: OR,
INDEMNITY the Effect of VACANCY.
SIR,
I Remember in one of your former Letters you were pleased to desire me to send
you the general Opinion of the Country concerning the Vacancy of the Throne,
and how they seemed to stand affected upon it: And I then returned you in
Answer, That your Proceedings therein were very well approved of; for it could
not be imagined that so many of the Nobility and Gentry would have been so
ready to have hazarded their Lives and Fortunes as they did without a just and
reasonable Cause; nor that so many Gentlemen of Estate and Quality would have
appeared in this Parliament, if they had not been entirely convinced of the
safety and innocence of their appearance; neither the People of England who
chose them, nor the Persons elected, could be imagined to admit themselves
guilty of High Treason, the greatest Crime of the Law: and if there had not
been a Vacancy of the Throne, by the late King's Abdication of the Government,
no less a Crime than High Treason could have been imputed to them. But since
that Point has been so solemnly determined, the Nation is entirely satisfied,
that the Parliament have thereby set forth a Declaration of Indemnity to
Themselves and all Others; and therefore it was that by the universal Consent
of all People, Their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY were proclaimed in
all places with so much joy and satisfaction: There was something in that Vote,
that pleased all manner of persons, as soon as they had a right Notion of it;
they looked upon the Nation as newly Baptized from all its Sins and Corruptions,
and that every Man was to begin the course of his Life upon a new Basis and
Foundation; when they saw no public accusation was like to happen, every Man
began to condemn himself; some their Ambition, Vanity and Pride that cast a
Mist before their Eyes; others their mistaken interest and fears: some began to
review the Principles of Loyalty and Government which they had imbibed from
their Infancy, under the Doctine of Passive- Obedience; others condemned their
unfortunate compliance of doing evil, that good might come of it: but all
looked back with Safety, as well as resolution of Amendment, upon their past
Errors. Those who never saw any Changes of Government, and had little
experience in such Affairs, thought themselves sufficiently provided with a
Stock of bought Wit, to make them good Subjects for the Public, as well as
cautious and prudent as to themselves. Thus whilst every Body reflected upon
their own Miscarriages, they could not but see that a few Evil Ministers at
Helm had been the cause of all this Misery, both to Themselves in particular,
as well as the Nation in general; and therefore some extraordinary Act of
Attainder against those Evil Counselors, was all that was expected, or can be
approved of by the generality of the People of England: And the rather, because
it is so publicly known with what Zeal His Majesty has recommended a most
General and Express Act of Oblivion for all his Subjects, with Exceptions only
of such Evil Counselors as you in your great Prudence and Mercy should think
fit. Matters being in this posture with us in the Country, and such being the
common expectations of all Men, I must confess I found that general Vote
against those that omitted to take the Oaths, did not only affect the Persons
concerned, who, I Will assure you, are very numerous, and have many Friends and
Relations that pity their Case: but I perceived all sorts of People concerned
at it; for they looked upon it as a leading Card to their own Miscarriages, tho
of another nature: All those that were concerned so much as in Addresses and
Abhorrences in the Reign of King Charles the Second, who are a great part of
the Church of England; and all those that signed Addresses, or other Papers for
taking away the Test and Penal Laws, who are a great part of the Dissenters,
(not to mention a multitude of greater Offenders, who cannot expect to fare
better) are terribly afraid of these Proceedings; and where there is Fear,
there you will always find Hatred and Aversion. So that I may safely say, That
the Consequences of these things are dangerous at such a critical juncture of
time; and tho the evil effects thereof may not be so visible to the World, yet
I fear this Nation may too soon be sensible of them. Therefore it is that I
have thought fit to put you in mind of that Abdication and Vacancy, which being
voted by you as a matter necessary both for your own particular Indemnity, as
well as the general Interest of the Nation, the Benefit thereof cannot without
some Inequality (not to say more) be denied to the more general Miscarriages
and Offenses of the Nation. But there are some zealous Men in the World, who
being lately freed from severe Usage themselves, are not contented with Revenge
against their particular Adversaries, unless they can involve all Mankind
(Friends as well as Foes) in Troubles and Afflictions. And from such Men as
these, who are neither willing to admit of this, nor any other Act of
Indemnity, I meet with several Objections, which I thought fit to give a sudden
Answer to, for your private satisfaction; and that with all the submission and
deference imaginable to the Wisdom of our Superiors at this time assembled in
Parliament.

Object. I. That nothing is more common in our Law Books, than to find Offenses
committed in one King's Reign, to be called in question and punished in the
Reign of his Successors; and that Their present Majesty's (whom God long
preserve) being Crowned King and Queen of England, etc. there is the same
reason in this, as in all other Cases.

Resp. There are indeed many Cases and Instances of that kind; but the reason
why there may be a Retrospect in such Cases, is a clear Illustration why there
may not be in this. There is as much difference between the two Cases, as there
is between a Descent, and Purchase at Common Law: The Heir by Descent may
distrain upon the Tenant for Rent, partly incurred in the Life of the Ancestor;
but a person that comes in by Purchase, cannot. The Law casts a Freehold upon
the Heir by Descent, before entry; upon a Purchaser it does not. But in the
Case of the Crown, there seems a much greater difference; for in the Case of a
Descent to the Crown, the same Politic Capacity remains in esse, tho in
another person; and therefore it is said in such a Case, That the King never
dies, but he is said only demittere Coronam upon the next Heir; for in such a
Case the Law allows of no Interval, or Inter-Regnum, but the Regal Power is
immediately devolved upon the next Heir by construction of Law. And since the
Politic Capacity remains without interruption, and the Execution (or punishing
Power) of the Law is lodged in the King, by reason of the Politic Capacity;
and since all Offenses are committed contra Coronam and Dignitatem suam,
against the King by reason of his Politic Capacity, and not by reason of his
Natural; that is, against him quatenus Rex, and not quatenus Homo: where the
Regal Power continues without interruption, and therein the Executive Power of
the Law; there Offenses against that Power do continue also, and may be
punished.

But in this present Case, where there is a total Vacancy of the Throne by the
late King's Abdication of the Government, both the Natural and Politic
Capacity, and therein the entire Subject of the executive (or punishing) Power
of the Law, is in Judgment and Construction of Law totally merged and extinct
by lesser and Devolution of the Government upon the People; and where there is
a total failure both of the Politic Capacity, and of the Executive (or
punishing) Power, there must, by consequence, be an Indemnity to all Offenders.

Where there is a total Vacancy of the Throne, or Regal Power, there must be a
Vacancy of Offenses against that Power.

And the late King James could not Abdicate the Government, but he must also
Abdicate that which was inseparably annexed to it, viz. the Executive Power of
the Law, unless you will support as great a Miracle as Transubstantiation, by
preserving an Accident, or abstracted Power, without its Subject.

Object. II. There are some Offenses which are not only against the King, but
being against the Fundamental Constitution of the Government, are Offenses
against the People also; and those Offenses may remain, notwithstanding an
Abdication of the Regal and Punishing Power.

Resp. What these Offenses against the People are, we do not find determined in
our Books of the Law; but this I have often read, That the King may pardon all
Offenses whatsoever: And where the King may Abdicate the Government from his
Heirs, tho he could not dispose of it from them, a fortiori, he may Abdicate
the punishment of all Offenses, where he had a right to pardon them.

But secondly, Let the Offenses be of what nature they will, if they must be
punished at this day, the Indictment must run in this manner, for instance, in
the Case of Treason.

Quod A. B. nuper de L. gen' ut falsus proditor' contra Illustrissimum and
Christianissimum Principem Jacobum secundum nuper Angl' etc. Regem, ad tunc
supremum and naturalem Dominum suum, timorem Dei non habens, nec debitam
legianciam suam ponderans, sed instigatione Diabolica seductus cordialem
dilectionem and veram and debitam obedientiam quam verus and fidelis subditus
dict' nuper Regis erga ipsum Regem gereret and de jure gessisse tenebatur,
penitus substrahere delere and extinguere intendens (tali die anno and loco)
false malitiose and proditorie conspiravit imaginatus fuit circumivit and
compassivit dictum nuper Regem interficere, and ad mortem and finalem
destructionem adducere, and so forth. And then concludes, Contra legiantiae
suae debitum ac contra pacem dicti nuper Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suam.

The like form, mutatis mutandis, is to be observed in all lesser Offenses.
Now, if no such Offense can be punished but by Indictment in this form, for
committing such a Fact against the Peace of the late King James, his Crown and
Dignity, since his Crown and Dignity is totally vacated and extinct, how can
any Offenses remain?

Object. III. That by a late Act of Parliament for reviving of Actions and
Processes, and for supplying other Defects relating to Proceedings at Law, it is
provided, That in Indictments, Informations, or Actions, wherein Conclusions
used to be [contra pacem Domini Regis] to conclude [contra pacem Regni,] and
the Indictments shall be good, tho the words [Domini Regis Coronam and
Dignitatem suas] be omitted.

Resp. That this Statute extends only to Offenses committed between the 11th of
December, Anno 1688. and before the 13th day of February following, and not to
any Offenses committed before the late King's departure, nor after the
proclaiming of Their present Majesty's: So that this Statute can be no real
Objection, but on the contrary may rather seem to enforce the precedent
Argument. Nay, here seems an Authority of this present Parliament in this
Point; for they agree, and have thereby determined, That after the Abdication
of the Government, all Indictments contra pacem Domini Regis, Coronam and
Dignitatem suas, are void: But at this day no Offenses committed before the
late King's departure can be punished, but by such an Indictment or
Information; therefore they cannot be punished at all.

Object. IV. That this Opinion is of the first Impression, and only promoted by
some Guilty Lawyer, one of the Ringleaders of all our late Miseries; and that
it would be inconvenient that those Evil Counselors, who by their Advice had
almost sacrificed the Nation to Popery and Slavery, should reap the benefit of
such an Indemnity.

Resp It Is not desired that they should; but such as the Parliament in their
great Wisdom shall think fit, are by all People freely submitted to a Bill of
Attainder. The Representatives of the Nation may, if they please, supply the
defect of a Jury; and, after hearing the Parties in their own Defense, inflict
what Punishment seems just and equitable in their great Judgments upon
particular persons.

This is a Lawyer, you well know, intends nothing but the public Good, and
humbly conceives this Opinion is as ancient as the other upon which it is
grounded: but having for some years withdrawn himself from Practice, humbly
begs a favorable Construction of such an hasty Letter.

As to all those worthy Members of your acquaintance, that neglect their own
Concerns for the public Service of the Nation, you may assure them, That
nothing is so much wanting amongst us in the Country, as an express Act of
Indemnity, which the People do humbly hope that Their Majesty's in their great
Goodness and Clemency will not permit to be any longer delayed, especially
since your own Proceedings give them such a Title to it. When that is past, you
will find England will be united, the Throne established, and no hopes left for
France;

Et praestat CAUTELA quam MEDELA.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
MDCLXXXIX.


