A LETTER FROM Duke Schomberge's CAMP, Giving an Account of the Condition Of
the English and Irish ARMY.

AND A True Account of all the Papists in Ireland, their Number and Estates,
with Reasons for declaring them forfeited, and the several Parties amongst them.

With all the Material Circumstances that relate to that Kingdom.

From the Camp at Dundalke, November 4. 1689.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst: And Published by Randal Tailor over
against Stationers' Hall. 1689.

A Letter from Duke Schombergs Camp, giving an Account of the Condition of the
English and Irish Army.
SIR,
IN compliance with your commands, and discharge of my promise, I will acquaint
you with the State of our Affairs on this side, to which will be added a
distinct character and discrimination of the several Parties amongst the
Papists in this Kingdom, their several Interests, and the Numbers of them, by
which you will be the better enabled to judge how matters are likely to go here.

As to the first part; King James having had particular Information from the
French Traitorous Fugitives (of which you have heard) of the condition of our
Camp, the strength, and weakest parts of our Trenches, where he might most
easily surprise Us; and being assured by them that they would seize one or two
of our Posts; to facilitate his Entrance into our Camp, he adventured to
command his Army on the 14th of September, to advance within one or two Miles
of Us, that he might the better execute his Design; his Army consisted of about
Forty thousand Men, whereof thirty thousand were Armed, the rest had such Arms
as the Country afforded, Sheans and half Pikes; they entrenched themselves,
and waited for the opportunity wherein to surprise Us, but providentially the
Traitors were discovered, seized, and six of the principal of them Executed;
about Two hundred more are sent into England, where, I hope, they will be dealt
with according to their deserts. The Irish being informed that their Plot was
discovered, their hopes being frustrated, they did on the sixth of October set
fire on their Camp, and retreated four Miles with more speed than they came
forward, and posted themselves near the Bogg of Ardee, being always willing to
have so convenient a Retreat as a Bogg at hand.

They had not the courage in all that time to make any Attempt on Us. Indeed,
seldom has it been known that two such Armies have been so long posted so near
each other, and no Action happen between them.

The intemperateness of the Weather, the great Rains, the Flux and Distempers
in King James's Camp, has taken off so many of his Army, that he was compelled
to send his Men into Winter Quarters, a good part of them are at Drogheda, and
a considerable number is sent to Athlone, which is the Center of Ireland; some
are sent to Dublin, and about Five thousand continue Encamped at Ardee.

I suppose you have heard of the death of some of our Soldiers, for it is
impossible for an Army, at this season, to keep the Field in any part of the
world, and that some should not drop off; but the Companies are in some measure
recruited with Northern Protestants who are seasoned to and acquainted with the
Country.

Since I wrote the former, we have a strong report that King James his Forces
that Marched toward Athlone continued their March to James Town and Sligoe,
and have cut off some of our men in each of those places (whose loss we
sensibly lament) the rest retreated, some to Ballyshanon, some to Eniskillin.

Our General intended as soon as our Forces should join us that were detatched
toward Charlemont, to have marched forward toward Dublin. But the wetness and
immoderateness of the season will necessitate our drawing into Winter Quarters,
it being almost impossible for our men to contend any longer with the Extremity
of the Weather.

As to what concerns the several Parties in King James his Army, the whole body
of the Papists in this Kingdom, their Number, Estates, and what may be fit to
do with them, and how they may be made to pay the Charge of their Reduction,
etc. you will find in the Answer to the following Query.

An Answer to that Seasonable and Important Question. Which Party of the Irish
Rebels may be invited to Submission by a second Declaration, or Offer of
Pardon, with most Advantage to His Majesty, to England in respect of Charge,
and to the Protestant Interest in Ireland.
ALL the Papists in that Kingdom, as well those of English Extraction, as the
Natives, are joined in this Rebellion; this being noted, it is expedient (for
resolving the Question) to consider the several Parties amongst them, and the
distinct Interest of each of these Parties which will open the matter, so as it
will be easy to observe which of them are likeliest to be charmed to any
Advantage.

The Popish Clergy and Lawyers have a right to the Van, for they are the
Contrivers and Incendiaries to Rebellion, sworn Vassals to Rome and France,
restless in their Endeavors for Extirpating the Protestant Religion, and
regaining the Church Lands: Should His Majesty offer them any of those Lands,
to buy them off, it would be resented worse than the taking away of Magdalen
College, for our Clergy think them little enough for themselves, and will not
consent that a third or half should be given their Brethren of the Church of
Rome, yet less than the whole (nor that) will not satisfy, for these pant
after the Lives as well as the Livings of the Heretics.

And that this work may be done effectually, both these sorts of men are now
commissioned, and actually in Arms: The Bishops, Priests, etc. (according to
their degrees) are Colonels, Captains Lieutenants, and Ringleaders of the
People; to the greatest Mischiefs of their Secular and Regular Clergy, there
are four Titulur Archbishops, 23 Bishops, 2^ 28 Parish Priests.

Next comes the most numerous part of the Gentry and Nobility, who by their
Rebellion in 1641. forfeited their Estates, of which the Protestants are
seized, these having gained some Military Experience, in foreign parts, are the
flower of the Rebels Arm^d their condition cannot be made worse by any
improsperous event of War; dig they cannot, and they will not easily be
persuaded to return to beggary, nothing less than a good part, or the whole of
the Estates they forfeited will be a bait for them.

As to the common Soldiers, part of them have been dragooning the Protestants
in France, the residue have from their Cradles lived by Theft and Robbery, are
incapable of labor of industry; did these and the former submit being
disbanded, protected and dispersed, they would be more dangerous than now
together in Arms, for they would fill that Kingdom with particular Murders,
Rapes and Robberies, render the Planting of it dangerous of impracticable:
These cannot be saved to any good use, nor transported, but they run to France,
to strengthen that Enemy of Mankind.

As to the Nobility and Gentry that were restored to their Estates by Charles
the Ild's Court of Claims, they were as bloody Rebels as the former (such as
the Marquess of Antrim, etc.) yet had better luck, for these were rewarded with
better Estates for their Murder's, than they lost by their Rebellion: And good
reason if they were commissioned to that Villainy by Charles the First, as they
allege and Charles the Second seemed to countenance in the case of that
Marquess, who was proved by many credible Witnesses to have been in the first
contrivance of the Rebellion in 1641 and to have perpetrated many horrid
Murders, yet that King commanded his Estate to be restored, giving for reason
that he acted nothing in that matter but by Commission from his Father Charles
the Martyr, and by order of his Mother, pursuant to the Royal Commands she
received from his Father.

Of eight millions of Acres profitable Land in Ireland, these Popish
Proprietors possess about three millions, or a little more than one third of
the whole; they are neither persons of Conduct nor Interest; it is certain they
have little influence on the common people; for by their Oppressions and
Exactions, they have so far lo^^ their hearts, that where Protestant Landlords
will receive them, they will not live under those of their own Nation and
Religion: It Is not there as here in England, where Tenants have Leases for
Lives, long Terms of years, or such Tenures as lays them under many ties of
Interest and Obligation to venture for, or be swayed by their Landlords, but
the quite contrary; for the Popish Landlords set their Lands but from year to
year, that they may the oftener rack their poor Tenants; and hence it is, that
though those people live in the most plentiful Country in the world, yet they
feed almost wholly upon Milk and Potatoes, only now and then, they have a
little Barley or Oaten-bread:

This party are as deeply concerned in the Rebellion, dispoiling and plunder of
the Protestants as the former, should any of these submit, it will be but
singly, or with very few, probably with consent of the rest, that they may save
their Estates, preserve an Interest for the Papists in future, that they may
give private Intelligences to their brethren, that England may be at the whole
Expense of the War, the dispoiled Protestants of Ireland be left without
reprize for their Losses, and his Majesty less capable to prosecute the War
against France; should these be pardoned, they will be in a better Condition
for a future Rebellion than yet they have been, being disciplined and now
enriched with the spoils of the English.

The only party that remains to be spoken of is the Husbandman and Labourer
which constitutes the body of that people, and are Nineteen parts of Twenty of
the Papists in Ireland. For the whole of them, Men, Women and Children, are but
one Million, of which we suppose 40 or 50000 in Arms unfit to be pardoned or
transported (except to the East Indies) and that these should perish in their
Rebellion, and that His Majesty and the wisdom of the Parliament think good to
spare such of the common people as are not guilty of Murder, the body of that
people will remain entire though all the former parties should be destroyed.
These (to say the truth of them) are least dangerous, being in themselves a
well-natur'd people, and may by easy methods be made useful, if freed from
their Clergy and great men, the generality of them speak or understand English,
which the twentieth man did not in 1641. They willingly yield their Children
for Servants to Protestants, and are content they become such, their Clergy
have of late been so extremely burthensom to them, that they are more than ever
disposed to admit a Reformation, and to part with them and their Irish
Landlords, and indeed such is the Ascendant that the Priests have over the
Consciences of that bigoted people, that it will be difficult and very
chargeable, if not impossible (whilst these remain amongst them) to keep them
from rebellion on the least Foreign encouragement, as 130 years sad experience
verifies beyond Contradiction. They naturally love Learning for their Children,
and were there Free Schools set up to instruct them, they would (without
compulsion) insensibly become Protestants. For which great and good works the
present Rebellion, and their Reduction will furnish their Majesty's with a fit
Opportunity.

All that this part of that Nation can expect or desire is Pardon and
Indemnity, which His Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, may extend as they
think fit, but if any of the former parties be comprehended with them, it will
render them dangerous and formidable to the English there.

Thus I have set down the several Parties and Interests of the Papists in
Ireland, whereby it plainly appears that there is danger in sparing any of
them, though least (according to my sense) in taking the Pesants, or (in that
Country language) the Skulloges into Protection, as for the Clergy, Lawyers
and those who lost their Estates in 1641. we have no bait for them; if they
must live, they would be least mischievous in the East Indies; were they
charmed at present, these Cockatrices would in a little time bring forth
Scorpions; which is true also of their landed men.

The Common Soldiers are less mischievous in open hostility than under our
Protection; their Nobility and Gentry who possess about one third of that
Kingdom are as deep in guilt and rebellion as the rest, have little influence
on the other parties, the receiving them to mercy will not shorten the War, but
give heads to, and strengthen the Papists for the future. Subject us to
innumerable mischiefs, impoverish England by bearing the charge of the War at
present, and keeping up a numerous standing Army in future to keep these from
rebelling, all which by their Forfeitures may be prevented; the despoiled
Protestants in part reprized for their Losses, and His Majesty reimbursed,
which money employed against France would expedite the bringing down of that
Christian Turk.

Let it not be forgotten that King James and the supposititious Prince of Wales
pretend Title to the Crown. And that both their Titles have been recognized by
Act of Parliament in Ireland. That not only the Papists in these three
Kingdoms, but a numerous party that declare for Passive Obedience and
Non-resistance long for and are industriously endeavoring his Restoration,
and the destruction of the Protestant Interest, the pardoning the Estated
Papists in Ireland will strengthen and encourage these, furnish the French King
with the means ^o distract us at pleasure, intail dangers on posterity,
discourage the planting of that Kingdom; for the Protestants whose houses and
Estates are ruined will not in that case repair them, because they know that
the pardoning of one Rebellion in Ireland, is always the preludium to another.
For Cambden truly observes, that by long use it was grown a mischievous Custom
in Ireland, That Rebels might with part of the money they got by Pillage and
Plunder, (of the English) procure themselves pardon and protection, and escape
without punishment, and that the Costly rebellions of Ireland spread under
pretext of Religion; were cherished and nourished by contempt, lenity and
pa^simony in England. As also that great Sums of money were spent about
Ireland, but to little purpose, for that by a certain infelicity, common as
well to England as to Ireland, where for the most part to such public work,
such men thrust themselves forward, and are admitted, as sordidly prefer their
own private, before the public good, I hope these passages were Historical and
not Prophetical.

Five hundred years have not furnish'ed one instance of the Irish, being
reduced, when in Rebellion, by kind Offers, (unless made them at the last
extremity) but there are innumerable of their growing insolent, and obstinate
thereby. He that knows not this, understands not an Irish man, nor how rightly
to deal with him.

If we imagine that Liberty for their Religion, a share in the Civil Justice,
will oblige and restrain them from violence and treason; we shall be mistaken;
for in 1641. the Papists in that Kingdom had their Titular Archbishops, and
Bishops, their Frieries and Nunneries, their Secular and Regular Clergy, they
were Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs of Counties, Mayors and Bailiffs of
Corporations, etc. they were seized of three fourths of the Lands there all the
Laws against them (which are but few in Ireland to what they are in England)
were suspended, as to their Execution. There was then a Parliament sitting in
that Kingdom mostly of Papists, wherein they remonstrated all their imaginary
Grievances; the Government concurred that they should send their Deputies into
England to represent them to the King, whereupon they had many forfeitures
(some of whole Counties) released to them, and all the rest of their grievances
redressed, which only put them into a better condition to rebel. For
notwithstanding all these Concessions, in a few Months after, (being stirred up
by their Clergy) they broke out into that barbarous and horrid Rebellion,
wherein 150000 Protestants were massacred in cold blood (without any
provocation) besides as many more that perished by Famine and Sword, in the
prosecution of that Rebellion; which is demonstration to all the World, that
these people are not to be retained in obedience by Immunities, Privileges and
Kindness, nor restrained from Murders and Massacres any longer than they are
kept under by a powerful standing Army.

In 1650. Oliver being in Ireland the growth of Charles 2d party in Scotland
calling him into England, he was put to it how in a little to divide, and break
the power of the Irish; as the best expedient he elected to hold a solemn
debate for three days successively, whether that Nation should not be wholly
extirpated, which had the desired Effect: For on notice thereof they instantly
were terrified, divided and scampered, and many submitted on condition to be
transported.

Let it be remembered that the Tragedy which for three years past, and now is
acting in Ireland, was intended also for the Theater of England, God forbid
that by weakness, good nature, or out of good husbandry, we should be prevailed
on to bring ruin on England also, by preserving the Instruments of our
destruction; If they abide among us, they will certainly prove goads in our
sides, and thorns in our Eyes.

The Lives of the Protestants in Ireland can never be secured whilst these
remain among the Natives. If (as Sir Walter Rawleigh relates) the wise State of
Venice, when their Senate is met, will not enter on any Consultation, until
solemn Proclamation be made that all Priests shall depart (because they know
them pernicious Counselors of State, even amongst those of their own Religion)
why should it be thought rigorous, that we should remove such Instruments of
mischief, to such distance as may secure us from dangers by them.

If against what has been said; that vulgar Objection be started, That His
Majesty must deal tenderly with the Papists at home, else he will possibly
disoblige his Popish Allies: I answer, this Objection is foppish, are not all
the Papists in these Kingdoms in the French Interest? Have they not contributed
most to that Kings present Greatness and Tyranny? Are not all the Irish and
several of the English Papists now in Arms against their Majesty's? Therefore
the Rooting out or suppression of these is as serviceable to the Confederates
(at present and in future) as the taking of Mentz or Bonn, for these are they
that direct their Majesty's Arms from invading France, yet were the Rebels
Estates in Ireland by the Parliament declared forfeited as in 1641. It is
demonstrable that money may be raised to reimburse His Majesty's probable
charge in that War, which employed against France, will save much to this
Kingdom, gratify the Confederates, and expedite the bringing down that French
Tyrant.

It Is certain there is a very ancient Prophecy in the Vatican at Rome, which
says, That that Mother Church falls when in Ireland the Catholic Faith is
overcome; if it be duly pondered, there is very much in it; were these three
Kingdoms once entire, being freed from the Effects of the Plots and Treasons
of the Papists, Popery would soon tumble in the World; it is pity we should be
so stupid as to support that Chair by cherishing those vipers in our bosoms.

May their Majesty's that have been the Instruments of so much good to these
Nations, have the Eternal honor to give this blow also to that Interest!

FINIS.

