A LETTER FROM AN OFFICER Belonging to the ORDNANCE On BOARD the FLEET Lying in
the BAY before the ISLE of MAN, Giving an ACCOUNT of the Duke of Schomberg's
Arrival and Landing of the FORCES under his Command at Carrick Fergus IN
IRELAND.
From the ISLE of MAN August 15th.

YEsterday seven Night, we arrived at the Camp that was formed near Highlake in
Order to be Transported for Ireland, and last Saturday we shipped our Stores and
Provisions that we brought with us, as also two hundred and fifty draught
Horses, belonging to our Train of Artillery; after which we went on Board our
selves. On Monday morning very early the Duke of Schomberg our General, with
Lieutenant General Solmes, set Sail, having embarked two days before, the Wind
being fair at East, with four Frigates, and about seventy or eighty Sail of
other Ships, on board which there were about twelve hundred Land Soldiers for
the Irish Expedition; having given Orders that the Vessels on which the
Artillery, Provisions and Victuals were shipped, should make what haste they
could after them under the Convoy of three Frigates, that were left to
accompany us, and join him in this Bay; about eight of the Clock that morning,
which was some hours after the General had been under sail, we set sail, and
the Wind continuing fair, we came on Tuesday morning to an Anchor in this
place, being about forty and four sail in all; it was no small surprise to us,
that after we had safely, and with what haste we could come to the place of
Rendevouz to find no tidings of our General, nor meet with any Orders from him,
there being no body left to direct us what we should do, or what Course we
should steer; however we were resolved to stay until we heard from his Grace,
which we had the good luck to do this Morning by the Antelope Frigate, who
sailed out of Highlake with the General, and brought us Orders from his
Excellency to sail with all possible speed from hence, and to come and join him
in the Lough of Carrick Fergus, where the Captain said he had left him, landing
the Forces in the Country on Antrim-side.

The Captain tells us, that the General having fair wind did not think it
needful to put in and come to Anchor in this Place being resolved to make the
best of it, and proceed on his way, and farther tells us that the Town of
Carrick Fergus was not all burnt down, but only some Fort, or Castle that was
on a Rock that was blown up. Thus Major General Macarty was certainly wounded
and taken Prisoner by the Inneskilling Men who had given a very great defeat to
the Irish Army, as they were endeavoring to retire from the North, after the
Relief of London Derry, and that it was credibly reported in those Parts, that
there was hardly a Body of five hundred Irish together in all the North
Counties of that Kingdom.

LICENSED

August th 19. J. Fraser.

LONDON Printed for Ric. Chiswell. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
Yard. MDCLXXXIX.


