A LETTER From FATHER La CHAISE, Confessor to the French King, To FATHER
PETER'S, Confessor to the King of England.

In which is Contained the project and design of that faction to Introduce the
Prince of Wales; with some observations on his Conception and birth, to which
is added a Letter from Will Penn to Father la Chaise about the affairs of that
babe and the Ensueing progress of the Popish design.

Printed in the City of Philadelphia in the Land of promise by order of Father
Penn and are to be sold by Stephen Lob at the sign of Apostasy, in
priestcraft lane next door to the Alamode Religion.

A LETTER From FATHER La CHAISE, Confessor to the French King, To FATHER
PETER'S, Confessor to the King of England.
Honored Father,
WIth unexpressible Joy I received yours of June the 22 by which I understand
the good effect of our Endeavors which we have so Long been Laboring in: and
am glad to hear the work is so well managed and done, you following the advice
we gave as well by diverse Letters as word of mouth from our Ambassador Barillon
now at whitehall. And as soon as I had received the news I went to the King my
Master and acquainted him that there was one of the Holy babes of your own
getting brought to the queen and that both the King and she did own it for
their own son and Prince of Wales, and under that notion it was showed and
published to the whole Nation, then I acquainted the Fathers of our Society who
had with sacred Instruments for the purpose Calculated the whole project Long
before: and showed their Constant zeal in this weighty affair: they also were
Extremely Joyful when they heard it, and it is impossible. To express the mirth
and Jollyty of all our friends in this Country who have heard of this weighty
Concern, for now it seems as if heaven it self did Contribute to our (...) give
the Holy Church greater Dominion, and render our Enemies the longer the weaker.
For in our Country the Heretics are very near quite destroyed: in Piemont and
Savby they are Reduced to a small weak number, in Himgary they shall no Longer
Continue then till the Emperor and the Turk have made peace, for it is the
opinion of our Society that the Emperor does not stand in need of the
Assistance of the Protestant Electors, nor need he fear them when that War is
Ended. Then shall we persuade him not only to destroy them in all his
Territorys but also to make war upon the Netherlands and so root out all the
Heretics from the face of the Earth; and indeed the Heretics in Holland are
not far from their Ruin, as for the Palatinate it will be Easily done there
because we have got a Popish Elector Chosen, and for the King of Denmark we
doubt not but to make him in his Country follow the Example of the great Monark
in ours either to make them turn or Run, and tho the freindship between that
Crown and ours seems weak yet it is not so much decayed as some people wish
and pretend. And if I please I can quickly make him zealous, and a perfect
servant to our King and that he shall assist in the Romish Cause as faithfully
as the best Catholic as ever was born, for in his Country the sheep yield him
but a small fleece, and let our King but send him a good present of Pistols and
he shall do all that we desire him tho it were to subscribe to the Alchoran and
turn Mohammedan.

England Holland and Switzerland are indeed the only bulworks and places of
Refuge that the Heretics have left: and it has Cost us many a nights study
and diverse meetings to Consult how we may bring them under, and now we have an
Excellent opportunity, to which purpose our King has resolved to bring the
Switsers under his Dominion and Convert those Heretics by his Dragoons: and
also to (...) in Holland, which resolution I will Constantly put him in mind
off as often as I give him absolution.

When I Consider of these things it rejoices me to think how zealous his
Majesty of England is to perfect his designs, which are to us of great
Cencerns, to which purpose he has the assistance of our troops. And Cardinal
Furstenberg [when he shall be made Elector of Collen] Can bring Holland under
his obedience, having first made himself master of his own people and brought
them in subjection to his absolute power: I say when I Consider and think of
these things they do so rejoice me that I am almost overwhelmd there with; nay
it is so great that I am not able to write it, and indeed it is the greatest
pleasure I have in this world, and I must say that since the last Letter I
received from you things have been so forwarded that I must now necessaryly
Conclude we are not far from the highest step: and nothing can be said to be
perfect now, till I can demonstrably see such signs that will testify the work
is complete.

And as Concerning that Letter of yours which gave us that Incomparable
satisfaction and joy, the principle things therein are these following: first,
you did very wisely not to follow the Litteral direction that we had laid
down, but to use such endeavors and devices as the then accidents and present
affairs did require, and indeed they were such as did much conduce to the
perfection of our bussines: namely, the sending the Bishops to the Tower: the
Prince and Princess of Denmark to the Bath, and diverse Heretic Gentlemen to
Windsor where they Expected the Queen should lie in: in which inventions you
showed your admirable skill and Judgment: for they without doubt would have
been present and you say the Laws of England do so require it. Therefore it was
your wisdom to advise the King to impose some (...) not in honor do, and so
find occasion to send them to the Tower and there keep them till the great
work was done.

Neither was the other part of your Invention les to be admired, when you
persuaded the Prince and Princess of Denmark, that it was a month or six weeks
before the Queen could be delivered and they might easily return sooner, and
therefore if you had not taken this course they would have waited and have been
prying into the bussines, and the other is also as praise worthy as any, for
you could not have trickt those Heretic fops better then to send them like
fools to windsor with a Commission to set up a bed, provide a Cradle and a Nurs
and diverse other things necessary for her lying in, and also to wait there till
she came, which you never intended she should, and likewise it was a good
project of yours to give out that the Queen altered her mind often about the
place she would be delivered at, for when you had given out seven or eight
several times it was resolved to be windsor, Hampton court, Richmond, St.
James's, etc. they did not at last believe when you Resolved in earnest, by
which means you caught the fools neatly: all which were neatly Laid and
contrived, for which we thank you wishing all succes to your designs and
Endeavors toward the perfecting this mighty work.

Secondly. That you keep both their Majestys to their former Resolution in
declareing this child to be really their own, and also by public
proclamation for a day of Thanks giveing to tell the whole Nation he was their
son, and Heir to the Crown: in spite of all the prateing Inquisitive
Heretics in Holland and England, who have got some kind of sent of the work
and design now in hand, but I can tell them, they think they know more then
really they do, how ever they have Endeavored by dispersing of various papers
to render his Majesty suspected, and I assure (...) that your King would have
fell of and departed from his pious Resolution, for we well know that he is but
a weak man, and you know such kind of people are easyly led away: when they
have nothing to depend upon but what lies in other men's heads.

Thirdly. That there is such great care taken for the young Prince, and also in
case of the Kings death to declare his consort Queen Regent, and to appoint
your self, the Lord Chancellor with some other good men to govern while the
Prince is under age. And by the same manner we defended our King, his [reputed]
Father having appointed Cardinal Mazarine for his Tutor and Governer till by
force of Arms he was able to make his way to the Crown, and if any are so
Inquisitive as to ask if this Prince shall be brought to the Crown by the same
manner, let such know that it may be easily done for our King has declared
that if there is occasion he will stand by him with his whole fore and power.

Fourthly. That which administers great Joy to me and all the Fathers of our
Society, is, that the King of great Britain is resolved and has also promised
you that in case this Child should dye, there shall be another ready to put
into the cradle in his place, but if that should prove difficult and that there
should not be a Child readily found to carry on the show with some reputation,
you must take the same course as before and send the King to St. Winifreds well
to wash that little he has, let the Queen wear a Cushion upon her belly for
nine months and that will certainly produce another Prince of Walls.

Fifthly. That his Majesty has given orders to all the priests to write to the
foreign Colleges and desire them to in treat the English Scotch and Irish
and all other outlandish Catholics, that are well inclind to advance and
further the Kings pious designs: and to encourage every one that can with all
speed to come over into England: with promise that they shall all be advanced
according to their several quallifications, which will be of great use for the
carrying on this blessed work, defending the young Prince against his
Conspireing Enemies, and to root out all the Heretics. In which work I do
promise not to be negligent, but to send over as many as I can possibly
persuade.

And now as these things are truly Joyous in themselves, so have they in me
and all the Fathers of our Society created an un expressible Joy. If I should
tell you how I was affected when I heard this news, I could say no more but
this, that my soul was separated from my body, and transported with Joy and
gladness into the paradis of the most high, which no man can conceive; as St.
Paul writes of himself when he was taken up into the third heaven.

Now Concerning the question you have put to me, that is what is the best course
to be taken to root out all the Heretics? to which I answer, there are diverse
ways to do that, but-we must consider which is the best to make use off in
England, I am sure you are not Ignorant how many thousand Heretics we have in
france by the power of our Dragons converted in the space of one year: and by
the Doctrine of those booted Apostles turned more in one Month then Christ and
his Apostles by their preaching could in ten year: this is a most Excellent
method and far excells those of the great preachers and teachers that have
lived since Christ, his time. But I have spoke with diverse Fathers of our
Society who do think that your King is not strong enof to accomplish his
design by such kind of force. So that we cannot expect to have our work done
in that manner for the Heretics are to strong in the three Kingdoms, and
therefore we must seek to convert them by fair means before we fall upon them
with Fire Sword halters, Jailes and other such like punish(...) better advice
but to begin with Soft easy means, weedle them in by promises of profit and
offices of Honor till you have made them dip themselves in treasonable actions
against the Laws Established, and then they are bound to serve for fear: When
they have done thus turn them out and serve others so by putting them in their
places, and by this way gain as many as you can: and for the Heretics that
are in places of profit or Honor turn out or suspend them on pretense of
Misbehaviour, by which their places are forfeit and they subject to what
Judgment you please to give upon them: then you must form a Camp that must
consist of none but Catholics this will make the Heretics heartles and
Conclude all means of releife or recovery is gone. And lastly take the short
and the best way which is to surprise the Heretics on a sudden; and to
Encourage the Zealous Catholics let them Sacrifice them all and wash their
hands in their blood, which will be an acceptable offering to god: and this was
the method I took in France which has well you see succeeded: but it cost me
many threatenings and Promises before I could bring it thus far, our King being
a long time very un willing.

But at last I got him on the hip: for he had Lay with his daughter in Law for
which I would by no means give him absolution till he had given me an
Instrument under his own hand and Seal to Sacrifice all the Heretics in one
day: Now as soon as I had my desired Commission I appointed the day when this
should be done, and in the mean time made ready some thousands of Letters to be
sent into all parts of France in one post night, I was never better pleased
then at that time, but the King was a affected with some Compassion for the
Hugonets because they had been a means to bring him to his Crown and Throne:
and the longer he was under it the more sorrowful he was, often complaining and
desireing me to give him his Commission (...) do, adviseing him to repent of
that hanious sin, and also telling him that the trouble and Horror of his
spirit did not proceed from any thing of evil in those things that were to be
done, but from that great wickedness which he had done; and that he must resolve
to undergo the severe burden of a troubled mind for one of them or the other,
and if he would remain Satisfied as it was, his sin being forgiven there would
in a few days be a perfect atonement made for it and he perfectly reconciled
to god again but all this would not pacify him for the longer the more
Restles, and therefore I ordered him to retire to his closet and there spend
his time Constantly in prayer without permitting any one to interrupt him: and
this was in the morning early when the Evening following I was to send away all
my Letters, I did indeed make the more have for fear he should disclose it to
any one, yet I had given him a strickt Charge to keep it to himself, and the
very thing that I most feared to my great sorrow came to pass, for Just in the
nick of time the Devil who has always his Instruments at work sent the Prince
of Conty to the court, who asked for the King, and it was told him that he was
in his Closet and would speak with no man: he Impudently answered that he must
and would speak with him: and so went directly to his Closet: he being a great
Peer no man durst hinder him, and being come to the King he soon perceived by
his Countenance that he was under some great trouble of mind for he looked as
if he had been goeing into the other world Imediately: Sir [said he] what is he
matter with you, the King at the first refused to tell him, but he pressing
harder upon him, at last the King with a sorrowful Complainent burst out and
said I have given Father la Chaise under my own hand a Commission to murder all
the Hugonets in one day, and this Evening will the Letters (...) performing it:
So that there is but small time left for my Hugonet subects to live who have
never done me any harm, whereupon this cursed Rogue answered, let him give you,
your Commission again: the King said how shall I get it out of his hand: for if
I shall s^nd to him for it, he will refuse to send it: this devil Answered, If
your Majesty will give me order I will quickly make him return it; the King was
soon persuaded being willing to give Ease to his troubled spirit, and said:
well go then, and break his neck if he will not give it you, whereupon this
son of the devil went to the Post house: and asked if I had not a great number
of Letters there, and they said, yes more then I had sent thither in a whole
year before, then said the Prince: by order from the King you must deliver them
all to me: which they durst not deny, for they knew well enof who he was And no
sooner was he got into the Post House and had asked these questions, but I came
also in after him, to give order to the Postmaster to give notice to all those
under him in the several parts of the Kingdom that they might take care to
deliver my Letters with all speed imaginable. But I was no sooner come into the
house but he gave his servants order to secure the door: and said confidently
to me: You must by order from the King give me the Commission which you have,
forced from him; I told him I had it not about me: but I would go and fetch it:
thinking to get from him and so go out of town and send the contents of those
Letters another time, but he said: You must give it me, and if you have it not
about you, send some body to fetch it or else never Expect to go alive out of my
hands, for I have an order from the King either to bring it or break your neck:
and I am Resolved either to carry back that to him in my hand, or your hearts
blood on the point of my sword: I would have made my Escape but he set his
sword to my breast and said you must give it me or Dye, therefore deliver it or
else this goes through your body.

So when I saw nothing else would do I put my hand in my pocket and gave it him,
which he carried immediately to the King and gave him that and all my Letters
which they burnt: and being all done the King said that now his heart was at
Ease, now how he should be Eased by the devil, or so well satisfied with a falls
Joy I cannot tell, but this I know that it was a very wicked and ungodly action
as well in his Majesty as the Prince of Conty: and did not a Little increase
the burden and danger of his Majestys sins: I soon gave an account of this
affair to several Fathers of our Society, who promised to do their best to
prevent the foresaid Prince doing such another act, which was accordingly
done: for with in the space of six days after the damned action he was Poisoned
and well he deserved it. The King also did suffer to, but in another fashion,
for discloseing the design to the Prince and harkening to his Council: and
many a time since when I have had him at Confession I have shook hell about his
Ears, and made him sigh fear and tremble before I would give him absolution;
nay more then that I have made him beg for it upon his knees before I would
consent to absolve him, by this I saw that he had still an Inclination to me
and was willing to be under my government: so I set the baseness of the action
before him by telling the whole Story and how wicked it was: and that it could
not be forgiven till he had done some good action to balance that and Expiate
the crime, whereupon he at last asked me what he must do? I told him that he
must root out all the Heretics from his Kingdom, so when he see there was no
rest for him without doing it, he did again give them all into the power of
me and our Clergy: under this Condition that we should not murder them; as he
had before given orders; but that we should by fair means or force convert them
to the Catholic Religion, to which End he gave us his Dragoons to be at our
devotion and service that we might use them as we saw Convenient to convert
them to the true Religion, now when we had got the Commission we presently put
it in practice, and what the Issue of it has been you very well know.

But now in England the work cannot be done after this manner: as you may
perceive by what I have said to you, if you have carefully observed what has
been delivered, so that I can not give you better Council then to take that
course in hand wherein we were so unhappily prevented, and I doubt not but it
will have better succes with you then with us, and the rather because your King
and his Son are under the government of our Society, and are to obey the orders
of our General, and do all that can be contrived for the destroying the
Heretics, I would not be here understood as if I thought the King of England
were unwilling to prosecute and promote our orders and directions for the good
of our holy mother the Church: and you must always keep him perfectly possessed
of that: for I know well that he of himself is Zealous enof, for that Excellent
Example in Ireland that was done by his father [that is the murdring 200000
Protestants] is still so deeply printed in his soul that he had rather do it
to day then wait till to morrow, if he saw an advantagions opportunity, and I
mention this story of Ireland that you may press it upon him and by that
encourage him how easy a thing it is to do.

The reason why I am so long in relateing this matter: is to let you know how
we had at first laid our design and also what obstructions there came in the
way: yet at last we arrived at the thing we desired, so you must not be
disheartened when you meet with opposition but prosecute the thing, do your
duty and leave the succes to time and fate.

Our King is at present very sickly and we can have no account what he ails,
for some times the Doctors say he has an Ague, a while after they say it is the
Gout and then Melancholy or some such thing, now whither the slow progres of
the great design in the Hague to get the Prince of Orange into his Interest;
or to murder him; does so weaken and impair him, I know not. But this I can
assure you of: that he began to be sick when he received the news of that
provokeing answer that the Pensionaris Fagel gave to his Ambasador D'Avaux: and
was after published in very Scornful terms; and therefore there was but little
hope left to accomplish the first: and Indeed less to perform the second,
seeing the Prince has smelt out our Kings design, and for all those that have
intermedled in the affairs of our Ambasador concerning what he has done for
his master; let them look to themselves, possibly he may fear that their
Majestys of great Britain may alter their opinions about the young prince that
we have been so long contriveing for, and at last disowne him, and so destroy
the design, and from thence may his sickness proceed, for he is considerable
better since he has heard of its good succes and the probabillity of its good
conclusion. And this is the more possible because his Majesty takes all his
Measures from the Constitution of the affairs in England, and undertakes
nothing of any great importance till he considers how it stands with that King,
[and you well know that we in the late troubles forbore to persecute the
Hugnoets till we heard of his Majestys conquest and the defeat and death of
Monmouth, and then we began again very smartly] so has he now likewise don,
as soon as he heard this news gave present orders that all those Heretics who
were not converted to the Catholic Religion by such a day should be offered up
as a Sacrifice to the young Prince.

And I would Entreat you against you write to me again to Inquire and let me
know of what Lady, Nun, or other Holy Virgin the young Prince was born: that I
may remember her in my prayers who has brought this hopeful babe into the
world that is like to be the pillar of our Religion, and also send me word how
old he was when he was brought to the Queen or as the Common cant is when he
was born: for there is a Father of our Society that is very skilful in
Astrology and would Calculate his Nativity.

I have Received a Letter out of the Hague by which I am told that in Holland
they use very unreverend Expressions of the young Prince: one says that among
all the Children you got for this design there was not one found fit to be
used, either they were sickly, deformed or born with some other ill accident:
so that they say this is a Millers Son: others say it was a Carpenttrs Son in
Holborn thereby intimateing a sacred miracle parallel to the holy Joseph who
was of the same trade, others say the young Prince was a month old when he was
born, and that he could presently eat pap with a spoon, and there are others
who say he had six teeth in his mouth and immediately began to bite like a
young Devil, which was the only cause why they would not let him suck, but
some others say that he sucked long enof before he was born, and should they now
let him suck again he would go nere to prove a whoremonger; yet there are
some that are more Rude and uncivil and report him to be the son of a Plowman,
and say it is no wonder that he is so fat, big boned, and strong made; being
designed by nature for the flaile and not for the Throne. Nay there be some
here in France that tell us they have heard in the Taverns and Coffehouses nay
and a long the streets also in London as bad language as there and therefore
you must as much as possible, endeavor to suppres these things, by giveing
orders to the Marq: d'Albeville your Kings Envoy at the Hague to complain of
some particular men, and in London you must apprehend them, bring them to
Justice and hang up one or two for an Example that dare talk thus.

I am also informed that few or none of all the Heretic Bishops and ministers
in the three Kingdoms will pray for the young Prince in their Churches, which
if true is of ill consequence, and therefore you must endeavor to have it done:
and all those Rebellious Heretics that will not obey his Majestys absolute
power in this and other cases must be turned out, and dealt with as I have in
this Letter before showed.

I would write to you of many other things but that I fear what is here already
done does detain you to long, and I also well know that you have a weighty
affair on your shoulders: and therefore your time is precious, so that you
stand in need of the Grace of God and the prayers of all good men to assist you
in it; wherefore I will conclude, and for you and all good Catholics show my
will to the best of my power praying for you to God, to Mary the H. Mother of
God; to all the Angels and to the Holy and blessed souls, that they may help
you in your Necessity, from Paris July the 10. 1688.

Postscript: as I was about to conclude this Letter there came an Expres from
Cardinal Furstenburg to our King to let him know: that the Chapter had showed
themselves very much Inclined to Choose Prince Clement of Bavaria to be Elector
of Collen, his Holiness having first quallified and then represented him for
that purpose, whereupon the King was much discomposed and I fear he will [by
this News comeing to him] have his Ague again, and indeed I am my self not a
little concerned at this News; for Prince William of Furstenburg would
immediately have entered into a league with our King to subdue Holland, and
then should we have had a brave opportunity to carry on our designs in England
and to make his Majesty of great Britain absolute over his subjects, but I
must here conclude.

P. la. Chaise.

Here Courteous Reader thou have word by word the Letter of la Chaise to Father
Peter's: being the two principal Traitors in this part of the world, and the
most unsatisfied suckers of Christian blood, here thou feast a proof of their
unheard of Cheating and Cruelty, and if what you have already read in this
Letter is not sufficient to convince you of that abominable cheat in the court
of England, to bring in and impose a Popish Bastard upon the people for the
Kings Son: Prince of Wales and heir to the Crown I will presently better
inform you and if you please but to make use of your Judgment and reason you
will not have the least ground to doubt it.

That the King of England has had a distemper in all his Limoes and members
for more then twenty years which has rendered him unfit to beget vital
Children Especially in the last fourteen or Sixteen years; for it happened some
years after he came to England as he was lyeing at Anchor in Rotter-dam bay
near Ninnyport in Bog-land by an accident let slip his cable and so fell foul
of a Scotch sire ship, and in the heat of the broile before they could get
their tackling clear, they both unhappyly took fire and yet were miraculously
preserved to the great comfort of the whole nation: however by the misfortune
of this adventure his lower. Tier was so damnified that he remains more fit for
show then service; but to lay by all dubious and dark Expressions take the
story in plane terms which was thus.

There was a Scotch noble man whose name was Carnegie but his title South E^k
who died the 19 day of February last, with this Gentleman's lady the King (who
was then Duke of York) had an Indecent conversation, the Earl parceiveing it
was very much discontented and said to his Father who was then alive, that he
would challenge the Duke of York to give him satisfaction, but his father
knowing on the one side It was against the law to Challenge a Prince of the
blood, and on the other that his son was more a Gentleman them to put up such a
wrong, gave his son advice to pox his wise, and by so doing he would pox the
Duke also. The Earl his son approved of the Council and so went to a Bawdy
house and desired the old Matron to help him to the pockyest whore that was to
be found, which she immediately provided; and having well warmed his codpeice
he went home and bestowed it on his wife. Now so soon as he saw the work was
done he retired and put himself under the hands of a Doctor who restored him in
a short time to his pristine health, the King [then Duke] perceiveing the Earl
was from home made the best improvement he could of the opportunity, and away
he went with all have to his pickled Mistress to cool his Reins not dreaming of
a snake in the Grass. A while after this was done the Duke began to besick; so
was his duchess and the Countess of South Esk and no body knew what was the
matter with them, not one of the three having the least suspicion of the pox.
The Countess was the first that was discovered to have that disease, which the
Duke hearing began to believe himself and Duchess peppered with the same
spice, which then grew public, and sent for the most shillfull pocky Doctors
to advise with about it, how they were cured you may guess: and it is
sufficiently known [and the King can to his sorrow if he pleases testify it]
that ever since he has carried a half pik, and to this very day he Carrys so
much of it about him that he is perfectly unable to get a sound Child, and it
appears plainly since the year 1669 or 1670 [when he was almost dead with it]
all his Children have dyed of that diseass in a miserable Condition, and it is
Judged by all knowing men that it is Impossible for him to get a Child that
shall live long after it is born Ergo.

2. It is a thing unheard of among Physicians that a woman should be let blood
with in a few days of her delivery as the Queen was and what is more that a
woman should flood to Excess but a month before her delivery and yet bring a
lusty Child Into the world as they say she did Ergo.

3. That it is an Impossible thing for a new born Child to have an Issue as
they say the young Prince has; and yet supposed to be but two days old, such a
piece of non sense that any fool may discover the cheat of it, for before we
can believe this: they must make us believe that popish Kings successors are of
another kind of substance then other new born Children are: for the body of a
Child of four: six or eight days old is not fit for a Chyrurgions Instrument,
neither is there yet blood or other matter to flow from thence as is in that
case Expected tho the body were full of Issues: Ergo.

4. That it is a thing unpracticable in England to have the Queen delivered
without the Chiefest of the Nobility, the Bishop of Canterbury, the Lord Mayor
of London, English Gentlemen of note, and the foreign Ministers being there
by, as it was now, which is sufficient to make all people mistrust it is a piece
of Roguery; and has given Just cause to any Ingenious man to Judge the
contrivers of this project to be fools in folio if there was no cheat in it,
and that this small Creature was Son of the King and Queen and lawful Heir to
the Crown of England, nay what is more, from the very first hour that they
reported the Queen to be with Child, the English and Scotch Nations and almost
the whole world besides that heard of it: Concluded it was a cheat. Now what
way was there to convince them of the truth of it, and to stop the Months of
Gain sayers, but to take care to have it done Regular and public according, to
the ancient, Custom in that case, that all man kind might be satisfied it was
true and Just, but Alas here was the popes finger in it and the French Kings
to: Ergo.

5. The subtilty they have used to have the Queen delivered in the eight month,
and that with so much suddennes as if she had not time to call any or give
notice to those who ought to have been there, they Judging that the world will
think from hence that she was catched at unawares. But alas this is so far from
taking off the suspicion that it does much Increase it, for from thence all
men must Judge that they made Choice of this opportunity to do it in a private
corner in the Dark: it being not fit for the light, for such works and workers
hate that, and you need not doubt but they were afraid that some persons of
quallity, Bishops, and) others would have come [had they known of it] that
they could not have hindered; and tho it was the custom yet they did not desire
their Company on that occasion. Secondly, we must necessaryly, conclude it is a
cheat; because all men know that a Child born in the eighth month can not be so
perfect lusty and vigorous as one of nine months is; and all that have seen
this Child say it is biger and lustyer then even this Queen had any when she
went full nine months, and indeed biger then any new born Child usually is.
Thirdly; we have great reason to conclude it is a cheat, because all Physicians
and Philosophers do affirm that it is impossible for a Child born in the eighth
month to live, but we need not go to those, for Common Experience tells us it is
true. Therefore the Jesuits who have undertaken to cheat the whole world,
should have laid this design better and have let the Queen been delivered in
the seventh month, because a Child of the seventh month may and often times
does live, so that this would have been far more probable to have hid the
villainy seeing it lay in their power to let her be brought to bed when they
pleased, but they did not think upon it, for their wisdom zeal and power has
cheated them, and the mighty providence of god has ^wakned the world to see
the (...) of the Cheat: a Cheat Contrived and managed for no other on^ but to
give the Inheritance of the Crook to a stranger, to Cheat the heir, and
preserve the papists from the hand of justice, to which they and their
accomplices have forfeited their Necks for their endeavoring to alter the
Religion, their breaking the laws, and for bringing in a Bastard to accomplish
the work.

A Letter from Will. Penn to Father la Chaise.
Father and fellow Labourer in the Lord.
IT is not the least part of my trouble that I cannot enjoy the happiness of
they sweet conversation viva voce in these so pernicious days, whose Council
and advice in things as well sacred as secular I value far above all the
direction of Scripture and those who pretend to it; and thanks be to the Father
of lights we walk by a more entering spirit thou those who dote upon that dead
Letter, and make a noise about that man that was crucified at Jerusalem, I need
not tell thee how useles the dead Letter is especially where there is the light
within and miracles without; nor how foolish it is to believe three persons in
the trinity; not how ignorant them people are that depend on him they call
Christ for their salvation, thou know these thing well and therefore they
are to thee the less useful and indeed since I have so much to say to thee
about other more weighty affairs I must omit these.

Notwithstanding our various disappoinments which we daily meet with on every
side, we keep as close to the Rule and method prescribed as any men in this
great affair can do that must engage with such opposition; the great point at
present is that of our young Prince: which me thought would have done far
better them of does, for the Noblem^^ that are Heretics, laugh at it, the
Gentry do not believe it, and the Common sort speak such scandalous words of
him that I am ashamed to name them. By our last Letters from Holland we have,
Received account that on July the 9th the M. d'Albeville our Envoy at the Hague
made a great Entertainment there [for Joy of the young Prince's birth] but it
unluckily proved but a small one; for he made provision for about three hundred
persons and there did not appear above twenty: and by the account I have I
question whither there had been any there [Except the French and Portugal
Ambassadors] had not some very honest Loyal Gentlemen been then in the Hague
who were Intending for England. Among these three hundred he Expected one
hundred of them to be women; but the number fell short and unhappily proved to
be but seven or eight; of which four of them were very honest women of their
bodies having only a whisk with their talles. As for the people of quallity at
that court there was none of them present at this Entertainment: And should I
but tell thee how Contemptibly they looked upon the whole matter, and the
Ambasador also for doing it, thou woulds Conclude that they had but a very
Indifferent opinion of the young Prince, and what is more, the young Prince's
health was not drunk at the public table; which shows either a great weakness
in our Envoy or Else the guests were more in love with the wine, then the cause
and occasion of their Meeting: and besides I hear he is forbid to be prayed for
there in the number of the Royal family which makes me think they do mistrust
or have heard something of the matter; and therefore by the next I desive a
word or two ofthy opinion and what is best to be done in the affair.

But that which is more considerable and abusive to the Child was at Amsterdam
the thursday following being July the 12th. O. S. where there was an honest
fellow a Creature of ours that made an Entertainment with a supper wine, and
fire works: which drew a great concourse of people to the place besides the
Guests invited? the people were grumbling all the Evening and said [what must
us have all this stir sor a Bastard, and such Expressions; but after supper
they within the house offered some affront to the people, [the Mob, or Jan
Hagel as they there callem] upon which the Mutiny began and the first attach
was made by stones in at the windows, swearing they would pull the house down
for Joy the bastard was born: this put the Guests upon shifting for their
lives, some crept into the Empty bottles, others got to the next houses and
being night were taken for thieves, the good Catholics pulled out their beads
the three Kings of collen etc. and began to pray: the women went through holes
with their feet foremost and so slipped their skins as a snake does at Midsummer
to the great astonishment of the beholders, and many of them were so ingenious
that they crept through places where a cat could not go through: but that which
is most pleasant of all: B. our old Consul who I am Informd began the Riot
crept into a four Gallon Cask to save his life, thus you see what reputation
our young Prince has in other Countries bot the best ont is they are all
Heretics.

And for England, people of all sorts shere are most scandalously abusive by
undecent Expressions: some say he is a millers son: some, a Gardiners son, and
others a Carpenters son, but all conclude he is a son of a whore, they also say
that as the Queen was goeing to Mass news was brought to her that the Child was
come and therefore she most he brought to bed presently, others tell it for a
positive truth that there was a Coachman swearing in St. James's court a bout
nine of the Clock in the morning and being asked what was the matter with him:
he swore dam him he had brought two old Bardes with a Bastard in a basket and
they were gone and had given him but a shilling and he had almost killed his
horses to make have. And they also talk of the Queens Applying plasters and
taking medecines to stop -- but you know en of of that already, These and
abundance more of such reports is the Common talk and belief both of City and
Country, and the longer the worse, and yet Brother Lob, Brother Alsop, Brother
Cox and many of our friends the Anabaptists take a great deal of Pains in their
pulpits to pray for him, and preach up the great blessing that god in him has
bestowed upon the nation; and yet poor Gentlemen they are by the people counted
Rogues for their pains which is very hard.

It is the advice and Council of most of our Catholic peers and other well
wishers to the cause not to make to much have, but Father Peter's says it must
be hastened for we do not know how little time we have to work and when the
King dies [which we fear] the work is at an End: Therefore it is Resolved to
Cite the Bishops before the Eclesiastical Comissioners again and to proceed
against them with all the force possible, and also to turn out the greatest
part of the Clergy for disobedience and in their Roms to put in Non Conformist,
and if they do not answer our Ends, or as soon as we see occasion we will turn
out them and put in Roman Catholic priests, it was debated whither we should
follow the advice or not: to cut them all of at once, but upon Examining our
Army and fleet, we do not think our selves strong enof nor the work yet fit for
that Issue. And therefore we will (...) talk of a Parliament in November, to
which End we have our Trumpeters in all parts of the town and some of them
pardoned Rebels: these are to propound ways to the people for an Equivalent to
their Test: and as one of them very well says take away the palisado and build
a brick wall; which notion takes with many, but if things should not do to have
a Parliament in November we shall by that time perhaps be able to come to the
great work, and to that purpose in the mean time we will Entertain all the
popish officiers and soldiers we can get.

We also resolve to get in to the work such as have been pretended Enemies to
the King formerly and these will do our work to our hearts content, for we have
picked out a select number of them that Gape after honor and profit, and this
they shall not want so long as we have need of their service: these are to take
their degrees in preferment and rise as they deserve: the boldest follow rises
first, and he that can with sword, pen, (...) law and liberty is the bravest
man: such are Steward, Williams and some new ones as faithful as they, whose
names shall be published with their actions: it being to early to mention them
yet, least they do as one of them has done before, Run away for fear.

It is likewise resolved that in case this design with the Non cons does not
take effect to get a Parliament for our purpose at the time appointed, to lay
by all thoughts of smooth means and get in a good number of french privately
and and so fall down right to dragooning: for it is not thought convenient to
dally any longer and in the mean time to take up all those we can have proof
against, that speak treason against the Prince of Wales and whip hang or
imprison them as we see Convenient for if we suffer the people to talk as we
do: they will do the same when the Queen shall be brought to b^ again [should
we see it needful to let t^ ^ for you know they must be all boys.

It Is further more resolved that toward the End of the year the King shall go
again to St. winifreds well and there pray and wash, and against his return
the Queen shall prepare her vessel to try a second time how god will bless
their Endeavors, and we doubt not but it will succeed well.

It Is also resolved that in case the King can not get the Test and penal laws
abbrogated to save his friends harmles after his death, that there shall he
always [under pretense of necessity for the nations good] vessels of small
burden ready to carry them away and save them from hanging: for we do Expect it
if he dies on a sudden.

I will not detain thee longer least it may be troublesome to thee: and indeed
my time will not permit me to stay longer for I am Just at the finishing of
this to go and meet Brother Alsop: Cox: Jones, Nokokes, Lob, the King and some
others where we go to Consider of some (...) affairs relateing to the Kings
bussines.

I am thine WILL. PENN.
Whitehall the 16 day of the fifth month in the year Commonly called 1688.

