A LETTER From an Eminent Merchant in CONSTANTINOPLE, To a FRIEND in LONDON:
Giving an exact Relation of the Great and Glorious Cavalcade of Sultan Mahomet
the fourth, present Emperor of the Turks, as he Marched out of Constantinople,
for the Invasion of Christendom, and the Siege of VIENNA.
Entered according to ORDER.
SIR,
ELeven Days past, the Grand Signiour made his public Alloy (or Exit) out of
this City, accompanied by the Grand Vizier, and the Officers of the Empire, as
also Prince Mahomet his eldest Son, a Youth of about Eighteen years old, and
the first that any Emperor ever suffered to show himself to the people. In
this Sight was exposed to view the greatest Riches of the Empire, consisting in
Jewels of inestimable value, Horses, Clothes and Furniture, the Magnificence
whereof is not to be expressed in Writing, unless it was possible to show you
Horses Furniture covered over with Diamonds, Rubies and Emeralds; and the
Horses themselves more remarkable than their Furniture. They proceeded in
order: First; A Body of Horsemen Armed Cap-a-pe with their Bows, Quivers,
Swords and Lances; Next the Bashaws, each with his retinue of led Horses,
handsome Pages with Coats of Mail richly dressed; And next, all the Caddees, or
Justices, with Turbants at least a Yard Diameter, with their Attendants; After
them proceeded the Chiauses of the Viziers who bring people to Justice before
him, with prodigious long Turbants, but not so big as the Caddees, and with
them their followers; To them succeeded the Emirs, or Kindred of Mahomet, all
with Green Heads to distinguish them: Next came the Viziers Chia (Nor
Secretary) with a vast and rich retinue of led Horses, Pages and Aga's; Next
came the Great Treasurer, or Desterdar, with a greater Attendants of like
nature; Then appeared a great number of Horses richly Trapped, and led by very
fine Pages, and followed by many persons of Quality, Attendants on the Two,
which immediately succeeded on most stately Horses, with rich Furniture, being
the Mosaip, or Favorite, (who Married the Grand Signiours Daughter,) and Kara
Kiah the greatest Officer in the Empire next the Vizier, called Chimacham, who
were attended by a vast number of Pages, on Foot and Horseback: Then past the
two Cadalesches or Lord Chief Justices, then the Viziers Guard covered over
with the Skins of Lions, Bears, Tigers and Leopards, every one differently
habited; Next came the Six Horse-Tails, carried before the Vizier by Eighteen
Men, on Poles of Ten yards long; Then Fifty of the Viziers Pages a Foot on each
side the way, between whom Rode himself, and the Mufty; After him all his Aga's
and great Officers of his Household, with a number of Pages; Next several of the
Grand Signiours, Eunuchs; and after them the Kizler Aga or black Eunuch, with
attendants equal to the Viziers; He was succeeded by bauling Holy men; Lean,
ill-favored, praying all the way for the Grand Signiours Life, and the
Propagation of their Law; These were followed by Two of the greatest Camels to
be found in the Empire; the first of which carried the Clothes of Mahomet,
which he wore in his Life time; the latter carried the Alcoran as it was
delivered by Mahomet to his Successors; which Beasts when they dye, the Turks
persuade themselves go to Heaven. After the Camels, and before the Grand
Seigniour, Rode Soliman Chia (Friend to our Nation) Master of the Horse to the
Grand Signiour, and his Favorite, but mortal Enemy to the Vizier: After him
Rode the Grand Signiour on a Milk-white Horse, covered over with unvalluable
Jewels, attended by Pages dressed a-like with Caps of Massy Gold; their Habit
Cloth of Gold; reaching down below their Knees, girded with a Girdle of three
Inches broad, covered as thick with Diamonds and other Jewels as they could be
set together. After these Rode the Prince in a plain habit, Grand Seigniours
Son.
and on an ordinary Horse, followed by about Four hundred, all the Grand
Signiors Pages, Armed with Caps and Coats of Mail, Gauntlets, Swords and
Targets, each with a Quiver of Guilt Arrows on his Right side, and a Bow on his
Left; the Case of which, and the Quiver of some, was set with Diamonds and
other Jewels: They wore a loose flying Garment of Satin, some Green, some
Scarlet, some Blew, some Yellow, and all colors, which mixed, made a delicate
show; Between every Ten or Twelve, Rode two white Eunuchs, the Turks being as
jealous of their young Men as of their Women. After these the Officers of the
Grand Signiors Household, in the midst of whom, his Coaches and Wagons, with
loaded Mules, Camels; etc. The Rear was brought up by about five Thousand
Spahees or Horsemen, each carrying in his hand a Pike Advanced, with a Bandera
of several Colors flying, which made the sight delightful; with which it
concluded, having lasted Five or Six hours.

Constantinople October. the 10th. 1682.
LONDON: Printed for A. Jones, in the Year, 1683.


