A LETTER from an Absent LORD to one of his FRIENDS in the Convention.
My Lord,
SInce you seem surpised that I answered not the Letter in which your Lp. so
earnestly pressed to see me at London and at the Convention, in my place in the
House of Peers: you will undoubtedly be more surpised to understand now, that
the Letter from the House which I have received as well as the rest of the
Lords, who stay in the Country, wrought no more upon me, than the many reasons
alleged by your Lp. To deal ingenuously, I will freely tell you, that it
absolutely confirmed me in my former Resolution to tarry at Home, and have
nothing to do with your Assembly, strongly suspecting that we were sent for,
only for Forms sake, and that nothing was feared more, than a full House of
Lords; for your Lp. (I suppose) will agree with me, that, if we had all come
up, you would not have been able to carry every thing according to the Pleasure
of your new King, since the Vote of the House of Commons prevailing with much
ado by bare two or three Voices, he was forced to make use of Threats and
Promises to gain eight or ten more to pass it. You will easily believe that I
and the greatest part of those who remain in the Country, would not have Voted
on that side: And therefore I leave it with you to judge whether your self and
some sixty more, who Voted with you could have carried it against above one
hundred and fifty who have had no hand in your Doings: Wherefore I could not
but perceive, that when they made Letters be written to us in the Name of the
Upper-house, and engaged our particular Friends to urge our repair to London,
they mocked both them and us, and feared nothing so much as to see all the
Peers of the Kingdom assembled. For then, resolutions so extravagant, and so
contrary to the good of the Nation, as have been taken, would never have past.
I pardon those of meaner extraction, as -- who being sensible they were the
first of their Race honored with the Title of Lord, and made equal to those in
whose Families heretofore they would have been glad to have lived, were the
most eager to give the full swing to their new Honor, which they have so ill
acknowledged from the King who gave it. I likewise Pardon the Lords, -- whom
the uneasiness of their Condition has cast into the wrong side, and those who
have been drawn in, they themselves, as it often happens among us, not well
knowing why. But I must confess I understand not how diverse others, no ways
subject to the same temptations, could be tainted with Baseness enough, to
engage in an attempt so black and abominable as it is, to renounce the
Obedience, which by Nature and Oath they owe to a lawful King only, to become
Slaves to the Prince of Orange.

It Is likely another would tell me I speak like a Papist, and an Advocate for
Arbitrary Power, but you well know that I am of the Church of England, and that
I have been so little employed in public Matters, and so little Favored,
since the death of His late Majesty, that I am not liable to the suspicion of
Partiality. It Is true, I have not only unconcernedly observed, but sometimes
praised the Kings zeal to favor his Papists as much as he could, for I always
thought, and so, to your knowledge did many of our Friends, that the Protestant
Religion had nothing to fear, and that the noisy Designs to destroy it were no
more than imaginary. I was always persuaded, and still am, that more improper
means to advance Popery could not be taken, then those which were; and so it
would never sink into my Head that there was any harm toward Protestant
Religion in all those Alarms which startled many Religious Protestants who by
their own Fears, and the Artifice of those who care not one pin for Religion,
have been dipped in the present doings, of which I doubt, we shall not see an end
so soon. Pray, my Lord, could a Man of sense be alarmed at an Embassy to Rome
when we knew the Ambassador so well as we did? And knew the first thing he did
at Rome, was to fall out with good Cardinal Howard, and all that were able to
instruct him in what might conduce to his purpose? Nuncio Dada too was a likely
man to endanger the Reformation: I for my part, could never believe otherwise,
but that he dreamt more of a Red Cap, than making Converts. Had he been put to
defend his Religion against our Bishops, in what a case would he have been,
whose Divinity stretched no farther, then to exclaim perpetually against, and
all to be Heretic the French, often to the Scandal, and sometimes Laughter of
the Company, especially when he would take upon him to play the Doctor: To my
thinking most of the Papists were much discontented and slighted him among
themselves, at least some have told me, that the Pope himself was ill satisfied
with him, and would recall him, but since he did it not, it must needs be that
he either ill understood the Affairs of England, or cared little for them.
However it be these are the only hands, through which past all the Traffic
betwixt England and Rome, whereof the one brought as bad Relations from thence,
as the other sent from hence: And we may conclude, that the the reunion of the
two Churches were possible, it would never be, by the Politics of the
Ambassador, or Learning of the Nuncio.

I hear what is said of the Kings dispensing with the Test, his employing and
advancing Papists to very considerable Places; his filling his Army with them,
and his design of suppressing our Religion and Liberty by them; and I know how
much it has been, endeavored this last twelve Months to heighten these things
and fright us all. To say the Truth, I must acknowledge I was my self for
sometime of the number of those who believed there might be something in it:
But it is now but too plain, that there was nothing. For had the King taken
such Measures for such a purpose, he had not been so shamefully betrayed,
whereas trusting to Protestants, he has hardly found a Man who would venture
his Life for Him. In good Faith, my Lord, the injury we have done our Religion,
grieves me strangely. For what Prince will ever trust us more, when all the
Declarations of our Church and Universities, our Oaths, and whatever is most
Sacred among Men, bind us no longer then we think sit? Our Bishops and Clergy
as often as they Preach against Papists and reproach the inconsistancy of their
Doctrine with the Duty of Subjects to their Sovereign, are sure to meet with an
Answer; and I fancy there will fine Comments be made on a Coronation Sermon,
the Dean of Canterbury's Letter to my Lord Russel, and the Oxford Censures,
etc. I confess to you I know not what to say, save that all good Protestants
will look upon those who have hurried your Convention into such Extremities, as
Rebels, insensible of Religion or Law, and that as excusable as many honest
dissenting Men among the Commons may be, the rest will not be reckoned among
the true Children of the Church of England, nor of her Communion. I am thinking
to write of this matter to a Bishop a Learned and an Honest Man, tho I believe
I know his mind by my own before hand. If the Yeas among you alleged reasons
of weight enough to silence all the scruples, which the Case must needs raise,
you will much oblige me to acquaint me with them. For I declare to you, that as
little as I pretend to Learning, I fancy I am Scholar enough to be pretty well
assured there was none to be alleged able to satisfy a Man who has never so
little smack of the Duty of Christianity; but strangely persuade my self there
Votes were grounded upon the detestable maxims of Doleman; and Buchanan, Knox,
Goodwin, Milton, and such Presbyterian Saints, whose Books, as often as they
have been forbidden and condemned by the Parliaments and Church of England, I
expect should now be Reprinted by order of the Convention, not that I believe
the leading Gentlemen troubled themselves at this time much with scruples:
There is no better remedy against the Disease, than that Fanatical spirit which
was predominant in your Assembly, chiefly in the House of Commons, made up for
the most part of Nonconformist Presbyterians, who by the Laws of Q. Elizabeth
and later Statutes ought to have been excluded. But let your new King alone for
that matter, let him once be but steady in his Throne, he will quickly bring in
more Christian Principles among you: Tho my Lords the Bishops, I am persuaded,
will be the first Reformed, according to the primitive Apostolic Pattern, and
being eased of the heavy load of useless Riches, and worldly Honors, reduced,
according to my Lord Shaftsbury's wish, to a Pension of bare 100 l. per Annum;
some of them, to my grief, deserve it but too well, and if I should resolve to
make one amongst you, I will not answer I shall Vote against it. But I declare
to you, I shall concur in nothing else, and it shall be no fault of mine if
those Lords with whom I have any credit; join not to undo all you have done as
soon, as the Nation, which I hope it quickly will, shall open its Eyes and
become sensible of the infamy which your Convention has thrown upon it.

The truth is, there need no meeting for the matter. For that were to suppose
some Authority in what you have done, whereas it has none: and is every way
extravagant. You must needs have lost your Wits, if you imagine we shall ever
take the Votes of your Houses for Laws. You will know that England acknowledges
no other Law, but those which are made by Lawful Authority, that is, by the
King in Parliament. Search all Parliaments, search all Court-Rolls, there are
no other to be found. I appeal to the very Lawyers, who, after they had been of
Council to all the Seditious Men; and Conspirators of late times, were chosen
to be yours. These Famous Lawyers and you your selves, know that no Authority
but the King's alone, can call the Peers and Commons together, and you
acknowledged it, by not daring at first, to take the Name of Parliament upon
you. You are therefore Convened by the bare Authority of the Prince of Orange,
and that Authority you gave him, though you had none to give him; Put case you
had, he was incapable either to receive or exercise it. For having entered the
Kingdom in Arms, Declared against the King, and attempted upon His Sacred
Person and Liberty; he incurred the Crime of High Treason, and forfeited all
his Rights, Honors and Prerogatives in case he be a Subject; If he be not, he
is a public Enemy, and against whom the Nation is bound to stand by the King,
and not to obey him under pain of High Treason. And yet this is the Authority
by which you sit, and which by your own confession cannot make an Assembly,
such as our Laws call a Parliament. And yet this notwithstanding your
Convention, which, stretch its Power to the utmost, cannot pretend to more than
Parliament Power, has done what no Lawful Parliament ever durst do; Judge their
King; Declared His forced Retreat, to be an Abdication of the Government, and
the Throne Vacant; and finally, disposed of it to the use of P. of Orange. I
beseech you, send me word what Presidents your Learned Council brought for
these Resolves. Those of the Spencers and other Traitors of those times? or
those of Cromwell? I know none else who maintained, that as often as a King
Governs not according to Law, his Subjects may take Arms and compel him to it.
But you know all Parliaments have placed this case amongst Crimes of High
Treason.

The truth is, you have bethought your selves of a subtle expedient, which I
expect should be clapped for a color upon your Proceedings, viz. that you did
not vacate the Throne, but only filled it when it was vacant. But in good faith
this is to top upon a whole Nation with your false distinctions. In virtue of
what Law I beseech you, could you declare the Throne vacant? can a parcel of
Seditious Men, met at the tumultuous call of an Usurper, give sentence in such
a cause? Is the Kingdom of England Elective? and is there any uncontested
President to be found, which Authorizes the People to dispose of the Crown, or
declare it Vacant? can an Heriditary Kingdom become Vacant otherwise than by
the Death of the Lawful Occupant? This way perhaps your new King might have
made it Vacant; but though it were, is there no Heir? The Prince of Wales, for
whose Birth all England, and the Prince of Orange himself so solemnly
Congratulated with his Father, is He no longer in the World? And is He not
considerable enough to be thought of? His age is not capable of breaking the
Original Contract, which you have fancied between King and People, and
therefore the Throne, if it be Vacant, must belong to Him. I know the Prince of
Orange would make a Counterfeit of Him, and this becomes his Conscience. But
tell me in yours, whether all these impotently malicious surmises, which are
spread by his Emissa^ys, be not palpably shameful? So shameful, that he has not
yet ventured to press you, as great an Influence as he has among you, to come
to a Declaration in that point. It is reserved it seems to your Parliament in
which Oats and his Brethren of the Post, will swear some mishappen Oath for
Burnet to lick over, and you upon their credit enact him suppositions, in
virtue of some new Law which shall reach backwards, as, That the Queens of
England (to purpose) shall be no where validly Delivered, but in the
Banqueting House, both Houses of Parliament present.

I will say nothing of your Grievances, as much more cry than wool as there is
in them. But I will stop a little at the New Oaths, which you substitute in
place of those which are appointed by Law. You, my Lord have taken the Oaths of
Allegiance, Supreamacy, and the Test, as well as your Neighbors. Do you
believe those Oaths obliged you to perform what you swore, and tied you to the
King to whom you swore, or do you not? In likelihood you do not, since those
Oaths notwithstanding, you thought your self free to take up Arms against your
King, and to join with His Enemies: of necessity then, you must either be
Perjured, or believe there is no regard to be had to Oaths, as indeed you were
no Slaves to yours. We must be confident Men to reproach the Papists longer
with their Lies and their Equivocations, (to which abundance of them are no
greater Friends than we) when your Convention not only teaches, but orders us
to make such May-Games of our Oaths. Besides they were Enacted by Parliament,
the bare dispensing with which, in favor of Papists, is a principal part of
your Outcry against His Majesty; with what face can you take them quite away,
and pop in others in their room, you who by changing your Convention into a
Parliament, acknowledge you have not the Authority of a Parliament? How could
you do, what you make a Crime in the King, who at worst has an Authority, which
you have not? Zeal, I suppose, for Protestant Religion, will be pleaded for
your Proceeding, and your strange Votes against the King. And yet it would
puzzle the most Religious Man of quirk among you to cite the Article of
Protestant Religion, or Act concerning it, which justify your Zeal. There is
none which enables Subjects to dispose of the Crown, in case their King profess
not the Protestant Religion. On the contrary, the last Act of Uniformity
formally detests the Doctrine of those who teach that Subjects may take up Arms
against their King. And though some Law had made the Profession of the Protestant
Religion necessary, to be King of England, it were to be understood of the
Protestant Religion Established by Law: yet you take the boldness to declare
the Throne Vacant, (whatever you pretend to in reality) because the King is of
the Romish Religion, and at the same time set up a Man who has always been of a
Religion contrary to Law, as well as the King, since the Prince of Orange is a
Protestant Dissenter, for the Law is against Protestant Dissenters as will as
Papists. But I see you take upon you to do, what the Fanatics have so often
demanded, and no Legal Parliament yet would ever grant, to take away the Penal
Laws from Protestant Dissenters, and leave them still in force against Papists.
Where I ask again, what Authority you have to alter the Laws, and what pretense
to Dispense with them, when you fall out with the King for Dispensing? Turn it
which way you will, these Proceedings are unmaintainable, and as you are no
Stranger to our Laws, you will I make no doubt, acknowledge that there is no
speaking of them and your Votes the same day.

And then the King is traduced with designing Arbitrary Power, when the
Arbitrary Power of the Convention has subverted more in a week, than our Kings
in a hundred years. It has subverted the Fundamental Law of Succession; all
that have been made for the security of Kings and the State; those of
Supreamacy, of Uniformity in Religion, and so many other, that there will
hardly remain more, than just to keep Nisi prius es going. For in what concerns
Criminal matters, all Laws have been laid aside by the illegal Proceedings
against diverse Papists and others, Peers as well as Commons Imprisoned against
Law, and this at the very time in which complaint was made of bringing one into
the King's Bench, who ought to have been Tried in Parliament. Peers are
priviledg'd Persons; how then can you take upon you to Arrest even Popish
Peers, you who neither had the Authority, nor Name of a Parliament? The Law
allows the meanest Man in the Nation his Habeas Corpus, and by it his Liberty
upon Bail, and yet you refused it to Peers. The Chancellor is the Third Man in
the Kingdom, and has the privilege not only of his Peerage, but of his Office,
which makes the usage he has received, Treason. And yet you have put and kept
him in Prison; notwithstanding that, even though you had been a Lawful
Parliament, all you could do, is to Address to the King to punish him for
Maladministration, if he be guilty. But I will enlarge no farther upon your
irregular doings, whereof I do not think it possible to pack a greater number
into one Vote. I will only tell you (that to my thinking) your Convention has
outdone the long Parliament it self in bare faced contempt of the Laws. Those
Seditious Paricides stumbled not, as you do, at the Threshold. They demanded,
and (though by very bad means) obtained a Parliament, They acknowledged the Kings
Power when they met, they sought, and (to his, and the whole Nations
misfortune) got his consent to an Act for not Disolving or Proroging them,
without their own consent. They then, kept at least some measures, you keep
none; and they were a Parliament, you are not. I know you ill, if you will
always be content the World should think something better of the most execrable
Paracides, that ever were, and take you for the less modestly wicked of the two.

For what concerns your new King, he has nothing but Force to trust to, the
only thing which can silence the Laws and preserve him. But I am persuaded that
you, who are his Favorites, will be the first to repent the trusting your
Liberty in such bad hands. Those Brutes of Hollanders, are far from the
Freemen which he found them. He persuaded them to rid themselves of their best
Patriots, as he has persuaded you to rid your selves of your King: and is like
to make you sensible one day, that your great Liberty which you found, it
seems, uneasy, will bid fair to enslave you. If persuasions will not do, there
are other expedients in the World, which may, and if we will believe malicious
Tongues, have been thought of, I for my part am resolved to stay at home, till
I see which way matters are like to go. Whatever you Write, I cannot but think
them wondrous tottering still, though he has appeared in his Robes, perhaps
suspecting, that if he had stayed his Coronation day, he might never have worn
them,. Between you and me, the Description you make, puts me in mind of Kings
in old Tapestry, with their Crowns and their Mantles always on, even in Bed.
It Is like that day he went to Bed with his, to expose the Raree-Show a while
longer: But let him Reign over those, who find him, and his ways to their mind,
happen what will, I will not taint my Family and my Credit, no not with
Treason, if sure to be pardoned, and the Infamy of acknowledging a Foreign
Usurper, whose double Alliance to the Royal Family, is the only pretense he has
to the honor of commanding us. When I take a fancy to choose a Master, I will
pitch upon one of a higher rank. As my humor is, I should rather, if I had
been a Hollander, have obeyed the King of Spain, than a Gentleman of Germany;
and being an Englishman will never submit to a man, whose Nobility is no
higher raised above mine. And this is my Resolve upon the Question, to which I
believe, I shall always adhear, let what will be offered to the contraty. As
for the dismal consequences, with which you threaten me, I hope they will pass
one way or other. For we live in the Land of Revolutions, where Changes happen
in a moment, and always without knowing why. If they will not let me stay
quietly at home, Ireland is not so far off, but that I may slip thither, where,
as I have a Title, I declare to you before hand, that if the King call a
Parliament, you are like to hear news of Dametas. I do not mean to be Deaf and
Dumb there, as I have been to your Convention. Only I am troubled for my
Contrymen, whom their Titles, or other considerations, make answerable
before a Parliament of Ireland. If the rigor of the Law should fall upon them,
they can the less complain, because the English having set the Irish so many
examples of severity, and that too in the case of men, who had done and
suffered much for the King, they cannot well expect to be spared by the Irish.
These thoughts grieve a man who loves his Nation. But since all the Calamities,
still fresh in memory, which the last long Rebellion power'd upon the Kingdom,
cannot extingvish that violent Animosity, which some men have against Lawful
Princes, who can complain or wonder, if Providence permit it those which are
not so. I shall have at least, the satisfaction to have had no hand in them,
and will never with your distinction of de facto, and de jure Kings,
distinguish my self into the Politic Idolatry of falling down before the Idol
of the Commons, Perhaps we may one day see the Golden Calf bruised to pieces.
You may dance about it in the mean time, and your Aaron the Bishop of London
and such Levites cry out, These are thy Gods O Israel, which have brought thee
out of the Bondage of Egypt. This is the MESSIAH of the Presbyterians, who has
broken in pieces the CHAINS of POPERY, and delivered you from the Slavery of
Arbitrary Power. They may amuse, and they may lull you asleep, till you wake,
much I fear, in Blood. God in his Mercy, will I hope, take pity on honest Men.
And as to the Gentlemen of the House of Commons, we may possibly live to see
some of them led to Tyburn. Many to my knowledge did deserve it long before the
Convention, and without that Dispensing Power, against which they are now so
eager, bid much fairer for the Halterlative than the Legislative Power, for
Hanging than for Parliament Speeches. The worst is, that nothing they have, or
can do, can keep them clear of the guilt of High Treason, into which they have
run you All; and the best I can wish you, is that our Lawful King may speedily
return, and bury all Faults in an Act of Oblivion, the only thing which can
secure your Estates, your Honors, and your Lives. It was the Advice of Honest
Judge Jenkins to the Roundheads who came to him for Council in the time of
Charles the I. They Laughed at him, as you perhaps will at me. But he was found
to be in the right at last, and so, I hope, shall I. In the mean time I entreat
you that these matters may not slacken our old Friendship, I am, etc.

At -- 20th. April 1689

