THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THOMAS HOWARD Duke of NORFOLK, BEFORE THE Earl of
SHREWSBURY Lord High-STEWARD of ENGLAND. ALSO, A Brief Derivation of the most
Honorable Family of the HOWARDS.

With an Account of what Families they are Related to by Marriages. Transcribed
out of Ancient Manuscripts, never before Published.

Printed by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into Old Spring-Garden near
Charing Cross, MDCLXXXV.

To the High and Mighty PRINCE HENRY Duke of NORFOLK. Earl Marshal of ENGLAND,
Earl of Arundell, Surrey, Norfolk and Norwich Baron Howard, Mowbrey, Seagrave,
Brewes of Cower, Fitz-Allen, Warren, Chun, Oswaldestry, Maltrevers, of Cales,
Graystock, Farnival, of Sheffield, and Howard of Castle-Rising. Constable and
Governor of His Majesty's Royal Castle of Windsor. Lord Warden of Windsor
Forest. Lord Lieutenant of the County of Norfolk, Surry, and Berks, and of the
City of Norwich, and County of the said City. And Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, etc.
My Lord,
AS Your Grace is the Chief of Your Illustrious Family, it would appear as
rudely, Improper to Dedicate this Discourse to any other, as perhaps it does an
unbecoming presumption to present it to the Honor of Your hands, and since
there is no avoiding a Crime; the least must be admitted, for which I hope to
obtain a Pardon with less Difficulty, from that excessive Coodness which is
your Character, than I have had to Collect these scattered Papers (slubber'd
with Antiquity) which were long preservd in Your Family, and hastily thrown
into this posture by

My Lord Your Graces Most Humble and Most Faithful Servant J. Lacy.

THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THOMAS HOWARD Duke of NORFOLK, BEFORE THE Earl of
SHREWSBURY Lord High-STEWARD of ENGLAND.
THe Names of the Lords Summoned by Thomas Edwards Sergeant at Arms; who being
Called; came and sat, down in their Places appointed: They that sat on the
Right Hand of the Steward, are Noted with the Letter A. and they that sat on
the Left Hand, with the Letter B. Earls
Kent A. Worcester B. Sussex A. Huntington B. Warwick A. Bedford B. Pembroke A.
Hartford B. Leicester A.
Lords,
Clinton A. Howard of Effingham B. Burghley A. Gray of Wilton B. Monjoy A.
Sands B. Wentworth A. Bourghrave B. Mordant A. St. John's B. Rich A. North B.
Shandois A. St. John's of Bostock B. Buckhurst A. De la Ware B.


Then was Robert Catlin Lord Chief Justice of England, commanded to return his
Precept upon Peril; which being returned, was read, Statute Issues, and then
the Lieutenant of the Tower was called to return his Precept, and to bring
forth his Prisoner the Duke of Norfolk: Then was the Duke brought to the Bar,
between Sir Owen Hopton Lieutenant, and Sir Peter Carew; and next Sir Peter,
stood one holding the Tower-Axe with the edge from the Duke.

The Duke immediately at his coming to the Bar, perused all the Lords, first on
the Right Hand of the Steward, then on the Left Hand; and the Lieutenant
delivered in his Precept, Versus Thomas Ducem Norfolk, etc. And then was
Proclamation made, every man to keep Silence; and Mr. Sands spoke to the
Prisoner in this manner.

Thomas Duke of Norfolk late of Kennington in Norfolk, hold up thy thy Hand;
which done, he read the Indictment, the effect whereof was, That He the 22th.
of September Anno Dom. 1570. did Traitorously Compose and Imagine to put to
Death our Sovereign Lady the Queen, to raise Rebellion, to Subvert the
Commonwealth, and to stir up Foreign Enemies to invade this Realm, and to Levy
War against the Queen; for that he knew Mary late Queen of Scots to have
claimed the Crown of this Realm, and to have Named her self Queen of England,
and bore the Arms of our Queen without difference; did the 22th. of Semptember
Anno predict' before and after Compose and Imagine to deprive, destroy and put
to Death our Sovereign Lady the Queen, to raise Rebellion, to subvert the
Commonwealth, and to stir up Foreign Enemies to Invade this Realm, and to Levy
War against the Queen; for that he knew Mary late Queen of Scots to have
Claimed the Crown of this Realm, and to have Named her self Queen of England,
and bore the Arms without difference, did the 22th. of September Anno predict'
before and after, without the Consent of our said Queen sent diverse Tokens and
Letters to the said late Scottish Queen, and lent her diverse Sums of Money, and
received diverse Tokens from her, contrary to the Commands of the Queen, and
contrary to his own Submission and Promise under his Hand and Seal; and that He
knowing the late Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the Northerns
Markenfield and others, which had Levied War against the Queen the 16th. of
November Anno predict' and had Assembled to them the number of 1000 persons,
and then fled the 12th. of December Anno predict' into Scotland, and there were
received by the Duke of Castol, Herald Lord Hunne, and there pursued by the
Earl of Sussex. He, on the 7th. of August Anno predict' did send before and
after Money unto them, and that he being Adherent to the Pope, the Queens
Enemy, the 10th. of March Anno Reginae, did Consent and Consult with Robert
Rodulph Merchant Stranger, and the Pope 's Factor, to have Money from the Pope,
and the Duke of Alva, and that they should send an Army to Invade the Realm, to
deliver the said Scottish Queen. And further, whereas the said Robert Rodulph
had written in the Name of the said Duke three Letters, one to the Pope, the
second to King Philip, and the third to the Duke of Alva; the said Duke sent
his Servant to the Ambassador of King Philip, to desire him to Certify the
Pope, King Philip, and the Duke that he allowed of the same Letters; and that
they should be taken as sent from him, which was so agreed; but the said Robert
Rodulph who delivered the Duke of Norfold 's Ciphers, whereof he carried one
Copy to Rome; whereby each might Certify others, and likewise required of the
said Duke what time the Aid should arrive, that they might be provided: And
further, that the said Duke did receive Letters from the said Pope with Promise
of the said Aid: And also that he did send Comfort to the Lord Ferris and other
Scots the Queens Enemies, etc. Which Indictment being read, Mr. Sands said to
the Duke; How say thou Thomas Duke of Norfolk, art thou guilty of these
Treasons, or not guilty?

Duke, The hearing of this Indictment gives me occasion to make Request, which
I did not intend to have done: Which is to have Council Assigned me, if the Law
will permit it?


Catlin, You must have none.


Duke, That Is very severe, I was told the Indictment was only concerning
matters contained in the Statute of the 25th Edward the III. I have had very
short warning, not more than 14 hours, night and all; I am no Lawyer, and there
is many circumstances in which I must submit my self to the Opinion of the
Justices, I could not have Books to inform my self, and direct, but must Fight
without Weapons: Yet I have heard in the Cause of Mr. Humphry Stafford in the
time of Henry the VII. in a Case of Treason, had Council Assigned him.


Dyer, The Case you speak of, was concerning the pleading of a Sanctuary by
prescription.


Duke, I must submit then to your Judgments, I must plead for my Life, Lands,
Goods, and Children, and for that which I esteem much more Dear to me, my
Honor and Honesty, my Blood will Cry aloud for Vengeance, if I am Condemned
Unjustly. One Request I make to you my Judges, to tell me if the Indictment be
perfect in all, or in part; and in what part, that thereto I may give my Answer.


Catlin, The Cause being true, the Indictment is sufficient.


Duke, I should know whether they are all Treasons or no?


Sands, How say thou Thomas Duke of Norfolk, art thou Guilty of these
Treasons, or not Guilty?


Duke, Not Guilty?


Sands, How will thou be Tried?


Duke, By God and my Peers; I am in a great Consternation at the Treasons
that is imputed against me, but am comforted by the Justice of the Queen in
giving me that Trial which the Law allows me, and it is such as I require;
But this Suit I make to the Lords, that I may have Justice, and not be oppressed
with Un-necessary Diversities; my Memory is ill of it self, and rendered much
worse by evil usage, since my severe Imprisonment. I pray God I may forgive it:
And concerning you my Peers, I hope I may call it my Happiness that I shall be
Tried by You, in whose Hands I must put my Life; and I think I dare into the
single Hands of a great many of you, whom I know profess Religion, and I hope
will not burden your Consciences contrary to Law and Justice, depending upon
the clearness of my Innocence, I would not take a needless and cowardly Flight,
I have what I expected and wished, a Trial; I crave it with Justice, and must
confess I have neglected my Duty in matters under Treason; I desire those
Omissions be not imputed as Treasons.


Sergeant Berham, This Indictment contains three several matters of Treason.
First, It is by Deprivation of the Queens Majesty. The second, Is the Relief of
the Rebels in England. The third, The assistance of the Scots the Queens
Enemies. To prove the first, there are two matters of Fact declared in the said
Indictment. First, knowing the Scottish Queen to have claimed the Crown, he
has attempted Marriage with her: Also, the Conspiracy to procure Foreign
Power to Invade the Realm, does prove him Guilty of the matter.


Duke, The Duke interrupting him, said, Mr. Sergeant, You begin, as I thought
you would, in laying the matters of the Marriage, and other things to my
Charge, which are not Treason, to exasperate the matter; you may do your Duty,
but yet Conscientiously; and (then something smiling) I should speak one thing
which I had almost forgot; A man suspected is half Condemned; I have been
charged with an Oath, I protest I took the Oath, as I shall prove; I Pray let
it not be laid out to my Discredit. They desired it.


Barham, He that would marry with one that claims the Crown, hops to aspire
to the same; This matter began at such a time as the Duke was one of the
Commissioners for hearing the Cause between the late Scottish Queen and the
Lords of Scotland, at which time the Duke took an Oath to deal therein
directly, to weigh indifferently occasions and Answers; wherein notwithstanding
he dealt indirectly, thereby committing Perjury, and disclosing the Queens
secret Councels; if you deny it, I Will prove it.


Duke, This Case has diverse parts, not within the compass of Treason.


Burham, I demand if you know the claim?


Lord Steward, Your Grace must Answer directly.


Gerrard, After (upon viewing Sergeant Burham and the Queens Attorney,) the
Duke Confessed the Claim, but not the Contrivance, etc.


Burham, He showed the Contrivance by her Refusal to acknowledge the Queens
Majesty to be the Lawful Queen.


Duke, I did not approve it, but I must defend her doing it, she having a
Husband, did it; which at the Request of Throgmorton was left by the Queen; she
has since entered into League with her, professing great Friendship, and has
Christened her Child.


Burham, But she has not yet renounced her Claim, and yet you have as far dealt
with her as being the Queens Commissioner, to hear the matter opened to her,
the Accusations; You gave Instructions how she should deal that matters might
not come to light; and conferred with the Bishop of Ross about the same.For
proof whereof was showed the Examination of the Bishop taken the 6th. of
November one thousand five hundred seventy one, declaring that the Duke
discocover'd to him all that he knew of that business, and promised what help
he could, etc. But he spoke nothing of the Marriage, but referred all to
Luddington, who had caused the Duke to stay the Conference, and showed unto him
her good Will, and how she was set to accompany the Earl of Murray to Convey
the Queen, where he showed that the Duke did Advertise him, that they did go
about to Degrade the Scottish Queen with the People of England, that she might
be the less able to attempt any thing against the Queen of England; And these
matters the Duke answered at large, the effect was.


Duke, Luddington only moved the Marriage to him, which He at that time
refused: That he only told the Bishop of Ross he could not condescend to that
Proposition; and as her Circumstances were stated, it would neither be for her
Honor, nor His; He desired the Bishop of Ross might be sent for: Then was
showed a Letter of the Bishops, wherein was contained, That it was appointed
the Earl of Murray should be Murdered in the North, going into Scotland; But
the Duke having Discoursed with him at Hampton Court about the Marriage, to
which he consented, the intended Murder was also stopped: There was also a Letter
to the Duke showed, moving the Marriage at that time, and that it should be for
the Advantage of his Family to Marry the Queen, who proposed her Son should
also Marry the Lady Margaret Howard the Dukes Daughter, which Argument inclined
the Duke to it: Yet when it was rumored that he designed the Marriage of the
Scottish Queen, he appeared much offended, and told the Queen of it, and seemed
to dislike her for her former Marriages; And said, the whole Revenues of the
Crown of Scotland, the Ordinary Charges deducted, was not so Considerable as
his Estate in England; and that he thought himself as great a Prince in his
Bowling-Alley at Norwich, as if he were King of Scotland; this was affirmed by
Mr. Burham, that he heard the Queens Majesty speak it, and by the Dukes own
Examination taken the sixth of November proved plainly: It was further showed,
that at Treachfield he had Commandment not to proceed any further in that
Marriage; and yet it was apparent he had treated about it, though he had
declared to Banister an ill Opinion of the Queen, and said, he believed she was
privy to the Murder of her Husband.


Duke, These are far fetches Mr. Burham, and come short of proving a
Deprivation of the Queen, and Destruction of her Person: when the Marriage was
proposed to me, I made several Objections against it, though without any unjust
or unbecoming Reflections upon that great Princess, whose Virtue is above
Calumny; But my Lord Leicester, who persuaded me to the Marriage also, told me
of the Queens Consent, and advised me to proceed in the Treaty, and leave the
Mannagement to him, who would attend an opportunity to Discourse it with the
Queen, whom he knew he could dispose to it.


Burham, To come nearer to you, it appears you have gone about to procure it by
Force, and Conspired to have taken the Tower; which if true, you must grant the
Destruction of the Queens person: For the jealousy of a Kingdom is such, that
it will not admit of a Rival: Then some Letters of the Dukes were read, and
several long Letters written by the Queen of Scots, from whence it is inferred
the Duke, did not pursue the Marriage for Love of the Queen of Scots, but for
the Ambition of the Crown of England.


Duke, Your Conclusions and Inferences are ill applied, it is true one came to
me and advised the taking of the Tower, which I refused, and disliked.


Burham, Why then did you Consult the Earl of Pembroke about the same.


Duke, To tell him what had been Proposed to me, was not to Consult him.


Gerrard, You took a Knife and cut down a Green Vine with this saying, Virescit
vulnere virtus.


Duke, Why, what do you gather from thence?


Burham, The use is not to cut Vines whilst they are Green that should grow
again.


It was also objected, That when the Queens Majesty had demanded of the Queen
of Scots, certain Castles in her Possession, which the Rebels delivered; the
Duke advised the contrary, and went about to procure the Queen of Scots her
Liberty, and that Ross opened the Window; and after he had promised and given
it under his hand never to Treat about the Marriage any more, he held
Correspondence with the Queen of Scots and her Friends: Then they showed him a
Prophesy by Hiekforth, which was this, In exaltatione Lunae leo deprimitur, Leo
Leon^ conjungitur and semen eorem Regnabunt; which was proved by the
examination of Hickforth, to whom the Duke had showed it, terming it a Foppish
Tale.

Duke, By which you see I did not esteem it. Then one Candish was brought in,
who was Sworn; the Substance of his Evidence was, That being at Southhampton
with the Duke, he advised him to endeavor to obtain the Queens Favor and
Consent to the Marriage; He answered, He would have her, or it should cost him
his Life: And another time the Duke and the Lord Lumley being together at
Howards Palace, with that the Duke turning toward him, said, Can thou accuse
me of any thing? I defy Thee and the Devil, to which he answered.


Candish, I can accuse him of nothing, but the Marriage: And that at
Kenning-Hall he did say to him, That there was nothing to undo us, but the
rising of the Northern Lords; If they should then rise, I further asked, if the
Queen were dead, that he may procure my Brother Candish to be of his side.


Duke, All which the Duke positively denied, and declared how little Credit the
same Candish was of, that he had often Relieved him, and given him Money, and
that he was one of no Estimation, as the business between him and Mr. Christmas
did sufficiently testify.


It was also said, That the Duke sent one Travers to the Earls, desiring them
not to Rise; for if they did, they were utterly undone; but this and much more
was without proof: There was also a Letter produced from the Queen of Scots to
the Duke, written in Ciphers, which was Decypher'd and read, declaring her
Sorrow for his Disappointments.

Duke, The Duke answered, That all these things were unlikely, nor would he
have thus proceeded, if he had, (as he is charged,) Imagined and Contrived the
Deprivation of the Queen; and the chiefest Evidence against him, was by Radolph
and Bracton, who was not to be Credited for a Witness: He also said, that
Trevers went not to the Earls with any such Message, and that he never offered
to fly, which one Guilty would have done; nor did he ever esteem those Earls so
much as to Trust them with his Life.


Gerrard, Thus have you heard the attempt of the Marriage proved, and to prove
the Deprivation of the Queen, was the dealing with the Pope, King Philip, and
the Duke of Alva, for the bringing in of Foreign Power to Land here (which God
has revealed) most wonderfully, according to that saying, Nill est tam
occultum quod non revelabitur: At the first opening of the business, it could
not be known whom it concerned; Then by opening of a Bag of 600 l. Sealed with
Letters in the same to Sherbury for 50 l. which was opened by some of the
Council at London: The Queen and Council understood the whole matter at Easter
by the Letters directed to Quadrantus and Trantus, but who that signified could
not be known till of late, for it appears by Quadrantus is meant the Duke, and
by Trantus another Nobleman, this Secret is now found out by Ciphers hid in the
Tyles, and Letters described by Hickforth, commanded by the Duke to be Burnt,
found under the Matts going into the Dukes Chamber; These matters are to be
proved by those that are neither Indicted nor Convicted of Treason.


Duke, There was not a Letter of mine that contained a Syllable of Treason; and
if the malice of ill men has contrived any thing that deserves blame, it is fit
they should bear their own burden, and not lay Crimes upon my Shoulders to
lessen their load.


Gerrard, You had Conference your self with Radolph for bringing in 10000 men
out of Flanders to be Landed at Berwick, whereof 3000 should be Horsemen; For
proof whereof, was read the Examination of Barker.


It was further showed, that the Bishop of Ross and H^ had Conference together
about these matters, and concerning Letters sent by the Duke of Norfolk to the
Duke of Alva and the Pope, and King Philip, but the Duke had refused to
Subscribe them; Then was it advis*d by the Bishop of Ross, that he should send
Barker his Man to the Spanish Ambassador to tell him, the Duke was well
Contented with those Letters, and that they should be taken as his own, and
that the Ambassador should certify so much from him.

Duke, My memory is too weak to answer to a heap of matters hudled up I know
not how, having nothing but Truth and Ignorance to support me; and you are four
of the Queens Council, who have Notes, and the faculty of flourishing upon
them; and it is hard for me to answer all of a sudden, and may (through the
defect of Memory and the surprise of an accused Innocence) omit that which
might be easily answered: It was very unlikely and extremely untrue, that I
should deal with the Pope; I had rather be drawn in pieces with wild Horses,
than change from that Faith which I was brought up in from my Youth; and for
Landing an Army at Harwich, it is well known how impossible it is for an Army
to March in that Country, which is all Ditches, and Woods: If I had designed
such a matter, I would have made Provision of Arms and Powder; I have not
bestowed 10 l. of any Armor these ten years, except it were eight Corslets of
proof; I have no Cullivers in my House, and I am sure not three Barrels of
Powder; And if I had designed any such thing, I would have been provided
otherwise than I was, neither would I have sent Barker of such a Message, but
rather have Trusted my Hand to the Letters, than to have put Words into his
Mout^ (...) being one of no Credit with me; and if I would (...) framed such a
Message, I would sooner have (...) Banister than 20 Barkers.


Then was showed a Letter from the Bishop o^ (...) to the Scottish Queen about
the Marriage; there was also a Letter from the Duke to Radolph, written with
Okier, since he was in the Tower, bidding him burn the Bagg of Letters which
Barker had put in a certain place, and to lay up Ross's, whom the Law could not
touch, because he was an Ambassador.

Duke, I had heard that he had Accused diverse; and when I perceived there was
such Searching, I gave that advice for avoiding of Trouble, though the Letters
were insignificant.

There was also a Letter from the Duke, which expressed that he could not be
charged with any Crime; and if he loved his Life, he should take heed whom he
Accused.


Duke, By which my Innocence appears?


Brumly showed Letters from Radolph, sent by Bayley Ross's Servant; by which it
appeared that the Duke D' Alva liked the matter, and inquired how far Harwich
was from London.

Brumley further said, the whole Conspiracy was opened at Antwerp to the
Ambassador of a Foreign Prince; who acquainted his Master, who had written the
whole Discourse to the Queen; which because it concerned others as well as the
Duke, should only be opened to the Lords of the Privy Council.

Duke, This is a Mystery that I know not how to Reply to, unless that part of
it which concerned me were discovered.


Then Mr. Milbourn made a formal Discourse for the Credit of the Depositions of
the Duke and others.

Duke, I know not how to come after so smooth a Tale as the Attorney of the
Court of Wards has told, yet he reflects nothing, what fear and promised Reward
might prevail upon Timorous and Mercenary minds; But I refer you unto Bracton
for Discrediting and disproving those Witnesses.


Catlin, In such Matters and Cases of Treason, the Depositions of Strangers may
be taken, and it lies in the Breasts of the Peers to Credit the same as they
shall see Cause; and to proceed to the second point of Treason specified in the
Indictment, which was the Aiding the Rebels after they were fled.


Duke, There is little danger in a discerned Enemy; yet I never relieved any of
them.


Catlin, Then for the third point of Treason contained in the Indictment, for
Assisting the Scottish Rebels the Queens Enemies by Letters from the Duke to
Banister, and from Banister to Luddington, and from Luddington to Radolph; and
by the Examination of Banister, and by the Bag of Money delivered to Sherbury
with Letters in the same Bag, as it was before declared by Mr. Gerrard.


Duke, I desire the Opinion of the Judges, If the Subjects of another Prince
(the Prince not being in War with the Queen, may be accounted the Queens
Enemies.


Catlin, That might well enough be seen, for the Queen might make War with a
Duke in France, and have Peace with the French King.


Shrewsbury, have you ought else to say?


Duke, I depend upon Truth and Innocence, which I hope will outweigh the
Malice and Artifice of my Enemies, and I also hope my Judges will consider the
Invalidity of the Evidence against me; the persons being of no Credit nor
Reputation: And for the Marriage I Treated in it with the Queens Consent and
Appointment; and afterward suspended it (though several Letters and Arguments
were directed to me concerning it.)


Shrewsbury, Lieutenant of the Tower, withdraw the Prisoner a while, then was
Silence Proclaimed.


Shrewsbury, My Lords, here you have heard that Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk
has been Indicted of diverse points of Treason, and has Pleaded not Guilty, and
has put himself upon the Trial of God and his Peers; You are now to Consider
upon the whole Evidence which you have heard, whether he be Guilty or not
Guilty, and to speak your minds upon your Honors and Consciences, and so bid
them withdraw together and return as soon as they could; which they did to a
place for that purpose where the Chancery is now kept; and there consulted in
the sight of all; Then the Lords being Returned and sat in their places, the
Earl of Shrewsbury Lord High Steward of England commanded the Duke to be placed
further out of Hearing of them; then he asked aloud, first to the youngest
Lord, saying, what say you my Lord De la Ware, is Thomas Duke of Norfolk guilty
of these Treasons; yea, or no, who standing up, answered, Guilty; then the same
was asked of all the Barons and Earls one after another, beginning at the
Youngest; and so to the Eldest in Degree; and all said Guilty. Then the Lord
High Steward commanded the Prisoner should be brought to the Bar, who being
placed, the Earl of Shrewsbury Lord High Steward said. Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk, thou have been Accused of diverse Treasons, and have Pleaded against
all not Guilty; and have put thy self upon God and this Peers, who have all
declared thee Guilty; what can thou say now, that Judgment may not proceed
against thee.


Duke, The great God and my own Innocence be between me and my False Accusers.


Then was there a profound Silence a good while; after which the Tower Axe was
turned toward the Duke.

Burham, May it please your Lordship to understand, That Thomas Howard late
Duke of Norfolk has been Indicted of several Treasons, and has thereunto
Pleaded not Guilty; and thereupon has put himself upon the Trial of God and
his Peers; and they have found him Guilty: I am therefore to pray your Judgment
in the behalf of our Gracious Sovereign Lady the Queen.


Shrewsbury, Thou Thamas late Duke of Norfolk have been Indicted of several
Treasons, and thereunto have Pleaded not Guilty, and have put thy self upon the
Trial of God and thy Peers, and have been by them found Guilty. Therefore our
Court and the Queen does Award, That thou shall be lead from hence to to the
Tower, and thence to be drawn through the midst of London to Tybourn, and there
to be Hanged, until thou art half Dead, thy Bowels to be taken out and Burnt
before thy Face, thy Head to be Cut off, and thy Body quartered, and thy Head
and Quarters to be at the Queens Will and Pleasure, and our Lord have Mercy on
thy Soul.


Duke, You have said unto me as unto a Traitor, God forgive you, and wash my
Innocent Blood from your Souls, that it rise not in Judgment against you: I
condemn not you, and yours; I die no Traitor, but a True man, both to my Queen
and Country: And since you have put me out of your Company, I hope to go where
I shall find much better, who will regard that Innocence which you have
rejected. I am at a point never to beg for Mercy where I have no Guilt, but the
Suit I have to you my Lords, is, that you will move the Queen to be good to my
Children and Family, and to see the Discharge of my Debts.


Thus fell that Illustrious Prince, whose greatness in Estate and Title was his
only Crime, for being of an Ancient and Splended Family, the Blood Royal of
England and France not being out of his Veins, and being Allied to all the
Considerable Families of England, and having an Estate to support that
Greatness, of a hundred thousand Pounds a year; Besides the Fortunes he
obtained by his Marriages, which was also very large: All his Paternal Estate
was disposed of by the Queen, without regard to the Innocence of his Children,
the hard measure of his Accusations, and his Obedience, which led him to the
pursuit of Her Commands upon all occurrences: Which Estate, as it is divided,
and Improved, is valued at five hundred thousand Pounds a year. My Lord of
Leicester, who was the Leading man at that time, (and sat with watchful
Diligence) at the Helm, which he managed as his Interest or Passion inspired
him: First proposed the Marriage of the Queen of Scots to the Duke of Norfolk;
which he refused, till importuned by the Persuasions of those that appeared to
be his Friends, and assured by a Letter under Queen Elizabeth's own Hand of Her
Consent; all which ensnared him till the Consummation of the Marriage; which
was made evident by a Letter kept long in the Family from the Hands of the
Queen of Scots, in which she Subscribed her self, Your most Obedient Wife, Mary
of Scotland and Norfolk: And this great Family thus Eclipsed, remained under
the Cloud of a severe Deprivation, till the last King Charles of Blessed
Memory, restored them to their former Titles and Dignities; that excellent
Prince considered their long and silent Sufferings, with what forwardness most
of them engaged their Lives and Fortunes in the Service of his Royal Father;
there being but two of all that great and numerous Family that drew a Sword
against their King; may those two be Buried in the dull ashes of Oblivion for
ever, and wip*d out of our way, as perhaps they are out of the Book of Life.

A Brief Account of the Noble Family of the HOWARDS.
THe Family of the Howards came into England with the Saxons, being from a vast
length of time very considerable in that Country, having the Title of Barons,
and the Name in that Language being Hoffwerd, as some Ancient Books there
Testify, which signifies the chief Office in the Court: William the Conqueror
found them in a great Condition of Estate and Quality here, according to the
Mode and Method of those Times, bearing Distinctions proper to Barons: They
continued most Eminent in their Country, and linked themselves into the
greatest Families in the Kingdom, as with all Evidence appears, behold here.

A Brief Account of the Descent of the Dukes of NORFOLK.
THomas of Brotherton, second Son of King Edward the First by Margaret of
France his second Wife, was Earl of Norfolk and High Marshal of England, whose
Daughter and Heir being Married to John Lord Segrave, was created Duchess of
Norfolk; and Elizabeth their Daughter and Heir being Married to John Lord
Mowbrey, was Mother to Thomas Mowbrey created Duke of Norfolk by King Richard
the Second in the year one thousand three hundred ninety seven, and first
Earl-Marshal of England: Which Thomas by Elizabeth his Wife, Sister and Heir of
Thomas Fitz-Allen Earl of Arundel, was Father of John Mowbrey Second Duke of
Norfolk, and of Margaret his Eldest Daughter, Wife to Sir Robert Howard Knight,
whose Son John Mowbrey the Third Duke of Norfolk, was Father of John the Fourth
Duke of Norfolk; whose Daughter and Heir Dying without Issue in the Reign of
King Edward the Fourth: The Honors and Lands of Mowbrey were divided between
John Lord Howard Son of Sir Robert Howard and Margaret Mowbrey, who was Created
Duke of Norfolk by King Richard the Third, and William Lord Berkley Son of
Isabella Second Daughter of Thomas Mowbrey First Duke of Norfolk: This John
Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk was slain at the Battle of Brosworth one thousand
four hundred eighty five, and Attainted, leaving Thomas Howard Earl of Surry
his Son: Who in the fifth year of King Henry the Eighth, was Restored Duke of
Norfolk; and Dying, Thomas Howard his Son was Duke of Norfolk, and Father of
Henry Earl of Surry, who was Beheaded the last of Henry the Eighth; which Henry
Earl of Surry was Father of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, who was Beheaded and
Attainted for the Marriage of the Queen of Scots the Fourteenth year of Queen
Elizabeth; whose Son Philip (Earl of Arundel in right of the Mother) dyed in
the Tower, his Son Thomas the great Lord Marshal (whose memory is a lasting
Honor to his Family) left his Son Henry of unblemished Honor and Reputation
also, whose Son Thomas was restored by the last King Charles the Second of
Happy and Glorious Memory, to the Dignity of Duke of Norfolk, whose Brother
Henry survived him, and left two Sons, Henry the present Duke of Norfolk, and
the Lord Thomas Howard, who has Issue.

This flourishing Family has spread it self into many Eminent Branches, as the
Lord Viscount Stafford, the Earls of Suffolk and Barkshire, the Lord Escrick,
the Earl of Carlisle, and the rest of the Descendants from the Lord William
Howard of Naworth, whose Memory is to be preserved as Sacred in the Family, who
for Wisdom, Virtue and Honor, was the Glory of his Time; he was Third Son of
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, whose Trial and Unfortunate Death you have here had a
view of; the Sons of which Lord William Howard, were men of great Honor, and
served their King with their Lives and Fortunes; his Second Son Sir Francis
Howard, having raised a Regiment at his own proper Charge, and suffered a long
Imprisonment in the Tower. Colonel Thomas Howard the Fourth Son of the Lord
William, also raised a Regiment for King Charles the First of Sacred Memory,
and Bravely lost his Life at the Head of it; having refused very Advantageous
Conditions from the King of Portugal, who had invited him into his Service, he
being a Soldier of long Experience Abroad, and much esteemed for his Courage
and Conduct, and detained here by the Commands of his Prince, whom his Honor,
Religion and Conscience obliged him to obey; he fell (a willing Sacrifice for
the Service of his Prince) to the rage of the Rebels.

Here is also an Account of such Families as are Descended from the House of
Howard, taken in the year 1660.
BY the Daughter and Heir of Sir John Howard, who was of the same Family with
the Duke of Norfolk, and Married to John Vere Earl of Oxford; are descended by
the Heirs of Wingfield, and of Nevil Lord Latimer, the Families of Wingfield
now remaining, Percy Earls of Northumberland, Cecil Earl of Salisbury, Danvers
late Earl of Danby, who quarters the Arms of Howard; Norris late Earl of
Barkshire, the Lord Pawlet of Somersetshire, and many other Noble Families,
namely the Ancient and Honorable Family of the Lacies, and from John Howard
first Duke of Norfolk of that Name, by his Daughter Married to Windham, and
from them by Lutterel and Rogers descended the Marquess of Hartford, the Lord
Seymor, and many other Ancient Families in the West; and by other Daughters,
the Families of Knivet and Gorges: From Lord Edmond Howard Third Son of Thomas
Second Duke of Norfolk is descended the Lord Arundel of Warder; From the said
Thomas Second Duke of Norfolk are descended first all those of the House of
Nottingham and Iffingham, and from them by Daughters the present Marquess of
Winchester, the Earls of Mulgrave and Peterborough, the Viscount Mordant, the
Lord Fairfax, and many other Eminent Families. By his Daughter Married to the
Earl of Darby, are descended at this day the Earls of Darby, Bridgewater, the
Lord Sturton, Morley, Dudley, Stafford, Shandois, Powis, and many other Noble
Families. By his Daughter Married to Sir Rice ap Thomas, the Earls of Carbary,
and many other Noble Families in Wales are descended.

By his Daughter married to Sir Thomas Bullen Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond are
descended, the Families of Carry Earls of Dover and Monmouth, the Viscount
Faulkland; and by the Daughter of Carry Married to the Family of Knowles, the
Earls of Banbury, Northumberland, Essex, Warwick, Holland, Newport, and the
Lord Paget, and many others.

From Thomas Howard Third Duke of Norfolk are descended the Heirs of the Lord
Scroope of Nevil, Earl of Westmorland, the Lord Berkley, and the Heirs of the
Viscount Binden.

From Thomas Howard Fourth Duke of Norfolk, the present Duke of Norfolk, the
Viscount Stafford, the Earls of Suffolk, Barkshire, Carlisle, Lord Howard of
Escrick, all the Howards of the North, the Earl of Dorset, the late Duke of
Richmond; and by Marriage at present many other Noble Families are nearly
Allied, as the Earls of Northumberland, Bedford, Salisbury, Devonshire, the
Lords Darcy, Sandis, Fairfax of Imulleth, Mac Donell, and many other Ancient
and Honorable Families are descended.

This great Duke of Norfolk whose Trial you have read, first Married the
Daughter and Heir of Fitz-Allen Earl of Arundel, by whom he had Philip, who was
Poisoned in the Tower; the Dukes second Marriage was to the Daughter and Heir
of the Lord Audley, by whom he had Thomas Earl of Suffolk, and the Lord William
Howard of Naworth, who was long detained a Prisoner in the Tower after the
death of the Duke. The Dukes third Marriage being to the Widow of the Lord
Dacres of the North, who by the said Lord Dacres had two Daughters, Anne and
Elizabeth, to whom the Duke Married his two Sons, Philip and the Lord William
Howard. Thomas the Great Lord Marshal (who is never to be mentioned without the
memory of his Honor) was the Son of Philip Earl of Arundel, and Anne the
Eldest Daughter of the Lord Dacres, which Thomas Married the Lady Alathea
Talbot, Daughter and Heir to the Earl of Shrewsbury, by whom he had Henry Lord
Matrevers, and William Viscount Stafford, which Henry Married the Lady
Elizabeth Stuart Daughter to the Duke to Lenox, and the Lord Viscount Stafford
Married the Daughter and Heir of the Lord Baron Stafford; This Henry after Earl
of Arundel, left Eight Sons and two Daughters, Thomas who died at Padua, and
was restored to the Dukedom, Henry last Duke of Norfolk, Philip Lord Cardinal,
Charles a person of much Honor and Integrity, Edward, Francis, Bernard and
Esma. Henry, who after the Decease of Thomas, was Duke of Norfolk, Married the
Lady Anne Somerset, Eldest Daughter to the Marquess of Worcester, and Sister to
the present Duke of Beaufort, by whom he had two Sons, Henry the present Duke
of Norfolk, who Married the Lady Mary Mordant Daughter to the Earl of
Peterborough; and the Lord Thomas Howard, who Married the Daughter and Heir of
Sir George Savil, of the Family of the Marquess of Halifax, by whom he has
Issue: Also the said Duke had two Daughters, the Eldest Married to the Duke of
Gordon of Huntly, the youngest to the Marquess of Waperiso. Charles the fourth
Son Married Mary the Eldest Daughter, and Coheir of George Tatershall of
Hinshamsted in the County of Berkshire Esquire, a Lady of great Virtue, and
extraordinary Parts, of an Ancient and Honorable Family, which came into
England with the Saxons, and long retained the Title of Baron, as is recorded
by many Authors, by whom he has a Hopeful Son, named Henry-Charles Howard:
Bernard Married to Catharine the Younger Daughter of the said George Tatershall
Esquire who has also Issue, one Son Named Bernard and three Daughters. The Lady
Elizabeth Teresa the youngest Sister of the last Duke of Norfolk, was Married
to Alexander Mac Donell, Eldest Son to Sir James Mac Donell Baronet, and Nephew
to the late Marquess of Antrim; by whom she had one Son Named Randal Mac
Donell: She after Married to Bartholomew Russel Esquire of Seaton in the County of
Dublin, of the Family of the Earls of Bedford.

The Lord Thomas Howard, after Earl of Suffolk, second Son to Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, who so unfortunately lost his Life for Espousing the Interest of the
Queen of Scots, Married the Daughter and Heir of Sir Ppilip Tenevit, whose
Eldest Son Married to the Daughter of the Earl of Dunbar, his Eldest Daughter
to the Earl of Salisbury, (...) (...) bury, and the third to (...) Eldest had
many Sons an^ (...) Berkshire being the second (...) Daughter of Cecil Earl of
Sa^^^ (...) Sir Robert Howard of Clun, Marr^^^ (...) Nevil Lord of Abergaveny.
The (...) created Lord Howard of Escrick, Marr^^ (...) of the Lord Butler. One
of the D^^^^ (...) said Earl of Suffolk Married Percy Earl o^ (...) ^^^land;
another to Boil Earl of ^rory; one (...) and another to Walsingham, all of
which ha^^^.

But to return to Philip the Eldest Son of t^^ (...) William Howard of Naworth,
who Married in^^^ Family of the Carols, by whom he left one Son ^^led William,
who Married the Daughter of the Lord Evers, by whom he had Sons and Daughters,
Charles the Eldest Son late Earl of Carlisle having Married the Daughter of the
late Lord Escrick Howard, by whom he had Edward the present Earl of Carlisle,
who Married the Daughter and Heir of Sir William Vdall, by whom he has a
Hopeful Offspring. Also two Daughters, one Married to the Lord Preston, the
other to Sir John Fenwick. Sir Philip Howard Brother to the late Earl of
Carlisle, Married the Daughter of Sir William Newton, by whom he has one Son.

Sir Francis Howard the second Son of the Lord William Howard, Married the
Daughter of Sir Henry Widrington, by whom he had Heirs, Francis his Eldest Son
Married the Daughter of Sir William Gerrard, by whom he had two Daughters; and
after Married the Daughter of John Townly of Townly Esquire by whom he has Issue.

(...) Son of Sir Francis, Married (...) Dawson Esquire has Issue also. (...)
^^ving taken Religious Orders. (...) ^^ain in the late Wars.

(...) Son of the Lord William, Mar^^^ (...) ^^^er of Sir Henry Widrington, by
(...) William the Eldest Son being (...) Daughter and Heir of George Cuning^^^
(...) by whom he had one Son Charles, who Mar^^^d the Daughter of John Mear
Esquire. Dorothy the Daughter of Sir Charles Howard Married William S^l^^^ of
Croxdale in the County of Durham, and has Issue. Another Daughter Religious.

Colonel Thomas Howard the fourth Son of the Lord William, who so eminently
Served his King, and lost his Life in that Service, Married Margaret Daughter
to Sir William Evers, second Son to the Lord Evers, by whom he had one Son
named Thomas, and six Daughters; Thomas married the Daughter and Heir of George
Heron of Chip-Chace Esquire by whom he has three Daughters. Mary the Eldest
Daughter of Colonel Thomas Howard, married Ralph Fetherstonhalgh of Stanop in
the County of Durham of an Ancient Family in the North, Margaret and Antonia
were Religious, Catharine married to Nathaniel Lacy of Deeping in Lincolnshire
Esquire whose Family were formerly Earls of Lincoln; and after married to Edward
Lacy of Brewry Castle in the County of Limerick Esquire descended from the Earls of
Vlster in Ireland. Teresa, the youngest Daughter of Colonel Thomas Howard
married to Ralph Booth of the County of Durham Esquire of an Ancient Family related
to the Lord Delamer, bearing the same Name and Arms, who has Issue.

Thus has this Illustrious Family spread it self over the three Kingdoms, and
has acquired so much Glory Abroad, that in all places where Nobility is known
and understood, the Name of Howard is Honored: Germany claims it by its
Original, and France by Alliance, Italy by Respect; having had that Object of
Honor, Thomas the great Lord Marshal among them, whose Generous and Noble
Disposition planted such lasting Obligations there, that even in these present
times some of his Descendants have reaped the Benefit. Courage has been so
essentially due to this great Family, that never any was known of that Blood,
that did not possess an excessive share of that Virtue, which they generally
employed in the Service of their Prince, few of them having been in Rebellion;
and it is wished they may never Sully themselves with so black a Crime, and as
they are descended from Princes, so they may Unite themselves in a True
Obedience to their Soveveraign, which is the best Defense of Families, nothing
being so (...) as Faction and Sedition, which has a^ all ^imes proved a Canker
to consume them.

FINIS.

