A RELATION Of the DEATH Of the Primitive PERSECUTORS.

Written Originally in Latin by L. C. F. LACTANTIUS.

Englished by GILBERT BURNET, D. D.

To which he has made a large PREFACE concerning PERSECUTION.

AMSTERDAM, Printed for J. S. 1687.

The Translators PREFACE.
AMong all the Discoveries that have been made in this Age, of the Books that
had been esteemed lost, there is none, since that of the Epistle of St.
Clemens, that has been received with more joy than this of Lactantius's Book of
the Death of the Persecutors, for which the World is beholding to the happy
Industry of the most learned Baluzius, who having found this treasure, not only
communicated it to the World, but enriched it with his learned Notes: by which
he has added a new Essay, to the many that have already appeared, of his great
Sincerity, his profound Learning, and of his solid Judgment: It has been since
that time reprinted at Oxford, with shorter Notes; in which there are many
happy conjectures, made both for supplying some of the Words that were worn out
of the Manuscript Copy, and for correcting some Passages, which the Copyer
perhaps writ wrong, and it is upon that Edition that this Translation is made.

The Importance of this Book will be easily apprehended, by those who consider
that Lactantius was the politest Writer of his time, in whom one finds somewhat
very like Augustus's Age revived; he had also particular Opportunities of being
well informed of his Subject, by the Post to which he was advanced in
Constantine's Court, of being his Son's Tutor. It is true, his Eloquence
carries him often into strains that become an Orator, better than a Historian:
for he has a heat of style, that ought not to be imitated by one that would
write History. But he seems to have designed this Book to be a mixed sort of
writing, between a Discourse and a History; so that the Figures that agree not
to the one, may be allowed to the other.

The Account that he gives of Saint Peter's coming to Rome, cuts off the Fable
of his being there for five and twenty years: but if what he says of things at
so great a distance from his own time, is not thought so Authentical, and if
his Authority seems not strong enough to cut off all those Persecutions that
are said to have risen between Domitians Reign and Decius's, since he
represents all that Interval as a time of a long Peace to the Christians; yet
we must at least suppose him, to have been much better Informed of that which*
fell out during the last Persecution; so that the beginning* which h^ assigns
to it cuts off all those Legends of Martyrs, that (as is pretended) suffered
before that year, and as we cannot doubt of the time in which he tells us the
Persecution began, so no more ought we to call in question the Limits that he
sets to it; and therefore since he tells us, that Constance ordered only, that
the Churches in which the Christians held their Assemblies, should be pulled
down, and that he would not carry the Persecution further against the
Christians themselves; and since he excepts the Gauls out of those Provinces
that felt the Fury of those Edicts, we see what a number of Legends there are
to be cut off. For the truth is, that very soon after this Persecution was
over, some that loved either to make (or at least to report) very tragical
Stories concerning it, seemed to give no Bounds to their Invention upon a
Subject that was fruitful enough of it self, and so needed not to have been
swelled up by such Additions. The Destruction of the Records that the
Christians kept, which were so carefully searched after during this
Persecution, gave some color for those pretended Discoveries; for it served
turn to give them credit, to say, that such Relations had been preserved from
the Searches of those Inquisitors, and so that they were by accident found out
in some corner, where very probably those that forged them, both laid them and
found them: and the matter would no doubt have been received with more Credit,
if some Dream or Vision had been pretended, as that which had made the
Discovery. Of all those Legends none is more copious, nor less credible than
that of the Thebean Legion, and that upon many accounts; but as the silence,
not only of Eusebius and Sulpitius Severus, but of all the other Writers of the
fourth Century, gave a just Prejudice against a Story that begun not to appear
till the middle of the fifth Century; so the positive Testimony of Lactantius,
who excepts the Gauls from the Persecution, puts an end to the Fable. For tho
he shows so great a disposition to speak well of Constance, that this may seem
to lessen the Authority of one, who to make his Court with the Son, would
naturally raise the Father's Character; yet so remarkable a transaction as that
was, could not have been suppressed with any sort of Decency, by one that must
have certainly heard of it if it was true.

The false appearance of a greatness of mind, that was inferred from
Diocletian's resigning the Empire, is also taken off by this Relations; since
it is plain, that both Diocletian's Brain was turned, and that he was forced to
it; so that his Resignation was not the Effect of his Philosophy, but of the
Unnatural Ambition of his Son in Law Maximian.

The Subject of this Discourse, and the Application to which a Translation of
it tied me, together with the present seen of affairs, led my mind very
naturally into more general thoughts. ^ the Characters of those Ancient
Persecutors, such as these, that they had delivered themselves up to all the
Brutalities of sensual Pleasure, that they had ruined their Subjects by severe
Impositions for maintaining vast Armies, that they had in their Wars, showed
more care than was decent in preserving themselves out of all danger, that they
were weak to the most excessive Flatteries, the Profuseness of their Expense in
the raising of costly Buildings, their great Success in a course of many years,
their Superstitious and Fearful Tempers, and to crown all, the Cruelty that
they practiced in the Persecution, to which they were uneasily drawn, and in
which they begun at first with requiring all to abjure, besides many other
particulars; all these, I say, insensibly carry ones thoughts to make Parallels
between some Modern Persecutors, and those that are here set forth: but if the
respect due to their sublime Character, makes one drive away those less decent
sallies of his mind, to which he is carried before he is aware, yet the
Importance of this matter leads to speculations that are more General, and by
consequence less offensive. And since the Melancholy State of things at present
carried me in those Intervals in which I discontinued the dry work of
translating, to consider the grounds on which those cruel and persecuting
Doctrines and Practices are founded, together with the Motives from which they
rise, the Characters that accompany them, and the Effects that follow them; I
thought I might be forgiven a little, if I took the liberty to swell up the
bulk of this small Book with a Preface of some length; in which my design is
not only to expose this ill natured Principle, and to show, that wherever it
is authorized, it is a more infallible mark of an Antichristian Church, than
all the other Characters are of an Infallible Church, to which those pretend,
that have died themselves so red in the Blood of others; but likewise to form
in the Minds of those who hate Persecution, perhaps only because they either
feel it, or are afraid of it, such a Notion of this Matter, as may preserve
them from falling into the same Excesses if a Revolution in the State of
Affairs should put it in their Power, to use others as hardly as they have been
used by them. It has been often observed, that tho a Plea for Moderation is the
Sanctuary of all the Unfortunate, yet their Fortunes came no sooner to be
changed, but that they insensibly got into that Principle which was so much
decried by themselves, when their Affairs were in an ill condition: as if the
only quarrel that they had to Persecution, was because they had not the
managing of it themselves. I will treat this Subject with all the closeness
that the Matter deserves, or that I am capable of; and will avoid the serving
up what I am to propose with the garnishings of the fine Sayings of others: for
as that would carry me too far, so a good Reason is so much a better thing,
than a round Period, or a labored Sentence, that the Mind finds it self
satisfied with the one, whereas the Fancy is only pleased with the other.

All Persecution rises out of an Impatience of Spirit, which makes a man less
able to bear Contradiction. There is a Tyranny in most men's nature, which makes
them desire to subdue all others by the strength of their understandings: and
such men have an implacable hatred to all that do not render themselves to
their Reasons; and think that they are affronted when other men refuse to
submit to them: so that he who would strike at Persecution in its root, must
begin here, and endeavor to soften men, especially toward those who differ
from them in matters of Religion. This Imperious temper, when it works upon
Subjects of Religion, finds somewhat to raise its spleen, that was of it self
Impetuous enough before: and that which is called Fury and Rage, when it is
employed in other Disputes, comes to be called Zeal when it is turned toward
the Theories that relate to another World.

But when we consider what a sublime thing Divine Truth is, and what a poor low
thing the Mind of Man is, we shall see cause to blunt a little the edge of our
Spirits, if they are too sharp in such matters. Man is much governed by Fancy,
and Fancy follows the texture of the Animal Spirits, which renders many more
capable of apprehending Objects that are some way proportioned to them, and
more disposed to follow them; so that Temper prepares men for some Opinions and
prepossesses them against others. With the reater part of mankind, Education is
so powerful, that they are scarce able ever to overcome it; and if Education
and Temper have hit together, it will require a very extraordinary elevation to
rescue a Man from their force. Men likewise receive with their Impressions of
Religion such a respect for them, as makes them look on every thought that
calls them in question as criminal: and when persons are bred up to disquiet
themselves with Scruples, if they have so much as made a doubt of their
Religion, it is not hard to see them adhere so firmly to the Principles of
their Education, which stick so fast to the worst sort of men, that even
Atheists themselves after all the pains they take to get rid of them, cannot
shake them off so entirely, but that they will be apt to return often upon them.
Men that think much, and that Reason well, that are freed from the biass that
Interest, Honor, Kindred, and Custom, do give them, and that have leisure to
examine matters carefully, may indeed get above all these: yet there are so few
that can do this, and there are yet so much fewer that will do it; that it is
rather a wonder to see so many change their Persuasions, than to see so few do
it. And indeed it is so sublime a Theory to think on God, and his Attributes
and Works, or to think of another State, and of the Way that leads to it, that
till God furnishes out a new Mission of Apostles with a Measure of those
Extraordinary gifts, which he poured out on the Great Pentecost, it is not easy
to imagine how the Conversion of Heathen Nations should be made. For tho the
Idolatry of some of these is extreme gross, yet their Priests have such
Symbolical significations for all these Rites, that they do much diminish the
horror which is raised by the first sight of them in the minds of Strangers;
and since the chief grounds, upon which we prove the Christian Religion, are
taken from the Prophecies in the Old Testament and their Accomplishment in the
Now, from the Evidence that was given concerning the Miracles, the Death, and
the Resurrection of Christ, which we confirm from the Collateral Proofs of the
State of that time, of the writings of the Enemies of this Religion, and of
that Succession of Authors that in all the Ages that have past since, have
mentioned those matters, and cited the Books which we hold to be Divine. All
this is so evident to those who can make the Enquiry, that it is strange to
find how any one can withstand it; but to Barbarians, who know nothing of it,
and who have no way of Informing themselves concerning it, all this can signify
nothing. So that in order to the convincing their understandings, (for I do not
treat of Gods secret Methods in touching their Consciences) I do not see how we
should expect that they should yield easily, unless there were a new Power of
working Miracles conferred on those who labor in this work. And what noise
soever the Missionaries may make with their Miracles in those remote parts, it
is plain, these are all Impostures; for the most necessary of all other
Miracles for the Conversion of strange Nations, being the Gift of Tongues, with
which the Apostles were so wonderfully furnished at first, and since they all
are forced to acknowledge, that this is wanting to them, we have all possible
reason to conclude, that God would not change his Methods, or qualify men to
work Wonders, and not give them that which is both the most sensible and the
most useful of all others, toward that end for which he authorizes them.

But to return from this digression, a man is scarce the Master of his own
thoughts: Habit, Constitution, and other things do so concur, that he cannot
open his eyes to new Objects, nor see them in a new Light other than that in
which he has been accustomed to view them; and a Man can no more change his
notions of things, because a set of new Opinions would accomodate him better,
than he can change the relish that his senses, his ear or his taste has in their
objects; a man may prevaricate, but he still thinks as he thinks; and cannot
think otherwise, because he would have himself do so: But if a man is not the
master of his own mind, much less is any other man the Master of it. No man has
that Superiority over any other man's reason, as to expect, that it should
always accomodate it self to his: and the severest exercise of Tyranny must
still leave the thoughts at liberty: the forcing a man to say, or do otherwise
than he thinks, by threatenings, the execution of which is above his force to
endure, is only the delivering over such a person to the rack of his own
Conscience here, and to all those miseries hereafter, which must be the portion
of Hipocrites, and of Dissemblers with God or Man. Nor is there such an
infallible distinction in one man's nature from another, that the one is more
like to be in the right than the other: Since therefore, among all those that
differ, some must be in the wrong, those that have the power in their hands,
may possibly be of the wrong side, and in that case all their Severity is
turned against the Truth, and those who believe it. And since God makes the Sun
to shine, and the Rain to fall on the just as well as the unjust, Gideons
reasoning may be applied to this matter if Baal is a^ God, let him plead for
himself; and the force of Gamaliels Argument, that if it is of Men, it will
come to naught; and if it is of God, we must not fight against him. As it
silenced an Assembly of very fierce Persecutors, so it is full as strong now,
as it was then: For Reason is Eternal, and changes not. It seems also plain,
that those Actions which concern humane Society, belong indeed to the Authority
of the Magistrate; but that our thoughts, with relation to God, and such
actions as arise out of those thoughts, and in which others have no interest,
are Gods Immediate Province; and can belong to no other Jurisdiction. God only
knows our thoughts, as he alone can change them; so that a Magistrate by
encroaching upon them, breaks in upon Gods propriety, and upon that essential
right of humane nature, of worshipping God according to our conviction, which
is in us Antecedent to all humane Government, and can never become subject to
it.

But if the General Theories from the nature of man, give a very favorable
view of what is now advanced, the characters of the Christian Religion, and the
many express texts that are in it should determine this matter more positively.
The Religion revealed by Moses consisted in Temporal Promises, an Earthly
Canaan, and all the blessings of this life; so that since the Jews had all
these things by virtue of that Covenant, it was very reasonable that a
violation of that Law should infer a forfeiture of all those Rights, that the
Jews held by virtue of it; and therefore it was as just, that a Jew should have
been put to death for the violation of those Laws, as it is lawful for us to
put a man to death, that coins or clips Money: yet as for Opinions the case was
different, even among the Jews: and therefore, tho the Doctrines of the
Sadducees struck at the Foundations of all Religion, the Pharisees, when they
had the upper hand, never carried the matter so far as to proceed to
extremities against them. But what Severities soever might have agreed with the
Mosaical dispensation, they seem to be all out of doors under the Christian
Religion; which gives us no Earthly Canaan, no Temporal Blessings, nor the
Rules for Civil Society: but having found the World in the possession of their
Temporal Rights, it only came to superadd to those the Doctrines and Rules of a
Divine Discipline, upon which the Happiness or Miseries of another State do
depend. Now it seems to be an uncontested Rule in Justice, that in whatsoever
Society one is engaged, the Violation of the Laws of that Society can only
inser a Forfeiture of all that one had or might have expected by virtue of it:
but this cannot be carried so far, as to make one forfeit all that he holds by
virtue of any other Society, to which he belongs; and therefore, since we hold
our Temporal Estates and Liberties, not by virtue of our Christianity, but as
we are the Members of the State or Kingdom to which we belong, our doing any
thing that is only contrary to our Religion, may well make us forfeit all that
belongs to us by virtue of our Baptismal Covenant; but this ought not to be
carried so far as to cut off those Rights that we have antecedent to our
Christianity, as we are Men, and the Subjects of a Civil Government. Our
Savior confirmed all this by saying, that his Kingdom was not of this World;
that he came not to destroy, but to save; and by giving this Rule of Justice,
of doing to others that which we would have others do to us: which would soon
let all Persecutors see how differently they act to it: but above all, our
Savior has made the Doctrines of Meekness and Charity, such main Ingredients
in his Gospel, that he has made them the Characters by which his Disciples may
be every where known; and this Spirit of Love is so diffused through the whole
Writings of the N. Testament, that how hard soever it may be to understand some
of the other passages that are in them, yet there is no ambiguity at all in
those that set this forth; we are not only restrained from ruining those who
differ from us, but we are required to love them, to bear with them, and to
deal with them in the Spirit of Meekness: there are some of the Epistles that
do not mention several of the Duties Incumbent on Christians, yet there is not
one, how short soever, in which this of Love is not proposed, in terms that are
both strong and tender; and while the Church of Corinth was almost rent asunder
by a variety of Opinions, and by the different Parties that followed the
several Teachers that had been among them; St. Paul does not enter much into
the Grounds of their Disputes, but recommends Love and Charity to them, in
terms that show how much he himself was Inflamed while he writ them; and he is
carried into all the raptures of a Divine Eloquence that so transporting a
Subject could inspire: S. John, lived so long as to see a great deal of the
first fer vour of the Christian Religion slacken; but when he writ to revive
that Spirit, the Argument upon which he dwells chiefly, is to persuade all to
love one another, and he does that in the softest and most melting terms that
can be imagined. The Controversy concerning the Obligation that lay on the
Gentiles for obeying the Mosaical Law, was judged by the Apostles against the
Iudaisers, and the Inferences that depended on that Controversy were such, that
Saint Paul shows, they went so far as to make void the Death of Christ; yet the
same Apostle is gentle to those that without seeing the extent of these
consequences, were carried away by those Iudaisers; so that he acknowledges,
that in their observing them from a good motive, they were acceptable to God;
and that as the Kingdom of God, or the Gospel, consisted not in those
scrupulous Distinctions of Meats and of Drinks, but in Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost; so he adds, that every man was to endeavor to be
fully persuaded in his own mind, and was not to judge his Brother in such
matters, but to leave him to the Judgment of God. This way of managing a
Controversy, that was of such importance, and that was maintained with so
stiff an Opposition, even to that extraordinary Authority that was lodged in
the Apostles, ought to have been the measure upon which all the succeeding Ages
of the Church, ought to have formed themselves; and when the Apostles, that had
an infallible Assistance, and so might have spoken in a strain of a higher
Authority than any that have come after them, yet thought fit to treat of those
Matters in such an humble and softning style, those who cannot pretend to such
a direction, ought not to take upon them to dictate, and to threaten and
destroy those who differ from them.

It is indeed an amasing thing, to see how much the Christian Church has
departed from that Pattern: and when one considers the first beginnings of the
Christian and the Mohammedan Religion, he is not a little surprised to see the
changes that have befallen both. The blessed Author of our Holy Religion, as he
was a Pattern for Humility and Charity, so he was made perfect through Sufferings:
and his Religion, as it contains precepts suitable to the Example that he gave,
which are set down in the plainest and most persuading Expressions possible, so
it gained its first Glory in the World, and obtained its chief Triumphs over
it, by the Meekness and Gentleness, and the Love and Charity of those who
embraced it: on the contrary, the Mohammedan Religion began in the Person of
that Impostor, with all the Fierceness of rage, and was carried on by the
Sword, by which Mahomet pretended that he was sent of God to convert the World:
The Nations that have received the Mohammedan Religion, are by their
Constitution rough and barbarous: and yet how shameful a reverse of the first
beginnings of the two Religions is but too visible to the World: the Mahometans
in a course of several Ages are so much softened, that instead of that cruelty
with which their Religion appeared at first, they are now so gentle, that those
of a Religion, which believes theirs to be only an Imposture, live secure under
them, and know the Price that the Liberty of their Conscience must rise to: and
that being paid, they enjoy in all other respects the Protection of the
Government, together with the public Exercise of their Religion: whereas on
the other hand, that part of the Christian Church, that pretends the highest,
has so far departed from the Meekness of its Author, and of his first
Followers, that notwithstanding all the polishings of Learning and Civility
that are in it, it is now the cruellest and the most implacable Society that
has ever yet appeared in the World: if there were no other Evidences but this
single one, it is enough to demonstrate, how much that Body has departed from
its first Institution: and if our Savior has given us a short Abridgment of
the Character of the Devil in these two qualities, that he is a Liar and a
Murderer, then any Body of men, that has decreed, that faith is not to be kept
to Heretics, and that has also decreed the Murder of so many Innocent Persons,
who have done nothing against that Civil Society to which they belong, that
deserves a forfeiture of their Lives; such a Body, I say, if we may take our
Saviors Character for a Rule, looks more like the Followers of that fallen
Spirit, than the Body of which the Lamb of God is the Head. And when we
consider the plain and express Words, in which the great Duties of a Holy Life
are delivered in Scripture, but most particularly those of Love and Charity,
and the Darkness that are in many other passages of which the meaning is more
disputable, it looks like an unaccountable Perverseness to see men, who still
pretend to make that Book their Rule, yet to be so visibly faulty in executing
the one, and so excessively severe in imposing the other, of which I shall
content my self to give one single Instance.

Pope Leo the Tenth in the Reformation that he set out, with the concurrence of
the Lateran Council, ordered a severe Prosecution to be made of all Heretics,
and that all the Laws against them should be put in execution: but at the same
time, he ordered such slight punishment against those that should wilfully and
publicly Blaspheme God and Christ, even tho they relapsed in it over and over
again, that it is plain he had no mind to deter men with too much severity from
the practice of that which was so common in his own Court: a small Fine, or the
Forfeiture of the Profits of a Benefice, is all the punishment that he laid on
the one, even when Clergy men relapsed in it. This may serve to show, that tho
naturally one is apt to think Blasphemy a much more heinous Crime than Heresy,
yet a Pope, together with a Council, which they pretend was General, made a
Distinction in the punishing of them, which is very little for their Honor.

The Christians did, during the first Ages, declare highly against all Cruelty
on the Account of a Difference of Persuasion in matters of Religion: and tho
their Interest Naturally led them to this, yet we pass a very hard Judgment on
those times, if we think that they were only of that mind, because the Power
was then in the hands of their Enemies. When the Empire turned Christian, the
very Heathen Worship was not only tolerated for above a whole Age together, but
the Heathens themselves continued to be in the chief Employments of the Empire:
and it is pleasant to see how the Heathens, that had so long persecuted the
Christians, and that had contrived the severest of all the Persecutions under
Julian, which very probably had been put in execution, if he had returned
victorious from his Persian Expedition, saw the State of things no sooner
altered, than they began to employ all their Eloquence in the behalf of
Toleration; as if Liberty of Conscience had been an essential Right of Mankind,
from which they ought never to be cut off: and they carried this so far, as to
pretend, that a difference in Religion tends more to the Honor of God, than a
Uniformity in it could do: and so they fancied, that a variety in it was
acceptable to God.

The first severity that Christians practiced upon one another, was the
banishing of Arius, and a few of his Followers: it must be acknowledged, that
this seems to be the utmost extent of Civil Authority in those matters: for
certainly a Government may put such persons out of its protection, that are
Enemies to its Peace, and so banish them upon great occasions, giving them
leave to sell their Estates, and to carry away with them all that belongs to
them; yet this being all that any Humane Government can claim, it ought not to
be applied too easily nor rashly, till it is visible, that all other Remedies
are ineffectual, and that the public Safety can be no other way secured: but
tho this severity against Arius had no great effects, yet the Arians had no
sooner the Power in their hands, than they put in practtice first all the
Contrivances of Craft and Fraud, together with many less crying Violences,
under Constance, and they carried this afterward to a more open Persecution
under Valens: and after that, both in Spain and Africa it appeared, that a
cruel Spirit was so inherent in that party, that it showed it self as often as
ever they had it in their Power: but while Valens persecuted in his Division of
the Empire, it is observed, that Valentinian his Brother thought it was enough
to support the Orthodox, without persecuting the other; Gratian carried the
matter further, and tolerated both almost equally. And in the happy turn under
Theodosius, at what pains was S. Gregory Nazianzene to restrain the Orthodox
from retaliating upon the Arians the ill treatment that they had suffered from
them: and not only the Novatians, but even the Arians, continued to have their
Churches in the Imperial Cities. The first Instance of the Employing the
Secular Arm against Heretics, that was set on by any of the Orthodox, was
under the Reign of that bloody Tyrant Maximus, and it was managed by two such
scandalous Bishops, that their ill Lives is no small Prejudice against every
thing that was carried on by such Instruments. This was condemned by the best
Bishops of that Age, and the ill Effects of that Severity are very copiously
marked by the Historian. One is unwilling, for the sake of those Ages, to
reflect on the Rigor that appears in some Laws that are in the Code; yet the
mild behavior of Atticus, Proclus, and some other Bishops, is marked with the
praises that were due to it: and it is probable, that those Laws were rather
made to terrify, than that they should be executed.

The Donatists, after a Contest of above 120 years continuance, that was
managed at first more gently, grew at last so fierce and intolerable, that not
being contented with their own Churches, they broke in upon the Churches of
those of the Unity: and committed many Outrages on the Persons of some of the
Bishops, putting out the Eyes of some, and leaving others for Dead: the Bishops
upon that consulted, whether they ought to demand not only the Emperor's
Protection, but the Application of the Laws made against Heretics to the
Donatists. S. Austin and some Bishops opposed this for some time; but they
yielded at last: and these Laws were so severely executed, that not only the
Donatists themselves complained heavily of them, but S. Austin in several
Letters that he writ to the Magistrates upon this occasion, made the same
complaints; he interceded very earnestly for the Donatists, and said, that it
detracted much from the Glory of the Church, that had received so much Honor
from the sufferings of the Martyrs, to see others suffer upon the account of
the Church: and he told them plainly, that if they did not proceed more
moderately, the Bishops would suffer all that could come upon them from the
Rage of the Donatists, rather than Complain any more to those who acted so
rigorously. Yet tho S. Austin condemned the Excesses of the Civil Magistrates
in some particulars, he set himself to justify Severity in General, when it was
employed* upon the account of Religion, and all the moderate Pleadings for
Liberty, that are to be found either in Tertullian, Cyprian, and more copiously
in our Author Lactantius, with relation to Heathens, and the like Reasonings
that are to be found in Athanasius, Hilary, and Lucifer, with Relation to the
Persecutions of the Arians, were in a great measure forgot; Saint Austin had a
heat of Imagination, that was very copious, which way soever he turned it: and
this was employed chiefly in allegorising Scripture, so as to bring together a
vast number of proofs for every cause that he undertook; without troubling
himself to examine critically what the true meaning of those Passages might be:
and he is so apt to run out in all his Reasonings into excessive
Amplifications, and into all the Figures of copious and uncorrect Eloquence,
that it is no wonder to find that passage of our Savior in the Parable, compel
them to enter in, with some other places misapplyed on this occasion.

With that Father the Learning of the Western Church fell very low, so that his
Works came to be more read in the succeeding Ages, than the Writings of all the
other Fathers: and in this, as in other things, men that knew not how to reason
themselves, contented themselves with that lasie and cheap way of copying from
him, and of depending on his Authority. The Incursion of the Northern Nations,
that overthrew the Roman Empire, and those Polishings of Learning and Civility
that fell with it, brought on a Night of Ignorance, that can scarce be
apprehended, by those who have not read the Writings of the following Ages:
Superstition grew upon the ruins of Learning, and eat up all. The fierce
Tempers of the Northern People being mufled up in Ignorance, and wrought on by
Superstition, were easily leavened with Cruelty: perhaps the Holy Wars, and
what they observed in the Rage as well as in the Successes of the Saracens,
heightened this further: at last Heresy came to be reckoned the greatest of all
Crimes; and as it condemned men to everlasting Burning so it was thought that
those might be well anticipated by temporary ones of the Inquisitors Kindling.
It is true, the Church pretended that she would shed no Blood: but all this was
insufferable juggling: for the Churchmen declared who were obstinate or relapsed
Heretics; and the Secular Arm was required to be ever in readiness to execute
their Sentence. This was not only claimed by the Bishops, but it was made a
part of their Oath at their Consecration, that they should Oppose and Persecute
Heretics to the utmost of their power: Nor were they contented to proceed by
the common Rules of Justice upon Accusations and Witnesses; but all Forms were
superceded, and they by virtue of their Pastoral Authority, (as if that had
been given them to Worry their Sheep, and not to Feed them) objected Articles
to their Prisoners upon suspicion, and required them to purge themselves of
them by Oath: and because Bishops were not perhaps all so equally Zealous and
Cruel, some of them being Persons of great Quality, so that some remnants of a
generous Education, and of their lay pity, might still hang about them; that
Bloody Man Dominick took this work to task, and his Order has ever since
furnished the World with a set of Inquisitors, compared to whom all that had
ever dealt in Tortures in any former times were but Bunglers.

So far has this Melancholy Speculation of the Degeneracy of the Church of Rome
carried me: they at last came to extol a Zeal against Heresy as the highest
Act of Piety toward God: and since Heresy is reckoned by S. Paul among the
Works of the Flesh, it seemed as just to punish it in the severest manner, as
it was to punish any of the other Works of the Flesh: and since all Heretics,
were looked on as Persons damned, all Tenderness toward them, and Pity for
them, was as far exinguished as it was possible. For a false Religion will not
easily have the better of good Nature so entirely, as to root it quite out; tho
it must be acknowledged that the Roman Religion has done more toward that,
than any other that has ever yet appeared in the World. All the room that was
left for good Nature, was the favorable Definition that was given of Heresy:
by which Obstinacy was made its peculiar Character, that distinguished it from
Error, which lies in a more Innocent Mistake concerning Divine Matters: and as
many have explained this Obstinacy, it amounts to a continuing in Error after
one is convinced of it. This Notion of Heresy, which has been received by many
of the greatest Men even in the Church of Rome it self, seems to agree well
with that of St. Paul's ranking Heresy among the Works of the Flesh; for if it
is merely a mistake in the Judgment, in which one continues, because he cannot
overcome his persuasion, nor see Reasons that are strong enough to oblige him
to change his Mind, such an adhering to Error may be called any thing rather
than a Work of the Flesh. But if a Man from a Principle of Interest, Pride, or
Discontent, either throws himself into ill Opinions, or continues in them after
his Mind is better enlightened, so that he stisles and denies that inward
Conviction, then the Reason is very plain, why such an ill Temper of Mind
should be reckoned a Work of the Flesh, because it plainly arises out of a
depraved Nature.

I will not here enter into so troublesome an Enquiry as it would be, to
examine how far an Erroneous Conscience acquits one before God; for that must
be left to Him, who will judge every Man according to his Works, and who best
knows how far he will accept of a general Repentance of unknown Sins, and of a
general Act of Faith, even of Truths that are yet unknown; but as for the
Judgments of men, certainly when the other parts of ones life make it clear,
not only to a Judgment of Charity, but even to that of Discretion, that he is
sincere, and that he means well, it is hard to know when he is Obstinate, and
when his Errors become Heresies, that is to say, Works of the Flesh.

So far have I been led upon the consideration of the Spirit of Persecution,
that is not only warranted by Custom, and a long continued Practice; but is by
the Authority not only of Popes, but even of General Councils, established into
a Law on the Church of Rome. I am carried next into a Scene of Thoughts that
are more particularly suited to the Doctrines of the Reformed Churches: and here
it must be acknowledged, that Persecution is a more justifiable thing according
to the Principles of the Church of Rome, than it is according to our Tenets;
for the Church of Rome, that pretends to be infallible, has a better Right to
demand a blind Submission from all its Subjects, and to treat those roughly who
refuse to grant it, than a Church that pretends to nothing but a Power of Order
and Government; and that confesses, she may be mistaken. Our being Subject to
Error, is unreasonably urged, when men would carry it so far as to make us
doubt of all things: yet it ought at least to have this effect on us, as to
keep us from being too ready to judge hardly of those who are of another mind,
or to use them roughly for it; since it is possible, that they may be in the
Right, and that we may be mistaken; at least, they may have very probable
Reasons for their Opinions, which if they do not quite justify their Mistakes,
yet do very much excuse and lessen them. It is likewise visible, that all
severe Proceedings upon the diversity of Opinions, how effectual soever they
may be on base-minded men, who will always make Shipwreck of a good
Conscience, when it comes in competition with the Love of this present World,
yet work quite contrary wise on men of awakned Understandings and generous
Souls; instead of gaining on such Persons, these Inspire them with horror at a
sort of men who go about to ruin companies of people, that never did them hurt.
It is from this, that those Violent Hatreds arise among men of different
Persuasions. Every man is not capable to understand an Argument, or to be much
disturbed at it: and tho Divines, that carry their Speculations further into
the Consequences of Opinions, whether Real or Imaginary, grow hot and angry at
one another upon those Heads, yet the people understand them little, and feel
them less: but every man feels an Injury, and Nature makes her Inferences very
quick upon it: and concludes, that those who use us ill, hate us: and there
must be a great degree of Regeneration to keep men from hating those that hate
them: upon this arises all the Animosity that is among the several Parties: for
every one reckoning himself a Member of that Body to which he associates
himself, thinks that he is obliged to resent all the Injuries that are done to
his Fellow Members, as much as if they were done to himself in particular: and
by the same natural Logic, he casts the Guilt of the Wrongs done his own
Party, not only on those Individuals of the other Party, from whom they did
more Immediately arise, but upon the whole Body of them: and so here a War is
kindled in men's Breasts, and when that is once formed within, it will find some
unhappy occasion or other to give it self a vent. Those who are ill used, are
in a State, like that of a Mass of humors in the Body, which roll about less
perceived, till some unlucky Accident has weakened any part of it; and then they
will all discharge themselves on the part that suffers. Men that are uneasy,
naturally love Changes: for these are like the shifting of postures, they give
some present ease, and they slatter the Patient with the hope of more to
follow. The Advice that the old Man of Samnium sent his Son, was certainly very
wise; he had Intercepted the whole Roman Army in the Hills, shutting up the
Passages so that they could neither go backward nor forward: the Father advised
him first to dismiss them all without any Injury, since that would probably
oblige the Romans; or if that were not followed, to cut them all off; for that
would weaken them considerably: whereas the middle Method, which the General
took, of letting them all go, having first put a public Affront on them,
enraged the Romans without weakening them. According to this Advice it seems
evident, that all considerable Bodies of Men, that are in any State, are to be
set at ease, or to be quite rooted out; and there is nothing wise in this
severe Method, but an extreme and an unrelenting Persecution, and in this
point, if the Church of Rome has forgot the Innocence of the Dove, yet it must
be confessed, that she has retained the Wisdom of the Serpent.

Persecution is not only hurtful to those that suffer many hard things by it,
but is likewise mischievous to them, by the aversion that it inspires in them
to those at whose hands they suffer, by the ill Habit of mind into which it
throws them, and by those violent Projects and Convulsions which do very
naturally come into the heads of those, who as they feel much, so they fear yet
more.

Those that do persecute, tho they seem to triumph for a while, with the Spoils
of their Enemies; yet will soon feel how this sinks their Credit extremely
among those that were more Indifferent Spectators, while the Debate was managed
with the Pen or Tongue; but they will certainly take part at least in their
Compassions with the Miserable; and will be disposed to think ill, not only of
those men that are heavy upon their harmless Neighbors, but even of the Cause
it self, that is supported by such Methods.

The multitude even of the lowest Order of men has a remnant of good Nature
left, which shows it self in the sad looks that all put on at the Executions
even of Malefactors: but if a false Religion has not quite extinguished
Humanity in its Votaries, this will make a more sensible Impression, when men
that have done nothing amiss, and are only in fault because they cannot help
thinking as they do, are made Sacrifices to the Rage of others, that perhaps
have little more to say for themselves, but that they are in possession of the
Law; which in the next Revolution of affairs that may fall out, will be an
Argument so much the Stronger for using themselves in the same manner, because
it is a just retaliation on them for that which they made others to suffer.

The men of Persecution do also naturally engage themselves into the Intrigues
of Courts, and all the Factions of Parties: they enter into Dependances upon
Ministers of State, who drive them on to execute all their Passions, and to
serve all their Ends: and who have too good understandings themselves not to
laugh at the officious forwardness of those who are perhaps more eager than is
intended, in the doing of that for which those very persons, whose blind
Instruments they are at one time, will reproach them at another.

In short, Persecution does extremely vitiate the Morals of the Party that
manages it. The worst men, so they are furious and violent, are not only
connived at, but are even courted: and men otherwise of severer morals, will
insensibly slacken, by reason of their Engagments with vicious men, whom they
will find themselves forced to cherish and Employ: and if those who have
persecuted others, fall under a Reverse of Fortune, and come to suffer
themselves a little of that which they made others feel, as their ill behavior
will deprive them in a great measure, of those Compassions that would otherwise
work toward them, so it will raise within them many uneasy Reflections upon
their own Actings, which will prove but Melancholy Companions to them in their
Afflictions: and these will force them to conclude, that because they showed no
Mercy, therefore they now meet with the requital of Judgment without Mercy;
which how unjust soever it may be, in those by whom they suster, yet they will
find it meet to look up to God, and to confess, that just and Righteous are all
his Ways: and it may be reasonably apprehended, that it may have contributed
not a little to fill up the measure of the Sins of a Church, and to bring down
severe strokes upon them, when the visible Danger, which was apparent from a
formidable Enemy, could not turn their thoughts to that side, but that instead
of Using Legal and just Precautions for their own Security, they let themselves
loose to all the Rages of a mad Prosecution of some poor undiscreet and deluded
People; and all this to gratify their own Revenges, or to Insinuate themselves
into the Favors of those who do now justly laugh at them, when the turn that
they intended is served by their means: and those who would prepare themselves
for those hard things which they have reason to expect from a Church that has
always delighted to bath her self in Blood, ought seriously to profess their
Repentance of this Fury in Instances that may be as Visible and edifying as
their Rage has been public and destructive.

But there remains yet one point, without which I am sensible that this
discourse will appear defective; I know it is extreme tender in our present
Circumstances, yet that does not defer me from venturing on it; it is, How far
Protestants ought to Tolerate Papists. It seems at first view the most
unreasonable thing in the World, for those to pretend to it, who we are sure
must destroy us, as soon as it is in their power to do it. I say, they must do
it; since by those Councils, which they themselves hold to be General, the
extirpation of Heretics and the breaking of Faith to them, has been so
formally decreed, that it is a foolish piece of presumption to imagine that
they can ever lay down those Principles. Infallibility is the bottom upon which
their Church is built, and she must be as Infallible in the Rules that she
gives of Morality, as she is in her Decisions in Points of Faith: for all the
Reasons that are given for private persons depending on the Church for the Rule
of their Faith, do bind as strongly to depend likewise on the Church for the
Rule of Life and Manners. If we are in danger of forgetting, what was decreed
in that Church so long ago, they take pains from time to time to refresh our
Memories, not only by their Cruelties in the last Age, for which there was so
much more to be said, than for later Barbarities, because the Reformation was
looked on as a revolt then made from established Laws: and if Persecution can be
at any time excused, it is in the first beginnings of Heresies, before the Evil
has spread it self into greater numbers of men: The Heats that were raised in
the first Formation of that Breach, may some way take off from the guilt of the
Sacrifices that they made: for men in the first surprises of Anger do seldom
Reason true, or Act wisely; but when a whole Age has passed, and those first
Heats are in a great measure laid, and when all the Securities that could
possibly be demanded have been given, and while these have been enacted into
the most Obligatory Laws that could be contrived, which were confirmed by
solemn (...) well to my self; yet the Body of the People, that are bred up to
the other Points of Popery, and that know nothing of these, which their Priests
keep as Mysteries from them, and either deny them quite, or disguise them so
that they show in other Colors to those who believe Implicitly, and who do not
give themselves the trouble to enquire into such matters; but think it is
safer, as well as easier, to take things upon trust; they I say, are not so
formidable as to raise our Fears and Jealousies to so high a pitch: and Secular
Priests are naturally a softer sort of men, who have not the sourness that
seems to belong to all the Orders that are among them; nor are they so far
possessed with the ill-natured and dangerous Opinions that belong to that
Church, as to be past cure: and as a softning of rigor toward such, would lay
the Apprehensions that Self-preservation does naturally raise in all People, so
it would at least make the utmost degree of Severity, that seems reconcilable
to the Common Principles of Humane Society, or of Christianity, appear more
justifiable, if a restlesness under such easy Circumstances should afterward
drive a Government to it. But the returning of the Severities that our Brethren
have suffered at the hands of the men of that Religion on the Papists of
England, is a Practice so contrary to the Christian Religion, and to the
Principles of the Protestant Religion, that I do not stick to say it, that I
had rather see the Church of England fall under a very severe Persecution from
the Church of Rome, than see it fall to persecute Papists, when it should come
to its turn to be able to do it. The former will only serve to unite us among
our selves, and to purge us from our Dross; and in particular from any of the
Leaven of the Doctrine of Persecution, that we have not yet quite thrown out;
but the other would very much stain the purest and best constituted Church in
the World; and it would be too near an approach to the Cruelty of that Church,
which we cannot enough detest: but how much soever we must hate their
Corruption, we must still remember, that they are men and Christians, tho
perhaps of a course grain, and that we our selves are Reformed Christians, who
in Imitation of our Blessed Master, must not render evil for evil, but overcome
evil with good.

GILBERT BURNET.

The PERSECUTORS
Here mentioned, whom the Judgments of God did so visibly pursue and overtake,
and whose Death's were so signally remarkable, are in order thus.

NERO. DOMITIAN. DECIUS. VALERIAN. AURELIAN. DIOCLETIAN. MAXIMIAN, surnamed the
HERCULIAN. GALERIUS MAXIMIAN. SEVERUS. DAIA or DAZA, to whom GALERIUS MAXIMIAN
gave the name of MAXIMIN, so that he was thereafter styled MAXIMINUS DAZA, or
simply MAXIMIN. MAXENTIUS, the Son of MAXIMIAN the HERCULIAN.
A RELATION Of the DEATH Of the PRIMITIVE PERSECUTORS.
Written by Lucius Caecilius Firmianus Lactantius;
Addressed to Donatus the Confessor.
I. GOD has at last heard you (My dearest Donatus) in those Prayers which you
offer up daily to Him, as well as our other Brethren, who by the Virtue of
their Faith, and of the glorious Consession that they have made, have acquired
to themselves an eternal Crown of Glory. To these Prayers God has hearkened; and
has delivered us from our Enemies: and a blessed Peace being now again
re-established upon Earth, the Church of God, that was lately laid so low,
begins to flourish again: and through the Mercy of God, his House, that was laid
in Ruins by his Enemies, is now rebuilt with a new Magnificence. God has raised
up to us Princes, who have repealed all the wicked and bloody Edicts of the
late Tyrants; and have so settled the Peace of Mankind, that instead of the
Clouds and Storms of the late times, there is now an Universal Calm every
where: and after all those Hurricans of Fury and Violence are now blown over,
we enjoy a serene Air, and the happy quiet which we had so much longed for. Now
Gods Anger is turned away, and he harkening to the Prayers of his Servants, has
by the Interposition of his Divine Aid, raised up their afflicted and broken
Spirits: Now he has wiped away all their Tears, and has put an end to the
Conspiracies of their Enemies. Those who had set themselves in opposition to
God, are now laid in the dust: Those who had rased the Temples of God, are now
become spectacles to the World; and they who had exercised so much Cruelty on
the Servants of God, have received at his hands a severe Return of their Rage,
and have breathed out their defiled Souls after they had undergone a great many
dismal strokes, that were laid on them by the Hand of God. Their punishment was
for some time delayed, but at last it was signal: and in them all succeeding
Ages ought to observe the Justice of God in punishing such proud and impious
Persecutors suteably to their Crimes. In the manner of their Death, God calls
likewise on all at what distance soever, either of time or place, to observe
the Greatness and Majesty of his Providence in destroying the Enemies of his
Truth. And this will appear yet more evident to us, if we call to mind who have
been the Porsecutors of the Church from its first beginning, and if we observe
the Severity of the Divine Justice, that has appeared in their punishment.

II. Toward the end of Tiberius's reign, in the Consulate of the two Gemini,
our Lord Jesus Christ was crucified by the Jews on the 23. of March. He rose
again on the third day, and brought together his Disciples, whom the fear of
his Sufferings was beginning to disperse, and he continued with them for the
space of 40 days on earth, opening their hearts, and expounding the Scriptures
to them, which till then had appeared dark and involved. He ordained and
instructed them to go and preach this new Doctrine over the World; and he left
them a scheme for their conduct, and for the Government of this new
Dispensation. When he had finished his Ministry, a Cloud received him, and
carried him up into Heaven: and then his eleven Disciples having assumed into
their number Matthias and Paul, dispersed themselves over the World for the
preaching of the Gospel, as their Master had commanded them: And during the
space of 25. years* till the beginnings of Nero's reign, they continued
founding many Churches in a great many different Cities and Provinces. During
Nero's reign, S. Peter came to Rome, and made a great many Converts there,
having through the power of God, that rested on him, wrought several Miracles,
and* so he formed a Church in this place of Empire. This was brought to Nero's
ears, who finding that great multitudes, not only in Rome, but in all other
places, were daily falling often from Idolatry, and were turning to this new
Religion, and being carried by his brutal Tyranny to all sorts of Cruelty, he
set himself first of all to destroy this Religion, and to persecute the
Servants of God: So he both ordered S. Peter to be crucisied, and S. Paul to be
beheaded. But he did not escape unpunished: for God had regard to the
Sufferings of his People. The Tyrant, as he was dispossessed of the Empire, so
he disappeared all of the sudden, nor is there so much as the least remembrance
left of the Burial Place of that Brutal Prince. But some have from hence taken
up a very foolish Imagination, of his being translated, and of his being
preserved alive in some other Region; which they found on some words of the
Sybil, that mentions a Murderer of his Mother that had fled away, but that
should return again: and they fancy, that as he was the first who persecuted
the Christians, so he shall be likewise the last of their Persecutors; and that
he is to appear again immediately before the coming of Antichrist: and they
judge, (tho very unreasonably) that as there were two of the Ancient Prophets
who were translated, and who before the last Revolution of time are to appear
as the Forerunners of Christ, when he is to be come again, accompanied with
his Saints, to begin his holv and endless Reign; so likewise that Nero shall
appear as the Forerunner of the Devil, who must make way to him, who is to
bring a strange Desolation upon Earth, and a Destruction upon all Mankind.

III. After Nero, and the Interval of some few more years, there arose another
Tyrant, Domitian, not much Inferior to him: who tho he acted in a most
Tyrannical and Arbitrary Manner, being heavy to his People, and no less hated
by them, yet he reigned in Peace and Safety for several years, till be began to
set himself against God. But as soon as he was set on by the Instigation of the
Devil to persecute the Holy Seed, then was he delivered up to the hands of his
Enemies. Nor was his being Stabbed thought Punishment enough for his Crimes,
but care was taken that no Memory should be left of him to Posterity; for tho
he had raised many Magnificent Buildings, and that there were many Monuments of
his Empire, both in the Capitol and in other Places, yet the Senate did express
such a detestation of him, that they ordered that there should remain no Statue
for him, nor so much as the Traces of any Inscription that made mention of his
Name: And by a most severe Decree, which they past for this effect, they
branded his Memory with eternal Infamy. Thus all the Acts and Edicts of this
Tyrant being repealed, the Church did not only recover its former quie^, but
became much more Flourishing under a Succession of many worthy Princes, who as
they governed the Roman Empire very happily, so the Church suffered no
Hardships under them: and she being thus freed from the Rage of her Enemies,
dilated herself both in the Eastern and Western parts, so that there was no
corner of the World so remote, nor any Nation of it so wild, that was not
visited by this Divine Light, and that was not tamed by its Discipline. But
this long peace came at last to an end.

IV. For after many years the execrable Decius persecuted the Church, and who
but so vile a man would have set himself against so holy a Doctrine. It seems
he was raised up to the Imperial Dignity for this very end, that as soon as he
began to rage against God, he might be immediately thrown down: for having
marched against the Carpi, who had possessed themselves of Dacia and M^sia, he
was surrounded by the Barbarians, and both he and a great part of his Army was
cut off: nor had he so much as the Honors of a Funeral, but as well became one
that had set himself against God, his Carcass was exposed as a prey to the
Beasts of the Earth, and to the Fowls of the Air.

V. Not long after Decius the Emperor, Valerian was inflamed with the like
Rage, and stretched forth his hands against God. In a very little while he shed
a great deal of the Blood of the Saints; but God plagued him with a new and
unusual sort of Judgment; and in his person there was a new remembrance lest to
Posterity of Gods Severity in punishing his Enemies according to their Merit.
He was taken Prisoner by the Persians, and so he not only lost the Empire,
which he had governed so insolently, but as he had robbed many others of their
Liberty, so he likewise lost his own at last, and fell under a most Infamous
Slavery. For as often as Sapores the King of Persia, who took him, had occasion
either to mount on Horseback, or to go into his Chariot, he made the Roman
Emperor stoop down, that he might make his Back his Step to get up; and
whereas the Romans had made some Representations of the Persians being deseated
by them, Sapores used to rally Valerian, and to tell him, that the posture in
which he lay, was a more real proof to show on whose side the Victory went,
than all the Pictures that the Romans could make* Valerian being thus led about
in Triumph, lived for some time, so that the Barbarians had in him occasion
given for a great while, to treat the very name of a Roman with all possible
Indignity and Scorn. And this was the heightning of his Misery, that tho he had
a Son, upon whom the Empire had devolved by his Misfortune, yet no Care was
taken by the Son either to rescue the Father, or to Revenge his ill Usage.
After he had ended his Infamous Life, his Skin was flead off his. Body, and
both it and his Guts being tinctured with a red coloring, they were hung up in
one of the Temples of the Persian Gods, to be a perpetual remembrance of so
remarkable a: Triumph, by which they might always put such Roman Ambassadors
as should be sent among them in mind of it, and from so unusual a sight, warn
them not to presume too much upon their own strength, but to remember
Valerian's fall. But how strange a thing was it to find, that notwithstanding
such remarkable Judgments of God upon former Persecutors, there should: arise
any that should dare so much as to project, much more to re-act, such crimes
against the Majesty of that God that supports and governs all things.

VI. Aurelian, that was naturally Violent and furious, seemed to forget what
had befallen Valerian, or if he remembered his Captivity, he did not seem to
reflect on his Crimes, or to consider that as the Punishment of them, and so he
likewise drew down the Divine Displeasure on himself by his Cruelty: but he
lived not long enough to execute what he had designed, and he ended his days in
the beginnings of his Rage. For before his Edict against the Christians was
sent over all the Provinces of the Empire, he himself was killed at
Caenophrurium, a Town in Thrace, by some of his own Domestics, upon some
ill-grounded suspicions that they had conceived of him. It might have been
expected, that the succeeding Emperors should have been restrained by so many
and such signal Examples: But they were so far from being terrisied by them,
that they acted yet with a more daring Boldness against God.

VII. Diocletian, that was the Contriver of all our late Miseries, as he ruined
the Empire by his ill Administration, so he could not be kept in from acting
likewise in Opposition to God. His Avarice and his Cowardice joined together,
had produced great Mischiefs. He assumed to himself three partners in the
Empire, having divided it into four parts; and he did so increase the number of
his Troops, that every one of the four had a greater Army than the former
Emperors had, who alone governed the whole Empire; and the number of those who
received his pay, growing greater than that of those who paid him Taxes, there
was such an increase of new Impositions, that those who labored the ground
being exhausted by them, they deserted the Empire, and by this means the best
cultivated Soils were turned to Deserts and Woods; and so severe was his
Government, that he erected a great many new Charges and Employments; The
Provinces were divided into many separated Jurisdictions: many new Presidents
and Courts, Auditors, and other Magistrates were set up both in Towns and
Countries, who took little care of the Administration of Justice, their time
being all employed in Condemnations and Attainders; and they laid so many Taxes
upon all sorts of things, that as the Burdens under which the People groaned
were increased every day, so in the levying of them great Violences were
likewise committed. All this had been more tolerable, if the money so raised had
circulated among the Soldiers: but the Emperors Avarice was such, that he
could not endure to see his Treasure any way diminished; and therefore he was
always contriving new ways of raising Money, that so his Exchequer might be
always full: and that tho his Expense was great, yet his income might so answer
it, that he should never lessen that stock of Money which by his Exactions he
had brought together. After that the many Oppressions which he put in practice
had brought a general Dearth upon the Empire, then he set himself to regulate
the Prices of all vendible things. There was also much Blood shed upon very
slight and trifling accounts; and the People brought Provisions no more to
Markets, since they could not get a reasonable price for them: and this
increased the Dearth so much, that at last, after many had died by it, the Law
it self was laid aside. To all these Diocletian added an Inclination to build
great Fabrics, and this brought a new Charge on several Provinces both for
furnishing of Laborers, and Artisicers, and of Wagons for Carriage. He built
Palaces for himself, for his Wife, and for his Daughters: and to these he added
a Hippodrome, an Arsenal, and a Mint house: so that in a little while a great
part of Nicomedia being filled with those Buildings, many of the Inhabitants
were forced to leave the Town with their Wives and Children, as if it had been
taken by an Enemy: And when he had finished a piece of Building at the cost of
ruining some of the Provinces by it, he found some fault or other in it, and
then he pulled all down, and gave orders to rebuild it in another manner: nor
was this second Building secured from a new caprice, upon which it might be
likewise perhaps levelled with the ground. So madly expenceful was he in the
design that he took into his head of making Nicomedia equal to Rome it self. I
pass over the Ruin of many, who were brought under severe Judgments, that so a
color in Law might be found for seizing on their Estates: for this was become
such a common practice, that the frequency of committing it had almost
authorized it. And this was certain, that wherever a man was the Master of a
rich piece of Soil, or of a Noble Building, that seemed to be Crime enough; and
a Pretense was quickly sound out for condemning the Owner, as if it had not
been enough to seize his Estate, without taking away his Life likewise.

VIII. His Colleague in the Empire, Maximian, surnamed the Herculian, was not
unlike him. Nor could they have been cemented into so entire a Friendship, if
they had not been both of the same mind, the same Thoughts, the same
Inclinations, and the same Designs. In this they differed, that Maximian had
more Courage as well as more Avarice than Diocletian; who as he was fearful, so
perhaps from that Principle he was less Ravenous. Yet Maximian's Courage
consisted rather in a daring to commit Crimes, than in a generous Nobleness of
mind. And tho his share comprehended not only Italy it self, the Seat of
Empire, but likewise those rich Provinces of Africa and Spain, yet he was not
so careful in the management of his Treasure as was necessary: But as often as he
wanted Money, the richest of the Senators were accused by some Witnesses, that
were suborned to swear against them of some practices for the Empire, and thus
every day there were new Arts set on foot to get rid of the Eminentest men of
the Senate, so that the ravenous Exchequer was often full of this ill-acquired
Wealth. That accursed man did also let loose his Appetites not only in those
unnatural and hateful Disorders with Boys, but likewise in the debauching the
Daughters of some that were of the first rank. For whenever he was in any
Journey, as he past he had Instruments at hand, to bring Virgins to him by
force in the very sight of their Parents. It was on these things that he built
his happiness; and he reckoned the chief Felicity of Empire to consist in this,
that he denied himself in nothing to which either his vicious Appetite or his
Lusts carried him.

I say nothing of Constantius, because he was so very unlike the rest; and did
indeed deserve that the whole Empire should fall into his hands.

IX. But the other Maximian who married Diocletians Daughter, was not only
worse than the two formerly mentioned, but did exceed the wickedness of the
worst Princes that ever were: There was a Barbarous Brutality in his Temper,
together with a Cruelty not known to those that were of a Roman Extraction: And
no wonder; for his Mother was born beyond the Danube: and when some of those
Nations crossed that River, she came along with them, and had settled her self
in that part of Dacia which was formed into a Province by Aurelian. His body
was suitable to his mind: he was very tall, and most excessively corpulent: and
there was a sierceness in his Looks, his Words, and in his whole Behavior,
that gave a very formidable Idea of him. His Father in Law, Diocletian, dreaded
him extremely upon this following account: Narses King of Persia, being
encouraged by the success that his Grandfather Sapores had against Valerian,
resolved to extend his Empire, and to drive the Romans out of the East: upon
which Diocletian, who was naturally very fearful, quite desponded, and searing
a fate like Valerians, he durst not undertake that War, but sent Maximian into
Armenia, and stayed behind himself, that so he might see what was like to be
the issue of this War: Maximian took his measures so well, that finding the
Persian Army exceeding numerous, and that they were much encumbred with a vast
Equipage, that they drew along with them, their Wives having followed them in
this Expedition according to the Ancient Persian Custom: he, I say, got such
Advantages against them, that without any considerable loss, he defeated their
whole Army. Narses himself escaped, but Maximian took all their Baggage, and so
returned with great Glory, which increased his Insolence, as much as it did his
Father-in-Law's Apprehensions of him. For upon so great a Victory* he thought
it below him to carry only the second rank of Honor, and to be only called
Caesar; and when at any time he received Letters addressed to him, with the
Inscription Caesar, he used to cry out in his brutal way, Must* I be still
Caesar? he grew at last to that pitch of Insolence, as to give it out, that Mars
was his Father; so that he ought to be looked on as another Romulus, not
considering the prejudice he did to his Mothers honor, of which he made small
account, desiring only to be looked on as begotten by a God. But I will not now
enter into the particulars of his Life, that so I may not confound the order of
things: for it was after his assuming the Imperial Dignity, of which he forced
his Fatherin-Law to strip himself, that he broke loose into all the excesses of
Insolence and Fury; in the mean time, tho Diocletian by his own ill conduct,
and that of the two Maximians, whom he had taken Copartners into the
Government, (the first as Emperor, and the second as Caesar) had brought great
disorder upon the whole State of the Empire, and tho his private crimes were
very crying, yet matters prospered in his hands in a very unusual manner, till
he came to defile them with the Blood of the Saints; and this carries me to
give you an account of the occasion that led him to persecute them.

X. While he was in the East, he being excessively desirous to know what was to
be the event of things, offered many Sacrifices, and in their Livers the
Diviners searched for those Indications, upon which they pretended to foretell
things to come: But some of his Courtiers, that were Christians, being near
him, made the sign of the Cross on their Foreheads, at which the Devils being
frighted away, they were all put in a great Confusion. The Diviners being
likewise in disorder, could not find the ordinary Marks that they looked for in
the intrails of the Sacrifices; tho they offered up many, one after another,
pretending that the Divinity was not yet appeased; but all the number of their
Sacrifices was to no purpose, for no signs appeared: upon which Tages that was
set over the Diviners said, either upon some conjecture or upon knowledge, that
their Rites did not succeed, because there were some profane persons that had
thrust themselves into their Assembly. Upon which Diocletian being enraged,
commanded, that not only all those who were present, but that all the rest of
his Courtiers should come and sacrifice to their Gods, and ordered those to be
whipped who should refuse to do it. He likewise sent orders to his Military
Officers, to require all the Soldiers to sacrifice, and to dismiss such as
would not. But this was all that he thought sit to do at first, nor did he
suffer his Rage to carry him to farther Extremities against God or his true
Religion, till after some time had past, that he came to Winter in Bithinia:
and there Galerius Maximian, who was likewise inflamed against the Christians,
met him, and engaged the vain Old Man to go on with the Persecution, which he
had already begun, concerning whom I have received this account of the grounds
of his Fury against our Religion.

XI. His Mother was a superstitious Woman, and was particularly addicted to the
devotion of the Gods of the Mountains, so that she offered Sacrifices to them
daily, and feasted her Officers with the meat of those Oblations. The
Christians would not assist at those entertainments, but gave themselves to
Fasting and Prayer, while she and her Company were at those Feasts. Upon this
she conceived a hatred of them, and she set on her Son, who was no less
superstitious than she her self, by her spiteful Complaints to contrive their
Destruction. Diocletian and his Son-in-Law had many secret Consultations during
a whole Winter, to which as no body was admitted, so it was generally thought
that they were treating about matters of the greatest consequences. The Old Man
withstood Maximian's Fury long, and showed him how pernicious the Council would
prove, and how great a Disturbance it would bring upon the Empire: much blood
would be shed; for the Christians were observed to be very willing to dye.
Therefore he proposed this expedient, that none of that Religion should be
suffered to continue in the Court, or in the Army: But all this could not
divert the Rage of that Furious Man. Therefore he proposed the asking the
Opinions of those in whom they consided; for he had this piece of ill nature,
that when he was about to do any thing that was acceptable, he did it of
himself, without taking the Advice of others, that so the Praise of it might
belong wholly to himself: But when he undertook any thing that was liable to
Censure, he called for many persons to deliver their Opinion upon it, that so
others might be charged with the Blame of that in which he was chiefly in
fault. Some few Judges, and some few Military Men were called upon, and
according to the Order of their Dignity they were repuired to tell their minds;
some that had a particular spleen to the Christian Religion, opined that all
the Christians were Enemies to God and to the established Worship, and that
therefore they ought to be destroyed. Those that were of another mind,
perceiving what was Maximian's design, and being either afraid of him, or
desirous to make their Court with him, agreed to the rest in Opinion; yet all
this did not prevail on Diocletian; so he resolved to consult the Gods
themselves, and sent a Diviner to consult with Apollo, who answered as might
have been expected from an Enemy of the Christian Religion. Upon this
Diocletian yielded; and as he would not oppose himself to that which not only
his Friends and Maximian, but even Apollo had advised, yet he endeavored to
maintain this moderation, that the design might be composed without the
shedding of Blood: whereas Maximian moved, that all those who refused to
partake in the Sacrifices, should be burnt alive.

XII. A proper and an auspicious day for beginning this work was next sought
for; and choice was made of the Festivity of the God Terminus, which was within
five days of the end of February, that was the Conclusion of their year:
implying by this, that an end was to be put to this Religion. This was the
first day of their Executions, and the beginning of those Miseries that not
only fell on them, but on the whole Empire. In the morning of that fatal day,
in the seventh and eighth Consulate of the two Ancient Emperors, the Prefect
accompanied with some Officers, and some of the Receivers, went to the Church,
and having forced open the Door, they searched for the Image of God: Not that
the Christians had any Images in their Temples, as Lactantius himself
testifies, de Origin Erroris, lib. 2. page 65, 66, 67, 107, but the Heathens
having Images in all their Temples, were ready to conceive the like of them.
all the Books of the Scriptures that were there found were burnt, and the
Spoil that was made was divided among all that were present: this struck a
Terror into many, and many withdrew them. selves from the Storm. The two
Princes, who from convenient places viewed all that was done (for that Church
stood upon a height, so that it was within the prospect of the Palace) were
long in debate, whether they should order fire to be set to it: But in this
Diocletians Opinion prevailed; for he was afraid lest if the Church had been
set on fire, that might have spread it self into the other parts of the City:
for it was environed on all hands by a great many Noble Buildings; so that
instead of setting fire to, it there was a considerable Body of the Guards,
sent with Axes and Mattocks, who in a few hours time levelled that lofty
Building with the ground.

XIII. The day after this an Edict was published, by which the Christians were
declared incapable of all Honors and Employments; and that they should be
liable to Torture whatsoever might be their Rank and Dignity; all Actions were
to be received against them, and they were put out of the protection of the
Law, and might not sue neither upon Injuries done them, or Adulteries committed
against them, nor for Thefts or Robberies; and they were to loose both their
Liberties and their Right of Voting. When this was affixed, one that showed
more of Courage than Discretion in it, took it down and tore it, and rallied
the Emperors, who had put among their Titles, that they had triumphed over the
Goths and the Sarmatians, that they acted like those whom they pretended that
they had subdued; he was presently seized on, and after he had endured several
sorts of Torture; he was burnt at last, but suffered all with admirable
Patience.

XIV. But Maximian was not satisfied with the Severity of this Edict, so he
resolved to draw on Diocletian to consent to further Rigor by this Artifice;
he set on some of his Creatures to raise a fire in the Palace, that so he might
engage him to an unrelenting Persecution: some parts were burnt down, and the
Christians were presently accused as the Common Enemies; and this Fire, that
consumed the Palace, raised a most Implacable Rage against them. For it was
given out, that they had entered into Consultation with some of the Eunuchs for
the Destruction of their Princes, and that two Emperors were well nigh burnt
alive in their own House. Diocletian who affected the Reputation of being a
Wise and Crafty Man, could not be brought to give any credit to this: but being
excessively enraged upon it, he ordered many of his Domestics to be put to
Death in a most terrible manner. So many innocent Persons were brought before
him, and were burnt. All the Judges and all the Officers of his Household being
authorized thereunto, put all People to Torture, and seemed to vie with one
another who should be the first that should discover the bottom of this matter.
But nothing could be found out; for none of Maximians Family was put to the
Torture. He came and stood by Diocletian, and continued still to inflame him
more and more, that so his anger might no way be abated. And a fortnight after
the first burning, fire was a second time set to the Palace: But this was
observed in time, yet neither could the Author of it be found out. And then
Maximian, tho it was in the midst of Winter, left Nicomedia on the same day in
which this second Fire was raised, protesting that he went away fearing lest he
should be burnt alive.

XV. The Emperor was now set all on fire, and upon this he forced not only all
that were of his Household, but all Persons whatsoever, to defile themselves
with their Sacrifices; beginning with his Daughter Valeria, and his Wise
Prisca. Some of the Eunuchs that were in the greatest Credit, and by whose
Directions the whole Affairs of the Palace had been conducted before this
Edict, were now put to Death; some Presbyters and Deacons were seized on, and
without any proof against them, they were condemned and executed. Persons of
all Ages, and of both Sexes were burnt, not singly one by one, but by reason of
their numbers, whole Companies of them were burnt all in the same Fire: and
their Servants were cast into the Sea, Millstones being tied about their Necks.
Nor was this Persecution less violent in all other places: for the Judges were
sent to all Temples, and they forced all people to join in the Sacrifices. The
Prisons were every where full. Unheard of kinds of Torture were invented; and
that no man might have the Benefit of the Law that was not a Heathen: they
placed Altars in the very Courts of Justice, and in the public Offices, that
so all who came to sue before them might be put to it first to offer Sacrifice,
before they could be admitted to plead: so that men came before their Judges as
before their Gods. Nor was this all, Letters were also sent to the other
Emperor and to Constance, inviting them to concur in this matter, tho their
Opinions had not been before asked, notwithstanding the great Importance of it.
The Old Maximian did comply very willingly in Italy; for he was naturally
cruel* But Constance, that he might not seem to dissent from those that were in
rank above him, did indeed give order for the pulling down the Walls of the
Houses where the Christians held their Assemblies; for these could be easily
rebuilt: but he took care to preserve those true Temples of God, I mean the
Christians themselves.

XVI. The whole World was now brought under great vexation, the Gauls only
excepted; those three wild Beasts exercised their Cruelty upon all the
Provinces from the East to the West. If I had a hundred Tongues, and the
strongest Voice, I could not set out all the Forms of Crimes, and all the Names
of the Tortures that the Judges in the several Provinces put in practice
against so many Holy and Innocent Persons: But what need I engage in this
recital, especially to you, My Dear Donatus, who had so extraordinary a share
in them. For whereas you first fell into the hands of the Prefect Flaccinus,
who was not a small Murderer, you fell next into the Hands of Hierocles, who
from being a Deputy was made a President, and had been an Adviser and a
Promoter of the Persecution: and in the last place, was brought before
Priscillian his Successor, where, as well as before the other two, you gave an
Evidence of your unconquered Courage: you were nine several times put to a
great many Tortures, and at every one of them you overcame the Rage of your
Enemies, by a glorious Confession. In those nine encounters with the Devil you
defeated him with his whole Troop of Assistants* and by so many Victories you
triumphed over the World with all its Terrors. How pleasant was that Triumph in
the sight of God, in which instead of White Horses or Elephants about your
Chariot, you triumphed over the Emperors themselves, and seemed to drag them
after your Chariot. This is true Victory, when those that have conquered the
World, are subdued: for they were overcome and subdued by you, who despising
their Impious Edicts, made no account of all the Pomp and Terrors of their
Tyrannical Authority. Their Whippings and their Pincers, their Fires and
Swords, and all the several shapes of Torture had no effect upon you: No sort
of Violence could make you fall from the Faith, and from the true Worship of
God* This is to be a true Disciple and a true Soldier of Christ; whom no Enemy
can overcome, no Wolf can carry out of Gods Fold, no Snare can entangle, no
Sorrow can subdue, and no Torture can break. After all those nine Engagements,
that proved so glorious to you, the Devil finding himself always overcome by
you, durst not assault you any more: for experience had showed him, that you
were not to be vanquished: and since he saw that the Crown of Victory was ready
to be bestowed on you, he would not, by provoking you any further, give you the
occasion of receiving it so soon. Tho it was not given to you then, it is
safely kept for you in the Kingdom of God, as the Recompense of your Virtue and
Worth. But now I return to the series of the History.

XVII. Diocletian being now engaged into this wicked design, and having
succeeded so well in the Execution of it, went straight to Rome, that so he
might celebrate there his entering upon the twentieth year of his Empire, that
he was to open upon the Anniversary of his coming to it, which was the
twentieth of November. But as soon as that was over, he showed how little he
could bear that Freedom that the Romans had still retained; at which he was so
uneasy, that tho the first of January was very Near, in which he was to enter
upon his ninth Consulate, yet he could not be prevailed on to stay to that day,
and so he could not bear the staying thirteen days longer at Rome, but he began
his Consulate at Ravenna. The Winter was both extreme Cold and Rainy, so that
the Journey did so affect his health, that it threw him into a lingering
sickness, that never went off quite: and being ill all the way, he was forced
to be carried for most part in a Litter. His illness lay upon him all the
Summer long: about the end of it he continued his Journey, and having come
round the Coast of Phrygia, he got at last to Nicomedia, his Sickness being now
come to a great height. But tho he was brought very low by it, yet he would
needs appear in public, and assist at the Dedication of the Hippodrome that he
had built, which was done at the end of his twentieth year of Empire. His
sickness grew at last to such a degree, that Supplications were made to all the
Gods for his Life: but on the 13th of December a report was spread all about
the Palace, that he was dead: the sad Looks and the Terror that appeared in
all his Courtiers, and the solemn silence that was over all the Court, made
that the Report was generally believed: The City of Nicomedia believed him not
only dead, but buried; but the next day it was given out that he was yet alive;
upon which the countenances of many that were concerned, were much changed: but
others believed still that he was dead, and that it was concealed for fear of
the Soldiery, lest they should have fallen into some dangerous Consultations,
and that therefore his Death was to be kept up till Maximian should come to
Nicomedia. This grew to be so Universally believed, that is he had not showed
himself on the first of March, it had not been possible to have persuaded the
people that he was still alive. He was strangly altered by a whole years
sickness* that they to whom he was very well known, could hardly believe him to
be the same: He had indeed on the thirteenth of December fallen into so deep a
Swoon, that it was thought he was dead, and he never recovered this so
entirely, as to be wholly what he had been formerly: for he had ever after
this, some fits of Madness, which returned at some* times upon him, tho in the
Intervals of those fits he had his Understanding very perfect.

XVIII. Not many days after this, Galerius Maximian came to him, not to
congratulate upon his recovery, but to force him to resign the Empire: He had
made the same attempt upon the elder Maximian, and threatened him with a Civil
War if he would not resign; so now he set on Diocletian: He began at first more
softly and gently with him; telling him, that he was now become ancient and
infirm, and less able to undergo the fatigue of Government, and that therefore
he ought to give himself some repose after so much Application and Toil. He set
before him Nerva's Example, who resigned the Empire to Trajan: Diocletian
answered, that as it was not honorable for him, after he had born so sublime a
Character so long, to shut himself up in an obscure Corner, so it could not be
safe for him to do it, since during so long a Reign, he must needs have made
himself many Enemies. The case was quite different in Nerva, who had past his
whole life in retirement; so that his great Age and his unacquaintendness with
affairs made him less capable of bearing so great a Burden, which therefore he
threw off, and returned to that privacy in which he had spent the former parts
of his life. But he offered to Maximian to receive him to an equal Dignity with
himself; so that they should be all called Emperors, if that would have
contented him. The other, who had now formed a project of making himse sole
Emperor, seeing that from this Title that was offered him, little real
Advantage would accrue to him, pretended that the Order which Diocletian had
begun, of having two Emperors with the Supreme Power, and two Assistants to
them in a lower degree of Dignity, ought to be forever maintained: It was an
easy thing to preserve a good Correspondence between two Persons, but that
could not be composed if there came to be four of equal Dignity: He concluded,
that if the Emperor would not retire, and make way for him, he would see to
himself; for he would be no longer contented with the low degree in which he
had been so long held: He had been now for fifteen years as it were banished to
Illiricum, along the River of the Danube, and engaged in constant Wars with the
Barbarous Nations; while others were reigning quietly, and in delicious Seats.
The Old Man, that was now much broken, having heard all this, and having
likewise received Letters from the elder Maximian, that gave him an account of
what had been said to himself upon that subject, and had also heard that
Galerius Maximian was increasing his Army; upon this, not without Tears; he
consented to that which had been proposed to him; so that which remained was,
that the Cesars should be named by the concurring Advices of all the Four. But
the other rejected this, and said, that the other two must consent to
whatsoever they should resolve on: and indeed, it seemed that there was no room
for choice, but that the Sons of the other two must have been named for Cesars.
Maxentius was Son to the Elder Maximian, and had married the younger Maximians
Daughter. He was a Man of a wicked and vicious Disposition, and was so proud
and so willful, that he would not pay the wonted respect of Adoration, neither
to his Father, nor to his Father-in-Law; so that he was equally hated of both.
Constantine Son to Constance was a most virtuous Youth, and had all the
Qualities that could recommend him to the highest Dignity: his Air and Person
were graceful; his capacity for Military Affairs, his Probity, and his obliging
Deportment, made that he was beloved of the Soldiers, and wished for by all
Persons: He was then in Diocletian's Court, and was put by him in the chief
Command of the Army. But Maximian had his Objections to both these: as for
Maxentius he thought he was not worthy of that Dignity, and he reckoned, that
he who had behaved himself so Insolently toward him, while he was a private
person, would become intolerable if he were raised so high. Constantine was
indeed so amiable a person, that it was thought he would be a better and a
gentler Prince than his Father had been: and so he would be able to check him
as he pleased: wherefore Maximian resolved to have such persons promoted, who
should be always in his power, who should be afraid of him, and should do
nothing but by his order, so he proposed Severus: Diocletian excepted to him,
as a Mad Extravagant, and Drunken Person, who changed the Day into Night, and
the Night into Day: but the other answered, that he had deserved that Dignity
well, for he had taken great care of the Army, and had prayed them faithfully;
and added, that he had sent him to Maximian the elder, that he might receive
the Nomination from him; so this was aggreed to: and when Diocletian asked him,
who should be the other, he presented one Daia to him, a young Man, that was
half a Barbarian by his Extraction, and whom he had lately ordered to be called
Maximin from his own name. For Diocletian had changed his own Name to that, to
distinguish him from the other Maximian, who had always maintained his
Fidelity to him most religiously. Diocletian asked him, who that young Man was;
the other said, he was his Ally: but he sighed, and replied, that he did not
propose to him persons that were capable of conducting the Commonwealth; the
other said, that he had already tried them. Diocletian insisted and said, that
he who was to enter upon the Empire, ought to see to it: and that for his part,
he had taken his share of Toil, and had studied to preserve the Commonwealth
in a good State during his Empire, but if after his time it should fall into
Disorder, it should not be by his fault. All things being thus concerted in
secret, on the first of May this great Affair came to be declared. The eyes of
all People were on Constantine, not doubting but the Nomination must fall on
him: all the Military Men, as well the Soldiers as the Officers, looked at him,
wished for him, and showed much Joy in the hopes that they expressed of his
Advancement: There was a rising ground at almost three Miles distance from the
City, and it was there where Maximian himself had first received the Imperial
Purple, in remembrance of which there was a Pillar erected with a Statue of
Jupiters upon it. That place was marked out for this Solemnity, and the Army was
drawn out about it: and there the Old Man with Tears in his Eyes, told the
Soldiers, that he was now become Infirm, and therefore he was resolved to give
himself some rest after so much Toil, and to deliver up the Empire to those who
were able to undergo the fatigue of it: and that in order to that, he would now
name new Cesars. Upon this all men's expectations being raised, he named Severus
and Maximin; all people were amassed; and since Constantine was standing by,
some began to ask whether he had changed his name into Maximin: but to the
admiration of all the Spectators, Maximian put by Constantine, and drew out
Daia, and showed him to the people, having stripped him of the habit that he wore
as a private person: and while all men were surprised, and knew neither who he
was, nor of whom he was descended, (tho this unlookt for promotion, had so
disordered them, that they testified no aversion to it) Diocletian threw his
Purple Robe about him, and so he himself retired to a private State again, and
returned to his private name of Diocles, which upon his coming to the Empire he
had changed to Diocletian, and thus the Solemnity ended: and the old Emperor,
like a Soldier that had obtained his dismission, retired, and drive through
Nicomedia, and so went into his own Country. And Daia, that was raised up from
following of Cattle through Woods, and was first a common Soldier, then an
Officer, after that a Brigadier, and now at last got to be Caesar, had the East
assigned to him, tobe oppressed and ruined by him. And tho he neither
understood Military Affairs, nor Matters of State, yet he was now set to
conduct Armies instead of feeding Cattle.

XX. Maximian having now effected that which he had projected, in driving out
the Old Men, behaved himself as if he had been the sole Emperor of the whole
Roman Empire. For tho Constance had the Precedence, and so was to be always
named before him, yet he was despised by him, both because he was naturally of
a mild temper, and was now much disabled through the indisposition of his body. He
believed that either he would soon die, or that it would be no hard thing to
force him to resign his share of the Empire. There was about Maximian one
Licinius, who was his ancient Friend; for they had been Comerades from their
first Employments in the Army: and he had now the chief stroke in all Affairs.
Maximian had not put him in the nomination of the Cesars, because he would not
put him in a rank so far Inferior to himself as to call him Son, but he
reckoned that Constance would soon die, and then he was resolved to receive him
to be his Brother and Colleague in the Empire: and thus he projected to
establish himself in his Authority, and to be able to carry all things
according to his mind; and after he should come to his twentieth year, and
celebrate the Festivals of it, as his Predecessors had done, he intended to
resign the Empire, and to put his Son in his stead, who was now only nine years
old: so that he intended that Licinius and Severus should be the Emperors, and
that Maximin and Candidianus should be the Cesars: and thus he being
established and secured as much as was possible, should pass the rest of his
days in quiet, and great safety. These were his Designs: But he having made God
his Enemy, all his Projects came to nothing.

XXI. He having attained the Supreme Dignity, set himself to disquiet the
World, that was now become subject to him. In his Expedition against the
Persians he had observed that Custom which was established among them, by which
all those Nations esteemed themselves the Slaves of their Kings: so that they
reigned over them with as absolute an Authority, as a Master of a Family does
over those of his Household. This vile Man intended to establish the same Method
of Government in the Roman Empire: and he was so impudent, that ever after that
Victory, he used to magnify it: and tho he durst not openly attempt the
reducing the Romans to the same State, yet he behaved himself so as if he had
considered all others as his Slaves: he began with the degrading those that
were in honorable Employments; for he subjected the Magistrates and the Chief
Citizens of the greatest Cities, that were in the eminentest Rank, to the Law
of Torture: and upon the slightest accounts, and in Matters that were merely
civil, he would put them to death as the Fancy took him, and for lesser
transgressions he put them in Irons; he took such Women of Quality as pleased
him out of their own Houses, and brought them by Violence to his Seraglio: and
when any were to be whipped, he had posts struck into the ground in his
Stables, to which they were tied, and so stretched out, which was done more
Infamously than was wont to be done to the Slaves themselves. What shall I say
of his Diversions, and his Pleasure? He had some Bears that he had chosen out
in a great many years among all others, that were the biggest and the fiercest
that could be found, and that were by Consequence so much the liker to himself:
and when he intended to divert himself, he ordered one of these to be brought
out, and a Man to be thrown to him, not to be killed by him outright, but to
be eat up in morsels: and as the Limbs of those Wretches were torn asunder, he
used to burst out most indecently into Laughter; so that he seldom went to
supper before he had shed some man's Blood. As for those that had no Dignity, he
condemned them to be burnt: and tho at first he gave the Christians leave to be
gone, yet afterward he not only condemned them to Torture, but to be burnt in
flow Fires: the manner of which was this, they were first chained to a post,
then there was a gentle Fire set to the Soles of their Feet, by which all the
Callus of the Foot was contracted, till at last it fell all off from the Bones;
then Flambeaux were lighted and put out, and while they were hot, they clapped
them to all the parts of their body, that so they might be tortured all over:
and care was taken to keep them alive as long as was possible, by throwing cold
Water in their Faces, and by giving them wherewith to wash their Mouths, lest
otherwise the Violence of the Misery that they suffered should have quite dried
up their Throats, and so choked them. Thus their Sufferings were lengthned out
whole days, till at last their Skin being quite consumed by the Fire, it at
last reached to their Vitals, and then a great Fire was kindled, into which they
were thrown, and so their Bodies were burnt to Ashes: and their Bones that were
not quite burnt, were gathered, and ground to powder, and thrown into some
River, or into the Sea.

XXII. These practices of Cruelty, that were begun upon the Christians, grew in
him to such a Habit, that he began to exercise them upon others: he never
punished any gently: he seldom banished any, nor did he condemn many to
Imprisonment, or to work in Mines: but his daily Judgments, which past the most
easily from him, were the condemning men to be burnt, to be crucified, or to be
thrown to Wild Beasts. His Domestics, and those whom he employed in his
Affairs, were also severely disciplined by him. And as to all Capital Matters,
Beheading was thought an extraordinary Grace, which was granted to very few; so
that it was looked on as a Reward for past Services, to have the favor of a
gentle Death; yet all these were small Matters. Eloquence was exstinguished by
him; the Advocates were destroyed, and all that were learned in the Law, were
either banished, or put to death; all sort of Literature were reckoned among
the ill Arts, and all learned men were looked on as ill-affected to the
Emperor, and were both hated and ruined by him. The Judges having superceded
all the Laws, had a License given them to do whatsoever they pleased; and
Military men, who had no sort of Learning, were made Judges in the several
Provinces, without having so much as Assess^rs assigned them.

XXIII. He also took care to involve the whole Empire into a general Calamity,
and under a common Grievance, by the new Tax that he laid both on the Cities
and Provinces: which was so severely levied by the Taxmen that he sent every
where, that the state of Affairs looked as dismal as if the Empire had been
overrun by some Enemy, or as if it had been brought under some heavy Bondage.
All men's Fields were measured, an account was taken of all their Trees and
Vines, and of all Cattle; all men were likewise polled, and where those lists
were made, no difference was put between those that lived in Town or Country.
And as *the Taxing was managed in the Towns, without any Distinction of the
ancient Citizens, and those that were newly come out of the Country, so in the
Villages all people came with their Children and Slaves to be listed: and upon
the slightest suspicions men were whipped or tortured; Children were hanged up in
the sight of their Parents; Slaves were dealt with to accuse their Masters, and
Wives to accuse their Husbands. When no sort of Evidence could be found, men
were forced by Torture to accuse themselves; and when any thing was thus
extorted from them, then they were proceeded against as if they had been
clearly convicted of those Crimes. No regard was had either to Men's Age or
Infirmity: for the Sick and Feeble were taxed as well as the whole: and in the
estimate that was made of men's Age, they added years to those that were not yet
of Age, as they detracted some from those that were past it. All Places were
full of Grief and Sorrow. And he adventured to put in execution against the
Romans, and those Provinces that were subjected to them, all that any
Conquerours had done to those who being subdued by them, were by the Law of War
at their Mercy: as if he would have revenged the Tax that Trajan put on his
Ancestors, the Dacians, which he laid on them as a Punishment for their
frequent Rebellions. After that all men were thus listed, then so much money
was laid upon every man's head, as if he had been to pay so much for his life.
Yet this matter was not trusted to the first Taxmen, but new sets of them one
after another, were sent about; that new men might always find new matter to
work upon; and tho they could really discover nothing, yet they increased the
numbers in the lists that they made, that so it might not be said, that they
had been sent to no purpose. By the means of those Oppressions, the Stock of
the Cattle was much diminished, and many men died: and yet the Taxes continued
still to be levied, even for those that were dead: to such Misery were men
reduced, that even Death did not put an end to it. The Beggars were the only
persons that were exempted from these Oppressions; for to have nothing to pay,
was the only way to be covered from those Exactions: But this Cursed Man took
care to put an end to their want; for he gave Orders to gather them all
together, and to put them in Vessels, and when they were at Sea, he ordered
them to be all drowned. So Compassionate was he, that he was resolved that no
body should be extremely miserable during his reign: thus he found out an
effectual Expedient to keep all men from pretending Poverty, as an Excuse from
paying the Taxes; but he at the same time, against all the Rules of Humanity,
put a multitude of miserable Persons to Death.

XXIV. At last the Judgments of God came to seize on him: and now all that
Success which he had hitherto enjoyed came to be changed. While he was appyling
himself to those things of which I have given you an account, he had taken no
care to destroy or to dethrone Constance; for he was waiting for his Death; yet
he did not apprehend that it would come so suddenly as it did. But Constance
being now very sick, writ to him that he might send his Son Constantine to him,
having made the same desire often before, but to no purpose: for Maximian had
no mind to let him go to his Father: on the contrary, he had exposed him to
many Dangers, hoping that he would have fallen under some of them; he durst not
make an open Attempt upon him, fearing a Civil War, or rather a Mutiny among
the Soldiers: but under a pretense of exercising him, he had engaged him to
encounter with Wild Beasts, yet all was in vain; for as the Hand of God was
visible in protecting him all along, so it appeared most signally now in the
last and critical moment; for the Emperor not knowing how he could deny it any
longer, granted him at last a pass, which had the Seal put to it, while it was
late; but he ordered him to come to him next morning to receive his Commands;
and he had resolved either to find some Color for hindering his Journey, or to
send Orders to Severus, to stop him on the Way. Constantine had some
apprehension of that which might happen, and therefore as soon as the Emperor
went to sleep, after Supper he took Journey, and in the several Stages through
which he past, he carried with him all the Post Horses. The Emperor on purpose
to delay him, did not open his door next day till it was noon, and then he
called for him: but he heard that he had gone last Night, immediately after
Supper; upon which the Emperor fell into a most violent fit of rage; and
ordered some to be sent after him for fetching him back; but when he understood
that he carried all the Post Horses with him, so that this could not be done,
the Emperor could hardly forbear weeping. Constantine made all the have that
was possible, and found his. Father just breathing out his last. Constance
recommended his Son to the Soldiers, and delivered over the Empire to him, and
so he ended his Life in all points as he wished to do. Constantine was no
sooner possessed of the Empire, then he gave the Christians the free Liberty of
their Religion, so that his first Edict was the Restoring the Exercise of this
holy Religion.

XXV. Within a few days after this, his Image with the Characters of the
Imperial Dignity upon it, was sent to Maximian: he was long in suspense, not
knowing what he should do, he once intended to throw both the Image it self,
and likewise Him that brought it into the Fire: but his Friends diverted him
from this; for they were sensible of the Inconveniences of irritating the Army,
who were already displeased, because that no notice was taken of them in the
Nomination of the Cesars: and they might probably enough have declared for
Constantine, if they should have seen him coming against Maximian at the head
of an Army. These Advices prevailed so far upon him, that tho it was much
against his Heart, yet he received the Statue, and sent Constantine the Purple,
that so it might appear that he had of his own accord received him into the
Partnership of the Empire. But this broke all his measures; nor could he now
make another Emperor Supernumerary: yet he fell upon this Contrivance, of
declaring Severus, who was the Antienter person, Emperor, and Constantine not
Emperor (as had been already done) but Caesar only, in Partnership with
Maximin, that so instead of being next to himself, he might be the last of the
Four.

XXVI. But while he thought that this matter was quite settled, he received a
new Alarm, which was, that Maxentius, who was his own Son-in-Law, was declared
Emperor at Rome. The occasion of which was this: Maximian having resolved to
exhaust the Wealth of the whole Empire by his Impositions, proceeded to that
pitch of Madness, that he would not so much as grant the City of Rome an
Exemption from (...) Tax: so he named the Taxmen, who should go to Rome to take
a (...) of all that were in the City; he had also at the same time made an
attempt upon some of the Privileges of the Pretorian Bands; so a few of those
Guards that were left at Rome, having found a fit Opportunity for it, they
first killed some of the Judges, and perceiving that the People, who were now
much irritated, were not ill pleased at this, they declared Maxentius Emperor:
When the news of this was brought to Maximian, he was a little disordered with
the first surprise of it, yet he was not much terrified at it. He both hated
the Man, and could not resolve to make three Cesars all at a time. He thought
it was enough to have been for once constrained to do a thing to which he had
not a mind, so he sent for Severus, and persuaded him to assume the Empire, and
he sent him against Maxentius with the Army that had been under his Fathers
command, and ordered him to march straight to Rome, knowing well that those
Soldiers, who had tasted so often of the Pleasures of that place, would not
only endeavor to preserve the City, but would desire to make it their chief
quarter. Maxentius beginning to reflect on the Boldness of his undertaking; as
on the one hand he had some reason to hope, that the Army which had so long
been commanded by his Father, might be easily practiced upon to declare for
himself; so on the other hand he apprehended, that his Father-in-law, searing
the same thing, might leave Severus in Illyricum, and might come in person with
his own Army to destroy him: upon this he began to contrive the means of
securing himself from this danger, which was hanging over his head; so he sent
the Purple to his Father, who had lived in Campania ever since his Resignation
of the Empire: and he declared him now for the second time Emperor. His
Father, who had resigned against his will, and was longing for a Change in the
State of Affairs, accepted of it very willingly. In the mean while Severus
marched with his Army, and came at last to the very Walls of Rome. But the
Soldiers seeing against whom they were come, did immediately abandon him, and
went over to him against whom they were sent. Severus being thus forsaken, was
forced to fly. But he was met on his way by Maximian the elder, who had now
assumed the Empire, so that to avoid him he went to Ravenna, and with a small
handful of men he shut himself up in that place: and seeing that he must needs
be delivered up, he resolved to prevent that, and both rendered himself, and
gave back the Imperial Purple to him, from whom he had received it: but all
that he could obtain by this Submission, was a Gentle Death; for order was
given to cut his Veins, so that he died easily. Thus did Maximian persecute
those that were raised up by himself.

XXVII. But Maximian the elder knew well the Madness of Maximian the younger:
and did not doubt but that as soon as the news of Severus his Death should be
brought him, he would upon the heat of Anger, into which that might throw him,
march immediately with his Army, and would perhaps bring along with him
Maximins Forces; and he knew well that he was not strong enough to resist so
great an Army, therefore he fortified Rome, and having settled matters in the
best method that he could, he marched into Gaul, that so he might engage
Constantine into his Interests, by offering him his younger Daughter in
Marriage. But the other Maximian having gathered together his Troops, marched
into Italy, and came to Rome, resolving to extirpate the Inhabitants, and in
particular to destroy all the Senators: but he found all shut against him, and
well fortisied: There was no hope of carrying it by a Surprise, and it was a
very hard thing to besiege it, nor had he Men enough for the Siege: for he had
never before seen Rome, nor knew how great it was; but had fancied that it was
no greater than those other Cities which he had seen. Some of the Legions began
to have a Horror at the unnatural War, in which the Father in-Law was fighting
against his Son-in-Law, and the Roman Soldiers were fighting against the City
of Rome; upon which they carried their Colors with them, and deserted, and
many others were staggering, so that fearing Severus's Fate, he was so sunk
with the Fright into which this threw him, that casting himself at the
Soldiers feet, he begged that they would not deliver him up to his Ennemy: and
what with his Submissions, and what with the great Promises that he made them,
he prevailed over them to continue true to him; but he would not venture more
with such Troops: so he marched away in all haste, and in such great
Consternation, that if he had been pursued by ever so small a Body, it had been
an easy thing to have defeated him quite, whereof being apprehensive, he sent
out his Army in Parties on all hands, with Orders to Plunder and Destroy the
whole Country, that it might not be possible for an Army that might pursue him
to find whereupon to subsist; so that all that Part of Italy, through which this
destroying Army had marched, was quite ruined; all was spoiled, Women were
Forced, Virgins were Ravished, and all men were tortured, that they might
discover where their Wives, their Daughters or their Treasures were concealed;
and the Flocks of Sheep and Herds of Cattle were driven before them, as they
used to do the Spoils that they took from the Barbarians; and thus he, who
instead of being the Roman Emperor, was now become the Plunderer of Italy,
retired back into his own Division, after he had in this Hostile manner
destroyed the whole Country. He had indeed long before this, at the time of
his receiving the Empire, declared himself such an Enemy to the very name of a
Roman, that he once intended to have changed the very Designation of the
Empire, so that instead of the Roman, it should have been called the Dacian
Empire.

XXVIII. After that he had left Italy in this manner, the other Maximian
returned out of Gaul, and he and his Son were Masters of that part of the
Empire, but the Son was much more considered than the Father, both because he
had given the first rise to this Revolution, and that he had invited his Father
to his share in it. The Old Man grew uneasy when he saw that he was not in all
points the Master, and by an Emulation unworthy of a Man, he envied his Son
that respect which he saw was paid him. This went so far with him, that he
resolved to drive away his Son, that so he might reign alone; this he thought
would be easily effected, and that the Soldiers, who had abandoned Severus,
would stick firmly to him. Upon which he called together an Assembly of the
People, and the Soldiery, as if he had some matter of great Consequence to be
communicated to them. He harangued to them long upon the Miseries that lay on
the Commonwealth, and at last he pointed out to his Son, and said, he was the
Cause of all those Miseries, and the Chief Occasion of all the Calamities that
lay upon the Commonwealth: and thereupon he tore the Imperial Purple from him.
He being thus stripped of that badge of Dignity, leapt down from the bench on
which the Emperor sat, and was well received by the Soldiers, who expressed
upon this Occasion so much Anger and Fury, that the Old Man being asfrighted at
it, fell into great Disorder, and was driven out of Rome almost as
ignominiously as Tarquin the proud had been.

XXIX. He retired first to Gaul, and after that he had staid there for some
time, he went to the other Maximian, knowing him to be his Sons Inveterate
Enemy: he pretended that he went to concert with him some things relating to
the State of the Commonwealth; but his true Design was, that he might under
this pretense of Reconciliation, seek an Occasion to Murder him, and so possess
himself of his share of the Empire, since he was now thrust out of his own.
Diocles was then with the other Maximian, for he had been sent for by him, that
so his presence might give some more Authority to his installing of Licinius in
Severus's stead. So that both the Old Emperors happned to be present on that
occasion: and now there were all at once six Emperors. But Maximian the elder
finding that there was a Distraction in the Councils, and that he could not
compass his Designs, fled again for the third time; and withdrew into Gaul,
with new Projects no less wicked than the former had been: for tho both
Constantine and his Father Constance had married two of his Daughters, yet he
laid a design against his Life, and in order to his effecting it, he laid aside
his Imperial Habit. The Franks were then in Arms, so that Constantine was
obliged to march against them. But his Father-in-Law persuaded him, who as yet
was in no distrust of him, that it was not necessary to carry his whole Army
with him: and that a small Body would be sufficient for defeating those
Barbarians; that as he might have the Army that was left behind in his own
Power, so Constantine having so few Troops with him, might be Infallibly
overwhelmed by the Franks. He was easily wrought on by his Father-in-Law,
whose long Experience gave great Authority to his Advices. So after that some
days were past, and that Maximian believed his Son-in-Law was now engaged
among the Barbarians, he again assumed the Purple, brake in upon the public
Treasure, and as he was wont to do, he distributed a large Donative among the
Soldiers; and gave out false Reports concerning Constantine: but all this was
quickly turned upon him: for Constantine was soon advertised of all that had
past, and came back with almost Incredible Diligence, so that Maximian had not
time enough to settle himself in his new Usurpation, but was surprised, and was
also abandoned by the Soldiery; upon which he fled to Marseilles, and shut
himself up within it. Constantine did quickly Invest that place; and having
demanded a personal Conference with him from the Walls, he neither reproached
nor threatened him, but only asked him, what he himself had done, and what was
in Maximians mind, that had pushed him on to act so Indecently as he had done?
The other answered him very scurrilously: but those about him set open the
gates to Constantines Soldiers: so this rebellious Emperor and treacherous
Father-in-Law, was now in Constantines power; who satisfied himself with laying
his Crimes before him, and so chiding him for them, he stripped him of his
Imperial Purple; but carried his resentments no further; and left him both his
Life and Liberty.

XXX. But Maximian having lost both the Dignity of an Emperor, and the Regard
that was paid to him as a Father-in-Law, and not being able to bear this
Lowness of Fortune, fell to contrive new Plots: and such ill use made he of
Constantine's forgiving him, that he set on his Daughter Fausta, soliciting
her, what with Caresses, and what with Entreaties, to contrive her Husbands
Ruin, and promised her a better Husband when that should be once done; so he
besought her to leave their Bedchamber Door sometimes open, she undertook to
do all that he begged of her, but revealed all to her Husband: Thus a train was
laid for discovering his Treasons, in an undeniable manner; there was an Eunuch
put in Constantines place, to suffer what was projected against him. Maximian
rose in the dead silence of the Night; and all things seemed favorable to him:
he saw some few Guards, that were at some distance from the Bedchamber; he
told them, that he was going to give his Son-in-Law an account of a strange
Dream that he had dreamt. So he went in Armed, and having killed the Eunuch,
and fancying that he had executed his project, he came out boasting of what he
had done. But he was not a little confounded when he saw Constantine coming
toward him with some Soldiers about him. The dead body of the Eunuch was
drawn out, so that he was manifestly convicted of the Murder: and he was so
confounded with this Discovery of his Treachery, that he was, as it were struck
dead with it, nor had he any sort of Excuse or Defense ready. The choice of the
manner of his Death was left to him, and he made choice of Hanging. Thus this
great Emperor, that in the long course of 20 Years Reign, had governed the
Roman Empire with so much Glory, was now forced to this most Ignominious End of
his Execrable Life.

XXXI. The Judgments of that God, who is the Avenger of his Truth and of his
People, were in the next place no less visible upon the other Maximian, that
had been indeed the chief Contriver of this Persecution. He was now thinking to
celebrate the Festivals of the Twentieth Year of his Reign, and tho he had
promised that upon that occasion he would restore some of those severe
Exactions by which he had ruined so many of the Provinces; yet now instead of
performing it, he made use of this Solemnity to lay new Taxes upon them. It is
not easy to set forth the Severity of these Impositions that he raised upon
this occasion, chiefly of those which were laid on the Corn. There were
Soldiers, or rather Hangmen, that waited on all the Taxmasters: and men did
not know whither to turn them. The Officers came with their unreasonable
Demands, and those who had not wherewith to satisfy them, were subjected to
great Variety of Tortures from which they had no way to save themselves, but by
doing that which was impossible for them: Men were beset with such numbers of
Soldiers, that they could hardly breath for them: there was little or no
cessation in the Trouble to which they were put all the year round; the very
Judges and the Soldiers that attended upon them, fell into many Quarrels
amongst themselves: there was not a Barn nor a Vineyard that was not severely
visited; nor indeed was there enough left to preserve men alive. But tho this
may seem a very Intolerable thing thus to snatch out of men's Mouths that Bread
which they had earned by their Labor, yet all this was softened by the hopes
that were given of what the Emperor was to do in his twentieth year. It was
expected that men should appear in rich Clothes, and bring much Gold and Silver
along with them, but it was not possible to provide this, except by the sale of
the product of the Ground; and when this mad Tyrant destroyed all that, so that
all men were ruined in order to the raising of that Treasure, which was
designed to be laid out when the twentieth year should come; yet the Emperor
lived not long enough for that.

XXXII. When Licinius was declared Emperor, Maximin resented it extremely, and
would neither be contented any longer with the Title of Caesar, nor allow
Licinius the Precedence: Upon this Maximian sent many Messengers to him, to
induce him to submit to the Order that he had settled; and to pay the Respect
that was due to Licinius's Age, and to his Gray Hairs. But Maximin stood upon
his terms, and very boldly said, that he to whom the Purple had been first
given, ought always to be considered as the Ancienter Emperor: and so he
would neither yield to Maximians Entreaties, nor to his Commands. The Tyrant
was extremely troubled at this, and in his brutal way he complained of Maximins
Ingratitude, whom he had raised from so mean a state to so great a Dignity; of
which the other was now so unmindful as to reject all his Orders, and his most
earnest Desires. But when he saw that nothing could prevail on him, he resolved
to put an end to this second rank of Dignity, and so to extinguish the Title of
Caesar; therefore as he declared himself and Licinius the Emperors, so he
declared Maxentius and Constantine the Sons of the Emperors, (by which Maximin
was quite shut out.) But he not daunted with this, writ to him that upon the
last occasion of a great Assembly that met in the Field of Mars, he had been
saluted Emperor by the Army. Maximian received this with great Regret, but yet
upon it he declared all the four Emperors.

XXXIII. In the eighteenth year of his Reign, he was visited by God with an
Incurable Stroke: An Ulcer bred in his Secret Parts, which daily grew and
spread. The Physicians used both Incisians, and other Medecines; but tho they
brought it to a Cicatrice, and seemed to have healed it, yet it festred, and
broke out again, and the Humor did so corrode the Vessels, that a Vein burst,
upon which he lost so much Blood, that it had almost cost him his Life; for it
was very hard to stop it. A new Cure was carried on with that success, that the
Wound was again brought to a Cicatrice. But upon a little shaking of his Body,
the Vein broke again, and he lost at this second time more Blood than he had
done at first. He became pale, sunk, and wasted to nothing. So that the Low
estate of his Body made that he lost no more Blood. But now his Wound became
more dangerous, outward Applications had no effect any more upon it: The Cancer
spread it self still further, and the more it was cut, it seemed to grow so
much the faster; all the most famous Physicians that were every where searched
for, began to lose hopes. And while all humane means became ineffectual,
recourse was bad to their False Gods, and Prayers were made for his Recovery to
Apollo and Esculapius. And some relief was pretended to have come from Apollo.
But he grew still worse and worse. His Death seemed very near, for the Cancer
had consumed all the bottom of his Belly; his Guts were laid open, and were
likewise rotting, and his whole Breech was overrun with the Putrefaction; some
bold, but unhappy Physicians would not for all this give over, and tho they had
no hope of success, yet they were still trying new Remedies. Those drove the
Evil inwards, even through his Bones to the very Marrow, and now Worms began to
breed within him. The Smell that came from him was so noisome, that it was felt
not only over all the Palace, but in the very City likewise; and the Passages
of his Urin and Excrements were now mixed, all the Membranes being corroded
that separated them. He was eat up by Vermin, and the whole Mass of his Body
turned into an universal Rottenness. With all this, he had most intolerable
Pains, so that he often bellowed out, as if it had been a Bull wounded. Some
living Animals, and others that were boild, were applied to the putrified
parts, to try if the heat would draw out the Vermin: and this indeed opened as
it were a vast Hive of them: yet a second Imposthumation discovered yet a much
greater Swarm, so that his Gutts seemed to dissolve all into Worms. A Hydropsy
joined to all his other ills, did strangely disfigure his Body: all his upper
parts were exhausted quite, and dried like a mere Skeleton, covered with a
Dead-like Skin: but at the same time all his Lower Parts were swelled up like
Bladders, so that the Shape of his Feet was scarce to be seen any more. In all
this Misery did he languish a full year. His Conscience was at last awakned,
and he was forced to give praise to God: so that in the Intervals of his pains,
he cried often out, that he would rebuild the Church of Nicomedia, and that he
would repair the Mischiefs that he had done: and being in his last Agonies, he
published this following Edict.

XXXIV. Vide Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 1.
Among our other Cares, for the Profit and Advantage of the Commonwealth, one
was to reduce all people to observe the Ancient Laws, and the Puplick
Discipline of the Romans; and in particular to oblige the Christians, who had
forsaken the Religion of their Fathers, to return to a better Mind: Having
observed, that they, by what Reasons so ever moved to it, had been guilty of
the Wilfulness, and even Madness of forsaking the Ancient Institutions of the
first Christians: and that according to their different humors and Fancies,
they were framing new Laws, by which they might govern themselves, and were
falling into Divisions, and forming many separated Assemblies: upon this, we
gave out our Edicts, obliging them to return back to their first Institutions;
which had great Effects on many; but while great numbers continued still firm
to their Rules, and as on the one hand they did not offer that Worship, and
that Devotion to the Gods that is due, so on the other hand they did not adore
the God of the Christians. We therefore having regard to all these things, and
being moved by our Princely Compassion and our constant Custom of Gentleness
toward all men, have thought fit to extend this our Grace and Pity even
toward the Christians: and therefore we do not only suffer them to continue in
their Religion, but suffer them to hold Assemblies for their Worship; provided
always that they do nothing contrary to the Established Discipline. By another
Ordinance we will signify our pleasure to our Judges, for their Direction. In
the mean while we expect that the Christians, in return to this our Clemency,
shall pray to God for our Health, and for the continuance of the Prosperity of
the Commonwealth; and so they may still hope to enjoy our Protection in their
respective Dwellings.

XXXV. This Edict was published at Nicomedia, the last of April in Maximian's
Eighth Consulate, and Maximin's Third. Then when the Prison Doors were set
open, were you, My Dear Donatus, with the other Prisoners set at Liberty, after
you had been for the space of six years shut up. Yet all this did not turn away
the Judgments of God from Maximian: His Putrefaction went on still, till it had
quite wasted his whole Substance; so that not many days after the Publication
of this Edict, he breathed out his last, having recommended his Wife and his
Son to Licinius, and having put them into his Hands. This came to be known in
Nicomedia before the end of May, so that he did not attain to his twentieth
year of Empire, which was not to begin before the first of March following.

XXXVI. As soon as ever Maximin had heard the News of his Death, he being then
in the East, made all the have that was possible to take into his possession
all those Provinces: and as Licinius lingered, he possessed himself of all to
the Straits of Thrace: and when he came into Bithinia, he took care to
recommend himself to the Favor of the People, by discharging them of the Tax
that was laid on them. By this means the two Emperors were now in ill Terms,
and almost engaged in a War: For they lay with their Armies on the opposite
shores. But expedients were found out for the making up of all their
Differences; and they had an Enterview upon the Sea, in which they were not
only reconciled, but they entered into an Alliance: Maximin went back, reckoning
that he was now secure, and so he governed Syria and Egypt just as he had done
formerly: and tho the Christians were now received under the Protection of the
Government, yet he broke all this, and he set on underhand the Procuring
Addresses from the several Cities to be made to him, for hindering the
Christians to build Meeting Houses within their Bounds; that he might seem to
be in some sort forced to do that which he had resolved on of his own Accord.
So having granted the Demand of those Addresses, he made the Chief of the
Priests in the several Cities out of those who were of the Government of the
City, which had not been practiced in any former time, and he ordered them to
offer every day Sacrifices to all the Gods, and to call in the Assistance of
all the Ancient Priests, for looking after the Christians, that they might
neither have Public Meeting Houses, nor assemble themselves in Secret for
their Worship: and required them that they should seize on them wherever they
could find them, and either force them to offer Sacrifice, or deliver them to
the Magistrates. And not contented with this Subordination that he had settled
among the Priests, he ordered one in every Province to be over all the Priests
of the Province; and as he raised them up to this high degree of Authority, so
for adding some Splendour to it, he ordered them to wear that sort of white
Habits edged about with Gold, which might only be worn by the Chief Officers of
the Court. He was resolved to put the same things in execution against the
Christians in the other Provinces, which he had already done in the East. For
that he might seem merciful toward them, he would not suffer them to be put to
Death, but he ordered many other Punishments against them, such as the Picking
out their Eyes, the Cutting off their Hands or Feet, and the Cutting off their
Noses or their Ears.

XXXVII. While he was designing all these things, he received Letters from
Constantine, which put him in such a fright, that he resolved to dissemble for
some time. Yet whenever any Christian was found out, he was drowned secretly
and in the Night; nor did he discontinue his Custom of offering Sacrifices
every day in the Palace. He also began another Custom, of ordering all the Meat
that was to be served up to his Table, to be offered up first by the Priests at
some Altar, and not to be killed by his own Cooks; so that nothing was
presented to his Table, but that which had passed through some Rites or other of
their Idolatry; by which means it was that none could eat with him, without
being in some manner or other polluted with those Abominations. In all other
things he followed the pattern that his Master had set him: For if there was
any thing left by Diocletians or Maximians Oppressions, he took care to raise
all that so exactly, as to be sure to leave nothing to any that should come
after him: so that without any sort of shame, he robbed the People of all they
had: He shut up all men's Granaries and Storehouses, and forced them to pay by
an Advance the Taxes of the year to come. So that there not being seed to sow
the Ground, this brought on a most intolerable Famine. Whole Droves of Cattle
and Sheep were brought for his daily Sacrifices, with which he fed his
Domestics and his Soldiers so copiously, that they came to despise the Corn,
that was brought them for their Provision, so that without any Care they threw
it often out of Doors. And as he had a vast Army, so he clothed his Guards very
richly, and furnished them with much Gold, and the commonest and rawest of his
Soldiers had Silver in abundance given them. He was also extreme liberal to
the Barbarians. All the Praise that is due to him is, that he was like those
merciful Robbers, who are contented to strip men without killing them; for if
he did not put People to Death, that so he might seize on their Estates, yet
upon every occasion he either took away all they had, or gave it to such as
begged it of him.

XXXVIII. But there was one Monstrous Wickedness, that exceeded all the rest,
which he carried to such a blind and brutal degree, that one cannot find Words
equal to it, for the Indignation which this must give, carries ones Thoughts
further than his Tongue will serve him, to set it forth as it ought to be.

His Eunuchs, and the other Instruments of his Appetites, searched in all
Places, and wheresoever they found a beautiful Woman, she was dragged away
without any regard had of her Husband or her Parents: Those whom he Employed in
this Service, stripped both married Women and Maids, and so viewed them naked,
and if any refused to submit to this, she was drowned as guilty of High
Treason. Several married Men, whose Wives were thus violently taken from them,
not being able to bear the Grief which this gave them, murdered themselves: and
under this Monster, there was no other Security for Modesty, but Ugliness. At
last he carried this Licentiousness to such a pitch, that no Body was suffered
to marry without his leave, and without his taking all Liberties with the
Bride, before the Bridegroom was admitted. He took the Daughters of the Men of
Quality, and after he himself had corrupted them, he gave them to his Slaves to
marry them. His Courtiers were easily induced to follow his wicked Example, and
to defile the Beds of such as depended on them: for they saw that no Body durst
punish it. Those who were of ordinary rank, were ravished by every body at his
Pleasure; and such as were of the Chief rank, and so could not be ravished,
were begged of the Emperor as Boons, and when he signed any such grant, the
Father durst not refuse it, but saw that he must either die, or accept of some
Barbarian for his Son-in-Law. For he had scarce any other Domestics or Guards,
but such as had been driven out of their Countries by the Goths in the twentieth
year of Diocletians Reign, during that Festivity. All these came and delivered
themselves up to Maximian, and so he made use of those who had fled from being
enslaved by the Goths, as his Instruments for enslaving the Romans. Maximin
being environed with such Guards, and depending so entirely upon them as he
did, treated all the rest of the East with the utmost degree of Contempt.

XXXIX He made this the measure of his Appetites, to esteem every thing lawful
to which his Desires carried him; And according to this Rule, tho he had
acknowledged the Empress Valeria, that was Maximians Widow, his adopted
Mother, yet that did not secure her; she had come to live in his Court,
reckoning that she would be safer there than in any other place, since he had a
Wife of his own. But nothing was Sacred to him, when he was pushed on by his
impure Appetites; she was yet in deep mourning, the year not being out, when he
proposed Marriage to her, offering to divorce his Wife, if she would accept of
him. Her answer was such as could have been expected from her; that she could
not treat of her Marriage, while she was yet in her Mournings, and while the
Ashes of her Husband, his adopted Father, were not yet quite cold. She added,
that it was a strange piece of Impiety in him, to offer to put away his Wife,
who had been always faithful to him: which let her see what she herself might
look for from him; and in the last place, it seemed to her no small Crime, as
it was a thing without an Example, for a Woman of her rank to think of a second
Husband. All this was reported to Maximin in her name: But he was so enraged at
it, that his brutal Desires were now changed into Wrath and Fury. He presently
put her under a Proscription, he seized on her goods, he took her Servants from
her, and tortured some of her Eunuchs to Death; and sent her and her Mother
into Banishment; but not to any certain place: but ordered her to be hurried
about from place to place: and he charged such Women as were dearest to her,
with Adultery, and upon that forged pretense he condemned them.

XL. There was an Ancient Woman of Quality, whom Valeria had always considered
as a Mother, and Maximin believed that the refusal that was made of him, was
advised by her; so he ordered Eratineus the President to put her to an Infamous
Death; with her he ordered two other Women of the same Quality to be likewise
executed. The one was Mother to one of the Vestal Virgins of Rome, the other
was the Widow of a Senator and was the Empresses Kinswoman: but both their
Crime was, that as they were Beautiful, so they were no less modest. They were
violently seized on, not as if they had been to be carried before a Court of
Justice, but as if they had fallen into the hands of Robbers, yet there was no
Accuser to lay any thing to their Charge. But a Jew was found out, who being
condemned for some other Crimes, hoped to obtain his pardon by becoming a false
Witness against them. The Judge who condemned them upon this Evidence, carried
them out of Town to their Execution with a Guard; for he was afraid that he
should have been stoned by the people, This Tragedy was acted at Nice. The few
being put to the Torture, was forced to accuse the Women as he had been
instructed: and when they offered to say any thing for themselves, they were
beaten by the Tormenters; so that notwithstanding their Innocence, they were
condemned. There was a great Lamentation raised upon this, not only by the
Husband of one of them, to whom his Wife was extreme dear, but by all the
Multitude, that so unusual a Spectacle had brought together: and so
apprehensive were the Judges of the Peoples using force for rescuing those
Persons out of their Hands, that there was drawn about them a Body of Archers,
and others of the lightly armed Soldiers: and with this Guard were they led
out to Execution. Nor was there any care taken of their Burial, for their
Servants were forced to abandon them; yet some of their Friends, moved with
Compassion, came secretly and buried them. The Adulterous Jew had not the
Pardon that was promised him, so seeing that he was to be hanged, he discovered
all this Mystery, and with his last breath he declared to all that were looking
on, that the Women had suffered Unjustly.

XLI. The Empress being now banished to the Deserts of Syria, found a secret
Way of acquainting her Father Diocletian with her Condition. He upon that sent
to Maximin, and desired that his Daughter might be sent to him; but tho he
repeated this over and over again, all was without effect: So after all, he
sent a Kinsman of his own, that was an Officer of the Army, in a high Post, and
in great Credit, to whom he gave in charge, to put Maximin in Mind of the
Obligations that he had received from him: but this Intercession was as
ineffectual as the others had formerly been.

XLII. At this time Constantine gave Order that the Statues of Maximian the
Elder, should be every where pulled down; and that such Pictures or Figures of
him, as had been any where set up, should be removed. Now Diocletians Statues
and His being always coupled together, the Disgrace of the one drew the others
likewise after it. Diocletian seeing this Affront put on his Statues, which no
Emperor before him had ever seen done in his own time, and being now
overcharged with this redoubling of Grief, he resolved to put an end to his
Life. He was in a perpetual Uneasiness, and could neither eat nor sleep. He was
heard to sigh and groan continually, and was seen often to weep; and to be
tumbling sometimes on his Bed, and sometimes on the Ground. Thus he that had
reigned over the Roman Empire for twenty years, was now so cast down and
mortified, that he dyed partly of Hunger, and partly through Anguish of Spirit.

XLIII. There was only one of the Enemies of God now left alive, namely
Maximin, whose Fall and Death comes to be related in the next place. He bare a
great Envy to Licinius ever since he had been preferred by Maximian to himself;
and tho he had lately entered into an Alliance with him, yet when he heard that
Licinius was engaging himself into a straiter Alliance with Constantine, and
was going to marry his Sister, he concluded that this Union of those two
Emperors, must certainly be fatal to himself; So he sent secretly to Rome, and
writ very kindly to Maxentius, desiring his Alliance and Friendship, which
Maxentius embraced very readily, as if it had been somewhat sent him from
Heaven; for he had declared War against Constantine, upon the pretense of
Revenging his Fathers Blood. From this some have imagined, that the Father had
only pretended to fall out with his Son, that he might have the more Credit
with the other Emperors; and by that means find an occasion of Destroying them
all; that so He and his Son might have the whole Empire between them: but this
is a Mistake; for it is certain, that Maximian the Elder had a mind to destroy
his Son with the rest, and that when this was done, he intended that Diocletian
and he should again reassume the Empire.

XLIV. Now the War was begun between Maxentius and Constantine, which Maxentius
managed by his Generals, but would not stir out of Rome himself; having had a
Response, that whenever he went out of the Gates of Rome, he should perish.
He had much the better Army: for he had not only those Troops that had
abandoned Severus, but likewise others that he had brought together out of
Manritania and Italy. The two Armies fought, and Maxentius's had the better;
yet Constantine did not for that lose Heart, but having resolved to put all to
hazard, he marched on to the Gates of Rome, and posted his Army at the other
side of the Milvian Bridge: the 27th of October was now near, which was the
Anniversary of Maxentius's coming to the Empire: and now his fifth year was
almost out. Constantine was warned in a Dream to put the Divine Mark, the Sign
of the Cross, upon the Shields of his Soldiers, and so to give Battle; he took
care to execute this, and ordered the Letter X with the Letters of the Name of
Christ mixed in a Monogramme, to be drawn on all their Shields; and having made
this his Distinction, he drew out his Army. The Enemy's Forces came likewise
out, and crossed the Bridge, but Maxentius himself came not with them; they
drew up both in the same manner, and both sides fought with great Courage,
neither of them giving Ground to the other; in the mean while there was a
Sedition raised in Rome, and an Outcry was made against Maxentius, as if he
had taken more care of himself than of the Public; and while he was
entertaining the People with the Spectacles of the Hippodrome, there was a
Universal Cry raised, that Constantine could not be withstood; this put him
into a great Disorder, so he made the Sybilline Books to be searched, in which
it was found, that the Enemy of the Romans was to perish that Day. This gave
him such assured hopes of Victory, that he marched out in Person to his Army:
as soon as he had passed the Bridge, it was broke behind him. Upon this the
Battle was renewed, and the Hand of God appeared over the Armies. Maxentius was
beat, and when he thought to repass the Bridge, he found it broke, and was
carried by the crowd of his men, that were flying, into the Tiber, and so was
drowned there. An end being thus put to the War, Constantine was declared
Emperor, with great Expression of Joy, both by the Senate and People of Rome.
Among Maxentius's Papers he found Maximins Letters, by which he discovered his
treacherous Designs against himself: He also saw the Imperial Statues that he
had sent to Maxentius. The Senate did Constantine the Honor to order his Name
to be put first in order, before the other Emperors* tho that was claimed by
Maximin, who was as much struck with the news that was brought to him of Romes
being thus freed from Tyranny, as if it had been a Defeat given himself; and as
soon as he heard of the Senates Decree, giving Constantine the Precedence, he
treated Constantine in a most reproachful and insolent manner.

XLV. Constantine having settled matters at Rome, went during the Winter to
Millan: and thither did Licinius come to marry his Sister. Maximin hearing that
they were now amused with the Solemnities of this Wedding, marched with his Army
out of Syria during the bitter Cold of the Winter; and having harassed his Army
with great Marches, he got to Bithinia: for the Season was very severe, and
both by Snow and Rains the Ways were very deep; and what with Cold and what
with hard Labor, he lost all his Horse, so that all along where he had
marched, he might have been traced by them; which was but an ill Omen to his
Men: Nor did he stop within his own Limits, but having crossed the Straits of
Thrace, he came with his Army to the Gates of Bysance. There was a Garrison put
within that Place by Licinius for all Events; so he shudied first to corrupt
the Soldiers by Presents and Promises, and then to terrify them by threatening
them with a Siege; but both the one and the other proved equally ineffectual:
they had eleven days assigned them, for advertising the Emperor, and having no
return from him, they being disheartened by the smallness of their Numbers,
rendered themselves. From thence he advanced to Heraclea; and being stopped there
in the same manner as at Bysance, he lost some days there likewise. But by this
time Licinius having marched as quick as was possible, had got to Adrianople
with a few men about him; in the meanwhile Maximin having likewise taken
Perinthus, which gave him a new stop, he advanced 18 Miles beyond it, where he
posted himself: he could go no further; for Licinius had possessed himself of
the Post that lay next to that, which was likewise eighteen mile distant from
it; and having drawn together as great a Body as he could on the sudden, he
marched on toward Maximin, on design rather to hinder his Progress, than to
enter into action; for as he did not intend to fight, so he had no Prospect of
Victory; for he had not above 30000. men: whereas Maximin was at the Head of an
Army of 70000: for Licinius's Army was scattered over a great many Provinces,
and he could not bring all his Troops together in so short a time.

XLVI. While the two Armies were thus so near one another, that it was expected
that the matter should come to a speedy Decision, Maximin made a Vow to
Jupiter, That if he got the Victory, he would utterly extinguish the very Name
of a Christian. The next night an Angel appeared to Licinius in his sleep, and
ordered him to rise immediately, and join with his whole Army in calling on the
Great God, and promised him an assured Victory in case he should do this.
Licinius dreamt, that after this he rose, and that the Angel dictated to him
the very Words in which he should osser up his Prayers. And as soon as he was
awake, he called for one of his Secretaries, and ordered him to write down the
Words, which were these, We pray to thee, O Great God; we pray to thee, O Holy
God; we commit the Justice of our Cause to thee; we commit our Lives to thee;
we commit this our Empire to thee. It is by thee that we do live; our Conquests
and our Happiness come from thee: O thou great and good God, hear our Prayers;
we stretch out our hands to thee: hear us therefore thou Holy and Great God*
Many Copies were quickly made of this Prayer, which were sent about to all the
Ossicers, and all were required to make their Soldiers get it by heart. This
raised the Courage of the whole Army, who now looked on the Victory as assured,
since it was so Divinely fore* told. Maximin resolved to give Battle on the
first of May, which was the Anniversary of his coming to the Empire, this being
now the eighth year complete since he was raised to that Dignity: and thus it
happened, that as Maxentius was defeated at Rome on his Anniversary, so Maximin
run the same Fortune on his; only Maximin would needs anticipate his own Ruin;
for he would needs sight the Day before it, that so he might celebrate his
Anniversary with the more Pomp, when he had defeated his Enemy. When Licinius
heard that Maximin's Army was advancing, he likewise drew out his, so that they
were in view one of another. There lay between them a great and barren Plain,
called Serenum. Licinius's men laid down their Shields, and took off their Head
pieces, and with hands lifted up to Heaven, they said their Prayer, the
Emperor himself beginning, and the Officers and Soldiers following him in it;
which was pronounced so loud, that the other Army that was to fall before them,
heard the noise of it. The Prayer was three times repeated, and that being
done, the Soldiers being now wonderfully animated, put on their Headpieces,
and took up their Shields. The Emperors themselves parlyed a little; Maximin
would hearken to no Propositions of Peace; for he despised Licinius, and
fancied that all his Soldiers would have deserted him, because he was more
sparing in his Bounty to them; whereas Maximin was extremely prosuse; and as he
had begun with Licinius, not doubting but that his Army would without giving
any stroke come over to him, so when he had thus doubled his Forces, he
resolved to go against Constantine.

XLVII. The two Armies drew at last so near one another, that the Signals were
given, and the Ensigns on both sides advanced; Licinius's men gave the Charge
with great Vigor; but the others were so disordered and terrified, that they
could neither draw their Swords nor throw their Darts: Maximin run about on all
hands, persuading Licinius's Men to turn over to him, what with Presents, what
by Intereaties; but all was to no effect; and being charged in person, he was
forced to retire. His Army fell before the Enemy without being able to make any
Resistance; and that vast body of men was mowed down by a handful. They seemed
to have forgot their Rank, their Courage, and their former Exploits; and the
hand of God was visible in delivering them over to have their Throats cut by
their Enemies, as if they had come into the Field for an Execution, and not for
a Battle. When Maximin saw that the matter went far otherwise than he had looked
for, and that great numbers of his men were killed, he threw away his Purple,
and put on the Habit of a Slave, and so crossed the Straits; for now the one
half of his Army was destroyed, and the other half either fled or rendered it
self. And since the Emperor had deserted his Army, the Soldiers were not at
all ashamed of deserting his Interests: he made great have; for in a Night and
a Day he sled to Nicomedia; and got thither the first of May in the Night,
which was an hundred and theerscore Miles distance from the place where the
Battle was fought: he stayed not long there, but having taken along with him
his Sons and his Wife, and some few of his Domestics, he went to the East; yet
he stopped in Cappadosia, and there he took the Purple again, having gathered
together some Soldiers partly of his own Straglers, and partly of some Troops
that came to him from the East.

XLVIII. Licinius, after he had distributed a part of his Army into Quarters,
crossed the Straits, and went over to Bithinia with the rest. When he entered
into Nicomedia, he offered up his Thanksgivings to God, by whose Aid he had
obtained the Victory: and on the thirteenth of June, Constantine and he being
now in their third Consulate, the following Edist was sent to the President.

Whereas both I Constantine the Emperor, and I Licinius the Emperor, had a
very succesful congress at Millan, in which we treated of all things that
related to the profit and safety of the Public; among other matters we thought
that nothing could be of greater Advantage to our People, or concern our selves
more, than the settling of those matters, in which the Worship of the Deity
consisted; and therefore we judged it meet to allow to all Christians and
others, free Liberty to follow that Religion which they should like best: that
by this means that Supreme Deity, which dwells on high, might be gracious and
favorable to us, and to all our Subjects: therefore upon due Deliberation and
weighty Reasons, we have thought sit, that no man may be denied the Liberty of
Professing either the Christian Religion, or any other, as he shall judge it
best; that so the Great God, whom we worship with free minds, may in all things
bless us with his gracious Favor and Protection. Therefore we will have you to
know, that we have thought fit to annull all those Restrictions, that might
seem to be in our former Edict addressed to you, relating to the Christians:
and we do now ordain, that every one that is disposed to adhere to that
Religion, shall be suffered to continue in it with all Freedom, and without any
Disquiet or Molestation: and we have explained this the more copiously to you,
that so you might understand that we have given a free and absolute Liberty to
the said Christians to profess their Religion. And since we have allowed this
Liberty to them, you will likewise understand, that we allow the like free and
full Liberty to all those who profess any other Religion; that so according to
the quiet to which we have brought the Empire, every man may enjoy the free
Exercise or that Religion of which he shall make choice* for we will do nothing
by which any man may suffer any prejudice either in his Honor, or upon the
account of his Religion. With Relation to the Christians, we have thought it
sit likewise to add this particular; that the Places in which they used to hold
their Assemblies, and concerning which there were some Rules set in a former
Edict addressed to you, that have been purchased either from our Exchequer, or
from some particular persons, shall be restored to them, without any Excuses or
Delays; and without either Asking or taking of any Money from them upon that
account. We order likewise Restitution to be made by all that have obtained
Grants of them; and that all such as may have either purchased them, or
obtained Grants of them, shall in order to their being repaired by us for their
loss, go to some Magistrate, that so we, according to our Clemency, may relieve
them. In the mean while, we order you to take care, that without any further
Delay, Restitution be made to the Christians. And whereas the Christians had
besides those Places in which they used to hold their Assemblies, others
likewise that belonged to them as a Body corporate; that is to say, to their
Churches in common, and not to any particular persons among them; we comprehend
all these under the same Law; and order them also to be restored to the
Corporations or Assemblies of the Christians, and that without any Fraud or
Dispute, upon the forementioned Terms; that those who restore them freely, may
hope to be recompensed by us according to our Bounty. In all which matters you
are required to give your most effectual Assistance to the Bodies Corporate of
the Christians, that so our Pleasure may be the more speedly executed; and by
which we shall the more effectually secure the public Peace. And we will be
hereby assured, that the Divine Favor, of which we have had hitherto such
Proofs, shall always watch over us, and that we our selves shall be always
succesful, as well as the public happy. And that the Tenor of this our
Gracious Edict may be universally known, we order you to affix attested Copies
of it in all places, that so no man may pretend Ignorance. When the Edict was
published, Licinius did likewise by Word of Mouth entreat all persons, to see
the Meeting Houses of the Christians restored again to them: and thus from the
first beginning of the Persecution, and from the Destruction of the Church of
Nicomedia, to the Rebuilding of it, there were ten years and about four Months.

XLIX. But while Licinius was pursuing after Maximin, he still sled before him,
and possessed himself of the narrow passages of Mount Taurus, where he built
Forts to stop them up, that so it might not be possible for Licinius to pass
them; but he took a compass to the right hand: and when Maximin saw that there
was now nothing to stop him, he fled to Tarsus; but being like to be shut up
there, both by Sea and Land, and seeing no possibility of escape, the Anguish
of his Spirit and his Fear, made him fly to Death, as the only way to escape
from those Evils with which God was pursuing him. He first eat and drunk to a
great excess, as is ordinary for those to do who reckon that it is their last
meal that they eat, and then he took Poison; but his Stomach being so
overcharged, made that the Poison had not a present operation on him; but
instead of killing him outright, it threw him into a lingering Torment, not
unlike the Plague; by which his Life was so far lengthned out to him, that he
felt his Misery long: The Poison began now to work violently on him, it burned
his Vitals so much, that his insufferable Pains threw him into a Phrenesy; so
that for four Days time he eat Earth, which he dug up with his Hands, and
swallowed it up very greedily. The Rages of his Pain were so intolerable, that
he run his Head against a Wall with such force, that his Eyes started out of
the Eyeholes; but as he lost the Sight of his Eyes, a Vision represented
himself to his Imagination, as standing to be judged by God, who seemed to have
Hosts of Ministers about him all in White Garments; at this sight he cried out
as if he had been put to the Torture, and said, that it was others, and not he,
that were to blame; yet afterward he confessed his own Guilt, being as it were
forced to it by the Torments that he suffered: he called upon Jesus Christ, and
with many Tears he begged that he would have pity on him; he roared and groaned
as if he had been inwardly burnt up: and thus did he breath out his defiled
Soul, in the most dreadful manner that can be imagined.

L. Thus did God destroy all the Persecutors of his great Name, both Root and
Branch: for Licinius being now settled in the Empire, gave order to put both
Valeria and Caudidian to death. Valeria had been still preserved by Maximin,
who notwithstanding all his Rage against her, and tho he saw now his own End
approaching, yet had not the boldness to put her to death. Caudidian was her
adopted Son, for his Mother was a Concubine of Maximians; but Valeria being
barren, had adopted him. She had no sooner got the news of Maximins Death, then
she came to his Court in disguise, that she might see what would become of
Caudidian; but he appearing publicly in Nicomedia, and fancying that Respect
would be showed him because of his Birth, and apprehending nothing less than
what befell him, was put to Death: upon which Valeria fled away immediately.
Licinius ordered likewise Severian to be put to death. He was Severus's Son,
and was now grown up to a man's Age, and had accompanied Maximin in his slight;
but it was pretended, that he was aspiring to the Empire, and for that he was
condemned. All these had great Apprehensions of Licinius, looking on him as an
ill man; only Valeria, who had refused to resign her pretensions to Maximin,
had resolved to do it in his savor. Licinius ordered likewise Maximins eldest
Son, who was then eight years old, and his Daughter that was only seven, and
had been contracted to Caudidian, to be put to Death. And before that was
executed, their Mother was drowned in the River Orontes, where she had made
many chaste Women to be drowned formerly. And thus through the just and righteous
Judgment of God, all those wicked persons came to suffer the same things that
they had done to others.

LI. Valeria her self wandered about in the Habit of a Peasant, during the space
of eighteen Months; but was at last discovered at Thessalonica, where both she
and her Mother suffered. The two Empresses were led to the place of Execution
through a vast multitude of Spectators, who were struck with the Compassion that
was raised by so lamentable a sight: their Heads were cut off, and their Bodies
were cast into the Sea, so fatal did their Dignity and Valeria's chastity prove
to them.

LII. I have given you this recital upon the credit of persons that were well
informed of those matters: and I have thought sit to write them just as they
were transacted, that so the true account of those great Revolutions might not
be lost; and that it might not be in the power of any, who intended to write
the History of that time, to corrupt the Truth, or to suppress either their
Sins against God, or Gods Judgments upon them.

It is to his Insinite Mercy that we owe our Thanksgivings; who has at last
visited the World, and has gathered together and recovered his Flock, that was
partly scattered abroad, and partly torn by ravenous Wolves; and who has
destroyed those Beasts of Prey, that had wasted the Pastures of his Flock, and
had broken their Folds. Where are now those once Glorious and renowned Names of
Iovins and Herculins, that were assumed with so much Insolence by Diocletian
and Maximian, and that were afterward derived by them to their Successors! God
has blotted them out, and rased them-out of the World.

Let us then Celebrate Gods Triumph over his Enemies with all the Elevations of
Joy: Let us sing of his Victories, and praise him for them; and let us beg of
him by our most earnest Prayers, repeated Day and Night, that he will forever
establish that Peace which he has given to his People after ten years of War.

And you in particular, My most Dear Donatus, who deserves that God should hear
your Prayers, Intercede earnestly with him, that he may always show Mercy to
his Servants; that he may be gracious and favorable to them; that he may
protect his People from all the Snares and Assaults of the Devil; and that the
present Flourishing Estate of his Church may be always preserved safe and
undisturbed.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. lin. 4 dele If. P. 12. l 11. read greater. P. 17. l. 6. for as r. a.
Page 49 l. 5. after be r. purchased by. p. 61. l. 26. the, r. she. p. 62. l.
17. Mepsia r. Moesia. p. 86. l. 3. after place r. you. p. 90. l. 6. after
sickness r. so. p. 92. l. 12. composed r. compassed. p. 104. l. 4 were r. was.


