A LETTER From Gentleman OF THE City of New York To another, Concerning the
Troubles which happened in That Province in the Time of the late Happy
REVOLUTION.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
School.

SIR;
I Cannot but admire to hear that some Gentlemen still have a good Opinion of
the late Disorders committed by Capt. Jacob Leyster, and his Accomplices, in
New York, as if they had been for His Majesty's Service, and the Security of
that Province; and that such Monstrous Falsehoods do find Credit, That the
Persons before in Commission, and did labor to oppose and prevent those
Disorders, were Jacobites, or Persons ill affected to the Happy Revolution in
England. But it has been often the Calamity of all ^ges to palliate Vice with
false Glosses, and to criminate the best Actions of the most Virtuous and most
Pious Men. So that Truth and Innocence, without some Defense, has not proved at
all times a sufficient Bullwo^k against malicious Falsehoods and Calumnies.
Wherefore I shall endeavor to give you a true and brief Account of that
matter, as I my self have been a Personal Witness to most of them.

It was about the beginning of April, 1689. when the first Reports arrived at
New York, that the Prince of Orange, now his present Majesty, was arrived in
England with considerable F^rce^, and that the late King James was fled into
France, and that it was expected War would be soon proclaimed between England
and France.

The Leiut. Governor, Frances N^cho^son, and the Council, being Protestants,
resolved thereupon to suspend all Roman Catholics from Command and Places of
Trust in the Government, and accordingly suspended Major Baxt^r from being a
Member of Council and Captain of a C^mpany at A^bany, and Bartholomew Russ^l
from being (...) in the (...) at New York, they both being Papists, who
forthwith ^^st their Command, and departed the Province.

And because but three Members of the Council were residing in New York, viz.
^ir. Frederick Phillips, Coll. Stephanus Cortlandt, and ^oll. Nic^olas Bayard,
all of Dutch Birth, a^l Members, and the two last, for the space of near thirty
Years p^st Elders and Deacons of the Dutch ^rotestant Church in New York, and
most affectionate to the Royal House of Orange; It was Resolved by the said
L^eu^. Gov^rnor and Council, to call and conveen to their Assistance all the
Justices of the Peace, and other civil Magistrates, and the Commission Officers
in the Prov^nce, for to consult and advise with them what might be proper for
the Preservation of the Peace, and the Safety of said Province in that
Conjuncture, till Orders should arrive from England.

Whereupon the said Justices, Magistrates and Officers were accordingly
convened, and styled by the Name of The General Conventi^n for the Province of
New York; and all matters of Government were carried on and managed by the
major Vote of that Convention.

And in the first place it was by them agreed and ordered, Forthwith to
fortify the City of New York.

And that for the better Security of the Fort (since the Garrison was weak, and
to prevent all manner of Doubts and Jealousies) a competent Number of the City
Militia should keep Guard in said Fort, and Nicholas Bayard, Coll. of said
Militia recommended to give suitable Orders accordingly.

And that the Revenue should be continued and received by some Gentlemen
appointed by that Convention, for Repairing the Fort, and Fortify^ng of the
City; but against this Order Capt Leyster (who as a Captain was a Member of
that Convention) did enter his dissent, with some few others.

It was also recommended to said Coll. Bayard to hasten to fortify the City
with all possib^e speed, who upon the Credit of the Revenue did advance what
Money was needful for Materials. And by the Assistance of the Militia Officers,
and daily Labor of the Inhabitants had the same finished before the end of
May, excepting Capt. Leyster's Q^ota.

About the middle of May the Ship Beaver, John Corbie Master, being ready to
sail for England, the Lieu. Governor and Council sent in her by Mr. John
Riggs, and in several other Ships that soon followed, Letters to the Earl, now
Duke of Shrewsbury, then Principal Secretary of State, and to the Lords of the
Committee for Trade and Plantations, wherein they signified their rejoicing at
the News of his Royal Highness, the Prince of Orange, now his present Majesty's
arrival in England. in order to Redress the Grievances of the Nation, and
giving a particular Account of the state of Affairs of this Province, and that
they would endeavor to preserve its Pe^ce and ^ecurity till Orders should
arrive from England, which they humbly prayed might be hastened with all
possible speed. Which said Letters were most graciously received, and answered
by his Majesty's Letter bearing date the 30th of July, 1689.

But against Expectation, it soon happened, that on the last day of said Month
of May, Capt. Leyster having a Vessel with some Wines in the Road, for which he
refused to pay the Duty, did in a Seditious manner stir up the meanest sort of
the Inhabitants (affirming, That King James being fled the Kingdom, all manner
of Government was fallen in this Province) to rise in Arms, and forcibly
possess themselves of the Fort and Stores, which accordingly was effected
whilst the Lieut. Governor and Council, with the Convention, were met at the
City Hall to consult what might be proper for the common Good and Safety; where
a party of Armed Men came from the Fort, and forced the Lieut. Governor to
deliver them the Keys; and seized also in his Chamber a Chest with Seven
Hundred Seventy Three Pounas, Twelve Shillings in Money of the Government. And
though Coll Barard, with some others appointed by the Convention, used all
endeavors to prevent those Disorders, all proved vain; for most of those that
appeared in Arms were Drunk, and cried out, They disowned all manner of
Government* Whereupon, by Capt. Leyster's persuasion, they proclaimed him to be
their Commander, there being then no other Commission Officer amongst them.

Capt. Leyster being in this manner possessed of the Fort, took some Persons to
his Assistance, which he called, The Committee of Safety. And the Lieut.
Governor, Francis Nicollson being in this manner forced out of his Command,
for the safety of his Person, which was daily threatened, withdrew out of the
Province.

About a week after, R^ports came from Boston, That their Royal H^ghnesses, the
Prince and Princes of Orange were proclaimed King and Queen of England.
Whereupon the Council and Convention were very desirous to get that
Proclamation, and not only wrote for it, but some of them hearing that two
Gentlemen were coming from Co^necticut with a Copy of said Procl^mation, went
ou^ two days to meet them, in expectation of having the Happiness to proclaim
it but Major Gold and Mr. Fitz missing them, having put the Proclamation into
Capt. Leyster's hands, he, without taking any Notice of the Council or
Convention, did proclaim the same, though very disorderly, after which he went
with his Accomplices to the Fort, and the Gentlemen of the Council and
Magistrates, and most of the principal Inhabitants and Merchants went to Coll.
Bayards House and drank the Health and Prosperity of King William and Queen
Mary with great Expressions of Joy.

Two days after, a printed Proclamation was procured by some of the Council,
dated the 14th of February, 1688. whereby their Majesty's confirmed all
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Collecters and Receivers of the Revenues, etc.
being Protestants; which was forthwith published at the City Hall by the Mayor
and Alder men, accompanied with the Council, and most of the chief Citizens and
Merchants. And pursuant thereunto the Collector, Mat. Plowman, being a Papist,
was forthwith suspended by the Convention; and Coll. Bayard, Alder man. Paul
Richards, Capt. Thomas Winham, and Lieut. John Haynes, Merchants, were by them
commissionated and appointed to collect the Revenue until Orders should arrive
from England Whereupon those Gentlemen were sworn by Coll. Cortland, then Major
of the City, they being the first in this Province that took the Cathes to
their Majesty's appointed by Act of Parliament, instead of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supreamacy.

But as soon as those Gentlemen entered upon the Office, Capt. Leyster with a
party of his Men in Arms, and Drink, sell upon them at the Custom-House, and
with Naked Swords beat them thence, endeavoring to Massacree some of them,
which were Rescued by Providence. Whereupon said Leyster beat an Alarm, crying
about the City, Treason, Treason, and made a strict search to seize Coll.
Bayard, who made his escape, and departed for Albany, where he staid all
Summer, in hopes that Orders might arrive from England to settle those
Disorders.

The said Capt. Leyster finding almost every man of Sense, Reputation or Estate
in the place to oppose and discourage his Irregularities, caused frequent false
Alarms to be made, and sent several parties of his armed Men out of the Fort,
dragged into nasty Goals within said Fort several of the principal Magistrates,
Officers and Gentlemen, and others, that would not own his Power to be lawful,
which he kept in close Prison during Will and Pleasure, without any Process, or
allowing them to Bail. And he further published several times, by beat of
Drums, That all those who would not come into the Fort and sign their hands,
and so thereby to own his Power to be lawful, should be deemed and esteemed as
Enemies to his Majesty and the Country, and be by him treated accordingly By
which means many of the Inhabitants, though they abhorred his Actions, only to
escape a nasty Goal, and to secure their Estates, were by fear and compulsion
drove to comply, submit and sign to whatever he commanded.

And though Capt. Leyster had at first so violently opposed the collecting of
the Revenue, alleging it unlawful, as soon as his Wines were landed, and that
he got into some Power, he forthwith set up for himself the collecting of said
Revenue by Peter d' Lanoy, allowing him a great Sallary, and all the Perquisits
of that Office.

Upon the 10th of December following returned the said Mr. John Riggs from
England, with Letters from his Majesty and the Lords, in answer to the Letters
sent by the Lieut. Governor and Council above recited, Directed, To Our Trusty
and Well-beloved Francis Nicholson, Esquire Our Lieutenant Governor and Commander
in chief of Our Pro^^nce of New York in America, and in his absence To such as
for the time being, take care for the Preservation of the Peace, and
administering the Laws in Our said Province. Whereby his Majesty approved of the
Proceedings and Care that had been taken by said Lieut. Governor and Council
for the Peace and Safety of the Province, with further Power and Directions to
continue therein till further Orders. Which said Letters the said Mr. Riggs
designed to deliver on the following Morning to the ^entlemen of the Council,
to whom they properly did belong, being an answer to their said Letter; but was
obstructed therein by said Leyster, who sent a party of his Men in Arms, and
brought said Riggs to the Fort, where he forced said Letters from him, though
some Gentlemen of the Council, that went the same time to the Fort, protested
against it, but he drove them out of the Fort, calling them Rogues, Pap^sts,
and other opprobious Names.

Soon after the Receipt of said Letters said Capt. Leyster styled himself
Lieutenant Governor, appointed a Council, and presumed further to call a
select Number of his own Party, who called themselves The General Assembly of
the Province, and by their advice and assistance raised several Taxes and great
Sums of Money from their Majesty's good Subjects within this Province. Which
Taxes together with that 773 l. 12 s. in Money, which he had seized from the
Government, and the whole Revenue, he applied to his own use, and to maintain
said Disorders, allowing his p^ivate men 18 d. per Day, and to others
proportionably.

On the 20^h of January following Coll. Bayard and Mr Nicolls had the ill
fortune to fail into his hands, and were in a barbarous manner, by a party in
Arms, dragged into the Fort, and there put into a Nasty place, without any
manner of Process, or being allowed to bayl, though the same was offered for
said Coll. Bayard, by some of the ablest and richest Inhabitants to the Sum of
Twenty Thousand Pounds, either for his appearance to answer, or d^p^rt the
Province, or to go for England; but without any Cause given, or Reasons
assigned, laid said Coll. Bayard in Irons, and kept him and Mr. Nicolls close
Prisoners for the space o^ fourteen Months, where they, with several others,
that had been long detained Prisoners, were set at Liberty by Governor
Slaughter.

And whilst he kept those Gentlemen in Prison, he quartered his armed Men in
their Houses, where they Committed all manner of Outrages; And to give one
Instance of many others, A Party of twelve Men were quartered at the House of
Coll. Bayard, with directions to pillage and plunder at discretion, which was
bought off with Money and plentiful Entertainment. But the same day, when that
party had received their Money, another party came in with Naked Swords, opened
several Chambers and Chests in said House, and did Rob and carry away what
Money and other Goods they found.

At the same time Coll Bayard and Mr. Nicolls were taken, strict search was
made for Coll. Cortlandt, but he, with several other Gentlemen, having made
their escape, were forced to leave their families and Concerns, and remain in
Exile, till relieved by the arrival of Governor Slaughter.

It is hardly to be expressed what Cruelties Capt. Leyster and his Ac^omplices
imposed upon the said Prisoners and all others that would not own his power to
be lawful. Neither could the Protestant M^n^sters in the Province escape their
Malice and Cruelty; for Mr. Selyns, Minister of New York, was most gross^^
abused by Leyster himself in the Church at the time of Divine Service, and
threatened to be silenced, etc. Mr. Dellius, Minister at Albany, to escape a
nasty ^oal, was forced to leave his Flock, and fly for shelter into New
England. Mr. Varick, Minister of the Dutch Towns on Nassaw Island, was by armed
men dragged out of his House to the Fort, then imprisoned without bayl, for
speaking (as was pretended) Treasonable words against Capt* Leyster and the
Fort; then prosecuted, and decreed by Peter d' Lanoy, pretended Judge, without
any Commission or Authority, To be deprived from his Ministerial Function,
amerced in a Fine of 80 l. and to remain in close Prison till that Fine should
be paid; yea, he was so tormented, that in all likely hood it occasioned and
hastened the sudden Death of that most Reverend and Religious Man. The French
Ministers, Mr. Periet and Mr. Dellie had some better Quarters, but were often
threatened to be prosecuted in like manner, because they would not approve of
his Power and disorderly proceedings.

None in the Province, but those of his Faction, had any safety in their
Estates; for said Capt. Leyster, at will and pleasure, sent to those who
disapproved of his Actions to furnish him with Money, Provisions, and what else
he wanted, and upon denial, sent armed men out of the Fort, and f^rcibly broke
open several Houses, Shops, Cellars, Vessels, and other places where they
expected to be supplied, and without any the lea^^ payment or satisfaction,
carried their Plunder to the Fort; ^ll which was extremely approved of by those
poor fellows which he had about him, and was forced to feed and maintain; and
so he styled those his Robberies with the gilded Name and Pretense, That it was
for their Maj^sties King William and Queen Mary 's special Service, though it
was after found out, that whole Cargo's of those stolen goods were sold to his
Friends in the City, and shipped off for the West Indies and else where.

In this manner he the said Leyster, with his Accomplices, did force, pillage,
rob and steal from their Majesty's good Subjects within this Province, almost
to their u^ter Ruin, vast Sums of Money, and other Effects, the estimation of
the Damages done only within this City of New York, amounting, as by Account
may appear, to the Sum of Thirteen Thousand Nine Hundred and Fifty Nine Pounds,
beside the R^pines, S^oils and ^iolences done at ^oll. Will^ts on Nassaw.
Island, and to many others in several parts of the Province.

And thus you may see how he used and exercised an Exorbitant, Arbitrary and
Unlawful Power over the Persons and Estates of his Majesty's good Subjects
here, against the known and Fundamental Laws of the Land, and in subvertion of
the same, to the great Oppression of his Majesty's Subjects, and to the
apparent decay of Trade and Commerce.

In this Calamity, Misery and Confusion was this P^ovince, by those Disorders,
enthrawled near the space of two years, until the arrival of his Majesty's
Forces, under the command of Major Ingoldsby, who, with several Gentlemen of
the Council, arrived about the last day of January, 1690/1. which said
Gentlemen of the Council, f^r the Preservation of the Peace, sent and offered
to said Leyster, That he might stay and continue his Command in the Fo^t, only
desiring for themselves and the Kings Forc^s quietly to quarter and refresh
themselves in the Cit^, till Governor Slaughter should arrive; but the said
Leyster, inst^ad of complying, asked Mr. Brook, one of his Majesty's Council,
Who were appointed of the Council in this Province? and Mr. Brook having named
Mr. Phillips, Coll. Cortland and Coll Bayard, he fell into a Passion, and
cried, What! those Papist Dogs, Rogues Sacrament if the King should send Three
Thousand such I would cut them all off; And without any cause given, he
proclaimed open War against them. Whereupon, they, for Self-preservation,
protection of the King^ Forces and Stores, and the safety of the City, were
necessicated to persuade to their assistance several of their Majesty's good
Subjects then in Opposition against the said Leyster, with no other intent, as
they signified to him by several Letters and Messages, but only for
self-security and Defense; yet notwithstanding, the said Leyster proceeded to
make War against them and the Kings Forces, and fired a vast Number of great
and small Shot in the City, whereby several of his Majesty's Subjects were
killed and wounded as they passed in the streets upon their lawful Occasions,
though no Opposition was made on the other side.

At this height of Ex^remity was it when Governor Slaughter arrived on the
19th of March, 1691. who having published his Commi^sion from the ^ity Hall,
with great signs of Joy, by firing all the Artillary within and round the City,
sent thrice to demand the surrender of the Fort from Capt. Leyster and his
Accomplices, which was thrice denied, but upon great Threatenings, the following
Day surrendered to Governor Slaughter, who forthwith caused the said Capt.
Leyster, with some of the chief Malefactors to be bound over to answer their
Crimes at the next Supreme Court of Judica^ure, where the said Leyster and his
pretended Secretary Millborn did appear, but re^used to plead to the Indictment
of the grand J^^y or to own the Jurisdiction of that Court; and so after
sev^^^l hearings, as Mutes, were found guilty of High Treason and Murder, and
executed accordingly.

Several of the other Malefactors that pleaded were ^lso Found Guilty, and
particularly one Abraham Governe^^ for Murdering of an Old Man peaceably
passing along the Street, but were Reprieved by Governor Slou^hter, and upon
Coll. Fletcher's arrival by him set at liberty, upon their Submission and
promise of good Behavior.

Sir, All what is here set down is True, and can be proved and justified by the
Men of greatest Probity and best Figure amongst us. If I were to give a
particular Narrative of all the Cru^lties and Robberies perperrated upon their
Majesty's most affectionate Subjects in this Province, they would fill a
Volumn: There was no need of any Revolution here; there were not ten Jacobites
in the whole; they were all well known, and the strictest Protestants, and men
of best Figure, Repuration and Estates were at the Helm, it may plainly be
perceived by the several steps and measures were followed at that time, and by
their Letters to the then Earl, now Duke of Shrewsbury, and to the Lords, and
the Kings Answer thereunto. The Copy of which Answer, and some other Papers
worthy of your perusal are enclosed.

So soon as Governor Sloughter arrived, an Assembly was called, which upon the
18th of April, 1691. did present an Address to his Excellency, signed by their
Speaker, together with the Resolves of that H^use, which when you are pleased
to read, gives the Conclusive Opinion and Judgment of the General Assembly of
this Province, of all those disorderly Proceedings, for which those two have
suffered Death, and their Sentence was since approved by Her Majesty, of ever
blessed Memory, in Council.

Many worthy Protestants in England, and other parts of the world, being
sincerely devoted to his Majesty's Interest, have yet notwithstanding
(unacquainted with our Circumstances, and not duly apprized of the truth) been
more easily induced to give credit to the false Glosses and Calumnies of
biased and disaffected Persons from this Province. But in my Observation, most
Gentlemen that have come hither so prepossessed, after some time spent here,
have been thoroughly convinced of their Mistake, and that those men who suffered
Death, did not from pure zeal for their Majesty's Interest, and the Protestant
Religion, but being of desperate Fortune, thrust themselves into Power, of
purpose to make up their wants by the Ruin and Plunder of his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects, and were so far engaged in their repeated Crimes, that they were
driven to that height of Desperation, had not the Providence of Almighty God
prevented it, the whole Province had been Ruined and Destroyed.

I have put this in writing at your Request, to assist your Memory, and leave
it to his Excellency Coll. Fletcher, and your own Observations, to enlarge upon
the Characters of those Persons who have been the greatest Sufferers in the
time of those Disorders, and of their Patience and Moderation since your
arrival; also, of the Disaffected, and the Causes which you have frequently
observed to hold this Province in Disquiet and Trouble. Notwithstanding all
which, and the frequent Attachs of the French and Indians upon our Fronteers,
this Province has not lost one foot of ground during the War, but have had
considerable Advantages upon the Enemy, which, under God, is due to the prudent
and steady Conduct and great Care and Diligence of Coll. Fletcher, our present
Governor.

You have been an Eye Witness, and have had Time and Experience enough to
enable you to inform others in England, which if you will please to do, I doubt
not but it will gain Credit, and be an extraordinary piece of Service to this
Province. I am,

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant.
New York, December 31. 1697.
The KING's Letter.
William R.

TRusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. Whereas We have been given to
understand by Letters from you, and others the principal Inhabitants of Our
Province of New York, of your Dutiful Submission to Our Royal Pleasure, and
readiness to receive from Us such Orders as We should think requisite for
settling the Peace and good Government of Our Province of New York. We have
thought fit hereby to fignifie unto you, That We are taking such Resolution
concerning the same as may tend to the Welfare of Our Subjects, Inhabitants
there. And in the mean time We do hereby Authorize and Empower you to take upon
you the Government of the said Province, calling to your Assistance, in the
Administration thereof, the principal Freeholders and Inhabitants of the same,
or so many of them as you shall think fit, Willing and Requiring you to do and
perform all things which to the Place and Office of Our Lieutenant Governor
and Commander in Chief of Our Province of New York, does or may appertain, as
you shall find necessary for Our Service, and the good of Our Subjects,
according to the Laws and Customs of Our said Province, until further Order
from Us. And so We bid you Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 30th Day of July, 1689. in the first Year
of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Nottingham.

Was Superscribed, To Our Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Nichollson. Esquire Our
Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief of Our Province of New York in America;
And in his Absence, To such as for the time being take care for preserving the
Peace and administering the Laws in Out land Province of New York in America.

The Resolves of the House of Representatives, etc.
House of Representatives for the Province of New York, April 17. 1691. P. M.
UPON further Consideration of the Petition presented to this House by many of
the Freeholders and Inhabitants within this City and Province,

Resolved, Nimini Contradicente, Jacob Leyster, Samuel Edsall, and diverse
others aiding, assisting and abetting him in the Dissolving the Convention that
was convened at the City of New York for the Preservation of the Peace, the
Execution of Justice, and the securing of this Provi^ce for their Majesty's
Service, King William and Queen Mary, King and Queen ^f England, etc. was
Tumultuous, Illegal and against their Majesty's Right over this their Province,
being a Dominion of their Crown of England.

Resolved,

Resolved,

Resolved, French and Indians upon Schanectady, and other Plantations in the
County of Albany, by which many of their Majesty's Protestant Subjects were
slain, their Houses burnt, and others carried into Captivity; which great loss
is only to be attributed to the Disorders and Disturbances that were raised by
those who had usurped a Power contrary to their Majesty's Authority and Right
of Government over this Province.

Resolved,

Resolved,

Resolved, New York against their Majesty's Officers and Soldiers lately
arrived, was Rebellious, and in prejudice to their Majesty's Right and Dominion
of this Province.

Resolved, England.

Ordered,

Ordered,

By Order of the House of Representatives, Ja. Graham, Speaker.

An Address to his Excellency Colonel Slaughter.
May it please your Excellency;
WE Their Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects convened by their Majesty's
most grac^ous Favor, in General Assembly, in this Province, do in all most
Humble manner heartily congratulate your Excellency's arrival in this
Government; and withal, pre^ume to acquaint your Excellency, That as in our
hearts we do abhor and detest all the Rebellions* A^bitrary and Illegal
Proceedings of the late U^urpers of their Majesty's Authority over this
Province so we do, from the bottom of our hearts, with all Integri^y,
acknowledge and declare, That there are none that can or ought to have Right to
Rule and Govern their Majesty's Subjects here, but by their Majesty's
Authority, which is now placed in your Excellency. And therefore we do solemnly
declare, That we will with our Lives and Fortunes support and maintain the
Administration of your Excellency's Government, under their Majesty's, against
all their Majesty's Enemies whatsoever.

And this we humbly pray your Excellency to accept as the sincere
Acknowledgment of all their Majesty's good Subjects within this their Province,
praying for their Majesty's long and happy Reign over us, and that your
Excellency may long Live and Rule us, according to Their Majesty's most
Excellent Constitution of Governing his Subjects by a General Assembly.

By Order of the House of Representatives, Ja. Graham, Speaker.
April 17. 1691.
At the Court at White Hall the 17th of March, 1691. The Queens most Excellent
Majesty in Council.
WHereas the Right Honorable, the Lords of the Committee for Trade and
Plantations, have by their Report, dated the 11th Instant, represented to Her
Majesty, That they have examined the matter of the Petition of Jacob Leyster,
the Son of Jacob Leyster of New York, deceased, referred to the Committee by
Her Majesty's Order in Coucil of the 7th of January last, Complaining of
Proceedings against his Father and Jacob Milbourn, by Coll. Slaughter at
New York, who were thereupon condemned and put to Death, and their Estates
confiscated. And their Lordships having fully heard the said Jacob Leyster, the
Petitioner, by his Council learned, upon the whole matter, are humbly of
Opinion, That the said Jacob Leyster and Jacob (...), dec^^s^d w^^ condemned
and have suffered according to Law. But the Lordship^ do humbly offer their
Intercession to her Maje^^^ in behalf of their Familie^, as fit Objects of
their Majesti^^ Mercy, That the Estates of the said Jacob Leyster and J^^^b
Millbourn, deceased, may b^ Restored to them, upon their humble Application to
their Majesty's by Petition for the same. Her Majesty in Council is this day
pleased to Approve the said Report, and to declare. That upon the humble
Application of the Relations of the said Jacob Leyster and Jacob Millbourn
deceased, Her Majesty will order the E^tates of Jacob Leyster and Jacob
Milbourn to be restored to their Families, a^ Objects of her Majesty's Mercy.

Rich. Colinge.

FINIS.

