A LETTER from an English Merchant, who left Holland, and came to take a
Prospect of our future Settlement, to his Friend in Rotterdam, which being
Intercepted, is thought fit to be Published.
SIR,
YOU very well know, that the strongest temptations which returned me to my
Native Country, were the hopes of seeing it entirely happy, the Land of Canaan,
the Land of Promise. When the P. of O. Declared the design of his Expedition
was to obstruct the Evil Courses of his Father-in-Law, I could never imagine he
would have fallen in with the same Measures, and as bad Ministers himself. I
expected a Theocracy, a Government levelled to the Common Good, an utter
Extirpation of Arbitrary Power, and an Extensive Liberty of Conseience, a
Consistency of one thing with another, and as much of Plato's Idea as could be
reduced to Practice. Little did I dream that the P. of O. could be infected
with Monarchy and that he who had been bred up in a Commonwealth, could so soon
aspire to Tyranny. I did not believe that Monsieur Benting was to give
Closet-Law to England, and that no Man should get into Preferment, however
worthy he is of it, unless he has first settled his Accounts with my Lord
Portland: But since this is the way* I don't doubt but we shall have more
Shales's every year to betray the King and our Country; and I begin to fear
this man will grow as fast a Grievance as the Old Duke of Buckingham was to
this Nation in the days of King Charles the First. I could not guess that
D^^by, Nottingham, Godolphin, and such like, were to manage all our Affairs, no
more than I could suppose that Lieutenant General Ludlow would have been Hunted
down, for having once so greatly vindicated our Rights. Here, indeed, I am
astonished, that Major Wildman, Major Manly, etc. (who were Outlaws) were fit
to sit with them in the Parliament House, and at the same time Ludlow fit to be
Hanged. If Kings are punishable for Maladministration, that punishment is
most Wise and most Honest, that makes things most safe: And it is an Act to be
repented of, that we did not make our selves as secure at Rochester this time
Twelvemonth as we did formerly. If a King is Impunible, we ought all to have
subscribed to Passive Obedience, but if he can be a Traitor to the
Commonwealth, he should dye as such, and his Judges never upbraided for it; but
when such are employed as were the avowed Fautors of unlimited Power, it is a
complement to the Ministry to Stigmatize, and cry out upon Republicans. But I
am not only disappointed in our Prince, for no man could have persuaded me that
my Lord Do --, and Del --, would have sold Places* or could have been guilty of
Bribery, much less should I have feared that Hampd --, and the leading Men of
the House of Commons, should have sold their Fellow Subjects for the greatest
Advancement at Court. And least of all did I apprehend that the Members would
be so openly Pentionary, and run as errantly into the Distinction o^ Court, and
Country Party, as they did in that long Parliament of King Charles the Second:
But we have now fresh reason to remember who was the greatest Minister then.
Thus far for Civils, but Religion is managed yet more oddly: The King has sworn
positively to maintain two Religions, has changed his own, and for the sake of
Episcopacy, has Exercised a Dispensing Power, and turned out the Whigg Faction
in Scotland. The Sacramental Test, is kept on foot to keep those out of Office
who are fittest to be in it; and a new Creed is made for the Quakers, that
neither they, nor any body else understand. And to conclude, with what is yet
most miserable, we are crowded with Foreigners, to support and maintain this
certain Vassalage, and uncertain Religion. Torys must Govern the Corporations,
and Mercenaries the Kingdoms, which I shall from henceforward give up for
irretrieveably lost, unless I see some Brave Patriot, have the Courage and
Honesty to Impeach Benting, etc. that source of all our Miseries, who is not
only ill himself, gets all ill men into Preferment for what they can give him,
but has the King too under an Incantation. I am sick in Body, and perplexed in
Mind, and am making what haste I can to you; in the mean time, I give you all
assurance that I am, without reserve,

SIR (...)



