A LETTER From a Gentleman of the Isle of Ely in Cambridgeshire, TO Colonel
Roderick Mansel, Containing an Account of the First Discovery of the Pretended
Presbyterian Plot At the Assizes at Wisbich in the Isle of Ely, upon the 23 Day
of September 1679.
SIR,
I Have read your Narrative of the pretended Presbyterian Plot: At the first I
was infinitely surprised at the Audaciousness of the Undertaking: But when I
considered that Hell and Rome had combined together for the Extirpation not
only of Protestantism, but Morality, and that they would leave no Stone
unturned to effect these Execrable Designs, though they waded through Treasons
and Murders to accomplish them; and that they had found after the Dissolution
of Two Parliaments, Flagrante Conspiratione, and the several Prorogations of a
Third, that Englishmen were resolved to be Protestants, and that no sinister
means could pervert those honest Gentlemen Elected into Parliament by the sweat
and labor of the Industrious Freeholders, but that they would adhere to Truth,
and the Protestant Religion, in despite of all the Terrors of Popery, and its
Adherents, then was it that these Conspirators thought they must bestir
themselves more than ordinary, or else the Catholic Cause, and their dearly
beloved Diana, Arbitrary Government, must receive a total defeat; a thing too
hard for them to d^gest, that had laid a Design for many years bypast, and
which they looked upon the last year to be brought to perfection, and only
diverted by a False Brother to them, yet a True One to his Country: And
therefore they did cast about, how at one dash they might retrive all, and
throw the whole weight of this Plot upon the Presbyterians, as they call them;
but really intending by that Name all the Noblemen and Gentlemen of England
that had either Courage or Honesty to own the Protestant Religion, and the
Liberty of Englishmen. These, amongst others surely, were the Motives that
prompted them to attempt this Horrid Villainy; a thing not to be parallel^d in
Nero's time, to hang so great a number of Gentlemen for a Plot by Subornation,
who never knew one Syllable of that they were accused of: For my part, I think
it is the Jesuits Masterpiece.

But one thing, (SIR) I must tell you, and I cannot resolv^ whether to
attribute it more to the Knavery, or the Folly of some
Popishly-affected-Church-men: It Is now some months since the Ecclesiastical
Drums of my Neighborhood, as well as of your City, have beat an Alarm of a
Presbyterian Plot, and the Honest Drinking Justic^ believing in Verbo
Sacerdotis, did easily swallow the Bait; and if it had not been for the
stubborness of the honest Freeholder, who is now convinced, by sad Experience
that one Cheat endeavors to support another, truly we had been in some danger
of being misled.

Well Sir, to show you how far this Design has influenced the Country, as well
as the City, I have sent you the following Narrative of what happened with us,
which will show you, that we were Hectored with this Plot, above a month before
it was sent to your Lodging. Our Bishop has the Power of holding Assizes
within this Isle, and of appointing a Judge, and Justices of the Peace, and a
Bailiff of this Liberty, who has the power of Returning all Juries, and
whatsoever else the High Sheriff executes in the County, which Place of
Bailiff is now held by Mr. Wren, Son to our late Bishop. And the Assizes being
holden at Wisbich upon the 23d. of September past, there came thither from
London one Mr. Perne, Minister of Crowland, a Living as they say of 4 or 500l.
a year in Lincolnshire, and brought News that the Plot was now discovered to be
a Presbyterian Plot, and reported a great number of the Protestant Peers, and
Gentlemen, that had eminently and undauntedly asserted our Religion and
Liberties to be engaged therein, many whereof he named, and that with such
confidence, that it had entire credit with some staggering Protestants, who did
not a little insult at the News, and amongst others, one Mr. Scotrell, a
Gentleman of the Grand Jury was thereby so transported, that upon Thursday in
the Assizes, he with a glass of Wine in his hand, invited the Grand Jury to
drink the Popes Health, and being opposed therein, did say that the Pope was a
Worthy Person, whereupon complaint being made to the Judge in the Court, Mr.
Scotrell boldly owned the Charge, and justified his offering to Drink the Popes
Health, and being reproved by the Judge for so offending, at a time when there
was such a damnable Popish Plot discovered and carried on; he confidently
replied, My Lord, is it a Popish or a Puritan Plot; this unparalled
confidence created, as I conceive, a suspicion with the Judge, that there might
be disguised Papists on the Grand Jury, and thereupon he put them to take the
Oaths of Allegiance and supremacy in the Court. Afterward, in that Evening Mr.
Scotrell being in company with several Gentlemen, did again set on foot the
Drinking the Popes Health. Upon the next day he was again charged in the Court,
for drinking the Popes Health, and for having drank it at another time to two
young Men of the Town of Wisbich, but he continued to justify himself, and
said, my Lord, I know not but I may drink the Popes Health, as well as your
Lordships, whereupon the Judge enquired of the Justices of the Peace, of the
Religion and Conversation of Mr, Scotrell, and one Mr. F. a Gentleman of about
160l. a year, accounted a Protestant, who is a Justice of the Peace in our
Isle, and lately since the putting out of some Justices in Norfolk, made also a
Justice there, did interceed with the Judge for him, and declared that there
was not a known Papist in the Isle of Ely (but God, and I believe Mr. Prance
know some concealed ones) however the Judge bound Mr. Scotrell to the good
Behavior, and acquainted the Country, that he would represent the offense to
the King and Council.

It may also be worthy Observation, that one of our Justices, who is also an
Officer in the Militia, did at the same Assizes in the Court affirm, that there
is a Puritan Plot, and indeed those that desired a belief thereof, did so
outdoe in eonfidence though not number, that though some few saw through the
Design, they were more that dreaded the difficulty of Detecting the contrivance
and Contrivers, and for my part, I tremble to think what Blood would have been
shed, and what ruin brought upon our best Patriots, if others had entertained
this Plot as we did; and that we are not overwhelmed by it, deserves a
perpetual Commemoration, at least equal to that of our Deliverance from Faux^s
conspiracy. Now Sir with your leave, I will offer something to the
consideration of true English Gentlemen, and of the Sober Clergy of our English
Church; for such I hope are left with you, though here too rarely seen.

What inducement have many, and especially of the Clergy, so frequently to
defame as they do the Kings Evidence, and with all their might, to dissuade
from a belief of the Popish, and at the same time to endeavor, per fas and
nefas, to prepare the People sor a Belief of a Presbyterian Plot. What do your
good Queen Elizabeth Protestants think of such Men? I assure you Sir, that to
the great dishonor of Protestanism, the plain Countryman begins to call them
by that harsh name of Papists, but they are numerous, therefore Heaven forbid
there should be such Accession to the Conspirators: the most discerning, and
most charitable in our Neighborhood pity their blindness, and hope that some
that they think acting what may bring us under the yoke of Roman Idolatry, will
rather suffer Martyrdom, than take that Yoke upon themselves; and we hope that
those of them that desire to live and die Protestants, and to deliver over our
Religion, and Liberties to a better Generation, will now awake; seeing God has
so providentially brought to light this last Villainy.

I read Sir, to my amazement in your Narrative, that that valiant Protestant
Prince, the Duke of Monmouth (the Glory of our Nation) and the Earl of Essex
(who I hear is Son of the brave Lord Capel, who died a Martyr for our present
Sovereign) and the Lord Gerard, who fought so gallantly for King Charles the
Martyr, amongst many others were designed to be cut off, and that as
Presbyterians too. I conclude they are not tame and low Spirited Men, and
therefore long to know how they resent it, for methinks they should call for
Reparation, so far as all the Popish Party are able to make it; but I am
tedious, and therefore shall conclude assuring you, that I am your Affectionate
Friend and Servant.

Nov. 28. 1679.
Multi ob Stultitiam non putabant, Multi ob Ignorantiam non videbant, Multi ob
pravitatem non credebant, and non credendo Conjurationem adjuvabant.

Some were such stupid Sots, they did not think,
Some through affected Ignorance did wink;
Some were such Rascals, they believed it not,
And by their unbelief helped on the Plot.

FINIS.

