A LETTER from a Gentleman in the Country to his Correspondent in the City,
concerning the Coronation Medal, distributed April 11. 1689.
SIR,
YOU have obliged me very much by the account you gave me of the Coronation:
But I have had some Remarques from another hand, concerning the Truth of which
I suspend my Judgment till you inform me better.

I shall give you the Relation in the very words, as I received it. -- There
was one thing which much afflicted all true Englishmen, because it is believed
it never hapened since William the Conqueror's time; which was, that a King and
Queen of England should make their Procession at the Coronation through a
treble Rank of Armed Horse and Foot all Foreigners. It grieved us all to see,
that for want of some Interpreters betwixt them and the Multitude, which
usually press upon such Occasions, an infinite of the poor English, even well
wishers to the new King and Queen, were not only rudely treated with stern
Countenances and Dutch Curses, but continually pushed back with the Eut-ends of
the Soldiers Muskets, or the Serjeans Halbards, and sometimes received broken
Heads, or as dangerous Bruises if they did but endeavor to get nearer. I saw
my self many Persons knocked and pushed upon the Breast with the Troopers
Pistols, and pricked with their Swords for endeavoring to couch under the
Horses heads; and when any one offered to get nearer through the Ranks of
Horsemen, where they found Protection at former Coronations by their own
Countrymen; these rude Strangers were sure to check their Horses and make them
Curvete or turn round, which could not be without the hazard of breaking their
Legs, or Bruising those that were in the way. I need not mention the Tossing
and Pushing Men and Women from Place to Place, and Draging them through the
Kennels, more like Slaves, nay Dogs, then Christians, which made many
Spectators Sigh and pity the Condition of several Hundreds whom they saw so
used: Whilst others were not afraid to say, what most I believe thought, that
this was but the beginning, and a light matter in comparison of what the whole
Body of the English Nation (who are not now it seems to be Confided in) must
suffer under these new Lord-Danes before the King can be so settled in his
Throne that he may safely dismiss his Foreign Force; nay some they say had
their Skulls broken and died in the Crowd, though this is endeavored to be
stifled. -- Neither do you mention the unlucky Qualm my Correspondent tells me
the King had; nor the Duke of Norfolk's fall from his Horse, when he Ushered in
the Champion, which were something Ominous.

The Gold Medal you sent me, the true meaning of which you desire me to
explain, gave me and some Friends of mine no small Diversion. And to deal
plainly with you, I think the Contriver of it has done their Majesty's little
Service.

I need not tell you that the custom of Stamping Medals (upon whose Reverses
the Inaugurations, Victories, or great Acheivements of Princes or Generals,
were represented either expressly or by some Emblem) is as old as the first
Coynage of Money by the Grecians and Romans. Nor that in the last Century and
this they have been Improved, and many Ingenious Devices invented suitable to
the Noble Enterprises which were by those means to be perpetuated; and are to
be found in the Repositories of Princes, or published by Luchins and others on
that subject. Insomuch, that we find even John of Leyden after he had gotten
entire possession of Munster, and filled it with his Crew of Anabaptists,
notwithstanding his pretended Sanctity and Mortification, Coined several
Medals, which were indeed very Ominous to him; for this Mushrum King, sprung
from Holland, continued not above six Months, before he was hung up in an
Iron-Cage, with some of his Accomplices, upon the top of a Tower in Munster.

I might give you various Instances of Auspicious and Inaugural Medals, but
that I intend this only as a Letter. Therefore I shall proceed to the present
Medal, which, of what nature it will be, time alone must show; yet I foresee it
will give great occasion to the Maligners of our new Crowned King and Queen to
pass their malicious Censures on it.

One of my Friends viewing the two Faces of the King and Queen, said, That such
Conjunctions in Medals, had oftentimes proved Unfortunate; for he had, not long
since, by him the Medal made for the two Dewitts, which much resembled this, if
the Head Attire had not been different, whose inhuman Buchery by the Mobilee of
Amsterdam, gave the very first rise to the then blooming Prince of Orange's
Greatness: And all the World (says he) knows that King Phillip and Queen Mary
of England, and King Henry and Queen Mary of Scotland, whose Faces and Names
were joined in their Coyns and Medals, were not very Fortunate. But I told him,
since the Parliament had joined them in the Sovereignty, they could not be
dis-joyned in their Coin, and I doubted not but their Fortunes would be alike,
good or bad.

When I received the Reverse, I was heated into an Indignation that any person
should be so indiscreet, as to choose an Emblem upon such an occasion, so
subject to mis-interpretation as this would be. For as Julius Caesar said to
his Wife Calphurnia, That it was not enough that she should be Innocent, but
that she ought to be so cautious in all her actions, that she should be free
even from Suspicion; so ought it to be with Emblems and Medals; they ought to
signify and express so clearly, the Worth and Greatness of those Princes
Actions which they Represent, that no sinister Interpretations might be made of
them. And this Indignation was increased by the Reflection which a Gentleman
made, who first looked upon the Reverse with me.

This Gentleman seeing a Chariot, but not understanding the Latin Inscription,
and having heard the Town talk of Tullia, who instigated her Husband Tarquinius
to kill her Father Servius Tullius, King of the Romans, that he might succeed
him in the Throne, and, as Livy says, Caused her Chariot to be driven over his
mangled Body; cried out, Is this Tullia 's Chariot? This I say shocked me, and
raised my anger against the Contriver, who had chosen so ill an Emblem, which
upon so superficial a view, brought such an odious History into Men's minds.

Another by-stander seeing the Figure represented Phaeton, whom the Poets feign
to have obtained leave of his Father Phoebus to guide his Chariot for one day,
and who by his want of skill to govern the Fiery Horses, had like to have set
the World on Fire, had not Jupiter struck him dead with a Thunderbolt;
Exclaimed against the Emblem as full of ill Omens, and said, That the People
knowing that this King and Queen had, not by Permission, but by Violence,
Ascended their Fathers Throne, would look upon this as his Chariot which they
drive, and interpreted Jupiter's Thunderbolt as a Sign of some Judgment of God
impending over our Gracious Prince, for this, which he called, An unnatural
Usurpation.

This made my Cheeks and Ears to burn, and I told them, they were both
extremely wide of the Inventors meaning. For by Phaeton he meant King James,
who by Mis-government had endangered the Destruction of this Kingdom, and that
God having Compassion on his Church and People, had struck Him from His Regal
Seat.

But another Gentleman then present said, That although he verily believed that
was the Contrivers meaning, yet there were so many Exceptions to the congruity
of that Fable with the Cicumstances of King James's Reign, that he might as
well have offered the War of the Giants against Jupiter, as this, to represent
the Inaugural Glory of our King and Queen, which ought to have been the only
Subject to be considered.

He said, that Phaeton could never represent King James; since the Throne or
Chariot belonged solely to Him, as Hereditary Lawful King; neither could it be
said that He had asked any ones leave to Guide it. But that all Men knew an
Usurper was the Moral of Phaeton in the Fable, and an Usurper in his Fathers
Reign.

Moreover (said he) If King JAMES must be Phaeton, then King William must be
Jupiter that struck Him out of His Chariot, or Phoebus that reassumed it after
he had been Thunderstruck; and how disagreeable this was to the whole Scope of
the Fable, was obvious to every Schoolboy that read Ovid's Metamorphosis. Nay,
he further affirmed; That this Emblem seems to Presage King JAMES's Returning
to His Throne again, and if so, it would be congruous in almost all its
Curcumstances.

I must confess Sir, I could not heartily contradict this Gentleman; but wished
the Author had either consulted Books or Men, for a more significant and
unexceptionable Emblem. But since he has been so Unfortunate, if not Malicious,
if you know the Person, advise him to get himself included in the Act of
Indemnity; it being a Crime, equal to the Counterfeiting the King's Coin, to
contrive a Coronation Emblem that gives such occasion of Censure and Reflection
to the Malcontents, and Maligners of King William, our present Phoebus, from
whom we expect a Wonderful Deliverance.

Sir, I am, Yours.
April the 16th. 1689.

