A Letter from Scotland, WITH OBSERVATIONS UPON THE Anti-Erastian,
Anti-Praelatical, and Phanatical Presbyterian Party there: By way of a Dialogue
between Anonymus and Antipraelatus.
SIR,
I Acknowledge my self extremely your Debtor for the constant Intelligence you
send me, affairs are going in the right Channel, and cursed be he that diverts
their course: I receive your Observator every Post, the Author does discover
the underminers of Authority, and consequently of your Peace, in very
Intelligible Characters; and since we are endangered by a Malicious, and
restless faction of Phanaticks, I shall endeavor to represent them in their
true colors. I am confident this will give no offense to Authority, whose
only Crime is the weakness of its Author: Others might have done it more
effectually, but it were unreasonable for me to refuse to fight for my Prince,
because others might do that better: And now I cannot but regret our
circumstances, when I consider how our affairs are misrepresented abroad: I
must confess we live among a Generation of Vipers, whose teeth are set on edge
to tear out the Bowels of their Mother, tho they cannot reach her, but through
the sides of a most Indulgent Father his Sacred Majesty: But I can assure you
that Party is very inconsiderable and daily loses Ground, while Loyalty gains
it: Certainly if Rebellion and Witch craft where not of kin and Fascination in
the case, Men would not be at so much pains to ensure to themselves Damnation;
is there any Crime more severely threatened in Scripture than Resisting
Authority? they that Resist shall receive to themselves Damnation; the Laws of
the Land threaten it, and Reason will allow it no favor: For before we engage
in any thing, we ought to consider the conveniences and inconveniences, that
attend the undertaking, but reason and experience the best Schoolmaster will
instruct us, that a Civil War (the most intolerable of all burdens) is the
natural product of Resistance, therefore Resistance, as the greatest evil;
ought to be abandoned Neither can Gratitude admit of it, for we owe so many
blessings to the Government, that it were the higth of Injustice to fly in its
face: The Government of a Caligula is desirable, if compared with the Miseries
of that Land, Where every Man, does that which seems good in his own eyes: So
that it is evident that none but Knaves invented, and Fools approve, so
Unchristian, Illegal, Unreasonable and Ingrate principles. Sir, this is a piece
of Service I owe to my King and Country, however I have resolved to give better
Testimonies of the sense I have of my Duty when an occasion shall offer, and
till then let me be known by no other Title than that of,

Your Friend and Anonymus.

News public and private explained, the Party in a bad taking. A Man may salva
conscientia indulge the flesh a little, so it be done in the fear of God, of
protecting Preachers and others. Resistance the Soul of the work. Of Whiggs,
Preachers, Packmen, and dealers in books.
Anonymus. I See you have been in the Coffee-House: What News are stirring?


Antiprelatus. I can hear no good news, the Pillars of the Cause are tottering,
our Private News bring no comfort; and what can we expect from the Public, but
matter of grief? Now I fear the Cause will down.


Anony. I remember, to have heard the distinction of Public and Private news
ring in the streets, a while ago: But now the import of these terms, as you use
them, is almost out of my head.


Antipre. Private news are these which our correspondents send us exactly
Calculated for the Meridian of the True Phanatical Presbyterian, Anti-erastian,
Anti-Praelatical party, however dispersed in any place of the Earth: Public
news are these which go abroad Cum Privilegio.


Anony. I remember the private news that the City of London, was in Arms, and
that the Dutch had joined with them in Petitioning for a Parliament, that his
Royal Highness was fairly repulsed when he came last to London by 50000 Men in
Arms, did tickle the Party a little, but methinks, the disappointments they met
with should be very insupportable after such hopes: But what private news are
now current? Be igenuous.


Antipre. Not one word of news is stirring, except what is made publici: Our
Informers abroad will not send bad, and cannot send good news: And as for
affairs here, you see how they go, we have been praying for an English
Parliament, but have got no return, neither by Dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by
Prophets: We are in Saul's condition, before he caused to raise Samuel to him.


Anony. Well if you would consult a woman of a familiar Spirit, alias a Witch,
as did Saul; you will have less difficulty of finding her, tho a great many of
that sort of late, be added to the number of your Martyrs: I must confess you
are but in a bad taking, your friends in England do not agree with the air
there, but are gone in search of more healthful Climats, and our Kingdoms cold
as it is, is too hot for your Polititions here; you have nothing left but a few
Tools ready for any work, but none to set them a going; and without being used
they will rust and be of no use. I imagine, I hear the Cause at the last gasp
complaining, its Votaries are pursued to, and hunted from their last and safest
refuge, the Bed-Chambers and Closets of Keeping (I mean protecting) Ladies:
They have oftimes given proof of their Manhood there: By their skill at close
fighting, as well as Preaching: They are still in Duty one way or other: You
know a Preacher, who in a Ladies Family improved that precept, increase and
multiply extremely; and such effect had his Doctrines and Uses upon the Ladies
Daughter; that it was evident by the fruit his seed had been sown in good
ground.


Antipre. I must interrupt you since it runs in my head; and vindicate that
Preacher you speak of; I had the Narration from his own Mouth of that affair:
Several of his Majesty's Guard having in the night time invaded the Ladies
House, in search of my Friend, she for his security, Charitablely did take him
to her own Bed, and left him there with her Daughter, while she waited upon the
Guard, and had got them dispatched, in the mean time my Friend fell a
trembling; and the young Lady his Bedfellow out of Charity, could not but
cherish and embrace and such effect had her Embraces, that the temptation grew
too strong to be Resisted: Nay he gave me instances of several Saints who had
done the like, even while they conversed with none but those in the state of
Grace: And yet their Saintship was never called in question: The truth is
betwixt you and me (when Scandal can be avoided) a man may salva conscientia,
indulge the flesh a little that way so it be done in the fear of God, and not
with the Daughters of the Land: It is not for the interest of the Cause to deny
it.


Anony. I love thy Ingenuity; I have heard what strange feats the Cause has
done, it has Sanctified greater crimes indeed; have not the worst of Murderers
been reputed Martyrs? Is not Rebellion made the Test of the sincerity of
Religion? You know I could give many instances to prove this and much more. Yea
Buggery, Bestiality, incest, Adultery, clame interest: In your Cause: But I
shall at this time forbear.


Antipre. I shall let you rail on; but do not you think that Ladies meet with
hard Measure to be carried before Criminal Courts for receipting honest men,
who have no other retreat, in time of danger? Is it not Barbarity.


Anony. No, I neither think it hard nor Barbarous: For Women are certainly in
this case the cause of our ruin, when they Keep Preachers, who Sow poisonous
seed in the Land. And if they might plead Impunity because of their Sex, we
should never remove the cause of our disturbances, we should never enjoy peace
nor tranquillity: Your principle of Resistance is so far improved, that the
Kings Authority is declined, and a War Proclaimed against him; It is thought
Duty at any rate to destroy his Dutiful Subjects; and must Authority tamely
suffer Women, to harbor Instruments to put in Execution your bloody designs?
This were a Barbarity indeed, but to the Government: Especially when your
Murdering Martyrs, have sealed that Principle with their blood, that it is not
only Lawful but Duty to Murder his Majesty and all his Servants: A Principle
that Humanity, must blush at.


Antipre. That is but the principle of a few; but may not honest well-meaning
Men be protected? Who do not Preach up Resistance, and whose Conscience will
not permit them to comply with the times.


Anony. Authority Protects honest men; for no honest Man will disobey the Laws
of the Land where he lives, and those who obey, their obedience is a surer
safeguard, than a Ladies Chamber. Those who are not pleased with our Laws, let
them go and search for better elsewhere, or stand to their hazard at home: But
the truth is whatever you may pretend Resistance, is the Soul of your whole
work, was not your Covenant that Monster of Religion, brought fourth and
mantained by Rebelling, was it not nursed with, and yet thirsts after Christian
blood? I hope you will acknowledge these things, since they cannot be suspect
of falsehood: We have learned from the principal Standards of the Party; (who
are living instances of his Majesty's inclination rather to pardon penitent,
than punish obstinate offenders) that the Interest of a few Men of broken
Estates and no Conscience. Was the Spring that acted the people as they
pleased; but now when the Mobile is left to it self j you ^e what effects
furious Zeal in Conjunction with ignorance has produced; have not a party of
you burnd the Bible, Renounced their Baptisims; committed Adulteries every Man
with his Neighbors Wife of late at a Meeting near Borrowstouness, retaining
nothing of Saintship but that of having all things Common. But you are not
ignorant of hundreds of such instances perhaps not come to my knowledge.
Therefore be ingenuous, confess all to be a Cheat, you have an Indulgent
Prince: And besides it will be the greatest despite you can do the Devil for
frustrating your hopes.


Antipre. vou mistake me perhaps, and think I will divulge the Secrets of the
Saints; Shipwreck my Conscience, lose my inward peace, and Break my Staff of
Bread.


Anony. I have more Charity than to think it was a principle of Conscience made
you Phanatick; I had rather think you Knave than Fool, for Knaves may repent
and make amends by their after services to the Government, but little to be for
hoped from fools, and the division of the Party in Fools and Knaves is exact:
And if (as I must p^^sume) Interest led you from the way; Let the same ^otive
now bring you back; there are many ways of living honestly, and tho your Gain
be less yet your safety will cast the Balance: You can have no place of
retreat now.


Antipre. I will be so ingenuous as to acknowledge I was never satisfied with
the methods taken by the Party, I have told them of their Errors over and over
again; but it would do no good: However you must pardon me to think your
Complement but very course: And your motives for my return not at all
convincing: There are yet places of retreat even at home, but I can live
abroad: If one Trade fail me I can fall to another.


Anony. I thought you only dealt in Rebellion, (I would have said Religion.)
But it seems you deal in other Commodities; pray inform me further.


Antipre. It is true, the propa^^tion of Religion is the end I aim at, but I
use not always the same means: In Scotland I am Preacher, in England Peddler,
in Holland I deal in Books.


Anony. How much pains are you at, to do the Devils business; to raise a flame
to consume three Kingdoms; He dilate you to his Majesty's Advocate as an
Incendiary a Wilful fire raser.


Antipre. Then to be alike with you, I shall dilate you at our next public
Meeting as an Incorrigable Enemy to God and his Cause; and as a person not
worthy to live. This will be Sentence of Death without further proof than my
assertion; and when ever occasion offers none of the Party will think it below
him to be your Executioner, for this Crime. And tho you should dilate me, your
Evidence will, be no proof.


Anony. You talk so ^aturally of Evidence, that I believe you would make a
Swingeing witness if Occasion offer, and this would be another means to promote
the Cause: But now I must be going, and if you will meet me here again to
Morrow, we shall talk further of affairs.


Antipre. I Will not fail to meet you.


London, Printed for E. C. 1682.


