A LETTER FROM A PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER TO A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT.

A LETTER FROM A PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER TO A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT.
YOur Desire (which has always the force of a Command to me) to give you my
Thoughts in Writ, of a Petition given in to His Grace the Duke of Hamiltoun His
Majesty's High Commissioner and the Honorable Estates of Parliament, by them
who conformed to Episcopacy, brings you this Trouble, which a Multitude of my
Brethren (were they to undertake the subject of this Missive, and handle it
according to the Grace and Wisdom which God has more copiously given to them)
could have done with more Accuracy of Style, and more Fully and Nervously to
the Conviction of these Concerned, particularly the Honorable Members of this
present Parliament, than I am capable to do; yet I have exposed this Draught to
an observant Generation, and am willing to bear the Censures and Contempt of
Many, if I may but contribute some Light to the Consciences of some
Well-meaning, but less Discerning and Observant Friends.

The Petition, at first view, seems so plausible, as might challenge Reception
from all that love the Advancement of the Great Ends of the Gospel: And truly
if the Petitioners had not bewrayed a want of Candor, unworthy of their
Character, in their Address to to the last General Assembly, in the Terms of a
Formula, Adjusted by His Majesty; to which Formula in the Letter they closly
adhere, but not to His Majesty's Meaning, and the genuine Sense of the Words as
Conserted for Terms of Communion: The Assembly at that time would have made a
considerable progress in laying down such Rules, whereby an effectual Door had
been opened for Receiving and Assuming into a share of the Government all duly
qualified; of which they only were the competent Judges, especially in the
first instance.

Now that the World, as well as our Friends in Parliament, may understand how
the late Assembly could not without great Unfaithfulness to God, the King,
their Religion and People, receive the Addressers into their Communion; nor
will (I hope) this Parliament interpose their Authority for that effect,
without an antecedent Judgment of the Church. I shall give an ingenuous
Representation (...) the Matter of Fact, as that Affair was managed before the
Assembly.

But lest I be mistaken in the following Lines, I must Preface a few Things. 1.
I would Anathematize in my self, and Condemn in others that Malignant and
Censorious Zeal that overlooks much Excellence in any, and that envies and
dispises all deserving Services, Gifts and Graces, if not seated in, and
performed by themselves, and that makes particular Opinions, Modes, Forms and
Humors, the Main, or the Only Terms of Peace and Concord, and that bottoms the
Christian Interest, Peace and Welfare of the Churches on any Terms too mean and
narrow to sustain them. I shall never neither Value nor Vindicat that Zeal
which shuts out those Characters of the Wisdom which is from above mentioned in
James 3.17, 18. 2ly. I would have no Man think that the Representation of the
Addressers Behavior to the General Assembly is Levelled against all, or the
greatest part of that Way, and least of all against many of them who are in the
Exercise of their Ministry on the North side of Tay' of whose soundness in the
Faith, Piety of Life, and painfulness in their Ministry, we have sufficient
Documents, but only against those whose Immoralities, Errors, Non-residence
when vested with a Charge, tampering with persons dissaffected to the
Government, Civil as well as Ecclesiastic, and other Enormities has rendered
them contemptible in the Eyes of the people, and incapable of any Office in a
well constitute Church. 3ly. I would have none to suppose that the Exceptions
of the Presbyterian Ministers are mainly against the Formula, which in most
things coincide with the Act of the General Assembly in the year 1690,
instructing their Commissioners anent the Reception of such Ministers into
Ministerial Communion, but against their Method of improving it, for it is
uncontestable his Sacred Majesty (whose civil Interests are inseparably
Complicated, and twisted with these of the True Religion) did certainly intend
that thereby. They should give sufficient Evidence of the Orthodoxy of their
Principles: But when the Assembly found it necessar (from the pregnant Grounds
of Jealousy Ministered by not a few of them who openly taught Arminian Doctrines
at their Synodical Meetings, and Presbytries without being censured: And that
Doctor Monro a leading man amongst them offered to Subscribe the Confession of
Faith and Catechisms as vinculum pacis, not Symbolum fidei: And withal the
Formula it self seemed a little dubious, and capable of being stretched to a
sinister Sense, whereby all security to our Doctrine was eluded and Evacuat, as
will appear afterward from the particular consideration of the Formula, which
is the Ground they still stand upon) to interrogate them concerning their
meaning of some parts of the Address, how unsatisfactory their Answers were I
leave to any Judicious and impartial person to Judge.

I shall pass over their Answer' to the first Interrogator without Discanting
on it, or drawing these Inferences which natively follow from it, but when I
have told you the Question which was, if they owned the Authority of the
General Assembly? I shall set down their Answer in their own Words, and leave
you to your own Remarks and and Animadversions upon it. The Answer then in
terminis, was That they conceive they cannot be oblidged to Answer any
Questions about any part of the Direction and Address, or to express their
Judgment of the Authority of this General Assembly farther then his Majesty
has required them to direct their Address thereunto.

But the main Question I was concerned about who am neither of a contracted
Charity nor a sworn Votary to humane Inventions, and I must confess their
stingy Answer did much trouble me. The Question was, Whether by their promising
in that Declaration to sign the Confession of Faith and Catechisms they do
explicitly avow and cordially and firmly profess their belief of the Doctrines
therein delivered in opposition to the Popish, Socinian, Arminian and other
Tenets, Doctrines and Opinions contrare to, and inconsistent with the said
Confession and Catechisms? Their Answer to this Question given in by them in
writ, no doubt after Deliberation, for time was allowed them for that end was,
That they can give no Explication of any point or Article in the said Formula
and Declaration it being conserted for them, and seen and approven by his
Majesty, and that they are satisfied in Conscience to sign the said Formula and
Declaration in the words as it now stands, and that they can give no Answer, if
the whole Formula and Declaration should be turned into Questions, and that
they conceived the words of the Formula and Declaration, are as clear as any
they can give by way of Explication.

The Committee of the Assembly found their first Answer unsatisfactory being
shifting, and upon the matter a Disowning, or at least a not Owning of this
Assembly to be the Lawful General Assembly of the Church of Scotland: And their
asserting they cannot be oblidged to Answer, does not bear that Candor and
Respect which they ought to carry to this Assembly in such a matter, and seems
to be inconsistent with that Desire they mention in their Address to exercise
their Ministry, in Concurrence with the Presbyterian Ministers.

Their second Answer was also declared by the Committee no way satisfactory, it
being not only a Refusal to explain what appears unclear to the Committee in
any part of the Formula and Declaration, but also a Refusal of what is most
necessar for the security of the Protestant Religion.

Now let the impartial World consider what any conscientious Judicatory upon
Earth could have done in such Circumstances, when with a peremptoriness very
Grievous to some of us, they refused to give the lest Satisfaction to any
Question concerning their meaning in their Formula, nor would the Commissioners
from the North, viz. Mr. Forbes, and another, whose Name I have forgot (both of
them grave and pertinent men) Treat with the Assembly for themselves Personally
in disjunction from their Constituents: Though the Assembly declared they would
admit of no Proxies in this matter, nor of any who did not Personally Compear
at this, or some other Lawful Judicatory; the Nature of the Address, and what
is thereby craved, being so personal and peculiar to the Addressers themselves.
Now could any Men of Conscience admit of all promiscuously, without the least
knowledge of them, or Testimony concerning them; yea the Addressors themselves
could not read some of their Names, being Ciphered, who were their
Constituents, nor give an Account of the Places where they served and were
Ministers for the time. But that the Assembly did most sincerely design the
Reception of all Worthy Men, is undenyably evident; by what they and inferior
Judicatories have already done, I know one Presbytery, where these who are
already assumed are the Plurality, so little Jealous or Nice are we in
receiving Good Men. And that many more were not assumed before this time,
proceeded not from us, but from the stop that was given to the Committee of the
Assemblies Proceeding in the North.

But that you may have a full view of the Formula or Test to be Signed by all
those who were to be assumed, I shall here insert it Verbatim. I A. B. do
sincerely Declare and Promise that I will submit to the Presbyterian Government
of the Church, as it is now by Law established in this Kingdom under Their
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, by Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and
a General Assembly: And that I will as becomes a Minister of the Gospel,
Heartily concur with the said Government for the Suppressing of Sin and
Wickedness, the promotion of Piety, and the purging of the Church of all
Erroneous and Scandalous Ministers: And I do further Promise, that I will
Subscribe the Confession of Faith now confirmed by Act of Parliament; as
containing the Doctrine of the Protestant Religion professed in this Kingdom.

Now though this may well pass with Honest Men, yet the thinking men of the
Assembly guided, I hope, by the promised unerring Spirit of Grace, seriously
perpending and reflecting upon the Genius of some of those with whom they had
to do, (for I dare not say but others of them were Sincere in their meaning)
who are belived to be Pragmatick Self-designing Men, supported by Some at a
Distance, who can be pleased with nothing that falls not even with their
Sentiments and Ways, and who by all means endeavor to keep them at sinful
Distances from Persons better (perhaps) than themselves, because their
Schibboleth is not pronounced by them; and by Others at home, who without
breach of Charity are the Troublers of our Israel, and down right Enemies to
the Government, both Civil and Ecclesiastic; I say the Reverend Assembly
considering this, feared that latet anguis in herba; and it being their proper
Work to Judge of Confessions and Conditions of Communion, they found the Terms
of the Formula General and Uncertain. And truly it cannot be denied but Ill
Men may have a Backdoor to go out at in the last and principal Clause of the
Formula. For if the as Reduplicat the Establishment by Act of Parliament and
not their own Confession of Faith, there is not the least Security given
thereby to our Religion: For I may safely not only Subscribe, but, if I were
called to it, Swear the Canons of the Council of Trent as the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, and the Alcoran as the Doctrine of Mahomet, tho there were not
a Word of Truth in one of them, but not as the Articles of my Faith; but This I
durst neither Subscribe, Say nor Swear, without telling withal that they are
not the Articles of my Faith with the same Breath I do the other, whatever
liberty some of their way may take, who are professed Arminians, and yet
willing to subscribe this Formula without any such Declaration.

But that which most of all troubles me (who have been their Advocate not in a
Corner, my meaning is, I have with a particular zeal urged the Reception of
those into Church Communion, and a share of the Government, the course of whose
Life and Ministry demonstrate them to be Men of God, for this is my Test by
which I would have them tried; and then though they were Jure Divino Men in the
point of Episcopacy, of whom I hear there are but very few, and declared at
their joining with us (as the Famous and Renouned Bishop Usher for Learning and
Piety did to some of our Banished Presbyterian Brethren in Ireland, when they
challenged him for allowing, at least complying with some of the old
Corruptions and Trash of Rome) hoc facio propter Evangelium, they should be a
thousand times welcomer to me than those who are most liberal in their
Professions of Repentance and Signing of Tests, and yet have skill and cunning
enough to wait for every opportunity, and to improve it for the Subversion of
the Government I say that which most of all troubles me is the Petition just
now given into this present Parliament, which makes them liable to the most
perplexing exceptions that can be made against them. For beside that it was an
unkindly thing, unbecoming a true Son of the Church to exhibit a Complaint and
Lybel Her as Arbitrary in Her Refusal of their Address, and all this to the
High Court of Parliament: In the Pettitory part they seem to have forgot
themselves; for though their late Episcopal Government, was built upon no other
Foundation, and advanced by no other Methods then Civil Laws Rigorously
executed, without any consequent, far less antecedent determination of any
Church Judicatory: The Honorable Parliament they now apply unto, will
certainly abhor that down right gross Erastianism, the like whereof is not to
be found in the World, as it would appear They desire the Honorable States of
Parliament to set up, for as I understand them, they would have an Independent
Imperium in Imperio, which cannot miss in a short time of Issue in that which
will be eversive of the one, and fatal to both. But do they not well know that
our Gracious King and Parliament has established Presbyterian Government, as it
was in the year 1592. And His Majesty has given repeated Assurances to the
Church, That he will inviolably preserve it all His Life? Do they think then
that they will destroy what they have Built, and pluck up what they have
planted, which agrees so well with the Soil, and wants not its Divine Warrant.

I am told they are but few who Join in this Petition, and most of these from
their Consciousness to themselves of their Insufficiency, Profanity or
Heterodoxy, Despair of Admission into the Brotherhood of the Presbyterians, and
therefore would climb up to any Window, if so be they might have Entrance, and
thereby access to their Livings and Stipends, but have no Tenderness for our
Lords Mediatory Crown, and the Privileges he has purchased and conferred upon
his Church, which do not in the least interfere with Magistrates Prerogatives.
For our Learned and Wise Parliament know, our Principles ascribe as much power
to them in reference to the Church, as any Wise and Pious Magistrate will
require. We grant the Magistrate has a power, for repairing a broken Church,
though not for Constituting the frame of its Government, and building such a
Fabric of a Church as he pleases. A power for calling Church Assemblies to
meet for the Government of the Church, though not a power of hindering them to
meet at all; a Power of defending the True Religion, the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government of the Church; though not a power to determine
concerning these things at his pleasure, a power to concur by his Civil
Sanction with the Determinations of the Church, and confirm their Obligation on
his Subjects, though not a power to force the Church to follow his Dictats in
Things Ecclesiastic. And in a Word we grant him all power even in
Ecclesiastics, that is Cumulative to the Churches Advantage, tho we deny him
to have any Privative power to the Churches Prejudice, and our Fittedness to
their Principles is sufficiently confirmed, because we could never be driven
from them by a Tract of many Years violent Persecution.

And now because this Seribling of mine may go Abroad, and amongst others reach
the hands of those who are of the Episcopal way, I Will gratify a little the
frankness of my own natural Disposition, and deal roundly with the Episcopal
Brethren, and their Adherents and Abettors: Only with this precaution, that
whatever indiscretion Defects or Mistakes, what I say may be Taxed with, these
may not be casten upon my brethren, For I ingenuously declare, that by Counsel
Knowledge nor Contryvance, they have no accession to it: And therefore let all
these be lodged at my own Door, and tho I be so tender of my self, as to
conceal my Name: Yet I fear the Bluntness of the Style Father it self, and tho
I expect to be lashed with Tongues, as sometimes perhaps I have been
undeservedly; yet in my humble Fitts, the desire, endeavor and design of my
Poor Soul is to think as meanly of my self as others can, but seldom or never
is my mind shaken with fear, tho alace other passions equally dangerous are
more predominant in me.

Let me therefore ask the Brethren and others of that way, What makes you stand
aloof and keep at so great distance from Conformity unto the present
Establishment, We who are Presbyterians cannot be so unthankful to you, but we
must acknowledge (and I persuade my self the late King James know it) that
these of your Holy Order, and Persuasion had the most Active Chief and pincipal
hand in the late happy Revolution, (Pray let me not be mistaken it is the
Bishops and others in our neighbor Kingdom of England I speak of, for our
Scottish Bishops gave a most seasonable Testimony of their Loyalty, expressing
their Detestation of the then Prince of Orange his coming to England, as an
unjust and unnatural Invasion signed by them all. Of this I crave pardon to be
a Remembrancer to our Parliament and yet I cannot deny but they ought to be
excused if they be all of a Piece, and make no Bonds to declare (as some of
them did) these wished rather to see Popery set up in Scotland then Presbytry)
And tho it is not to be doubted, but the Presbyterians in both Kingdoms had good
will enough, and were as Active as was possible: Yet his present Majesty is
more adebted to them for their cordial Reception of him, and closs adhereing to
him then for the change that was made, and truly were I in their predicament I
would value my party on that head, and improve it. But when I put my thoughts
to the Rack to find out why it is they improve not this Advantage, I cannot
suppose it flows from a stupid carelessness, this may be the case of such poor
Souls among whom there has been no Vision, whose idol Shepherds have made them
like themselves without any spiritual Sense: Sometimes I think it is Policy
their carnal Wisdom teaching them to stand as Spectators, and when things come
to a perfect setlement they think to have a share in the Benefit, tho they have
nothing at stake: In others I think it fear lest their Trade go down, and no
wonder tho such Crafts men make an Uproar and cry up their Diana, or be content
to divide the living Child and make a mixture like the transplanted Nations 2
King. 19. Who feared the Lord and served graven Images others fear the Refiners
fire and Fullers soap when the sons of Levi come to be tried, purified, and
purged, but there is no fear that the Ark of God will smite any with Emrods and
afflict him, unless he be a Philistine, in others it is pride affectation of
singularity, rash Vows never to conform to Presbytry; and big Expectations of a
new Revolution, I would have all separatists Examine their Principles by the
Touchstone of the Sanctuary, for in my Life I could never understand what could
justify separation, but when the Terms of Communion were unlawful.

And now I crave pardon for my long Letter, and shall presume to give you my
Advice while ye are at the Helm of Government, and because I love to offend no
Friend to our Cause I give it you in the words of the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, Let your Moderation be known to all men, the Lord is at hand. Which I
propose as the best expedient to prevent Convulsions in Church and State; I
remember a significant Sentence of an English man. Power is a Liquid Substance,
put it in what Vessels you will, it is apt to run over, Are there not with you,
even with you, Sins against the Lord your God.

I have but two or three words more which I cannot ommit, Mantain Unity amongst
your selves, intertain no enemy in your Bosoms, for one secret enemy admitted
to your Counsels is more dangerous then ten Thousand open and declared enemies:
And as ye desire to prosper and would have God to Bless you, fail not by a full
clear and incontravertable Act of Parliament (that the present Judges may be
ashamed to fly in the face of) to Restore and Redintegrat these poor broken
Sufferers by Forfaultures, Fines, and other ways for Conscience sake in the
Late Times, to whose Prayers and these of their Predecessors, called Puritans,
who bare the Heat and Burden of the Day, ye owe your Deliverance, it is not
Charity but Justice to refresh their Bowels, and that these Leeches and Spunges
that have sucked themselves full, and raised their Fortunes upon their Ruins,
be left as dry as they were at first, if they would follow my Advice they would
restore of their own accord what they have unjustly purchased: For it is an
uncontroverted Maxim in Divinity, non tollitur peccatum ni restituatur Oblatum.
But if this be not to be expected of most of them; then pray let Justice be
speeded, that Expenses and Attendance upon Law Suits eat not out and exhaust
the Principal in question, and the little Stock that by a providence was hid
from their Enemies. But above all my earnest desire is, That our Blessed LORD
were first set into the full possession of His Right, and that His Tabernacle
were pitch, before any of the Lots for our own Liberties or Interests were
drawn; This is that which David Swear unto the Lord, and Vowed unto the Mighty
God of Jacob, surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my House: nor go up
into my Bed: I will not give sleep to mine Eyes: or slumber to mine Eyelids:
until I find out a place for the Lord: an habitation for the Mighty God of
Jacob. Psalm. 132.2, 3, 4, 5. Now that the Lord may enable you first to
Faithfulness and Thankfulness to God, and then to our Savior and Deliverer
under him the Kings most Excellent Majesty (whose praises without being a
plagiary I would but obscure, but you may read them in their due Elevation in
the Sermons published since the Revolution by Tallitson, Burnet, Patrick, and
others) and that our Jerusalem may be beautiful for situation, the the Joy of
the whole earth, and God known in her Palaces for a Refuge under the auspicious
Government of our King and Parliament, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Real Friend and Humble Servant.


