A LETTER from LIVERPOOL, Giving an Account of the Arrival of the Bonaventure
Frigate, FROM Major General Kirk: And of what has been done for the Relief of
Londonderry, and for the Encouragement of the Men of Inniskillin. As also of
the Recovery of the two Ships that were taken by the French Men of War, and of
the Arrival of the Fleet, with the Artillery, Provisions and Ammunition for the
Army Bound for Ireland.
Licensed, August 7th 1689.
SIR, Liverpool August 4. 1689.
LAst Thursday night the Bonaventure Frigate arrived here from Major General
Kirk: This Frigate was ordered to cruise on the Scotch Seas; and returning to
the Fleet, she met the Deptford coming hither with Letters to Duke Schomberg:
But, being Admiral, she sent the Bonaventure with them. They were on board each
other: The Chaplain is now at my Lodging here, from whom I had the following
Account both of Londonderry and Iniskillin, ( viz.)

That Major General Kirk finding that the Irish Army had withdrawn themselves
from the Waterside, and had sormed themselves into three close Bodies; One
before the Island Inch; the other to hinder the conjunction of the iniskillin
Party with the English; and a third before Londonderry, did resolve to attempt
sending Ships thither; and accordingly on Friday last was seven-night ordered
two Ships laden with Provisions, under the Convoy of the Deptford, to fail up;
who coming to the Boum, found it broken by the Tide, and fresh: Whereupon the
two Ships failed up to the Town, without so much as a Gun fit'd at them. The
Deptford then returned. The Garrison had on the 16th of the last Month
acquainted the Major General, That they had but a Fortnights Provisions; but
now, thanks be to God, they are supplied. Leather is so scarce in the Town,
that the Soldiers are barefoot for want of Shoes; however they are in good
heart, and value not the Irish Army, and daily fally out with great Success.
Sometimes they do not suffer the Irish to bury their Dead; the sight of which
strikes such dread in their Soldiers, that often on their Approaches, seeing
the Dead Bodies, they retreat, without attempting any thing. A strong Body of
the Irish Army attempted to fall upon the English in Inch; but were beaten back
with great loss. This is the Frigate that was sent with Arms and Ammunition to
Iniskillin; viz. 70 Barnels of Powder, 2000 Arms, with Match, etc. and four
small Pieces of Cannon; all which was delivered as Killebegs to Colonel Floyd,
and guarded from thence to Iniskillin by 400 Horse, and as many Foot. The
Major General sent not only this, but Commissions to all the Officers of the
Garrison, and offered to make Colonel Floyd and Colonel Hamilton, the
Governors, Baronets for their good Services. That Place is in very good Heart
and Condition: They do generally scour the Country 20 miles round, and
sometimes they go 40 miles. They have taken and brought thither vas numbers of
Cattle: They have plenty of all things but Bread, which is scarce amongst them.
Colonel S arsfield has formed a Camp of 4000 Men at Bondrewis, within 12 miles
of Ballyshannon and 24 of Iniskillin.

This Frigate has retaken at the isle of Mull the two Ships that were taken by
the French Frigates, laden with Provisions: There were some Irish Soldiers on
board them, but quitted on ths Bonaventure's approach. Some of the Victuals
were taken out; but they left some Cloaks, Coats, a few Arms, and several
Portmantua's.

I left Chester yesterday, from whence on Thursday and Friday last there
marched toward High-Lake the following Regiments, in order to be shipped: The
two Dutch, three French, Colonel Wharton's, Earl of Kingston's, Lord
Drogheda's, Lord Lisburn's, Sir Henry Ingoldsby's, and Colonel Herbert's: They
are encamped, and only wait a fair Wind. Duke Schomberg and Count de Solms went
thither to see them in Camp. There is 120 Sail of Ships at White-haven, and the
Horse embark there, Orders being sent to dispatch them away. Colonel Earl's
Regiment is here, and takes Shipping in this place.

Yesterday morning the London Fleet of Ships arrived at High-Lake, under the
Convoy of six Men of War and two Yatchts: so that, with the Portland and
Bonaventure Frigates, and the two Frigates, fitted here, make Ten, two Yachts,
and the Fireship is ready, and will speedily fail.

There is here, at High-Lake, and Nesson, near 200 Sail.

LONDON: Printed for J. C. near Fleet-bridge. 1689.


