A LETTER FROM NO BODY In the CITY, TO NO BODY In the COUNTRY.

Published at the Importunity of NO BODY.

LONDON, Printed for SOMEBODY, 1679.

Dear Brother,
IT has been thought an old Blot in our Escutcheon, a Reproach to our Name and
Family, that we are all not only averse from good Offices, but do all the ill
ones, all the mischief done by others, who for Reasons best known to
themselves, walk in an invisible Cloak, and force one of us to own whatever
they are ashamed to be seen in themselves. They clip the Kings English, Truth*
Coin most false Reports, and malicious Forgeries, write Seditious Pamphlets,
affront Government, cast Dirt upon Religion, mock God himself, Rob Men of their
Goods, or their good Name, (the far greater Treasure) and all this to gratify
and gull a many-headed Beast called the Vulgar, that is ever ready to be rid
by, and believe them, (provided always, and be it further Enacted, that they
don't say True) and then father all their Villainies upon us; for if you make
equiry for the Author, and his Accomplices, the guilty wretches cry out with one
Voice, Nobody did it. I should be endless, and swell my Letter into a Volume,
if I should go about to enumerate all the wrongs they have done, do daily, and
will ever do us to the end of the Chapter: for there is no manner of Harm or
Roguery acted throughout the year, between Dover in Kent, and the Town of
Berwick upon Twede (to go no farther) be it of the First, Second, Third, or
Thirtieth Rate, from Killing a Man to crushing a Worm, from Firing a Town to
Breaking a Venice Glass, or cracking a China Dish, (...) faulty (...) it off
from themselves (if possible) and upon Inquest, Nobody is found Guilty: nay
the World is come to that pass of late that they are not content to slander,
and lay all their own faults upon us, that are as innocent as the Child unborn,
but they insolently make Taunts and Proverbs of us into the Bargain; and when
they have a mind to affright their Children, they cry Nobody comes, as if we
were a kind of Gorgous, or Devils: and upon every turn they are ready to say,
that which is Every-Bodies work, is No-Bodies work, though never so much
against their own consciences, never so palpable a contradiction; for
themselves know that that Family is no more Related to us, than we are to the
Pope of Rome. I must confess there was once a sober Moral of that saying,
before they abused and wrested it to ill works, when it was intended for good
only* for to our Honor and their Shame it was spoke at first, to signify that
Nobody did that good which Everybody jointly or Severally were obliged to do,
but did it not. But waving all lesser instances of their injurious Malice, my
chief Business at present is to give you to understand, that they boggle not
now to charge us with the highest Crimes imaginable, no less than Murder in
cold Blood, and unheard of Treason. You cannot be ignorant, for all Europe rings
of the Bloody death, and real Tragedy of that Loyal Knight St. E. G. such a
frightful spectacle that the Son was ashamed to behold, (for he put on his
Sabios and Sackeloth here not long after;) no, nor of that he^^^^ Plot, and
accursed Conspiracy against the Person and Government of His Majesty of Great
Britain, contrived, no doubt, by the two Old Enemies of Monarchy and Mankind.
And yet the impudent Actors would fain lay them both at our door; for being
brought up by a lying Catechism, they make not one true answer, but deny the
whole fact to their last Breath, being trapan'd into a belief they are Absolved
in Heaven, for Damning themselves solemnly upon Earth. And all this holy cheat
is out of spite to us, to make the Credulous World think that Nobody was in
the Murder, and Nobody in the Plot. Now I appeal to Caesar, and all his loyal
Subjects, whether Honest Men or Knaves, the Innocent or the Guilty ought to be
sooner credited? whether his Holiness himself should be believed when he tells
them any thing they know to be false, or Impossible? let them search all the
Annals and Chronicles that ever were extant, from the first year of the Reign
of Adam, the first of Monarchs, to this very day, and if they can produce one
single instance that Nobody was over Accused, Arraigned, Condemned, and
Executed according to Law for Killing a Man: or that any of our Blood was ever
tainted, and impeached of high Treason against so much as a King of Faeiries, I
will give them this and all the Causes in Westminster Hall, and be their
Bondsman for ever. Whereas they all know, if they would speak out, that these
have been the constant practices of Somebody of the Race of Cain and his
successers down to Sixtus Quintus, etc. 'Twas Somebody in Jury that Crucified
King JESUS: Somebody in England that Murderd King Charles the First; and
though there was this difference between them; that the former owned no King
but Caesar (looking upon this Pretender as one of another World) whereas the
latter fall foul upon Caeser himself, (it happening then to be an extraordinary
Leap-year, which sets Subjects above their Prince;) yet they both agreed in
this Third: Both confes'd the Fact, Both denied the fault. These were modest in
comparison to the present Tribe of Aequivocators, who make nothing to disown
and abjure both Fault and Fact in the same unhallowed breath, in spite of all
that clear evidence deposed against them by Somebody of their own Gang; but
let them gorge themselves with never so many Oaths of Secrecy, let them bind
up their abominable Lies never so close with Sacramental Cords, truth is great
and generous, prevailing and inrresistable; it will be hid no longer, but like
the Morning Sun, search into the darkest corners and caverns, and bring the
most abstruse Forgeries and deep-laid Villainies to Light. Murder will out at
last; the innocent Ghost sometimes appears to tell it, when they guilty Tongue
will not discover it, a Sacred Padlock being hung upon it, called the Seal of
Confession: Treasons kept never so private, though under as many Locks and Keys
as Somebody wears Crowns, shall break out by force, and disclose themselves,
be the Contrivers never so great and powerful; be the Roman Eagle it self in
the Plot, neither Fear nor Favor can prevent or hinder some little Bird of the
air from telling the matter, let all the arts and tricks be used which that
shop of mischief, the Mystery of Jesuitism ever forged; let them raise a dust
of false bruits to put out Men's Eyes, that they may not discern one truth in
such a crowd, yet the attempt will be vain and foolish at the long run, matter
of fact will not be smothered or concealed for ever. Nor; Men grow weary now of
being deceived and abused: they begin at length to believe their own Eyes, and
though the Sorbon Doctors, the whole College of Jesuits, and Conclave of Pope
and Cardinals to boot, should give the contrary under their respective Hands
and Seals, yet they cannot persuade us here now, but Somebody has been
convicted, and as fairly tucked up for Murdering the Knight aforesaid; and Some
Body has already (for designing to Assassinate Charles the Second, and sell his
Kingdoms and Subjects to utmost Vassallage) been Drawn, Hanged and Quartered,
without any manner of Aequivocation, or mental reservation whatsoever; (on
Ketch his part at least;) and Somebody else is still in Limbo for the same
Conspiracy, and may ere long be brought to ask their 12 Godfathers Blessing;
the old fatal Tree being of late grown young again, and likely to bear more
such fruit, such special Pippins in due Season. When that comes to pass the
Pope shall know it; mean while he may be preparing his trinkets for more
Canonization-work; for they say he pretends to an infinite power above other
mortals: he can make Holy Idols of every contemptible chip of the Old-Block,
and confer the order of Sainthood upon the veriest Rogue that lives and dies
so. I Am sure his Saints are a troublesome kind to Cattle to us: and if he keep
them not at home for the future, or teach them better Doctrines, and Morals, he
and they must expect what follows: mean while it is worth your Note, that he
has no power to make new Saints in our Kings Dominions, and transfer them into
his Bloody Calendar, without Ketch his assistance at the Ceremony. I say, the
Lord of the Triple Crown, with all his omnipotence, can do no more than an
ordinary Man in this matter, till the Knight of the Triple Tree, has prepared
and cut out his work for him. But of all things else I cannot forbear observing
to you, that this universal grand Usurper is not content to Lord it over Kings,
and Emperors, as if they were but his Tenants at will, and depose their
Persons, and dispose of their Crowns, as his consecrated Spectacles see
occasion, but he must needs encroach upon, and invade our highest Privileges
and very Birthright, and assume to himself what belongs of right only to us,
viz. an Exemption from all errors incident to humane nature; for let the
School men and Ignatian Sophisters, wrangle till Doomsday to the contrary, Men
in their wits cannot believe but Turk, and Pope, may and do err every day,
whilst (only) Nobody is Infallible.

Thus much I thought fit to write to you, concerning that same Gray Beard and
his followers, partly for my own diversion, partly for our common Justification
in matters of such moment; but chiefly because it is now a very critical hour;
for the King has this day summoned a new Parliament to advise with against
that Old Enemy: and if they do not secure King and Kingdom against him; if they
do not lay aside all odious names of Distinction, and join as one Man, to
settle Church and State, out Law and Gospel, our Lives and Liberties, our
present and future Peace; if they do not sound the botom of that accursed Plot,
encourage honest Loyal Subjects, and make all Traitors and Murderers, public
Examples, Somebody must certainly be in the fault, though I name

LONDON, March, 6. 1678. NOBODY.


