A LETTER FROM WINCHESTER, In Answer to his Lordship's time-serving Query,
Whether Passive Obedience is only a Bugbear, and fit for Fools, or a Christian
Duty?
Printed by the Command of the Noble Peer.

Praestat per virtutem mori, quam per dedious vivere.

Sen. THis Query was delivered to me by the hands of honest Elk -- your
Lordships Secretary; and it will not be amiss in the handling of this Question,
to premise the worth and beginning of Monarchy, which I conceive is as ancient
as Time it self: for the Obedience which all Subjects (at this day) yield to
Kings, is no more than the yielding of that duty which is due to the Supreme
Fatherhood. Adam, the first Father, had not only simply Power, but Power
Monarchical, as he was a Father immediately from God, for by the divine
appointment, as soon as he was created, he was Monarch of the World, though he
had no Subjects; And although there could not be actual Government until there
were Subjects, yet by the right of Nature it was Adam's due to be Supreme or
Governor over all his Posterity; though not in act, yet at least in habit, he
was a King from his Creation. And none doubt in the state of Innocence but that
Adam had been Governor of all his Children; for the Integrity or Excellency of
the Subjects does not take away the Order or Eminency of the Governor. And
although as long as men continued their state of Innocence, they might not need
the direction of Adam in those things which were necessarily and morally to be
done; yet in matters purely indifferent, that depended merely on their own free
wills, they might be directed by the Power of Adam's Command. Eve was subject
to Adam before he sinned, and the Angels, who are of a pure nature, are subject
to God.

For the Dignity of Monarchy, these are the words of the Almighty; By Me Kings
Reign, etc. And again Ec. 8.4.
Where the word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say unto him, what
do thou? And holy Job put this Query, Job 34.8
Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? much less to expose them to
violence. But this Command, 1 Chapter 16.22
Touch not mine Anointed, (being uttered by the Majesty of Heaven) renders the
Persons of Princes Sacred, and puts a Guard upon them; which to violate, though
in our own defense, is to proclaim open War against God himself, by the breach
of his Divine Command.

And as to the Power of Kings, De Benefic. lib. 7. c. 4. Ad Scapul. c. 2.
Seneca tells us, Ad Reges potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos proprietas.
And Tertullian tells us, Colimus Imperatorum sic quomodo and nobis licet, and
ipsi expedit ut Hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem; Hoc and ipse
volet, sic enim omnibus major est, dum solo vero Deo minor est: Kings are only
in the power of God, from whom they are second, after whom first, before and
above all others. And our late Bishop of Lincoln, in his excellent Discourse of
Popery, p. 4. says, England is a Monarchy, the Crown Imperial, and our Kings
Supreme Governors of this Realm, and all other their Dominions, etc. In our
Oath of Supremacy we swear, That the King is the Supreme, so none (not the
Pope) above him; and only Supreme, so none (not the People) coordinate, or
equal to him.

The true Church of Christ has always known no other Weapons to resist a
Lawful Sovereign, than Prayers, Tears and Sufferings; Else why do we bear the
Sign of the Cross, if we have not Courage, Christian Courage, of force enough
to endure, not resist with violence, the most exquisite Tortures that can be
imposed on us (upon the score of our Religion) by a lawful Authority? St.
Ambrose receiving Imperial Command to deliver up the Churches, says, Quid ergo
turbamini? volens nunquam vos deseram, coactus repugnare non novi, dolere
potero, potero flere, potero gemere: adversus arma, milites, Gothos quoque
Lachrymae meae arma sunt: If I be compelled, I may not oppose: I may grieve, I
may weep, I may sigh: Against Arms, Soldiers, the Goths also, my Tears are my
Weapons: Such are the Guards of a Priest, I neither can, nor ought to make
other defense.

But to resolve one doubt by the way; Suppose a Prince should send his Officers
to take away the Life of an Innocent man, how far is he bound by his
Christianity not to resist? I do not believe that he is obliged to open his
Breast to the Dagger: No, our Blessed Savior tells us, it is lawful for such
an one to save himself by flight, who bid his Disciples when they were
persecuted in one place, to fly to another. It does as readily follow, that for
his own Preservation in this Case, he may hide himself from their fury, or
otherwise make all the defense for his own Life that he can, without violence;
For all this while he does but hinder the Officers from doing evil, and keeps
his Prince from the Guilt of Innocent Blood, and saves himself: But whether
this person (hitherto Innocent) may imbrue his hands in the Blood of the
Prince's Officers, supposing there is no other way to save his Life, but by
their Deaths? And in this Case, I think he is bound (by the Rules of Christian
Religion) rather to permit his own Blood to be shed unjustly, than shed any
himself, though some imagine that self-preservation in this case does oblige
him to resist, even to Blood. For my part, I could never learn either by the
Doctrine or Example of the Son of God, the Obligation of this
self-preservation; for albeit self-preservation would incline a man to kill in
this Case, yet I cannot find any dutiful Obligation so to do; and though we
have a right by Nature to preserve our selves, yet in this case, if he suffer
death, rather than resist Authority by Blood, no man will determine that he is
thereby guilty of any sin; And this is of more force, when the Innocent man
considers, that he may shed Innocent Blood; for these Officers come in
Obedience to their Prince, and they may be ignorant (innocently ignorant)
whether he be not an Offender that has deserved death. Moreover, if a man ought
to suffer, even to death, as the Primitive Christians did when the Cause was
purely Spiritual; much more ought he in all Temporal Cases. Now this (as I
think) being the Case of every particular man, it is the obligation of the
People too; Neither indeed can I see what Privileges of the Subject, what
Rights, what preservation of our Lives, can compound for the least Sin, unless
we prefer this Life to Eternity. To suffer meekly, out of a regard to my duty,
is certainly no stupidity, (as some would have it) but an excellent Virtue. Nor
do I think this passive Patience, Phanaticks
a piece of Cowardliness, or want of mettle, but rather Fortitude joined with
Meekness, to dare to endure all things, even Death it self, rather than do
mischief, unless the fear of Eternal Misery be Cowardice.

But some will say that passive Obedience is but a Bugbear, and fit for Fools;
Char. Pop. Suc. fo. 24.
and the defense of it an effect of Ignorance, (which brings the reproach home
to the very person, as well as to the Doctrines of our Blessed Savior) or that
such passive Piety was more requisite in former times, when God's Design was to
convert the World, by suffering, not subduing; when the Seeds of Religion must
be watered with the Blood of Martyrs, than now in these purer times of
Reformation. Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
Yet we see Calvin advises us not to fight for Righteousness: Si ab impio and
sacrilego principe vexamur ob pietatem, subeat primum delictorum nostrorum
recordatio, quae talibus haud dubie Domini flagellis castigantur; Inde
humilitas impatientiam nostram fraenavit: Calv. Just. l. 4. c. 20. Art. 29.
Succurrat deinde haec cogitatio, non nostrum esse hujusmodi malis mederi, hoc
tantum esse reliquum, ut Domini opem imploremus, cujus in manu sunt regum corda
and regnorum inclinationes. If we be persecuted for Godllness, by an Impious
and Sacrilegious Prince, let us first of all remember our Sins, which no doubt
are corrected by God with Scourges; this will bridle our Impatience with
humility: Then let us entertain this thought, that it is not our part to heal
such distempers; that this is our only remedy, to appeal to God's assistance,
in whose hand are the Hearts of Kings, and the Inclinations of Kingdoms. And
the same Calvin in another place tells us, the Prophet Jeremiah clearly
resolves this Question: Insignis est and memorabilis apud Jeremiam locus, Calv.
Inst. Iib. 4.
quem tamet si prolixiorem, ideo non pigebit refer, quia totam hanc
questionem clarissime definit. The words of the Prophet follow: Jer. 27.6, 8,
9, 12.
(viz.) I have given all these Lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon. And it shall come to pass, that the Nation and Kingdom which will not
serve the same Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and that will not put their Neck
under the Yoke of the King of Babylon, that Nation will I punish (says the
Lord) with the Sword, and with the Famine, and with the Pestilence, until I
have consumed the Land: Therefore hearken not ye unto your Prophets, nor to
your Diviners, and which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the King of
Babylon, etc: Upon which place says Calvin, Videmus quanta obedientia Dominus
tetrum illum ferocemq, Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 20. Art. 27.
Tyrannum coli voluerit, non alia ratione nisi qui regnum obtinebat; We see
what obedience the Lord will have given to this wicked and fierce Tyrant; for
no other reason, but because he was a King. And Beza says as much: Epist. 23.
ad Peregri. Eccl. in Aug. fratres.
Illud solis praecibus and patientia sanari potest: The remedy against this
Poison is Prayer, not Vengeance. We must be subject, for conscience sake.

In a word; If it be lawful in no case to retaliate mischief; If in all cases
it be virtuous to suffer, and the more hard the thing, the more noble the
virtue, there is no difficulty in the point as to the matter of duty; the
Quarrel is only betwixt Duty, and Flesh and Blood: When we say, it is an hard
case, we cannot intend that it is hard for a Christian to find his duty, if he
dares do well, but rather it is an hard duty to endure Evil.

Our Blessed Savior had either a Power of force enough to resist (and so
prevent) his Enemies, or he had not: No Man will be so Impudently wicked, as to
deny the first, or affirm the latter. It follows then, that he submitted to the
Death of the Cross, either because he deserved to Die, or else because he would
not resist the Authority of those that put him to Death: But he that knew no
Sin, deserved no Punishment, and when he then Suffers, it is on the score of
passive Obedience. Hence it is Evident, that this sort of passive Piety is no
Chimaera, but a necessary duty, to be practiced by such as dare imitate the
example of the Lamb of God. The denial of this Doctrine renders Christ's
Passion and his Holy Gospel light and frivolous, mere Enthusiasme and
Imposture. And although our Savior did suffer for the Sins of Mankind, and it
was necessary that he should die, yet he himself deserved no Punishment; And
though the Roman Authority had power of his Life: (to which he submitted) Yet
that cannot excuse the sentence of his Judge from being rigid and unjust. Every
Majestrate that dares Pronounce an unjust Judgment, must certainly be
accountable, to the All-righteous Judge. But we must leave our Innocence to be
revenged till then, and in the mean time; In all things submit our selves to
our Superiors, for the Lords sake.

And lastly, if we should lay aside the duty, Argumentum ab inconvenienti may
prevail; for it is much better for the people to suffer a great deal of
Cruelty, than to rise up in Arms, and overthrow the Government. I remember
Livy's Nec morbum far possumus, Of which the Promoters and Prosecutors are
deeply Guilty.
nec remedium. Never yet was any Rebellion free from the guilt of pouring out a
great deal of Innocent Blood, besides the many mighty Injuries and Oppressions
that must inevitably fall upon the heads of a great number of men. So that we
had much better, with patience, suffer the present Calamities, than endure
worse, and bring by our means much worse upon others; closing with the wholesome
advice of Tacitus: Annal 12.
Ferenda Regum ingenia, neque usui esse crebras mutationes, vitia erunt donec
homines, sedneque hac continua, and meliorum interventu pensantur.

And now, my Lord, your sufferings have been highly eminent and notorious to
the whole World; You suffered your self to be transported by the Zeal of
Fanaticism, to raise Arms against our late Martyred Sovereign, and afterward
(as far as in you lay) you did strangely suffer the King's Head to be cut off,
and then with meekness you did suffer the deserved reproaches of the People for
that most abominable Fact.

You suffered your self to be laden with heavy burdens of Places of Trust and
Confidence to that Cruel and Bloody Tyrant Oliver; You suffered your self (even
actively) to be concerned with those Rebels in rooting up the Monarchy, and in
imposing the worst of Cruelties on the King's Party. In a word, your Sufferings
of the late Times after this rate, are matchless and innumerable.

You suffered your self, when you could not helped it, and for the sake of
VARIETY, (your Lordships Motto) to be a little concerned in the Kings
Restoration, you then soon suffered your self (by the contrivances of a cursed
Hypocrisy) to be thrust into the Kings favor, and who so great as your little
Lordship? you suffered your self, after all, to be ungrateful; and herein you
suffered your self to be cried out against, as the greatest Villain upon the
face of the Earth, You unluckily suffered your self to advise his Majesty to
shut up the Exchequer, to break the Triple League, To divide the Fleet, etc.
You suffered your self to be blowed upon by the stinking breath of the Rabble,
which swelled you into a Popularity; you have likewise suffered your self to be
Poisoned by the Venom of Hellish Plots; and you now Vomit forth nothing but
Devils! and Hell! and Damnation! Sedition in Speeches, and Treason in Tricks
and Devices.

Amidst all these Notorious instances of your Lordships passive Patience, there
is none to be reckoned of more note than this, that you have hitherto suffered
(as it is verily believed) much against your own Inclinations this King to wear
his Crown and Royal Head; Notwithstanding they talk of 60000 Men ready to force
the King to coruply with his Parliament; or else to bring him to the Block. And
in many other things of the greatest moment you have suffered in these times;
Which when time shall discover, if your Lordship should suffer your Head to be
Chopped off! O! the cries of the PARTY!

Voe nobis Infamis!

LONDON: Printed for ALLEN BANKS. 1681.


