A LETTER, giving A DESCRIPTION OF THE ISTHMUS OF DARIAN: (Where the SCOT'S
COLONIE is settled;) From a GENTLEMAN who lives there at present.

With an Account of the Fertilness of the Soil, The Quality of the Air, The
Manners of the Inhabitants, And the Nature of the Plants, and Animals. etc

AND A particular MAPP of the Isthmus, and Entrance to the River of DARIAN.

EDINBVRGH, Printed for John Mackie, in the Parliament-Closs, and James Wardlaw
on the North Side of the Street a little below the Cross, at the sign of the
Bible. Prince 7 Pence.

M.DC.XC.IX.

A LETTER, giving a Description of the Isthmus of Darian, ( where the Scot's
Colony is settled) from a Gentleman who lives there at present.
SIR,
COnform to your Desire, and mine own Promise: I have sent You the following
Description of Darian; I was up the Country when the two Gentlemen went for
Scotland who brought the News of our arrival: but having now an Occasion I have
sent you the following Account.

You desired a particular Account of the said Darian, long since, And according
to your Desire, I have sent a particular Account of the Nature of the Ground,
Animals, Fruits, and Trees; and what Minerals they have, with a Draught of the
Place, The Habits of their Kings and Queens, The Form of their Houses, The Way
of their Fighting with the Spaniards and other Enemies.

Since our safe Arrival We have vieued, transvers'd, and gone about near an
hundred Miles in the Country formerly called Darian: but We have named it
CALEDONIA, and there is a Fort very conveniently built, which We call
New-EDINBVRGH.

The Isthmus of Darian is situated in the Main-Land o^ America, on the North of
the Equinoctial Line, 8 degr. 11 min. Latitude; The Land is narrower from the
North to the South Sea, which you will see by the Mapp: As for the great River
of Darian, it is situated something to the Eastward ot the Golden Island.

The golden Island is but a small place, not much bigger than Inch-Keith in the
Firth of Forth.

There are a great many Islands westward from the golden Island 14. Leagues
called Zanblas Islands.

The Situation of our Fort does ly very conveniently, having a Bay upon the
West, with many small Rocks, which make it inaccessable; On the East, the great
River of Darian.

The Soil is as good here, as in any other place in America; up the Country
there are long Ranges of Mountains, well clothed with Trees, which for the
most part are Palm, and Yellow-Sanders; The Inhabitants call it Bois de
Chandle, or in English Candle-Wood; It burns like a Candle, and serves them
with Light while they fish in the Night time. Here grows also Lignum sanctum,
or Guiacum, its Virtues are very well known, more especially to those who
observe not well the VII. Commandment, and are given to impure Copulations;
Physicians drawing hence in several Compositions the greatest Antidote against
all venerall Deseases, as also for cold and vicious Humors.

The Tree likewise that affords Gummi Elemi grows here in great Abundance; As
does Radix Chinae, or China-Root;

There is a Prickle Palm, so called because it is infinitely full of Prickles
from the Root to the Leaves; with these Prickles the Indians use to torment the
Prisoners they take in Battle, they tie them to a Tree, then taking these
Thorns they put them into little Pellets of Cotton dipped in Oil, and stick them
in the Sides of the miserable prisoners, as thick as the Bristles of an
Hedg-Hogg: which cause an incredible Torment to the Patient; Then they set them
a Fire, and if the tormented Prisoner sing in the Midst of his Torments: He is
esteemed a courageous Soldier, who neither fears his Enemies nor the Torture;
But if on the contrary, He cry out, they esteem him a Coward, and unworthy of
any Memory. This Custom was told me by an Indian, who said He had used his
Enemy thus, oftentimes. But to return to the Prickle-Palm, I shall only tell
you that these Palm Trees in this only differ from the ordinary Palms, The
Leaves are like these of other Palm Trees, only a little bigger, and rounder,
and full of little Kernels, as pleaseing to the Taste as the Walnuts in Europe.
The Wine-Palm is so called from the Abundance of Wine gathered from it, of an
extraordinary Shape or Form for from the Root up half Way, it is only three or
four Inches thick; but upward, something above two thirds of its Height; It is
as big, and as thick, as an ordinary Bucket, and within it is full of a certain
Matter very like a slender Stock of white Cabbage, which is a very juicy of a
Liquor much pleasing to the Palate; This Liquor after Fermentation and Settling
of the Grounds, becomes very good and clear Wine.

The Fruit is much like to that of other Palms, but smaller, like Cherries; To
write farther of the Trees, it would fill a great many Sheets; But I will only
name them: Palm a Chapelet, or Rosary-Palm, so called by the French, and
Spaniards; Caremit-Tree, very like our Pear Tree, very pleasing to the Taste;
Genpa-Trees, like to our Cherry Trees; besides these, there are diverse other
Sorts of Trees, as Cedars in great Abundance, which this Part of the World
produces; They are very useful for building Ships and Canoa's, These Canoa's
are like little Ferry-Boats, being made only of one Tree hollowed, and fitted,
for the Sea: They are so swift, that they may be called Neptun's POSTHORSES.
The Indians make these Canoa's without any Iron Instruments, by only burning
the Trees nigh the Root, and then so governing the fire, as nothing is burnt
more than what they would have; Some have Hatches of Flint wherewith they
scrape or pare off whatsoever are burnt too far, and these by fire only they
give that shape which renders them capable of navigating 60. or 80. Leagues
with ordinary Security. Here is Basile-Wood, Yaco is another Sort of Tree; Here
are a great many Cabbage-Trees, the Cabbage growing on the Top of it. Here
grows the Coco-Nut, of which the Chacolat is made. Here grows the Pinn-Apple,
and a great dale of Plantine, or Sugarcanes, of which they make Sugar; And a
great dale of other Trees, which being too tedious to give you an Account of, I
forbear; You may have any Trees, Roots, or Herbs, that grow in Europe as well
as others that will not grow there, as Mammi; etc. You may have a great dale of
Tobacco if you plant, much better than in any Place to the Northward.

I shall give you an Account of the making Sugar and Indigo in another place.

Flies as Insects several Sorts of them, these are as big as Horse-Flies in
Enrepe, and denting themselves upon Men's Bodies, stick and suck the Blood till
they can no longer fly, which obliges the Inhabitants to wear continually
Branches of Trees to Fan them away; There are a great dale of other Sorts, as
Cochinilla's; There are monstrous Adders which are very frequent in these
Places, upon which Account I durst neverly on the Grass; Here are very good
Land Tortoises, which are very good meat; There are also Crocodiles, I could
tell you, a good true story about One of them, but being too tedious I forbear.

There is a great dale of Dogs, Deer, Rabbets, and Monkeys, and many other
Sorts of Quadrupeds, which Ye have not the like of in Europe.

You have a great dale of all Sorts of Fowls many whereof do not breed in
Europe, as Parrots; They make their Nests in Holes of Palmito Trees, which
Holes are before made by other Birds, for they are not capable of excavating
any wood though never so soft, having their own Bills too crooked and blunt;
Hence provident Nature has supplied them with the Labor of other Birds called
Carpenteros, or Carpinters; These are no bigger than Sparrows: Yet having such
hard and pierceing Bills, that no Iron Instrument can be made fitter to
excavate any Tree, though never so solid, and hard; And these Holes the Parrots
getting Possession of build their Nests.

Of Pigeons of all Sorts we are abundantly provided; There is another small
Bird here called Cabreros, or Goat-Keepers, and chiefly feed upon Crabs of the
Sea; In these Birds are seven distinct Bladders of Gall, and their Flesh is as
bitter as Aloes: Of these We have abundance.

There are very many Crows, or Ravens, more trouble^ome, than useful, who make
a most hideous Noise.

We have several fruits and roots very useful, as Potat^s, they dres them only
by well boiling them in a Kettle, with fair clean water; Then we cover them
with a Cloth for half an Hour where they become as soft as boiled Chestnuts; Of
the said Patates we make a Drink called Maiz: They cut them into small slices,
and cover them with hot water; when they are well imbibed they press them
through a course Cloth, and the Liquor that comes through tho something thick
they keep in Vessels made for that Purpose; Hereafter settling two or three
Days, it works: And having thrown off its Lees, is fit for Drink They use with
great Delight, and though it be somewhat four: Yet it is very pleasant,
substantial, and extraordinary wholesome; The Invention of this is wholly owing
to the Indians, as well as many other things found out for the Preservation of
Man's Life.

There is a Root called by the Indians Cazave of which they make a Liquor
called Vey-Con much like unto Beer.

Another Fruit called Bananas, is an excellent Liquor, which in Strength, and
Pleasantness of Taste, may be compared to the best Wines of Spain: But this
Liquor easily causes Drunkenness.

We begin now to plant Tobacco for Trade; The Manner whereof is this: We make
Bedds of Earth 12. Foot square, these they cover with Palmito Leaves, that the
Rays of the Sun may not reach the Earth; Then we water them when it does not
rain, as we do our Gardens in Europe; Being grown about the Bigness of young
Lettuce: we transplant it into straight Lines in spacious Fields, setting every
Plant 3. Foot distant from each other; The Tobacco must be weeded very
carefully: seeing the least Root of any other Herb comeing near it hinders its
Grouth.

There is a sort of Fish which the Indians many times eat of it is much like
unto a Cow, because its Head, Nose, and Teeth, are very like to them; They are
found commonly where under the Depth of the waters its full of Grass, in which
its thought they feed; They have no Ears, but in place of them two little
Holes, as wide as ones little finger; Near the Neck thy have two Finns, under
which are two Uders like the Breast of a Woman; The Skin is very closs, this
Skin on the Back is two finger thick which being dried is as hard as whalebone,
and may serve to make walking staffs the Belly is in all things like that of a
Cow, as far as the Reins; their manner of engendring is the same with that of a
land Cow, the Male being every way like that of a Bull; they conceave and breed
but once, but what Time they go with Calf, I could learn; These Fishes have a
very acute Sense of Hearing, so as in taking them the fishermen making not
the least Noise do not row unless very slightly, for this reason they use
certain Instruments for Rowing, by the Indians called Pagayos with which they
row without any Noise to fright the fish while they are a fishing they speak
not one to another only make signs, they dart them with Javelins having two
Hooks at the End; These fish are ordinarily from 20 to 24 Foot long; Their Flesh
is good to eat, being in like in color to that of a land Cow, but in taste to
Pork It has much Fat, or Grease, which We make Oil of.

We have also another fish called Tortoise, of an indifferent Bigness, and of a
green Color, their Scales are somewhat hard, and of a very pleasant Taste;
There is another Sort somewhat smaller; this Sort commonly keep themselves
among the Rocks, whence they crawl out for Food, which is generally Sea-Apples;
These other above mentioned, feed on Grass, which grows in the Water on the
sandy Banks; Their Eggs are almost like these of a Crocodile, but without any
shell, being only covered with a thin film; They are found in such prodigious
Quantitys along the shore, that were they not frequently destroyed by Birds,
the Seas would abound with Tortoises.

The Way and Manner of fishing them is as follows; viz. by making a great
Nail, or Kind of Dart; this they fix at the End of a long Pole, with which they
kill the Tortoises whenever they appear above Water.

The Indians for the most part are very dextrous in taking these Tortoises.

I will give you an Account of our shooting of some Monkeys, and Birds called
Pheasants; The Toil of shooting did seem, at least to me, to be sufficiently
compensated with the Pleasure of killing the Monkeys, for at these We made
ordinarily 15 or 16 shot before We could kill three or four, so nimbly would
they escape our Hands, and aim even after being much wounded; On the other side
it was a Diversion to see the femal Monkeys carry their little Ones on their
backs when any Person passed under the Trees-where these Monkeys are sitting;
They will commonly squirt their Excrements upon our Heads and Clothes; likewise
if shooting at any, one happen to be wounded, the rest flock about him, and do
lay their Paws upon the Wound to hinder the blood from issuing forth, others
gather Moss from the Trees and thrust into the Wound, and hereby stop the
Blood; At other times they gather such or such Herbs, and cheuing them in their
Mouth apply as Poultties, all which caused in Me great Admiration, seeing such
strange Actions in these irrational Creatures, which testified the fidelity and
love they had for one another.

I shall give you an Account, by the way, of the People; I have learned to
speak somewhat of the Language by One of them them who can speak tolerable good
English.

I inquired into their Customs, Lives, and Policy: whereof I give you this
Account; They are governed by a King, and several Princes: they have generally
a great Hatred against the Spaniards, There are a great many persons of them;
they are very courtious to any that give them any thing. Here are two Sorts of
People of them: The one Sort cultivates the Ground, and make Plantations; these
are most numerous, the other is a lazy sort, never seen but at Night: They have
Hutts that they live in all Day, till Night; they not careing for any other
Habitation

They use no other Clothes than an Apron tied to their Middle, comeing down so
as to hide their Privitys; such Aprons are made of the Rinds of Trees, which
they strongly beat upon Stones till they are sofned; The same they use for
Bed-Cloaths, except a few who make them of Cotton, they are whiter than the
whitest in Scotland.

The other is of a Brownish Color, but very handsome Bodies of Men and Women
tightly limbed, the Men of them are very dextruous at Bow and Arrow, and very
good spears the common Sort use spears of Timber, the points are shod with
Iron, or teeth of Crocodiles. They are most dextruous in Swimming, I did never
see the like of them in Doucking for they will continue near half an Hour below
the Water.

I could never learn what Religion they have, all I could learn was they
neither believe in, nor serve the Devil: as many other Nations in America, do;
Hereby they are not so much tormented by him as other Nations are. They are
very attentive at our Form of Worship; they did tell me they did not like
Spaniards Religion, for they are as ill as those that worship the Devil, for
that Religion can not be good which is so cruel.

Their ordinary Food consists in several Fruits, a little indian Corn; Fruits,
such as Bananas, Racoves, Ananas, Potatos, Cazave; As also Crabs, and several
Fish, which they kill in the fea with Darts, which they are wonderfully
dextruous at.

They are pretty expert in making certain pleasant and delicat Liquors; The
commonest among them is called Achioc, this is made of a certain Seed of
Palm Tree, bruised and steept in hot water, till it be settled at the Bottom.
This Liquor being strain,d off, has a pleasant ta^e, and is very nourishing.
Other sorts of liquors they prepare, which I shall omit for brevity; only I Will
say something of that made of Platanos These they knead hot with water, and
then put into great Calabashes, full of cold water for eight Days, during which
it ferments as well as the best wine. This Liquor they drink for Pleasure, and
as a great Regale, so that when they invite any of their Friends, or Relations,
they cannot treat them better than with this pleasant Drink.

They are very unskilful in dressing Victuals; so that they very seldom treat
one another with Banquets. But when they invite others they desire them to come
and drink of their Liquors. Before the invited Persons come to their House,
those that expect them, comb their Hair very well, and anoint their Faces with
the Oil of Palm, mixed with a black Tincture which renders them very hideous,
The women, also dawb their Faces with another Sort of Stuff, which makes them
look is red as Crimson. And such are their greatest Ornament, and Attire, Then
He that invites, takes his Arms, which are three or four Azagayas, and goes out
his Cottage 3 or 400 Steps, to wait for, and receive the invited persons. As
soon as they draw nigh, he falls down on the Ground, lying flat on his Face,
without any Motion, as if he were dead; being thus prostrat, the invited
Friends take him up, and set him on his Feet, and go altogether to the Hutt.
Here the Persons invited, use the same Ceremony falling down to the Ground, as
the Inviter did before. But he lifts them up one by one, and giving them his
Hand, conducts them into his Cottage, where he causes them to sit. The Women
on these Occasions use few, or no Ceremonys.

Being thus brought into the House, they are presented every one with a
Calabash, of about two Pynts of Scottish Measure, full of Achioc almost as thick
as Water Gruel, or Children-Pap. These they are to drink off, and get down at
any Rate.

These Calabashes being emptied, the Master of the House, with many Ceremonys,
goes about the Room, and gathers his Calabashes. And this Drinking hitherto
is reckoned but one Welcome. Afterward, they drink of the Achioch above
mentioned, to which they were invited.

Then follow many Songs and Dances, and 1000 Caresses, to the Women; So that
oftentemes, for a Testimony of their great Love, they take their Darts, and
with the points, they pierce and wound their genital parts. This I could
believe, though often affirmed to me, till my own Eyes were Witnesses of these
and the like actions. Neither only on this Occasion do they use this Ceremony
of pierceing their Genitals, but also when they make love to any Woman, thereby
to let them understand the Greatness of their Affection, and Constancy.

They marry not any young Maid without the Consent of her Paients. If any
desires to take a Wife; he is first examined by the Damsels Father concerning
feverall Sorts of good Husbandry. These are commonly, whether He can make
Azagayas, Darts for fishing; or spin a certain Thread, which they use about
their Arrows. Having answered to Satisfaction, the Examiner calls to his
Daughter, for a little Cabalash full of Achioc. Of this he drinks first; then
gives the Cup to the young Man; and He to the Bride, who drinks it out and with
this only Ceremony the Marriage is made. When any one drinks to the Health of
another, the second Person is to drink out the Liquor, lest in the Calabash,
but in Case of Marriage, as was said, it is consumed only among them three: And
the Bride allways obtaining, by far, the greater share.

When the Woman lys in, neither She nor her Husband observe the Time,
costomarie among the Carribes; But as soon as the Woman is delevered, she goes
to the next River, Brook or Fountain, and washes the newborn Creature,
swathing it up in certain Rowlers, or Swath-Bands, there called Cabalas. This
done she goes about Her ordinary Labor. When the Man dies, his Wife burys Him
with all his Azagayas, Aprons, and Ear-Jewels; and comes every Day to her
Husbands Grave bringing Him Meat, and Drink, for a whole Year after.

Their Years they reckon by Moons, allowing fifteen to every Year, which makes
their entire Circle, as our twelve Months, do ours.

Some Writers of the Carribbe-Islands, affirm, that this Ceremony, of carrying
of Victuals to the Dead, is general among them; and that the Devil comes to
the Sepulchers, and carries away the Meat and Drink. But I know the contrary,
having my self taken away these Offerings, and eaten them; for I knew that the
Fruits used on these Occasions, were of the choicest, and the Liquors of the
best Sort. The Widow having completed her Year, opens the Grave, and takes out
all her Husbands Bones; These she scrapes, and washes very well and puts them
in a Cabala, or Satchel, and is obliged for another year to carry them upon her
Back all Day, and to sleep upon them all Night, till the Year be out. Then she
hangs up the Bagg and Bones, against the Pest of her own Door, if she be a
Mistress of an House, if not she hangs them at the Door of her next Neighbor,
or Relations.

The Widows cannot marry the second time, according to their Customs, till
after two Years End; the Men are bound to perform no such Ceremonys for their
Wives; But if any Pirrat marry an indian Woman, she is bound to do in all
things as if he were an Indian.

I shall proceed now to give you an Account of the Men, Women, and their Habits;

They wear as an Ornament in their Noses, a Gold, or Silver-Plate, in Form of
an Half Moon; which when they drink, they hold up with one Hand, while they
lift up the Cup with the other. The Men paint themselves sometimes with Streaks
of Black, and the Women with Red. The Women have in their Noses a pretty thick
Ring of Gold or Silver and cover themselves with a Blanket only. They are
generally well featured: Among whom I saw several fairer than the fairest in
Europe, with Hair as white as the finest Flax. It Is reported of them, that they
see better in the Dark, than in the Light.

I shall further give You an Account of our going up the country to their King
or chief Captain; we marching from our Fort with Captain Andraeas, and other of
their Princes: We began our March toward their head Place, where their King
resided, first through a small Skirt of a Wood, and then over a Bay almost
three Miles, or a League in Length. After that We went about six or seven
Miles up a woody Valley, and We saw here and there some old Plantation, and had
a very good Path to march in. There we came to the side of a River, which in
most places was dry, and built Us Houses, or rather Hutts, to lodge in.

The Indians forbad us to ly upon the Grass, for Fear of monstrous Adders,
which are very fiequent in those places.

Breakeing some of the Stones that lay in the River, We found them shine with
Sparks of Gold; These Stones were driven down from the neighboring Mountains
in Time of Floods.

The next day of our March We mounted a very steep Hill, and on the other side,
at the Foot thereof, We rested on the Bank of a River, which Captain Andraeas
told us, ran into South Sea, being the same River on which the Town of Santa
Maria was situated. Hence We continued our March till about Noon, and then
ascended another Mountain, far higher than the former; Here We were often, and
in many places in great Danger, the Mountain being so nigh to a Perpendicular,
and the Path so narrow, that but one Man at a Time could pass, We arrived in
the Evening on the other Side of ihe Mountain, and lodged again by the Side of
the same River.

Next Morning, We marched all along the River aforementioned, crossing it
often, almost at every half Mile, sometimes up to the Knees, and at other times
up to the Middle, in a very rapid current. About Noon we came to a place, where
we found some Indian Houses. These were very large, and neat: The sides were
built of Cabbage-Trees, and the Roofs of wild: Canes, thatched with
Palmito-Royal; They had many Partitions, or distinct Ground-Roomes, but no
Ascent by Stairs. At this place were four of these Houses together, all within
a Stone's throw of one another, each of them having a large Plantan Walk
before it. Half a Mile from this place, lived the King, or chief Captain of the
Indians of Darian when came to visit Us in Royal Robes, with his Queen. and
Family. His Crown was made of small white Reeds curiously woven, having no
other Top than its lineing, which was red Silk. Round about the middle of it
was a thin plate of Gold, about two Inches broad, laced behind, in which stuck
two or three Ostrich Feathers. About this Plate went also a Row of golden
Beads, which were bigger than ordinar Pease; underneath which was seen the red
lining of the Crown. In his Nose he wore a large Plate of Gold, in Form of an
half- Moon; and in each Ear a great gold Ring, nigh four Inches diameter with a
round thin plate of Gold of the same Breadth, having an small Hole in the
Center, by which it hung to the Ring. He was covered with a thin white Colton
Robe, reaching to the small of his Legs, and round its Bottom a Frienge of the
same, three Inches deep; so that by reason of the length of this Robe, We could
see no farther than his naked Anckles. In his Hand He had a long bright Lance
as sharp as any Knife. With Him He had three Sons each of them having a white
Robe, and their Lances in their Hands, but standing bare-headed before Him; as
also did eight or nine Per ons more of his Retinue, or Guard.

His Queen wore a red Blanket, which was closly girt about her wast, and
another that came losely over her head and shoulders. She had a young child in
her Arms, and two Daughters walked by her, with their Faces almost covered with
stripps, or streaks of red, and about their Necks, and Arms almost laden with
small Beads of several Colors. These Indian Women of Darian, are generally
very free, airy, and brisk; yet withal very modest, and cautious in their
Husbands Presence, of whose Jealousy they stand in Fear. With these Indians We
made an Exchainge, or had a Truck, as it is called, for Knives, Pins, Needles,
or any suchlike Trifles; but in our Dealing with them we found them to be very
cunning.

He gave Us a Calabash full of Liquor which they make of Plantans; This sort of
Fruit is first reduced to Mash, then laid betwixt Leaves of the same Tree, and
so used with Warer. After which Preparation, they call it Miscelaw. On our
March hither We found in our Way, here, and there, an House or two, whose
Owners commonly stood at the door and gave, as we Passed by, to every one of
Us, either a ripe Plantan, or else a Cazave, or some other sweet and pleasant
Root.

This Captain or King, is the head of their other Captains when they go to
Battle against the Spaniards, somewhat to the Southward of this Place is a
pleasant Plain, the general. Place the Indians rendez-vous in.

I shall now give You an Account of the rest of their Captains.

Captain Ambrosio commands from the River Pinas, Bononos, Mango, and Cocos, to
the Samblas, He is a Man above sixty, but strong and vigorous, a mortal Enemy
to the Spaniards, with whom He has had long War; He is esteemed the bravest,
and most succesfull of all their Commanders on every Occasion; He Is of a middle
Size, well made, strongly limbed, and of a grave, and somewhat stern
Countenance.

He has a Son in law, one Pedro, a brisk little Fellow who speaks good Spanish,
having been a Slave to them at Panama for several Years, and who can never
forget, nor forgive, their Usage of him there.

Captain Diego commands from the Bottom of the Gulf of Vraba on this side to
Caret-Bay, and has about 3000. Men under his Command; He is esteemed the most
powerful amongst them, and has been at War with the Spaniard about a twelve
Month. The Occasion was this: The Indians having found three Gold Mines within
his Jurisdiction, being two small ones, and a very great Vein, consulted with
themselves what to do; And being sensible that they did not understand how to
work them, concluded to discover them to the Spaniards, provided they would allow
them such a share of the Profit. This was agreed to, and faithfully promised by
the Spaniards, but no sooner had the Indians showed the Mines but they shut up
two of them, and put strong guards upon them, and fell to work upon the third,
of which the Indians demanding their share, they beat and abused them, calling
them their Slaves, and threatened to exterminat them, which provock'd them so,
that a little time after, they siez'd upon 20. Spaniards, and 3. Priests, and
cut them all to pieces.

The next to Diego, is one Captain Powsigo of Caret-Bay, He is one of the
Indian Clergymen, and commands that Part of the Coast which lies between
Caret-Bay, and golden Island; He is but a small Captain; and Brother in Law to
Andraeas.

The Peninsulae which we possess, and which we found uninhabited (nor has it
ever been by any heretofore, that we have yet heard of,) lys betwixt his
Bounds, and Captain Andraeas's.

From Golden-Island, to the River Pinas; about a League to the Westward of the
Isle of Pinas, Andraeas, and his Brother Pedro command, they are greater than
Powsigo, but not so powerful as Diego; yet their united Interests by
Consanguinity, together with the Vicinity of their Commands to our Settlement,
makes their Friendship of much greater Consequence.

These People have had a good Correspondence, for several Years past, with the
Spaniards, and have suffered some of them to reside among 'em to give an
Account by Land to Panama, from time to time, who were upon this Coast about
two months before our Arrival here.

Captain Ambrosio, who has the adjoining Command, forced them to enter into the
common Confederacy, and cu^t off ten Spaniards who lived on the Main of the
golden-Island, I distinguish it thus, by reason the Natives call all the Main
opposite to the Island, by the same Name that it bears. About a League from the
Water side there is an high Mountain wherein they assure Us are several Mines
of excellent Gold. The Spaniards are very sensible of this, and from time to
time have taken great Care by fair or soul Means, never to let them be opned,
well knowing that (being so near the North-sea) they should have the least
share of them to themselves.

Captain Andraeas has often been at Panama, the Mines of Sauta Maria, and the
South Sea; The Spaniards believeing he might be useful to them, made Him a
Captain, by giveing Him a stick tip't with Silver, upon which He values himself
above others, and that has (we are apt to believe) endeared Him to their
Interests; yet the Love of ones Country, and Liberty is so natural, that we
have good Reason to believe that as soon (being a sensible cunning Fellow) as
He finds we are able to protect Him, he will heartily join to our Interest.

Captain Pedro is esteemed by Ambrosio, and all his People whose Daughter he
has to Wife, as also two of her Daughters by himself, which is allowed here,
yet it seems that they believe it a Crime, since if they have any children
during the Life of their mother, they are buried alive, (I mean the child ren)
which is very strange, that the innocent should suffer for the guilty.

They pressed Us very hard to come and live by them, as also jointly to make war
with the Spaniards, whom they would engage upon the Forfaulture of their Heads,
if we would assist them with an hundred armed Men, and as many Arms, with
2000. of their own People, to drive. not only out of the Mines, (which are but
three Days Journey from this Place,) but even out of Panama it self. We gave
them fair words, and promised to go to the Westward with them to vieu the
Coasts, and if there were any convenienter Harbor for our ships, we would be
their Neighbors.

The Sanblaz to the River Conception, is commanded by one Corbet.

Next to Corbet from the River Conception, is one Nicola, a Man who speaks
Spanish as well as any natural Spaniard, having been for about a dozen of
Years of his Youth among them; He likewise reads and writes it perfectly, and
understands the State of Europe very well: which none other of them have any
Notion of; He is said to be wise and extremly beloved by his People, for his
Justice, and good Nature, in so much that there has been Designs to cut off
Ambrosio, and place Him in his Room, for He is of a rough military temper, and
often upon slight pretinces makes bold to take away what they have from them;
However if they do not love him, they fear him, and his near Alliance, and
strick Friendship with Diego in the Gulf, a powerful, and gallant old Fellow,
renders Him very secure.

This Nicola was in good Terms with the Spaniards till about a twelve Month
ago, a Triffle made Him brake with them: and 'twas this;

He had got an excellent French Fuzie from a Buccanier, which He valued
extremly: 'Twas somewhat out of Order, nor did He know how to right it again; A
Spanish Don from Porto-Bello being at his House, told him he would carry it
with Him, and get it mended for Him, which the other consenting to, with a
Desire it might be returned as soon as possible, They parted. The Don showed it
to the Governor, who liked it extremly, and said 'twas too good for an
Heathen; So ordered an old rusty Match-Lock to be sent in Lieu. This He took so
hainously, that He fell upon the Spaniards wherever He sound 'em, and cut them
off, neither is He to be reconsil'd to them.

Ambrosio who all the rest allow to be the most dareing, and brave, as also the
most faithful to his Promise; being a true Friend, and a most inveterat Enemy
to the Spaniards: keeps Him within Bounds.

From the mouth of the River Coco, about a good League We went to Ambrosio's
House, it standing upon the Bank of this River, with about ten or a Dozen
lesser Houses about it. When We came near, Ambrosio advanced about fifty Paces,
with twenty Followers, all clothed in white loose Frocks, with Frienges round
the Bottom, and Lances in their Hands.

He saluted Us kindly, and gave Us a Calabash full of Liquor almost like
Lambs-Wool, which they call Mishlow, being made of Indian Corn, and Pa^tatoes.
This they get drink withal often; Before the house, about twenty Paces it was
very smooth and clean. The house was about ^0. Foot in Length, 35. in Breadth,
and 30. in Height. I was curiovsly thatched with Palmetto-Royal, and over that
Cajan Leaves, The Floor was of a firm Earth, like Tarras, very smooth, and
clean. The Sides were of large Canes, about the Bigness of a Man's Leg, and
near an Inch asunder.

In this House live Ambrosio, and Pedro with their whole Familys, in all about
40. Persons.

There was an old Woman who cooked their Victuals for them, and was very
stirring about the House; She seemed to Us to be near sixty. (and was
Ambaosio's Grandmother) but upon asking Her Age, We were in^orm'd She was an
hundred and twenty; We could not believe it, and were persuaded they must
mistake in the Computation of Time: but as an infallible Demonstration, they
showed to Us the sixth Generation of this Woman's Body in the House, which was
indeed very surpriseing; And we were assured 'twas common amongst them to live
150. or 60. Years; Yea it is observed those of them who converse often with the
Europeaus, and drink their strong Liquors, are short lived

While We stayed there, Ambrosio, and Pedro went out with their Guns to kill
some Fowl for Us; Pedro returned with some Partridges, the largest, and best
that e're I saw, being bigger than our Capons, and exceeding sweet.

On November 30. Captain Andraeas came a-board the St. Andrew, We waiting an
Opportunity of clearing some Suspicions We had of his Correspondence with the
Spaniard, We taxt Him with it, and He ingeniously confessed that the Spaniards
had been friendly to Him, and had made Him a Captain; that He was obliged for
his Safty to keep fair with them, They assureing Him We were nothing but
Privateers, who had no Design to settle, but to plunder both Spaniards, and
Indians, and be gone in two or three Months time, as they used to do, and if
so, if He assisted Us in any Measure, as soon as We were gone, they would destroy
both Him, and His.

We gave Him all possible Assurances of the Contrary, so that He was fully
satisfied, and desired we would give Him a Commission, and receave Him, and his
People into our Protection; which if we did, He Would give Us all his Right to his
part of the Country. VVhereupon a Commession was ordered for Capt. Andraeas,
and being read and approven of, it was delivered to Him.

The Commission being read, and rendered Verbatim to Him in Spanish, He agreed
to every Article: then before 7 or 8 of his own People, and several of ours,
it was delivered unto Him with a broad basked-hilted Sword, and a Pair of
Pistolls, with which He solemly promised to defend Us to the last Dropp of His
Blood, against all our Enemies.

Upon Advice of the K. of Spain's Indisposition, Count Montizeuma Viceroy of
Mexico, born in that Kingdom, and of the Race of these great Emperors, had made
such an Interest that it is not to be doubted that he will speedily set up for
himself.

Carthagean has likewise been in a civil War, which is only covered, not
quenched.

At Porto-Bell about 700. Slaves got into a Body, which in a little time
encreast to above 1500. The Governor not being able to suppress them, was
forced to come to very dishonorable Terms, viz. to allow them to be a free
People, independent o^ the Spaniards, and only called their Friends.

Captain Powsigo of Caret-Bay, told us of several Gold-Mines within two Miles
of us, and showed us a Sample of the Gold, which was extraordinary fine.

FINIS.

