A LETTER OF ADVICE TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN Of an Honorable FAMILY, Now in His
TRAVELS Beyond the SEA'S: For his more safe and profitable Conduct in the Three
great Instances, of Study, Moral Deportment, and Religion. In Three Parts. By a
True Son of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for R. Clavell, at the Sign of the Peacock in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1688.

LICENSED,

July 25th. 1688.
Honored SIR,
MY Old Distemper returning suddenly upon me, I could not wait on you as I
designed, and see you on Shipboard: Yet my hearty Prayers and Well-wishes
have, and shall ever attend you, for the good Success of your Travels, and safe
Return. I think my self also obliged to congratulate your happy Voyage, and
hopeful Settlement (and as I am informed) in a flourishing and well-governed
University; where you cannot want Means and Opportunities to improve your Parts
considerably, and enrich your Soul with such excellent Habits, as none of your
Rank and Years may outdo you in the most desirable Accomplishments of
Knowledge, Wisdom and Experience.

But (Sir,) besides those many Obligations which I shall always recognize with
the greatest Expressions of Love and Gratitude, I have several other Motives
and Inducements, (as you will see in the Sequel of this Epistle,) which have
prompted me to give you the trouble of perusing these following Sheets: And tho
I am very sensible, that you cannot want the Counsel and Advice of Men far more
eminent for Learning and Observation than I durst ever pretend to; yet my
Endeavors may have their desired Influence (and kind Acceptance) as the Effect
of undissembled Love and Fidelity, and the Product of his retired and serious
Thoughts, who (to his power) ever was, is, and, God willing, shall be a true
Friend to your Self and Family.

Yet I must beg leave to tell you, (before I proceed to the subject Matter of
this Epistle,) that the Eyes of your Country are much upon you, as the hopeful
Son of such a Father; and therefore you must expect, as your Accomplishments,
so your Defects will be narrowly and critically observed. You must therefore
either study to equal, and (if possible) outdo his eminent Virtues and
Endowments, or otherwise you will find that they will exceedingly lessen and
eclipse your own. Besides, you have left your Country, Relations and Friends,
for the increase of Learning and Experience; we do all therefore hope to see
the generous and worthy Fruits and Effects of your Care and Industry, and as
great a change in your Person as in the Climate. Nor can it be much
satisfaction to your self or others, tho you be able to give an account (at
your return) of the strange Occurrences of Nature or Event: For, the Fruits of
Study and Travel should not rest there, but your chief business will be to
cultivate and beautify your Soul with such useful and profitable Knowledge, as
may be a future benefit both to your self and others; nor can any thing less
than this, counter vail the great Charge, Hazzards, and Fatigues of Travel.

You should also consider (Sir,) that your Co-temporaries here are growing up
apace, and may be great Proficients in all sorts of Learning; and therefore as
you will have greater Opportunities, so you must endeavor to make a suitable
Improvement in all the gentiel, ingenuous and virtuous Accomplishments, both of
Mind and Body. But if by their Diligence they should outstrip you, it would be
no little Reflection; not to mention the fruitless expense of Time and Money,
and the far greater Hazzards you run upon amongst Foreigners and Fugitives.

Nor will it be unseasonable to remark to you, that several Young Gentlemen
(within the compass of your own observation,) have returned from beyond Sea's,
as ignorant to the full, and more immoral and extravagant, than if they had
never left the Smoke of their own Chimneys. They have indeed dearly purchased,
and brought over with them some new Modes, affected Gestures, (if not the
Diseases of the Country,) and such Language and Deportment as are not only
ungentiel and unbecoming, but unmanly and unchristian: (We shall have occasion
to take notice of some Particulars afterward;) insomuch that they are so far
from being either wiser, or better for their Travels, that (to give them their
due) they have only commenced Masters of that hellish and black Art of
Debauchery, Irreligion and Profaneness. But,

These Examples (Sir,) are only noted by way of caution: For we know, and shall
always hope for, and expect better Things and Fruits from you: And your
virtuous Temper, and hither to religious Education, will be a Sovereign
Antidote, and sure Defensitive against all the dangerous and charming
Illectives you can possibly meet with. To which give me leave to add the
following Advice, which I hope may be useful to you in all your Travels; nor
shall it be unseasonable, whilst you continue in that well governed Society,
where perhaps the least Danger is neither feared nor suspected.

Not to trouble you with a longer Exordium: What I have further to impart,
shall for Methods sake, be comprehended under these Three following Heads of
Discourse. And the

First, will respect the well-husbanding and management of your Time in
attending your Studies, or Conversation with others. The

Second, Your Morals, and Civil Deportment. And the

Third, Your Religion.

In all which I shall endeavor to lay down such Rules, as I hope may direct
and encourage you to employ your Time to the best Purposes; so that you may go
on cheerfully in your Business, with the greatest success, delight and
satisfaction; and return home through Gods Blessing, every way accomplished, as a
well-bred Gentleman, a good Scholar, and a sound Christian. All which would be
the greatest Comfort and Blessing to your Parents, an Ornament to your Country,
and the most peculiar Happiness to your Self.

Of these severally and in Order. And First,
A LETTER OF ADVICE TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN Now in His TRAVELS Beyond the SEA'S,
etc. PART I. Of STVDIES.
NOW (Sir) it would be an ill and unaccountable Application of your Time, if
your Quality (as we have seen in too many) should make you impatient of
Discipline and Restraint, or make you consult your Liberty and Ease; the
Effects whereof are usually dangerous and destructive. For since God has
blessed and ennobled you with the Privileges of Birth and Blood, and an
ingenuous and religious Education, you should employ your Time and Faculties in
the search of, and pursuit after those things which now, and in the
after-course of your Life, will afford you the greatest Advantages, as well as
Pleasure and Delight. You must not fancy then, that God made you only for
Sports and Pastimes, but gentiel and heroic Exercises: Let those who understand
no better, please and divert themselves with their Horses, Dogs, Wine, etc. But
what are all these to the more noble and worthy Endowments of a Gentleman and a
Scholar? And seeing God has been pleased to bless you with the understanding
and all other Faculties of a Man (and those too in the best degree) employ the
most considerable part of your Time (especially now whilst you have Leisure,
Opportunity, and few Avocations) at your Book, and in your Study. For,

First, As this will adorn your Soul with the greatest Treasures this World can
afford, so you will have cause to congratulate to your self your own Happiness,
and God Almighty will bless and prosper you in your Endeavors: Who even in
Paradise would not allow Pleasure to the first Adam (tho certainly as Noble as
any of his Descendents) without Labor and Industry. Nor can your retired and
seeming Obscurity in your Studies lessen your Gentility, since there is no
well-bred Scholar that can fail of the Reputation and Character of a Gentleman.
But besides,

Secondly, You Will hereby become not only more courteous and obliging to all you
converse with, but more capable also of managing (with Prudence and Discretion)
those weighty Affairs which may await you at your Return; and your Birth and
Education will entitle you to, both of Justice and State. Besides, you will better
understand what Respect and Encouragement is defervedly due to Learned Men,
(such I mean as are diligent, sober and pious) and herein your dear and worthy
Father may be a Pattern to you, who by his discreet and obliging Carriage, has
extremely endeared himself to all Scholars, but the Orthodox Clergy of the
Church of England especially. And hence it is very observable, that those
Gentlemen only who have purchased to themselves the honor of Learning and true
Breeding, know best how to value and esteem, and are most willing to encourage
those Seize in others; which will also have a mighty Influence upon all
your Dependents, as well as others below you, who do usually either respect or
contemn wise and good Men, by the Examples of their Leaders. Consider,

Thirdly, That whereas the Virtues or Vices of private Men do commonly pass
without much Notice or Censure, you will beset as it were a Beacon upon an Hill;
and as the Words of great Men are usually Maxims and Theorems, so their Actions
become Examples, Rules and Presidents for others to steer and walk by. Besides,
you will be no less esteemed and admired for the Excellency of your natural and
acquired Abilities, than herein for the sway and influence of your Authority;
nor can any thing be more base and inglorious, than a Gentleman only by name,
whose Soul is ignorant and Life immoral.

Fourthly, There Is nothing in this World, which can countervail the great
Expense of your Time and Pains, etc. but Learning and Experience (as before)
which are only attainable by Study and a suitable Conversation with Scholars and
Men of Parts; for hereby you may be qualified both for Action and Speculation,
and excel the Mobile as much in Understanding and Virtue, as Nobility of Birth
and gentiel Extraction. Now, these are the genuine and proper Fruits of
Education and Study; and unless you employ and improve your Time and Faculties
to these purposes, tho perhaps you may gratify and please your Fancy with vain
and empty Delights, yet your Understanding will prove unfruitful; and after
many tedious and dangerous Traverses, you may return Home with a shattered
Body, and a barren and empty Soul.

These are all such generous Inducements, as will prevail with your ingenuous
Temper and Inclination, to keep close to your Studies: But as a further
Obligation and Inforcement, give me leave to remind you of the Miscarriages of
some (who would neither be persuaded to love Learning nor Books) which may be a
sure Caution to you to avoid those Sins and Indiscretions of licentious and
ungoverned Youth.

For alas! we have many deplorable Instances (the Sparks and Blades of our
Age) who consume their Time, Parts, Wit, Estates, etc. in pursuit of the
greatest Fooleries and Vanities in the World, to the greatest shame and
disgrace of themselves, and scandal of others; as if they were a distinct
Species from all Rational Beings, and made only for a Sword, or a Horse, or a
Dog, and the other brutish and sensual Exercises of Luxury and Profaneness. I
am no Enemy to moderate and innocent Pleasures; but those Sots and Ignaro's
make it their Trade and way of Living, to observe all Modes and Fashions,
drink, swear, curse, whore, game, sight and quarrel like Hectors and Madmen,
despise and scorn all below them, and run on in a full Carreer of Sin and
Extravagance.

Insomuch, that I Am afraid they have scarce leisure to say their Prayers, or
look on a Book, and therefore wholly unfit for Christian or ingenuous Converse;
(their Dogs, Horses, etc. being usually the Subjects of their Discourse in
their more serious Intervals). By all which inhuman Methods, many of them are
become so barbarously Ignorant, and void of all Learning, that they have almost
forgot that ever they were at Schools or University (unless they happen to
remember some Pranks they played there) and are as much strangers to Humanity,
Philosophy, History, etc. as if there had been never any such thing as Books or
Learning in the World.

Nor are these the Faults only of our homebred Gentlemen; (for we have many
learned, wise, and good Men, who never had the Curiosity nor Convenience of
Travel) but even of those who have seen many Foreign Countries, Cities,
Delights, etc. yet neglecting the Business they went about (as we have observed
already) have returned home after many impertinent Wanderings, more vain and
prodigal, wicked and irreligious, than those Companions of Ignorance and
Epicurism they left behind them. For what pleasure and satisfaction has that
Man, who has seen all the Novelties and Curiosities in the World, if he has
studied nothing else but to please and pamper his own Appetite? All that we can
say of him, is, that he has bestowed much pains to no purpose, or for that
which is worse; and bought his Sins and Vanities at a dearer rate than others.

Thus, I have set before you those Arguments and Motives, and Dangers and
Hazards, on the right hand and on the left, which your Prudence will consider
betimes; so, that you may improve all those Opportunities that fall in your way
to the best advantages, lest you should unhappily miscarry in your great
Adventure, (as those miserable Instances we have already noted; which the Lord
of his great mercy avert.

Consider again, that your Station, Quality and Parts, may dispose you at your
Return for Offices of Honor and Trust; wherein you may be highly Serviceable
to your King and Country, as your worthy Father is, and has been before you:
Nor can any Magistrate be duly qualified to administer Justice or Counsel, with
ease and satisfaction to himself, or for the benefit of others, but by such
habitual Accomplishments as are the proper Results of Study and Observation:
Insomuch that Charles the Great, Emperor, did solemnly declare, That he had
rather abound in Knowledge than Riches and Honor.

But besides those foregoing Topics, you will find by Experience, that the
Pleasures as well as the Benefits of Study, are so charming and delightful,
that it is next to impossible for a Scholar to be idle: Especially considering
(as a Learned Man observes) the many Improvements of Reason, the sweetness and
delights of Knowledge, the great range and multitude of Thoughts and
Speculations; for there is much wit in Poetry, in Philosophy Reason, improved,
in Mathematics Acuteness, in History curious and strange Events, in Politics
variety of Projects and Designs, in Oratory sweet and delightful Eloquence, in
Divinity supernatural Light, Rules of holy Living and Dying, and heavenly
Devotions: Which last will be a means to sanctify all Endeavors to your use,
and make all your other Studies both pleasant and profitable.

Now a strict and diligent Enquiry into all these several sorts of Learning,
will fill up all the empty Spaces of your Time, which is commonly mis-imployed,
if not vainly misspent, by all those Gentlemen that are not Scholars. You may
alter the Methods and Course of your Studies as you please, so that there shall
never be any spare Time upon your hands; nor will it ever seem to pass away
slowly. But seeing the Husbanding of Time well, is a thing of the greatest
advantage and importance to a Student; I shall give you an account of the
Method which I have used, and found very successful in the Conduct of mine own
Studies: Yet I would not have you to observe it so exactly, as to neglect the
more seasonable Advice of others.

Now I have always thought, that it is the Duty and Interest of every Christian
to be well skilled in the divine Arithmetic of numbering his Days: For Time is
a precious Jewel, for which we must all be accountable; and therefore he who
loses a Day is dangerously prodigal; but those that dare mis-spend it, little
less than desperate. For the prevention then of those Evils and Mischiefs
resulting from the fruitless expense of Time, I shall propound to you this
following Method. And,

First, Rise early in the Morning, if your Health permit; for Aurora musis
amica, and the sooner the more early the Blessing. Let your first Thoughts be
always with God; return him most humble and hearty Thanks for your Refreshment
and Protection from the dangers of the Night. Present the first Fruits of your
Reason and other Faculties to your Maker; think on him whilst you are dressing,
and humbly beg that you may be clothed upon with the Robes of your Saviors
Righteousness, and the most precious Ornaments of his Grace and Spirit.

Then return to your Closet, and pray earnestly, servently, constantly,
devoutly and affectionately unto God, for your Preservation that day, and for
ever, from Temptation. Sin and Danger; and that he would sanctify your Person,
and bless and prosper you in your Studies. 'Twas Luthers observation of
himself, that been or ass est been studuisse; and if your Heart be early
seasoned with Gods Presence, 'twill relish of him all the day after. And when
you have thus happily performed your Morning Devotions, then,

Secondly, Sit down a little and consider (especially if you have occasion to
go abroad or entertain Company that day at your Chamber,) what Temptations or
Sins you are in danger to run upon; resolve against them, and see that your
Purposes be fixed and steady: So that if any of those Temptations should
afterward assault you, call to mind what you have resolved on in your Closet,
and then endeavor to arm your self against them with the Arguments of your
Religion; as the considerations of Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell. But if you
expect nothing extraordinary that day, (intending to continue in the course of
your Studies,) then a serious Recommendation of your Person and Assairs to God,
in a general Petition, will be acceptable and sufficient.

Thirdly, Begin your Studies with reading a Chapter or more of the New
Testament, every morning, till you have read it all over; and then begin again;
always observing the same Method. Meditate of, and consider well what you read,
that you may thence collect some useful Notes and Observations, for the
Confirmation of your Faith, and Conduct of your Manners in the ways of
Religion. And having read some Portion of the Holy Scripture seriously and
deliberately, (for the better understanding of it, you may consult Dr. Hammonds
Paraphrase, or Grotius;) this, with your Prayers, will prepare you for your
other Studies. Wherein,

Fourthly, Your Tutor will be careful to give you the most proper and
seasonable Advice. Your University Learning will be chiefly (as I suppose)
Logicks and Philosophy: Now if you will but take pains to be an accurate Logician,
and thorow-paced Philosopher, (which will not require very much time, if you be
always careful to attend the Lectures and Disputations in the Schools) you will
readily understand any Author; and the whole course of all your future Studies,
will not only thereby become beneficial, but pleasant and delightful.

Yet herein I desire to caution you, not to spend too much Time in dry and
useless Notions and Speculations, being a Fault which I have observed in the
Methods of reading Philosophy in Foreign Universities; for no Study is worth a
Man's while that is not accompanied with Profit, and such unanswerable Reasons
and Arguments as are in a great measure able to silence all future Debates,
seeing the capacity of the Ignorant lies as much below such Philosophical
Curiosities, as the more knowing and judicious are above them; so that there
remains to all in things dubious and only probable, a Power to admit, or reject
what Opinions they please. Therefore I would recommend Mathematics next to
Logicks, as the most useful part of Philosophy; for this Science proposes
nothing but what is apparent by most undeniable Demonstrations; which Knowledge
is not only the chief we can acquire upon Earth, but will also accompany us to
Heaven.

Fifthly, When you have leisure, read over your Classick Authors, and remark
with your Pen what you find most observable in them; for as you will hereby
understand the Customs and Manners of the most ancient and celebrated Heathens;
so this sort of Learning will qualify you to write and speak Latin well: And
when you have obtained this Faculty, you cannot be a stranger in any place
where you come; nor can any thing be a greater Ornament to a Gentleman and a
Scholar.

Sixthly, And seeing your Quality and Estate will exempt you from all other
Professions but that of a Statesman, the Knowledge of all sorts of History
will be very useful and necessary; but especially French Authors, being of all
others the most accurate in Negotiations and Memoirs, recorded by public
Ministers, and published by their Secretaries after their Deaths: For it is
observed by a Person of great Judgment and Policy, that none make more faithful
Reports of things done in all Nations than Ambassadors; having the best and
most authentic Intelligence from their Princes Pensioners, who are obliged to
acquaint them with all they can discover.

Seventhly, Consult likewise all the several Speeches, Declarations, Trials and
Transactions, occasioned by the late unhappy Wars in England, wherein you will
find more natural and useful Knowledge, than is ordinarily to be met with in
all the moldy Records of ancient Statists and Politicians.

Eighthly, There will be no need to advise you what Authors you shall read in
Divinity; for I know sufficient care is taken for that already; yet in my
Opinion, next to the Holy Scriptures and our Churches Catechism, Dr. Hammonds
Practical Catechism, and those Books by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man,
are the best. And indeed all our modern Writers of the Church of England for
the last fifty or sixty years, (who have employed their Parts, Faculties and
Time, in treating de omni ente, and outdone the greatest part of the World,) if
accurately read and well digested, will furnish you with variety of Matter, all
sorts of Methods, and a delicate Style. But then you should take Advice in the
choice of such Books, as are approved and most authentic upon every Subject,
that the whole Time of your Study may be profitably employed; for a few Books
well read and thoroughly digested, will more improve your Reason and Judgment,
than hundreds superficially turned over, as many young Students do.

Yet there is abundance of Pleasure in variety of Books; for when your Faculties
grow dull and weary of one, you may pass to another, as your own Genius and
Inclination shall direct; whereby the whole Time and Business of your Study
will become a delight and benefit, rather than a burden to you: Nor can any
Recreation be so pleasant, (this I find by experience,) nor any Labor so
profitable to a Scholar as Study. And,

Lastly, You Will find it of singular use and advantage for the improvement of
your Parts, to employ and exercise your Pen upon every Occasion. Write often to
your Relations and Friends; for the neglect of that is a general fault in young
Students. Have always a Commonplace Book by you, (your Tutor will direct you
to the most useful Heads, and note therein the most remarkable, quaint, and
ingenuous Passages you meet with in any Author, which you may afterward have
recourse to immediately upon every occasion: Observe likewise, and note in
writing, all the Remarkable Occurrences in your Travel; particularly the
Situation of Places, the Customs and Manners of the People, their Religion,
Government, Policies, Traffic, etc. This will be of great ease to your
Memory, and of singular use and advantage in the whole Progress of your Life;
besides, you will find that your Parts, Style and Method, will be the best
improved by much Writing: All Learned Men can witness this from their own
Experience, and is very remarkable in all our English Worthies; insomuch that I
dare be confident, if you will apply your self to this method, your Reason and
Judgment will by degrees attain to such a Habit, as will not dare to present
you with any thing but what is very curious and excellent.

Yet I would not hereby engage you to be so earnest in the pursuit of your
Studies, as to prejudice your own Constitution; for there is a Time for all
things, and too much reading may prevent the Access of a newer, nearer, and
quicker Invention of your own: Besides, if your Body be strong, as you will rather
complain of the shortness of the Day, than be wearied with Study; so, if it be
weak and feeble, the Decays of Nature may be repaired, being also allowed to
the strongest Constitutions,) either, First, By a suitable Conversation; or,
Secondly, By moderate and innocent Recreations.

For the first of these, namely a suitable Conversation: When you are wearied
and indisposed with your Studies, a door of Conference is open, and the
Conversation of learned, wise, and good Men, is a greater Refiner of the Spirit
than Books. Yet let not this tempt you from your Studies in the Forenoon, which
is the most proper Time to be reserved, and at your Book; however, whilst you
continue in the University: And herein let me advise you to lay down such Rules
to your self, in observing those stated Hours, as no Man shall be able to
persuade you to recede from them; for that when your Resolutions are once
known, as no Person of Ingenuity will disturb you, so you will find this Method of
keeping this best part of the Day to your self,) will become not only
practicable, but very commendable, and of singular benefit to you in more
instances than I can readily mention.

But when Dinner is over, (so soon as you can with convenience and civility to
the Company,) retire to your Closet, and pray (as in the Morning,) always
concluding your Devotions in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the
Lords Prayer: Again, read some portion of the Holy Scripture in the Old
Testament, and the Psalms for the Day, and (as before) with attentive
Observation. (And be as careful in performing your Evening Devotions, with
Thanksgivings for the Blessings of the Day, and earnest Prayer for your Safety
and Protection, that night and for ever). I do not doubt but you have good As
Common Prayer Book, Patrick's Devotions, etc.
Helps and particular Devotions by you for Morning and Evening, which you may
use with your own, as God shall be pleased to enable you: But be sure that you
never lie down to rest, till you have made your Evening Oblation; that whether
you sleep or wake, you may be always safe under the shelter and protection of a
gracious Providence.

But to return, having performed your Devotions after Dinner, then you may
either go to, or send for such Companions as you think fit, and see that they
be always choice and few; for as the vicious and unlearned are not worthy of
your Company and Acquaintance, so too many of the more learned, wiser, and
better sort, will but increase the expense both of your Time and Money;
besides, the Examples of others do usually prevail more, and have a greater
Influence than their Precepts and Counsels; and by the opportunities of
Converse, either good or bad, we commonly imbibe all the Tinctures of Vice or
Virtue; insomuch that it is almost impossible for the most prudent Man to hold
out long against the forcible Batteries of Custom and Opportunity. But,

There are no certain Rules to be prescribed for Converse; seeing all
Discourses of that Kind are Occasional, and depend much upon the Circumstances
of Time, Place, Persons, etc. yet a Gentleman has usually the freedom to be as
inquisitive as he pleases; and what would be censured in others as humorous
Moroseness, or pragmatical Sawciness, will be interpreted in you, as an
ingenuous desire and thirst after Knowledge: Therefore it is a singular and
extraordinary Privilege you have in this Kind above Persons of a lower Rank,
which (being improved to the best Advantages,) may very much conduce to your
Interest and Satisfaction; for he is a very weak Companion from whom you may not
receive some benefit, and return wiser. But then if you correspond with Learned
Men and Communicative, they will freely impart to you those Secrets (in a little
time,) which have cost them, and would have put you to the expense of much
Pains and Travel; and if the Company be below you in Parts and Learning in
being free, open, and discursive of what you know, and the oftener you repeat
them they will be more riveted and confirmed to you, and impress them upon your
Mind and Memory, in more durable and indeleble Characters.

Yet give me leave to caution you in two things: And First, See that you be
innocently free and cheerful in your Conversation: Let hoc age be your constant
Motto; for if a Man be sullen, morose, mopish, and unseasonably poring upon his
Book or Business, he loses the Fruits and Benefits of Converse, nor will his
Company be looked upon by others to be either profitable or diversive. And
Secondly, Avoid the other Extreme of talking too much, as troublesome and
absurd; for every Man that can be a fit Companion for you, will expect to have
a share in the Discourse. It must needs then be a great Vanity in many
Gentlemen, who having some little smatterings of Learning, (for empty Vessels
have the loudest Sound,) do make all Places echo with their Latin, Italian,
French, etc. and Citations out of the most celebrated Authors; for the more
that any Man seems to borrow from Books, he does thereby proclaim the meanness
of his own natural Parts, which only and properly can be called his own.

Be reserved in passing your Judgment, especially in what may concern the
Reputations or Interests of other Men; your Business will be rather to enquire
(as before,) and that too with all possible Candor and Modesty, into the
Policies and Forms of Government, all sorts of Learning, etc. And therefore to
this End endeavor to be acquainted, and converse with Men of the greatest
Parts Sobriety and Experience; from whom you will always receive Benefit, and note
something worthy your Observation. I would not advise you to avoid wholly the
Conversation of your Countrymen, yet correspond as little with them as
possible; for you would find it very unprofitable upon several accounts, which
I leave to your own Consideration.

Thus every thing is beautiful in its Season: And we have seen hitherto how the
chief part of your Time should be employed at your Book, Lectures, and
Exercises in the Schools, and Conversation with others, whilst you continue in
the University, or when settled in any other Place: (For upon Travel,) the
Methods must be altered and ordered according to the Laws and Dictates of
Prudence and Discretion. And tho neither Birth, nor Quality, nor Estate, can
give any Man a Privilege or Patent to be idle: Yet,

Secondly, There must be some convenient Time set apart (which should always be
in the Afternoon,) for seasonable and innocent Refreshments; the Diversion and
Reparation of your weary Thoughts, as well as the Ease and Support of your
Body. But herein I must caution you, that your Recreations be moderate,
endeavoring always to confine your self to these following Rules and Measures.

Therefore your bodily Pleasures should not be expensive of too much Time, nor
Money; both which may be very well employed to better Purposes; nor cruel, nor
bloody, nor sinful; as when Pastimes and Sports are mixed with Anger, Passion,
Violence, Fury, Cursing, Swearing, Quarrelling, Covetousness, and the like: For
we should use our Diversion and Merriments, as we do Sawces to our Meats, to
delight and refresh Us, that we may hereby become more active and vigorous when
we return to our necessary Business and Studies; which cannot by any means
serve those good and necessary Ends, unless they be always conducted with
Reason and Sobriety.

Hitherto of those Arguments and Motives, Rules and Methods, which I hope may
be of some use, not only to allure and invite, (tho most agreeable to your own
temper, and therefore more attractive,) but direct you too in the successful
Management of your Studies. We pass on now to the Second Head, which will more
immediately respect your Manners and Deportment, as they dispose to Religion.

The End of the First Part.
ADVICE TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN Of an Honorable FAMILY Now in His TRAVELS Beyond
the SEA'S, etc. PART II. Of Manners and Deportment.
THE tender Care of your Worthy Parents in your virtuous and religious, as well
as learned Education, and your own natural Genius and Temper might spare me the
trouble of writing a large Essay of Morality and Civil Deportment: Yet because
Wickedness and Vice is always more insinuative than Virtue and Goodness, which
by several repeated Acts grows (gradually) to a custom, and becomes habitual;
and because Persons in your Station are usually exposed to more and greater
Temptations than those who move in a lower Orb: Therefore without any further
Apology, you will be pleased to indulge me the liberty and freedom to become your
Remembrancer, or rather Monitor in a few Things. And,

First, It will be a great Argument of Parts and Discretion, to be modest and
reserved in speaking of your Self, Family, and Affairs, lest by a sanciful and
overweaning Conceit of your own Quality and Merits, you deservedly incur the
the Censure of Pragmaticalness and Ostentation; from which Precipice many have
dangerously fallen: For we know that Pride was the Sin of the fallen Angels and
Foundress of Hell, the ruin of Mankind from the beginning of the Creation, and
ever since hateful in it self, and abominable to God and all good Men: But
besides the Evil, such is the Folly and Vanity of this Vice, that tho the
humorous and self-conceited Man has seldom any thing to boast of, yet he is
usually so transported with an Opinion and towering Ambition of what he has, as
to neglect a Supply of what is wanting; and being always attended with
Insolence and Contempt of others, does effectually blast and disparage all
other Virtues: For every Man is more inquisitive after the Blemishes than
Beauties of a proud Person; whereas the humble and modest Man may pass silently
and uncensured, with more real Faults and Indiscretions.

Therefore have always a lowly and modest Opinion of your own Person, Quality,
Acquisitions, Merits and Endowments, both of Body and Mind; and be content that
others should have so too: For why should any Man admire those little Pittances
of Learning, Knowledge, etc. seeing they are not properly our own, but are
either begged or borrowed from others, or have been purchased and acquired by
dear-bought Experience? Besides if we seriously reflect upon and consider all
the Desiciences, Follies and Indiscretions of our best Performances, the
Ignorance and Errors of our Judgments, the Perverseness and Obstinacy of our
Wills, the many Sins and Infirmities we are daily guilty of, and that every
thing we have may be taken away or blasted in a moment: Such Considerations as
these, would humble the proudest Man alive, and subdue all the vain and
insolent Conceits of our haughty and ambitious Spirits; for such proud and
supercilious Humors are more suitable to the Court of Spain, where Men seem
wifer than they are, than this of England, where our Patriots are usually wiser
than at first sight they seem to be. Therefore as you are obliged to subdue and
abandon all aspiring and lofty Conceits of what you are, or what you have, so
the Practice of Modesty and Humility will recommend you to the Acceptance, and
procure you a good Esteem and Opinion from all you converse with.

Secondly, Be prudently reserved in censuring or ridiculing the Faults and
Indiscretions of other Men: For, a prudent Carriage is highly esteemed by all,
but strangers especially. Besides, Prudence and Discretion will teach and
direct you how to subjugate all the Appetites, Passions, Affections and
Inclinations both of Soul and Body, to the Empire of Reason and sound Judgment;
so that when you have reduced all your lower Faculties to this Order and
Harmony, your Understanding will direct aright, and your Will and Affections
become conformable to the Laws and Rules of right Reason and Religion. Then,
you will manage all your Affairs prudently, with the greatest Calmness and
Tranquillity, and be always in the pursuit of generous Ends, and the most
effectual Means and Methods of obtaining them. And thus,

Thirdly, By acting according to these Rules of Prudence and Discretion, you will
come by degrees to an excellent Temper and Habit of Sobriety and Moderation:
For you will hereby prevail with your self, not to indulge your Appetite, to the
disturbance and disquiet of your rational Powers: Nor will any Man of Prudence
and Sobriety endeavor to please and gratify his Palate with delicate Meats
and Drinks, nor his Touch with Softness and Effeminacy, nor his Eye with fair
and gaudy Show's, nor his Smell with costly Perfumes: For an immoderate
Compliance with all or any of these, would not only force your Reason to quit
her Dominion and Authority, and thereby hurry you into all manner of sin and
wickedness, but continually distract your Thoughts, with a fruitless variety of
Expectations and Disappointments. The ready way then to be at peace with God,
and Man, and your own Conscience, will be to govern your self according to the
sober Dictates of Prudence and Moderation, as Gods Holy Word and the Dictates
of right Reason shall direct you.

Now, these Virtues and their opposite Vices having the most considerable
Aspect upon Gentlemen, as the greatest Examples either of Good or Evil; I shall
therefore be more particular in the handling of this Point of Sobriety: And for
the prevention of a Shipwreck of your Interest and Honor, (many thousands
having split their Vessels upon this Rock,) give me leave to advise you in the

First place, To be very sober and temperate in Eating. Have recourse always to
the foregoing Rules of Prudence, and they will teach you to consult the Health and
Preservation of the Body, that so it may be the fitter Mansion for your Soul:
For it is always observable, that ungoverned Lusts are the inseparable
Companions of intemperate Eating, and all other Sins are indulged and
encouraged by this Kind of Excess; whereas on the contrary, those that live
temperately and according to Rule, are seldom tempted, or troubled, as the
intemperate are, with sickly and ill Humors, or deprived of the comforts and
benefits of Health by raging and violent Distempers: For as a good Conscience
is the best Divinity, so Temperance is the best Physic, and a good Expedient
through Gods Blessing, to preserve mentem sanam in Corpore sano. And therefore if
through inadvertency you should transgress at any one Meal, let no Temptation
allure you to a second Repast, till by a fierce Hunger and Fasting, you find
your self discharged of the former Excess: By which means, your Understanding
will be always clear, and your Constitution firm and unshaken; especially if
you take care,

Secondly, To use the like moderation in Drinking, for your Health and
Refreshment, both as to the Quality and Quantity of Liquors. Your Prudence will
observe, that this is one of the reigning and epidemical Sins of the Nation,
and an Inlet to most other Sins, which many thousands (and those generally none
of the meanest Rank,) make their chief Trade and Business; and is of late Years
become so modish and fashionable in all Entertainments, that the many will
scarce think themselves welcome, unless the Liquor and Freedom be allowed them
to make Beasts of themselves: One would think that their Quality and Education
should reach 'em better Manners. But alas! they will go further yet, and the most
which is yet a higher Aggravation of their Sin and Villainy,) become the Devils
Factors for Damnation; and use the most base and sordid Methods, not only to
debauch themselves, but knock down others. But for the prevention of all Excess
in this Kind, be pleased to consider,

That intemperate Drinking is the incentive to, and fuel of all filthy Lusts:
For Chambering and Wantonness is the usual Effect of Rioting and Drukenness, as
the most Debauchees find and feel by woeful experience. This puts Men upon
desperate Projects, and engages 'em in all sorts of Wickedness and Villainy;
insomuch, that the very most in their drunken Fits, will blaspheme, swear,
curse, lie, backbite and rail against their innocent Neighbors, and do often
kill and destroy one another: For some of 'em are cut off by sudden Accidents,
others in Duels, occasioned through Drinking; and not a few of those guzling
Hectors have summed up their Days at the end of a Watchmans Bill. In a word,
intemperate Drinking lays a sure Foundation for all sorts of lingering Diseases,
makes the most not only Beasts, but Madmen, and either brings them (as I have
noted to you,) to a swift, untimely, and cruel Death, or a detestable and
infamous Old Age, (which not one in a thousand ever attains to,) and those that
do, are offensive to all honest and virtuous Company, and to God the most of
all: And besides these temporal Punishments, see their eternal Doom is detained
already, if they live and die in this Sin unrepented of, and unreform'd. Isa.
5.11, 12. Luke 21.34. Gal. 5.21. Whereunto might be added many other parallel
Passages to the same purpose.

These Considerations well weighed, might persuade any Man to be master of his
Appetite, and keep himself within the due bounds of Temperance and Moderation;
which would not only be an extraordinary Blessing to private Persons and
Families, but conduce very much to the Interest of the Public: For I am
confident, there is more Money spent in one year in excessive Drinking, than
would very well provide for and maintain all the truly poor and indigent People
in England.

Therefore as you tender the Welfare of your Person and Family, and Interest of
your Soul and Body, in this and a suture Life, avoid and abandon the
Conversation and Company of all dissolute, debauched and intemperate Persons:
Let not their Allurements, nor Scoffings, nor Railings, persuade you to a
compliance with them in their inhumane and beastly Immoralities, so as to run
with them to the same Excess of Riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. For, they are the Devils
Instruments, whom he commonly imploys, to precipitate inconsiderate Youth from
the Throne of Virtue: Besides, it is a most infectious and bewitching Vice,
insomuch, that if a Man should once fall in love with, and contract a Habit of
Drunkenness, 'twill be very difficult to shake it off; for the longer it
possesses him, the more he will delight in it; and the older he grows, the
more beastly and sottish: Upon which account many have complained at the last
Hour, that this single Sin has been the cause of all their other Wickednesses,
which they must eternally smart for.

I know the best of Men may sometimes exceed the Boundaries of Sobriety and
Temperance in Drinking: Now (Sir,) if ever it should be your Unhappiness to be
overtaken with this Fault, whose Consequences are so mischievous, (which I
beseech you beware of;) do not remove from the place where you received it,
except in such a place or company where the Danger may increase by your
continuance therein; for hereby some part of the Inconvenience may be avoided,
and more of the Shame and Scandal, always attending this giddy Spirit; which
working in the Pate, will make one act all the Humors habitual in a Madman.
When you have obtained a Habit of Temperance, in the moderate use of Meats and
Drinks, which are the proper Effects and Fruits of Prudence, these Virtues will
dispose you:

Thirdly, For the well-governing of the other Lusts and Appetites of the Flesh,
in your Abstinence from bodily Pleasures. Now (Sir) you are under the most
forcible Obligations by the Laws of Nature and Christianity, to avoid and
abstain from all carnal Pollutions, and every kind and degree of Effeminacy:
For unless you keep under your Appetite (as Prudence directs,) 'twill presently
set on fire the whole Course of Nature, and plunge both Soul and Body into most
desperate, damnable, and irreparable Mischiefs.

For this kind of sinful Excess and Extravagance, seldom or never fails to draw
Men away from God and his Worship; which is observable in that deplorable
Instance of young King Solomon, 1 Kings 11.12. who tells us from his own sad
Experience, (which might be a sufficient Caution to all young Men,) that when
they are once plunged into those Pits of Filthiness, it is very difficult to
retreat. See Prove. 7.22, 23. and Prove. 23.27. implying in both Passages, the
great Perils and Dangers intemperate rate Persons run upon, who will prostitute
their Wit, Learning, Honor. Estates, and endanger their Souls, Bodies, and
All, rather than not gratify their brutish and unsatiable Lusts. This is not
only the case of this great Man before us; for we have seen many sad and
miserable Spectacles even in our own Age of the decayed Bodies, shattered
Estates, and ruined Families, of many (otherwise hopeful) Young Gentlemen. And
tho perhaps here and there one may escape the woeful Effects of this Lewdness
and Debauchery, for the present,) yet without repentance and amendment of Life,
Gods Judgments and Vengeance will certainly overtake them in another World: For
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; and whosoever dies under the
reigning Power and Prevalence of this Sin, shall never enter into the Kingdom
of God.

Therefore for God's sake and your own, and as you tender the Weal of your
Family, hold no Parley with your Appetite in this Case; for if you do comply in
the least, you are in great danger of being overcome. Set a strict Guard then
upon all your Senses, watch all the Ports and Avenues of your Soul against the
incursion of carnal Temptations, and have God always in your thoughts: This was
young Joseph's security against the lustful Temptations of his wanton and
importunate Mistress; so that by this means, if any evil Motions should creep
in unawares, you will not suffer them to fix there; but either cast them out, or
kill them.

Use strict Temperance (as we have persuaded before,) with Fasting and Labor;
all which are powerful Expedients to subjugate the Flesh, and the best
Instruments to further you in the great work and necessary business of
Mortification and Self-denial. And hereunto add your most earnest Prayers unto
God for the assistance of his Grace, that you may obtain a comfortable Victory
over your Appetites and Passions; which is a Duty so absolutely necessary, that
unless it be constantly and regularly performed, all your other Natural and
Moral Endeavors will prove ineffectual and to no purpose. And thus your
Christian Prudence and Moderation in all these several Instances, will further
qualify you,

Fourthly, For the exercise and improvement of those other excellent Virtues of
Meekness and Patience, which you will find of admirable use and advantage for the
quiet and peaceable government of your whole Life; so that your Conversation
will become not only pleasant, but delightful both to your self and others. Now
these Virtues do eminently consist, in bearing and suffering meekly and
patiently all the cross Accidents (which you will often meet with,) without
fainting and fretting, and such an evenness and composedness of Mind, as is
only consonant to the Mild and Gentle, yet magnanimous Temper and Spirit of
Christianity; and if all be thus well within, no Troubles nor Afflictions can
vex nor discompose you from without. Besides, when by the Assistance of God's
Grace you are formed into this admirable Frame and Temper of Mind and Spirit,
you will neither be timorous in Danger, envious in Want, impatient under
Afflictions, angry or restless at Reproaches and Contempt, nor malicious and
revengeful under Injuries and Affronts; but bear every cross Event with
equanimity and a cheerful submission to the Will of God, in all Straits and
Difficulties whatsoever. And this is certainly the greatect Victory in the
World, (and far beyond all the Conquests and Achievements we ever read of,)
for a Gentleman to be master of his own Passions.

Hence therefore 'twill evidently appear, how much those Persons are to blame,
who think it a piece of Honor in case of Injuries and Affronts, to make the
Sword Umpire of their own Life and others. And tho many great Families have
paid dear for this Honor or Valor, (as they are pleased to call it,) yet I do
not find it warranted either by Prudence or Religion, (as a worthy Gentleman
observes;) nor will any Man that is either wise or pious, either give or accept
a Challenge: For no Quarrel can be screwed up to that pitch of Indiscretion,
but one or both Parties must be arraigned as guilty of the most stupendous
Folly and Madness in the World. Besides, formal Duels are but a late Invention
of the Devil, and never heard of in former Times, as relating to private
Injuries and Affronts; and it is most certain, that sending of Challenges
renders the Dead a greater Murderer than he that kills him, as being the
immediate Author of his own Death: Nor are these inhumane and unchristian
Practices so genteilly treated by our English Laws, that any Man should be
encouraged in this desperate Attempt: For if the Murderers Legs, or his Friends
procure not his Pardon or Reprieve, (tho he should not die in the Encounter,
yet) he runs precipitantly upon his own Death, and his Estate shall be
confiscated too, to the perpetual detriment and undoing of his Family. Besides
the Sting of Conscience, (if he has any Conscience at all,) and a dreadful Fear
like that of Cains, attending Blood, will render the whole remainder of his
Life tedious and miserable to such unfortunate Men; who will ever after smell
too strong of Blood, to be admitted into any intimate Friendship or Relation.

Therefore in this Case particularly, Meekness and Patience are not only a
Christian Virtue, but the truest Courage and surest Defensative against all
Injuries and Affronts: And as the practice of these Virtues may probably
qualify the Heats and Passions of any quarrelsom and dissolute Company you
shall happen to engage in, (tho take all possible care to avoid such Furies,)
so this excellent Frame and Temper of Mind and Spirit, will dispose you for a
brighter Crown when these Storms are blown over. Again, The exercise and
improvement of this Christian Prudence and Moderation, Meekness and Patience,
will further direct and enable you,

Fifthly, To be moderate in using, and a good Husband in the management of that
Patrimony and Estate, which Gods Providence and the Discretion of your Parents
have allotted you. Now it is observable, that Riches and Honors do expose Men
to the greatest Temptations; (and tho your present Circumstances do not require
much Enlargement upon this Head,) yet give me leave to remark to you, That it is
a great fault and weakness in many Young Gentlemen, who cannot see the Pomps
and Vanities of the World, but they must needs fall in love with them. These
seeming Beauties may and will tempt you (if possible,) to Lewdness and Luxury;
but it is your own fault if you be ensnared and led captive by them: Nor shall
you ever find any thing in those vain Fooleries, which will be able to satisfy
or please your rational Desires and Expectations.

Yet I shall readily grant you, that he whom God has blessed with a plentiful
Estate, has many great Opportunities to do good both to himself and others;
(for your direction herein, see the Gentleman's Calling): Nor can any Man of
Reason and Piety (tho he be rich and honorable,) come under the Temptations of
being either Idle or Extravagant: For righteous Noah did in reality see two
Worlds (before and after the Deluge,) and yet was not polluted with the Vices
or Vanities of either; virtuous Lot was holy and chaste in the midst of Sodom;
and Moses in Pharaoh's House kept close to the God of Israel; so did Elisha in
the Syrian Court, and Daniel and others among the Persians, etc. Your Danger or
Safety then, must slow from a Principle within you: For tho the Devil and the
World may and will tempt, yet they have no power to constrain you: Nor can any
thing ever make a Man unhappy, but a voluntary compliance with those
Temptations, and the base suggestions of his own slavish Appetite. Be prudent
and moderate therefore in disposing of your Money (both now and always); for if
you spend too high, you will incur the Censure of Prodigality or Epicurism; and if
too low, either of unbecoming Niggardliness, or fordid Covetousness: Which (as
an ingenious Person observes,) is like a Candle ill made, and smothers the
splendor of a happy Fortune in its own Grease.

Sixthly, Be moderate also in your Habit and Apparel; let it not be youthfully
wanton, but grave and comely, like the Mind and Behavior of the Wearer. But do
not by any means exceed in the Humor of Bravery: For our Clothes should rather
humble, than puff us up, being always the visible Ensigns of our Sin and
Slavery; nor shall any Man be esteemed for this sort of Extravagance, but by
Fools and Wantons.

Seventhly, I shall but add one Consideration more, and that will be of general
use and necessary importance, in the prudent, moderate, patient, peaceable and
christian Conduct of your whole life; which will render your Conversation
pleasant and profitable to your self, and acceptable to all virtuous and good
Men. And this will be the discreet and conscientious Management of all your
Thoughts, Words and Actions. And,

First, For the government of your Thoughts. Now (Sir,) if you be careful and
reserved, so as not (willingly) to conceive or foster an evil Thought, you will
then be afraid to speak, or act any thing contrary to your own Reason and
Conscience. And to this End think often (as before) of the quatuor Novissima,
Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell; which through the assistance of God's Grace,
may keep all the sinful Excursions of your Thoughts under so much restraint, as
you will not readily and willingly conceive any thing that shall be either sinful
or irregular. And this will be an excellent Disposition.

Secondly, For the Government of the Tongue, which should be always kept under
a strict guard: For Solomon says, That Life and Death are in the power of it.
And Euripides truly affirms, That every licentious and unbridled Tongue shall
in the end find it self unfortunate: For we see by daily experience, that all
Quarrels, Mischief, Hatred, etc. and Destruction, arises from unadvised
Speech; and in much Talking there are many Errors, from which your Enemies
will take the most dangerous Advantage. Besides, all scurrilous, frothy,
profane, idle, uncharitable, filthy, and wanton Communication, is not only
sinful and impertinent, but altogether unbecoming a Gentleman; whose Example is
usually a Pattern to others, and for whose sins they must be accountable (if
they be Patterns of wickedness) as well as their own.

Set a watch then always before the doors of your Lips, that no vain
Communication proceed out of your Mouth; and pray earnestly unto God, that he
would so sanctify your Speech, that Truth, Integrity and Innocence, may be the
Rule and Standard of all your Discourse. And as it will be very happy for you
if you observe these Rules, so 'twill be as necessary to avoid the Conversation
of those whose Tongues are profane and licentious. Do not by any means listen
to, nor give the least Encouragement to Whisperers, Tale-bearers, and
inquisitive Persons, who busy themselves with the Affairs of other Men, that
creep into Houses as Spies, to hear and learn News, which concerns them not:
For I have always observed them to be base and unworthy; few of them thrive and
prosper, nor shall they ever be respected amongst worthy and wise Men. But,

Thirdly, Be circumspect and prudent in the Management of all your Actions. Set
your self against all Sins in general, and every one in particular, but
especially, against those whereunto your Temper and Disposition are the most
inclined; for these will require the greatest Diligence and Endeavor to
overcome and subdue them. Do not indulge your self in any one Lust, neither
commit the least sin with delight and approbation; because, even those which we
think are the smallest, will prove Decoy's and Incentives to greater; vain and
sinful Thoughts proceeding to Words, and Words to Deeds: So that in this
Progress of Wickedness, a Man knows not where to stop, till he has plunged
himself into the most dangerous and irreparable Mischiefs.

And then on the other hand, for your Positive Duties; you should always
propose God's Glory, the happiness of your self and others, as the End, and his
infallible Word and the Dictates of sober Reason, as the Rule and Standard to
govern all your Affairs by: For without this, your best Endeavors will prove
either unprofitable or sinful. Whereas, if you observe this Method, and your
Intentions be sincere, tho you fail in many Instances of Duty, and unwillingly
fall into some Sins and Errors, yet God will be gracious in not imputing them,
and pass Judgment upon you according to the general Frame and Tendency of your
Life, if you do not wilfully and wickedly continue in any known Sin, or the
neglect of any known Duty.

It Is observable hence, what Obligations you lie under, to avoid the most
accursed and tempting Company of profane Swearers, gluttonous Persons,
Wine-Bibbers, unchaste Men and Women, etc. I have singled out those Vices (on
purpose) which are most incident to Youth, and given you the most seasonable
Advice I can think of, to vanquish and overcome them. Reject therefore every
Temptation to sin and wickedness in the first Assault, and the Conquest will be
easy and certain. Lament and deplore your past Failings, and humbly beg the
assistance of God's Grace and Spirit, that you may be more watchful over your
self and ways for the future. Now the best and most certain Means to avoid
greater Sins, is to make Conscience of the less: (For the least Sin is damnable
in the sight of God); and when the work of Regeneration is wrought in you,
beware of Relapsing; consider the dangers of habitual Sin and Apostasy from
Grace, and exert all your Endeavors to live in the exercise of a Conscience
void of offense both toward God and Man: For so the whole Time of your short
abode in this World, will be pleasant and comfortable, and your Death happy.

There are some other little things I desire to note to you before I leave this
Point. And,

First, Beware of Swimming, which you will probably be allured to in those Low
Countries, the most being dexterous in that Art: For tho it may save a Man's
Life in case of necessity, yet a vain Currosity herein may expose you to the
greatest Dangers and Hazards. Therefore if you should attempt it for your
Pleasure, exceed not your own Depth; and in seeking to save another, have a
care you drown not your self.

Secondly, Your Gesture and Deportment should neither be light, nor insolent,
nor wanton: For the Life and Soul of true Honor, is in generous Qualities, and
a modest and affable Carriage; but yet with a comely regard to your self, and
such as becomes a Gentleman, whose Mind is furnished with worthy and generous
Spirits. But in this Point (as in his abstinence from the Vices, and practice
of all the Virtues hitherto recommended,) you have an admirable Pattern in your
dear and worthy Father, almost beyond Example; whose temper and sweetness of
Disposition has deservedly recommended him to the Favor, and made him
honorable and respected amongst all Persons of all Ranks and Conditions. Yet
be careful to avoid the other Extreme of affected Easiness or Compliance, lest
your good Disposition should be imposed upon by others Deceit, and your own too
much Credulity: For too much Familiarity and Fawning is always rewarded either
with Flattery or Contempt.

Thirdly, What concerns your Bodily Deportment, Wrestling, Fencing, and other
Feats of Arms and Military Skill; and how far all or any of these are expedient
or necessary to be understood or practiced, I must leave to your self, and
better Judgments, for Advice and Direction; for these are not my Province.

What other Virtues or Vices may occur in your Conversation with others, (which
my designed Brevity and the Occasion I write upon, have persuaded me to omit,)
you should note and observe them, and make that use of them, at least to
improve and correct your own: For what you dislike or admire in others, study
and endeavor to avoid the Evil, and strive to imitate what is virtuous and
commendable. And when you have seriously considered all those several Rules and
Arguments, which under this Head do concern your Manners and Deportment; you will
be pleased to go one step farther to the last Branch of this faithful and
friendly Advice, which will have a more peculiar Respect to your Religion.

The End of the Second Part.
ADVICE TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN Of an Honorable FAMILY Now in His TRAVELS Beyond
the SEA'S, etc. PART III. Of RELIGION.
THE Business of Religion is the grand Concernment that all of us are sent into
the World to mind; and our eternal Happiness or Misery depends on the right
knowing and acknowledging of God, or mistakes about it. We had need therefore
be very accurate in the choice of that Religion we intend to live and die in,
and venture our eternal Salvation upon.

Now, there are many Opinions in the World concerning Religion; and we may be
easily imposed on and deluded, if we make not a prudent and wise Choice. I
shall not trouble you with an account of Heathenism, Mahometanism, and Judaism:
For these are all false Religions, and contrary to the whole scope and design
of the Gospel; which being without the Lines of Christian Communication, we
leave 'em to themselves and the righteous Judgment of God. We Christians know
no other way to Salvation but One, and that is by Faith in Christ Jesus; and
therefore we think our selves obliged to believe the Principles of Christianity
with all our Hearts, and live according to them: For there is no other name
under Heaven whereby we can expect or hope for Salvation, but the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12.

Yet there are many Differences, not only Circumstantial but Fundamental, even
amongst those that are called Christians, which disturb the Peace of the
Church, and ruin the Souls of many private Persons, as will appear more fully
afterward. But it is more immediately my Design to recommend to you, and
enforce the Belief and Practice of the truly Primitive and Reformed Religion,
as now solemnly and publicly professed, and by Law established in the Church
of England.

I have not the least cause to doubt or suspect, but that your Parents did
seriously weigh and consider (when they sent you abroad,) the Minority of your
Age and Judgment; which (yet) without your own extraordinary care and caution,
may hurry you unawares into the peril of Miscarriage. For alas! how many young
Gentlemen have lost their Hopes and themselves in Foreign Adventures, and
returned home as empty of Grace and other virtuous Accomplishments, as full of
Words, Vanity, and other vicious Habits and Inclinations? Now (Sir,) if you
should unhappily Miscarry, which the Lord of his great Mercy prevent; as it
would be the greatest mischief to your self; so not only your Parents hopes of
your Youth, but the Staff and Comfort of their Age will lie a bleeding, to
their unexpressible Grief and Sorrow.

These Considerations have very much affected me, which I took the freedom to
mention to some of your Friends, when I first heard of their Design of sending
you beyond Sea; and upon more due and serious deliberation, do now with more
considence (yet humbly) communicate my Thoughts to you upon these Subjects: For
I am very well assured, (that considering me as a Divine and True Friend,) I
shall not incur the least suspicion of being (herein) too bold or presumptuous;
and will think my self sufficiently apaid, if through God's Blessing, I may be an
happy Instrument in doing the least good to your Soul. I know it would be the
greatest Happiness to your self, as well as a Comfort to all your Friends, if
you be persuaded by any means to fall in love with Religion betimes, and
remember your Creator in the Days of your Youth, Eccles. 12.1. This has been
for many Ages the glory and support of your Family, which has been always
eminent for Religion and Loyalty; nor could there ever be less Danger of a
degenerous Heir, (not to slatter you Sir, nor puff you up,) nor greater Hopes
of its establishment to future Generations.

But before we come to the Point, give me leave to note to you (for your
greater Security,) That you will be in danger of meeting with many Brokers of
Villainy, whose Trade and Business it is to pervert, and do live upon the Spoils
and Ruins of Young Gentlemen; insomuch that scarce any Person of your Quality
can travel into Foreign Parts, but he shall be mightily caressed, and treated
with so much respect and civility, as if it were a pleasure to be seduced. We
know very well what Stratagems are used by some Men, to undermine the sacred
Foundations of the Doctrine and Worship of the Church of England; insomuch that
(before his Majesty's Declaration of Indulgence) neither Laws nor Penalties
could restrain them. What then will they not dare to attempt within their own
Territories and Jurisdictions, especially when they meet with Persons of Temper
and Quality, who are inclined and disposed (as you are) to Religion? And seeing
also they have not only free scope and privilege, but encouragement to seduce;
so, that it is next to impossible not to be assaulted (at least) by their close
and cunning Insinuations.

There have been, alas! too many perverted already; the loss of whom joined
with the Churches, we have sufficient cause to lament: And indeed it is a great
wonder we have lost no more, (and let us praise God for it,) considering the
importunate Methods and Plausibleness of our Adversaries, on the right hand and
on the left; who like those infected with the Plague, have always an itching
desire of tainting others. Wherefore none can blame the Clergy of the Church of
England, if we be as zealous for Truth, as our Adversaries of Falsehood; which
Argument alone might be a sufficient Apology for this Undertaking.

I have read (Sir) of some Countries (I wish your Curiosity may not carry you
thither) whose chief Virtues (modestly speaking,) do very much border either on
Impiety or Superstition; and yet those very Places (as Travelers observe,)
which are most worth seeing, are of all others the most contagious. Now it is no
small difficulty for a Young Gentleman to be chaste and virtuous in the midst of
Sodom, and few have traveled thither, however they may please themselves with
variety of Objects, and returned home without some dangerous Tincture, either
of Sin and Wickedness, or Schism and Sedition.

Thus I have noted in general, what Temptations and Hazards you are exposed to
amongst Foreigners; and the greatest of all is, the danger of being corrupted
and contaminated in your Religion and Manners: And it is certain, tho your
Tutors be never so careful, yet much must be left to your own Temper and
Inclination, how to sever Good from Evil: For there is no Man proves Factious,
Superstitious, or extremely Wicked on a sudden, but through several Declinations,
falls by degrees from Virtue and Religion. Seeing then so many Temptations and
Snares may await you in every Place where you come, (which no Man's Prudence can
foresee,) and your own Heart prove deceitful and forward to betray you:
Therefore I beseech you, be constantly upon your Guard; and if your Tutors
should either be negligent or persidious, (as many have been in the like Trust,
and I could name some of them,) yet through the Assistance of God's Grace, you may
secure your Religion and Conscience inviolable.

But for the further prevention of their Machinations, who lie in wait to
deceive, and your Establishment and Confirmation in the Religion of the Church
of England, I offer these Three following Particulars to your serious and
impartial Consideration. And,

First, I shall give you a true (tho short) Account of the Constitution of the
Church of England, both as to her Doctrine and Worship, or Discipline; which I
hope may for ever oblige you to continue in her Communion.

Secondly, We shall enquire a little into the Principles and Practices of the
Romish Church and Religion, wherein they chiefly differ from Us: A Religion of
all others (within the Pail of the Christian Church,) the most pleasing and
delightful to Flesh and Blood: A Religion which no Man scarce can comply with;
especially if he has been bred up in the Church of England, but must offer
violence to his own Reason and Conscience, if he pretends to either.

Thirdly, We shall consider the Pretensions, Reasons and Arguments, which our
Brethren of the Nonconformity have urged in their own Defense, to palliate
their Separation from our Communion, and seduce others: By all which, I hope
'twill evidently appear, that there cannot be the least color of Reason, nor
any thing like Argument to tempt, much less to persuade you, or any other
Person of Parts and Education, (who is not blinded with Passion, Interest or
Prejudice,) to separate from the most truly Orthodox, and best constituted
Church in the whole World; I mean the Church of England. Of all these
severally. And,

First, Of the Religion of our Church, both as to its Doctrine and Worship, or
Discipline. And First, Concerning her Doctrine: Wherein it is most plain and
evident, That we have a clear Profession of all Fundamental Truths and Duties,
both to God and Man, in our Creeds, Commandments, Lords Prayer, and the Doctrine
of the Two Sacraments; which every Orthodox and Believing Christian in the
whole World, will readily subscribe, and say Amen to.

Our Sabbaths are duly observed and kept, with the greatest Reverence and
Solemnity. God's Holy Word is purely and faithfully preached; his Sacraments
duly administered, according to our Blessed Saviors own Institution. We worship
God, viz. the One Divine Essence, and Trinity of Persons, in Spirit and Truth;
in and through Christ, without the Mediation of Saints and Angels. We hope for,
and believe the Remission of Sins, and Salvation of our Souls and Bodies, by
the Merits of Christ alone, through the Mercies of God, and upon the condition of
a sincere and unseigned Repentance: Which Repentance in the Judgment of our
Church, implies a true Sight and Confession of, hearty arrow for, and the
hatred and forsaking of all our former Sins; with a steadfast Resolution never
to return to them again, with any consent, delight or approbation, and the use
of all possible Endeavors to put these Resolutions in practice, even to our
Lives End: So, that if we shall at any time fall into the commission of the
least Sin, or the neglect of any Duty, either wilfully, or by infirmity and
surprise; we do again seriously and solemnly renew our Repentance, and are
never at peace with our Selves and in our Consciences, till we be again
reconciled unto God, or our Neighbor, whom we have offended. And this we do as
well after as before our Conversion; not daring to continue in any one sin
unrepented of, unreformed.

When we have thus renounced and abandoned Sin, the World, and the Devil, as
our deadly Enemies, we think our selves further obliged to magnify and adorn
our Profession, by the Works and Fruits of Piety and true Holiness, Justice and
Charity, Purity and Sobriety, Tit. 2.12. and to perform all and every one of
these Duties both to God and Man, without Partiality, without Hypocrisy. This
is a short Specimen of the Doctrine and Fundamentals of our Religion, which in
all and every particular are warranted and recommended to Us by God's
infallible Word, and the concurrent Suffrages and Confessions of all the
Churches of Christ, in the Primitive and Purest Ages of the Gospel. And as the
Doctrine of our Church is Sound and Orthodox, so,

Secondly, Our Worship and Discipline is truly Ancient and Apostolical: For
there is not one single Passage in our Liturgy and Church Service, and
Circumstantials of Worship (our most rigid Adversaries being Judges,) that is
either Anti-Scriptural or Sinful, but do all very much conduce to Decency,
Order, Uniformity, and the Edification of its Members: All which, I could
easily make appear to you by an Induction of Particulars; insomuch that there is
not one National Church under the Cope of Heaven, that is more Orthodox than
Ours, in Her whole Worship and Polity. Consult and examine our Liturgy,
Articles, Homilies, Canons and Constitutions, Ceremonies, etc. and there you will
find a truly Primitive and Apostolical Spirit in the disposition of the several
Parts, for the Honor and Glory of God, and Advancement of his true Religion
and Worship amongst Us.

And for a further Testimony hereof, and your own particular Satisfaction, read
(when you can have the convenience of those Books, and leisure to read 'em,)
Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity, Dr. Comber's large Volume on our Church
Liturgy, and Dr. Falkner's Libertas Ecclesiastica; which Triumvirate are
sufficiently able to answer all the Doubts and Scruples of any unbiast and
unprejudiced Reader. Besides, I can give you a Catalogue of such Books, when
you please to command it, as have treated so learnedly, judiciously and
convincingly of the Religion of the Church of England, in all the Points of
Faith, Worship and Discipline, as will furnish you with such Reasons and
Arguments, as neither Papist nor Phanatick were ever yet able to answer.

Let your Religion then, and that Church into which you were admitted and
initiated by Baptism, and in whose Communion you have been hitherto educated,
be as dear to you as your Estate and Life. Remit nothing of your Love and
Affection, Zeal and Courage, to defend it, when you are thereunto lawfully
called: For the Doctrine and Worship of our Church has been transmitted to Us by
our pious Ancestors, with all the Sanctions both of divine and humane
Authority; and as sure as there is a God, the Religion which you profess came
down from Heaven: For the everlasting Prince of Peace has consigned and
confirmed it to Us, by the Effusion of his own precious Blood, and the Suffrage
of many Saints and Martyrs in this Kingdom; so that you have not the least
reason to scruple your Compliance with, and Conformity to it.

If therefore an Angel, or Devil, or any ill Men, should at any time suggest
the contrary to you, have no Communication with him, but reject him as an utter
Enemy and Impostor. And when you have more leisure, opportunity and experience,
your Curiosity may lead you to read over and consider the Canons and
Constitutions of the Greek and Latin Churches; wherein you will find the true
State of Things and Times, the Beginnings, Proceedings, Increases, Encounters,
Yieldings, and Restaurations of the Gospel; and what the Primitive Fathers did
and suffered for the propagation of the Christian Religion and the interest of
the Church: And herein you will also see the Conformity of our Church of England
Men, since the beginning of the Reformation, to the Primitive Pattern. And when
you have thus made some considerable Progress in inquiring into the
Fundamentals and Superstructures of our Religion, you will be better able to judge
of the Opinions and Errors of those that differ from Us. But till you have more
time and convenience to inform your self as to the Particulars, I shall present
you,

Secondly, With a true and brief Account of Popery, or the Doctrine and
Practices of the Church of Rome, as to those Particulars wherein they differ
from the Church of England: For which cause, we are forced to separate from
them, since we cannot communicate with them without sin; nor have we departed
further from 'em, than they have departed from Themselves, and the Truth.

Now for Method's sake, we shall consider also, First, The Principles or
Doctrine; And, Secondly, The Practices of the pretended Catholics of the Romish
Church: Whereby 'twill evidently appear, that Popery (if rightly understood,)
is no such beautiful and charming Object, as to allure any Man of Reason and
Conscience to fall in love with it. And,

First, For the Principles of Popery; and we are obliged to call them so,
because they are so esteemed and accounted by their own Church: For since their
Council of Trent, no Man can properly be admitted into the Romish Communion
(however in Popish Countries) but shall be censured and condemned as a damned
Heretic, unless he believes as follows, viz.

That a Mortal Man, as the Pope in Cathedra, (or as some say, with his Council
of Cardinals) is infallible, knows all things, and can err in nothing; that he
directs, informs, animates, and commands both in Earth and Purgatory; expounds
Scripture, forgives Sins, canonizeth Saints, creates new Articles of Faith; and
in all these, (and many other of the same Stamp and Character) is as absolute
and infallible as his Maker. [But they are not yet agreed amongst themselves
where to fix this Infallible Judgment, whether in the Pope alone, or Council,
or the Pope and his Council; and therefore their Church and Pope, for any thing
they have yet proved or determined, are erroneous and fallible in the first
Principle of their New Creed, and monstrous Doctrine of Infallibility.]

The the Pope is the Supreme Head, and Christ's chief Vicar in, and has an
Unlimited Jurisdiction over the whole Catholic Church; that he has power to
dispense with the Laws of God, and can set up Laws of his own devising, which
obliges all Men's Consciences to pay him the Tribute of Fealty and Obedience,
as will more fully appear afterward. [This is a grand Usurpation upon the
Rights and Privileges of Kings, Emperors, and all other Christian Bishops;
two parts of Christendom having rejected his Authority, and that upon most
reasonable and just grounds: For the Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome, was
limited for the five first Centuries to the Suburbiarion Regions, and had only
a Primacy of Order, not Jurisdiction over his Fellow Bishops. See Hammond's
Fundament. Dr. Barrow upon the Supremacy; and Dr. Fulwood's Roma ruit. Which
Usurpation does also directly overthrow Christ's Kingly Office.]

Council of Trent. Sess. 13. Chap. 1. Canon 1.
That the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, is transubstantiated into the real
Body and Blood of Christ, which was sacrificed for our Sins upon the Cross at
Jerusalem; the Color and other accidental Qualities of the Elements only
remaining without their Substance. [This violates the Truth of Christ's Human
Nature, which themselves do confess, is in Heaven; and yet according to their
Hypothesis, must be in a thousand places on Earth at the same time; contradicts
the holy Scripture, Man's best Reason, common Sense, and the Nature and Design
of the Sacrament of Christ's holy Supper.]

Lib. 6. p. 465. Hist. Council Trent.
That there is no real difference between Christ on the Cross, and Christ in
the Mass; it is the very same in both, only differing in the Reason of
Offering: For on the Cross he offered himself immediately, in the Mass he offers
himself by the Ministry of his Vnder-Priests. [Which Doctrine of the Popish
Mass, is one of the greatest Idols that ever was invented in the World: For a
piece of Bread is made the Savior of Mankind, and a proper Sacrifice for the
pardoning all Sin; is worshipped as God, and of singular benefit not only for
the Living but the Dead: And this they are bound to believe, tho the Apostle
has told them in express terms, That there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins,
because Christ once appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, Heb.
9.26.]

Council of Trent, Sess. 6. Chap. 16. Canon 3.
That Good Works are meritorious of Grace and eternal Life; which are not so
much given of God freely and out of liberality, as out of debt. [Which Doctrine
destroys Justification by Faith, and the Merits of Christ Jesus; who came down
from Heaven on purpose to redeem us from all Iniquity, and tells us, when we
have done the best we can, we are unprofitable Servants, deserving nothing but
Hell and Damnation every hour.]

Decret. Council Flor. about 200 Years ago.
That there is a certain place called Purgatory, wherein, as in a Prison, Souls
are purged after this Life, that were not fully purged here; to the intent they
may enter pure into Heaven. [Which Article of their New Creed, destroys the
Satisfaction of Christ, and his meritorious Intercession with the Father for
Us; makes good Men afraid to die, being a terrible thing (as their Priests
represent it,) to enter into Purgatory; and bad Men less careful to prepare for
Death, because a great part of their business may be done by other hands when
they are gone.]

Council of Trent. Sess. 8. Canon 9.
That, if any say, that the Clergy who have received Holy Orders, or Regulars
who have sosemnly professed Chastity, may contract Marriage; and that such
Contract (notwithstanding the Ecclesiastical Law, and their own Vow,) is valid;
and that the contrary Assertion is no other than to condemn Marriage; and that
all (although they have vowed Chastity,) may contract Marriage, that do find they
have not the Gift of Continency; let him be accursed: Forasmuch as God will not
deny this Gift to those who rightly seek it, neither will he suffer Us to be
tempted above what we are able. [Now this Doctrine is expressly contrary to the
Word of God, which says, That Marriage is honorable in all, etc. Heb. 13.4.
See also, 1 Cor. 9.5. Tit. 1.6. 1 Timothy 3, 2, 4, 5, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 7.1, 2, 8, 9.
Besides, the Prohibition of Priests Marriage, has been the cause of much
Lewdness and Villainy, as Adultery, Fornication, Incest, Sodomy, Murder, etc.

Council of Trent. Sess. 9.
That the Saints reigning with Christ, and offering up their Prayers for Men,
it is good and profitable humbly to invocate them; and that we may obtain
Benefits of God, through his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our only Redeemer
and Savior to have recourse to their Prayers, Aid and Assistance, etc. [This
Doctrine has no Foundation in, nor Warrant from God's Word: For there is not one
Precept nor Example of praying to Saints in the whole Bible, nor Promise that
such Prayers shall be heard and accepted; but the contrary is every where
evident. Besides, this Practice is irrational and absurd: For the Saints (and
Angels) are neither omnipresent nor omnipercipient; and therefore they cannot
hear Us. Cassand. de Merit. and Intercess. Sanct.
And they do also solemnly invocate and worship many of their reputed Saints,
whose Saintship, nay, whose Existence (says one of their own celebrated
Authors,) is very questionable.]

Not to trouble you with Citations at large, there are several other known and
received Doctrins of their Church, which bear the same Impression and
Character; but those I have mentioned already being the most considerable, the
rest will either stand or fall by 'em. Yet their Doctrine of Oral Tradition
(which I had almost omitted,) deserves its place amongst the rest: For this
vilifies the Holy Scripture, destroys its Authority and Sufficiency, by a
certain Dependence upon the Church; whereby they make our Savior's Prophetical
Office a mere Nullity, in saying no less, than that He has not sufficiently
revealed the Will of God to the Sons of Men, but all the World must be beholden
to the Church of Rome for their Oral Tradition. In a word, all their Pardons,
Confessions, Indulgences, Satisfactions, Merits, etc. do expressly contradict
the great End and Design of our Saviors Incarnation, and set up the Pope and
Priests in his stead.

These are the New Articles of Popery, which (as incredible and absurd as they
are) the Subjects of that Communion are bound to believe, under the pain and
peril of the Pope's Anathema. And indeed, they are all New, (you may see the
Original of 'em in Dr. Comber's Advice to the Roman Catholics) and wholly
unknown to the Old Church of Rome, in her Primitive and Gospel Purity: For
these Errors and Delusions seem to have been contrived on purpose, for the
Support and Maintenance of the Pride and Covetousness of the Bishop of Rome and
his Clergy, as well as the Advancement of the Stateliness and Grandeur of their
Church.

I could easily make it appear to you in all the Particulars, that there is not
one of these Articles that has any Foundation in Scripture or Primitive
Antiquity, but are contrary to both, and do undermine and overthrow almost all
the Articles of our Christian Faith. But what I have said already concerning
these Doctrins, may be a sufficient caution to you not to venture your eternal
Salvation upon such a Bottom, lest you communicate with them in their Plagues,
Rev. 18.4. I have taken some pains to digest the whole Body of Popish
Controversy into Order and Method, for the satisfaction of my Self and
Friends, (which I thought of necessary use at this time.) There are other
excellent Authors which may be more valuable, but you may command this if you
please; it is not very large, yet Methodical. But to return: As the Doctrine and
Principles of the Church of Rome, (in those Instances wherein they differ from
Us) are heterodox, absurd and erroneous; so,

Secondly, Their Practices are the natural and genuin Results and Consequences
of such Principles. Not to mention their private and personal Immoralities,
which may consist well enough with that Religion, especially considering the
Liberty and Indulgence allowed them, (which do more professedly belong to those
of that Communion than any other,) we shall consider their Practices as Popish,
which are warranted to them by the Examples and Sanctions of their Superiors.
And of this Rank are,

Their Worshipping of Images, Relics, Crosses, Angels, Saints, and particularly
the Virgin Mary; all which are a most direct Violation of the Second
Commandment; and therefore they leave it out of all their Catechisms, Manuals,
Mass-Books, etc. lest it should rise up in Judgment against them; which
Practices are also contrary to the whole Word of God, and the Doctrine both of
the Old and New Testaments.

Such also are their Dealings with the Laity, who rob them of the Bread of
Life, in denying them the reading of the Holy Scriptures, the Cup in the
Sacrament, and in commanding the whole Worship of God to be celebrated and
performed in an unknown Tongue; which few of their Laity, and perhaps some of
their Priests do not understand. Tho they cannot but know that our blessed
Savior has expressly commanded, that all (indefinitely) both Priests and
People, should search the Scriptures, drink of that holy Cup, and pray with the
Spirit, and pray with the Understanding also: Which no Person can in their
Communion, unless he understands Latin well, and the strange Mumblings of their
Priests; who being generally too ignorant themselves, are afraid that the
People should know it. O horrendum Nefas! that such Practices as these should
be so much as tolerated by those that are called Christians. And yet there are
still others as bad, or worse than the former, viz.

Their Spiritual Tyranny, in exacting a blind Obedience in Matters of Faith;
their innumerable Ceremonies and Superstitions, which almost swallow up the
whole Substance of Religion; their notorious Schism (many degrees worse than
that of the Donatists and Novatians,) in separating from all other Churches,
far more Pure and Orthodox than themselves; and yet, because they cannot be the
Pope's Subjects, therefore they shall be none of Christ's.

To say nothing of their School Points and Casuistical Divinity, it is evident
that their whole Religion is only the bare shadow and outsides of Christianity,
and mere Pageantry and Formality of Devotion: For alas! their poor simple and
ignorant Laity, say, hear, and do they know not what, and return from their
Churches as void of Instruction, and Christian Admonition and Edification, as
when they went; and yet for all this, (which is the highest aggravation of
their Sin and Misery,) they are obliged to believe, that this their blind
Devotion is not only acceptable but meritorious. Besides, how many notorious
and damnable Sins pass for Venial, and how easily are they atton'd for?
Insomuch that a few Drops of Holy Water, and Cross upon their Breasts or
Foreheads, will thoroughly wash off the Stain, (according to their groundless
Apprehensions,) and expiate the guilt of all their heinous and crying Sins.
Their notorious Equivocations have scarce left any room for Truth, whereby they
deceive others, and offer violence to their own Consciences. But tho poor
ignorant and unwary Souls may be imposed upon and deluded, yet it cannot be so
with an All-seeing God; who will one day convince all Men, and expose their
Sophistical Villainies and Reservations to the open and public view both of Men
and Angels.

Now this Liberty and Indulgence of theirs is so pleasing and acceptable to
sensual and carnal Men, that it is no great wonder that they gain so many
Proselytes to their Party, as some do presumptuously and vainly boast. But then
if we give our selves the trouble to enquire what sort of Persons they are whom
they have perverted; we shall find, that many of 'em are silly Women and Men
notoriously debauched, or ignorant, or of mercenary Spirits, who expect
Preferment in that Way. And therefore we have no great cause to regret the loss
of them; and if our number be less, yet we are not the worse: For if all our
Licentious Hypocrites and Malefactors, who are not worthy to live in the World,
should go over to their Communion, we shall have no great cause to complain.

But alas! these erroneous Principles and worse Practices of the Papists, who
being the more intelligent and judicious sort of that Communion, cannot be so
much the error and mistake of their Judgments, as the perverseness of their
Wills: And tho a simple and ignorant Popeling, who lies under such Temptations
and Obligations, (as before,) may be saved; yet I am afraid, the more Learned
and Discreet having made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, are in a
very dangerous State, if they live and die according to those corrupt
Principles; because they are in the number of those damnable Heresies the
Scripture speaks of.

What I have already offered, are Truths as clear as the Sun; nor can any thing
in the World be more demonstrative to a Person thoroughly acquainted with the
Principles and Practices of Popery. And yet for all this, it is a thousand to
one you will meet with some bold and cunning Sophisters, who will tell you a great
many plausible Stories, and endeavor to elude the most clear and convincing
Reasons, which can be urged against them; whereby they do strangely impose
upon, and many times entrap poor ignorant and unwary Souls. To instance in some
Particulars: And,

First, A Catholic (say they,) so living and dying, even by the Confession of
the Protestants themselves, may be saved. [Which is a confessed Argument of our
Charity and Moderation.]

Secondly, That the One Church of Christ is more likely to be found in all
World, than in a Corner. [As if there were no true Church in the World, but
theirs.]

Thirdly, In all Ages than of later Years. [Not considering that we had a
Christian Church in England, before ever Popery was known in the World.]

Fourthly, That this One Church is rather to be found in Unity, than in
Division. [Which we could easily recriminate and retort upon themselves: For
there are more and greater Schisms and Divisions in the Church of Rome, than in
any other Christian Church whatsoever.]

Fifthly, That they have a Succession of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, from the
Days of the Apostles downward. [So have we, as is fully evident from all our
Ancient and Authentic Records. See Bishop Bamhal's Account of the Schism of
the Church of Rome. And they have quite forgotten that there were three Popes,
or Bishops of Rome, at the same time: What then became of their uninterrupted
Succession?

Sixthly, That the Bishop of Rome is the Supreme Head of the Church Universal,
and Christ's Vicar in extraordinary upon Earth. [Which spurious Title and
Usurpation, (as we noted before,) is rejected by at least two parts of the
Catholic Church at this day, and disliked by some National Churches (as it is
supposed) of their own Communion; who are inclinable enough (if they knew but
how) to cast off that Papal and Tyrannical Yoke.]

Seventhly, That the Church of England is only a Branch lopt off, or a Rag torn
from the Coat, and that we had no Church nor Religion before Luther. [This is a
most gross and manifest Untruth: For we had a Christian Church in England
before ever St. Peter came at Rome, founded by Joseph of Arimathea, and
flourished under King Lucius, the first Christian Monarch in the World. And we
know very well by what Usurpations and Encroachments, and the time when Popery
first got footing in England; that Augustine the Monk, caused some hundreds of
that Order to be slain at Bangor, to make way for it: And it is further evident
by what Means and Methods the Bishops of Rome did work upon the Weaknesses and
Credulity of some, and the Necessities of others of our Christian Princes, not
having the Power, or Courage, or Resolution, to cast off the Popes Supremacy,
till the Reign of Henry the Eighth, King of England: A Person whose Temper and
Affairs (let our Adversaries bespatter him as they please,) made him a fit
Instrument to begin the Reformation; which through God's Providence, and the
prudent and religious Conduct of his Successors, has been happily carried on
and perfected; which we hope through the Favor and Protection of his Sacred
Majesty who now Reigns, may be continued a Blessing to Us and our Posterity.]

Hence therefore 'twill appear to you, That these are all threadbare and stale
Evasions and Subtersuges, to color and palliate their groundless and
unreasonable Pretenses to Antiquity, Visibility, Unity, Magnificence, Right of
Succession of, and in their Church: All which have been answered at least an
hundred times, by Worthy and Learned Authors, as you will see afterward. But this
Controversy has been so well stated and thoroughly canvassed by our Church of
England Men in these last three Years, that there will be more difficulty now
than ever, to persuade any Gentleman of Sense and Ingenuity to believe their
incongruous and hateful Absurdities.

But yet there are some others of the same Foot-mark, who having laid aside all
Modesty and Candor, their Foreheads are so steeled with Confidence, as to
affirm, That we have neither Church, Priests, Sacraments, nor Religion amongst
Us; and are so uncharitable as to load Us with all the nonsensical and unjust
Calumnies imaginable, not regarding what they are, so they be but spiteful and
malicious; observing the old Maxim, Fortiter calumniari aliquid haerebit. Nay,
they will even disclaim their own Popish Doctrins and Practices, as the Invocation
of Saints, Worshipping of Images, etc. and do tell the credulous People, that
their Adversaries out of mere Spite and Malice, do misrepresent them.

These Methods have been lately used (by an Eminent Papist here of my
Acquaintance and Neighborhood,) to some Persons of our Communion who were
formerly my Parishioners, and seemed to be warping toward Popery: They
acquainted me with it, and looked upon those Sophisms to be nervous and strong
Arguments and Motives, (and so indeed they were if they had been true,) to
persuade them to change their Religion. But such shuffling Tricks as these
carry their own Confutation along with them; for this is an old piece of
Legerdemain, which one would have thought should have been long since exploded.
And I find the very same Hocus pocus, Illusions, used by the Popish Priests,
about the beginning of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth: For we know very well, what
Privileges are allowed them to swear and forswear; and not only deny, but even
rail against their own received Doctrins, Practices, Church, and the Pope
himself, for the Interest of the Catholic (i. e.) the Roman Religion. Consult
Dr. Nalson's Foxes and Firebrands, and there you will find many of their juggling
Devices, and being Men of Latitude and Faculties to prepare Dishes for every
Palate.

I have been a little more express in stating these Differences, because I know
those Popish Emissaries are crept into all Countries, and do every where lie in
wait to debauch and corrupt Young Gentlemen, both in their Principles and
Manners. There are not a few Instances of both, who have been taken Captives by
them: I shall name Two particularly. The one a Person of good Quality, strong
and quick natural Parts, an excellent Scholar, under the Conduct (as 'twas
supposed,) of a well qualified Tutor, well educated according to the Church of
England, by his pious and prudent Parents; and yet for all this, was perverted
in his Travels, and continues a zealous and cunning Papist. There was another
Gentleman also, both of my Acquaintance, not inferior to the former, and every
way as well fitted for Travel, yet did contract such a habit of Lewdness and
Debauchery, (to say no worse,) that in few years an Estate of above 2000 l. per
Annum is entirely wasted, and nothing remains but a bare puff of Honor without
any Estate to support it: I could tell you all the particulars by what Methods
that unfortunate, sweet, and ingenuous Young Gentleman was allured and trapan'd
into these Mischiefs, who also died immaturely, etc. Which Examples amongst
many others, have been often in my Thoughts: And tho there be not the least
grounds of any Jealousy or Suspicion of your Miscarriage, yet I have set them
in your View as Land Marks, and Sea Marks, to prevent the danger of splitting
your Vessel, (so well built and richly laden,) either upon the Sands and
Shelves of Debauchery and Profaneness, or the Rocks and Splinters of Schism
and Superstition.

Therefore (Dear Sir) let me beseech you once more to be continually upon your
Watch, that you may return with the same Soul and same Body you carried from
hence, and all the Tempers and Dispositions of both. And for this End endeavor
thoroughly to understand, and then live up to the Principles and Rules of that
Religion you have hitherto professed. This will prove the best Antidote against
that destructive Poison, which might otherwise taint and infect both your
Intellectuals and Morals; and not only destroy the Christian, but even the Man
(or rational part) within you.

Let me advise you still more particularly, not so much as to lend an Ear to
hear, nor a Tongue to discourse with those enchanting Sirens; be afraid of
their seeming Favors, whose Errand is Deceit, and under the pretense of
Kindness and Respect, will wound you to the very Heart. Look not upon the
pompous Ceremonies and costly Ornaments of that Religion wherein all things are
outwardly glorious and pleasant to the Eye; but keep close to innocent Truth,
and let your Soul be always deeply affected with that Worship whose Majesty is
in the Heart, not in the Face, which we profess (with the greatest comfort and
satisfaction, and may we ever do so) in the Communion of the best of Churches.

Thus we have seen at length that the Errors and Superstitions of the Church of
Rome wherein they differ from Us, are Fundamental Points both of Faith and
Worship: Therefore have no communication with those of that Way, unless it be
where civil Relations, and Offices of Humanity and Charity require your
compliance.

Now, to conclude this Point, all the Members of the Church of England are
called Protestants; a Name common to Us with our Brethren of the Reformed
Churches beyond Sea, and so indeed we are: For we do solemnly protest against
the Popish Universal Hierarchy, Infallible Judgment, Dispensations with the
Laws of God and Sins of Men, Oral Traditions and other Sacriledges, disposing
of Kingdoms, deposing and Murdering of Princes, the Merit of Good Works in our
Conversion, the Priests pretended Power of transubstantiating Bread and Wine
into the Body and Blood of Christ, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Adoration of the
Hostie, Images, Relics, Prayers to Saints and Angels, Power of Indulgences,
Doctrine of Purgatory, necessity of Auricular Confession, Prohibition of Priests
Marriages, Pilgrimages, Prayers in an unknown Tongue, multitude of Sacraments,
Penances, Miracles and Indian Wonders, and pretenses of curing the Deaf Dumb,
Blind, Lame, and raising the Dead, Equivocations, mental Reservations, pious
Frauds, legendary Fables, devilish Incantations, sacred, yet diabolical Magic,
and all their other Delusions and Fopperies, as damnable and antichristian.
You Will be pleased (Sir) to join with me in this Protestation, (the very naming
whereof, tho I cannot now insist upon all the Particulars, might almost induce
you to it,) and let all true hearted and reformed Protestants, both here and
every where, say, Amen.

There are also several other Religious Sects (or rather Heretics,) which do
err from the Foundation and the true Faith: Such are the Anti-Trinitarians,
Arians, Socinians, etc. who deny the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, the Divinity
of Christ and the Holy Ghost, and our Saviors Satisfaction: All which being
excommunicated by Us, you must avoid them as the Pests, and Enemies of our
Religion, and have no Intercourse nor Communion with them.

There Is another silly Sect called Quakers, a People so far fallen from
Christianity, that they do scarce retain any one Article of the true Faith,
slight and reject all the Ordinances of the Gospel; and extol the Light within
them above the Holy Scriptures, as the only sufficient Rule they are obliged to
walk by. I only tell you in short, what Quakerism is, and shall need to say no
more of it, being there is so little Temptation to that Opinion. Thus much by
way of Digression. My method leads me,

Thirdly, To consider those Pretensions, Reasons and Arguments, which our
Brethren of the Nonconformity have urged in defense of their Separation from
Us. But to do them all the Justice imaginable, I must note to you in the first
place, That those called Antinomians, Anabaptists, Independants, and
Presbyterians, do hold the Foundation, tho they differ from Us in some Opinions
not essential to Salvation; and notwithstanding their uncharitableness to Us,
we account them Christians, and Brethren, as holding the Essentials of
Christianity, tho they build upon a weak Foundation.

And seeing Providence has led you into those Countries for the present, where
you cannot worship God according to your own Way; the Church of England, both
in her Judgment and Practice, allows you to communicate with those
Sister-Churches of the Reformation, to whom we have always given the right Hand
of Fellowship, tho there be some circumstantial Differences between Them and
Us. But,

You Will probably meet with some in your Travels, as well as in our own Nation,
who will be very forward to find Faults with and censure our Liturgy and
Discipline, (as we have many of that capricious Humor amongst Us, tho they
scarce understand it. Therefore for the further Confirmation and Establishment
of your own Judgment herein, and that you may be better fortified with Reasons
and Arguments to vindicate our Church, and clear those Objections which may be
urged against her. We shall consider,

First, The most material Objections, which have been formed against our
Liturgy and Church Polity, both at home and abroad.

Secondly, We shall draw some rational Inferences from those Answers and
Solutions, for your further satisfaction. And,

Thirdly, Lay down some Rules by way of caution, which I hope may secure you,
and by your Influence, many others from a groundless Separation. Of these
distinctly: And,

First, All the Scruples of our Nonconforming Brethren, against our Discipline
and Set Form of Worship, are reducible to, and comprehended under these two
Objections. And,

1. They charge Us with Popery, (which we abhor as much, if not more than they
do,) because (say they) our Form of Common Prayer by Law established, is taken
out of the Popish Mass Book, that they are Popish Prayers; and much of our
Discipline, and many of our Ceremonies are now used in the Church of Rome.
Which Objection at the first appearance, seems to be very harsh; and has so
affrighted some weak, yet well-meaning Christians, that they dare scarce come
near Us, but hold off, and separate from our Communion. To which I

Answer. This Objection is so far from being of any force against Us, that it
does very much approve and justify the singular Moderation of the Church of
England, as most willing and desirous to communicate with the Papists in all
Things wherein we can do it lawfully, and with a safe Conscience. Besides,
those Divines who compiled our Liturgy, were all Men of extraordinary Parts,
Piety and Learning, and several of them died Martyrs for our Religion. Nor have
our dissenting Brethren the least color of Reason to brand our Church Service
with savouring too much of Popery, seeing the Papists always have, and ever had
our Worship in the greatest detestation and abhorrence; because they know it is
impossible that Popery should ever return upon Us, or be established again in
England, while our Common Prayer Book is kept unaltered.

For, the whole Form of our Worship is point blank contrary to Image Worship,
praying to Angels and Saints, Propitiatory Sacrifice, Doctrine of their
Sacraments, Transubstantiation, etc. And this is the true Reason why they do so
mortally hate both Us and our Religion. And again, those Prayers in our Liturgy
which were taken out of the Mass Book, are many of them the Collects and
Devotions of the Ancient Fathers, which were in use before ever Popery was
known in the World; which being purged from the Popish Superstition by our
Reformers, are now lawfully used by the Church of England, according to their
Original Institution: Insomuch, that those who cavil at our Service, because
some part of it is used by the Papists, may as well find fault with the
Epistles and Gospels, Psalms, Chapters, Creeds, Commandments, Lords Prayer,
etc. these being also in the Papists Mass Book. Having fully cleared this first
Objection, we pass to the

2. And they charge Us again with many Corruptions, Additions, Defects, and
circumstantial Errors in our Set Form of Worship and Discipline, (for they have
no Objections against our Doctrine and Fundamentals;) and for those seeming
Reasons, they think themselves obliged to withdraw and separate from our
Communion.

Answer. This may seem to be a weighty Objection at the first sight, and the
most plead it (being joined with the former, which we have answered to the
full,) as the Cause, why they think and speak so hardly of our Church, and
desert our Communion: But they might be persuaded to alter their Opinion, if
(laying aside all Prejudice,) they would but seriously and impartially consider
these few Things. And,

1. It Is a true and undoubted Maxim, that all Persons are obliged to hold
Communion with the National and Established Church where they live, and must by
no means separate from it; tho there be some circumstantial Additions, Errors
and Defects, in its external Worship, Polity or Discipline. For it is plain,
that the Prophets and People of God, did not separate from, but held Communion
with the Jews in their Public Worship, tho there were very many and great
Defects and Corruptions, etc. both in their Doctrine and Practice. This is clear
in many Instances: For the solemn Ordinances of God, as Circumcision and the
Passover, were for a long time a-wanting; and such Monuments of Idolatry were
set up, as not only the People thereby became superstitious and immoral, but
even the Priests also (as Eli's two Sons, etc.) brought a Scandal upon their
Religion. Were not these greater Faults than any of our fiercest Adversaries
can charge upon us? And yet for all that, we sind not one President of so much
as any single Person that departed from their Communion.

2. At the time of our B. Saviors coming into the World, the Jewish Worship
was exceedingly corrupted with the Leaven of the Pharisees and the Heresy of
the Sadduces, who denied the Immortality of the Soul and the Resurrection of
the Body. Besides, the whole Service of God was intolerably profaned, the
Temple polluted, Religion subverted, Judgment and the Love of God trampled upon
and neglected, many needless and superstitious Ceremonies interlarded with
their Worship, the People. addicted to all manner of Wickedness, and even the
Priests themselves very heterodox and dissolute both in their Faith and
Manners: And yet at that time, we find several religious Persons, both Men and
Women, with great Zeal and Devotion, worshipping God in the Temple, as Zachary
and Simeon, Hannah and Elizabeth, etc. And our Blessed Savior himself was (by
his pious Parents) presented in the Temple according to the Custom and Law of
Moses. He afterward kept the Passover, and all the Festivals of the Jewish
Church, frequented and taught daily in the Temple and in their Synagogues, gave
Honor and Reverence, and paid Tribute to their Rulers; nor did he ever desert
their Communion, till he was forced to retire to save his own Life: So that he
thought it necessary (and so did those other Votaries) to join in Gods Public
Worship, notwithstanding those great Errors and Defects, which thanks be to
God, are not chargeable upon Us. But,

3. There were many Errors and Defects, both in the Doctrine and Practice of the
then slourishing Churches of Corinth, Galatia, etc. and yet the Apostle S. Paul
was so far from encouraging a Schism in, and Separation from the Communion of
those Churches; that he threatens those Persons with the severest Punishments,
who were the Instruments in fomenting and promoting those Animosities and
Divisions. Nor is there any one Instance or President in the whole Scripture,
to warrant our departure from any Church that is Sound and Orthodox in her
Principles, however erroneous and corrupt in the Polity and Circumstantials of
Divine Worship. We might hereunto add,

4. The concurrent Judgments and Opinions of the most Eminent and Reformed
Divines beyond Sea; who have unanimously declared their Dislike of a Separation
from our Communion; as Calvin, Bullinger, Bucer, and many others. And tho they
dissented from Us in lesser Things, yet held Communion and Correspondence with
our Church and Churchmen, as may appear by their several Letters to our
Reformers; and would have been glad if their Circumstances would have allowed
our Form of Church Polity; and deservedly preferred it to any Church
Government in the World. But to argue yet more closely;

5. If any will refuse our Communion, and separate from Us, because there are
some pretended Errors in the Discipline and Circumstantials of our Worship,
(which yet none have ever been able to prove against Us,) they will be obliged
upon the same score, to withdraw their Communion from all the Churches in
Christendom: For what Church Government shall they be ever able to assign,
that is so pure and sincere, as to be wholly exempted from Circumstantial Errors
and Defects? And were there not more Faults in the Worship of the Primitive
Churches for the five first Centuries, than are at present in Ours? Are there
no Errors in the Worship, Constitutions, and Ecclesiastical Government of
Geneva and Amsterdam? I Am sure many of their Learned Divines have ingenuously
acknowledged that all things were not according to their Desire, and yet did
not think it Prudence to alter the Government for the sake of some small Errors.

In short, our Dissenting Brethren must either disclaim these Conceits, or turn
Hermits and Anchorets, live in a Cell or Wilderness, and even depart from
themselves; who (as I could easily show them) are guilty of as many, if not
more, and greater Faults and Errors in their little Assemblies, than can be
justly charged upon Us, or the Liturgy and Government of the Church of England.
Whither would not these wild and extravagant Fancies carry any Man that shall
give way to them? So that they must either prove their own Churches to be
infallible in point of Worship and Discipline, which I think the most of them
disclaim, or for ever quit their Pretensions for a Separation from Us, because
of the little Errors which they have discovered in our Administrations.

Having thus fully answered the chief Objections of our Brethren for their
unwarrantable Separation from the Church of England, which I know will fully
satisfy you. We shall proceed,

Secondly, To draw some clear and undeniable Inferences from the Premises, for
the prevention of all further Scruples in this Case. And,

1. It would be a strange Delusion, and no less than absolute Profaneness to
cast off all the Public Ordinances, or neglect the Sacred and Solemn Worship
of God, because some things may be disliked, or excepted against in their
Administrations

2. The greatest Honor we can ascribe to God, is to worship solemnly and
devoutly in the Public Assemblies of the Church: And therefore it must be the
most heinous Crime to make a Schism and Rent in any particular Church, where
Christ is effectually present by his Grace and Spirit. Nor can any one have a
sufficient Plea, to withdraw from the Public Ordinances in any Nation, till
Christ has deserted them; which no Man can object against the Pure and
Apostolical Church of England: Wherein (as before) the whole World will
acknowledge, that the Word of God is purely preached, and the Sacraments duly
administered in that admirable Order and Uniformity, which is scarce to be
paralleled in any National Church upon Earth.

Besides, those who are so strait laced as to require absolute Perfection in
the Administration of Divine Offices and Church Government, must be guilty of
that Popish Error, in confining the Church, with all its Privileges and
Immunities, to their own Sect and Party; and so cast off a considerable Part of
the Catholic Church, (as the Church of England is at this Day,) which
professes and practices all the Essentials of Faith and Worship. Hence we also
infer,

3. That many great and unavoidable Mischiefs do always attend a wilful and
unlawful Separation: For a Scissure in and departure from a True Church, (as
the Church of England is, and none of our severest Adversaries can deny,) is
most dishonorable and displeasing to God, a scandal to Religion, hinders the
Success of the Gospel, opens a wide Gap to Atheism and Profaneness, Heresy
and Popery and is a dismal Presage of the removing of our Candlestick, Mat.
12.25. Why then should any Persons withdraw and separate themselves from the
Communion of our Church for the sake of a few Ceremonies, and set up Altar
against Altar, and hereby put an Opportunity into the Adversaries hands, to
ruin both us and themselves? But,

4. Tho all Persons in this Nation are obliged to hold Communion with the
Church of England, (seeing those pretended Defects in her are only modal and
circumstantial, which no Church in the World can be free from in this State of
Trial and Probation,) yet we are sorbidden to communicate with any Church in
Sin: And this is the true reason and ground of forsaking the Church of Rome,
because her Errors are Fundamental, (as we have seen already,) and the
Conditions of Communion with her such, as we cannot comply with, unless we
offer Violence to our own Reason and Conscience. And we do always solemnly
declare, that if their New Articles of Faith and unchristian Practices did not
hinder Us, we should most freely and cheerfully communicate with her; nor do we
further depart from her, than she departs from Christ and her Self, as to her
ancient Faith and Worship.

And again, we have so much Love and Charity for our modern Dissenters in
England, that if any one has a truly tender Conscience, so as after a diligent
and faithful use of all convenient and necessary Means and Methods for his
Conviction, (as earnest Prayer to God, reading of good Books, consultation with
his Parish-Minister, or some other Pious and Learned Divine of the Church of
England, he still remains scrupulous and unsatisfied; yet rather than sin
against his own Conscience, we do not blame, but pity him, if he modestly
withdraws from our Communion. But I am afraid there are some who have not
practiced these Methods, although I have the Charity to believe that very many
have; and that most of those who have separated from our Communion, have not
done it through a wilful Obstinacy, but merely upon the account of Conscience.

5. Our Brethren of the Nonconformity might do well to consider also, that
none gains any thing by a groundless Schism and Separation, but that sort of
Men whose chief Maxim to promote their own Ends, has always been, Divide and
impera: For it is very observable that the Interest of the Reformed Religion is
daily weakened by our unchristian and intestine Divisions. And it is very
certain, that we cannot do our Enemies greater Service nor more precipitate our
own Ruin, than by crumbling our selves into Sects and Parties: Insomuch, that
I am afraid, that those who now separate from Us, and (in this juncture)
forsake our Communion, will one day find and feel to their great cost (not to
mention the present Mischiefs) that it were a thousand times better to swallow
an innocent Ceremony than rend a Church; seeing the greatest Sins shall have a
lighter Punishment than Schism and Separation. For the Eye that mocketh his
Father, and despises the Garment of his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall
pluck it out, and the young Eagles devour it. See further upon the Mischiefs of
Schism, Dr. Falkners Libertas Eccles. from the beginning. Which brings me to
the,

Third and last thing, Which will be to lay down some Rules by way of Caution
and Advice, which may secure you, and by your Influence, many others from a
groundless Separation. And,

1. We must be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake: For they
are Gods Ministers, and the supreme Magistrate of these Kingdoms is invested
with Sovereign Power and Authority to order and administer the Affairs of
Government, for the peace and benefit of Men's Souls, as well as their Bodies
and Estates: Nor can this seem strange to any one, who either understands the
Scriptures or Ecclesiastical History: For it is plain, that the religious Kings
of Judah and Israel, as King David, Solomon, Asa Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, etc.
and all the Christian Emperors, as Constantine the Great and his Successors,
(till the Bishop of Rome's Usurpation,) were as much concerned in ordering of
the Affairs of the Church, as the Administration of Civil Government. And
indeed, unless this Power and Sovereignty were allowed to the Supreme
Magistrate, he should be unable to provide for the benefit of his Subjects; nor
could there be any such thing as Order and Uniformity in the Churches of
Christ; the Ecclesiastical Laws being only Bruta fulmina without the
concurrence and enforcement of the Civil Power: So that from hence it must
needs follow, that a cheerful Obedience to and a hearty Compliance with all the
Laws and Constitutions of our admirable Government, both in Church and State,
is absolutely necessary, not only for our own sakes, but the Peace and
Preservation of the whole Body.

2. It Is a strange Mistake then which some have run upon, that nothing is to be
admitted in our Public Worship, and Ecclesiastical Discipline and Polity of
our Church, but what is plainly expressed in the Holy Scriptures; hereby
excluding all human Laws and Constitutions in Matters and Things indisserent.
Which wild Hypothesis has been the Original of all those untenable Opinions now
on foot; and the very most of our unchristian Divisions, which have almost torn
in pieces our Church, are owing to this unreasonable and groundless Conjecture:
Whereas on the contrary, the Writers of the greatest Note and Eminence amongst
our Brethren of the Nonconformity, are forced to acknowledge, that there are
many Circumstances in the Public Service of God, and the Government of the
Church, which must be regulated and ordered according to the Light of Nature,
and Laws of Christian Prudence; as the holy Apostle directs in those general
Rules, Let all things be done decently in order, and for Edification. And do
also confess, that even in their own Assemblies (and we know it to be true and
certain,) there are many such Circumstances, for which they have no express
Rule in Scripture; but do use them prudentially for the Honor and Interest of
Religion, and the Order and Uniformity of Gods Worship.

Besides, it is observable that the Holy Scriptures treat chiefly of the
Essentials of Faith and Worship, and only mention the Governors and Government
of the Church, with some general Rules (as before) for the ordering of its
Polity and Discipline: Insomuch, that many Persons of great Learning and
Judgment are of opinion, that there is no one Set-Form of Government for the
Christian Church to be found in the whole Bible, but must be left to our
Governors to order and appoint according to the Rules and Dictates of sound
Judgment and Discretion: Which the Learned and Judicious Hooker gives a most
admirable Account of in his Ecclesiast. Polit.

Nor can this in the least impeach (as some have vainly objected the
Sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures, or the Fidelity of Christ in not leaving a
perfect Model of Church Government behind him: For we have seen already, that
the Holy Scriptures were primarily intended to instruct us in the Fundamentals
of Faith and Christian Morality, and speak only overtly of Church Discipline
and Government. And, for the Fidelity of Christ herein, it is plain that the
Church in our Saviors Time was in her Minority, which must afterward (by
degrees) grow up to a state of greater Liberty and Perfection. What others have
urged from the Form of Church Government under the Jewish Oeconomie concludes
nothing: For the Jews lived all under one Polity and in one Nation; whereas
Christianity is dispersed all over the World, under many disserent Civil
Governments; and therefore the Circumstances of Religious Worship and Church
Discipline, must be suited to the State and Condition of different People
within their several Jurisdictions, as may appear most just and reasonable to
the Judgments and Discretion of their lawful Governors. Therefore,

3. Tho every Person be obliged to hate and fly from Idolatry, Heresy, etc.
yet none should be affrighted from his Duty with mere Buggs and Scar-crows, or
the empty Appearances of Error without sufficient Grounds. For tho our Liturgy
and Set-Forms of Worship have been extremely cavil'd at by some of our
Adversaries, yet it is evident that neither the Prophets of old, nor our Savior
and his Apostles, nor the Primitive Fathers, did ever find fault with the
Stated Methods and Forms of Prayer, but did practice and appoint 'em
themselves, and highly encouraged them in others. For there are many Set-Forms
of Prayer, Benedictions and Thanksgivings, in the Writings of the Prophets; our
Savior composed a Form of Prayer to be used by his Apostles and Followers,
(tho they were doubtless as able to pray by the Spirit as the most Seraphick
Enthusiast,) which Method also was observed by John the Baptist, for the
direction and assistance of his Disciples in God's Worship. All which Stated
Forms became Patterns and Presidents to the Churches of Christ in after Ages,
who had all their several Liturgies as we have; nor is there any thing in our
Service Book which is contrary to, but most exactly conformable to those Rules.

4. Let not the bare Pretense then of some small Errors in and about the
Circumstances of Public Worship, prevail with any Man to separate from the
Communion of his National Church, seeing there have been, and are as many, and
probably greater Errors in all the Churches of Christ in all Ages of the
Gospel: For tho our Blessed Savior promised, that the Gates of Hell should not
prevail against the Universal Church, that he will be with her to the end of
the World, send his Spirit to lead her into all Truth, and abide with her for
ever; yet these Promises do only respect the Fundamental Doctrins of the
Catholic and Universal Church of Christ, or a People professing the Truth,
however they may err (as all of them do) in Opinions not essential to Religion.
And seeing every particular Church may be guilty of some Errors and Mistakes in
outward Circumstances of Religion, therefore fore he that will separate upon
this Account can scarce hold Communion with any National Church upon Earth. And
those fickle and fanciful Persons might have had the same Plea, to have
separated from the Christian Church in the time of the Apostles that they have
now from Us: Nor is there any one that understands the State of our Church, but
will readily acknowledge, that our Orders of Bishops Priests and Deacons, and
Set Form of Worship and Discipline, are if not of Apostolical,) yet of
Primitive Institution.

5. No mere Inconveniences, or circumstantial Errors or Defects and those only
alleged, not proved against Us, can justify or excuse a Departure from Us,
since I have made it fully evident that our Church holds and maintains all the
Essentials both of Faith and of Worship. For, we have seen already, that all
Men are obliged to conform themselves to the Constitutions of their National
Church, tho some of the external Modes and Forms be inconvenient, disorderly
and defective, rather than not be of any Church at all: And what they cannot
reform without disturbing the Peace of the Church,) it is their Duty to
tolerate, seeing there is no National and Particular Church in the World, (as we
have already observed) whose Constitutions and Government are absolutely
perfect. Therefore,

6. Those Persons are extremely to blame that require greater Purity in Gods
Public Worship, than the Holy Scriptures have commanded, or our Blessed Savior
and his Apostles, or the Primitive Orthodox Fathers have recommended to
Posterity. And tho there were some things amiss in the outward Rules and Laws
of Worship and Government: Yet it is not the Province, nor in the power of
private Men to reform Religion; this being wholly lest to the prudent
management of those Governors, whom the divine Providence has constituted and
appointed to rule over Us. Wherefore that precipitant and rash Zeal (which some
miscall Puty) will more disturb the Peace of their own Consciences, and
prejudice the Interest of the Church, than their charitable and peaceable
Compliance with those seeming Error, and Defects, which they so much cavil at
and complain of.

7. It Is the greatest Argument then of Imprudence and Indiscretion, to run upon
manifest and real Evils, upon those Fears and Jealousies (which are merely
groundless) and only imagined to be so. Will any Man of Reason and Religion
dare to forsake Gods public Ordinances, and make a Schism in the Church of
Christ, because perhaps there may be some probable Defects in her Communion.
For Gods Commands to attend his Public Worship, and endeavor the Peace of the
Church, are plain and positive, whereas the Errors objected against us are
dubious and disputable: And now, to cast the Scales, the far greater number of
pious, learned and judicious Men are on our side; so, that for any thing they
know, they may be mistaken. But granting 'em that we do err, let our Governors
see to it, we have a sufficient Rule for our Obedience, (nor dare we substract
it for the sake of an Inconvenience only, if their Commands be not sinful) but
they have none for their Disobedience. And therefore seeing they have no lawful
Authority to reform the least Error or Mistake in Government, it would be the
greater Prudence, and more Christian like to pray and mourn in secret for what
they apprehend amiss, than to disobey and exasperate their Governors, stir up
Divisions in the Church, and run upon the dangerous Hazzards of a licentious
and unwarrantable Separation.

8. We should be always more concerned for promoting the Interest of the Gospel
and our own National Church, than the gratifying of our own personal and
private Fancies and Opinions. For it has been a great fault in most of our
Brethren of the Nonconformity, who have been so wedded to their own private
Humors and Conceits, that they have almost quite forgot the Peace of the
Church, and the true Interest of the Protestant Reformed Religion. Hence have
sprung those Heresies and Schisms, and that Atheism and Profaneness, which
have so strangely overspread the whole Nation, to the great scandal of our
Religion and Government; and have done what in their power lies to yield up
themselves and us a Prey to our cruel and merciless Enemies. Whereas, if they
had the least sense of their Duty and Interest, they would keep close (at this
Time especially) to our Communion; which under God would be their chief Refuge,
and yield in some small Matters, tho less agreeable to their own private
Sentiments and Opinions, for the greater Benefit of the Public.

9. No Prejudice should prevail with any Man so far, as to make him unwilling
to recant and disclaim his Errors upon a through Conviction, and return to the
ways of Truth and Peace, from which he has formerly erred. And therefore it is a
great Fault in many who are unwilling to retract those Errors which they have
espoused, lest they should be censured by their Party as Renegadoes and
Apostates from their Religion: Whereas, if they would but seriously consider
it, 'twill be their greatest Honor as well as Interest, and a special Evidence
of their Integrity, to acknowledge and recant their Errors and Mistakes; nor
need any Man be ashamed or afraid to confess he has erred. St. Aug. writ a
whole Book of Retractations, for which he was deservedly as much esteemed, as
for any of his other Works: Nor can any Man come under the vile imputation and
scandal of an Apostate, who changes only some mistaken Errors and Opinions, not
his Religion. And

Lastly, Others have been extremely to blame in setting up their own private
Glosses and Interpretations of the Holy Scriptures, as infallible Maxims and
necessary Conclusions, insomuch that they I rather disturb the Peace of the
Community, than be persuaded to recede from them: For being ignorant of the
scope and meaning of those sacred and lively Oracles, they presently sancy
without the least true ground, that every Passage founding that Way, must be a
strong and forcible Argument to prove and confirm their Opinion. The Scriptures
indeed be allowed, and are of important and necessary use for the Conduct of
their Faith and Manners in the ways of Religion: But then shall every Mechanic
presume to be an Interpreter and Judge (and think himself as infallible as the
Pope in Cathedra) of all the abstruse and difficult Passages in Holy Writ?

Now, what can it be but mere Enthusiasm and Delusion in any one to pretend to
interpret the dark Points of Scripture, (which neither concern Men's Faith nor
Manners) without the use of those Means which are out of the reach of the
Vulgar? They Will readily grant, that in all other Professions, Arts and Sciences,
a Man must be a considerable time, and take great pains to gain Experience ere
he can be capable of managing, and must be an approved Artist before any one
will entrust him with Business in his way of Dealings in the World. Shall every
Novice then who can scarce read a Chapter distinctly in the Bible, presume to
have as much Skill in Divinity and the Holy Scriptures, as he that has been
trained up all his life in the Schools of the Prophets; has the advantage of
all useful Books, understands the Languages wherein the Scriptures were
originally written, and makes this Study his whole Business and Profession?
These are such wild and extravagant Conceits, as one would think that no Man of
common Reason and Prudence should once pretend to: And yet there are several
illiterate country Hobs, and conceited Tradesmen in Market Towns (and of my
acquaintance, as there are in most places of this Kingdom,) who will undertake to
interpret the Scripture, and preach (according to their way; and yet) with more
boldness and confidence than the greatest Doctors of the Chair. But we leave
such to their own Fancies and Delusions, which can neither concern you nor me
more at present, than to pity and pray for them, that they may come in due time
to a true sense of their unaccomtable Errors, and (whilst unretracted)
unpardonable Mistakes.

These I am persuaded are such Reasons, as will puzzle our Dissenting Brethren
to answer, and obviate all their Pleay and Pretenses to a warrantable
Separation from the Church of England: However (Sir) such as they are, are
humbly offered to your serious Perusal; and probably they may be useful to you
in your present Circumstances, having calculated them primarily for that
Meridian. Yet let not these or any other so bind you up, as to neglect greater
and better of your own: For it will be your great Interest and Advantage to
weigh and measure the Drift and Design of all Counsels, by the Dictates of your
own Reason and Judgment.

I doubt I have wearied your Patience with a tedious Epistle; the Subjects
being so copious have drawn it out to an undue Proportion. Yet, when you have
seriously considered the Scope and Design of it in its full Latitude and
Importance, I hope you will heartily excuse not only the Length, but all other
Mistakes and Defects in it without any further Apology. Whatever Indiscretions
I have been guilty of either in the Undertaking, or management and composure of
this Discourse, are wholly imputable to my Self; none of your Relations or
Friends being yet acquainted with it. For all which I do most earnestly and
humbly beg your Pardon. Now, that God Almighty may ever bless, preserve,
succeed, and prosper you in your Progress and Return; and that all your
Endeavors may be acceptable to Him, well-pleasing to your Friends, and a
comfort and benefit to your Self, shall be the most earnest, hearty, and
constant Prayer of,

Prayer of, Honored SIR, Your humble devoted Servant.
March 6h. Stylo vetere 1687/8.

