A LETTER to a Member of Parliament On the Account of some present Transactions.
HONORED SIR,
THE Experience I have had of your impartial dealings, encouraged me to make
this Address to you; and however assuming if may be thought, yet I am sure it is
no unseasonable Application: how unhappy soever the several late turns of our
Affairs have been, I am sensible you have had no share in them, and therefore
when any of those Transactions are brought upon the Stage, I dare in every
thing appeal to you as an unprejudiced Spectator.

What you have hitherto done, I doubt: not is the Effect of a most deliberate
Consideration; and though some Objections are made, yet I hope that evident
Necessity, which is always able to overruled Forms, will easily justify the
Integrity of your Actions.

Most Men are by this time satisfied that Popery and Slavery are Vanquished,
and that nothing is wanting but a healing Cordial to settle the Constitution,
after the strains of a violent Purgation; But in some Men the Humors are so
floating, that when one angry part is relieved, another immediately becomes
uneasy; and this unhappiness of Temper is so afflicting, that there can never
be a perfect state of Health, when by all the Lenitives you apply, you cannot
make the Pain leave the Man, but only change its station.

I was in hopes that our present good Fortune would have made all Protestants
so loving, that the memory of former Injuries could never sour their good
Nature; since Men of all divisions among them have been unwarily injurious to
each other; this should facilitate their Reconciliation, and instead of ripping
up old Sores, should rather hide those, which perhaps may appear of a greener
Complexion. It Is too much like the common Artifice of Scolding to be quick in
throwing Calumnies: and 'twas only the Thief that never entered into Paradise,
who could upbraid when he himself was in the same Condemnation.

I must confess, there are some Dealings, that are enough to ferment even the
Blood of a Stoic: to hear a Regulator Cant against Surrendering of Charters; to
find a Man accused of holding Correspondence with Papists, by one that sat at
Meat with the Pope's Nuncio; to see a late Addressor (who in spite of all Laws,
would allow of the Dispensing Power) furious for some disputable Customs in
particular Corporations; I say to see Men under these Circumstances prosecuting
some few Miscarriages, which are so old, that nothing but Malice could
remember; must tempt a Man to believe that either they have no sense of their
own Faults, or else that they are afraid to be called to account, and so by
putting others first, would willingly Postpone their Punishment.

I am told that Sir I. M -- r, Sir W. P -- d, and some others, are accused for
Male Administration in their Offices Seven or Eight years since: So stale a
Resentment is not worthy of your Consideration; and since their Accusers are so
good at Recollecting of Crimes, I wonder they had not run back to Original Sin,
and prosecuted them for being the Progeny of Adam: this Fault is much more
demonstrable; and if Regeneration be an Excuse, they can in the other Case too
produce variety of Pardons.

But when the Matter comes before you, I do not doubt but you will transfer
such trivial Grievances to their proper place, and not suffer private Peeks to
disturb the Settlement of three Kingdoms: This Business is become the Discourse
of the whole Town, and doubtless shortly will be that of the Country too; some
rejoice at these Gentlemen's Misfortune; others, and perhaps the more
considerate, are exceeding Sorry; such contrariety of Passions must needs be
very clashing, and not fit Ingredients for that happy Union, which His Majesty
has graciously designed.

And indeed such unhappy Recollections must needs breed ill blood; for these
Gentlemen's Actions for which they are Accused, have been Countenanced by many,
and Approved of by most; so that the Censures you pass upon them, will
vertually reach all the rest, and upon a fair Poll they will be found too
numerous to be disobliged.

If several of those Men to whom this Passage may be very pleasing, should
perhaps since the Date of these Miscarriages, be found themselves Criminal in a
higher Degree; these provoking Accusations may tempt Men to bring on further
Complaints, and when you are once beset with Indictments, (besides the loss of
your time) you must either lie under the Censure of being Partial, or extend
your Animadversions perhaps further than you at first intended.

The great Objection against these Gentlemen is, That what they did, was to
serve a Popish Interest: I must confess that I think the Papists have been a
long time undermining us, but I believe when these Gentlemen were in Office,
they lay deeper under Ground than they have done some time since, when others
became the Favorites; and when the design began visibly to appear, they
worthily refused their Assistance: So that how foul soever you may fall upon
their mastakes, their Integrity is Spotless; and tho excess of Loyalty might
induce them to be influenced by the King, it is plain they had nothing to do
with the Papists.

If these Gentlemen consented to some things which were fatal in their
consequence, it is plain that others received what they had done, and improved
them to greater inconveniences: They are accused for an undue Choice of two
Sheriffs, others had consented to put upon us four Parliament Men by illegal
Elections; now after a due consideration of Circumstances, that which appears
to be the most dangerous mistake, ought in reason to be the Subject of your
first Enquiry; and then in common construction, which do you think is most to
blame, he that unwarily sets a House on Fire, or another who feeds the Flame
when he sees it kindled.

Perhaps those Persons who would have you censure these Gentlemen, may think
their crimes to be Notorious, and that there is nothing to be found on their
own side but Innocence. Whereas it is difficult to imagine, that men in such
great heats, always kept within their due compass; and if Men of all sides have
been faulty, this unreasonable Prosecution will oblige these Gentlemen to
discover for their defense, what they are willing to conceal out of Charity; so
that the natural consequence of this contest, will be the reviving of old
Quarrels, the very thoughts of which to an honest Man must be but a very
uncomfortable prospect.

To prosecute old Grudges, at a time when we have Criminals of so high a Nature
to encounter, will be both a scandal to our selves, and a comfort to our
Enemies; 'twill show that revenge with us is not so much a Passion, as a
Principle; and that we can at any time let Popery gather strength, so that we
can but humble one another. Indeed these Gentlemen's Accusers may think it too
early to call to Account the late Instruments of our Miseries, and since crimes
are to be punished according to their Antiquity, ten Years hence may be the
proper time of their reckoning. But wise and indifferent Men will think that
crimes are to be considered, more according to their bulk than standing; for an
old fault has lost its Malignity, time has wiped off the Stain, and the man is
become Innocent by Prescription; so that to pursue a man with Anger, after a
long Truce and a tacit Reconciliation, is neither Just nor Generous; it is too
much like French Faith, to fall upon the Allies as soon as the common Enemy is
vanquished.

Neither can it be for the Interest of their Majestys, to have their Subjects
pickeering one with another; their Affairs are not yet so well settled, as to
bear the effects of private Animosities; and if their Enemies may expect
tenderness from the mildness of their Reign, it is a little too preposterous to
bring perhaps their best Friends immediately into Trouble. You are now upon a
noble project of uniting Protestants, and therefore I hope you will not think
that Anger is a convenient preparative to love, and that the best expedient to
make them Friends, is to divide them into factions.

That this will be the probable consequence of so ungrateful a review of former
proceedings, seems very evident; for First, a great part of the Nation have not
so terrible an Idea of the matter in Question, and then to be severe upon
Persons for a moot fault will sound very harsh, especially when their late
worthly behavior had sufficiently attoned for greater miscarriages; and
Secondly, a great many considerable men of the same, and other Corporations are
in the same instances culpable; so that if you extend your punishments only to
these Gentlemen, and your pardon to the rest, yet you involve them too in the
same Guilt, which to a generous mind is equally afflicting; and tho you do not
punish, yet you will be thought to insult, and expose them to the reproaches of
every insolent reflector.

And therefore I hope for the safety of the Nation, for the sake of their
Majesty's, and the interest of Religion, you will not countenance every angry
Spirit, which by its long continuance seems to be stiffned into Malice and
Revenge; that your Glorious Endeavors may not be frustrated by the remembrance
of former Misunderstandings, which I am afraid on all sides are easier forgot
then justified; that we may henceforth avoid the contrivance of the Jesuit,
which is always active and working; for he who has not strength to conquer,
may yet have the cunning to divide.

March the 14th, 1689. I am Sir, Your much obliged Servant.


