A LETTER of several French Ministers Fled into Germany upon the account of the
PERSECUTION in France, to such of their Brethren in England as Approved the
Kings Declaration touching Liberty of Conscience.
Translated from the Original in French.
Although in our present Dispersion, most dear and honored Brethren, it has
pleased the Providence of God to conduct us into places very distant from one
another. Yet that union which ought always to continue betwixt us, obliges us
to declare our sense to one another with a Christian and Brotherly Freedom upon
all occasions, that may present themselves to us so to do. It Is this makes us
hope that you will not take it amiss of us, if at this time we deliver our
opinion to you touching the Affairs of England in matters of Religion, and with
reference to that Conduct which you have observed therein.

We ought not to conceal it from you, That the greatest part of the Protestants
of Europe have been extremely scandalized to understand, that certain among
you, after the example of many of the Dissenters, have Addressed to the King of
England, upon the account of his Declaration, by which he has granted Liberty
of Conscience to the Non-conformists: And that some others who had already
ranked themselves under the Episcopal Communion, nevertheless published the
said Declaration in their Churches; and this at a time when almost all the
Bishops themselves with so much Firmness and Courage refused to do it.

If we may be permitted to tell you freely what our opinion is concerning the
conduct of the Bishops and of the Dissenters in this conjuncture, we shall make
no difficulty to pronounce in favor of the former. We look upon it that they
have exceedingly well answered the Duty of their Charge, whilst despising their
own private Interest, they have so worthily supported that of the Protestant
Religion: Whereas the others, for want of considering these things as they
ought to have done, have given up the interest of their Religion to their own
particular advantages.

It is not out of any complement to the Bishops, much less out of any enmity to
the Dissenters, that we make such different judgments concerning them. We know
well enough how to commend or blame, what seems to us to deserve our Praise or
our Censure both in the one and in the other. We do not at all approve the
conduct of the Bishops toward the Dissenters under the last Reign. And although
we do not any more approve that of the Dissenters in separating from their
Communion, yet we do confess they had some reason in the bottom for it; and
that the Ceremonies which they have refused to submit to are the Remains of
Popery, which we could rather wish might have been entirely abolished. In this
unhappy Schism which has so long time rent the Church of England; we look upon
it, that both Parties have been equally defective in their Charity. On the one
side, the Dissenters ought by no means to have separated themselves for the
Form of Ecclesiastical Government, nor for Ceremonies which do not at all
concern the Fundamentals of Religion. On the other side, The Bishops should
have had a greater Condescension to the Weakness of their Brethren: And without
doubt they would have acted in a manner more agreeable to the Spirit of the
Gospel, if instead of treating them with so much Rigor as they did, they had
left them the Liberty of serving God according to their Conscience, till it
should have pleased him to reunite All under the same Discipline. However the
Conformity of Opinion between the dissenters and Us, ought to have prejudiced
us in their favor, had we been capable of Partiality on this occasion. There
is also another thing which might have disposed us to judge less favorably of
the Bishops than of them, and that is the Yoke which they have imposed upon the
French Ministers, by obliging them to receive a second Ordination before they
could be permitted to Exercise their Ministry in the Church of England, as if
the Ordination they had received in France had not been sufficient. But we must
do Justice to all the World, and bear witness to the Truth. We have already
said, and we must again repeat it, It seems to us that on this last Occasion
the Bishops have discharged their Duty, and are most worthy of Praise, whereas
the Dissenters on the contrary are extremely to be ^^^^ned. And we will
presently offer our Reasons wherefore we judge so of the one, and of the other.

In the mean time, most dear Brethren, give us leave freely to tell you, That
if our Brethren the Dissenters of England, who have Addressed to the King, are
to be blamed, (as we verily believe they are) you certainly are much more to be
condemned. The Hardships under which they had lived for many years without
Churches, without Pastors, without Assemblies, made them think the Liberty of
Conscience which was offered to them, a great Ease. Their Spirits, soured and
prejudiced by the ill Treatments they had received from the Church of England,
had not freedom enough to let them see that the Present which was made them was
Empoison'd. And therefore upon the sudden they received it with joy, and
thought themselves obliged to testify their Acknowledgment of it. But for you
who never had any part in the Divisions of the Church of England, and who by
consequence were in a state to judge more soundly of things, How is it that you
should not have perceived the Poison that was hid under the Liberty of
Conscience offered to them? Or if you did not perceive it of your selves, how
is it that the Generous Refusal of the Bishops, though at the peril of their
Liberty and Estates, to publish the Declaration in their Diocesses, should not
at least have opened your eyes?

How have those Venerable Prelates now highly justified themselves from the
Reproach that was laid upon them of being Popishly affected, and of persecuting
the Dissenters only, but of a secret Hatred to the Reformation? How well have
they made it appear that these were only Calumnies invented by their Enemies to
render them odious to the Protestants, and that their hearts were truly fixed
to the Reformed Religion, and animated with a Zeal worthy Primitive Bishops?
Could you see those faithful Servants of God, disobey the order of their
Sovereign, expose themselves thereby to his Disgrace, suffer Imprisonment, and
prepare themselves to suffer any thing, rather then betray their Consciences
and their Religion, without admiring their Constancy, and being touched with
their Examples? But above all, could you resolve by your Conduct to condemn
that of those generous Confessors? Is this the Acknowledgment which you ought
to have made to them for that Charity, with which they had received and
comforted you in your Exile? Is this to Answer the Glorious Quality of
Confessors, of which you so much vaunt your selves? Is this the Act of Faithful
Ministers of Christ? Give us leave to tell you, most dear Brethren, your
Proceedings in this Affair appear so very strange to us, that we cannot imagine
how you were capable of so doing. It seems to us to have even effaced all the
Glory you had attained by your Sufferings, to reproach your Ministry and to be
unworthy of True and Reformed Christians.

This is no rash judgment which we pass; and to convince you that it is not, we
beseech you only to examine these things with us without Prejudice and Interest.

The Declaration of which we speak is designed for two purposes: The one, the
reestablishment of Popery. The other, the extinction of the Reformed Religion
in England. The former of these designs appears openly in it. The second is
more concealed; it is a mystery of Iniquity, covered over with a specious
appearance; and of which the trace must be concealed till the time of
manifestation comes. We will say nothing of a third Design, which is, Of the
oppression of the Liberties of England for the Establishment of an absolute
Authority, but shall leave it to the Politicians to make their Reflections upon
it. As for us, if we sometimes touch upon it, it shall be only with reference
to Religion: We will apply our selves chiefly to the two other Designs which
they proposed to themselves who made that Declaration.

It cannot be denied but that by this Declaration, there is Liberty of
Conscience granted indifferently to the Papists and to the Dissenters. It
comprehends both the one and the other under the name of Nonconformists. And we
may with confidence affirm, That they were the Papists especially whom the King
had in his eye when he gave this Declaration. And howsoever he may pretend to
have been touched with the Oppressions which the Dissenters had suffered; yet
that his principal design was to re-establish Popery.

Behold here already a very great evil, and such as all true Protestants are
obliged with their utmost power to oppose. What, shall we see Popery, that
abominable Religion, that prodigious heap of Filthiness and Impurity,
re-establish it self, with all its honors, in Kingdoms from which the
Reformation had happily banished it? And shall there be found in those Kingdoms
Protestants who not only stand still without making any opposition to it, but
even favor its re-establishment, and openly give it their Approbation? Who
could have thought that the Dissenters of England, Men who have always
testified so great an aversion to the Roman Religion; and who have no other
pretense to separate from the Bishops, than that they have in part retained in
their Government and Ceremonies the Exteriors of that Religion, should now
themselves join to bring it entirely in? But above all, Who could have believed
that the French Ministers, who after having experimented all the Fury of Popery
in France, were at last banished, rather than that they would subscribe to its
Errors and Abuses: And for this very cause fled into England, that they might
there more freely profess the Protestant Religion, should now contribute to
re-establish Popery in their new Country, where they had been received by their
Brethren with so singular a Charity? Would you indeed, Gentlemen, see England
once more submitted to the tyranny of the Pope, whose Yoke it so happily threw
off in the last age? Would you there see all those monstrous Doctrins, all
those Superstitions, and that horrible Idolatry which reigned there before the
Reformation, domineer once more in it? Would you that the People should again
hear the Pulpits and the Churches sounding out the doctrins of Purgatory, of
Indulgences, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. and see the Images and Relics
of the Saints carried solemnly in Procession, with a God formed by the hand of
Men? And that in fine, they should again publicly adore those vain Idols? We
are confident there is not a good Protestant in the world that would not
startle but at the thought of it.

But this is not yet all. The Declaration of which we speak does not only
re-establish Popery with all its abominations, but does moreover tend to the
Ruin of the Reformation in England. A Man need not to have any great Sagacity
to be convinced of this. And that as much as it seems to establish for ever the
Protestant Religion in that Kingdom, it does on the contrary destroy the very
Foundations of it.

The ground upon which the Reformation is founded in England, are the Laws
which have been made at several times for the settlement of it, and to abolish
either the Tyranny of the Pope, or the Popish Religion altogether. And as these
Laws have been made by the King and Parliament together, so that the King has
not the power to Repeal them without a Parliament, they secure the Protestant
Religion against the Enterprises of such Kings as should ever think to Destroy
it.

But now if this Declaration be executed, we are no more to make any account of
those Solemn Laws which have been passed in favor of the Reformation, they
become of no value, and the Protestant Religion is entirely left to the King's
Pleasure. This is what will clearly appear from what we are about to say.

The King not having been able to obtain of the last Parliament to consent to a
Repeal of the Laws which had been made against the Nonconformists, Dissolved
the Parliament it self. Not long after, without attending a new one, he did
that alone by his Declaration which the Parliament would not do conjunctly with
him. He granted a full Liberty of Conscience to the Nonconformists; he freed
them from the Penalties which had been appointed against them, and dispensed
with the Oaths to which the Laws obliged all those who were admitted to any
Charges, whether in the Soldiery, or in Administration of Justice, or of the
Government. In pursuance of these Declarations he threw the Protestants out of
all Places of any great Importance to clap in Papists in their room, and goes
on without ceasing to the entire Establishment of Popery. Who does not see,
that if the Protestants approve these Declarations, and themselves authorize
such Enterprises, the King will not stop here, but that this will be only one
step to carry him much further? What can be said when he shall do the same
thing with reference to those Laws which exclude the Papists out of the
Parliament, that he has done to those which shut them out of all Charges and
Imploys, and forbad them the Exercise of their Religion? Does not the
Approbation of such Declarations, as it overthrows these last, carry with it
before hand the approbation of those which shall one day overthrow the former?
And if the King shall once give himself the Authority to bring Papists into the
Parliament, who shall hinder him from using Solicitations, Promises,
Threatenings, and a thousand other the like means to make up a Popish
Parliament? And who shall hinder him with the Concurrence of that Parliament to
Repeal all the Ancient Laws that had been passed against Popery, and make new
ones against the Protestants? These are without doubt the Natural Consequences
of what the King at this time aims at. These are the Fruits which one ought to
expect from it, if instead of Approving as some have done his Enterprises
against the Laws, they do not on the contrary with all imaginable Vigor oppose
them.

Reflect a little on what we have here said, and you will consess that we have
reason to commend the Conduct of the Bishops who refused to publish the
Declaration; and to condemn those Dissenters who have made their Addresses of
Thanks for it.

It is true that the Dissenters are to be pitied, and that they have been
treated hardly enough, and we do not think it at all strange, that they so
earnestly sigh after Liberty of Conscience. It is natural for Men under
Oppression to seek for Relief: And Liberty of Conscience considered only in it
self, is it may be the Thing of all the World the most precious and most
desirable. Would to God we were able to procure it for them by any lawful
means, and without such ill Consequences, though it were at the peril of our
Lives! But we Conjure them to consider how pernicious that Liberty of
Conscience is which is offered to them, as we have just now shown. On the one
side, It is inseparably linked with the Establishment of Popery; and on the
other, it cannot be accepted without approving a terrible Breach which his
Majesty thereby makes upon the Laws, and which would be the ruin of the
Reformation in his Kingdoms, were not some Remedy brought to it. And where is
the Protestant who would buy Liberty of Conscience at so dear a rate, and not
rather choose to continue deprived of it all his Life?

Should the private interest of our Brethren the Dissenters blind them in such
a manner, that they have no regard to the general Interest of the Church?
Should they for enjoying a Liberty of Conscience so ill assured, shut their
Eyes to all other Considerations? How much better would it be for them to
reunite themselves to the Bishops, with whom they differ only in some points
of Discipline; but especially at this time, when their Conduct ought to have
entirely defaced those unjust Suspicions which they had conceived against them?
But if they could not so readily dispose themselves to such a Reunion, would
it not be better for them to resolve still to continue without Liberty of
Conscience, and expect some more favorable time when they may by lawful means
attain it, than to open themselves a gate to Popery, and to concur with it to
the Ruin of the Protestant Religion?

You will, it may be, tell us, that it looks ill in us, who so much complain,
That we have been deprived of Liberty of Conscience in France, to find fault
with the King of England for granting it to his Subjects: And that it is the
least that can be allowed to a Sovereign, to allow him the Right to permit the
exercise of his own Religion in his own Kingdoms, and to make use of the
service of such of his Subjects as himself shall think fit, by putting them
into Charges and Employs. You will add, That his Majesty does not go about
neither to abrogate the ancient Laws, nor to make new ones. All he does being
only to dispense with the Observation of certain Laws in such of his Subjects
as he thinks fit, and for as long time as he pleases; and that the right of
dispensing with, and suspending of Laws, is a right inseparably tied to his
Person: That for the rest, the Protestant Religion does not run the least
Risque. There are Laws to shut the Papists out of Parliament, and these Laws
can neither be dispensed with, nor suspended: So that the Parliament partaking
with the King in the Legislative Power, and continuing still Protestant, there
is no cause to fear, that any thing should be done contrary to the Protestant
Religion. Besides, What probability is there, that a King, who appears so great
an Enemy to oppression in matters of Conscience and Religion, should ever have
a thought, tho he had the power himself, to oppress in this very matter the
greatest part of his Subjects, and take from them that Liberty of Conscience
which he now grants to them, and which he promises so inviolably to observe for
the time to come?

These are all the Objections that can with any appearance of reason be made
against what we have before said. They may all be reduced to five, which we
shall examine in their order. And we doubt not but we shall easily make it
appear, that they are all but mere illusions.

1. We do justly complain, That they have taken from us our Liberty of
Conscience in France, because it was done contrary to the Laws. And one may as
justly complain, that the K of England does labor to re-establish Popery in
his Country, because he cannot do it but contrary to the Laws. Our Liberties in
France were founded upon solemn Laws, upon perpetual, irrevocable, and sacred
Edicts; and which could not be recalled, without violating at once the Public
Faith, the Royal Word, and the Sacredness of an Oath. And Popery has been
banished out of England by Laws made by King and Parliament, and which cannot
be repealed but by the Authority of King and Parliament together; so that
therefore there is just cause to complain, that the King should go about to
overthrow them himself alone by his Declaration.

2. It is not true that a Sovereign has always the right to permit the exercise
of his own Religion in his Dominions, and to make use of the service of such of
his Subjects as he himself shall think fit, that is to say, by putting of them
into Charges and Employs: And in particular, he has not this right, when the
Laws of his Country are contrary thereunto, as they are in the case before us.
Every King is obliged to observe the Fundamental Laws of his Kingdom. And the
King of England, as well as his Subjects, ought to observe the Laws which have
been established by King and Parliament together.

3. For the third, the distinction between the Abrogation of a Law, and the
Dispensing with and Suspending of it cannot here be of any use; whether the
King abrogates the Laws which have been made against Popery, or whether without
saying expressly that he does abrogate them; he overthrows them by his
Declarations, under pretense of dispensing with, or suspending of them; It is
still in effect the same thing. And to what purpose is it that the Laws are not
abrogated, if in the mean time all sorts of Charges are given to Papists, and
Popery it self be Re-established contrary to the tenor of the Laws? The truth
is, If the King has such a power as this, if this be a Right necessarily tied
to his Person,'it is in vain that the Parliament does partake with him in the
Legislature. This Authority of the Parliament is but a mere Name, a Shadow, a
Phantome, a Chimera, and no more. The King is still the absolute Master,
because he can alone, and without his Parliament, render useless by his
Declarations the Laws which the Parliament shall have the most solemnly
established together with him. We confess the King has Right of Dispensing in
certain Cases, as if the Concern be what belongs to his private Interest, he
may without doubt whenever he pleases depart from his own Rights; it is a
Liberty which no body will pretend to contest with him. But he has not the
power to dispense to the prejudice of the Rights of the People, nor by
Consequence put the Property, the Liberty, and the Lives of his Protestant
Subjects into the hands of Papists.

4. What we have now said in Answer to the third Objection, will be more clear
from the Answer we are to give to the fourth. They would persuade the
Protestants that their Religion is in safety, because on the one side the King
cannot make Laws without the Parliament; and that on the other, there being
Laws which exclude Papists out of the two Houses, it must necessarily follow,
That the Parliament shall continue to be Protestant. But if the King has the
Power to break throught the Laws, under the pretense of Dispensing with and
Suspending of them, What Security shall the Protestants have that he will not
Dispense with the Papists, the observation of those Laws which do exclude them
out of the Parliament, as well as he has Dispensed with those that should have
kept them out of Charges and Employments? What Security shall they have that he
will not at any time hereafter suspend the Execution of the former, as he has
already suspended the Execution of the latter? Which being so, what should
hinder us from seeing in a little time a Popish Parliament, who together with
the King shall pass Laws contrary to the Protestant Religion? What difference
can be shown between the one and the other of these Laws, that the one should
be liable to be dispensed with and suspended, and the other not? Were they not
both established by the King and Parliament? Were not both the one and the
other made for the Security of the Protestant Religion, and of those who
profess it? Are not the Rights of the People concerned in the one, as well as
in the other? And whosoever Suffers and Approves the King in the Violation of
these Rights in some things, does he not thereby Authorize him to violate them
in all? If the King has power to put the Liberty and Property and Lives of his
Protestant Subjects at the Mercy of the Papists, by placing them in Charges
contrary to the Law, why should he not have the power to raise the same Papists
to the Authority of Legislators by declaring them capable of sitting in
Parliament, seeing that is but contrary to Law? Do not deceive your selves, the
Laws are the Barrier which bound the Authority of the King, and if his Barrier
be once broken, he will extend his Authority as far as he pleases. And it will
be impossible for you after that to set any bounds to it.

5. In fine, He must be very little acquainted with the Spirit of Popery, who
imagines that it will be content to Re-establish it self in England, without
aiming to destroy the Protestant Religion. Give it but Time and Opportunity to
fortify it self, and you may then expect to see what it is. In all Places
where it has got the Power in its hands, it will not only rule, but Rule alone,
and not suffer any other Religion besides it self; and imploys the Sword and
Fire to Extirpate that which it calls Heresy. Were not this a Truth confirmed
by infinite Examples both Ancient and Modern, which every one knows who has
read any thing of History, it would be too much evidenced by the Cruelties
which it has so lately exercised against the Churches of Hungary, of France,
and of the Valleys of Piemont. And men ought not to be lulled asleep by the
Pretense of an Inclination which the King of England would be thought to have
for Liberty of Conscience; nor by the Promises which he makes to preserve it to
all his Subjects without distinction. Every one knows that Perfidiousness and
Breach of Faith are Characters of Popery no less essential to it than Cruelty.
Can you doubt of this, Gentlemen? You who so lately came from making a sad
Experiment of it? How often did our King promise us to preserve us in our
Privileges? How many Declarations, how many Edicts did he set out to that
purpose? How many Oaths were taken to confirm those Edicts? Did not this very
King Lewis XIV. himself solemnly promise by several Edicts and Declarations to
maintain us in all the Liberties which were granted to us by the Edict of
Nantes? And yet after all, what scruple was there made to violate so many Laws,
so many Promises, and so many Oaths? The Protestants of England have themselves
also sometimes likewise experimented the same Infidelity: And not to allege
here any other example, let us desire them to remember only the Reign of Queen
Mary, what Promises she made at her coming to the Crown, not to make any change
of Religion; and yet what bloody Laws she afterward passed to extinguish the
Reformation as soon as she saw her self fast in the Throne? And with what
inhumanity she spilt the Blood of her most faithful Subjects to accomplish that
design? After such an instance as this, a man must be very credulous indeed,
and willing to deceive himself, that will put too much confidence in the
Promises of the King that now Reigns. Do we not know, that there are neither
Promises nor Oaths which the Pope does not pretend to have power to dispense
with in those whom he employs for the extirpation of Heresy? And do we not
also know, that it is one of the great Maxims of Popery, a Maxim authorized
both by the Doctrine and Practice of the Council of Constance, That they are not
obliged to keep any Faith with Heretics. We ought not to believe that King
James II. a Prince who has so much Zeal for Popery, should be governed by any
other Maxims than those of his Religion. And whosoever will take the pains to
examine his Conduct both before and since his coming to the Crown, will find
that he has more than once put 'em in practice.

And this, Gentlemen, we suppose may be sufficient to convince all reasonable
persons, that there is nothing more pernicious than that Declaration which you
have approved; whether by publishing it, as some of you have done, or by
Addressing to the King to thank him for it. When you shall have reflected upon
these things, you will without doubt your selves confess, that you have
suffered your selves to be amused with some imaginary advantages which you hope
to make by this Declaration. In the mean time, most dear Brethren, you will
pardon us, if we have chanced to have let any thing slip that is not agreeable
to you. We had no design to give the least offense either to you, or to our
Brethren the Dissenters of England. If we have spoken our Thoughts freely of
your Conduct and of theirs, we have at least spoken with no less liberty of
that of the Bishops. And God is our Witness, that we have said nothing of the
one or the other, but in the sincerity of our heart, and out of a desire to
contribute somewhat to his Glory, and the good of his Church. We are,

Most honored Brethren, Your most Humble, most Obedient, and most affectionate
Brethren in Jesus Christ, N.N.


