A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament CONCERNING The four Regiments commonly
called MARINERS.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwicklane, 1699.

A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament CONCERNING The four Regiments commonly
called MARINERS.
SIR,
IN my last I undertook to show that the Establishment of the four Marine
Regiments is an useless Charge to the People, a Nuisance to the Navy, and
dangerous to the Kingdom's Liberties.

And in order to it I shall premise four things.

The First I have already proved, That seven thousand Men are more than
sufficient for Guards and Garrisons, and consequently these Mariners are not
necessary for Land-service, nor can they be used to that purpose, the last
Parliament having appropriated them to the service of the Navy only.

The Second is, That every Country will breed as many Seamen as their Trade and
the ordinary occasions of their Navy in times of Peace will give constant
Employment to: for as Sir William Petty observes, The Wages of a Seaman is
equivalent to that of three common Laborers; and therefore if our Acts of
Navigation were duly observed, Men will naturally fall into the most beneficial
Employment, till it becomes overstockt, and some of them for want of
subsistence, are forced to seek out other Livelihoods, which is true not only
in this but all other Trades.

The Third is, That if by a War or any other Accident, more Seamen are bred in
a Country than their Ships of War, and the bulk of their Trade will constantly
employ, the Supernumeraries must go to other Trades, find out new Countries,
beg, steal or starve, which I take to be the case at present of England: for
during the War we maintained between forty and fifty thousand Men in the Royal
Navy, and now we do not employ above ten thousand; so that near forty thousand
Men bred in the Fleet are to seek out their Livelihoods elsewhere, and it is at
present a miserable complaint amongst the Seamen, that many thousands of them
want subsistence.

The Fourth is a Consequent from the two last, that this Marine Establishment
is no Nursery for Seamen, but rather the contrary: I do not say that in no
Circumstance it may be so; for perhaps in a War where the occasions for Seamen
are very great, or in a Country initiating themselves in Sea Affairs, such
Regiments may be of use to bring Land-men to Sea, for bad Seamen are better
than none at all; but in a Country thoroughly versed in Sea Affairs, where there
are more Seamen than there are occasions for them, such an Establishment is so
far from making Seamen, that they take up the room, receive the pay, and hinder
the Employment of those that are actually made.

Having premised these things, the Question in my Opinion will be, Whether
Marine Soldiers are better than an equal number of Seamen? that is, Whether ten
thousand Seamen, and three thousand Mariners, will be more beneficial to the
Kingdom than thirteen thousand Seamen?

Now I shall endeavor to show the contrary.

First, There is a natural Antipathy between Seamen and Land Soldiers, as
having different Customs, Manners, Economy and Officers; nor, as Sir William
Petty observes, Political Arithmetic, fol. 57.
do the Seamen heartily rejoice at those Successes of which Landmen have any
share, thinking it hard that they who are bred to miserable, painful and
laborious Employments (and yet profitable to the Commonwealth) should at a time
when Booty and Purchase is to be gotten, be clogged and hindered by any
Conjunction with Landmen, or forced to admit those to an equal share with
themselves. The truth of this has been abundantly demonstrated in the last War,
when Sea and Land Soldiers were never sent any long Voyage together, but their
differences have always defeated the Enterprise they were sent about,
particularly in the Squadron commanded by Sir Francis Wheeler to the
West Indies, where the Resentments were carried so high between the Sea and
Land Officers, that the whole Expedition was unsuccessful, to the loss of many
thousand Men, and a prodigious Sum of Money.

Secondly, The Charge of Mariners is by above a third part greater than an
equal number of Seamen whilst they are used as such; for the Marine Soldiers on
board receive the Wages of Sailors, and the Pay of the Officers amounts to
20933 l. besides, which is an useless Charge to the Kingdom, the Officers very
seldom going to Sea with their Men, and when they do, are only a hindrance to
the Seamen, and raise Factions in the Fleet; or if they happen to agree with
the Sea Commanders, are of no use but to debauch with them, and hinder them
from doing their Duty.

Thirdly, Their Land Methods have mightily interfered with the Navy Rules, and
introduced pernicious Notions into the Fleet Officers, such as Mis-ratings,
false Musters, and other Abuses, which the Sea Officers formerly were ignorant
of: and I have been often told by a Commissioner in the Navy-Office, that that
Board always opposed them, as an Establishment that broke all the Rules and
Economy of the Navy; and how fond soever the Lords of the Admiralty may be of
them now, we may remember the time when a spleenatick Gentleman in that Post
publicly ridiculed them, calling them Water-Rats. And these poor Wretches have
been worse used than if they were so, many of them being starved for want of
Clothes and Sustenance; and indeed they have always been the miserablest
Creatures in the Nation.

Fourthly, instead of making Landmen Sailors, they have made Sailors Landmen;
more Seamen having been inveigled to be Mariners, than Mariners made Seamen:
and tho the Officers have had 40 s. a man for Recruits, yet Men pressed for the
Fleet have been taken into the said Regiments upon that account, and the Money
put into their own Pockets.

Fifthly, They are a dead Charge to the Navy on shore, and burdensome to the
People, being quartered up and down in the Inland Countries; nor could they
ever be obliged to any work in the Yard, tho it has been often proposed, and
one of their Establishments required it: and indeed, tho there have been
several Establishments made, yet none have been observed: and some People will
be so ill-natured as to say, That nothing was designed by that Noble L -- d who
has the honor of this Invention, but to be a Colonel of one of the Regiments.

Sixthly, They are dangerous to the Kingdoms Liberties, as has been abundantly
proved in the several Trades wrote concerning Standing Armies; where it is
demonstrated beyond the possibility of a Reply, that small numbers of Men may
and have destroyed the Liberties of potent Nations: how much more easily then
in England, where besides these Mariners, who will be called to Land when they
have occasion for them, our Kings will have 7000 Men for Guards and Garrisons,
12000 in Ireland, 5000 in Scotland, and almost 6000 in Holland, which in all
amounts to 33000 Men? A dangerous and dreadful Force, and such a one as our
Apostate Whigs (if I may use another man's Expression) in any Reign, wherein
they were not in the Ministry, would have thought sufficient to have enslaved
the Nation.

Now I think it lies upon them to show what great Advantages the Mariners will
bring to the Kingdom more than an equal number of Seamen, which may balance
these Inconveniences, and justify the introducing an Establishment into the
Navy, to which the Seamen have not been accustomed.

I must confess, I could never hear any Reason, or rather Pretense for it,
which did not move my Laughter and Scorn; nor would I condescend to answer them
seriously, but that the Subject it self is above Ridicule, tho these Gentlemen
and their Reasons are below it.

REASON I. Marine Regiments kept in constant Pay will be more ready upon any
Emergency or sudden Occasion than Seamen, who perhaps will be then difficultly
raised.

ANSWER. I have supposed before, that in the room of these Mariners we are to
employ an equal number of Sailors (which I have showed will be less chargeable
to the Kingdom by above a third) then I presume it will be granted that Seamen
actually on Board will be as ready as Mariners, whereof a great part will be
always on shore.

REASON II. That these Mariners do not take up the room of Seamen, but the Men
of War must have their full Complement of Sailors, and these Mariners into the
bargain.

I shall desire to be excused from making any Answer to this Argument, till the
Gentlemen of this new way of Reasoning are pleased to show, that their Mariners
do not receive as much Pay, eat as much Meat, lie in as many Hammocks; in
short, eating, drinking, standing, lying, or sitting, take up as much room as
if they were better Seamen. I must own it is my Opinion, they will not be
contented with the Accommodation Seamen are accustomed to, especially their
Beau-Officers, who will think themselves but ill used unless they have Cabbins
made on purpose for them.

REASON III. Mariners are more proper to make Insults upon the Enemies Coasts
than Seamen, who are not under so good a Discipline for Land-Service.

ANSWER. Our own Experience is contrary to this; for they have been employed
together but once upon Land-Service during the late War, which was at the Siege
of Cork; where a few Seamen, under the Conduct of the Duke of Grafton, did
gallanter Actions, and better Service, than the whole Body of the Mariners
either performed at that time or ever since. But supposing what they say were
true, we have no War, nor any occasino to make Insults upon our Enemies Coasts;
and must we be at a great Charge and Hazard to keep them up till the Lord knows
when, to be sent the Lord knows where, to do the Lord knows what? Besides, have
they ever been made use of to that purpose? And what reason have we to believe
that shall be done hereafter, which was never attempted in eight years War? But
if this were practicable, we may at any time qualify Land-Soldiers for such
Service, by keeping them only on Board till their Sea-sickness is over.

REASON IV. Marine Regiments are properer than Seamen to defend the Decks of
our Ships, and annoy the Enemy with Small-shot.

ANSWER. It has been always observed, that Sailors have been better Marksmen
than Land-Soldiers, as having through the course of their Lives been used to
Arms, not only in Sea-Service, but in their Voyages, and the several Ports they
come into, by exercising themselves to shoot at Wild-fowl: But if this were not
true, what hinders but it may be made a part of Sea-Discipline, to exercise
them by turns on board? unless we think there is an intrinsic Virtue in the
Word Mariners. And if this were impracticable too (as I said before)
Land-Regiments in case of a new War may at any time be fitted for that purpose,
by only keeping them on board till they have digested their Sea-Qualms.

REASON V. Besides the Service they do at Sea, they may be useful when they are
put on shore, by working in the King's Yards.

ANSWER. By their Establishment I presume the Design is to have a certain
proportion of them at Land, the rest at Sea: And since it is all one to the
Argument what number that is, we will suppose that two Thirds shall be always
at Sea, and one Third working in the Yards by turns. Now I have already showed,
that the two Thirds at Sea are more chargeable, and less useful, than an equal
number of Seamen: and if I can show that the Third at Land will be as
chargeable and less useful than an equal number of Artificers, then I think I
have made it appear that they are neither good for Sea or Land, and
consequently fit only to be disbanded.

I confess by their Establishment their Pay at Land is but Eight Pence a day;
but I presume if they hinder them from working any other way by employing their
whole time in hard Labor, they will increase their Allowance, as they do when
they send them to Sea; which by the way is always done when Soldiers are set at
work in the Garrisons, or elsewhere. If they do this, their own Pay will be
equivalent to the Hire of common Laborers, or very near it. But suppose they
do not increase it, I have showed before, that the Pay of the Officers is above
a Third of the whole Pay of the Regiments, supposing every Company to be full:
but if we can have such unbecoming Thoughts of them (which I can never believe
of such honest Gentlemen) as that they will make false Musters, then the
Officers Pay, in probability, will amount to half, which being thrown in, will
make their Wages much above the Rate of common Artificers: then the Question
will be, Whether Men that for the most part have been bred up in Idleness,
picked up at Hab Nab, whether Fish, Fowl, Ottar, or Sea-weed, are likely to do
better Service in the King's Yards than Artificers that exercise their own
Trades, which from their Youth they have been accustomed to: To which I shall
give no Answer.

But what shall the Officers do in the Yards? Shall they work there too? or
shall they stand in the way of the Workmen, and see the Soldiers work at a
Trade that neither of them know any thing of? Indeed if this Subject was less
serious, these Gentlemen would tempt us to be very merry.

REASON VI. These Mariners, besides working in the King's Yards, will defend
them against any sudden Insult.

ANSWER. There is no need of their Assistance; for the King's Yards, if new
Methods have not been introduced into them, are under the best Economy and
Conduct in the World.

First, There is a certain number of Guard-Ships (I think three) to guard every
Yard.

Besides the Guard-Ships, there is on board every Ship that is in ordinary an
established number of Men to do constant Duty there.

Every Watch, Scout-boats are sent out to hale each respective Ship, and
observe that the Watch is duly kept.

There is in every Yard such an established number of Watchmen (I think
sixteen) to give notice of any approach of danger; and upon the ringing of a
Bell, all the Workmen and Seamen are to appear under the Officers of the Yard,
to defend it: And there would not be a Man the more by employing the Mariners,
for we must then turn off just an equal number of other Workmen.

To give a full account of the Establishment of each Yard would be very
tedious, therefore I shall only say in short, that the Constitution of the
King's Navy, and especially of his Yards, was the noblest in the Universe, and
under that Economy we not only defended our selves, but beat all the World,
and rode Masters of the Sea for many Ages; but what Trophies we have raised to
our Country since these new Politics came in fashion, the Lords of the
Admiralty can best tell.

Indeed if the Gentlemen I oppose did not think our Understanding of a piece
with their own Honesty, they would not put such a scorn and affront upon it as
to talk at this rate; With what face can they pretend to use them either to
work in or defend the King's Yards? Did they ever use them to either of those
purposes in eight years war, when there was much more occasion than there can
be in peace? and what reason have we to believe they should do it now? But any
thing must be said or done to get them; as Polybius says of War, the true
reason is always concealed, and the most plausible one given out.

The Establishment of Marine Regiments is thought so useless in Holland, that
this very Winter they have rejected them; and it is plain that our Courtiers
themselves, whatever they pretend, think as meanly of them as I do, for they
have disbanded the old Regiments that were trained up in eight years War (which
if ever they would have been good for any thing might have been in that time)
and in their room have called a few Land Regiments, with near three times the
number of Officers, by the name of Mariners; and as these new Seamen have never
been at Sea before, so they have been kept at Land ever since, and quartered up
and down the Country against express Acts of Parliament; so that the dispute
now is not whether we shall destroy an Establishment already made, but whether
we shall make a new one in full peace.

I must confess it to be my opinion that some Courtiers design them only for
Land Regiments, and call them by a new name to deceive unthinking Men, who are
taken only with appearances. But I doubt not but your Honorable House of
Commons, the Guardians of the Peoples Liberties, will let the whole World see
that they are neither to be awed by the vain terror of foreign Invasions,
perverted by Places, or deceived by false Appearances; that they know how to
honor and reverence his Majesty, and yet punish corrupt and wicked Ministers:
In short, that they know the difference between English Subjects and French
Slaves.

M^^o, Qui vult decipi decipiatur.
THE END.
Newly published,
A Confutation of a late Pamphlet entitled, A Letter ballancing the Necessity
of keeping up a Land-Force in times of Peace, with the Dangers that may follow
on it. Price 6 d. Sold by A. Baldwin.


