A LETTER Sent from the LORD GORING DIRECTED To the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commonalty of the City of London, and what was agreed upon, at the receipt
thereof.

ALSO Rochester surrendered to the Lord Fairfax, and his further proceedings in
Kent, and Lieutenant General Cromwells coming up with his Forces.

As also The Lord Gorings passing over the River of Thames into Essex, and the
proceedings of the Essex men at Bow, and other places.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. MDCX^LVIII.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
THe particulars are too many to be related at this time concerning this last
nights Engagement with the Enemy at Maidstone, which in brief was such as never
was since these wars began: This Army strugled with so much difficulty, to
overcome a stubborn and resolute Enemy: The fight begun about 7 of the clock at
night, about a mile from Maidstone, and before we could hear them from hedge to
hedge, and get in at the Barracado's, it was past nine, after we had entered the
town, we disputed every street and turning; they having 8 pieces of Canon,
which they discharged above 20 times upon our men in the streets, and by Gods
mighty help and assistance, we overcame them between 12. and one of the clock
at night, being every minute in all that time firing upon their horse and foot,
and they upon us, we took about 400. prisoners, and near as many Horse, our
forlorn hope of horse gave the red Standard of horse as gallant a charge as
ever was seen, which is said to be Genesis Hales his Troop. The reason why the
Engagement began so soon, the Train and Rear of the Army being three miles off
(and not come up) was, that the Forlorn of horse and Foot being engaged in
viewing the town before it was dark, came off safe, The Enemy being with their
wh(...) of horse and foot within two miles on the top of the Hill toward
Rochester ^ll day long in view of our Army, about 8000. men, who, as ^hey
perceived that they (...) dispute the pass at Alsford, which was very difficult
for us to have done; they sent in a suppply of 1200. Horse and Foot to those
before in the town of (...) Seamen, Apprentices, and most part Commanders and
Cavaliers, There were in all, as we guess, 200. then slain in and about the
town, and Capt. Price a very honest and stout Gentleman Col. Hewsons Captain
Lieutenant, was also slain, and about 30. more of our men, most falling at the
mouth of the Canon with case-shot; we took 8 pieces, six Iron and two Brass
abundance of arms, having been up all night, and want of time cannot send more
particulars at present: Only I desire God to let you see, how the old quarrel
is revived by the same party, with greater violence then at first. You will
shortly understand what Earls, Lords, and other persons of quality appeared in
this business. His Excellency from the first minute of Engagement to the last;
could not be drawn off from a personal and hazzardous attendance on the
service, and is much impaired in his health.

Maidstone, June 2. 1648. 6 in the morning. John Rushworth.

Another Letter frm Maidstone.
SIR,
IN my last le^ter I acquainted you of our marching toward this town according
to the advice of a Council of War, which was thought and conceived more facile
and better to engage the Enemy then at Rochester, or Nor^^eet, and when we drew
near Maidstone we found the Lanes Barracado'd with trees and other things which
were thrown in the ways, and the hedges loyn'd with Musketeers, yet after some
time spent, (with great difficulty) we beat them from one place to another,
till we had driven them back into the very town, and at the bridge we found
little opposition, but the streets were strongest fortified, and the stou^^iest
defended of any that I have known in all the late unhappy wars, their ordinance
loaded with case shot did us some mischief before we could get under their shot
the rain was more disadvantage to us then unto them; for they shot out of
windows and at doors, but in this service the firelocks were of great use unto
us. From the time we had begun the fight till we had gotten the town was six or
seven hours, In the first action I cannot but observe unto you the gallantry of
a party of about sixty of our horse, which charged another party of theirs,
where ours gave them a through charge, and did that evecution upon them, that
it is thought, there was not a man of the Enemies party that was not slain or
wounded. In this town were above 2000 men, amongst which were few of the
Kentish Country men, but Seamen, Watermen, and such as came to them from
London, which were chosen out as the only fighting men they had among^^ them;
of these we took about 1400 ^risoners, horse and foot, of which you will have a
List by the next; they ar^ for the present put into Maidstone Church: our horse
are gone forth in parties toward Rochester, to discover the Enemies main body;
we hear that all is quiet about Dover, and in the wild of Kent, and I pray God
that all other Towns and places may avoid the bringing of that ruin upon
themselves, as is befallen upon this Town, we are very weary with travel and
much watching, therefore I take my leave and rest.

Your assured friend, I. T.

Die Sabbathi 3 Junij 1648.
On Sat^urday the 3 of this instant June ne^es was brought to the City of
London that the Essex men had gotten into a body and placed two Drakes on Bow
bridge, three or four miles from London and stood there in a posture but (...)
none that passed that w^y, it was said they in^end not to ma^ch out of their
county.

At the same time it was also certi^i^d that the Lord G^uring was in Greenwich
Park with diverse Collou^^ of hors^ and foot and about noon he sent a message
to the Lord Major and Alder^^^ and commonal^y of the City of London, and the^e
being at the same time sitting a Court of Common council some debate was
concerning the supersciption of this letter and it appears that it was not
directed in the usual proper style for that Court, it was conceived, that
th^re was a consideration betwixt him and those which were so desirous of a
Common Hall which they thought to have gotten this day, and by this letter to
breed division and distraction it was therefore agreed by the said Common
council that the said letter and the messenger that brought it, should be sent
up to the Parliament which was done accordingly and the Milita took great pains
to set the City in good and ready posture.

Out of Kent it was certified that this party which were with the Lord Goring
came from Rochester for his Excellency the Lord Fairfax being passed on the
oother side of the water at Maidstone we bridge the Kentish forces fearing that
they should be forced to fight or be all pend up suddenly in a corner of th^e
County th^se came away on this side the river again intending thereihereby to
get some more to them from London or to draw the A^my back again before the
other part of the County be quite ^^^ded or to intercept what should go to his
Excellency, but he may b^ prevented in this for letters came this day that
Lieutenant General Cromwell with a gallant party of horse is returned ^^t of
Wales and it was thought that this night his quarters would be about
Mayden-head which is but 22. miles London.

Die Solis 4 Iunij 1648
This morning we understand that the L. Goring with about two or 3000 men
fearing the pursuit of the L G. forces, ferried over the river of Thames near
Greenwich into Essex.

On Sunday the 4 of June 2 Drakes were brought up to Asgate, and there planted.

This day about 12 of the clock Letters out of Kent certifiing that the Kentish
men except such as came away with L. Goring, which were about Rochester side
are dispersed, and gone to their homes having laid down their Arms, and and the
City of Rochester is in the possession of the Lord General.

About this time Col: Whaley with a good party of his Excellencies horse came
back out of Kent over one the Essex side of the river Thames and had his
randezvous on miling-green which is between Bow and London he sent many
prisners which they had taken to Guild Hall, and the Lord Gen: is expected to
return suddenly.

Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbott.

FINIS.

