A LETTER TO A FRIEND. Showing From SCRIPTURE, Fathers, AND REASON, HOW FALSE
That State-Maxim is, Royal Authority is Originally and Radically in the People.

Nullus nascitur liber ab Imperio.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1679.

A LETTER TO A FRIEND: SHOWING From Scripture, Fathers, and Reason, how false
that State-Maxim is, Royal Authority is Originally and Radically in the People.
SIR,
I Have received the several Pamphlets (you were pleased to send me) on the
subject of the Succession; I have read them over and over, and I am now very
well satisfied in my own reason, that, The Descent of the Crown cannot, via
juris, be impeached in the Right Line, by any Act whatsoever. And indeed there
is nothing more prevalent with me, against the exclusion of the Rightful Heir,
than the Principle that must be made use of, for the effecting of that
Enterprise. I have been ever told, that all those Statutes that were enacted in
the Reigns of H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. R. 3. H. 7. and H. 8. for the settlement of the
Crown, must presuppose, that, Royal Authority is Originally and Radically in
the People; and from them by consent derived to the King. On this same
Principle must our next Parliament then proceed, in case their resolution be,
to alter the Cuorse of Right Succession: or else what makes one of your
Pamphleteers, (a person, I am confident, either of the Jesuitical, or
Puritanical Faction) to assert, that the power the King has, is derived from
the consent of the People, in the first Constitution of the Government. I will
give you his very words.

As to the Question, whence the Parliament derives the power, let him know,
that the Parliament derive their Power and Authority from the same original,
the King derives his: the King has not his Power from them, nor they from the
King; they both derive their Authority from the consent of the People in the
first Constitution of the Government, either tacit, or express, or by their
express or tacit consent, in the insensible, and little, or great, or more
remarkable Alterations, that the Government has suffered in the course of
time, etc.

Out of these same words you and I may clearly infer, that our Author is an
Assertor (amongst other things) of this one Doctrine;

That all Power is originally radically, and formally inherent in the
community, and from thence is derived to the King and Parliament.

The Author must be a very bold Britton that dare write and publish such
pernicious Antimonarchical Stuff. Methinks those Quarters on Ludgate should
teach him more modesty. Well, if a Gate be not his Fate, it is probable he may
at last, for his Crows Quill, meet with the Burial of an Ass. Had I been one of
his Cabal, I should have advised him, instead of the Statute of 13. Eliz. to
have placed the Act of 13. Car. 2. Regis c. 1. that is now in force (and long I
pray God it may be so) to deter such as he for the future, from Treasonable and
Seditious Practices, proceeding either from Printing, Writing, Preaching, or
malicious and advised Speaking.

Having given you a short Animadversion on the Author, and his Doctrine, I
think my self obliged (for the Vindication of Truth, and the Monarchy of
England) to say somewhat which may be pertinent, toward the destroying of our
Authors Leviathan; I mean the Original Sovereign Power of Mr. Multitude: and
for the effecting of this, I shall plainly set down,

1. The Position I undertake to make good.

2. The Proofs of it, drawn from Scripture, Fathers, and Reason.

My Position then is this -- That God is the immediate Author of Sovereignty in
the King, and that he is no Creature of the Peoples making.

Scripture, Fathers and Reason speak it clearly, that Sovereign Power refers to
God, as to its immediate Author, and Donor: but that it is underivedly,
primarily, and natively in the community from thence transferred to Kings: Ne
(...) quidem Lucidianum, not one Syllable. I begin first with Holy Scripture,
out of which I shall produce several Texts, to prove that the King and his
Power are originally, and immediately from God, dependent from him alone, and
independent from all others.

By me Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. The power that are, are ordained of God, Romans
13.2. I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.8. All power is given from above, Joh.
19. God has spoken it once, twice have I heard it, all power belongs unto
the Lord, Psalm. 62.11. When thou shall say, I will set a King over me, like as
all the Nations about me, thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom
the Lord thy God shall choose. And to descend to Particulars, does not God by
the mouth of his Prophet Nathan, tell David? 2 Samuel 12. 1 King. 2.
I anointed thee King over Israel. Does not Solomon acknowledge that the Lord
has established him, and set him on the throne of his Father David? Was it not
the saying of the Prophet Abijah in the person of God unto Jeroboam, I will
give the kingdom unto thee; 1 King. 11. Neither the Kingdom only, and the power
of Princes. but all things else proper unto them, are after a peculiar manner
Gods. Their Crown, Psalm. 21. Their Anointing, Psalm. 89. Their Scepter, 2 Chronicles.
9. And Throne are Gods, and their persons adorned with all these are so Divine
and Sacred, that they themselves are the Angels of God, and Sons of the most
high: 2 Samuel 14. Psalm. 82. These Texts being sufficient to prove my Position
from Scripture, I come to the Suffrages of the Fathers, and they assert, that
the constituting and making of Kings is reserved as a privileged case, a proper
Prerogative for God himself.

I begin with Tertullian, writing ad Scapulam, and he says, That a Christian
is enemy to none, much less to King and Emperor, whom he knows to be of God's
Constitution, and so is necessarily bound to love, reverence, and honor him,
to whom with his Empire he wishes all safety; for when that perishes, it is
like the world will he at an end; we honor the Emperor therefore so much as we
are allowed by God's Law, and as much as is expedient for him, as the man, who
is next to God himself.

Clemens Romanus Constit. l. 7. c. 17. says, Fear, or Honor the King, knowing
that he is ordained, or constituted by the Lord.

Irenaus thus, lib. 5. cont. Har. By whose appointment they are born men, by
his appointment they are made Princes.

Saint Hierome's mind is this, in his Comment on the second of Daniel, That
Kings and Kingdoms have their constitution, change, and destitution by the sole
Royal Pleasure of God.

S. Austin vindicates the making of Kings, absolutely to God, by a reason
unanswerable, Quia solus verus Deus est; Because he alone is the true God. His
meaning is, you may as well deny him to be the only true God, as robbing him of
this Prerogative of making Kings. Lib. 4. de Civit. dei. c. 33.

I will once more cite Tertullian, with whom I will conclude; he in his
Apologetick against the Gentiles, c. 30. tells us thus; Inde est Imperator,
unde and homo antequam Imperator; inde potestas illi, unde and spiritus. Thence
has the Emperor his power whence his spirit. And that is by God only, who
infused into him his Soul by creating it.

You see, that God in the Divinity of these five Fathers, is the immediate
Author, and Creator of Sovereignty in Kings and Princes; who in pre-eminence
are next to God, above all; their authority subordinate to, co^ordinate with
none. I fear, if these Holy Fathers were living now adays, they would be
traduced as Court Parasites, or Pensioners.

But after all this, our Considerator, or you for him, may object, that if the
Sovereign Power of Princes be thus wholly from God; how is it said in
Scripture, that some of the Kings were made by the People, and so received
their Regal Power from them, and by their Election. It is said of Saul, that
All the people went to Gilgal, and there made him king before the Lord. Of
David, The men of Judah anointed David king of Judah; the elders of Israel
anointed David king over Israel: 1 Samuel 11.15. 2 Samuel 5. It is answered, Zadock
the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet anointed Solomon King, and the Lord also
anointed him, otherwise he had not been the Lord's Anointed, but the anointed
of Zadock and Nathan. The Lord anointed Solomon, as the Master of the
Substance, and gave unto him Regal Power; Zadock and Nathan anointed Solomon,
as Master of the Ceremony, and declared God had given him this power. For
outward Unction does not confer upon Kings their Authority; but it is a sign
only of Sovereignty; because if we pour Oil into the same Vessel with any other
Liquor, it will be always uppermost.

The Elders then of Judah and Israel anointing David King, did manifest him to
be their King; but did not give unto him the Right unto his Kingdom; this was
only from the Lords appointing.

In like manner, Saul first anointed by the Lord, to be Captain over his
Inheritance: 1 Samuel 19. upon the Petition of the People, was set a King over
them by the Lord, and chosen immediately by God to be a King; he only gave Saul
Kingly Power, and not the People; and therefore when it is said, That the
people made Saul king; it must be understood, that they only did put Saul into
the possession of the Kingdom to reign over them.

But our Author may object further, and say thus, admit the power of Princes be
not from the People, yet it is often derived unto them from their Progenitors
by succession, or obtained by their own Conquest, how then is it only and
immediately from God.

I return this Answer; that Succession and lawful Conquest are Titles whereby
Princes receive their Authority, they are not the original and immediate
Fountain of this Authority. Heat, moisture, cold, dryness, and our temper
arising from them (whilst we are fashioned in our Mothers womb) are
preparatives whereby our Bodies are made Receptacles for our Souls; but the
Creator of our Soul is God: so Princes have just claim unto their Sovereign
Power by the Titles of Succession, and Conquest, but the prime Author of their
Power is God. In brief, though the Designation or Deputation of the person be
by election, succession, conquest. etc. yet the Royal Power and Sovereignty is
from God primarily, formally and immediately, as Matthias was designed by the
Apostles setting of him apart and the falling of the Lot upon him, but the
Apostolical Power was immediately, and solely from Christ. So a Woman by her
choice and consent designeth her Husband, but the Marital Power and Dominion is
only from God. So hat you clearly see, that an humane Act may design the person
of a King, but yet the power is conferred by God alone. Having answered the
objections that may be started by our Author, and clearly evidenced from
Scripture, and the Suffrages of ancient Fathers, That there is no supreme, or
Royal Power, but from God alone; and consequently he is sole Donor, and
Sovereignty relates to him, as to its immediate Author, come to prove in the
third place, by several reasons that the Collation, or Donation of Sovereign
Power cannot be from the Community.

That God then is the Author of all Government, and Sovereign Power shall be
manifested by these Arguments following.

1. The same, that is Author of all Creatures in their Being and Existence,
must be Author of their Subsistence, and preservation in that Being and
Existence. It is an infallible Maxim in the Schools, in Nature, in Scripture;
He that gives Being, is the same that preserves Being. Creation is begun
Conservation, and Conservation is a continued Creation: we assume; things made
existent by Creation, cannot subsist and have continuance, but by order, and
Government; from whence it will naturally follow, God must be the Author of
this Order, and Government; and consequently has not left it arbitrary to man
(as the Hobbeans vainly fancy) by composition and consent to do it. The
authority of S. Austin shall be produced to strengthen this Argument: Generale
pactum est (says he) societatis humanae obedire Regibus suis: Lib. 3. Confess.
c. 8.
It is a natural, a general, an universal compact, covent of humane society to
obey their Kings. In this Father's Dialect, Generale pactum is the Dictate of
Nature, the Law and Ordinance of God Almighty; if it be so (as indeed it is) I
would beg the favor that our Author will show as much for Aristocracy, or
Democracy, as here is for Monarchy: in case he does, he shall be my Apollo for
ever.

2. If this Sovereignty be natively inherent in the thing called the Multitude,
it must be proper to every individual of the Community: is it be so, (and must
be so according to the Tenet of the Sectarist, which is enforced by that other
as groundless and false State Maxim, which they hold, That every one is born a
Free man in the Forest;) then will follow of necessity, that the Generation and
Posterity of those who have first contracted with their elected King, are not
bound to that Covent, but upon their native Right and Liberty may start aside,
appoint another King, and that without breach of Covent, or any just Title in
the King of their Fathers, to force, or reduce them to his obedience: an
excellent way devised to preserve King and Kingdom in peace and safety.

3. It is absurd to say, and maintain in true Philosophy, that the Community is
the first Seat, and Subject in which Sovereignty is immediately fixed? How can
it be said so, seeing in them it was never found, never actuated, never
exercised? Vanae est potentia, quae nunquam reducitr in Actum.

4. This Tenet of our Author presupposes, that all men coming into the world,
are by the Right and Privilege of nature originally born equal, independent one
from another, without disparity or difference one from another. This is
contradictory to the Word of God, which teaches that God did fix Government in
Adam before the Woman was made, The most Learned men do assert it on that Text
in the first Chapter of Genesis, verse. 26.
or Children begotten by him. Is not every one that comes into the world
begotten of a Father? Is he not thus by the Law of God and Nature to submit and
subject himself in reverence and obedience to his Father? Is he not then so far
from having original power inherent in himself, that he has not his own
original being in the capacity of nature, but from his Father?

How then can he be freed from subjection to his Father? and if his Father be
subject to another, is he not by the same Law subject to his Fathers Superior?
who can make this subordination void, except he will ranverse the Ordinance of
God and nature? where then is the veracity of this fallacious Maxim which has
worked so much mischief in our Kingdom, Every man is born a Freeman in the
Forest? Are they not subordinate, subject to their pre-existent Father, and to
his Superior too, if he have any? Is not the Female Sex by the ordinance of
God and nature, inferior and subordinate to the Male? Does not nature teach
that the Wife by the Law of nature is subject to the Husband? it did so in my
great Grandfathers days, whether it does so now or not, let our Author give you
an answer; for I suppose him to be a married man, or Widower with Children,
seeing he is so careful of posterity.

5. If all power be originally in the People, then it will by consequence
follow, that the lawful authority of a Father over his Children, and a Husband
over his Wife, are derived from the Children and Wife, and the Children and
Wife in some Cases may resume their power, derived from them and their native
Liberty. If our Author will aver so, he is to be cudgelled, not to be answered.

The sixth and last Argument: God only has the power of Man's life. No Man is
Dominus vitae saae. Whosoever takes away the Life of Man, in God's Justice and
Ordinance, his life is to be taken away again. This principally and properly
belongs to God; but God has given this to some Deputies. This power is not
given to every one. This were to destroy mankind and make God the God of
Disorder and Confusion. Some man it is then by distinction and excellency, who
is God's Deputy, and then this can be none else but he, in whom is Sovereign
Power; and this power is from none else but from God Almighty: and if this
power over life be from God, why not all Sovereign Power? seeing it is
Homogeneous, and as Jurists say, In indivisibili posita: A thing indivisible in
its nature cannot be distracted, put away, nor impaired: as a Crown, take any
part from it, it is no more a crown.

To conclude with the very words of the most famous Earl of Clarendon; This
sole proposition, that men cannot dispose of their own lives, has always been
held as a manifest and undeniable argument, that Sovereigns never had, nor can
have their Power from the People.

My Reasons being thus presented to you, I will answer some Arguments, that our
Author, I know, is furnished with, to prove, that God is not the immediate
Donor, the Author, the Efficient, the Constituent of Kings, and their Sovereign
Power. And his Arguments, (which indeed you will find to be mere Parologisms)
Sophisms, or captious Reasonings) are such as these.

1. His first Argument may be framed thus; neither the Law of God, or Nature,
determine, that Monarchy is the Government, or Aristocracy the Government, or
Democracy the Government; or why one more than more, and some few more than
many should have the supremacy; ergo the Donation of the Power, the Collation
of Supremacy, is by derivation from the People to the Governor, or Governors.

To this Argument, I answer thus; It is an Inconsequence; because although I
should grant all the Antecedent, and that the specification of the Government,
the people designing (if ever any people were so really to be free of
Government, because it is imaginable, let us grant it as real) either one to
have the Sovereignty over them, as in Monarchy, or some few of the better sort,
as in Aristocracy, or many as in Democracy, it will not follow, ergo,
Sovereignty in one, few, or many, is by derivation and donation from them:
because their act in this is only to apoint one person, or more, or many
persons to be Governor. or Governors for the Government: the Collation of the
power follows upon this designation, and deputation of the person or persons,
from the immediate Donation and Ordination of God. As when such and such men
are designed to Holy Orders, and Functions, the designation of the person and
persons is the work, and Act of the Church; but the collation of the power is
the proper, peculiar and immediate work and act of God, as all knowing and
sound Divines do willingly acknowledge.

To reason therefore from the power, which designeth and deputeth a person, or
persons for the charge; to the power of collating, or giving the power it self,
is a Sophistical Caption, which the Schools call Figura Dictionis, where there
is a proposing in the Antecedent in one kind, and concluding in the consequent
in another and different kind.

2. His second Argument may be this; that which is of that condition, and
temper, that it may be enlarged or straightened: that which actually and
experimentally is found various and different, it cannot be such by any
constitution of nature, or Institution of God; but Monarchichal Power is such,
ergo.

The Major of his Syllogism must be some way better qualified: otherwise it
will conculde nothing, or too much, which is the equivalent in the Rules of
right Reasoning to that, to conclude nothing. In the same manner I will reason,
every man has not a little measure of Knowledge, Reason or Discourse: but some
are more, some are less knowing Men: some more, some less rational, ergo
knowledge, reason, etc. are not natural to man. The consequence halts like
Loyala; because to reason, Ab actu exercito ad actum signatum, or contrariwise,
will not always hold; or to reason a potentia secunda ad primam vel e contra,
from the difference in the exercise, to conclude a difference or disparity in
the first capacity, is inconsequent. To be rational in the first capacity, and
natural power, is essential to all men, and equal in all: but in the use, the
exercise of the Rational Faculty, there is a vast disparity, because of a great
latitude in different actual ability; nature admits a great variety in the use
and exercise of her natural powers, that all are not a like fitted, and enabled
for the second Acts. In the first capacity nature is so just, so equal, so
indulgent to all, that the native first Radical Power being of it self in
indivisibili, is equal in all; no less in the least knowing man, than in him
(such is our Author) who in sharpness of wit approaches nearest to Angelical
and Noetical Spirits.

I could give you Instances as well in Moral and Divine things as in natural,
but for the sake of Brevity I will pretermit them.

The Result of what I have said, is this, That seeing in things natural, etc.
this accidental and supervenient variety in their exercise destroys not the
true Essence, and inseparable essentials of things themselves, but naturally
they are uniform, and equally the same; so in the different Monarchies of the
world, the disparity and difference of the exercising of Monarchical Power,
which is accidental, makes them not specifically and essentially different,
and diverse. But before I leave this Argument, I must entreat you to consider,
that I maintain not, I plead not at this time for a Dispotical Sovereignty, an
absolute Power, such as the great Turk this day exercises over his Subjects: I
maintain only such Royal, Paternal Sovereignty, as we and our Ancestors have
lived long, and happily under. This as it has its Royal Prerogatives inherent
naturally in the Crown, and inseparably from it; so it trencheth not upon the
liberty of the person, or the propriety of the Goods of the Subjects, but in
and by the lawful and just acts of Jurisdiction. In a word, this Government of
ours is finely described by the Royal Pen of King Charles the glorious Martyr,
writing to the Prince of Wales, -- The next main thing, says he, on which your
prosperity will depend, and move, is that of Civil Justice, wherein the settled
Laws of these Kingdoms, to which you are rightly Heir, are the most excellent
rules you can govern by; which by an admirable temperament give very much to
Subjects In dustry, Liberty, and Happiness; and yet reserve enough to the
Majesty and Prerogative of any King, who owns his People as Subjects, not as
Slaves, whose subjection, as it preserves their Property, Peace and Safety; so
it will never diminish your Rights, nor their ingenuous Liberties, which
consist in the enjoyment of the fruits of their Industry, and the benefit of
those Laws, to which themselves have consented.

Thus (Sir) I have endeavored (so far as I am able) to vindicate Truth, and
his Majesty's Sovereign Power against all Papal and Democratical Practices, by
demonstrating to you from Scripture, Fathers and Reason, That God is the
immediate Author of Sovereignty in the King, and that he is no Creature of the
Peoples Making.

It Is high time to put a period to my Letter: I crave your pardon for its
length: but before I do so, I will, being well assured, by reading our Authors
Animadversions throughout, he has bestrid this Ass, the Multitude, ever since
Forty One; I will, I say, present to your view a Catalogue of the Trappings,
that this Beast is adorned withal, and they are these; That

Royal Authority is original in the Community, from them by consent derived to
Kings immediately, mediately only from God.

God is no more the Author of Regal, than of Aristocratical, or Democratical
Power; of supreme, than of subordinate Command.

Dominion which is usurped, and not just, while it remains Dominion, and till
it be legally again divested, refers to God, as to its Author, and Donor, as
much as that, which is Hereditary.

Sovereignty and Power in a King is by conveyance from the People, by a Trust
devolved upon him; and that it is conditionate, fiduciary, and propertioned
according as it pleases the Community to entrust more, or less.

Royal Power in a King is not simply supreme, but in some cases there is a
Coordinate Power, or Collateral: nay, that in some cases the King is
subordinate to the Community.

In some cases the King may be resisted and opposed by violence, force, and
Arms, at least in a defensive way.

Sovereignty is derived to the King from the People, by communication, so that
they may resume it in some cases.

A private man may make away his personal liberty, and enslave himself to
another, ergo a People or Multitude may do the like, and invest a King with
Sovereignty.

Neither Scripture nor nature determine the specification of Government, nor do
they intimate, why this man more than another, or be than a third, or these
more than those should have the power of Government.

Every Society of Mankind is a perfect Republic, and consequently the
community may supply and rectify the defects and errors of Sovereignty.

If there were not such a power and superintendency in the people to supply,
God has left Man remediless.

The Right of Dominion is founded in Grace.

Rex est major singulis, minor universis.

Quod efficit tale, est magis tale: That which makes any thing such or such,
is in it self much more such or such; our Author and his Brethren will be ready
to assume; but the People make the King, give him all the Power and Majesty he
has; ergo the People are above the King, etc.

Quisque nascitur liber; Every man is born a Freeman in the Forest.

Pray God, we do not instead of a Forest, come again into a Wood. These
Principles are the right way to effect it.

FINIS.

