A LETTER OF RELIGION TO THE PROTEST ANT-DISSENTERS FROM The Church of England,
of what denomination soever in the County of Kent; wherein is reported the
Ground of their Dissent, their Worship, way of Instruction, and behavior
toward Laws and Government. To which is added A persuasive to Conformity, at
least an acquiescence in the Religion established:

By a Curate of the same County.

LONDON: Printed by F. Leach, for Chr. Wilkinson over against St. Dunstans
Church, in Fleetstreet. 1675.

A LETTER, etc.
IF I thought it would any thing contribute to the success of this Paper to set
down particular Motives, by which I became persuaded to write to you, I would
not have forgone the pains, though it had cost me a long, and distinct
Paragraph. I hope it may be enough to say, that I am one of the meanest
Clergymen in the Church of England, in whom there should be always a
Conscience of its condition, and a zeal to do any office, that is but probable
for its peace and establishment; and moreover, that I think there is something
in the present guise of Affairs, that may call you at this time to heed any
man, or any thing, that means no worse, than to awaken you after many, to
another consideration.

I have assigned my Paper to you of Kent, because dwelling in the same County,
I have been more capable to observe you in such particulars, as are here
considered, and not knowing but the dissenters of other Connties may not be
such, as you, in all the Articles and practices of your dissent from the Church
of England, I therefore shall leave them to others who have greater abilities,
and better opportunities to deal with them. And though in London for an hundred
good Reasons, the Heads of all dissenters may be presumed to reside (for that
is the Mount, from whence a long time you have had your various Patterns) yet
considering my own insufficiency to manage any matter, and withal, that there
are many in the same City of strength, and warmth enough to take knowledge of,
and reprove too, any thing contrary, or prejudicial to the estabilihed Religion
in their ablest Adversaries, I betake my self to the weaker Country, and leave
them to convince and persuade, at least to mind those Head-men of the City, in
what Opinions and Practices they will continue to live.

The beginning of my attempt on you shall be thus fair; as first to lay
together those grounds of dissent, which either in Print or Discourse I have
found owned by such among you, who think they can give Reasons for their
dissent. Yet, before I do this, it is perhaps but very needful to interpose
thus much, and to tell you (especially those among you who boast of number)
that there are many practical Dissenters from us, and appear mostly at your
Assemblies; who cannot be suspected to have any grounds, and indeed have none,
or no other, but what are so apparently weak, that themselves are ashamed to
confess them, notwithstanding they are wholly managed by them; and, when they
are contested with, are forced to say them (in another dress) or nothing. For
there are many conducted to your Societies, and fill your Meeting Houses, on no
better score than Curiosity, Discontent, Design, Dependence, and Obedience. In
which enumeration, because there is one good word or two (which you are wont to
take presently for good Arguments) give me leave to call them over again, and
annex unto them a small Paraphrase.

1. Curiosity. I know not, whether old descriptions of Virtues or Vices will
serve those of the present Age, for it is conceited our Virtues are greater, but
known (I am sure) that our Vices are not less, and even in this particular of
Curiosity, which School Divinity has reckoned for a Vice: for, though more
knowledge be the pretense, yet the appetite may be inordinate, perverse, and
vicious, even after knowledge. And such surely is That, which shall engage men
to leave their immediate places, and duties to pursue an idle inspection and
acquaintance with the Practices and Opinions of others; and for love of this
satisfaction only, shall address themselves to every Meeting House and place of
Conventicle, intending to make no more gain thereby, either to themselves or
others, than to be able to become pleasant, and talkative about diverse manners,
matters, and Persons, over their Meat, Wine, and Coffee; of this sort there are
not a few among you, and of whom you are not all ignorant; for it needs no
proof, they are not careful to conceal themselves, nor apprehensive of any
injury done to them, when they are censured, as curious: Not that I think you
have all the curious ones among you; or that this sort of Curiosity is all that
is to be found among the Professors of Religion; for indeed there is more, as
is evident by such Questions, as are very familiar with us; which, though
Fashion and Custom do now save from being condemned commonly, yet nothing but
Curiosity is in their birth and original. For not to go further, who can give
any better account of this, or the like Quest. How does Mr. A. B. preach, or
was it a good Sermon? Supposing there was nothing preached but the common and
invariable truths of the Gospel, as is for the most part supposed by such
Inquirers: for the Questions, and the design of them that so ask rarely refer
to truth or falsehood, which are Questions only material in instructing men to
Salvation, and therefore these Questions are made to know, with what voice,
face, gesture, or perhaps method it is preached, which are all idle Curiosities
in so weighty an affair, as the Doctrine of Eternal Life. But to say truth, You
above all others do invite the Curious and do not often suffer them to lose
their labor in such a miserable quest. For you are not contented with the
general and plain Doctrines of Christianity, either in preaching or hearing,
but betake your selves to odd and uncouth Subjects, which do not concern the
Substance of a Christian's faith, or life; but are devised, and framed to the
Hypothesis of your peculiar Saintship. And when a Text containing wholesome and
necessary Doctrine falls into your hand, it is so shattered into niceties, or
smothered by your Phrases, that though the Curious be gratified, the plain man
is little edified.

The Curious come not to you for truth, or pertinacie, but for that (whatever
it be) they think they have not yet had any where else, and as long, as so much
of your study is laid out to provide for them (as you have been often told)
they will be your Customers. And as a man presented with a fresh Nosegay, at
first will handle it gently, and often scent it, though he is sure 'twill
quickly grow flat, and wither; so do the Curious with your Phrases, till their
very thinking on them makes them sink in their esteem, and so would desert you
as well as them, but that their Experiences make them hope, you will next time
provide them more.

How many soever they be, you procure to your selves by this trifling, and how
bad soever they are in themselves, yet they are not so distressed as to want a
piece of Scripture to help them, when by discourse they are reduced to that
modesty as to be ashamed of a naked and profane Curiosity; for then (as you
have taught them) their Curiosity is Scriptural and holy; and the Text is 1
These. 5. 21. Prove all things, etc. As if a man was thereby obliged to peep
into every corner, and forsaking his own station to hunt after new matters to
try his skill about, and not to stay till they are offered to him, as matters
concerning, and weighty (for every matter offered to us is not worth searching
into) and by those too, that we have some reason to think are affected with
care and Conscience for the good of our Souls.

2. Discontent is another thing that has added to the number of Dissenters,
which I might call (without taking extraordinary license to my self) spite and
peevishness. For some, in whose thoughts it never entered to alter their
Principles, or so much as to question the usages of the Church of England, have
yet made too open show of deserting the Church, by a bold frequenting your
Meetings; when the only reason of so doing was some occasional heat, they have
lately had with their lawful Ministers. For, if a Minister, either pressed by a
Conscience of his duty, or by the necessity of his condition, do venture to
take a measuring-cast of the Tithes due to him from his Neighbors Farm, and
would thereby adjust some mistakes and ill customs to do himself justice, if
there be no Arts left for the Owner to continue the fraud, he shall be sure to
find this woeful revenge ready for him, viz. That his angry Neighbor will hear
him no more. And to carry on this hasty and unwarrantable resolution, he for a
while perhaps keeps at home, afterward hovers about some neighbor Parishes,
and at last settles upon a Conventicle, where, whatever his Motives were for so
doing, he is sure to be welcome. And if you had leisure, or did dare to ask
such a one his reasons of departure from us, and joining with you (which were
but fair in such a change) you would find the account very shameful. For it is
not his love and liking of you, but his despite, and revenge to his Minister,
and he commends your Exercises on no other reason, but to disgrace his Sermons.
I know some of you have ways not only to salve the man's Conscience, but even
to sanctify the very occasion of leaving us; but the great Topic, from whence
your Methods are derived, is Interest not Integrity.

3. Design has helped you much in this matter: There being some who have such
desires and Projects in their Heads, (distinct enough from Religion) which can
never be accomplished, but by your Success and Prosperity. You well remember (I
suppose), when his Majesty was restored to the Throne of his Ancestors, there
were many with him returned to their own Estates, that had long been under the
hands, and embezelments of men, that knew how to make a good Market of an
unnatural War. These men enjoyed what they had thus basely gotten, long enough
to make them in love with what they possessed, and such love they have thereto
still, that they will not be out of the Design for another embrace. For there
are many pleasant Meadows, large Woods, and goodly Houses which yet hang in
their eyes, though they do not stick in their fingers, but these can never be
compassed again by them without making a new Bead-roll of Delinquents,
repairing to Haberdashers-Hall, and extirpating Episcopacie, that is, by
bringing all things again into War and confusion. Or, if it be done peaceably,
yet cannot be done without laying Bishops aside, and distributing their Lands.
Now, how can any laboring with this design of a re-investiture to such Lands,
more properly bestow himself and his ways, than in a diligent attendence on
your Conventicles, wherein Bishops have been so often declared your utter
Enemies, and the rooting them out both your aims and prayers? There is little
in such Designers Consciences, to bias them more to you than to Rome; but
dreading that Church is not their friend in this particular, they continue with
others, but on worse Principles, to cry out against her. It may perhaps be
Objected, that all of you are not for Alienation of Church-Land, but some are
against it, and are ready (as some of your Brethren at first did) to declare
against it. If this be true (of which there is some suspicion) you may please
to make it known at your next meeting, which will be well for us, but I doubt
not for your selves.

4. Dependence has given you some advantage, which because it is various, I
will only instance in such common connexions, as are every where observable to
have a power to increase the bodies of any sort of men that shall think fit to
separate themselves for a distinct Society. The Dependances which I mean, are
those which have a strong relation to food and raiment, such as the Shopkeeper
has on the good Customer, and the Tenant on the hopeful Landlord, which though
they are not intrinsecally evil, nor the arts of obliging one and the other to
be condemned, as universally dishonest; yet, if on such considerations men
shall sort themselves to a Sect, and distinguish out to themselves a meet
Religion, or Religious party, they are wicked and unreasonable. Neither will it
help you to say, that there are the same presumptions of such among us, and
though it were true (as in this it is probable) what you say. For whatever men's
secret motives are in abiding with the Church of England, they are besides
under a known Law for obedience and conformity to it, by which all men under
the same Government are equally obliged, the Seller as well as the Buyer, the
Tenant as well as the Landlord, which is a motive more extrinsecally honest
than the other can pretend unto. But to see men take a fair place in your
meetings, not to see and hear best, but to be seen and noted best, to remove
from thence timely to the door, and there to abide the train of the Company in
their departure, and all this time to distribute glances, smiles, and cringes
according to the hopefulness of the person going out; and lastly, to
acknowledge to their private Friends, that their Trades and livelihoods engage
them so to do, whatever profit it brings to them, can be no great comfort to
you, unless you are wonderfully pleased with gang and multitude. I will
acknowledge that it is not to be believed that you can easily discriminate those
from others; or if you could, that you would exclude them; but yet I know this
to be a truth, and is to be told only those of you, who glory in your number
and sincerity. My intent is to speak to such that understand and own the best
appearing Grounds of Dissent and Separation; and that I might so do, I thought
it best first to set aside those persons that have none.

5. Obedience has done you no hurt in your Plot of Separation, though a little
more Obedience in you or them (that have on this score separated) would have
done the Church of England much good. They that are drawn and held to you by
this Argument are Children and Servants, who certainly are the most defensible
of all the Families that belong to these Tribes; considering they do in some
sense assert hereby what their Parents and Masters do deny to the King, and the
Church, viz. Obedience. There are many considerations of great efficacy to
bind these persons to the very Sentiments, as well as Commandments of their
domestic Superiors. It Is sufficient, if there were only in the case a quiet
life, Trade and Portion to be forfeited by their reluctancie, and this there is
too often; to say nothing of those fearful curses some are afraid to incur
being pronounced on them by their dying friends, on condition of returning to
the obedience to the English Antichristian and Idolatrous Church.

I think the Servants are under the hardest terms, who for the most part have
had other kind of Education, and come to their Masters with Catechisms,
Principles and Practices according to the Church of England; and therefore must
unlearn somethings, and disuse more in the practice of their Religion before
they can comply with yours. You know a little skill in Case-Divinity will help
these young people to some ease, and the very Doctrine you often needlessly
press of an indispensable and prime subjection to God, will do them real good,
and you know the subjection we owe to the Church, and the King for Gods-sake,
supercedes the obedience we owe to Parents and Masters, if they once draw up to
a competition. And 'truly it is pity, but these should be relieved, not only in
respect of the Church and the good of their Souls, but also of their bodies,
especially when they are galli'd often a whole day to hunger, to strange
Prayers, and strange Propositions, whereof many of your underling Conventicles
are very full, and is not unknown to your Chief Rabbis and Masters.

Let me then dismiss these as not bringing much credit to any Society, and
least of all to yours, whose pretended formality and essence is to outgo others
in purity of heart and life.

The ground of your Dissent is next to be looked into, which after the most
diligent search that I could make, seems finally resolved into this Principle,
viz. That nothing may be lawfully done, or used in the Church of Christ without
Command or Example for it in Scripture.

For I suppose your chief dislike of our Church is, because in its usages there
are somethings inscriptural, and so I may boldly say, will be while the world
stands. But this is such a Principle, that if you resolve to stand by it, and
are content to abide by the just Consequences of the same, it will as well
serve you against any Church, as ours, not only that of Rome, but Geneva; not
only against the late magnified Platform of Scotland, but New England also.

But to be short, either you approve of this Principle, or you do not; if you
do, why do you not observe it, and govern your selves within your selves by it?
If you do not, why would you obtrude it on the Church of England, and desert
her too for want of an impossible Conformity to it? For examine the next most
Evangelical Assembling, and tell me, whether there be not some Circumstances in
the time, place, gesture, manner of Preaching and Praying, for which the best
Textuary of you all can bring forth no plain, positive, and particular Commands
and Examples from the Holy Scripture: And these Circumstances of yours ye are
overruled in, and suffer your selves to be obedient to on a Vassalage to some
private man, and it may be, he no great Apostle; yet continuing to blame those,
that in as innocent, and much more decent Ceremonies and Circumstances are
observant of Authority, and were derived from those men that were not ashamed
to live, nor afraid to die for the Gospel.

Moreover, this being the great Postulatum of the Science of Nonconformity,
and Novel Puritanism, may I be so bold as to ask you, whence you had it? Not
from the Scriptures I am sure, neither in word, nor sense; not from Examples of
Jewish or Christian Church in the Scripture registered, for they both used
Ceremonies and Circumstances in Worship, again took them up, and laid them down
without the interposition of a particular Divine Command, and yet are guiltless.

All that I can find of Scriptures that you are wont to allege for this.
Opinion, are some conceptions of your own on those Texts that mention God's
Holiness and Jealousy, That thou shall not add nor diminish, etc. which have
been an hundred times answered to you; and had you been ingenuous, the Answers
had long before removed the dotage. You will not say sure, that this is a
Principle enforced on you by Spiritual Wisdom, and prudential debates in the
understanding of every man that is possessed with a due fear of God; for this
were to make your selves the only true Christians, or to be found (if you
venture to talk of prudence) in the same Oven wherein you seek to find, or to
put your Adversaries. But the Church of England must be cautious in contending
against this Principle; for scarce any of her Members do, but they are readily
accused for disparaging the fullness of Scripture, for speaking
un-Protestantlike of the perfection of that Sacred Volume; and lastly, that
Christ, as Moses was not faithful in his house.

Which Accusations were they true would signify, but they are not true;
inasmuch as the Members of the Church of England have always willingly
asserted, and learnedly justified the perfection of Holy Scriptures, as having
in them a sufficient and full Revelation of supernatural Truths, and the
Substantials of God's Worship; and the advancing moral and civil Duties to a
more sublime and spiritual height, by directing them to a more noble end, and
exacting performance of them in a holy manner. Bishop Sanderson, Pref. to 20
Sermon. But then it is added by that renowned Bishop, that this the Protestants do
assert without any purpose thereby to exclude belief of what is otherwise
reasonable, or the practice of what is prudential. Idem ibid.

But the truth is, that Bishop might say what he pleased; my meaning is, that
his Exercitations on the Cause of the Church of England, as it stands in
Controversy with you are above your refuting: Else though Mr. Hookes's be a
longsome Book, why are not the Right Reverend Sanderson's few Sermons, and two
Prefaces taken into consideration? For does he not enervate your Principle, and
establish our Ceremonies with that freeness, as if he craved favor from no
man's Reason or Learning? Therefore let it be thought no unreasonable request
of mine to you who are engaged in this County to the way of dissension from us,
if I desire you to peruse that Author, and to proceed moderately (if you can)
in your Inconformity, till you or yours have answered him.

Neither can I think the denying of this your Principle will argue an Opinion
in those that oppose it, that Christ was less faithful than Moses: For, if he
has made known unto us all things that he has heard of his Father, John 15.
15. as to that Errand about which his Father sent him, as Moses did in respect
of the promulgation of the Laws he received from God for the Instruction and
Government of the Israelites, and yet left some circumstances unmentionned, he
is not unfaithful, nor his dispensation uncomplete; nor failed any more than
St. Paul, to declare the whole Counsel of God, though he has said nothing of
the Antipodes, Motion of the Earth, or World in the Moon; no, nor so much of
God's Decrees, as some others have, and continue to do.

What Ceremonies and Circumstances are recorded in the New Testament, as the
issues of the Will of the Great Captain of our Salvation to be constantly and
universally practiced in his Church, let him be anathematized that renounceth
to them either in Opinion or Practice; and let the Church of England stand
charged of partiallity and falsehood, If any children of her Family will not
say, Amen.

But if many Acts of Religion and Piety are commanded in their Substance only
in Scripture, and men cannot perform them without circumstance, what should be
the Reason (not the pretense) why lawful Authority (which is judge of decency,
and always aims at a blessed Uniformity, and in pursuance thereof injoyns
nothing contrary to the least Iota of the will of our Savior) should not
determine them? when de facto some circumstances will (though variously) be
used and determined by every private person.

But should this very obnoxious Principle be allowed you, yet I make a
Question, whether you have not exceeded (in your modern cavil) the fairest
extension of it: For under pretense of precisely standing to Scripture, and
therein often to words, sounds, and syllables, you have rejected somethings
that are Scriptural in sense and signification, at least in the judgment of
those that are as pious and learned as your selves, and infinitely beyond you
in number, and Antiquity, yet still within the acknowledged Church of Christ.
For what a daring rudeness was it in you to damn Episcopacie (supposing such,
as obtains in England) as Unscriptural, if the Jus Divinum thereof (which is
equivalent to the obligation of Scripture) be so fairly pleadable by men, that
are ever ready to go down with you into the Sand to defend it at any Weapon in
the Spiritual Armory, and are no near at a loss, or short of you in Piety than
Learning. For not to remember your former rage against this Government on the
account of the former Principle, or none: I ask, whether ever any Society of
men were unchurcht for being governed by Bishops, but by you? For to reckon our
Episcopacie Antichristian, is as much as to unchurch us. And though the
Long-Parliament-Sermons called it Prelacie, yet thereby they meant nothing else
but our Episcopacie both in sense and execution. But the people must have the
new word Prelacie (as then used by you) having something yet left in them of
the ancient reverence to Episcopacie.

But if the Divine right of Episcopacie be not demonstrable (as I believe it
is) yet has it not as fair pretense thereto, as any of those Hebrew, or Scotch
Roots from whence your different Associations are derived? For let it be shown
wherein it comes behind in evidence to your forming and predominant Theses,
viz. The Doctrine of Lay Elders, and purity of Ministers, The Doctrine of the
Church Covenant, and Independent-Pastors. Or again, That the Gospel has so
restrained the Subject of Baptism, as to exclude Infants; And, that men may now
expect the same degree of conduct and assistance from the Holy Ghost to guide
them into all truth, and even to prevent study and meditation, as the Apostles
had, etc.

And as it is in Government, so I go on to demand of you in the point of
worship, Who ever besides your selves ran away from an explicit Communion with
a Church for having a form of Prayer, for kneeling at the Lord's Supper, for the
use of the Cross after Baptism, and for the Surplise? when they were declared
not essential to Religion, nor substantial in Worship, but recommended, and
enjoined out of Reverence to Antiquity, and zeal for Uniformity by those who
had Authority over us, yet never asserted any other Authority in such matters,
but for edification: Concerning which Ceremonies there is no man among you (who
seems to have retained discretion, or a faculty of judging) but only hovers and
makes slight reflections, but never prove them to be directly sinful, unless by
the former weak, and every where (even among your selves) contradicted
Principle.

The Doctrines of the Church of England contained in the 39 Articles have of
late obtained to some better respect among you, and on a sudden grow into
favor with many Dissenters, which one would think were a good pledge of their
farther conformity, there being nothing (as I know) in our Government and
Worship that is contradictory or abhorrent from those Articles.

But what the reason should be of your approbation, or whether you be not real
in it, I know not; but if you are then proceed to examine other matters, and
your selves by them. I doubt, if you were urged to subscribe to them, you would
again, as heretofore have your exceptions, and only acknowledge for truth in
them those which be the great Commandments.

However it were but fair, if you do own our Articles, to let the rest of your
Societies know from your own mouths, that there are some good things among us,
that they may become more modest in their revilings, who seldom rate us below
the Idolatrous, the Superstitious, and Antichristian, not only in one, but in
all matters that pertain to us, as a Church.

Perhaps you lay hold on our Articles now as an Argument ad hominem, and to
beat us (as you think) with our own Weapon; for there are great cries among
you, as if many that live in conformity to the Church of England are departed
in their Opinion from the Catholic soundness of the 30 Articles, by espousing
Socinianism, of which there is much suspicion, and dread expressed in some late
Writers; but then they charge such persons therewith, that are so clearly not
guilty of it, as that they approve and use that Lyturgy, wherein there is a
particular Creed against the farce of Socinianism, and are willing (for ought I
hear) to give other assurance of their detestation of it, notwithstanding those
passages in some late Papers that they have with great confidence accused and
condemned.

But if the Doctrine of Socinus and his followers has gotten any credit among
us (which God forbid) who may we blame for it but your selves, and your
Forerunners, who could never endure that body of Canons, wherein was one in
Title and Doctrine against Socinianism? It is the fourth Canon agreed on by the
several Synods of London and York 1640. wherein Socinianism is called a
damnable and cursed Heresy, a complication of many ancient Heresies condemned
by the four first General Councils; and lastly, contrariant to the Articles of
Religion now established in the Church of England. I know on what Canon or
Canons the burden of your clamor was laid, and that the Lawyers helped you to
find out an irregularity in their making (though the Composers had the King's
Commission to empower them, and the Canons the King's Declaration before them)
yet this Canon underwent the same fate as others, though not so audibly
complained against; which I cannot think for all that, but was as well as the
rest secretly designed against by the first Authors of our confusions in
Religion: For soon after the Ministers that exercised before the Lords and
Commons at their Monthly Fasts complained against infinite Errors and Heresies,
and this (by name) of Socinianism, and that the persons who were guilty of it
were not the adherents to Episcopacie, but such as were hearded among the
Dissenters, and joined for a pretended Reformation. The matter therefore well
considered, though you dislike Socinianism (as well you may) yet you may see
whether directly, or by accident, I enquire not, who unhappily ministered to its
growth, if not to its first Introduction.

Concerning the Discipline of the Church of England, I have found nothing so
boldly talked against, as the particular of Excommunications, as if they were
irregularly decreed, and on light and unmeet occasions. But these exceptions
are so idle and vain, that they argue either ignorance or unrighteousness in
those who first made them. For had they observed how, and by whom men are
Ecclesiastically censured, they would not think the Keys usurped by Laymen.
It Is no news to hear Courts and their proceedings first misunderstood, and then
misrepresented by those who are obnoxious, or have an itch to rule, and are
impatient of Government. Now Government it self being sacred and necessary,
they that quarrel at it must begin with the suspected corruptions of it (of
which they are neither capable to judge or amend) and so proceed to confusion;
but still keeping up to a noise of corruption, till themselves are possessed of
it, and then become abominable.

And as for the causes and occasions of Excommunications, that are insisted on
by you to be light and trivial, it is manifest that those who so accuse are
very heedless, or very illiterate. For let them but read the ordinary form of
that Instrument, and they will find the cause is renouncing to Government, and
contempt of the Court; that is, when men do not acknowledge the Jurisdiction,
or will not submit and acquiesce in its determinations and censures,

Having thus mentioned your Principle of Dissent, and some Applications that
you make thereof for your own pitiful defense against the Church of England,
let me further add something of the ways and manners you observe, or at least
are in use among your selves. I have sometime considered your Worshipping of
God, and find, that though you have long handled that Text [That God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth] to
serve you against those you oppose; yet there is little assurance that there is
more spirit or truth in your worship than in your slighted Neighbor's. For, if
to worship God in spirit be to join the Soul with external performances in
God's Worship, what can you say for your selves more, than those from whom you
separate, who acknowledge the Doctrine, and profess the practice of the same
beyond your disproof, knowing herein they are to be tried by God (and not you)
who searches the heart, and tries the reins.

But yet have not the Sons of the Church of England greater appearances, that
their Souls are joined to the material parts of Gods worship than you? when
they readily use such Acts and Indications of reverence, as you make Conscience
to deny, and a piece of Religion to contemn; nay sometime become distinctly
charactered from us by an obstinate and insolent refusal to use them. The
Congregations that worship God according to the Canons and Rubricks if the
Church of England do in Prayer and Communions kneel, in hearing they are
uncovered, and in any other constant or contingent Office are decent and
orderly; of which they are so far observant, that to prevent any opportunity
for confusion, it is their Principle to submit and conform to a stated rule
given them by their Superiors, which is the only guard against indecencie and
distraction.

But your Assemblies (those of our County) are otherwise managed. Many profess
to come with no other design than to hear only, and think themselves
discharged to God and their own wish, if they come time enough to hear a
mystical Text pronounced, as the warning to a Sermon. This they believe to be
the worship of God, or else have knowledge of none. And when they come, there
is no difference between them in the Market, and in the Meeting House, and to
say truth, there needs none, that their carriage may bear proportion to the
nature of such unlawful Assemblies.

They have been taught, that Preaching and Hearing are the principal Duties of
Minister and People, and for the one to preach plain Doctrine, and the other to
be uncovered are both superstitious; and moreover, that Superstition is so
dangerous, that rudeness is much safer with suchlike whimsies, that whenever
they are reproved for it in our Assemblies, especially in this point of the
Hat, they think they are abridged of their Christian Privileges.

Neither is your Worship better for truth than spirit, if to worship God in
truth be to worship him after the manner, that Christ has revealed him, who is
the true God. For, concerning God, nothing is more Emphatical in the Revelation
of him by Christ, than, then that he spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all, Romans 8. 32. which Doctrine, that it might be preserved fresh in
the memories of Christians, then was an holy Rite instituted by our Savior,
that carried with it the most easy and familiar signification of the same,
viz. the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which is to be celebrated with such
words that do import the very Doctrine, whereby is shown not only our Savior's
care and faithfulness to continue an assertion of the Point; but over and
above, that this is the most properly differing Character of the Christian
Society.

But, alas! Of what little use is this among you? your former setting up
spiritual Rails by strange and unchristian Niceties has made a desolation of
this Table, not yet to be repaired by the soundest Doctrines and vehementest
exhortations to those that otherwise are governable people.

And as for your own Societies (I speak of Kent) there is a very little
obedience to it, or such obedience as little comports with the merit of the
Doctrine it relates to, or the solemnity wherewith it was instituted.

And to my experience, there are some who frequent your Assemblies with good
affection, having yet a veneration of that Sacrament do constantly communicate
with us, not our of compulsion, or more than ordinary persuasion; but because
not in practice in such Meetings of yours, to which they usually betake
themselves. I pray then consider how entire and integral your Worship is,
especialiy where there is nothing but an extemporary prayer and attempts on a
Theological Discourse. If in any place the Holy Scriptures are read, I do not
hear of any great care or order had for reading the same, in the most material
parts thereof; but in many places there is no more use of them than in such
Quotatations that are brought in to attend the Sermon; and in the rest, the
Method or Confusion of reading is left to the discretion of the gifted Brother,
Pastor, or Minister, be he young or old, Stranger or home-born. And therefore
it is, that the skill your Auditors have in the Scriptures is very narrow,
referring only to those Texts which are most in fashion for your Sermons: They
observe little connection or discrimination between Old and N. Testament, nor
particularly understand those Scriptures that essentially concern Christianity
but are under Rote and Government of such glosses, as you have fixed on those
places that appear fairest (at least in sound) for dissent and difference from
the Church of England.

This consideration makes me reflect on your way of instruction, supposing
instruction of men, not worship of God to be the chief end of your assembling:
For if it were not, you could not reasonably lay such stress on Sermons as you
do; and you cannot deny, but God may be publicly worshipped without them, and
that acceptably too, especially in those places where the Gospel has been long
received, and in such a Church, where there are ways of another name constantly
used to instruct the Members thereof. But if you should assemble without
Sermons for worship, what will become of you? For you have so long preached a
woe upon the neglect and very omission of Preaching, that the people (you know)
will curse you, if you should but attempt to call them together in any public
Meeting without it. But yet to let this pass, when you are convened, your way
of instructing one would think might be better advised. I meddle not now with
the unaptness of your Subjects to beget Principles of Christianity in your
Hearers; and if they were Principles which you teach, how unduly they are
proportioned to their capacities being inveloped with such Phrases, that it
were hard for the very Apostles to know their own Doctrines again, or the
Primitive Christians to resume their faith and practice of them, if they were
to judge and live by your Discourses.

But, say your way of Preaching is mended (for indeed the Writings of
Dissenters in other Cities and Countries are, being more congruous to sense,
and beginning to be more Orthodox as to Doctrine) what reasons can there be in
order to better edification (as you pretend) to neglect the use of the Ten
Commandments, public Catechisms, the Ancient Creeds, and the Lords Prayer,
which deliver the Elements of Religion in such plain words, and tractable
Periods as the meanest judgment and memory may receive and manage them? And if
the memory only be first obliged in those wise and blessed accomodations of
Divine Truths, they are the nearer to the understanding, and may at last rule
in the affections and conversation.

Yet with these you instruct not, but make them all subside to your own private
senses and illustrations of Scripture. If this be told abroad to those who are
of the Reformed Churches, it will become to their Judgment equally wicked and
incredible. That men should pretend to instruction (and the best way too)
without a Catechism, or the use of it without the Decalogue, Creeds, or Lords
Prayer. For to say you touch on all these in your Pulpit-declamations is but to
tell us of a Wild-goose-chase, wherein the Learner though he may come to hear
some good, shall never have a form of sound words.

This is the stranger for that these things are omitted, not only on choice,
but in opposition to Laws, that enjoin them: but what speak I of Laws, when as
there is no Church or Kingdom on the face of the whole earth that has better
and more wholesome Laws than ours; and yet none so slighted and baffled; not by
the Banditi, or men that live without any conduct of Law and Conscience, but by
those that pretend to have the greatest apprehension of Religion and liveliest
sense of the fear of God? For what Authority has consulted with greater wisdom
and compassion toward those it governs, has waited with more patience and
desire of Conformity and Obedience, or inflicted more gently and tenderly on
transgressors than ours? yet what Government has been more complained and
libelled against? That stand reproached and foiled in its wisest Decrees, and
most Christian Sanctions to the wonder and astonishment, as well as to the evil
Example of all the Nations round about us.

Should other men take your license to except against. Laws that they do not
like and abate openly in their Obedience to them as you do, no Law would be
regarded, but the constitution of the Kingdom must dissolve. Yet for this you
have taught them Principles, and given them Patterns, which they may know how
to use in matters of body and estate, as you in your pretended concerns of
Soul, and Religion. For, if you may deny Conformity to Law on the account of
Conscience toward God in a matter that is not intrinsecally evil, or by any
word of God absolutely sinful (as you cannot prove any thing in our usages is)
then may others also be set onto violate other Laws, which they judge
inexpedient, or otherwise; for I know not what reason, do not please them. I
believe many of you intend no such evil to your Nation and Country, but then
why will you hold and love that Principle, that may be so naturally improved to
infinite mischiefs?

The time past surely may suffice you to have wrought your own will, the
Consequences whereof cannot without horror be contemplated by any that have
affection to the Church or Commonwealth. Remember, I pray, your endeavors and
oppositions were and are against such a Church, that you cannot accuse of any
defect in necessaries to Salvation, or has any thing in use or injunction,
that may otherwise hazard any man's happiness (but set it forforward) that shall
unite unto it: And yet your opposition to it visibly contradicts such a
Doctrine (for ought yet has been proved) whose infringement brings damnation,
viz. obedience to Authority. Nor are your followers any way better prepared to
discharge themselves of being involved in this guilt, but by the precarious
Argument of an implicit Belief, that your Leaders are good men, and will not
go against the Scriptures; which Scriptures if you would be entreated to look
into without Party or Passion, and so far yield to as you are convinced, you
would quickly both Leader and Follower, leave your Tents and Camps, and find
more comfort (though perhaps not success) in obedience than obstinacy.

Here is nothing (I believe) in this Paper, but some of you may have heard,
but, I doubt, few of you considered, and therefore my design hereby is only to
give in familiarly another Memorial, and to renew the instance for peace and
conformity; which I do offer to you from the bottom of my heart, without sense
of any particular wrong or provocation from you, save what is to every Member
of the Church of England by your recessions from it, or batteries against it.

I need not tell you, that you with us are of one common Nature and Country,
but Religion too, for you are wont to defend your selves in all aggresses upon
you by the name and pretense to the cause of English Protestants; but sure you
were never acknowledged abroad, as you stand in your disagreements from the
Church of England to be in respect of Foreign Churches either Mother, Sister, or
Daughter, yet will you not cease to multiply distinctions from us, and enmities
against us. Consider how much the right spirit of Christianity is seen in
meekness and peaceableness, which; if they are to be exercised toward all,
then doubtless not to be denied to a righteous and innocent Authority.

We ask you not to part with any Christian Virtue or Doctrine, as necessary to
a compliance with us, but rather to become more practical in the most eminent
points thereof, and that you would leave off to mingle, and prefer your own
things before the things of Jesus Christ, his Gospel, and his Church.

There was a time when the Ordinances of a small piece of a Parliament were
cried up for Laws by you, and not only Obedience pressed to them on pain of
Delinquencie and Damnation, but Neutrality cursed, though the very matter of
those Laws was either to begin, or justify Rebellion or Schism: And shall an
integral and full Authority betrampled under your feet in Laws that are for
right Religion, peace, and? Unity?

FINIS.

