A LETTER Of November the 16th:

From an eminent Officer in the Army at Edinburgh to a friend at London,
declaring the true number of the horse and foot now under General Monck, and
their unanimons Resolution to adventure all for the support of Magistracy and
Ministry, the Rights of the People, and Privileges of Parliament; all which
are now endeavored to be subverted by that part of the Army under Colonel
Lambert and others about London.

Printed in the Year 1659.

SIR,
MY Lord General Monck not knowing if his Letter to your Brother, came safe to
him, commanded me to remember his service to you. We are here, the LORD be
praised, all of a piece, resolved to venture all for the establishment of the
Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry: some time since his Lordship sent to
acquaint such of the horse that were not free to act, That they should have
liberty to go whither they would, and about 55. of Twisleton's Regiment, most
of Capt. Davies Troop, and 24. of his own Regiment of horse, went away. We
shall march somewhat more then six thousand good Foot, and two thousand horse,
and leave our Garrisons well enough supplied. Yesterday the Nobility and Gentry
of the Scottish Nation met at Edinburgh, and have engaged to live peaceably
upon our marchaway, they have offered large assistance of men, but my Lord
General meddles not with any of them, four of the County troops of
Northumberland are come in to us, and three more had come but they were
suppressed by contrary orders from Newcastle: But we doubt not, by that time we
get a few days into England, recruits both from the Army and Country will
come in unto us, for we have certain intelligence that their men are much
divided, and many of the most pious Officers lay down their Commissions, and
few but Anabaptists and those that are professed enemies to Ministry engage
against us, except the nine whose Commissions were taken away by the
Parliament, and some of them are of that judgment also. We hear at London they
speak strangely of us for securing Colonel Cobbet and some other seditious
Officers that went about to divide us here, whom they call sober godly men. As
for Cobbet, I know not how my Lord could do otherwise, he being one that came
to command his Regiment after the Parliament had made his Commission void, and
being one of the most active in their interruption; and likewise his Lordship
had certain intelligence that he came to Scotland to secure his person if he
could not draw him to join with those at London in their wicked practices: but
as for the other Officers, after they were at first secured to prevent their
disturbance of the peace of this Army, as many of them as were free to own the
Parliaments Authority from whence they received their Commissions, were
admitted to their Commands, and the rest have their pay continued to them: but
truly, as for their sobriety, I think few in Bedlam were less wild in all
honest principles, and the best marks of Godliness we could observe in them,
were hatred, violence, emulation, strife, sedition, heresies, envyings,
revileings and such like: and notwithstanding all their pretenses for the Good
Old Cause, and the Godly interest, their whole endeavor has been to ingrosse
all power to themselves: and most of the Officers in England, and Ireland, and
Scotland of late put in, were all of that judgment; and all that were for
Magistracy and Ministry, reviled and called Priest-ridden, and the like; and
I am confident, not any but of these sort will oppose us: Major General Morgan
came in to us the 6th instant, he brought a letter from my Lord Lambert to
mediate for peace, but hearing my Lord General and our Officers (upon an
earnest desire of my Lord Fleetwood) had sent up three of our number,
Commissioners to endeavor to beget a good understanding betwixt us and our
brethren; he wrote a letter to my Lord Lambert by Colonel Talbot, wherein he
told him, if the Treaty succeeded not, he desired to be excused if he acted in
his station where his command lay, and he is at present with his Regiment,
putting it into good order, it being lately changed from Dragoons to be Horse;
since his coming to us Lieut. Colonel Ledger a Yorkshire Gentleman that was
Lieutenant Col. of Flanders Regiments now at York, has laid down his
Commission, declaring, he cannot with conscience act against us, and we have a
rumor that Col. Samuel Clark his Col. has done the like, and many more will do
so or better, of whose names it is not safe to write at this time. The
Regiments that marched from London were very unruly in their march,
Duckenfield's men would not endure him at the head of them, and cried out they
would have a Parliament, and Salmons men were very rude upon the Country in
free Quarter and violencies. My Lord Genesis has been so good an husband for us,
that we are all paid, and have enough for December and January; and we shall
march with much cheerfulness. All true English men, that think no hazard too
much for the Vindication of Magistracy and Ministry, the liberties of the
people, and privileges of Parliament. I presume by this time our Commissioners
know what to trust to, their time is almost expired, and if they cannot make a
good accommodation we should be glad to see them here, that we may do our
duties in this our generation to save the Nations from confusion in civil and
spiritual liberties, which were never so near subversion as now; Indeed if
they at London had ever yet stuck to any declaration they ever emitted, one
might expect something from them* but at a Committee of Officers at Whitehall,
about the 24th of October. (of which we have here certain notice from and of
them;) They being in debate about Tithes and Ministers maintenance, one of them
(a Colonel) said he was both against Ministers and their maintenance also, but
yet the time was not come to take them away, and therefore they should declare
at large, are these the Co^nsels of Saints? Truly I must tell you with grief of
heart, we are certainly informed here, That the Officers at Wallingford House
never meet in a day of Prayer, but the hearts of sober Godly people are
afflicted at it, finding all those devotions but the Forerunners to some
grievous mischiefs in perpetration. How can my Lord Fleetwood acquit himself of
the private engagement he made in the Parliament the day before he acted in
their interruption, and how can Sydenham be freed from the public Engagement
and Profession he made, and with what conscience can Salway Act to model
Governments, that was so severe against all things done in these years from
the first interruption in 53. Upon the 5. of this month Captain Dean the
Treasurer brought us a letter from the Officers at Whitehal, which was sent as
an answer to ours from Linlithgowe dated the 22. of October, and dispersed many
copies of it to seduce the Soldiers, so that as soon as our Officers had framed
an Answer to it, my Lord General caused both their Letter and our Answer to be
Printed, and I have sent them to you here enclosed, and I desire you would get
them Printed if you can, for I think they are well worth public view.

Sir, Your very humble servant.
Edinburgh, this 16. of November. 1659. I was commanded by my L. Monck to write
to you, and to give you this brief Account of our Affairs, I hope you will
pardon this boldness of

Sir, your very humble servant, A. B.




FINIS

