A Letter to a Friend, CONCERNING THE CREDIT OF THE NATION: And with Relation
to the Present Bank of England, AS NOW Established by Act of PARLIAMENT.

Written by a Member of the said CORPORATION, for the Public Good of the
KINGDOM.

LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, 1697. Price Three Pence.

A Letter to a Friend, CONCERNING THE CREDIT OF THE NATION, etc.
SIR,
THE Love you have for Justice, and the Zeal and Concern you have upon all
Occasions showed for the Honor, Reputation, Safety and Welfare of your
Country, has Enduced me to offer you my Thoughts upon the present
Circumstances of our Affairs, with relation to Credit: And I think I cannot
begin more properly than by considering the Natural Causes of it, as obtained
either by a Private Goldsmith, or Banker, or by a more Public and National
Bank. And

First of a private Banker: It is the Belief that the Generality of Men are
possessed with of his Ability, Care and Honesty; that is, Men believe that such a
Banker has a good Foundation, is a Careful, Cautious and Honest Man; that he
has an Estate to satisfy every Creditor, and will not dispose or alienate any
part of it, but what he really knows to be an Overplus, or more than will
answer all his Debts, that does not launch out his Money in many Foreign
Adventures, or on doubtful Projects, or uncertain Funds; a Person having once
obtained such a good Opinion amongst the Generality of Men, and they finding
they can have their Money when they demand it, are willing to take his Bills or
Notes rather than Money, for their Ease in paying and receiving, and to avoid
the Loss that often happens by bad Money, or Shortness in Tale. I say it is for
the aforementioned Reasons that any Bankers Notes pass currently in all
Payments, and are esteemed equal to Money; and not because Men do generally
believe, that a Banker has always Money lying by him, to pay all his Debts,
though they should be demanded all at once; few Men, nay none, that understand
themselves, can have such an odd Conceit.

If a Banker should do so, from whence could he get Profit to maintain Tellers,
Book-keepers, Porters, pay great Rents, and get something over and above to
reward his Care and Pains in that Affair.

It is said, That one Private Banker in Lombard Street owed, or had a Credit at
one time for 1100000 Pounds Sterling, when probably no Man believed he had at
the same time one twentieth part of that Sum by him to pay it with; but both he
and his Creditors believed, that whilst he gave no occasion to suspect or
question his Ability and Honesty to pay every one, it would be next impossible,
that all his Creditors should come at once to call their Money out of his
Hands, but as fast as some called it out others would bring it in, and that
would enable him to pay every Man's Demand, and so preserve his Credit entire.

But on the contrary, whenever the Generality of Men have entertained an
Opinion, That a Banker is Careless, Prodigal, Dishonest, or does Alienate any
part of his Estate, more than is truly and properly his own, or Engages his
Money in hazardous Adventures, new Projects, or doubtful and remote Funds, by
which he may be in danger to lose a great part of his Estate, or not be able to
command it in any reasonable time (whereby is occasioned a Jealousy of him)
his Credit will presently sink, and all his Creditors come upon him to take
their Money out of his Hands, fearing it not safe there; and then no Body will
accept of his Notes in Payment.

For the very same Reasons, and by the same Methods, a Public Bank may
Establish and Preserve, or Destroy its Credit.

If a Public Bank be Established upon a Fund that is Certain, Secure, Just and
Inviolable, not to be taken away, Lessened, Changed or Altered for the ^orse,
either as to Time or Security, upon any pretense whatever, either by King or
Parliament, without the free Consent of the Proprietors; and that the Managers
of it are generally Persons of clear Reputations, Estates, Prudence, and
generally esteemed so, and they are careful not to divide any part of their
Stock, but only the bare Interest and Profits, and also cautious not to lend
their Money upon any remote or uncertain Funds, or employ it in any hazardous
ways: I say such a Bank so Managed, cannot fail of having a great and lasting
Credit, and will never be in danger to be run upon by its Creditors, because
they can have no reason to fear, or distrust, the Safety of their Money, but
may be sure to have it, whenever they demand it.

If the Fund of a Public Bank be made as secure, and unalterable as any Man's
Freehold (as indeed it ought to be, in case you would make it a Bank of Credit)
and by that Credit supply the Nations want of real Species, then no Man will
scruple to Trust that Bank with his Money upon the Security of that Fund, no
more than Men scruple to lend Money by way of Mortgage upon an Estate in
Fee-Simple, whereof the Title is clear and unquestionable; for the same Law
that gives me a Title to my Freehold, gives the Bank an undoubted Title to
their Fund, during the time Contracted for with the Public. And therefore any
Supreme Power, or Government, may with the same equal Justice enter upon one as
they can violate the other.

No Fund or Funds upon which a Bank is Established, and which the Members of it
have purchased with their Money, or upon which a Bank, or other particular
Persons have lent their Money, should be taken away, changed or altered, except
only with the free and voluntary Consent of that Bank, or those Persons who
fully compose it.

For the taking away, changing, or altering of any Fund without such free and
voluntary Consent, will always be attended with dangerous Consequences, by
destroying the Credit and Esteem of Parliamentary-Funds.

And also when the Parliament do grant the King a Tax upon any thing, and give
it him for a certain Sum, and to come in upon a certain prefixed time, and
empower him to borrow, and Encourage the Subjects to lend so much as they give
it for; If this Tax or Fund prove deficient by any Means, or Occasion whatever,
and bring not in the full Sum it was given for, it cannot be thought
reasonable, that the Subjects who lent their Money in expectation to have it,
repaid them within the Term limited by that Act, and therefore lent their Money
upon a less Intrest, should either lose their Money, or wait for it a much
longer time, but should have the Deficiency made good to them out of the next
Money that is raised. And if that Method was constantly observed, no Man would
scruple to lend his Money upon the latter part of any Parliamentary-Funds,
which otherwise none will adventure to do, and that will hinder the King from
Loans beyond the half of the Fund, or at least not so much as every Man
believes will most infallibly come in upon that Fund; and by that means the
King's Occasions will not seasonably be supplied, but he must wait 'till the
Collector can receive and pay the Money into the Exchequer; how that will suit
with our Circumstances, especially in Time of War, I leave to the Judgment of
others.

I think it is obvious to every Man, that since this War, a considerable part
of our Treasure, I mean of Gold and Silver is exhausted, the Remainder of our
Money is by the Recoyning of it, reduced to one half of what it was before in
Tale or Demonstration; that is, what we called before Five Millions of Pounds
Sterling, is reduced to Two Millions and a half. And almost all that, which is
commonly called Paper-Credit, is sunk, lost, and become useless in Trade, and
Public Dealings.

And with that Paper-Credit; that is, with Goldsmiths, and Bank-Notes, which
amounted to near as much as all our Current Coin, the greatest part of our
Trade in and about this City of London was formerly driven: All Foreign and
Inland Bills of Exchange, and all great Payments were made in those Notes, and
very seldom any considerable Sum were paid or received in Money.

So whilst those Notes continued in Esteem and par with Money, they answered
all the Ends and Uses of Money in Trade, and Money was only needful in the
Markets, and for smaller Payments, for all which Purposes, a small quantity of
it was sufficient; and that made Money seem to be abundantly more plentiful
among us, than it was in reality.

But now it is plain we have not Money enough to turn the Markets, much less to
carry on our Foreign Trade.

The truth of this being granted, I must conclude, we have not in the Kingdom,
one fourth part of the Money and Notes (which served as well as Money) that we
had a few Years since; and it is as certain, that according to the Proportion,
that we have now less in Money and Credit, our Loans to the King, and our Trade
at Home will be less, and in Foreign Parts inevitably impaired.

Nothing but a long continued Peace, and a well managed Foreign Trade, can
restore that Treasure this War has drained from us, and especially the Damage
which the French have done us, is at least computed to be Twelve Millions
Sterling.

And how it is possible we should now carry on our Trade to that degree we
formerly did, with less than one fourth part of the Stocks, and other Means we
then had, I cannot understand.

And therefore since we have not real Species to do it with, nor can hope in ^y
reasonable number of Years, sufficiently to increase our Species, I think ^^ere
is no other Way or Means left us, either to carry on the War or our Trade with,
or without a War, to the Honor and Advantage of this Kingdom but only by
restoring Credit; and by that Credit supply our want of ^^^al Coin.

How such a Credit can be obtained, is the Question?

And for my part, considering our present Circumstances, I think it cannot be
effected any other way than by the Bank of England, as now Esta^^ish'd.

And I am confident that Bank could do it, if they had those Privileges ^^d
Encouragements the King and Parliament could grant them, without ^eing
prejudicial to any Subject.

It is certain, that all forcible and compulsive Means would destroy or
fru^^^te that Credit they are intending to Establish and Preserve.

The only sure way to obtain a lasting Credit must be easy, free and na^^^al;
Men will not trust their Money any where, nor with any Person against ^^^ir
inclinations, or with whom they suspect its safety.

Whilst Men believe their Money is safe in a Bank, and will be paid them ^^en
they demand it, they will choose to lodge it there, rather than at Home, ^^on
account of those Conveniences I mentioned before; but if either of those
things be questioned they will be their own Cashiers, and not trust their ^oney
in such a Bank.

Therefore, as I said before, the only way to make the Bank of England cable to
supply the Nations want of real Species by their Notes and Bills, is (...) to
ascertain to that Bank the Funds upon which they are Established, and ^e or
shall hereafter lend any Money to the Government, by the strongest ^^s and
Obligations of Security without any Mutation, that the Wisdom of the Parliament
can invent, so that the Generality of Men may be satisfied therewith.

This is the first and chief Foundation to build a great and lasting Credit
upon; and without this there is no possibility to effect it, for no Man will
trust his Money where he believes it is not safe; and where this Consideration
is wanting, no Credit can subsist.

The next means to make the Bank able to lend great Sums, and thereby to supply
the Nations want of real Coin, is to make it the General Cashier for all
Gentlemen, Merchants and great Traders in and about the City of London; which
must not be done by Compulsion but by making it necessary for the Interest and
Convenience of every Man to lodge his Money in that Bank; and keep an Account
with it; and when the Generality of Traders do make such use of it the Bank
will have little occasion to issue out Money, but only transfer it from one
Account to another as is now practiced in the Banks o^ Amsterdam, Venice and
Hamburgh; for if this Bank be once Established and supported in their Credit by
the Government, exclusive of all others, during the Term of its Continuance,
and its Fund or Funds secured to the Satisfaction of the Generality of Men,
then every Man will voluntarily, for his own Eas^ and Convenience, employ it to
receive and pay his Money, and keep a Book^ or Accounts, otherwise with it.

And this cannot be hoped for when there are more Banks than one for where the
Interests are divided and separate, a Distrust, Jealous^^ and Envy will
naturally arise to the Prejudice of each other, they wi^^ never dare to extend
their Credit, for fear of a Surprise by their Competitors.

Each Bank will have its Friends and Employers, and the Advantage of paying and
receiving of Debts without Money; by transferring Sums from on^ Man's Account
to another will be lost, and then Money will be as necessar^ to pay Debts with,
as it is at this Day.

If so the main End is frustrated, which is to furnish the Kingdom with a^
Imaginary Coin to serve the Uses of that which is really so.

This (besides the Experience and Example of other Countries) show that one
Bank will be infinitely more serviceable and advantageous to the Kingdom, and
beneficial to private Persons, than Two or more; for accor^ing to that
Observation of the late Excellent, and never to be forgotten D^puty Governor,
Mr. Michael Godfrey, we are under those happy C^^cumstances, that we cannot do
good to our selves, but by doing good to others.

Another way to enable the Bank to supply the Kingdoms Occasions with Money, is
to let several Branches of the King's Taxes and Revenues pass through it.

For by that means Money will be daily coming into it, to answer Peoples
Demands that will take their Money from thence: And though no part of the Taxes
should be permitted to lie in their Hands any considerable time after they have
received it; yet as that which they received some Days before is to be paid
into the Exchequer, other Sums will come in to pay it with; and that
successively will always keep them full of Money, and enable them to pay every
Man's Demand.

What Injury this Method can do the Public I am yet to learn; and if it should
happen to be prejudicial to any private Persons, who now have benefit of the
Use of that Money, that Advantage must give way to the Nations Necessity and
Welfare; and where it is in the King's Breast to give it to whom he pleases,
no Man can reasonably complain of any Injustice done him; and I know no Man,
nor number of Men, have so well deserved of His Majesty and the Kingdom, as the
present Bank of England has done.

Otherways to render the Bank capable of assisting the Nation, and Cure the
Evils we labor under for want of Money and Credit, are to lengthen the Term of
its Continuance; to make all Foreign Bills of Exchange payable at the Bank, or
at least demanded there before they can be protested. By severe Penalties to
deter Persons from Forging, Counterfeiting, Altering or Razing any of their
Bills or Notes, and the Officers of the Exchequer, and all Officers and
Receivers of the Revenue from deviating, delaying or obstructing the Course of
Payments into the Bank.

I say, with submission, that if these Privileges were granted to the present
Bank, it would immediately and infallibly recover its former Credit, and be
able to serve all the Occasions of the Public and private Persons, and I think
I may be bold to affirm, That the Credit of the Nation cannot be restored by
any other Means in any reasonable number of Years.

For we have a mighty Engine to move, and but very little Water to move it
with; and if the little Water we have be divided into different Channels, and
not united (as much as is possible) into one, it can never stir the Engine,
which is our Trade; and if that be stopped or stand still, every Man may guess
what the immediate Consequence will be.

Therefore since Credit, especially at this Time, is so indispensably necessary
for us, I should think the King and Parliament cannot do too much to restore it.

'Till Credit (which supplied our Occasions, as much as our real Species) be
restored, the great scarcity of Money will appear, and continue to distress us,
as much as it does at this Day, and cousequently high Intrest will continue;
for it will be impossible by any Laws to hinder Men from lending or borrowing
Money above or below the Natural Intrest.

For if I want Money I shall find out ways to give 10 per Cent. Intrest, when I
cannot have it for less, although the Law forbids Men to take more than 6 per
Cent. And if we can neither receive or must pay a much greater Intrest than our
Trading Neighbors, they will unavoidably get from us all that little Trade the
Nation have now left to pursue. For no Man will fond his Money to Sea, when he
can make more Profit by lending it out upon Intrest at Home. And he that Trades
with Money he has borrowed at 10 per Cent. cannot hold Market with him that
borrows his Money at 4.

The same Inconvenience will attend all Gentlemen that want Money, either to
pay their Debts or dispose of their Children: For 'till a great and full Credit
(which proceeds from Plenty and Safety) be restored, they cannot borrow Money
upon their Lands without giving an Extravagant Intrest, which in a little time
will eat up their Estates.

And another ill Effect it will have on the Price of their Land and Houses; for
no Man will buy Land or Houses when he can make double the Advantage by lending
his Money upon Intrest, buying Tallies, Bank-Stock, or Bank-Bills.

If we should have a Peace to Morrow our present Difficulties, for want of
Money or Credit, will not be thereby removed; Money will be as scarce then, as
it is now; and the same Methods will be practiced by the Rich, to prey upon the
Necessities of others, as are at this present Juncture.

Before this War Money seemed to be very plentiful amongst us; and any Man,
upon good Security, could borrow what Sum he pleased at 4 per Cent. per Annum;
our Foreign Trade was generally driven to the utmost degree it was capable of.
But I think (with Submission) it was not the real Plenty of Money that made
Intrest low, or our Trade flourish, but the great Credit the Goldsmiths then
had, whereby were added as many Millions of Stock to the Nation, as we had in
real Species.

But if (even in that Time of Plenty of real Species) that Credit of the
Goldsmiths had been sunk, or lost by any Means whatsoever, every one must grant
that Intrest would have greatly advanced, and our Trade had a terrible Stop and
Declension: How much more must both these be affected now, when that, and all
other Credit is lost, and our Coin reduced to one third of what it was in those
Days.

I think it is evident we have not so much Money amongst us as will turn the
Markets, and make the smaller Payments; and if so, our Trade must stop for the
Necessities of People must first be supplied.

The longer we defer the restoring of Credit the more difficult, if not
impossible, it will be to effect it, and more particularly if the present War
should continue: For the longer we defer it the poorer we shall grow; and the
Art and Contrivance of Jobbing our Money, oppressing the Necessitous, by
extorting from them Unconscionable Gain, will improve with the Use and Practice.

If we had no Forces abroad to draw our Money from us, yet the Vanity of our
Fashions in our Apparel, Furniture, Eating and Drinking, will consume so many
Foreign Commodities, as will overbalance Trade to our prejudice, and
presently sink us into Debt; which without a great and well managed Trade, we
shall be forced to part with the little Money we have left to discharge those
Affairs.

If to restore Credit the Bank of England should be Engrafted upon, it must
evidently prejudice the present Proprietors of that Stock; for thereby the
General Credit and Bank of England, will receive these Inevitable Misfortunes.

First, That the present Specie Credit which the Bank now have, and attained to
again for near 100000 l. that very Money upon this Engraftment, will infallibly
be called out of the Bank to purchase Bank-Bills, Notes, Stock, and Tallies.

Secondly, Also all those Sealed Bills to the Value of one Million, (for which
there is at present no Funds to pay the Corporation their 8 per Cent.
contracted with the Government, for Relief of themselves and their Creditors,
in Payment at the Exchequer) will by the same Conjecture, after any Sum granted
of 4 or 500000 l. per Annum when settled, be speedily demanded out of the
Corporation.

Thirdly, And if Men should have that Impetuosity on their mind, as not to
trust them anew on their Parliamentary-Credit, they will then divide, and not
lend again; the Consequence of which will be bad to them, and to the Kingdoms
Intrest, and especially to Trade (for want of Specie now driven in a great
measure) with Bank-Bills or Notes (which being sunk into Bank with Tallies)
will be infinitely impaired for want of Money, as the Stock of the Bank will
also, when the great Personal Estate, now floating in the Nation in several
Divisions, be thereon Engrafted.

They who have Money may buy Stock, rather than Tallies, at what rate they
please, which with the future Consequence conceived will neither produce
sufficient Loans to the King, bring Credit to the Nation, nor Moneys into
Trade; which will not only be remembered by them and their Posterity, but be
reflected on by the New Subscibers as a Hardship that may also fall to their
Turn some Time or other.

All Men know the present Proprietors have taken much care and pains to bring
the Bank into Method and Form; and should they part with their Rights without
any Consideration, it would be a high Discouragement to all Public
Undertakings, after having done and suffered more for the Support of the
Government than any Body of Men ever yet did, and by those very Services only
they are reduced to their present Unhappy Circumstances, for whose Sakes they
were brought into.

And if such Favor be not granted or made, not only they, but all others by
the Example or their Sufferings, will be for ever discouraged from serving the
Public.

It is true, when we were told by some certain Gentlemen of Note, and others,
That except we did submit to be Engrafted upon, there would be no Favor showed
us; and that we could not expect to recover our Credit, 'till the End of our
Term, so till then no part of our Intrest could be distributed amongst the
Members of the Corporation.

The major part of the General Court did agree to it, some being terrified by
those dreadful Stories, some to serve other Ends and Intrests of their own, and
others by mistaken Notions of the Thing, but this was far from a free and
voluntary Consent.

For no Proprietor if he had believed the Government would have helped us, and
restored our Credit (as it is easy for them to do) would ever have been
enduced to give his Consent to any Engrafting, because that does unavoidably
cut off all hopes of future Profits by the Bank.

Besides when the Members of the Bank cannot expect any Profits from it, but
only the bare 8 per Cent. which is as well secured to them without a Bank, they
will never trouble their Heads about it, much less let any of their Money lie
therein to support it, fearing the like Contingencies it has already suffered,
may again happen, for want of its Merits being duly rewarded and encouraged.

As Money comes in, every Man will be scrambling to take away his share; all
Public spiritedness, will infallibly vanish at the remembrance of the
Ingratitude showed to the old Proprietors.

For no Man in his Senses can hope to deserve more, than they have done, though
so ill requited for all their past Services.

From whence I conclude, the Bank if Engrafted upon, can never restore the
Credit it has lost, and is expected from that Foundation in this Kingdom.

The Members of the Bank have actually paid in 80 per Cent. and they have 10
per Cent. Intrest and Profits more to divide, having had no Dividends for a
long time.

And now this 100 l. must be only esteemed equal with a Tally bought for 10 l.
and those that have them in Payment for Goods, have got 40 or 50 per Cent. more
of the King for their Goods, than they could have had of any Subject; but the
Members of the Bank all this while have got nothing, nor in three Years divided
more than 10 per Cent. So that they, notwithstanding their Merits, are much
more hardly dealt with than other People.

And as in all Public Transactions of Affairs where the Administration is
committed to several Selected Persons chosen out of the whole Community, for
their Probity, it was expected some extraordinary Applications would ensue and
be taken for the sole Benefit of the whole Society; therefore in the beginning
of this Session of Parliament, or as soon as any Engrafting was discoursed of
upon the Bank of England, the Proprietors of the present Stock expected the
Governor, Deputy and Directors would have laid before the Parliament, their
Services and Sufferings for the Nations Benefit and Tranqui^^ty; and by what
means they were brought under their present Circumstances, so as to Petition
for Relief therein upon the Measure of Equity, Gratitude, and restoring the
Reputation of Parliamentary Funds, and Public Credit; and proposed a Scheme or
Method, by which they might be effected.

They thought to have seen them daily in the Lobby, and Court of Requests
Soliciting the Honorable House of Commons in that behalf, proving to every
Member the Reasonableness of their Desires, the Justice of their Case; that the
many Aspersions and Calumnies that are cast upon them, are all false, malicious
and groundless; and showed how easily they might be helped without Engrafting;
their Credit restored, the Discount of Tallies, and Intrest of Money reduced to
what they were formerly, and His Majesty assisted with Loans; especially when
it was considered how deeply the Governor, Deputy and many of the Directors
were concerned in the Stock themselves, what Salaries they have for their
Pains, how many of their Friends they had engaged to buy Stock, what loss every
Man now concerned was like to suffer, if the Credit of the Bank was not
restored, or that it should be Engrafted upon.

And Lastly, When they considered how indefatigable the Committees of the
East India and African Companies and others have always been to attend, and
solicit a very bad Cause, they were amazed to see the Directors so remiss and
backward to defend and seek for Relief in a very good one; though those
Committees had a much less Reward and Encouragement for their Industry, than
the Directors: For from the beginning of this Session to this Day, they never
published any thing, or called a General Court beforehand to advise and
communicate on these Purposes I have mentioned above, nor has any of them been
seen at Westminster to solicit the Cause of the Bank (except some that
attended with Proposals to injure and destroy it, and with it all Public
Credit;) whence it is reasonable to conclude, That they have either done
something amiss, or seem not to acknowledge wherein they were Rewarded for such
an apparent Neglect (which is now too obvious to their own, Friends, and
several Gentlemen's Detriments) nor to the Obligations and Duties incumbent, as
became the high Trust they had in that Excellent Constitution: Their late
Worthy Deputy Governor showed them a better Example, he never knew any thing
proposed to the Prejudice of the Bank but he labored Night and Day to prevent
it; and sat not idle under any desponding Thoughts, that his Endeavor would
be in vain and fruitless, but in Imitation of a great Philosopher, who said, He
was not born merely to serve himself, but for others: So I wish these or any
other Considerations, had roused them up to imitate so brave a Pattern and
Example of General Good for their Countries Service

For it is well known, the Court of Directors consisting of Twenty six Persons
were chosen at first for their Integrity, Knowledge and Circumspection, and
whilst several of them still answer these Characters, yet some made little
better than a sine Cure of their Places, being very remarkable for their
particular Profits; returning to these Advantages, small Demonstrations of
their true Zeal, Ability and Tenderness for the Commonweal of the Corporation,
who in the space of two Years, for want of exercising a prudent Conduct in
their Trust and Affairs to nourish such a Constitution, have too apparently in
some great measure ruined, not only the General Credit the Bank had, to the
infinite Prejudice of Trade, but absolutely to the present Adventurers; and
it is too much to be feared, should there be so great an Engraftment of Five
Millions Sterling, to the 1200000 l. the Profit this Bank can make, or may
expect for the future, will not be so beneficial to the New Members (as
formerly to some) for that no Society of Men will (with Submission) ever
Subjugate their Hopes and Estates again, to such Vicissitudes as have already
happened for want of Credit and good Management.

I have for my true regard in serving the Government lost a very considerable
Estate by my Stock in the Bank of England, which is a very great part of my
Fortune, and my Family will feel the Effects of it hereafter: But as the Race
is neither to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, so I submit all to the
Wise Guidance of Providence, and conclude, That knowing your Zeal for the
Interest of the present Bank of England, as also for restoring the Public
Credit of this Nation, wherein consists so many Advantages for the Common Good
of Mankind, I remain a well Wisher, and with all imaginable Respect continue to
be,

SIR, Your most Faithful Servant.

FINIS.

