A LETTER TO A LAWYER: Containing an ESSAY To prove the Compassing and
Imagination Of the DEATH of the King's Brother and Heir To be High Treason
within 25. Ed. 3.

Written by a Gentleman in the Country, and (...) jesties Justices of the Peace
for the County of --

LONDON, Printed for John Eglesfeild, at the Marygold in Fleet Street. 1685.

A LETTER TO A Lawyer, etc.
SIR,
IN Reading somewhat of the Crown-Law this Vacation, I met with a Case of great
consequence, which occasioned me some thoughts; I would desire your Opinion
thereon, my first Conceptions upon it I herewith send you: You know that by the
25th of Edw. 3. Cap. 2. it is said to be Treason to Compass or Imagine the
Death of our Lord the King; our Lady his Companion, or of their Eldest Son and
Heir, etc. Upon reading of which Statute there seemed to me to arise a
considerable Question from the last words of that Clause, viz. If a Collateral
Heir be not there meant as well as Lineal? Although my Lord Coke determines it
in the Negative, yet considering how the Law stood before this Act of
Parliament, and what was the general end why the Common Law made, and this
Statute allowed Compassing or Imagination of the Death of the King's Eldest Son
and Heir to be High Treason, and the equality of the mischief to the Public in
the Death of a Collateral Heir with that of a Lineal, and the necessity and
design of the Law for the Preservation of the Royal Line in both these Cases:
Considering these things, I cannot upon first thoughts persuade my self any
other but that a Brother or Uncle being next Heir was intended by that Law as
much as a Son, if there happen to be such. For it must be agreed that at the
Common Law, before this Statute, it was Treason to Kill, or to Compass the
Death of the King's Heir, whether Lineal or Collateral; nay it was held to be
Treason in case of any of the King's Children, or Uncle, or other near
Relatives, though such were not Next, Immediate, Expectant Heir, but only of
the Royal Family, and remote by some Degrees from any appearance of Succession
to the Crown. And this is even agreed by Andrew Horn and the Lord Coke
themselves, neither of which were such friends to the Crown as to be suspected
of flattery or Biass in this particular: Now that this Statute alters not the
case is plain, for it is resolved to be an Act declaratory of the Ancient
Common Law, and not introductive of a novelty; it is true, it is Abrogatory of
all Treasons not therein expressed, and restrains Treason to the particulars
which it specifies; although the words are Eldest Son and Heir, which is to be
supposed the first Born, yet it is agreed that if such first Born die without
Issue, the second Son, being the Eldest Living, is within this Law, and so of
the third Son, which is a construction far from Literal, and yet consented to
by all Lawyers that I have read; now such interpretation of those words (though
this be in some for a Penal Law) proceeds from the common rule in exposition of
Acts of Parliament, even those which are Penal, that those cases which stand
upon the same Reason shall be within the same Law, Vbi eadem ratio ibi idem
erit jus, be the Law what it will; where there is the same Identity or Majority
of Reason in any case, there ought to be the same Rule; Besides this is not
such a Penal Law as is meant in that rule of Expositions of not being extended
by Equity, for those Penal Laws are such only as create new Offenses or inflict
new Punishments, of which sort you cannot reckon this in question. For if you
consider the end and design of this Law, 'twas not to either of those purposes,
but to declare what things our then Lawmakers thought fit to be reckoned and
allowed Treason from thenceforward; then consider the end why those particulars
there mentioned were agreed should be Treason for ever afterward, and the
consideration thereof will make this perspicuous, peruse the Act and take it
apart or the whole together, and you will find it either to concern the Kings
Person, the Kings Heirs, or the Kingly Government, the three Mischiefs designed
to be prevented were, Bodily harm to the Kings most Sacred Person, the
Extirpation of the Royal Family and Destruction of Kingly Government; All which
three are by this Act expressly provided against; The third and last in the
clauses of Levying War, adhering to the Kings Enemies, Clipping or
Counterfeiting Money or the Great Seal, or Killing any of his Grand Officers
there particularised, the Sole Power of making War and Peace, commanding
Subjects to assist against Foreign Enemies, ordering and regulating Current
Moneys, Custody and Management of the Great Seal of England, and consequently
of Pardons, etc. the making and removing of all Public Officers of State and
Justice, being some of the Royal Prerogatives of Britains Monarch: The first
is apparent in the first words of this Act, whereby it is made High Treason so
much as to think evil of the King in a Man's Heart; the second is no less
manifest, although some of Republican Principles are unwilling it should be so,
and therefore will say it is not so, but it is as plain as either of the two
former which I have mentioned, for that is the end and reason why it is
High Treason to compass the Death of the Queen, and the Words are Emphatical,
Our Lady his Companion, and their Heir; Then, which nothing can be more fully
expressed; it is easy for you further to animadvert on the sense of the Words,
and their Coherence; It not being placed among the Grandees of the Realm as the
greatest Subject, but between the King and His Heir; And Heir surely is the
principal thing there intended, and this Statute (you must needs imagine)
designed by that clause to preserve the Royal Family and maintain the
Succession, by providing a security for the Successor from all Danger as to his
Person: Now a Collateral Heir is in the same plight and condition in respect of
the Kingdom as a Son and Heir; and to destroy the Brother, may be of as
pernicious consequence as to cut off the Son, as is easy for any Man to
conceive, by considering the dismal effects which may happen upon either, as
the Extirpation of the Royal Family, (which God forbid) which was by this Law
principally meant to be preserved, and involving the Nation in Blood and War,
by rendering the Right of Succession disputable, so that the Mischief that may
happen in both Cases, and that was intended to be prevented, is alike and the
same. Then that this construction is contrariant to any one rule of Law, I
think no Man can affirm; if any do, I could with much facility evince its
consonancy to the rules of Law in other like Cases, even of Statutes meerlyand
strictly Penal, by abundance of Books; But I know you will object that here is a
restrictive Clause. I answer and confess, there is a Proviso, That if any other
Case supposed Treason, which is not above specified, etc. but this is specified
and sufficiently expressed by the Word Heir, which was the thing chiefly
intended, as I showed before in the threefold reason of this Act of Parliament;
and a Brother or Nephew that is apparent Heir, being within the same reason and
mischief with Son and Heir, which was mentioned, because he is (where there is
such) the first and next in Succession, and so the chiefest of the kind is
named, the rest being meant and intended (and that in Acts of Parliament it is
common and usual only to mention the first and chiefest, when all manner of
Persons of that kind or sort are understood, you know almost an hundred Cases
for it then) the Primogenitus, the Eldest Son, in the first place, then in
default of him, the second Son, because then Heir, then in default of him, the
third Son, for the same Reason, because Son, then Heir; and this is agreed to
notwithstanding the restrictive Clause, and pari ratione, If no such Son, etc.
then Brother or Nephew, when and because next immediate Apparent Heir in being.
This construction seems very natural and genuine; besides that, were it
otherwise, the Word Heir would be needless, and stand for a Cipher, for without
that Word Heir, 'twould have been sufficient to have said Eldest Son, and no
more, if no more had been designed by this Clause: Now I think it is a Rule in
all Constructions, as well of Statutes as of Wills and Awards, (those three
receiving always one interpretation secundum Intentionem, which the very
termination denotes, Parliament, Testament, and Arbitrament) never to expound
them so as any Word shall be void and useless, if all its Words may have a
meaning by another Construction; And here now if Coke's Construction be
received, That no Heir is meant but Eldest Son, then it is as much as if they
had said Eldest Son, that is, Eldest Son, and the Word Heir is superfluous, for
a Man's Eldest Son is generally reputed Heir: Besides, this Act being in
Affirmance of the Common Law, you know the Judges are not bound to that
literal, syllabical Construction, as is pretended in this Case; and the Law
against Treasons has in all ages been construed according to the Rule I
mentioned of an identity in the reason and Mischief: As in the Case of Petty
Treason, you find in the Books, that if the Servant Kill the Wife of his
Master, knowing her to be such, it is adjudged Petty Treason by all the Judges
of both Benches, because there is the same reason for the one as the other, the
one has affiance in him as well as the other, and he ows reverence to them
both: So for a Child to Kill Father or Mother, is Petty Treason, because
there is a majority of reason higher then that of a Servant, which is the
Submission due from a Son to his Father, and this very branch of this Act has
had the like Construction, as that a Queen Regent is here meant, though
literally. She be neither within the Words King nor Queen-consort, yet because
She stands under the same reason and is in the same condition with a King in
respect of the Kingdom and therefore Construed so, as it was in Case of the
late Queens, Mary and Elizabeth; and so the Eldest son and Heir of a Queen
Regent for the same reason. Further, it is observable that the Words are their
Heir, and yet it cannot be denied that though such Heir of the King be not Son
of the Queen, but Eldest Son by a Consort deceased before He came to the Crown,
yet such will be within this Statute, because within the same reason, and the
Kings Eldest Daughter (there being no Son) is surely within the Law, such being
the next in prospect to the Crown: And several other Constructions there are
upon this Statute, of persons designed by this Statute, though not literally
expressed, because in aequali Statu, as Keeper of the Great Seal being the same
in Power and Office with Chancellor, and many more which are obvious in almost
every Book: And I can see no reason why such Construction should be admitted
upon one part of the Act, and so vehemently denied in this Clause; thence it
seems very plain that a Collateral Heir, is as much within this Act as Son and
Heir, for that upon reading of the Statute it appears, the Lawmakers designed
the Preservation of the Successor under the term Heir, which must be meant to
the Crown: So Sacred a respect had our Lawmakers in those days to the Divine
right of Succession. As for the Distinction of Presumptive and Apparent, it is
so idle and trivial that it needs not the least answer, for they are often used
promiscuously one for the other, and a Brother whom perchance you will call
presumptive Heir is in default of a Son, as much an Heir apparent as any person
can be (when there is such) there being no intermediate Heir in being, and his
Right is as Sacred and Inviolable, and his condition the same in respect of the
Kingdom. For that saying of non est haeres viventis, it is of as little
consideration in this Case, for though it should be agreed in strictness true,
yet the Word Heir suffices to describe the person who is to succeed or inherit
by Descent, and in the Civil Law, which Governs in most parts of the Civilized
World, is used for him that succeeds to a man's estate, whether he be of the
blood or a stranger, whether he be so by Will or Descent. So that it is an
emphatical name in this place for to express the person intended by this Law to
be kept from violence, even in thought: But some may imagine this is to make
Treason against an Heir while a Subject; You know that to be otherwise, for the
Treason is against the King as well in this Case as that of the Queen-consort,
and all such Offenses are contra ligeantiam debitam Domino Regi; so it is in
Felony and Murder, though the Act of Violence be an immediate wrong to the
Goods or Person of a Subject, yet the offense is against the Kings Peace, Crown
and Dignity, for he is interested in the Life and Welfare of his Subjects, and
being more especially and personally concerned in those of the Royal Family,
the Law has made such Offense High Treason; But perhaps you will object that
the consequence of this opinion will be to make Treason uncertain, and that
such thing as is so to day, may prove otherwise to morrow, by the Birth of a
Son or the like; I answer that will be no inconvenience to any good Man, for
every such never dares to indulge himself in an ill thought of any of the Royal
Blood, but besides, 'twill be no more so upon this Construction, then in the
Case of Eldest Son, who dying, you agree the Second to come in his place within
this Law, and the Treason is still the same to Kill or to Imagine the Death of
the next and immediate Apparent Heir, be the person who it will, whether Son,
Brother, Nephew, Uncle, etc. You may perhaps further object, that this is
contrary to the opinion of the Lord Coke, and the Lord Hales; For Answer
thereto I need say no more than that the Reason of Laws, and not Authority, is
the Good old Rule, Consulendum and judicandum legibus non dictis; But however,
if you consult Cokes opinion, you will find it very odd in this particular, he
says, If such an Heir Apparent be a Collateral Heir, (Note here that Coke
himself styles a Collateral Heir to be an Heir Apparent) he is not within this
Law until Declared in Parliament; i. e. until he be declared Heir, as was Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, in Richard (...) Second's time. Now how the Declaration
in ^^^liament that such a one is Heir Apparent, can make him more within this
Law then he was before, I leave you to judge: and if he were within this Law
after he was proclaimed next Heir, then surely he was before, for he was as
much Heir Apparent before. Then for the Lord Hales, it is true this opinion is
mentioned in his Pleas of the Crown, but in the first Edition thereof it is
with a tamen quaere; but it seems, some disingenuous Dogmatist being of another
mind, has in the second Edition struck out those words tamen quaere, unwilling
to let the world know that that Great, Good Man doubted of Cokes opinion in
this particular, and in truth it was that tamen quaere made me first consider
this matter. So that to draw to an end of this my too tedious Epistle, there
seems to me neither authority nor reason against this opinion, which to my
present thoughts results most plainly from the consideration of this Statute,
and its design, which was to preserve the Sacred Person of the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, secondly, the Royal Heir, and thirdly the Kingly Government
of this Realm: The second of which includes a Brother or other Collateral as
much as Son; the mischief hereby to be prevented being the same, and
consequently the Reason alike in both Cases. Thus I have given you only some
rude hints which at present induce me to be for the affirmative in this
Question, Praying your thoughts hereupon if you have any thing to offer
contrary to what I have said, or in confirmation thereof, if you agree, and to
return me the same, and you will Oblige

Your Humble Servant, etc. S^pt. 29. 1684.

FINIS.

