A LETTER To a FRIEND, Concerning a POSTSCRIPT To the Defense of Dr. SHERLOCK's
Notion OF THE Trinity in Unity, Relating to The Calm and Sober Enquiry upon the
same Subject.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and 3 Crowns at
the lower End of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1694.

A LETTER To a FRIEND, etc.
SIR,
I Find a Postscript to the newly published Defense of Dr. Sherlock 's Notion
of the Trinity in Unity, takes Notice of the Enquiry concerning the possibility
of a Trinity in the Godhead. He that writes it seems somewhat out of Humor, or
not in such as it is decent to hope is more usual with him: And I cannot guess
for what, unless that one, whom he imagines a Dissenter, has adventured to
cast his Eyes, that way that he did, his. But for that Imagination he may have
as little ground, as I to think the Dean's Defender is the Dean: And as little
as he had to say the Enquirer took great Care that no Man should suspect that
he favors the Dean in his Notions, where he is quite out in his guess; for the
Enquirer took no such Care at all, but nakedly to represent his own Sentiments
as they were, whether they agreed with the Dean's, or wherein they differed:
And really cares not who knows that he has not so little kindness either for
the truth or for him, as to abandon or decline what he thinks to be true for
his sake, or (as he expressed himself p. 29. of that Discourse) because he said
it.

But the Defender represents the Dean as much of another temper, and that he
will thank him for not favoring him in his Notions. But yet he says, that though
the Enquirer does not in every particular say what the Dean says, yet he says
what will justify him against -- the Charge of Tritheism. And is there any
hurt to him in that? what a strange Man does he make the Dean! as if he could
not be pleased unless he alone did engross Truth! will he thank a Man for not
favoring his Notions, and yet would blame him for not saying in every
particular what he says, though he say what will justify him against the
heaviest Charge framed against him! may one neither be allowed to agree with
him, nor disagree?

But Sir, the Defender's Discourse has no design (nor I believe he himself) to
disprove the Possibility of a Trinity in the ever blessed Godhead. Therefore
the Enquirer is safe from him as to the principal Design he is concerned for,
it is all one to him if it still appear possible in what way it be so
represented, that is intelligible, consistent with it self, and with other
truth; so that it is hardly worth the while to him, further to enquire whether
the Dean's Hypothesis or his be better, if either be found unexceptionably,
safe and good. But because the Defender has, to give preference to the one,
misrepresented both with some appearing disadvantage to the Cause it self, what
he says ought to be considered.

And the whole Matter will be reduced to this twofold Enquiry:

1. Whether the Enquirer has said more than the Dean, or more than is
defensible, of the distinction of the Sacred Three in the Godhead.

2. Whether the Dean has said so much as the Enquirer, or so much as was
requisite of their Union.

1. For the former, the Defender, p. 103. mentions the Dean's Notion of three
Infinite Minds or Spirits: And makes the Enquirer to have been proving three
Spirits, three distinct Essences, three individual Natures, in the Godhead; and
then adds -- for my part, I cannot take where the difference is, unless it be
in the term Infinite. It Is indeed strange the Enquirer should have said more
than the Dean, if there were no difference, unless in the term Infinite,
wherein he must have said Infinitely less.

But he at length, apprehends another difference, though he after labors to make
it none, viz. that the Enquirer disputes, but asserts nothing, and he fancies
he does so to shelter himself from the Animadverter, of whom he says he seems
to be terribly afraid -- Here he puts the Dean into a fit of kindness and good
Nature, allowing the Enquirer to partake with him in his fears, though not in his
Notions, as more sacred. But he herein understands not the Enquirer, who if he
had been so terribly afraid, could very easily have said nothing: And who was
really afraid of a greater Animadverter, thinking it too great boldness, under
his Eye, to speak confidently of his own peculiarities, and that ly folded up
in so venerable darkness. He thought it enough, in opposition to the daring
Person (whosoever he was) with whom he was concerned that so peremptorily
pronounced the Trinity an absurdity, a contradiction, nonsense, and an
impossibility, to represent whar he proposed as possible for ought he knew.

And now the Defender will have the Dean to have done no more. And with all my
Heart let him have done no more, if he and his Animadverter, and the rest of
the World will so agree it: But he will have the Enquirer to have done more,
and to be much more exposed to the Charge of Tritheism, by asserting three
distinct Essences, three individual Natures, and three spiritual Beings in the
Godhead. This is indeed very mavelous, that the Enquirer should expose
himself to the Charge of Tritheism by asserting all this, when but a few Lines
before upon the same Page, he is said to have asserted nothing! But he may as
well make the Enquirer in asserting nothing to have asserted all this, as the
Dean in asserting all this to have asserted nothing.

And where the Enquirer has said in express words that the Sacred Three are
three distinct substances I cannot find: And we must in great part alter the
common Notion of Substance to make it affirmable of God at all, viz. that it
does substare accidentibus, which I believe the Dean will no more than the
Enquirer suppose the Divine Being to admit. But it is true, that there is
somewhat more considerable in the Notion of Substance, according whereto, if
the Dean can make a shift to avoid the having of any inconvenient thing proved
upon him by consequence, I hope the Enquirer may find a way to escape as well.

But whereas he says the Dean allows but one Divine Essence, and one individual
Nature in the Godhead repeated in three Persons, but without multiplication, as
he says he had already explained it. This has occasioned me to look back to
that explanation, and if he thinks the allowing but one Divine Essence, and one
individual Nature in the Godhead, will agree with what the Dean has said in
his Vindication, I shall not envy him, nor (now) go about to disprove it. But I
confess I see not how it can agree with what the Defender says in this his
explanation it self, when p. 23. he tells us the Son is the living subsisting
Image of the Father, and the Image and the Prototype can not be the same but
must be two. No man is his own Image, nor is an Image the Image of it self. And
he adds, this is so self evident, etc. But whereas the distinction all this
while might be understood to be but modal, and that appears to be the Defenders
present (what ever was the Deans former) meaning, that the three subsistences
differ only in their different manner of subsisting, yet with this meaning his
other words do little agree, for he plainly asserts a real distinction of three
in the same individual numerical nature. And who did ever make a real
distinction to be but modal? More expressly he had said before p. 18. the Divine
Nature is one individual nature, but not one single nature, for one single
nature can be but one person whether in God or man.

I shall not here discuss with him the Criticism upon which he lays so mighty
stress of one individual nature and one single nature, but take the terms he
chooses, and if the Divine Nature be not one single nature, it must be double,
it must be triple. And what does this come to less than three Natures? unless
all ordinary forms of speech must be quite abandoned and forsaken. And wherein
does it come short of what is said by the Enquirer? p. 50. and 51. This term
individual must (in the case now supposed, as possible not as certain) admit of
a twofold application either to the distinct essence of the Father, or of the
Son, or of the Holy Ghost; or to the entire essence of the Godhead, in which
these three do concur. Each of these conceived by it self, are (according to
this supposition) individual essences, but conceived together they are the
entire individual essence of God, for there is but one such essence and no
more, and it can never be multiplied nor divided into more of the same name and
nature. Duplicity, triplicity, are admitted; simplicity rejected, if (simple
and single be of the same signification.) Where is the difference, but that the
one thinks absolute omnimodous simplicity is not to be affirmed of the Divine
Nature, as he often speaks. The other says downright, it is not single or
simple without limitation. The one denies multiplication of it, so does the
other: The one indeed speaks positively, the other does but suppose what he
says as possible not certain. And there is indeed some difference between
supposing a thing as possible for ought one knows; and affirming it so
positively, as to impute Heresy, and Nonsense to all Gainsayers. But both
bring for proof, the same thing, The incarnation; as in the Postscript, the
Defender takes notice the Enquirer does. p. 102. And so does he himself in his
letter, p. 102. -- The Divine Nature was incarnate in Christ, he was perfect
God and perfect man, and if there was but one single Divine Nature in all three
persons, this one single Divine Nature was incarnate, and therefore the Father
and the Holy Ghost who are this single Divine Nature as well as the Son, must
be as much incarnate as the Son was. He makes the contrary absurd. And brings
in (fitly enough) Victorinus Afer teaching, that we ought not to say, nor is it
lawful to say, that there is but one substance (i. e. as he paraphrases it, one
single subsisting nature (therefore there must be three single subsisting
natures) and three persons. For if this same substance did and suffered all
(Patri-passiani et nos) we must be Patri-passians, which God forbid.

And what the Defender alleges from the Ancients, against the Sabellians,
allowing only a Trinity of Names and his taking the (...), Letter, p. 24, 25.
in the concrete not in the abstract, fully enough speaks the Enquirers sense,
his accounting the contrary too Fine and Metaphysical for him was what was writ
to Dr. Wallis, Calm Discourse, p. 107. too fine or too little solid, etc.

In short, till it can be effectually proved, that Mind and Spirit do not
signify somewhat as absolute as Nature or Essence (or rather more than the
former, which signifies the Principle of Operation as the other of Being,) And
till it can be as well proved, that asserting a thing as certain, so as to
pronounce it Heresy and Nonsense to think otherwise, is less than only to
propose it as possible, or enquire whether it be so or no, The Dean must be
judged by every one that understands common sense, to have heightened the
Distinction of three Persons at least as much as the Enquirer. And whether the
Enquirer have supposed more than is defensible against the Defenders
objections, will be considered by and by in its proper place. In the mean time
let it

2. Be examined whether the Dean has said as much for salving the Unity of the
Godhead as the Enquirer, or as much as is requisite to that purpose. And here
our Business will be short, for it all turns upon that one single point,
whether mutual Consciousness be that Union which must be acknowledged, or
suppose it only. For which we need only appeal to common Reason, whether Being
do not in the natural Order precede even the Power of working, and consequently
whether being united vitally, precede not the possibility of acting agreeably
to that united state, whereupon the Enquiry is not concerning actual conscience
only, but (as he speaks) Consciousness. Is it possible any three Persons or
Intelligent Subsistences, should naturally have vital Perception of each others
internal Motions and Sensations, without being vitally preunited? I say
naturally, for that God might give to three created Spirits a temporary
Perception of each other without bringing them into a stated Union each with
other, is little to be doubted; as a Spirit may assume a Body and animate it
pro tempore without being substantially united with it. And if that Body were
also a Spirit they might pro tempore for ought we know by extraordinary Divine
Disposition (for within the ordinary course of Nature we know of no such
intimacy of created Spirits to another) be quasi animae to one another. But if
naturally they were so to mingle and transfuse Sensations mutually into each
other, they must be naturally, first, in vital union with one another. Nor
therefore did the Enquirer mistake the Dean's Notion as the Defender fancies in
the passage he quotes p. 104. as if he took mutual Consciousness for mere
mutual Perspection. For though scire abstractly taken does not signify more than
perspicere, yet the Enquirer in that passage speaking of a never so perfect
mutual perspection properly enough expressed thereby as great a feeling such
Spirits were supposed to have of each other, in themselves, as mutual
consciousness is apt to signify, or as the Dean can yet be supposed to have
meant, that perspection being more perfect which produces gusts and relishes
suitable to the Object, than that which stays in mere speculation only.

And upon the whole, it seems very strange the Defender should say, if such an
internal, vital sensation, be not an essential union, he believes no man can
tell what it is. For how can such actual sensation be imagined to be union? As
well might the use of sense its self (speaking of any thing singly to which it
belongs) be said to be its constituent form, or (consequently) the doing any
thing that proceeds from Reason, be the form of a Man. So the writing a Book,
should be the Author. And whereas he says it is certain the Dean took it to be
so, and therefore he did not leave out a natural external union; it follows,
indeed, that he did not leave it out, in his Mind, and Design, but he
nevertheless left it out of his Book, and therefore said not enough there, to
salve the unity of the Godhead, but ought to have insisted upon somewhat prior
to mutual consciousness, as constituent of that unity, and which might make the
three one, and not merely argue them to be so.

2. But now p. 105. he comes to find as great fault with the Enquirers way of
maintaining this unity, and because he is resolved to dislike it, if he cannot
find it faulty, sets himself to make it so.

The Temper of Mind wherewith he writes to this purpose what follows p. 105.
and onwards to the end so soon, and so constantly shows it self, that no man
whose mind is not in the same disorder will upon Trial apprehend any thing in
it, but such heat as dwells in darkness. And he himself has given the Document
which may be a measure to any apprehensive Reader.

True divine Wisdom rests not on an ill natured, See his Letter, p. 1.
and perverse Spirit, I understand it, while the ill fit lasts. But it is
strange he could write those words without any self-reflection.

The Thing to be revenged is, that the Enquirer did freely speak his Thoughts,
wherein he judged the Dean's Hypothesis defective, his not taking notice of
what he reckoned naturally antecedent and fundamental to mutual consciousness:
A most intimate, natural, necessary, eternal union of the sacred Three. If the
Enquirer spoke sincerely, as he understood the matter, and him; and it
evidently apppear the Defender did not so, I only say the wronged person has
much the advantage and wishes him no other harm, than such gentle Regrets, as
are necessary to set him right with himself, and his higher Judge.

He says, he (the Enquirer) represents this (Unity) by the union of soul and
body, and by the union of the divine and humane nature, etc.

It Is true, he partly does so, but more fully by the (supposed union of) three
created Spirits (to which he that will may see, he only makes that a lower
step) and he says, (with respect especially to the former of these) That an
union supposeable to be originally, eternally, and by natural necessity in the
most perfect being, is to be thought unexpressibly more perfect than any other.
But (he adds) these are personal unions, and therefore cannot be the unity of
the Godhead. And he very well knew (for he had but little before cited the
passage) that the Enquirer never intended them so, but only to represent that
the union of the three in the Godhead, could not be reasonably thought less
possible.

What he farther adds is much stranger (and yet herein I am resolved to put
Charity toward him to the utmost stretch, as he professes to have done his
understanding) for he says -- as far as he can possibly understand and that he
should be glad to be better informed, though there is some reason to apprehend
that former displeasure darkened his understanding, (and even dimn'd his
Eyesight) which yet I hope has it is more lucid Intervals, and that his
distemper is not a fixed habit with him.) And what is it now that he cannot
possibly understand otherwise? that no other union will satisfy him (viz. the
Enquirer) but such an union of three spiritual Beings and individual natures as
by their composition constitute the Godhead, as the composition of soul and
body do the Man, i. e. He cannot understand but he means what he expressly
denies. Who can help so cross an understanding? If he had not had his very
finger upon the place where the Enquirer says in express words [I peremptorily
deny all composition in the Being of God] this had been more excusable, Calm
Discourse p. 34.
Calm Discourse p. 89, 90.
(besides much said to the same purpose elsewhere) It had been ingenuous in any
man not to impute that to another, as his meaning, which in the plainest terms
he disavows, as none of his meaning: And it had been prudent in the Dean (or
his Defender) of all Mankind not to have done so in the present case, as will
further be seen in due time. But he takes it for an Affront, when he fancies a
man to come too near him.

He adds, for this reason he disputes earnestly against the universal absolute
omnimodous simplicity of the divine Nature, and will not allow that Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness, are the same thing in God, and distinguished into
different Conceptions by us, only through the weakness of our understandings,
which cannot comprehend an infinite Being in one thought, and therefore must,
as well as we can, contemplate him by parts.

I know not what he means by earnestly, the matter was weighty, and it is true,
he was in writing about it in no disposition to jest. But it is said he
disputed against the universal, absolute, omnimodous simplicity of the Divine
Nature. I hope the Defender in this means honestly, but he speaks very
improperly, for it supposes him to think that the universal, absolute,
omnimodous simplicity, so earnestly disputed against, did really belong to the
Divine Nature, but I can scarce believe him to think so, and therefore he
should have said, his disputation tended to prove it not to belong. If he (viz.
the Defender, or the Dean) did really think it did, they, or he, must be very
singular in that sentiment. I would have them name me the man that ever laid
down and asserted such a position. Some I know have said of that Sacred Being,
that it is sum simplex, or more simple than any thing else, but that imports
not universal, absolute, omnimodous simplicity, which is impossible to be a
perfection, or therefore to belong to the Divine Nature. No man that ever
acknowledged a Trinity of persons even modally distinguished, could ever
pretend it, for such simplicity excludes all modes. Nay, the Antitrinitarians
themselves can never be for it, as the Calm Discourse has shown. p. 139.
And if the Dean be, he is gone into the remotest extreme from what he held
(and plainly enough seems still to hold) that ever man of sense did.

But for what is added, that he will not allow that Wisdom, Power and Goodness,
are the same thing in God: This is not fairly said, Civility allows me not to
say, untruly. There is no word in the place he cites, nor any where in that
book, that signifies not allowing, it is intimated we are not instructed by the
Scripture to conceive of the Divine Nature, as, in every respect, most
absolutely simple, or that Power, Wisdom, Goodness in the abstract, are the
same thing, and that our difficulty is great to apprehend them really
undistinguishable. And let me seriously ask himself, does he in good earnest
think it is only through the weakness of our understandings that we distinguish
the notions of the Divine Wisdom, Power and Goodness? certainly it were great
weakness of unstanding to define them alike. I believe he never met with the
writer yet that distinguished them less, than ratione ratiocinata, in
contradistinction to ratocinante, which implies somewhat corresponding to our
distinct notions of them (eminently and not formally) in natura rei.

And whereas he further says, This prepared his way to make Goodness, Wisdom,
Power, -- a natural Trinity n Unity, herein the Defender is mistaken. This is
not the Trinity which the Enquirers discourse was ever intended to terminate
in, as he himself has expressly said, and the Defender takes notice of it,
which makes me wonder how he could think it was so intended, citing the very
passage p. 37. where the Enquirer professes, Calm Disc.
not to judge, that we are under the precise notions of Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, to conceive of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. But why then were
these three so much discourst of before? They are three most celebrated Divine
Attributes, wherein we have our most immediate and very principal concern. And
some have thought the Trinity was most fitly to be conceived by them: The
Enquirer did not think so; but he thought first, it would be requisite to have
our minds disentangled from any apprehended necessity of conceiving them to be
in all respects the very same things, nor are they the very same, if they be so
distinguished as is expressed in the 16 th. of the summary propositions; Calm.
Disc. p. 140.
where also they are each of them said to be common to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, whence therefore it is impossible they should be thought to distinguish
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But that some distinction being admitted even of
them, this might facilitate to us our conception of the greater distinction
which must be, of Father, Son and Spirit, as is expressed p. 38. Indeed he did
not think fit to interrupt his discourse by staying to show reasons why he did
not rest in that account alone of the Trinity, though it might seem plausible, or
not absurd, but proceeded further to what was more satisfying to himself, and
might be so to other men. And (as the intervening Series of his discourse leads
thereto) this is more directly done p. 47. and 48. etc. especially where he
comes to speak of the necessary coexistence, and the (as necessary and natural)
order of the Father, Son and Spirit, toward each other. The second being, not
by any intervening act of will, but by necessary, eternal promanation, from the
first, and the third from them both. And the true reason why Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, were not thought expressive of the distinction of Father, Son and
Spirit, but common to each of them (as is said, Summary Prop. 16.) was, thatt
the two latter can not but be necessary emanations, most connatural to their
Original, as is truly suggested by the Defender, p. 1^1.

If you object (as the Defender brings in the Enquirer, saying) That this gives
us the notion of a compounded Deity, etc. This, i. e. the supposition, that
absolute omnimodous simplicity, belongs not to it, is the thing which may be
thought to give us this notion. And he tells us, he (the Enquirer) answers this
difficulty, by giving us a new notion of a compositum. And what is that which he
calls a new notion? that a compositm seems to imply a preexisting component,
that brings such things together, and supposes such and such more simple things
to have preexisted apart, or separate, and to be brought afterward together
into an united State.

And indeed is this a new notion? as new as the Creation? Let him show me an
Instance through the whole created universe of Beings (And for the uncreated
Being the Defender (now at this time) disputes against any composition there,
and the Enquirer denies any) first, where there has been a compositum without
a pre-existing component, or next the compounded parts whereof, if substantial
did not in order of nature pre-exist separate; i. e. whether esse simpliciter
do not naturally precede esse tale, or which is all one, to our present
purpose, whether they were not capable hereof if the Creator pleased: Let any
man, I say, tell me where was there ever a compositum made by substantial
union, that did not consist of once separate or of separable parts.

But note his admirable following supposition, that is to say, that if a man,
suppose, who consists of body and soul, had been from eternity, without a
maker, and his soul, and body had never subsisted a part, he could not have
been said to have been a compounded Creature? This is said with design most
groundlesly (as we shall see) to fasten an absurd consequence upon the
Enquirer, and see how it lucks: Did ever any man undertake to reprove an
absurdity with greater absurdity? a Creature without a Maker! what sort of
Creature must this be! we have a pretty saying quoted in the Defender's Letter;
He that writes lies down; and we are apt enough too, when we write to trip and
fall down, and ought in such Cases to be merciful to one another, even though he
that falls should be in no danger of hurting his forehead, much more if he be.
What was another man's turn now, may be mine next.

But let the supposition proceed, and put we Being instead of Creature, which
no doubt was the Defender's meaning, for Creature he must needs know it could
not be that had no Maker. And what then? why he should not (says he) have been
said to be compounded, though he would have had the same parts that he has now:
We have here a self-confounding supposition, which having done that first,
cannot hurt him whom it was designed to confound, being taken in season. Grant
one, and you grant a thousand. A Being made up of a soul and a body, is so
imperfect an entity, as could not be of it self. Nothing is of it self which is
not absolutely perfect. If he mind to disprove this, let him try his faculty
when he pleases against it, and (which I sincerely believe he never intends)
together with it, against all Religion. But besides, he has destroyed his own
supposition himself (to put us out of that danger) by saying in plain words, p.
107. We have no Notion of an eternal and necessary Existence, but in an
absolutely perfect and infinite nature. Now say I, what is so perfect, and has
whatever belongs to it necessarily, though distinguishable things belong to it,
has no parts, for what are parts, but such things as can be parted? such
things as never were parted, and never can be, (as it is nonsense to talk of
those things being parted that are united necessarily, and of themselves) are
no parts, if partiri, whence they are so called, must not (and herein he cannot
so fool the whole Christian World as to make it concur with him) lose its
signification to serve a turn. Though the things be real, there partibility is
not real. If any indeed will call them parts, beeause they may be conceived or
contemplated apart, as parts merely conceptible are no prejudice to the
perfection of the Divine Being, so are such conceivable parts acknowledged by
this Author himself in express words; His Letter, p. 105.
we cannot comprehend an infinite Being in one Thought, and therefore must as
well as we can contemplate him by parts. God can as little admit to be a part
of any thing, as to have any thing a part of him. And yet it is no prejudice to
the Dignity and Perfection of his Being, to conceive of him conjunctly with
other things, as when we make him a part (subject or predicate) of a
Proposition. All his disputation therefore against parts and composition in the
Deity, is against a figment, or no present adversary. For my part I am of his
mind, and I should be obliged to thank him that this once he vouchsafes to let
me be on his side, when he knows I am, if he did not take so vast pains to make
others not know it. How hard a thing is it for an angry man (especially when he
knows not why) to write with a sincere Mind.

But has he in all this fervent bluster a present concern at this time for the
Honor of the Divine Being? (as God forbid I should think he never has) what
is that he supposes injurious to it? Is it the words, parts and compounds? or
is it the things supposed to be united in the Divine Being? The words he knows
to be his own, and let him dispose of them more ineptly if he can tell how:
parts that were never put together, never parted, nor ever shall be the one or
other; i. e. that never were or will be parts: And a compound of such parts!
But now for the things upon which he would obtrude these words [ three
Essences, natures, (or if you please, Infinite minds or spirits) signified by
the Names of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in eternal union, but distinct in the
Being of God.] Let us consider his disputation against them united, or in
union, according to its double aspect: First, upon the Hypothesis or
Supposition of them: Secondly, upon himself.

First, Consider his Disputation as levelled against the Hypothesis or
supposition of such distinct essences, natures, minds, spirits, in necessary,
eternal Union in the Divine Being. And one of his arguments against it, is in
those words of his One principal argument against it (here put out parts and
composition which are his own, and we have no more to do with them) is, that
God is eternal and unmade, and whatsoever ( has parts, says he) has such
essences in it, must have a maker. And here let him prove his consequence, and
his business is done, viz. both ways, as will be seen by and by. But let him
show the inconsistency between a things having such distinct essences naturally
and necessarily united in it, (as the supposition to be argued against is, and
before ought to have been justly stated) and it is being eternal and unmade. But
how that is to be evinced I can not so much as guess; confident affirmation,
against the most obvious Tenor of Gods own Word, is of little account, who
shall ascend into the heavens? or fathom the depths? or can have that
perspection of God's incomprehensible nature, as without (and visibly against)
his own revelation to be able, without great rashness, to pronounce so
concerning him? But so toyish an Argument as here follows, is worse than the
Position; i. e. when one shall say, that for ought we know there may be three
distinct Essences by an eternal unmade union, united into one, in the Being of
God; any man should say, and be so vain as to expect to be regarded, that
because they are united by an eternal and unmade union, therefore they are not
united by an eternal and unmade union! If there be not a Contradiction in the
terms to disprove a thing, by it self, is to say nothing, or is all one with
proving a thing by it self. He proceeds, to what has no thing in it like an
Argument, but against his own Conceit of parts, and that very trifling too.
There can be but one eternal nature in God: But if there be three -- there must
be three. This it is now come to, proving his Point by its self. Here he makes
sure work to have nothing denied, but then nothing is proved, no advance is
made; if there be three, there must be three. But if there be three what?
eternal parts: There must be three different Natures, or else they -- would be
the same. (What? though distinct?) But this supposes some body said the first:
And who? himself; therefore he is disproving himself. If I had said so, I would
have denied his consequence, for there may be similar parts: Whereas by
different, he seems to mean dissimilar. He says not only distinct, but
different natures. Now you have that wonderful thing talked of some times, but
never brought to view before, a distinction without a difference. It Is strange
how any things should be distinct, and no way different. What distinguishes
them if they differ by nothing. This different, applied to this present Case,
is his own word, coined to introduce a Notion that is not new to Christians
only, but to all Mankind. If by different Natures he means (as he seems) of a
different kind, who thought of such a difference? But I trow, things that
differ in number, do as truly differ (however essentially cohaering) though not
so widely.

His next is, that though we have a natural notion of an eternal Being, we have
no notion of three eternal Essences (which again I put instead of his parts)
which necessarily coexist in an eternal union.

Does he mean we are to disbelieve every thing of God whereof we have not a
natural Notion? Then to what purpose is a Divine Revelation? Is this Notion of
God pretended to be Natural? It Is enough, if such a Notion be most favored by
his own Revelation, who best understands his own Nature, and there be no
evident natural Notion against it. He forgot that he had said, ( Defense, p.
5.) If every thing which we have no positive Idea of must be allowed to
contradict Reason, we shall find contradictions enough; adding, We must confess a
great many things to be true, which we have no Idea of, etc. He adds, once more
we have no notion of an eternal and necessary existence, but in an absolutely
perfect and infinite nature, but if there be (I here again leave out his three
parts, because I design to consider if there be any thing of strength brought
against what was supposed possible by the Enquirer, not against his fiction,
which I trouble not my self any further with) three spiritual Beings -- neither
of them can be absolutely perfect and infinite, (I would rather have said none,
or no one, than neither, since the discourse is of more than two. I thought the
meaning of uter and neuter had been agreed long ago,) though we could suppose
their union to make such a perfect Being, because they are not the same, and
(neither) no one of them is the whole, -- etc.

This is the only thing that ever came under my notice among the Schoolmen,
that has any appearing strengh in it, against the Hypothesis which I have
proposed as possible for ought I knew. They generally dispute against many
sorts of Compositions in the Being of God, which I am not concerned in. That of
Matter and Form, which is alien from this affair, of quantitative parts, which
is as alien. Of subject and accident, which touches us not. Of act and power,
which does it as little. Each subsistent, being eternally in utmost actuality.
And by sundry sorts and methods of argument, whereof only this can seem to
signify any thing against the present supposition. And it wholly resolves into
the Notion of Infinity, about which I generally spoke my sense in that first
Letter to Dr. Wallis. See Calm Disc. p. 122.123
And as I there intimated how much easier it is to puzzle another upon that
subject than to satisfy one self, so I here say, that I doubt not to give any
man as much trouble about it in respect of quantitative extension, as he can
me, in this. I think it demonstrable that one Infinite can never be from
another by voluntary production, that it cannot by necessary Emanation, I think
not so. In the mean time when we are told so plainly by the Divine Oracles, of
a sacred three, that are each of them God, and of some one whereof some things
are spoken that are not nor can be of the others. I think it easier to count
three than to determine of Infiniteness: And accordingly to form ones Belief.
But of this more when we come to compare him with himself. And for what he
discourses of the aspect this supposition has upon the Trinity, and the
Homo-ousion. p. 108.109, 110.
It all proceeds still upon his own fiction of parts, and upon the invidious
straining of that similitude of the union of soul and body, as he himself does
tantum non confess; except that he lessens it by saying most untruly that he
(the Enquirer) does expressly own the Consequence. Therefore if he do not own
the Consequence, then the Defender confesses himself to have invidiously
devised it; and what is it? That if all three by this composition are but one
God, neither of them by himself is true and perfect God. The Divinity is like
the English. But both his own. The Enquirer denies both antecedent (which he
knows) and consequent too. Leave out by this composition, (his own figment) and
his argument as much disproves any Trinity at all as it does the present
Hypothesis.

But wherein does the Enquirer own it? because such a Similitude is used (as
it is often in that discourse) of the union between soul and body (declared
elsewhere to be unexpressibly defective) that therefore the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are each of them by himself no more truly Lord or God, according to
the Athanasian Creed, or otherwise than in as improper a sense, as the Body of
a Man, excluding the Soul, is a Man, or an Humane Person. Or as if Deity were
no more in one of the Persons, than humanity in a Carcass! who that looks upon
all this with equal Eyes, but will rather choose as doubtful a notion, than so
apparently ill a Spirit! Are similitudes ever wont to be alike throughout, to
what they are brought to illustrate? It might as well be said, because he
mentions with Approbation such as illustrate the Doctrine of the Trinity by a
Tree and its Branches, that, therefore, there we are to expect Leaves and
Blossoms. Is it strange the Created Universe should not afford us an exact
Representation of uncreated Being? How could he but think of that; To whom do
ye liken me? At least one would have thought he should not have forgot what he
had so lately said himself. We must grant we have no perfect Example of any
such union in nature. What Appetite in him is it, His Letter. p. 5.
that now seeks what Nature does not afford? A very unnatural One, we may
conclude. 'Twere trifling to repeat what was said, and was so plain, before,
that the union between Soul and Body was never brought to illustrate personal
union but essential. The former is here imagined without pretense, there being
no mention or occasion for the the mentioning of Persons in the place he
alleges. Calm Disc. 47.
But to make out his violent Consequence he foists in a supposition, that never
came into any man's Imagination but a Socinians and his own. (Which I say,
contradistinguishing him to them, that the matter may (as it ought) appear the
more strange. His Letter p. 110.
) If God be a person, he can be but one. Is God the appropriate Name of a
Person? then indeed there will be but one person; but who here says so but
himself? The name God is the name of the Essence, not the distinguishing name
of a Person. But if three intelligent Natures be united in one Deity, each will
be Persons, and each will be God, and all will be one God; not by parts, other
than conceptible, undivided, and inseparable, as the Soul and Body of a Man are
not. Which sufficiently conserves the Christian Trinity from such furious and
impotent Attaques as these. And the Homoousiotes is most entirely conserved
too. For what are three spiritual natures no more the same, than (as he grossly
speaks) the Soul and Body are? no more than an intelligent mind, and a piece of
Clay? by what consequence is this said, from any thing in the Enquirers
Hypothesis? Whereas also he expressly insists, Calm Disc. p. 48.
that the Father, as Fons Trinitatis, is first, the Son of the Father, the Holy
Ghost from both. Is not the water in the streams, the same that was in the
Fountain? and are not the several Attributes expressly spoken of as common to
these three? Calm Disc. p. 140.
Essential Power, Wisdom, Goodness, (which are denied to be the precise notions
of Father, Son, and Spirit) said by more than a (...), as that may be
understood to signify, mere presence, (how intimate soever) but by real, vital
union, as much each one's as any one's? and all other conceivable perfections
besides? Why were these words read with Eyes refusing their office, to let them
into the Reader's mind? whence also how fabulous is the Talk of Powers
begetting Wisdom, Postscr. to his Letter p. 111.
etc. against what is so plainly said of the order of Priority and
Posteriority, Calm Disc. p. 48.
etc.

There had been some prudence seen in all this conduct, if the Defender could
have taken effectual care, that every thing should have been blotted out of all
the Copies of that Discourse, but what he would have thought fit to be
permitted to the view of other Eyes than his own. For then, though in so gross
praevarication he had not preserved his Innocence, he might have saved in some
degree his Reputation. Yet also he should have taken some heed that Anger might
not so have discolored his Eye, as to make so injudicious a Choice what to
confess and what to conceal. For had he not himself blab'd, that it was said,
we are not under the precise notions of Power, Wisdom and Goodness, to conceive
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. He might more plausibly have formed his odd
Births, and fathered them where he does. But wrath indulged will show its
governing power. And all this fury and vengeance (upon the Enquirer, and the
Dean too) he reckoned was due, only because it was so presumptuously thought,
that somewhat in his Hypothesis (or which he defends) might have been better,
and that he (probably) sees it might, so much a greater thing (in some ill
fits) is the gratifying a humor than the Christian Cause!

2. But let us now see how all this turns upon himself. And how directly his
ill-polisht (not to say envenomed) darts, missing their designed Mark, strike
into that very Breast which he undertakes to defend.

Whereas there are two things, principally to be designed in a Discourse of
this subject. viz.

1. The explaining the Unity of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, so as that though
they are some way three, they may yet be concluded to be in Godhead but one.

2. The evincing notwithstanding that unity, the possibility of their
sufficient distinction, to admit the distinct predicates that are severally
spoken of them in the Holy Scriptures.

The Enquirer's discourse chiefly insists upon these two things.

1. That necessity of Existence is the most fundamental Attribute of Deity. And
that therefore the Father, as the Fountain, being necessarily of himself: The
Son, necessarily of the Father: The Holy Ghost, necessarily from them both,
each cannot but be God, and the same, one God. (In reference to the former
purpose.)

2. That absolute omnimodous simplicity, being never asserted, in Scripture, of
the divine Being, nor capable of being, otherwise, demonstrated of it, and it
being impossible, either from Scripture, or rational evidence, accurately to
assign the limits thereof, and determine what simplicity belongs to that
ever-blessed Being, and what not. If it be necessary to our apprehending how
such distinct predicates and attributions may severally belong, to the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, that we conceive three distinct essences necessarily
coexisting, in an eternal, vital, inseparable union in the Divine Being. The
thing may be in it self possible for ought we know. (And this is propounded to
serve the latter purpose)

The Defender of the Dean seems to think otherwise of these two things, viz. Of
necessity of Existence, common to the sacred three, which will prove each of
them to be God, and, belonging to them in the mentioned order, as Father, Son,
and Spirit, will prove them, necessarily, to be one God.

And of what is said of simplicity, which might admit their sufficient
distinction; of both these, I say, he seems to think otherwise by neglecting
both, lest that Discourse should be thought any way pertinent, or useful to its
end. And disputes vehemently against the latter, How strongly and successfully,
he does it, in respect of the Truth of the Thing, we have seen.

But whether weakly or strongly, that his disputation tends to wound the Dean's
cause, all that it can, shall now be made appear.

It is notorious the Dean has asserted, so positively, three infinite Minds or
Spirits, that the benign interpretation wherewith this Defender would salve the
matter, (A new Vocabulary being to be made for him on purpose, and the Reason
of things quite altered) will to any man of sense seem rather ludicrous, than
sufficient, without express retractation. For which the Enquirer thinks he is
upon somewhat better Terms, than he, if there were occasion for it, both by the
Tenor of his whole Discourse, and by what he has particularly said in the 28
Sect. But after the Interpretation offered, Calm Disc. p. 73 74.
See whether such things are not said over and over in the Defense, as make the
Defender (and the Dean if he speak his sense) most obnoxious to the whole
argumentation in the Postscript. So as, if a part was acted, it was carried so
untowardly, that it seemed to be quite forgotten what part it was, and all the
Blows (for it was come now to offending instead of Defending) fall directly
upon him, whom the Actor had undertaken to defend.

It has been noted already, that the Defender says expressly, the Divide Nature
is one individual nature, Defense p. 16. p. 18.
(and so says the Enquirer) -- but not one single nature; Calm Disc. p. 50.51.
(then it must be double and triple, not absolutely simple, as also the
Enquirer says) to which he ( viz. the Defender) adds, one single nature can be
but one person, whether in God or Man. Now let any man judge whether all his
Reasonings are not most directly applicable against him, (if they signify any
thing) which are contained in his Postscript, p. 106, 107, 108. etc.

How furiously does he exagitate that saying, Postscrip. p. 108, 109.
When you praedicate Godhead, or the Name of God, of any one of them, (viz.
Father, Son, or Holy Ghost) you herein express a true but inadequate conception
of God, etc. insisting that the whole undivided Divine Nature (no doubt it is
everlastingly undivided wherever it is) subsists entirely, in three distinct
Persons: This the Enquirer never denied, though he charges it upon him, that he
makes no one of the Persons to be true and perfect God. Postscrip. p. 108.
But how well does that agree with what he had himself said, ( Defense, p. 26.)
Though God be the most absolute, complete, independent Being, yet neither the
Son, nor the Holy Ghost, can be said to be, an absolute, complete, independent
God. He falsely charges it upon the Enquirer that he makes the Persons severally
not perfect God, and he denies two of them to be complete God. To say not
perfect, is criminal (as indeed it is) to say not complete is innocent! But his
saying the Son and Holy Ghost are not complete God; How does it consist with
what is said, Postscr. p. 109. The same whole entire Divinity distinctly and
inseparably subsists in the Person of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. What is
wanting to make him complete God, in whom the whole, entire Divinity subsists?
No wonder if he quarrel with all the World who so little agrees with him, whose
Defense he undertakes, or with himself. In the mean time the Enquirer has the
less reason to complain, when he manifestly treats, himself as ill as him.

I only add, that for his Discourse concerning [the one Divinity, or one Divine
Nature, subsisting wholly and entirely, three times, (whereas I had thought the
three Persons had subsisted at all times, and all at once) Defense p. 26, etc.
And the Persons of the Son and Holy Spirit, not being emanations, p. 28. Not
the Son, because he is the Father's Image: And an Image is not an emanation,
but a reflection: (But how should there be a reflected Image without an
emanation?) Nor the Holy Ghost being (...), not in the sense of emanation, but
of the mysterious Procession] I shall make no guesses about it (for it concerns
not the Enquirer) only I think it very secure against the formidable Objection
which he mentions p. 35. of it is being too intelligible.

Upon the whole matter I see not what service it can do him, to put intelligent
person instead of mind. For I thought every Person had been intelligent.
Boethius his definition which he alleges plainly implies so much, and one
would think he must know that it is the usual notion of Person to understand by
it suppositum rationale or intelligents. Therefore methinks he should not
reckon it necessary to distinguish Persons (as he does by this addition of
intelligent) into such as are Persons and such as are no Persons.

But since he expressly says (and I think for the most part truly) that Defense
p. 30.
the three Persons or subsistences, in the ever blessed Trinity are three real,
substantial subsistances, each of which has entirely, all the Perfections of
the Divine Nature, Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; and therefore each of
them is eternal, Infinite mind, as distinct from each other as any other three
Persons; and this he believes, the Dean will no more recant, than he will
renounce a Trinity; for all the wit of man, can not find a medium, between a
substantial Trinity, and a Trinity of names, or a Trinity of mere modes,
Respects and Relations in the same single essence, which is no Trinity at all.
As also he had said much to the same purpose before, that to talk of three
subsistences in the abstract, without three that subsist, or of one single
nature which has three subsistences, when it is impossible that in singularity
there can be more than one subsistence, etc. I believe he will find no small
difficulty to name what it is, that with the peculiar distinct manner of
subsistence makes a person; not the very same common nature, for the Persons
can not be distinguished from each other by that which is common to them all.
Therefore the Divine Nature which is common to the three, must according to him
comprehend three single natures, and not be absolutely simple. Hither must be
his resort at last, after all his earnest disputation against it. And these he
will have to be parts, which because they are undivided, impartible,
inseparable, everlastingly and necessarily united. I do reckon the Enquirer did
with very sufficient reason, and with just decency (and does still continue
very peremptorily to) deny.

And whereas he contends that the whole Divine nature is entirely in each
subsistence, (as he does again and again) I think the term whole, improper,
where there are no proper parts. And I doubt not, when he gives place to cooler
thoughts, he will see cause to qualify that assertion. For if he strictly mean
that every thing that belongs to the Godhead is in each Person; I see not how
he will fetch himself from the Socinian consequence, that then each Person must
have a Trinity subsisting in it, and be Father, Son, and H. Ghost. For I doubt
not he will acknowledge that the entire Divinity includes in it the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost. And therefore he must be beholden to an inadequate notion in
this very case, when all is done, how much soever he has contended against it.
I do however think it safe and free from any other difficulty, than we
unavoidably have, in conceiving Infinites. To say that all perfection is in
each subsistent (which I like better than subsistence, as more expressive of
the concrete) as far as their natural, necessary, eternal order, toward one
another, as the first is the fountain or radix, the second from that, and the
third from both, can possibly admit. All must be originally in the Father, with
whom, the other two have that intimate, vital, eternal union, that what is in
him the other communicate therein, in as full perfection as is inconceivable,
and more than it is possible for us, or for any finite mind to conceive.
Therefore since that difference which only proceeds from that natural, eternal
order, is conjecturable only, but is really unknown, unrevealed and
inscrutable; it is better, herein, to confess the imperfection of that
knowledge which we have, than to boast that which we have not, or aspire to
that which we cannot have.

FINIS.
These Books written by the Reverend Mr. John How, are sold by Tho. Parkhurst
at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
1. THE Blessedness of the Righteous: The Vanity of this Mortal Life. On Psalm.
17. ver. 15. and Psalm 89.47.

2. Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the
immoderate Desire of fore-knowing things to come.

3. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42.
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to Will the Salvation of them
that perish.

4. Of Charity in reference to other Men's Sins.

5. Self-dedication discoursed in the Anniversary Thansgiving of a Person of
Honor for a great Deliverance.

6. A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict Enquiry whether or no
we truly love God.

7. A Funeral Sermon for that Faithful and Laborious Servant of Christ, Mr.
Richard Fairclough, (who deceased July 4. 1682. in the Sixty First year of his
Age.)

8. A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson,
Dr. of Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689.

9. The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons Preached at the
Merchant's Lecture in Broadstreet.

Books lately Printed for Thomas Parkhurst.
Spira's Despair revived. Being a Narration of the Horror and Despair of some
late Sinners under the Apprehensions of Death and Judgment. Wherein are such
Unquestionable Examples produced, and such Matters laid down and proved, as may
stop the Mouths of the Atheistical Scoffers and Mockers. By Thomas James,
Minister of the Gospel at Ashford in Kent.

The Confirming Work of Religion, and its great things made plain by their
primary Evidences and Demonstrations: Whereby the meanest in the Church may
soon be made able to render a rational account of their Faith.

The present Aspect of our Times, and of the Extraordinary Conjunction of
things therein; in a rational View and Prospect of the same, as it respects the
public hazard and safety of Britain in this Day. These two last by Rob.
Fleming, Author of the fulfilling of the Scriptures, and Minister at Rotterdam.

England's Allarm: Being an account of Gods most considerable dispensations of
Judgment and Mercy toward these Kingdoms, for fourteen years last past; and
also of the several sorts of Sins and Sinners therein: Especially the Murmurers
against this Present Government. With an Earnest call to speedy Humiliation and
Reformation, and Supplication, as the chief means of prospering their Majesty's
Councils and Preparations. Dedicated to the King and Queen.

A Discourse concerning Old Age, tending to the Instruction, Caution and
Comfort of Aged Persons. By Richard Steel, A. M.


