A LETTER Humbly addressed To the most Excellent Father of his Country, THE Wise
and Victorious Prince, King William III.

By a dutiful and well-meaning Subject.

LONDON, Printed by J. Darby in Bartholomew-Close. School.

SIR,
A Well-meaning and dutiful Subject humbly begs your Majesty to read this
Letter, which is written with no other design but only to set before you, I.
What was the ancient Foundation of the English Monarchy. II. How it was removed
from off its natural Foundation. III. By what Expedients it has bin supported
since that Removal. IV. By what Expedient your Majesty may support the Monarchy
during your Reign (which I pray God may be long and happy) and also raise it to
as high a degree of Glory as ever it has attained heretofore.


I. The Monarchy of England was settled upon an over balance of Lands vested in
the King, the Nobility, and the Church, who anciently possessed above two
thirds of the whole English Territory: But the Noblemen held their Lands upon
condition, that they should assist the King upon all his Occasions with certain
Quotas of Men well armed and paid: And then these Noblemen let out their Lands
to their Tenants upon condition that they should always be ready to follow
their respective Lords to the War as often as the King should have any occasion
for their Service. So that very small Rents were demanded by the Lord from the
Tenants, because he had contracted for their Personal Service.

'Twas this disposition of Lands which enabled our former Kings to raise great
Armies when they pleased, and to invade France (their natural Enemy) with
success: and hereby it was that the Nobility upheld the Grandeur of the King at
home as well as abroad; and at the same time they were a shelter and defense to
the common People, if the King were inclined to make any Encroachments upon
them. For the over-balance of Propriety (and consequently their greatest
natural Power) was vested in the middle state of Nobility; who were therefore
able to preserve both King and People in their due bounds.

Thus the English Monarchy stood upon a natural Foundation, the King being the
great Landlord of his People, who were all bound by their Tenures (in
subordination to one another) to support his Crown and Dignity.

II. This ancient Foundation of the English Monarchy was sap'd and undermined
by K. Henry the Seventh, who (having seen the Imperial Crown of England
disposed of at the pleasure of the Lords who had maintained a War against the
Crown for near 400 years) could not but be much concerned at the overgrown
Power of the Peers, who sometimes would pull down and set up what King they
pleased; and this Consideration made K. Henry the Seventh seek after ways and
means how to lessen the Power of the Lords, which had bin so prejudicial to the
Crown: and seeing that their over grown Power was supported by the great
Territories of Land of which they were possessed, and which they could not
alienate from their Heirs, He by the help of his Parliament found out a way to
change the Tenure of Lands in such a manner that the Tenant should be obliged
only to pay a Rent instead of Personal Service to his Landlord: and also a way
was found out for the Lords to alienate their Lands from their Posterity. This
was done to the end that the Lords might be encouraged by an expensive way of
living to sell their Lands, and that the Commons who lived thristily might be
enabled to purchase them. Hereby it came to pass that at the end of King Henry
the Eighth's Reign (in whose time most part of the Church Lands were also sold
to the People) the common People of England had near two thirds of the Lands of
England in their proper Possession, and the King, Lords, and Church little more
than one third part; whereby the Balance was turned on the side of the Commons,
who were therefore able to make War upon the King, Lords and Church together,
as appeard afterward in the Reign of King Charles the First.

Thus it appears that the ancient Foundation of the English Monarchy was
removed in the Reign of K. Henry the Seventh; and the over-balance of Lands
falling from the Lords to the Commons, it is evident that the Monarchy has ever
since stood, not upon an Aristocratical, but a Popular Foundation; and such a
Foundation dos naturally support none but Commonwealth Forms of Government.
Wherefore a Monarchy supported on such a Foundation may properly be called a
Government of Expedients, because it is by Expedients and Inventions, and not
upon any bottom of its own that it subsists. Now what Expedients our Kings have
used to support the Monarchy is the next thing to be considered. Wherefore

III. The Balance of Lands being changed by the end of K. Henry the Eighth's
Reign, from the Lords and Church to the Commons of England, it is past all doubt
but that Queen Elizabeth discovered the popular bottom of the Monarchy, because
she found out the only wise Expedient by which the Monarchy upon its new
Foundation was capable of being supported in its ancient Luster and Glory. Her
Expedient was her Popularity, by which she accommodated her personal
Administration to the true Genius of the Monarchical Constitution, as it then
stood. For the whole Reign of that Queen (of Glorious Memory) tho long (but not
tedious) was past over in a constant Courtship to her People, in which not only
all her Actions, but sometimes her very Words expressed her knowledge, that the
Monarchy was then founded on their Affections. In what Glory she supported her
self and the English Monarchy by that Expedient of Popularity, notwithstanding
very great Oppositions from the preeminent Powers of Europe, her History does
sufficiently explain.

King James the First was not in his nature inclined to pursue this honorable
and proper Expedient, but his thoughts seemed to be set upon his own Power more
than upon his Peoples Good; whereby it came to pass that the Flattery of the
Court was more pleasing to him than the general Interest of his Kingdom. And
having gotten some superficial skill in the Arts and Sciences, and a profound
knowledge (as he thought) in Theology, he made his Court to the Divines of the
Church of England, that they being appriz'd of his great Learning might in
their Writings celebrate his Fame, and insinuate to the People his great
Knowledge in all sorts of Divine and Human Learning. Hereupon at his first
coming to the Crown of England he industriously assisted the Bishops and
Church-Party against the Puritans; whom the Church looked upon as no less than
her Enemies, because tho they could endure, yet they did not admire her Bishops
and Ceremonies. And in this manner that King found out his Expedient in the
Church-party, which admired and almost adored his deep Learning, oftentimes
comparing him to King Solomon for Wisdom, and indeed omitted no opportunity
which might gain him an extraordinary Reverence among the People.

It Is not then to be wondered at that King Charles the First trod in the steps
of his Father, and persued the same Expedient which had been successful to his
Father, especially having derived from him the same Temper of Mind, and being
well pleased to have for his Flatterers the gravest of Divines; whose Courtship
ever tended to aggrandize the King by enlarging the Royal Prerogative, and to
set it above the Laws of the Realm, by virtue of some political Doctrines which
they drew from the Word of God. From hence sprang the Divine Right by which
those Kings were said to reign over us, and a Divine Right of Succession to the
Crown of England was derived to their Posterity. But yet King Charles the First
laid too great a weight upon his Expedient, and encouraged it too much, even
when the People began to be sensible that the Pulpit-Law did build the Kings
Prerogative upon the Ruins of the People's Liberty: And herewith began the
quarrel of the People against that King, in which he lost his Life; and the
Monarchy, losing its Expedient of the Church party, was likewise overthrown.

After this an Essay was made to introduce a Commonwealth-form of Government,
but it was interrupted by a Standing Army, which with their arbitrary and
uncertain ways of Administration at last tired out the People, that they
restored the Monarchy in the Person of King Charles the Second; who being the
Son of the Royal Martyr, was entitled to all that Assistance which the Church
was capable of giving: and there was one thing more which made the Churchmen
exert all their Powers with the greatest vigor in favor of their restored
King, which was this.

The Clergy and their Party having bin ill treated since the downfall of King
Charles the First, and being again restored with Charles the Second to their
former Dignities, they were highly animated against the Presbyterians, by whom
they had bin provoked in the late Interregnum, so that nothing was more in
their Desires than to be avenged of their Enemies; and this Master-passion of
theirs was so well gratified by their King, who granted severe Laws against all
Dissenters from the Church, that no Prince ever gained the Hearts of the Clergy
and their whole Party more entirely to his Interest than Charles the Second. No
Vice or Lewdness could stain the Reputation of the Martyr's Son; but tho he
were the greatest Encourager of all Profaneness and Immorality in the most open
manner, yet still he was our most Religious and Gracious King. In his time all
Atheists, Debauchees and loose Persons owned the Church of England for their
Mother; which numerous Party enlarging the Pale of the Church, assisted very
much to advance the Power of the King upon the foundation of a Divine Right,
which it was said God had given him: so that the universal Acclamation was,
viz. Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and great is the Jure divino King, the
Image which fell down from Jupiter!

But notwithstanding this loud Acclamation, the cautious King, who in his Youth
had bin forced to travel into foreign Countries, and was unwilling to take such
another Journey, did not think fit to rely wholly upon this Church-Expedient,
but to give it greater strength he twisted into it a Court-party, who by their
Places and Pensions were obliged to assist his Royal Pleasure by their Votes in
both Houses of Parliament: and thus the Monarchy had its Foundation laid in
Place and Pension, which by angry People is called BRIBERY. But let that be as
it will, it is certain that Men can never act so vigorously for a Bribe, as out
of mere Inclination. Besides this, mercenary Men are soon discovered in their
Designs, and the discovery of their Principle forfeits all their Credit with
the People. So that a small steady Country Party in Parliament were a great
clog upon the Projects of Church and Court, which, tho so closely united
together, proved but a lame Expedient to support the Monarchy in the Person of
King Charles the Second; so that between these two stools he fell at last to
the ground, but not without thoughts of the only Expedient by which he might
(had he lived) have established himself upon the foundation of the People of
England.

King James the Second would not trust to any of the forementioned Expedients,
because none of them could be sufficient to carry him through all his Designs,
especially through that of introducing Popery. Nothing less than a standing Army
could support his Tyranny, but Popery was too great a weight for the Army to
stand under: So that whilst he was subduing the people to Popery by a
Protestant Army, he lost both People and Army; in consequence whereof he was
lost himself. And that the loss of him may by means of your Majesty's happy
Reign be a Gain to England, it is to be considered,

IV. By what Expedient your Majesty may support the English Monarchy during
your Reign, and by which you may raise it to as eminent a degree of Glory as it
has ever attained heretofore.

Your Majesty may remember that the original foundation of the Monarchy was the
great Territory of Land possessed by the King: but your Majesty is also
sensible that there are but very small Remainders of this Territory in your
present Possession; even the very accidental additions of Lands to the Crown
have bin alienated to the Favorites of the Scottish Line: So that there is need
of an Expedient now as much as ever for the support of the Monarchy.

Be pleased therefore to review the Expedients of former Princes, and see if
any of them be suitable to your particular Circumstances, or proper for your
Majesty to depend upon for the Support and Glory of your Throne. And,

As for the Church-party, which was the darling Support of the Scottish Line, it
is so much worn out by a Succession of three Kings, that it is very weak and
(...) at present. The Craft of the Priest, (...) in framing such
Interpretations of holy Scripture as serve an indirect Interest, was never
discovered so much as of late; and no Person has so much contributed to the
discovery hereof as your own self; who by the Revolution you have lately made
have reversed all the Political Divinity which the Clergy have bin propagating
since the Reign of King James the First. 'Twas the Church-Clergy and Party who
by their preaching and voting opposed the Bill for excluding James D. of York,
a known Papist: 'Twas this Party who imposed upon the Nation the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience to a Tyrannical King upon pain of eternal Damnation: They
always avowed the divine right of a Lineal Succession to the Crown (by which
yout Majesty is excluded) and that all Kings are of God's (not the Peoples)
making. From these Principles some of 'em openly refused to swear Allegiance to
your Majesty; and those of 'em who yield a passive Conformity to your Title and
Government, have bin found in several differing stories about the ways and
means whereby they satisfy their Consciences in this matter. Some have
alleged, that your Majesty having conquered us, they may lawfully submit to a
Usurpation which cannot be avoided, and is settled by Success: but all of 'em
know that your Majesty can make Bishops and Deans de facto, and therefore they
will not question the Defactoship of your Prerogative Royal. But it cannot be
expected that the Clergy, who have usually required the Peoples submission to
their Sentiments under the pain of Damnation, should upon this Revolution be
contented to cry peccavi, and openly recant all their former Doctrines of
divine Polity by a hearty active conformity to your Majesty's rightful Title
and Government. For this reason it is you have received so little respect from
the body of the Clergy, although we have received all that we enjoy from you.

But yet suppose the Church were willing to exert it self in your Service, its
Influence is not at present so powerful as it has bin: for by meddling so much
in State Affairs she has lost (in great measure) her former Reputation: Nor has
she never so numerous a Party as formerly she had: for all the Deists,
Socinians, and Latitudinarians own no such Church Power at all. The
Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, and Quakers, tho they have their several
forms of Church Government, yet are no friends to that publicly established,
but they are unfeigned lovers of your Majesty. Bigotry likewise has lately
suffered a great diminution, and Incredulity is strangely increased, and almost
become fashionable. Thus the Authority of the Church is forced to submit to the
Reason of Mankind; and all those who are dutiful to your Majesty are averse to
the Homilies of the Church, because they exclude you from all pretense of Right
to the Crown you wear: So that the Toleration granted by your Majesty has done
you more Service than Uniformity can ever do.

As for the Court-party 'twas never esteemed to be any more than an Auxiliary
to the Church for the support of K. Charles II. in whose Reign too it was
discovered, that after a Catalogue of Court-Pensioners was published from the
Press, the Complexion of his Parliaments was very much changed. And if at any
time such a List should be printed, the People of England would refuse to give
their Votes for them in the next Election of a Parliament, and in their stead
will elect Members of a contrary temper: People commonly run out of one Extreme
into another; and when they reject a Courtier, they will probably choose a
morose-humour'd Man in his place.

It must be allowed that it has the face of a politic Expedient to adopt Men of
known Integrity and Love to their Country into the Court-party; for hereby the
Hearts of the People will be for the present gained to the Court: tho these
Patriots being endued with a ductile temper, will soon become conformable to
the nature of the Court. This very Expedient has for a time done good Service
to your Majesty's Affairs both at home and abroad. But I think it ought to be
considered only as a Cordial which for a short time may revive a languishing
Man's Spirit, but yet ought not to be depended upon as a constant support of
Life. And as for these new Whig-Courtiers, they will raise the Expectations of
all Men to hope for a steady virtuous Administration. But when this reputed
Patriot shall accommodate his Discourse to the old style of the Court; when he
shall insinuate such Notions to his old Acquaintance, the baseness and
unworthiness whereof his old Friends had heard him frequently detest all his
days in which he was unprefer'd; this new Courtier soon loses all his Credit
and Interest with his old Friends, who refuse to follow the Decoy Duck into the
Net.

But this is not all the mischief which attends this Project of a
Whig-Courtier, but a personal loss of your own Reputation is actually the
Consequence hereof: for as long as the Court was made up of Tories, the People
were willing to excuse your Majesty, and lay the faults of Maladministration
upon the Tory-Court, saying, That the old Tools would still do no other than
the old Work. But when a Man of known Honor, Integrity and Love to his
Country, upon getting a Preferment shall change his former Note, do Violence to
himself by changing his avowed Principle, and thereby losing all the Reputation
which his former Virtue had gained him, every Man will be apt to conclude that
this new Courtier is encouraged to do this by some higher Power, if not engaged
thereto by the fear of losing his Place or Pension. And when the People of
England shall come to know that as surely as a Land-man who is employed at Sea
will turn Seaman, so certainly will a Patriot employed in the Administration
turn Courtier, they will begin in earnest to think of such a Form of Government
which can subsist without a Court.

And having said this, I cannot forbear telling your Majesty my Thoughts
concerning a Commonwealth Party which has bin much talked of in England during
the Reign of K. Charles the Second, and has not quite bin forgotten at any time
since that Reign.

A great Veneration for Monarchy has bin frequently made use of by Men to
recommend themselves to the particular favor of our Kings of England; and when
real occasions have bin wanting to recommend their Affection for Monarchy to
the notice of the King, a mere fantastical imaginary fear of a Common wealth
has bin made use of: and hence they have bin persuading our Soverign Princes
that a great number of their Subjects have formed themselves upon Commonwealth
Principles, and are still waiting an opportunity to extirpate the Monarchy, and
to introduce into its place a Republican form of Government. But your Majesty
has seen this fantastical Opinion sufficiently confuted: For those who were the
suspected Commonwealths-men joined heartily together in preserving the
Monarchy, by voting your Majesty (then P. of Orange) into the English Throne,
in opposition to those Adorers of Monarchy who were setting up a Regency; who
had they put the Kingly Power into the hands of a Committee, had founded a
Commonwealth, or something very hardly to be distinguished from it. But to
proceed from matter of Fact, to reason freely upon this matter. I cannot
suppose that any Man who has the use of his Reason, and lives under a
Monarchy, should be fond of a Commonwealth, if all the ends of Government are
answered by the settled Monarchy. So in Holland he would be thought to have
lost the use of his Reason who should hazard his Life by endeavoring to
introduce a Monarchy there, where all the ends of Government are perfectly
answered by the established form of a Commonwealth. The end of all Governments
is the common good of the People; and if that great End be attained under any
established Form, he is fit only for a Mad-house who will endeavor to pull
down the established form only to introduce a new one: And a party of such mad
men as these can never be sufficient to raise a jealousy in any Government
which is under an upright Administration. Tho it must also be acknowledged,
that as corrupt Prelates make way for a Presbyterian Government into the Church,
so a corrupt Court-party may occasionally introduce a Republican form of
Government into the State. But to return from this Digression, since
Priestcraft and Court-craft have bin (of late) so much discovered; since
Bigotry of late days is grown out of request; since the unbigotted People are
more dutiful to your Majesty than the Bigots are; and since the common People
of England are more firm and trusty than a Court-party, I cannot but think that

A Real Popularity would be a better Expedient than a Church and Court-party
joined together can be: for as to the Expedient of a Standing Army, it is
certain, that besides its own intrinsic insufficiency, Lewis the present French
King, and James the last of England, have rendered it odious. It stinks in the
Nostrils of all freeborn Men, and can only be an Expedient to set up a
Commonwealth. But it is plain that

A professed regard to the Commonweal of the People of England steddily
persu'd did raise the English Monarchy under the Administration of Q. Elizabeth
(of blessed memory) to as high a degree of Glory as it did ever attain to when
it stood upon its natural Foundation. Nor is any Expedient so proper for your
Majesty to use as this. For,

1. Upon this Foundation the Glory of your Illustrious Ancestors was built. And,

2. Hereby your Majesty was recommended to the just and rightful possession of
the Crown which at present you adorn. Party-taking, Party-making, or Partiality
of all sorts overthrew King Charles the First, shook the Throne of King Charles
the Second, and overturned the Monarchy under the Administration of the late
King James, which by your Majesty's Affection to the People of England was
restored, and by the same means is still preserved, and may be advanced to as
high a pitch of Glory as ever heretofore it had gained. For hereby,

1. All the true ends of Government will be fully answered.

2. All Factions and Parties will be sunk and forgotten: there will be no Whig
nor Tory, no Jacobite, no Church-party, Court-party, nor Country-party: for the
Interest of Court and Country will be one and the same, which has not been
known since the death of Queen Elizabeth, and therefore will be wonderfully
pleasing for its Novelty, as well as for its Profitableness.

3. Virtue and Honesty (which have bin much decayed of late years) will be
encouraged and restored. For no Man can pretend to recommend himself to your
Royal Favor but by advancing the Design which your Majesty openly does
encourage.

4. Hereby your Majesty will gain such a Credit with your People, as by virtue
thereof very much to increase the Wealth and Strength of the Nation in a short
time. And your Majesty's Revenue must necessarily bear a suitable proportion to
the Trade of your Subjects; so that he who commands the Trade of the World,
will consequently command the Wealth of the World. And,

5. Hereby you may be able to follow the two great Maxims of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, which were, 1 st. To be the Head of the Protestants all over the World.
And, 2 dly. To keep the Balance of Europe equal and steady.


And thus the Glory of the English Monarchy under your Majesty's gracious
Administration will be the Terror of others, and the Delight of all English
People, which is the sincere desire of

Your Majesty's most faithful, dutiful, and humble Subject and Servant.

THE END.

