A LETTER In Answer to a CITY FRIEND, Showing how Agreeable Liberty of
Conscience Is to the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

Licensed April 9. 1687.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
1687.

A LETTER In Answer to a City Friend, SHOWING, How Agreeable Liberty of
Conscience is to the Church of England.
SIR,
I Have received Yours, wherein you seem to make some Reflections upon the
Church of England, and with some earnestness to desire my Opinion in the
Affair, especially in relation to the late Indulgence granted by His Majesty
for Liberty of Conscience. To a Friend I cannot deny so small a Request. I Will
therefore, without any farther Preamble freely speak to the Points you
proposed, and so leave them to your Consideration.

First, As to what you apprehend, that this Indulgence will not be well liked
by the Church of England, it is my Opinion you are under a Mistake: My Reason
is, because the Church of England is a Church, whose greatest Glory has been in
its Moderation and Tenderness. Now what occasion of Trouble can it be to a
Tenderhearted Church, to see all Christians peaceably professing their
Religion, without any possibility of Vexation from their Neighbors? Were the
Church of England a Church that took pleasure in Wracking of Consciences, in
Oppression of their Neighbors, in Persecuting and Imprisoning, I should be
something of your Mind, and begin to suspect, that this Liberty would not be at
all agreeable to such a Temper: But you know how She has always declared
against Cruelty and Violence on the Score of Conscience: She detests and
abominates all such Proceedings; and you cannot think She Will now so degenerate,
as to grieve for these Things being taken out of her Power, which She gloried
before to have Reformed. You seem not to be thoroughly acquainted with the
Constitution of this Church and Her Members, if you think 'twill be an
Aggrievance to 'em, because it is not in their Power to Persecute. If you had
but heard their Doctrins, and read the Sermons they have Preached and Printed
on this Subject, you must needs take 'em for the greatest Dissemblers and
Hypocrites in the World, if after so many repeated Claims to Moderation and
Meekness, they should be still in love with Persecution, and cannot see their
Neighbors Exercise their Religion in quiet, but this Quiet of their Neighbor
must be Their Persecution. Alas this would argue in them a Poor Spirit of
Christianity, 'twou'd make any one suspect the Sincerity of their Preaching,
and put into us a Jealousy that what they condemn in others, they love to
practice themselves.

But you fear this Liberty will introduce Heresies and Schisms into the Church,
which cannot be well pleasing to the Church of England, whose Concern it has
always been, to maintain a Unity and Uniformity amongst Believers. And here I
must take the freedom again to tell you, you do not judge of Things aright. Mr.
Kidder's Sermon Licensed by the Archbishop's Chaplain, and Published the last
Week, concerning the Judgment of Private Discretion in Matters of Religion,
would inform you better, especially page 20. where he tells you, It Is a fond
thing to imagine that there shall be no Heresies or Schisms, and that we have
found a Way to prevent them: This is like the Boast of a Mountebank. -- God
has foretold that there should come a Falling away, and that some should be
under strong Delusions, and believe a Lie. It is a vain thing to pretend a
Remedy against that Evil, against which God himself has provided none. Now what
reason have you to think, that if Heresies and Schisms should arise, they would
occasion any Disturbance to the Church of England, whenas they are very well
satisfied, there must be Heresies; that it is a Fond thing to imagine they can
be prevented; and that it is but Vain and Mountebank-like to pretend Remedy
against such an Evil, against which God has provided none? If they must come,
they must. The Church of England is Wise enough to Foresee these Evils, and
bear them with Patience, without an Unnecessary Care or Solicitude to Prevent
them. But I don't know what you may call Heresy and Schism: You know the
Church of England, as Mr. Kidder delivers her Doctrine, is not for having Her
Followers Guided in Matters of Religion by any Authority, nor taking up their
Faith upon Confidence of any Church Christ has left and assisted for this
purpose; No, this he looks upon as a Slavish Surrender, and the way to despoil
a Man of his Rational Faculties; This Mr. Kidder in the same Sermon undertakes
to prove a Vain and Impious Principle; it is to bid Men Pull out their Eyes, and
go Blindfold. And therefore to avoid such Impiety, as it is to bid Men Follow.
Hear and Believe the Church, He is for having Every Man set up for the Judgment
of Private Discretion, directs his Hearers, to Search and Examine for
themselves, assures them They need no Guide, if they use their Eyes; that a Man
of Ordinary Capacity is able to Judge, what is True or False, in Matters of
Faith and Religion: That All the Articles of the Creed (p. 19.) are so plainly
taught in the Holy Scriptures, that he who Runs may read them there: that
therefore, though the Judgment of the Church be not to be trusted in these
Things, yet every Man may very safely follow and rely on his own Judgment of
Private Discretion. And this is very fairly made out by Mr. Kidder, to the
admiration even of those who are not of his Mind.

Now here I desire you to consider, when the Church of England, as appears by
Mr. Kidder and other her Doctors, has encouraged all her Followers, to Search
and Judge for themselves in Matters of Faith and Religion, can it be any
trouble to her, to see Men Judge for themselves, and follow every Man his own
Judgment? If They do what she directs them, it ought to be a Comfort to Her,
and not any Trouble. You would certainly make the Church of England a very
Severe and Hard Mother; first in bidding her Children not to Trust Her, but to
follow Their own Eyes; and then to be Angry and Peevish, when they take their
own Eyes for their Guides, and don't follow Hers. If they should forsake their
own private Understanding of the Scriptures in any Article or Doctrine of Faith,
and submit to any Church-Interpretation of it, She tells them, this is to
hoodwink their Reason, it is taking up Religion upon trust, it is blindly giving
up themselves to a Guide, who may lead them to the Regions of Darkness. Is not
this to tell them, they ought to adhere in all Points of Faith and Religion to
their own Private Judgment of Discretion, and not take heed to the Guidance of
any Church or Authority whatsoever? And pray now what is the plain English of
all this, but Liberty of Conscience? And since the Church of England has been
so many Years pleading for this Free Judging and Determining; and giving
Direction to every Man, to erect within himself this Tribunal of Private
Discretion, can She be in reason thought to be Angry, when the Civil Power,
concurring with Her, Establishes and Confirms to every Man that Right, which
She holds forth as a Thing belonging to them, as they are Rational Creatures?
This is an Absurdity not to be charged on any Society of Men, To give
Directions, and then to be Angry when they are followed.

But to pass to your next Point; You know the Christians, who have the Benefit
of this Indulgence, are chiefly such as are called Nonconformists and
Dissenters, or else the Papists. Now I am persuaded, it can be no Aggrievance
to the Church of England, that Both these Sorts be allowed the Enjoyment of
this Liberty of Conscience. For as to the Former, it is the Opinion of many
Eminent Divines, and other Sober Men, that most Nonconformists differ not from
the Church of England in any Essential or Material Point; but chiefly in
Ceremonies, Circumstantials and Vnnecessaries. Now if you peruse the Writings
of the Church of England, of her Prelates and Doctors, you will find that many of
them have freely inclined of themselves to a Condescension to these Weaker
Brethren, and have been willing to abate many of these Circumstantials in
consideration of a better Union, and stricter Peace. Do we value (says Dr.
Stilling fleet in his Preface to the Unreasonableness of Separation) a few
indifferent Ceremonies, and some late Declarations, and doubtful Expressions,
beyond the Satisfaction of Men's Consciences, and the Peace and Tranquillity of
the Church? -- I do think it would be a part of Christian Wisdom and
Condescension in the Governors of our Church to remove those Bars from a
freedom in joining in full Communion with us. -- Such a Review may be so far
from being a Dishonor to this Church, that it may add to the Glory of it. I
think we have no cause to doubt (says Dr. Tillotson in his Sermon on John 13.
Ver. 34, 35.) but the Governors of our Church are Persons of that Piety and
Prudence, that for Peace sake, and in order to a firm Union among Protestants,
they would be content, if that would do it, not to insist on little Things, but
to yield them up, whether to the Infirmity, or Imporiunity, or perhaps, in some
very few Things, to the plausible Exceptions of those who differ from us.
Necessary Points (says Dr. Barrow, Treat. of the Pop. Supr. page 219.) may and
will by all Honest People be known and determined by the clear Testimony of
Scripture, and other Points need not to be determined. And again, A more ready
way to determine Controversies, is, for every one Not to Prescribe to others,
or to Persecute; for then Men would more clearly see the Truth, and Consent.
With these concur several others of the First Rank, which I could quote at
large; but these are sufficient to undeceive you, and let you see, that it is
not at all likely, that the Church of England, which has been, and is at
present, if I am rightly informed, willing to abate in her Worship a great part
of these Ceremonies, should be at all concerned to see the Dissenters have the
Free Exercise of their Religion and Worship, without the Obligation of
observing those Ceremonies, which She her self, by her Free Offer of
Condescension, seems not unwilling, at least for Peace sake, to leave out of
Her Public Service. As long as Her chief Concern is the Peace and Tranquillity
of the Church, and the Satisfaction of Men's Consciences, it is not to be
imagined, She Will ever be inclined to disturb this Peace, or molest Her
Neighbor, upon the Score of a Few Indifferent Ceremonies, Late Declarations, or
Doubtful Expressions. She Is satisfied, that for all Necessary Points, every
Honest Man will know them by Scripture, and for such as are not Necessary, She
thinks it better not to Determine them, nor Prescribe them to others, nor to
Persecute any on this Score. What Disquiet therefore can it possibly cause in
the Church of England to see a Liberty granted to the Nonconformists of
performing their Service without these Ceremonies?

And as for the Papists, it is generally granted, that They agree with all other
Christians in Fundamentals, holding all things that are of Necessity to be
Believed; and upon this Consideration, I cannot but think, that the Church of
England will be willing to allow them the Freedom of their Religion; it being
the Generally received Opinion of Protestants, that the True way to make a
Lasting Union amongst Christians, is to distinguish betwixt Tenets necessary to
be Believed, and Tenets not necessary to be Believed; and Necessaries being
once agreed on, to use a Forbearance in things Unnecessary. Why then, for the
greater Extension of Christian Charity, may not this Forbearance be extended to
Papists, since in all Necessaries they agree with other Christians? Besides, if
I mistake not, the Church of England has so much Charity, as to think, that
Papists may be Saved: This allows the Papists to be Sons of God and Members of
Christ; and if They and the Church of England have One Common Head in Heaven,
ought not they to have an Affection for them on Earth? Can it be allowable in
them to hate Those whom, as they own, Christ will receive? Or can They say to
Them, Go ye Cursed, to whom our Lord will say, Come ye Blessed? If God owns
them as Sons, I believe the Church of England may easily love them as Brethren:
For if God admits them to the Participation of his Kingdom, it becomes not any
to be averse from them on Earth, with whom they shall converse in Heaven.

And if the Papists are not so good Christians as to be the Members of Christ
and capable of Salvation, but as others seem to take them, Idolaters,
Superstitious, Profane, without Sense or Reason, or any Ground of Scripture
for what they teach or do; it ought still to be the Concern of the Church of
England, to let them partake of this Liberty; that so They being in Public,
their Follies and Superstitions might be more exposed; that the People might
hear those Absurd and Unchristian Doctrins from their own Pulpits and
Catechisms, and bear Witness of them, and so see whether all be not True, that
has been charged against them. This would better end all the Controversy of
Misrepresenting than many Volumes, and save the Church of England any farther
trouble of Laying the Papists open, which, if it could be excused, would be no
small Advantage to Her; this thing of mixing Invectives and Satyrs against
Neighbors with the Gospel in Pulpits, being no small Reflection upon Her with
several sorts of People; Some taking it to be Railing, others to be Vngentile
and Unmannerly, others to be Uncharitable, others to be an Effect of Sloth and
Idleness, whilst they think it much easier to Ridicule another Opinion, than
to Prove their own, or find out a more serious Matter for Exhortation. In fine,
if the Papists are thus Wicked and Abominable, the surest way to weaken them,
is to make them Public; for Wickedness and Abomination seeks for Corners, and
thrives most when it is concealed; when if 'twere exposed to the Public, 'twould
be detested by the Beholders, and be soon hissed out of the World.

I have only One thing now more to Consider, and it is that you apprehend, that
this Indulgence will be too favorable to many Disaffected Parties and Persons,
that 'twill give them occasion to increase and thrive, and grow up so many
Enemies to the King and Government, which cannot be acceptable to the Church of
England, which on all Occasions has been so truly Loyal, and Faithful to their
Monarch. To this I need say no more, than that I find our present Sovereign,
who in this is chiefly concerned, has Considered this Point; and he is of
Opinion, that on the contrary, this Liberty will remove Animosities, break
Factions, and make Friends of Enemies; the Constraint and Rigor that has been
used to Men's Consciences, for the maintaining Uniformity in Worship, having
created ill Blood, and been the Occasion of those Unnatural Rebellions, that
have disturbed this Nation for many Years. Now you know our Prince, whom God
preserve, besides his Great Wisdom, has had so long Experience of the Temper of
his People, and is so careful for the Good and Peace of the Kingdom, that no
Loyal or Good Subject can think he does not provide for the Welfare and
Tranquillity of it, in the Best and Safest way possible. And since the Church
of England is so Eminent for its Loyalty, I cannot imagine She can be troubled
at what the King does for the Safety of his Royal Person and Good of his
People; or be for the persisting in such a Method, which his Majesty conceives
has made the Government Uneasy to his Royal Predecessors, and in some manner
occasioned the most barbarous Effusion of Royal Blood.

This is sufficient to satisfy you in the chief Difficulties you proposed; and
to remove out of your Mind that Diffidence you seemed to have of the Church of
England in this Juncture of Affairs. Consider what Loyalty is, and for the
future take thence a Measure of their Behavior. Never question, but where this
admirable Quality of a Good Subject is, 'twill labor to unite the Peoples
Hearts with the Prince, 'twill cause an Approbation of what he does in the
Administration of his Government, and never permit any, by showing a Dislike to
his Orders, by being Sour and Peevish, to alienate the Peoples Hearts from
their Sovereign. No, never think this of Good and Loyal Subjects; this is only
for Malcontents, and such as are Disaffected to the Government; for such as
are for keeping up a Party, or maintaining a Faction: And if you find any do
thus Disloyally, never take them for Members of the Church of England. Every
Good Christian and Loyal Subject will be for removing ANIMOSITIES and
JEALOUSIES, and Laying these two Devils of this Nation. Let You and I
contribute to it with the best of our Endeavors, and as much as in us lies,
follow St. Paul's Advice of Living peaceably with all men. Farewell.

SIR, Your Servant.


