A LETTER TO A FRIEND, Occasioned by my Lord Howard of Escricks LETTER TO HIS
FRIEND, With his Protestation at the receiving the Blessed Sacrament in the
Tower, July 3. 1681.
SIR,
THough I have never received a Line from you these ten years, or know whether
you have so much as heard of the late Imprisonment of the great Triumvirate,
viz. Two Protestant Lords and a Joyner, much less read the Idle Stuff with
which they or their Friends have Pestered the Town in their Vindication; yet
because it is the new way of telling all the world what we please, and
especially our Sir Pol. Conceits of Affairs of State, by pretending to whisper
'em only to a Friend in a Corner, I must beg your leave to write now to you,
that this Sheet of mine too may come out with the Title of a Letter to a
Friend: Wherein I shall give you some account of a Paper, called, A Letter of
my Lord Howard of Escrick to his I riend, together with his Protestation at his
receiving the Blessed Communion in the Tower.

The Publisher of this Letter and Protestation of my Lords, Ushers it in with
an Harangue of his own, and very gravely tells us. That there are two times in
which his Charity does oblige him to think men, (especially such as style
themselves Christians,) dare not speak any thing deviating from Truth, to wit,
at their approach to Death, and to Gods Holy Table. Indeed I cannot choose but
be very much inclined to his Charitable opinion, and must needs think it very
hard that any person, especially if he has been of a Conversation void of
Offense toward God and toward man, and of a Life that might testify for him,
that he did not only style himself a Christian, but was really so; that such a
one, I say, should not be believed in either of these two Circumstances: But I
am as sure that it is very reasonable, that what is uttered in the very moment
of Death, with all the circumstances that usually attend such Protestations,
ought to carry much greater force than that which is never so Religiously
protested at the receiving of the Communion, where the hopes of avoiding
punishment by Swearing off a Guilt that is Capital, and the distance of the
Judgment that is threatened this Violation, and perhaps the disbelief of any
future punishment for it at all, may be very strong Inducements to any person
in these Circumstances to venture to approach this Holy Table with a Lie in his
Mouth: especially if his Life and Conversation has been such, and particularly
his Reverence for this Holy Sacrament at other times so little, as may give but
very small grounds of Credibility to his Protestations at the same Holy
Sacrament, when either to serve his Interest, or to save his Life they are
made; and how far this may concern our Noble Protestor, we shall shortly
enquire. If then the Scribler that tells us, There are two times in which we
are chiefly to believe men; tells us, as he does immediately after; that for
all this he cannot believe what has been so solemnly asserted by several
Gentlemen at one of these his two times, and that which of the two is least
liable to suspicion of Falsehood; he cannot sure be offended if some persons are
as hard of belief to what is as solemnly Protested at the other: And
particularly by my Lord Howard, if some reasons appear that may very well
justify the incredulity that suspects this Honorable Lords Declaration.

And first let People very well consider the last Confession of Fitz-Harris, so
deliberately written, each Period so Religiously Sworn to upon his Knees, and
with such dreadful Imprecations owned and asserted for Truth, both at his
Penning it, and at the last moment of his Life, without any hopes of Pardon
upon Earth, or any possibility of Pardon in Heaven, if he should die with a Lie
in in his Mouth; and and then let them tell me which Protestation ought to have
greatest weight, that of a Dying Penitent, or such a Communicant. Sure if Oaths
and Protestations make men either Innocent or Guilty, my Lord Howard's and this
being compared by Impartial Judges, it will go very hard on the Peers side. But
alas! there are other Testimonies, Living Witnesses which in these Cases are to
make good such a Charge as is laid to his Lordship before that Tribunal whose
Justice is not here to be Forestal'd: And therefore it is the Protestations on
both sides, and the Solemnity of them that is fittest for us to examine. In a
word then, if Mr. Fitz-harrys his Declaration be true, my Lord Howard's, (at
least the first part of it) is false. For the last part of it, viz. That he
never was in that house in Shandois Street, where the said Fitz-Harrys was
taken, and where his Wife soon after was brought to Bed, save only once in the
company of a Lady, etc. It may perhaps be true; but here is withal a Mental
Reservation, as had we no other grounds, might make us suspect all the rest he
labors to persuade us: For perhaps that Lady his Lordship speaks of can
attest, and I am sure several others can, that he has not been once or twice,
but very frequently, at diverse times, not only in public at Dinners and
Suppers, but also privately with Fitz-Harrys; not indeed in that House wherein
he was taken, and wherein his Wife soon after was brought to Bed, as his
Lordship so cautiously protests, but in that House where he formerly lived, Mr.
Fitz-Harys having removed from that to another not many doors distant a little
while before he was apprehended.

I beseech you, my Lord, why all this Caution? Why so tender of naming
Fitz-Harys his House, without adding these qualities to it; wherein he was
taken, and wherein his Wife was brought to bed? Was it not to evade the
including the other House of Mr. Fitz-Harys his in Shandois-street, where he
and your Lordship have sat up almost whole nights together, with all the
privacy imaginable, with no ill intention alas! only to smoke an innocent Pipe,
and have a little indifferent chat by your selves, or so? Or were you afraid
that, without this Restriction, you might be in danger of swearing that you had
not been above once in your whole Life at your own House. Your own House, my
Lord, which entertained Fitz-Harys so long, almost a whole Winter, that by an
easy figure it might be called Mr. Fitz-Harris his House, or at least Mr.
Fitz-Harris his Lodgings. Or was this mighty care and exactness used to make
people believe that you really valued what you swore? Was that the Policy? to
make a mental Reservation on purpose to be found out? that the World might
think your Conscience a little more scrupulous, and your Veneration for a
Sacrament somewhat greater, than when your Lordship administered it your self in
Lambs-wool? Indeed you would put this upon us, and therefore you tell us in
your Letter how solemnly this Protestation was made, under the most sacred ties
of Religion. But, my Lord, how shall we be assured that this Protestation with
you signifies any more, than if it had been as solemnly made under, the most
sacred ties of Apples and Ale? Or how could you ever hope that one who had so
profaned this most Holy Mystery of our Religion, so exposed our Blessed
Savior, and put him to a more infamous and open shame than ever the malice of
the Jews his Crucifiers could reach at, should yet get any Credit to his
Protestations by that Sacrament which himself has so notoriously violated? No,
my Lord, whatever Judgments are in store for the Profaners of our most Sacred
Rites, and the Contemners of the very Badge and Seal of our Holy Religion in
the World to come, this we are certain is the natural Punishment of such an
Impiety in this World, and the greatest Justice too that can possibly be, That
he who has thus made a mock of all that is Sacred, should never, in his
greatest extremeties, be believed, by pretending a Reverence to that Mystery
which he has so Atheistically abused, or have any benefit from that Grace of
God which he has turned into Wantonness.

What good Christian now can be so uncharitable as to doubt of the Verity of my
Lord Howard's Protestation? What Infidel among us can withstand the force of
this Sacermental Oath made as his friend tells you (p. 2.) by one whose
Principles will not allow the least grain of Equivocation, either with God or
man; and whose Honor and Quality, Behavior and Conversation strongly do
assert the Credibility of his Testimony. O Rhetoric! And have they not
strongly asserted indeed? Has not one only Instance of his Principles, his
Behavior and Conversation left us out of all possibility of doubting his
Truth? This very single Action of his whole Life, this playing the Priest over
a Bowl of of Consecrated Lambs-wool, is enough to convince us of it. Why then
should we search into the whole course of his Conversation and Behavior for
further Arguments? Why should we pursue this Honorable Peer through all the
Scenes of as Infamous a Life as almost is to be found among a whole pack of
Evidences? What need we follow him through his Brokers Shop into his sanctified
Tub, from cheating men of then Money, to gulling them of their Souls? Why
should we hunt him through all the Sects of Religions which he has herded
amongst, without having any at all himself, like the Polypus that has no Color
of his own, but takes that of the next stone he sticks to? Why should we search
into his secret Cabals with Rascals, from the highest to the vilest Quality,
all which, in a more proper place shall shortly come to light? Why should we
p^^ into the reason of his own Discontents, or his sac^^^ (...) whose of all
others he could meet with; his perpetual familiarity with Fitz-Harys, whom by
his Protestation he would insinuate he was scarce acquainted with; his
protesting for him whilst he lived, and protesting against him now he is dead?
What need, I say, is there of these, or of infinite other Instances of this
kind, to gain a Reputation to his Oath at the Sacrament? We will not (like his
Friend the Publisher) have his Credibility in this Case depend on such general
Arguments as the course of his Life does afford. No, certainly the value he has
for the Blessed Sacrament is to be estimated from that Action of his Life which
more particularly relates thereto. And that having been sufficiently insisted
upon, we shall leave the Reader to guess at all the rest of the motives of
Credibility which his Friend tells us may be drawn from the whole tenor of his
Behavior and Conversation by this one which we have produced, and then desire
him to believe as much of this Protestation even as my good Protestant Lord
himself that made it.

LONDON, Printed for A. B. Anno Dom. 1681.


