A LETTER TO A Friend in the Country, Touching the present Fears and Jealousies
of the Nation, and from whence they Arise.
SIR,
I Received yours the 10th. instant, and maturely deliberating thereupon, I
resolved to give you some satisfaction in your Request, or at least endeavor
it, and that as briefly as I can. The present Jealousies which do possess the
minds of the People, especially the vulgar sort, may solely be attributed to
the great increase of Sects and Factions amongst us, who though they differ in
some points of Religion, yet the aversion of them all is the same to the Church
of England. I desire you only to peruse the Records of 40 and 41. and thereby
you will plainly see their pretense to Religion and Reformation, and their
intention to Rebellion, etc. These present Times may very well parallel with
those; it is just as if the old Game was playing over again: 1. In their
seditious and factious Pamphlets, thereby endeavoring to render the present
Government odious to the People. 2. Their aspersing and calumniating the
Ministers of State, as being Popishly affected. 3. Their Whisperings at
Coffee-houses, (their common places of Rendezvous) of the fears and
apprehensions they have of an Arbitrary Government; these seem exactly to be
Ushers on to the Good old Cause. These Factions are so increased since the
Toleration, that by their boastings of their numbers, and that they are such a
considerable part of the Nation, they almost contemn Authority; the
Conventicles being now more in number than the Parish Churches, by reason the
penal Laws are not put in execution against them. The factious use diverse ways
and means to draw away the people to become their Proselytes, by their
contemning and scandalizing the Bishops, and the inferior Clergy of the Church
of England, and by their despising of the Liturgy and set Forms of Prayer and
dull and dead. In the next place I shall endeavor to give you the Character of
a Conventicle.

The Son of the Church being mounted up into the Pulpit, and placing the
Cushion for the ease of his Elbows, and giving the un-Canonical Cloak a twitch
or two, or if the weather be hot, lay it aside, that he may not appear lazy by
threshing in his Cloak; and which is a sure sign, he beginning to begin, having
rolled his Eyes about, as if he were falling into a Trance, he faintly begins
with a languishing tone, which as the holy fire of Zeal, comes gradually, by
motion gathers heat, advances still higher and higher, till at length being h
toughly warm, like a Pot with too much fire under it, the scum of his Brains
boyls over, and he tumbles his Expressions with that ardor and precipitation,
that every word treads upon the heels of another, and pushes it forward; or
does it import whether the Expressions be congruous, and whether it may be
decent, so long as they are but passionate and vehement, and at every third or
fourth sentence crying, Lord, Lord, at which the people are strangely melted,
some into sighs and groans, some into tears, which are the Hums and Plaudites
of a Conventicle. Now though he pretends to hate all Forms, yet he is not
without a Method; therefore he begins with Confession, and tells a parcel of
notorious untruths in the name of the people, and will be persuaded he knows
them too, saying, We have been guilty of all the sins of Omission and
Commission, and it may be gives a Catalogue of them, some of which the Hearers
may be so far from being guilty of, that possibly they never heard of them
before; and after this rate he goes on, being obliged to a constant use of a
little Book, by name, The Gift of Prayer. There is one general Rule which St.
Paul gives for public Prayers; I exhort that first of all Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks, he made for all men, for Kings,
and all that are put in Authority. But for all this, in a two hours Prayer,
first or last, you shall have but little of that; or if the King be named, his
Titles of Supremacy are not recited, or at most but half way; or if he be
faintly acknowledged the Defender of the Faith, it must not be said that he is
Supreme in all Causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; for you must know, a
Presbyter is as great an Enemy to the Supremacy as a Papist. As for Our most
Gracious Queen, and James Duke of York, and the rest of the Royal Family, the
Bishops and Clergy, they never come in their mouths; so that the Apostle's
general Rule, Especially pray for all men in Authority, must be liable to an
exception, or else Queens, Dukes, and Bishops, are no body with them, or not in
Authority. There is nothing which has gained these men that Veneration amongst
the Vulgar, as this Imposture has done, which they endeavor to impose upon
easy beliefs, whilst they pretend in these extempore effusions to be
immediately inspired by the holy Spirit, which all Dissenters cannot be, and I
am afraid none of them are. The Apostle St. Paul speaks of praying with the
Spirit; but it is manifest he means there, that miraculous effusion of the holy
Ghost, which gave them utterance in diverse Languages; and let me hear any one
of these men pray in Latin as fluently as they do in English, and I will
believe they pray by the Spirit; some of their Prayers are scarce tolerably
true English: But it suffices, they say it is by the Spirit, and the people
believe, and do from hence conclude, these are the best men in the World having
the Spirit in such an extraordinary measure above others. And this is not the
smallest Engine they make use of, to undermine the Church of England, and to
render the solemn Service of God contemptible, all set Forms, as they say,
being dull, flat, dead, etc. though they are in a great measure the express
words of Scripture, and warranted from the ancient usage of the Church, if not
from the Apostolical times, at least from the next and immediate Age unto them.
Now that we may discover the greatness of this dangerous and popular Cheat, we
will first make our Appeal to their own Judge, the Scripture, where our blessed
Savior himself gives an express charge against Battologies, and much speaking
in our Prayers, and commands a short Prayer, and a set Form too; whatever long
Prayer may be, it looks like Hypocrisy: but, says he, when you pray, say, Our
Father, etc. How well they observed this Rule, we need not trouble our selves
further to find out, since it is not very many years ago that the Lords Prayer
was generally out of fashion in the Pulpit, and so it is still amongst many
Dissenters; and yet then they would have us believe they prayed by the Spirit,
as well as they do now: and I believe they did, but it must be by the same
Spirit that made Saul throw his Javelin at the Musician. Further, if we examine
the Fruits of the Spirit, they are Love, Joy, Peace, etc. but not the least
mention of extempore Prayer, and the Gifts of the Spirit are Continency,
Prophecy, Miracles, etc but no Gift of Prayer. Certainly if it had been a Fruit
of the Spirit, or a Gift of the Spirit, it would not have been omitted. But let
us appeal to Example; for if it be a Fruit of the Spirit, then all they who can
or could pray thus extempore, have the Spirit of God. This is as much a
demonstance as can be, for now I will bring you such an Army of Saints, as
shall Pray and Fight with all Nations, with Old Nol in the head of them; viz.
St. Oliver, St. Bradshaw, St. Ireton, etc. either these Saints prayed by the
Spirit, and so were real Saints, or what they prayed was not by the Spirit, and
so were no Saints, nor extempore Prayer any evidence of the Spirit of God. I
will now appeal to these men, let them speak the Truth, and shame the Devil, Is
not this way of praying an Acquisition? Did not the aforementioned Book, or
some Collections of their own out of Scripture, often hearing of others, many
secret Trials and Exercises therein, bring them to these perfections? or could
they from the first moment of their Conversion pray thus? and they do as
punctually remember that time, as what they did yesterday; and then if ever
they had the Spirit of God, it was as well able to help them as now, and they
stood more in need of it; and it would have been more visible and apparent,
that it was not they, but the Spirit taught them what to pray. Did they not
with much pains and industry attain this which they call a Gift? let them deny
it if they dare; for if they will say they never used any of the aforesaid
means to help their weaknesses, I will undertake to prove them the most
impudent affirmers of a notorious untruth: for many of their expressions are
sentences picked out of the Bible, which they read over often, more for the
respect of getting Praying-Phrases out of it, then for their being informed of
their Duty toward God and Men. They have also so many Fantastical, uncommon
words of their own Mintage, and such a singularity of In-comings, and
Outgoings, and In-dwellings, and I know not what, which like the wild Gourd,
spoil all the Pottage. Some of them stuff their heads with Notions what to
speak on a sudden occasion; and those which have experienced can tell, that if
a man has but the Notions he intends to speak, it is far easier to pray this
way, then otherwise; the charge of Generals to the memory, being less
burthensom then Particulars. And if a man has but a smooth and voluble Tongue,
he affords such hints, which being improved with advantage, do surprise the
Speakers and Hearers with Novelties and Agreeableness. And this is the Art of
Prayer; a mere Art it is, which if a man has a good stock of Confidence, he may
soon arrive at, and the sooner the more Ignorant he is; because he will be
proportionably more conceited of himself, which is the reason why so many
Mechanics, who can hardly speak sense in common discourse, will steal
expressions, which with some Directions and Trials, will soon make them
proficient in it. If one would take the pains to write one of their Preachers
Prayers for three or four times, he would find it would be all to the same
purpose at one time, as at another, only some Sentences misplaced. He being now
come to his Text; I will leave him, because he runs so far from it, that I
cannot follow him: but if you desire to satisfy your curiosity further, you
may only go to a Conventicle, which I am sure you may do without riding 10
miles.

The Principles of this Geneva offspring are so contrary and averse to
Episcopacy, and therefore consequently to Monarchy it self, that by using their
old Aphorism to scandalize and slander the Clergy, even as they did to his late
most Sacred Majesty of blessed memory, saying, Let us blacken, let us blacken,
some will believe it: And thereby rendering the Church Government to be
Superstitious, as they are pleased to call the Holy Rites and Ceremonies of the
same. As for the State, they hold their old Maxims, viz. Salus Popuit est
Suprema Lex, and that a King is Major Singulis and Minor Vniversalis; These
sort of men will seldom speak any thing in favor of the Court, unless it be
for the Act of Oblivion, and Toleration; but as for any other proceedings, they
will always interpret them to the worst sense, which causes such Murmurings and
Distractions in the hearts of the Ignorant sort of People. These men on the one
side, and the Papistical Crew on the other, are fit Instruments to blow a
Kingdom into Rebellion, but I hope opportunity will be wanting for either of
them to act. The Discoverers of the Plot tell us, that the Jesuits come hither
under the notion of Presbyterian Ministers, and truly I think that is as fit a
way as any to accomplish their Designs; and I fear, and it is very probable we
have a great number of them amongst us still, and therefore it is impossible to
root the Jesuits out, unless the other Party and their Ministers be suppressed,
for that is the Jesuits only Backdoor to molest us by, and insinuate Rebellion
into the disaffected People. I could say much more to this purpose, but being
unwilling to trouble you any further, I draw to a termination for this time:

Sir, Your Real Friend and Servant.


