A LADY's RELIGION IN A LETTER To the Honorable My Lady Howard.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

With a Prefatory Epistle to the same Lady, By a Lay-Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Richard Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane, 1697.

MADAM,
I Never read any thing with more pleasure and satisfaction than the most
ingenious Letter of Religion addressed to your Ladyship. The Author's noble
design, and happy method of executing it, could add nothing to the value I
always had for his great Learning, Candor, and Ingenuity. But to find his
performance approved by a Person of your Ladyship's extraordinary Judgment and
Virtues, has, I own, very considerably increased my veneration for him.

If my Opinion is of any weight with your Ladyship, I think he has shown
Religion to be plain, short, and intelligible, according to those very rules by
which he tries its orthodoxy: And that the knowledge of it depends not upon the
helps of Spurious Learning, he has with a deal of genuine Learning
demonstrated. What ought to recomend him most, is, that although he be a
Divine, yet he pretends not to make any thing pass upon you by virtue of the
bare Authority of his Profession; but he modestly writes as an unprejudiced
Person, what he believes any other had a right of doing, whom your Ladyship
would please to honor with her Commands.

It Is now extremely rare to meet with Learning, Liberty, and Integrity, united
in one Person; as we find 'em in our Friend. For Learning is frequently
attended with Prejudices, Biggotry and Pride; Freedom of thought turns into
Licentionsness, when it is not guided by knowledge; and we perceive most Men
every day sacrifice both Learning and Liberty to their Interest. But what is of
more fatal consequence is, That several who have the Reputation of those
Endowments, are the farthest in the World from possessing them. Learning, for
Example, is a term of great Ambiguity. True Learning consists in the Knowledge
of things as they are in themselves, and the expressing of this Knowledge in
proper words whereby it is conveyed into the minds of others. To this a right
Method indeed is necessary, but Elegance only accidental.

This is a natural and easy notion; but did it universally obtain, Learning
would become more common than is compatible with some Men's interest. To
frustrate therefore all its native and useful effects, Learning must be made to
consist in strange and difficult words, in the mere Grammatical Knowledge of
Languages, without any regard to the sense, if sometimes they have any; in
frivolous, precarious, and impertinent distinctions; in Etymologies, a World of
old stories, and the Lord knows what Gibberish and Non^sense. This the truly
Learned call Pedantry.

But your Ladyship being apt to think others can have no indirect designs no
more than your self, may imagine that this false Notion could never be
industriously promoted, but might be only the prevailing effect of casual
Ignorance in certain places and times. I shall not trouble you now, Madam, with a
Historical account of the matter; but I beg of you to consider two or three
things which may be capable of undeceiving a less discerning Person. This kind
of Learning, in the first place, being attained with mighty difficulty, very
few of either Sex have the Patience, or the leisure to study for it; and so
most of the World are obliged to take it at second hand from others, who never
think themselves over-paid in consideration of their pains or merit. Be pleased
next to remember, that the ignorant are no proper Judges of Learning, and that
all those who are not Men of Art being ignorant, must therefore never pretend
to question or contradict any thing the Learned say; much less may they take
upon 'em to teach or instruct others. Now, Madam, if you don't think this
Privilege of being exclusively of all others the only Men of Learning, the only
allowed Teachers, and the only Judges of what they themselves do teach, to be a
formed design; if you don't think it as dexterously managed as any other
joint stock, or monopoly in the World; if you don't think the advantages worth
the pains of contriving the Scheme; I Am content to lose your Ladyship's good
Opinion, which I prefer to that of all the Learned in Four Ages I could name,
adding the majority of such as are now so accounted.

There Is nothing more obvious than that this artful Learning destroys all
Liberty of course; and as for Integrity, they are inconsistent, as Paint and
Beauty: for our Learned Guide must be always telling us that he labors for our
information; so far at least, he must complement us for our Patience and Money.
But that he otherwise intends, our slow proficiency assures us; Reason also
does convince us that it is against his interest we should improve, for so in
time he grows useless; and he often blabs out the secret himself when he tells
us that what he says is unintelligible, and not to be apprehended by us in this
World; whatever we may do in the next. How Religion has thrived, or is like to
do so under such management, I need not particularly describe to your Ladyship;
who more readily sees all the consequences, than many others can conceive the
thing it self.

As Religion is the concern of all, so our Author shows the study of it to be
the business of every body; and that nothing can be true Religion, which
Poverty, want of Letters, particular Callings, or any condition of Life can
hinder us from acquiring. Wherein this Excellent and most divine Religion
(which depends not upon certain forms, times, persons or places) does consist,
I shall not repeat out of the Letter which you have already perused; but give it
you in the words of Minutius Felix, the most Eloquent of the Christian
Apologists. Do you think, says he to the Idolaters, that we conceal what we
adore, because we have no Temples nor Altars? For what Image can I frame of
God, when, if you rightly consider, Man himself is his Image? What Temple shall
I build for him, when the whole Universe, which he has made, is not able to
contain him? And when I that am but a Man, can command a larger habitation,
shall I confine the power of the Divine Majesty within one small shrine? Should
we not rather dedicate a Temple to him in our Minds, and consecrate an Altar
for him in our hearts? Shall I offer those things in Victims and Sacrisices to
the Lord, which he has created for my use; scornfully throwing back his gifts
to himself again? This were Ingratitude; when the most pleasing Sacrifices to
him are a good disposition, a pure mind, and a sincere Conscience. Whosoever
therefore keeps himself Innocent, he prays to the Lord; He that loves Justice,
does offer him Sacrifice; whoever abstains from fraud, procures the favor of
God; and he that delivers any out of distress, makes him an agreeable offering.
These are our Sacrifices, this is our Divine Service: And he that is the
honestest Man among us, him we also count the most Religious.

Are not these, Madam, are not these most charming and Heavenly Expressions?
Here Is the description of a Religion truly becoming the Dignity and Goodness of
the Divine Nature. It Is as general as Mankind; not varied by their different
Languages, Occupations, or Customs; and as much the interest of all in general,
as it must be the delight of every honest Man to observe it.

Now if true Learning be nothing else, as I said, but the knowledge of things
properly expressed, (and of this, Madam, you show your Sex to be very capable)
I see no reason why all Men indifferently should not as lawfully teach, as they
are bound to practice, their Religion. Why Women likewise may not enjoy the
privilege of instructing others (...) the Religious duties, which they are
obliged to practice themselves, I want ^^^ll to be enform'd. They have the same
Senses of Seeing and H^aring with us, they have the same Faculties of Thinking
and Speaking, they learn to read and write with the same Facility, they equally
understand the notions of Virtue and Vice, of Disrepute and Honor, of Wisdom
and Folly; they are as much concerned, as we are for their own happiness, as
well as that of their Friends; and will be so for that of all Mankind, when
they consider themselves obliged to contribute toward the preservation of the
whole, in the good whereof their own is involved. Some Women have left behind
them Illustrious Monuments of their Invention, Knowledge, and Courage; and what
particular persons have done, it is possible for the generality of the Species
to do, or more. Nor can I perceive any difference between us, but that of Sex
and Education; and to whom the defects of the latter are to be imputed, any Man
would blush to relate that is concerned for the honor or justice of our kind.
The particular care your Ladyship has taken to inform a great many of your poor
ignorant Neighbor's Minds, as well as to feed and cover their Bodies, is a
Demonstration that the duty of Instruction may be as successfully performed by
your Sex, as that of Charity or good works.

I don't understand you right, Madam, or I need not beg your Pardon for
publishing this little piece without your privity or permission. Reason, I
know, is the Oracle that must decide this business: And there seems to be more
reason for the liberty I have taken, than for our Author's compliance with your
Ladyship's request, though he was likewise in the right. He wrote nothing but
what he was convinced you perfectly understood before, taught by the original
dictates of your own fruitful mind; so you received his admirable performance,
rather as a mark of his respect, than a present you needed: therefore I presume
now to distribute it among those of yours and my own Sex, who want such an
assistance from him: You envy no person, I Am sure, those divine perfections of
Body and Mind, whereof your Enemies (if you can have any) must own you are
Mistress; much less would you deprive others of the benefit they may receive
from this Treatise, although the usefulness of it to your self was prevented by
an excellent genius. That you may be ever happy, Madam, is the constant desire
of

Your Ladyship's most Observant Friend and Admirer. ADEISID AEMON.

A LADY's RELIGION.
MADAM,
SInce God has been pleased to incline your heart to an early and serious
enquiry after Religion, so that you are sincerely desirous to know the will of
God, in order to do it, I heartily wish you had laid your Commands upon one
more able to assist you, than I am: who, being bred up in an Age of Speculation
and Controversy, have addicted my self to the study of Divinity more perhaps
than to the practice of Religion; and have been (I pray God forgive me) more
desirous to furnish my Head with Notions, than my Heart with good Inclinations.
I thought my self, by my Profession, chiefly engaged in a study how to defend
the Church by Law established against all Dissenters, rather than to promote
the common cause of serious Piety; and whilst by the strange unaccountable
genius of this Age, I have been led aside to mix the study of Politics with
that of Religion, I have been busily assisting the Office of a Minister of
State, rather than doing the good work of a Minister of Jesus Christ.

Now although it has pleased God to make me in some measure sensible of those
Bypath, in which I have sometimes walked, to the hindrance of that duty unto
which I ought entirely to have devoted my self; yet I am apt to fear lest those
Prejudices and undue Prepossessions of Mind may still remain within me, by
which I shall be prevented from giving your Ladyship such an Idea of Religion,
as is short, plain, and pure, free from superstitious Appendages, and separate
from every by-interest.

But without doubt such as this is the true Spirit of the Christian Religion,
every line whereof directly tends to make us easy within our selves, kind and
comfortable to one another here, and happy with God hereafter.

That our holy Religion is a wise Institution, will be evident to any one who
considers that God is its Author, whose Wisdom appears in all his Works: Thus
the frame of visible nature being agreeably set together, and having each part
of it suited to useful and proper ends, demonstrates it self to be the work of
divine Wisdom: in like manner the whole Plan of pure Religion, having also its
parts suitable to each other, and every one of them agreeably set to the same
good and great Design of the whole, does thereby prove it self to be the
contrivance of an Allwise God.

And hereby the Wisdom of the Christian Religion will particularly appear,
because every part of it tends to promote the universal good of Mankind; for
which reason the divine Founder thereof was named Jesus, (that is) Savior,
because his only design was to save us from the prevailing power of Sin, and
from those Miseries in which that evil power would involve us.

Thus Temperance promotes our Health, Justice in our dealings prevents us from
sustaining the revenges of the injured, and gains us trust among Men, with all
the benefits which arise from thence. Charity by promoting the common good of
others draws back their love and affection to our selves, while Patience
preserves quiet within our own Breasts, and Self-denial by restraining our
extravagant Appetites, establishes the just power of Reason over us; thereby
fitting us for all conditions of life; and thus the law of Christ answers to
the Character of Wisdom, by its agreeableness to the best design of God in the
chiefest good of Man: and upon this account Solomon charactered the Idea of
Religion under the name of Wisdom.

Beside these moral duties there are several threats of God's Judgments and
promises of his favor contained in Christ's Institution; the former were
wisely designed to restrain us from Immoralities, which are our greatest
Follies; and the latter to engage us in the practice of Virtue, which is our
greatest Wisdom: the threatenings prepare the way for the Promises, and qualify
us to receive 'em; in as much as they shake off our affections from ill
objects, in order for the Promises to fix them upon good ones. We must needs
cease to do evil, before we can learn to do well.

Now although a due consideration of the divine nature will carry us on to the
belief of a future state, in which he who is in perfection the best of all
Beings, will distinguish the good from the bad by ample rewards and just
punishments: yet because every ones capacity may not be sufficient to make this
wise reflection, therefore Jesus Christ was pleased (as the Gospel phrases it)
to bring Life and immortality to light: i. e. to give the World full assurance
of a future state, in which the just God will distinguish Men hereafter in such
a manner as they shall distinguish themselves here; and it is the wisdom of
every one to preserve this belief in his heart, and bear it always about him,
because it is the most awful Monitor against our committing folly, and yields
the strongest encouragement to Virtue.

From what has been said, your Ladyship sees first what is meant by saving a
Soul, viz. to deliver it from vicious habits and fearful punishments, the fatal
consequents of such habits; and by establishing Virtue therein to recommend it
to the favor of God. And secondly, that the Gospel of Christ was designed to
this very end; and its tendency hereunto is its Wisdom. And thirdly, from hence
you also perceive in what respect Faith in Jesus Christ is said to save us,
viz. because this Faith is our receiving the Christian Moral for the Rule of
our lives, and the threats and Promises contained in the Gospel, for the
outward motives of our practice according to that Rule.

And from these three considerations, summed up together, you may examine all
the various pretenses which differing Churches and Communions make to the
purity of Christian Faith, so as to form a right judgment of 'em; for that
Communion which manifests it self to have no other design than to assist its
Members in saving their Souls from the power of Sin by the Moral and Motives
aforementioned, is certainly the purest Church; and that Faith which has no
other tendency, is the purest Faith. So that if you form your self upon this
Principle, you may pass by all nice Speculations, or profound Mysteries, which
have no direct tendency to improve your Morals, without any hazard of Salvation.

Secondly, As the Christian Institution is wisely practical, so it is plain: or
in other words, we may say, that as the wisdom of the Christian Religion
appears first by its being practical, so it appears secondly by being plain.
The obscure answers which were given out from the old Heathen Oracles, are now
known to have proceeded from the indirectness of a designing Priesthood: who,
to maintain their pretense of foretelling what shall come to pass, sent back
all those who came to inquire after future events, with doubtful and uncertain
Answers. And it has been the observation of wise Men, that when any one affects
to be dark and mysterious in his Conversation, either he has some indirect
design in so doing, or else whilst he makes an ostentation of wisdom he does in
reasity but discover his folly.

Now the Wisdom of God cannot be conceived to aim at any other design in
communicating it self to us, than the Information of our Minds in the nature of
good and evil, and this in order to direct our choice; and all Instruction must
of necessity be plain: since it is by things easy and familiar, such as at first
sight we may apprehend, whereby we can be led on to the knowledge of matters
more remote and difficult: but obscure and unintelligible doctrines can have no
effect upon us beside unprofitable amusement; and whatsoever is by the wisdom
of God laid out of our reach, can be no part of our concern.

Farther, to what end did he give us intellectual Faculties? surely not to
amuse but to improve us, by enabling us thoroughly to understand each part of
our holy Religion, which directly tends to that end, viz. our moral
Improvement: as you will soon perceive, if you reduce the Christian Institution
to its general heads, which are these.

First, A Narration of matters of Fact.

Secondly, A Declaration of moral Laws.

Thirdly, A Revelation of such motives which are proper to enforce this Law
upon our minds. And

Fourthly, Serious Exhortations to refresh our Memories with our duty: and
earnestly to recommend it to our practice.

First, Your Ladyship sees, that the matters of fact contained in the four
Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles ( viz. the Travels and Transactions of
Christ and his Disciples) are so plainly related, that you understand the
Relation as easily as you read it. And Secondly all Laws must be plain, because
they are Directions. Now, obscure directions are but Delusions. And Laws which
are dubious and difficult to be understood, are Traps and Snares. And Thirdly,
It Is as necessary that Motives should be very intelligible, because their
design is to work strongly upon our Wills, by convincing our Understandings.
Add to this Fourthly, That mystical and unintelligible Exhortations are
ridiculous, upon which account St. Paul forbad religious Exercises to be
performed in an unknown Tongue.

Now as the four Gospels and Acts of the Apostles contain matters of fact,
laws, and motives; so the Epistles contain Exhortations to Seriousness and
Piety, arising from the laws, facts, and motives beforementioned: and (...)
take these Books to be sufficiently comprehensive of the Institutions and
Ordinances of Jesus Christ: which ought indeed to be easily intelligible,
because they concern the poor weak, and unlettered People as much as the
Learned.

Nor can I see that the doctrine of Christ was by him, or his Apostles,
delivered first of all into the hands of the learned to be by them conveyed
into the minds of the ignorant; but on the contrary, it is manifest that our
Savior directed both his discourses and actions immediately to the common
people as well as to the Scribe; and in like manner did his Disciples address
their Preachings and Writings.

From all this Discourse concerning the clearness of Christ's Institution, you
may spare your self the needless trouble of reading abstruse and mysterious
points of Divinity. Nor need you suffer your self to be amused with the
pretended deep Speculations of profound Men, when you have the plain directions
of a wise, and a good God before you, in following whereof you shall meet with
great reward.

Thirdly, The Christian Institution is short. True and genuine Religion has
always been summed up, and gathered together into a narrow compass, by those
who best understood it. Thus Micah (6.8.) speaking of God, says, He has shown
thee, O Man, what is good, and what does the Lord thy God require of thee? but
to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And our Savior
sums up the whole Law in our Love to God, and our Neighbor. And in another
place includes the whole scope of the Law and the Prophets, in this one Rule,
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them;
hereby directing us to make a right use of that Reason which God established as
his Oracle in our Breasts: to which we may at all times resort; and from whence
we may be resolved in such cases as concern our duty to one another.

For as by consulting your own reason, you know wherein you are justly dealt
with, and wherein you receive wrong; when you are kindly used, and when
otherwise: so from the same principle of reason you cannot but know when you
deal justly or wrongfully, and when you do kind or ill offices to another; this
one short comprehensive Rule, taking for its Foundation the Equality of
Mankind in respect of their common nature, renders Religion it self a matter
sensible unto us.

For I can feel the wound of a sharp slanderous Tongue as sensibly as that of a
Sword; I can feel the wrongs done to my self and Family; and am as much
sensible of the benefits I enjoy from the just and kind dealings of those with
whom I am concerned; and hereby I am in the shortest and plainest way
admonished of my behavior to others: and if this one short Rule were reduced
to practice, the state of Paradise would be restored, and we should enjoy a
Heaven upon Earth.

For hereby first all Persecutions for Conscience sake, which have occasioned
such violent disorders, and vast effusion of blood, would be at an end, because
every one who has any Conscience, would most willingly preserve it free from
the Impositions of Men in the worship of God. To compel Men by Fire and Faggot
to partake even of a delicious Entertainment, is a savage sort of Hospitality.

Secondly, All Factions in any State would be at an end, if every Member
thereof were contented that every one of his Fellow Members who was not an
Enemy to the Government, might, having equal pretense of Merit, enjoy equal
Privileges with himself.

Thirdly, The occasions of War and Lawsuits would be taken away. Since nothing
but manifest wrong can be the just cause of either.

And Fourthly, There would be no private quarrels, and uneasiness among
Neighbors; Since by this Rule of doing as we would be done unto, all rash
Censures, sharp reflections, and ungrounded suspicions and jealousies, which
are the Seeds of private Animosities, are taken away. And hereby we may expect
a plentiful store of God's Blessings among us, who will measure out his
kindness to us in the same manner, as we measure out ours to one another.

The reason why Religion should be both a short and plain Institution, will
appear if you consider the common circumstances and conditions of Men in this
World. For though your Ladyship and many more, have leisure enough to read and
digest whole Volumes of useful Knowledge (if there are any such) yet the
greatest part of Mankind being necessarily employed in making daily provisions
for themselves and Families, and discharging the common offices of Life, cannot
attend to any religious Institution which is either difficult or tedious.

It Is certain, That the whole Life of Man is not sufficient for him to read all
the Controversies which have been written upon pretense of Religion; but it is
as certain, That God never lays on us a greater task than what he affords us
both Abilities and Opportunities to perform: wherefore we may conclude, That
since the duties of Religion are laid in common upon all, the poor Day-Labourer
must have ability and opportunity sufficient to instruct himself therein,
without hindering the constant work of his Calling. And in all this the Wisdom
and Goodness of God are made known, by adapting our duties to our circumstances
of Life.

From hence you may save your self the trouble of reading the long and tedious
Disputes which with such intemperate Zeal are always in agitation among the
several Parties of Christians. Indeed the true Christian Institution being
short, it cannot admit of being spun out into long Controversies: And though I
have read many Books of Controversial Divinity, I do not remember that I have
met with any one Controversy about the matter of mere Religion; as whether I
should maintain in my heart a high reverence and veneration for Almighty God?
Whether I ought to walk before him in Sincerity and Uprightness? Whether or no
I should be thankful to him for all the benefits which I have received from
him? Whether I shall submit to his will with Patience, and endeavor to govern
my Passions, to bring them to a due moderation and temper, by making them
subject to the Law of Reason? Whether I should be true to my Promise, just in
my Dealings, charitable to the Poor, and sincere in my Devotions? Whether I
should be temperate and sober, modest and chaste, and demean my self in an
humble, civil, and agreeable manner toward those with whom I converse? Whether
I should be heartily sorry when I come short of my duty, and should be watchful
in the denial of my irregular Appetites, Passions, and evil Inclinations for
the future? In short it has not (that I know of) been disputed whether Justice,
Benignity, Meekness, Charity, Moderation, Patience and Sobriety, should be
received into our affections? or whether we should love God and our Neighbor?
Orthodoxy of Faith is made the pretense of Controversy, but the one thing
necessary is Orthodoxy of practice.

I know your Ladyship will not be pleased with a Discourse upon the subject of
Religion, unless Devotion have its due place in it; nor ought it indeed to be
left out, because thankfulness is a necessary part of Religion, and Prayer is
the Preservative of the whole. A frequent repetition of our thanks for all the
benefits we enjoy, preserve in our Minds the consideration of God as the
greatest and best of Beings; and thereby nourishes Veneration and Gratitude. In
like manner Prayer for Pardon of Sin, and preservation of our Persons, is a
constant Recognition of the Mercy and bounty of God. But Prayer against the
power of Sin, is the actual withdrawing of our Inclinations from Evil; and
Prayer for any Grace is an actual application of our Minds, to attain the
particular Virtue for which we pray.

Now although I would not advise you against set Hours and Forms of Devotion,
either private or public; yet I would rather recommend a sort of habitual and
occasional Devotion, as very proper to preserve the strongest Impressions of
Religion upon your Mind.

It may be observed that many who are very punctual in keeping to their exact
times and forms of Devotion, have fallen short of any visible improvement in
Virtue. The same Pride, Frowardness, Falsehood, Covetousness, and bitterness of
Spirit, have appeared in many who have been constant frequenters of the public
as well as Closet Forms of Prayer; as if God had not been in all their
thoughts. The reason whereof seems to be because their formal Petitions
supersede their habitual Endeavors. Men are apt to think that since they spend
in every day such a portion of time in Prayer, they have done all their part:
And so they leave God Almighty to take care of the event. And this is indeed
all we can do when we make our Petitions to our Benefactors upon Earth, viz.
offer up our requests to them, either by word or writing, and then only expect
their answer.

But it is otherwise with relation to God. Our Petitions to him must not take
off from our constant endeavors to perform that work for which we pray his
Enablement. And this occasional Devotion, which I would recommend, is in its
own nature a constant endeavor after Virtue, as well as a serious Petition for
it. For it arises from a frequent observation of our selves in our particular
occurring circumstances; from which observation suitable desires will almost
necessarily flow. As if at any time I find that I have done an ill thing,
immediately upon the discovery, I beg God's Pardon, and resolve to make
recompense for the ill I have done. Or if I have designed any evil in my heart,
and presently beg Pardon of him who knows the secrets thereof; in so doing I
have given check to its progress. In like manner, if I have spoken
slanderously, rashly, or injuriously concerning any one; and upon Recollection
thereof I ask forgiveness of God, and desire that I may not do the like for the
future: but on the contrary, that I may govern my Tongue better; in all this I
am laboring to withdraw my Soul from evil, and to form my self upon a
principle of Virtue.

Every Night and Morning are proper times of leisure to call to Mind the
preservation, support, and advantages we have received the day or night
preceding. And this Recollection being accompanied with thankfulness to our
great Preserver, is the actual continuance and carrying on of our gratitude to
God. If I perceive Pride or Passion to arise in my heart, so that I am apt to
put a great value upon every thing I do, and despise others: or if I find my
self eagerly concerned for any little Worldly advantage, or any small punctilio
of honor; and hereupon I beg of God for an humble Spirit, and a Heavenly Mind;
I am herein endeavoring to expel the Poison of Sin by its proper Antidote.

We cannot but feel the Disorders of our Minds, as much as the Diseases of our
Bodies. And the causes of a disordered Mind are much more easily discerned,
than the causes of a Bodily Distemper. For either my Mind is troubled for want
or losses, or it may be for the prosperity of others, or want of a revenge, or
because I cannot have my will in what I designed. Upon these or such like
occasions, the proper Cure is Devotional in begging God's Pardon for my
discontent: and being desirous that my will should be submitted to his who has
taught me that I should not return evil for evil, but that I should love my
Neighbor as my self. This sort of Soliloquy, and occasional mental address to
God, is a sure way to compose the disorders of our thoughts. For the growing
power of any Sin is most certainly suppressed by introducing the opposite
Virtue into our desires.

The same method may be used as to Sins of Omission. A serious Person will
observe neglects of common duties, which respect either God or Man. He cannot
but take notice how much he has neglected his business, or his health; how
little he has confider'd God as his Owner, Governor and Benefactor: and how
small a portion of what God has blessed him with he has laid out upon the good
of his Fellow Creatures. And if hereupon a Man is seriously desirous to become
more dutiful to God, more useful to himself, and beneficial to others, he is
therein actually bending his mind to supply his former Omissions.

This casual Devotion arising from the observation of our selves, under the
common circumstances of Life (although it can have no set times and forms
prescribed to it) will be very effectual to produce, preserve, and increase a
true sense of Religion within us. And if you are pleased to apply your thoughts
hereunto, as occasion shall direct you, this Devotion will soon become
habitual, customary and easy. And its returns, which will be frequent and
short, will be a continual restraint from evil-doing, and an actual exercise of
Virtue.

This exercise which I have been prescribing is commonly reserved to be
performed all at once, in an actual preparation before receiving the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper; which is usually performed by help of an artificial
Catalogue of Sins methodically collected out of the Ten Commandments, according
to which Catalogue set Forms of Confessions are drawn up, which the Preparant
is to take upon content, and without any sort of judgment or discretion of his
own, he confesses himself guilty of all the Sins therein mentioned together,
with all their Aggravations, though, it may be, many of them were of such a
heinous nature, as never entered into his heart to commit. And if these
Catalogues and confessional Forms are read over once a quarter of a Year, or,
it may be, once a Month against the usual Sacrament-Day, the work of
Preparation is thought to be well passed over.

Yet I cannot but think it better to keep a constant customary watch over our
selves, and upon the first discovery of any evil design or action, immediately
to retract it within our own hearts, as in the presence of God, and by mental
Prayer, proper to the occasion, arm our selves against committing the like for
the future. Hereby you discharge a duty in its proper season, which is better
than to delay it to a prefixed distance of time: for what is most fresh in
memory will make the most lively Impression upon us; but may in a little time
be forgotten. Besides, we are apt to turn Forms into Formalities: And a natural
discharge of religious duties must be more improving than an artificial one.

And by this your Ladyship sees the reason why I have written a Discourse of
Religion in general, in Answer to your Letter, wherein you wrote only
concerning the Lord's Supper, viz. because I esteem a serious well-inclin'd
temper of Mind to be the best preparation, either for that, or any other of the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, that we may partake of 'em with advantage and
delight.

David advises us to delight our selves in the Lord, i. e. in all his ways and
Ordinances. And I cannot see why our preparation for the Lord's Table, and
participation at it, should be accompanied with greater Anxieties of Mind than
our Communicating in any other holy Office; such as public Prayer or
Preaching. We expect the same Blessing of God in the improvement of our Virtues
from all of these Ordinances alike. And why with terror upon our Minds we
should use any of those means which God has ordained for our good, I do not
understand. A Man indeed ought to perform every religious office seriously and
soberly; but Fear by amusing and distracting the Mind, is apt to render the
Ordinance unprofitable.

Men ought likewise to be discouraged from coming to Prayer, Preaching or
Communicating at the Lord's Table, with a careless, or profane temper of Mind:
because such unpreparedness does harden Men's hearts, and renders the Ordinance
unprofitable. Such as this was the case of the Corinthians, who in celebrating
the Lord's Supper, were so inconsiderate of what they came to do, that some of
them were drunk at the Lord's Table, as you read 1 Cor. 11.21. and to this
their profane behavior, those Texts of Scripture do particularly relate,
which affright some Men from, and others in receiving the Sacrament: on this
account 'twas said, by St. Paul, that they were guilty of the body and blood of
Christ: and to eat and drink damnation to themselves, not discerning the Lord's
body, Ver. 27, 29. i. e. by such a profane and unworthy communicating, they
call down God's Judgments upon themselves: for so the word Damnation ought to
be understood, because it refers to the Judgments specified in the following
Verse, where it is said, that, For this cause ( viz. of drunken Communicating)
many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, i. e. die. V. 30. Now to
avoid these Judgments he exhorts them to examine themselves, i. e. to consider
with themselves what was the meaning of that duty which they were to perform at
the Lord's Table, which duty was this, viz. to call to mind the death of Jesus
Christ. And this Commemoration is by St. Paul styled, Discerning the Lord's
body.

The visible signs of our Savior's Death, which we discern on the Lord's
Table, do prepare our minds to contemplate a divine Person, who for his great
Charity to the stupid World, suffered the highest injustice, with such an
invincible patience, and Heroic Fortitude, as was superior to the sharpest
malice of his Enemies. Thereby setting before us the brightest Example of an
unshaken resolution to do good in spite of all Discouragements.

You will perceive, Madam, by this Discourse, that the Christian Religion is a
wise, a plain, and a short Institution; the Belief whereof was designed to save
our Souls from the power and danger of Sin, by ingrafting virtuous habits in
our Minds. You will likewise perceive, that I hold it necessary to keep a
constant watch over our selves, to repent as often as we perceive our selves to
transgress, and by occasional mental Devotion, incline our hearts to observe
the law of Christ; and all this in order to build up a habit of Virtue within
us. You will also perceive, that the Contemplation of the death of Christ, with
all its circumstances, tends to the same admirable end.

And if these or any other means shall work upon you to be generously just, to
bear a good will to all Men, to do what good you can, and to be unconcerned for
the events of things which are not within your power; you will be easy within
your self, and satisfied in your own Conscience, which is the Dawn of Heaven
upon Earth; and you may cheerfully Communicate at any time.

FINIS.

