A LETTER IN ANSWER TO A FRIEND, Upon Notice of a Book Entitled, A Short View
of the Late Troubles in England, Wherein in the VIIIth. Chapter the Occasion of
the Execrable Irish Rebellion XLI. is egregiously mistaken.
SIR,
AS soon as I received Yours of the 26th. Instant, I immediately enquired for
The short View of the Late Troubles in England, which I found at our
Stationers: I fell presently on the Eighth Chapter, which (as you have
observed) ought to be Corrected; the Author endeavoring to make the Grand
Conspirators in the Long Parliament 41. a Great Occasion of the Irish
Insurrection, though not of their Counsel and Contrivance.

I have nothing to plead for those Conspirators, the Event of their Counsels
being Shame and Confusion. But there are those alive (writes an Illustrious
Person) that know how far (at first) their Souls abhorred, what afterward
neither Policy or Power could restrain. When (as his Majesty from Breda
observes) Through Mistakes and Misunderstandings Many Inconveniences were
produced, which were not intended. However, we are told, That the Parliament is
not to be excused from giving great Occasion of Rebellion, besides Suspicion of
a Design. Though the Earl of Castlehaven (in his Epistle to his Memoires) which
ought however to be reflected on, is so just as to confess, "That the Irish
Rebellion brake forth in a "time of settled Peace, without the least Occasion
given; which comes now to be considered.

The Method the Author takes I am sorry to find, being, That he makes the
Conspiracies and Plots that were charged on those of the Irish Profession in
England, to be mere Forgery; whence the Irish took a suspicion, lest they too
should be debarred of a Religion derived from their Ancestors 1300 Years.

What was suspected of the English Romanists, I shall not here insist on; it
being Notorious that the late Plot (so uneasy to the King, so desperate to the
State) has been like the Dragon in the Apocalypse, long watching to devour the
Protestants, though great Subtilty has been used, both in the Chair and
Pulpit, to decry what has been foretold thereof: As if all the Complaints
against Popery, these Fifty or Sixty years, had been as Properties only to
color the neglect of more weighty Business, and affront the Government, till
the Event had almost justified the Augurism.

But as for the Irish, I must say, if to prevent an Evil (as a great Father of
the Jesuits will have it) One may assume Arms, ruin States, invade their
Neighbors, and that merely on a Suspicion. I know not who may be secure;
otherwise none ever enjoyed with greater Freedom not a Connivance only of their
Religion, but a thorough Practice of it at that day, till their Presumption
looked Authority in the Face. Having Archbishops, and Bishops for all their
Sees, most of whom the Pope had ^ade not long before, and in all likelihood for
this Occasion. They had ab^^ (...) hundred ^hown Convents of several Orders in
that Kingdom, and their Prie^s, in all parts of it, freely exercising their
Function. So as in reference to their Religion, they had no reason to expect a
Storm, much less That That and their Nation should be extirpated: Which from a
Rumor raised at an Assize (as it is feigned) from Sr. William Parsons and Sr.
Adam Loftus, That an Army of 10000 Scots was to arrive in Ireland, to force the
Catholics to change their Religion, and that Ireland could never do well
without a Rebellion, to the End the Remnant of the Natives might be extirpated,
has begot some Credit, though on so improbable grounds, that it is not like
that men of such Estates in Ireland, who had been so signally Instrumental to
the settlement of that Kingdom in Peace, and had such a Numerous Progeny,
should ever hope for a Disturbance there, where the Result must be their
certain Ruin: No! This Rumor was hatched, as the Rebellion, First to raise
Tumults, and then by unjustifiable and improbable Pretenses to ground their
assuming Arms thereon. It must be confessed, the Irish were ever zealous
asserters of their Religion; it may be (as we are told) 1300 years; but That
was not, as the Learned and Incomparable Archbishop Usher affirms, what is now
owned, the Ancient Religion of the Irish. However; before the Rebellion broke
forth, was there ever any thing declared against the Connivance which had been
used in that Kingdom ever since the Reformation, of which we have spoke
something before? No! Nothing but their inbred hatred to the English tended to
make it a National Quarrel; from whence, if many proved to be eradicated, their
own Guilt begat the Event.

And as for the Irish Committee's being constrained (after his Majesty's going
for Scotland the 10th. August 41.) to return without any Redress. It Is such a
Mistake, as there was nothing which this Committee requested, which was not
fully granted; His Majesty (as to the Favor this Committee had with the
Parliament) expressy declaring Also, That those of the Parliament of Ireland,
by whom that Rebellion was hatched, were (by the Members of the Parliament of
England) countenanced in their Complaints and Prosecutions. Yea the Lord Keeper
in his Speeches in the Banqueting House the 21th of April 40. acquaints the
Commons (as an Argument to trust the King if they would supply his late
Necessities) That the Irish had all that they did desire granted, and had it
with Advantage. So as the Irish (how confident soever the View of the Late
Troubles in England will have it) can never be said to be exasperated, That
under Color of suppressing them as Rebels (from which all the Water of the Sea
cannot wash them) they might b^^^tterly destroyed or eradicated: Indeed I
cannot say, but when the Rebels were in Arms, the least Proceedings against
them (how just soever) might be Incentives sufficient to blow up the Sparks in
others, which wanted not predispos'd Fuel for Rebellion. But that which the
Parliament did then should encourage the Rebels, is a Suggestion so improbable,
that those who read the Order of the Lords and Commons in Parliament in
England, concerning Ireland, reprinted at Dublin, the 12th. of Nov. wooing the
Rebels to Submission, allowing Rewards to such as should do service to the
State, and the States frequent offers to the same purpose, must conclude the
Parliament neither gave Occasion of (nor had a Design in) the Irish Rebellion:
It Is wished that those, who cover that Rebellion with these Fig Leaves, work
not in the same Loom.

I cannot say but the Scots were willing to have had larger footing in Ireland
than they then had: Yet I do not find (by any Attempt they made) That they ever
endangered the Shouldering of the Natives out. Nay! So far was the Care of the
State remarkable before the Rebellion, lest the Scots (menacing England) should
offer any Violence on the North of Ireland, as the State Anno 39. sent an Army
down thither purposely to awe the Scots, under a Command that very prudently
managed that Affair. And Anno 40. the Earl of Strafford ordered his New-raised
Army to keep their Rendezvous in the North, intending to have landed them near
Dunbarr Frith in Scotland, the better to divert the Scots from attempting
Ireland; Than which there cannot be a greater Proof that the Insolences of the
Scots (how maliciously soever enforced) could never be able to have Eradicated
the Natives.

But we are told in the next place, That the Eager Prosecution of the Act for
the Confiscation of the Rebels Lands was not without suspicion, That the
Members at Westminster urged that Act to provoke the Rebels: Whereas, (as
Affairs then stood) no other expedient could then readily be found, or, if
there could, could any thing have been more just, than that the English (by the
forfeiture of the Irish Estates) might thereby have been somewhat repaired, and
for the future secured in their Station? In reference to which (after his
Majesty had proposed, Whether it were seasonable to declare Resolutions, before
the Events of a War be seen: He gave them thanks for their Care and cheerful
Engagement for the Suppression of that Rebellion, upon the speedy effecting
whereof the Glory of God in the Protestant Profession, the Safety of the
British there, His Honor, and that of the Nation so much depended.

As for the hindering of his Majesty to go over, the Reasons the Parliament gave
were so obvious, as his Majesty acquiesced therein; replying in his Answer to
the Parliament on that Subject, That he was glad to find the work of Ireland so
easy as they seemed to think it; It not appearing when He sent his Message,
and therefore He would stay some time, to see the Event of those great
Successes they mentioned, till he had given them a Second Notice.

And as for the getting of the War into their Own Hands, It Is Evident that few
would have adventured (at that time of Fears and Jealousies) to have advanced
large Sums, had they not had a Gracious Commission from his Majesty; impowering
such persons as were recommended to Him by the Parliament, "To advise" order,
and "dispose of All things concerning the Government and Defense of that
Kingdom; In such a way as should be thought most effectual by the Wisdom and
Authority of Parliament! It being known that the Irish won Ground, when the
Parliament every hour withered in his Affections.

It Is generally reported (and thence some have made a Conclusion) That if the
8000 disbanded Irish had been permitted (as promised) to have been transported
for Spain, the Irish might have wanted an Encouragement to have proceeded in
their desperate Enterprise. It cannot be denied but that the Irish (who were
trained up in that Army) were very serviceable to the Rebels at their first
Adventure: And some have thought it an ill Policy in the State There, That the
Irish should be instructed in Arms. But certain it was, that the whole 8000
were never designed to be sent abroad; and for those that were hindered, it was
more the Artifice of the Romish Members of Parliament in Ireland, who by very
many plausible and insinuating Arguments importunately urged their stay, than
any Motion Enforced by the English Parliament, more than that they might be
made good Husbandmen at home, of which that Kingdom had great need.

As to the want of a Lord Lieutenant in Ireland, (the Earl of Strafford not
being long before taken off) it must be acknowledged, that he was an Eminent
Instrument of State, and had as great an Insight into the Temper and Condition
of the Irish, as happily any that preceeded or may succeed him. Yet it must
also be allowed, that the times were of themselves quiet, and the several
Humors were not so angerly gathered together as to force a Crisis, so as
imperfect Plots were easily broken; whereas if he had lived to the Season,
there being at that time Complications both of Encouragement and Connivance,
the Rebellion might have outwatch'd his Providence; Nothing by the Governors,
then in place, being attempted like those Incitements which the Conspirators
(from his Lordships Government) avow as the Rise and Growth of all their
Complaints and Grievances. Besides, within few days after that the Earl of
Strafford was beheaded, the Earl of Leicester (who had been employed in most of
the considerable Embassies abroad) was designed for that Government; Being
thought by his Knowledge in Martial Affairs, and other his great Abilities, to
be abundantly capable to reduce the Irish to due Obedience: And certainly had
he gone over, the Civil and Martial Power having been lodged in One hand, there
would have been that Expedition in the work, as others, taking measures from
their Interest, unfortunately prolonged.

Other things, as The Insurrection of the Scots, from whence the Irish might
feign a President, but justly could make That no Example: And The Parliaments
unwillingness to levy men, till the King had disclaimed his Power of Pressing;
The Parliaments making use of the Money for the Relief of Ireland, might here
be insisted on: But what are these to the Motives or Occasion of that Rebellion
fully discussed in the Treaty at Vxbridge? Indeed it may be said that those who
in These, or other respects wrought their own Ends, were Obstructers of that
War: But nothing appears so plain, as that the unhappy difference betwixt the
King and Parliament then, was the chief Obstacle. And for that Particular so
much enforced, That Orders were made by the House of Parliament in England,
encroaching upon the Privileges of Parliament in Ireland, I must confess I am
ignorant; unless as to Sr. George Radcliff's Case, who being a Member of the
Commons House of Parliament in Ireland, was sent for thence, After a long
Debate, whether it would not be a Breach of Privilege of the Parliament there,
to demand by Order of the Commons of England a Member thence? Which was
unanimously agreed on to be no Breach of Privilege, for that being impeached
of Treason, there was no doubt but he might be sent for Thence: No Privilege
of Parliament neither Here nor There being sufficient to Protect him; And
accordingly the King writ to his Deputy, that Expedition might be showed in
that Business, which effectually was done. And I find Sr. John Vaughan (late
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in England) in Craw's Case versus Ramsey
fol. 292. makes it evident, "That Ireland is not absolute Sui Juris, declaring
amongst other things, "That the Parliament There cannot make it self not
subject to the Laws, and subordinate to the Parliament of England; which, in
that Ireland is a Conquered Nation, may easily be allowed, and not thought much
of by any whose Interest is English, or their Hearts Loyal, after such an
expense of Treasure, and so much Blood as the English have been prodigal of to
subdue that Kingdom.

To conclude, We are told, That the Northern Parts of Ireland were given up to
the Scots, and a small Body of the English were sent to preserve the South.
That a considerable Force of the Scots went thither is certain, but what
Service they did there more than live upon the Country, is to be enquired.
Indeed those who were there before acted well, and 'twas thought that the New
Scots were sent thither more for Convenience (the Passage being short) than for
any Confidence reposed in them; His Majesty very materially taking notice, That
some of the Articles (by which they came thither) employed too great Trust for
Auxiliary Forces, though to prevent greater Delays in the necessary Supply of
Ireland, He would not further insist on any thing that would delay them. And as
for the English in the South, their Courage and Conduct every way appeared
remarkable, the Cessation being made to their Prejudice and the Causes of it
(necessity) evidenced lately (by an Excellent Pen) to be disputable, if not
fictitious; serving rather to give the Irish more Security, than advance the
English Interest, That the Confederates might Reign alone.

Thus I have run over the Eighth Chapter you commended to my view in the Short
View of the Late Troubles in England, and that not with so severe a Reflection
as it required, It being like to be Favored, when I may not be heard: But in
maintenance of the English Interest in Ireland; the State's Integrity there,
and what was holdly attempted by the Irish; you shall ever have the Affection of

SIR, Your Faithful Humble Servant.
The last of April 1681.
LONDON, Printed for Randall Tailor in Amen-Corner. 1681.


