A LETTER To a FRIEND. Concerning the East India TRADE.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

A LETTER To a FRIEND, Concerning the East India Trade.
SIR,
HAving lately received from you the East India Company's Answers to the
Reasons for a Regulated Company, together with their Reasons why a Joint Stock
will Best carry on the Trade; and your Commands to give you my Opinion therein,
I most willingly submit thereto, in hopes that I may thereby Convince you, and
Confute them. I shall take them in order as they lie in their own Paper.

1st. To the Trade's being more Extensive in a Regulated Company: They Answer,
and say, That though it be a specious Argument, yet it is in Fact, directly
contrary; for in the Muscovy, Turkey, Hamborouh, and East-Land Companies, which
are the only Regulated Companies in England, there are not so many actual
Traders, as there are Persons Concerned in the present East India Joint Stock;
to which they add, That in a Regulated Company, the same is Circumscribed to
Experienced Trading Merchants, and no others; whereas in this Trade to India,
all degrees of Persons, of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy Widows and Orphans, as
well as Merchants, are, or may be Concerned in it, although not skilled in
Trade.

If by Extensive, they mean the Sum of Money Employed, a Joint Stock is no more
Confined to a particular Sum of Money, than a Regulated Company: But can with
great Ease extend the Trade to the utmost degree, as the Nature thereof is
capable.

If the East India Company mean there are not half so many actual Traders in
one of these four Companies, as there are Persons Concerned in the East India
Joint Stock, I do grant it them; for none can imagine there is occasion for so
many Traders to Archangle, the only Port the Muscovia Company Trade to, and
requires not above Forty Thousond Pounds Stock.

But if they mean in all the Four Companies, then they are grossly mistaken;
there are above two thousand English Men actual Traders to those Places, within
the limits of those Companies Charters, besides Foreigners, which are near as
many more. And were those Trades Restrained to the English only, there would be
more than three times the Number of the English Subjects Employed in that
narrow Compass of Trade, than there are Concerned in the present Joint
East-Inda Stock, whose Charter extends to far greater Territories than all
Europe.

Of the home Trades, experienced Merchants have generally the Advantage, though
these want no Instances of several Persons Employing the Estates of others,
that are not Traders, with their own in a joint Interest. But to Evidence
clearly to you, that were this Trade settled in a Regulated Company, the
Nobility, Gentry, Widows, and Orphans, would have greater Opportunities at all
times to be concerned, than in a Joint Stock: I offer as an Instance those
Trading Ships which they call Interlopers, in which not above one third of the
Persons Concerned are Merchants, but their Stock is made up by voluntary
Subscriptions, of all degrees of Persons, who Choose known Experienced Merchants
to Manage it for them, in which every Subscriber has a Vote; and no body can
deny, but those who desire it may have several opportunities Yearly, of
Engaging themselves in such particular Joint Stocks, without excluding all
others, whose Circumstances will not at this time suffer them to Trade to
India; and it is beyond all question, That those Merchants chosen fairly by
every Adventurer, because of their Experience and Honesty, are fitest and
ablest to carry it on, and much better than a Committee Chosen by Art, for some
by purposes in Joint Stocks, without Regard had to their Fitness and
Qualifications. And those Topping Men, who Influence the Choice of the
Committees, do, and by their Interest are bound to Confine their Trade to
particular Sums, and will not in any kind extend them to the Advantage of the
Nation, beyond their stated Profits and private Designs; witness the many
Dividents the East India Campany have made, until they had nothing left them,
on purpose (to use their own Words) to put themselves out of the Power of a
Parliament; after this, some of them lent the Stock 50 per Cent, at Interest,
and since that, they made an Addition to their Stock, as they so called it, by
a new Subscription upon their late Charter; but how much of this New
Subscription-Money was left for them to trade withal, I leave you to judge,
when you shall have deducted the 10 per Cent. abatement, 50 per Cent. advanced,
the Money exhausted for secret Service, the loss of their Stock Subscribed by
their own Members for the Company's Account, on purpose to draw in Honest and
Harmless Moneyed Men, and what they Owed at Interest here in India before all
this; by which means they have sunk most of their Stock, starved and dwindled
the Trade, nor had any Ships from China this long time, and in a manner lost
the Pepper Trade to the Dutch.

In their Second Answer they say, It must be distinguished, whether it is meant
one Buyer in England, or India; if in England, a Joint Stock must buy in Common
with others. As to Selling, the Goods of a joint Stock are always exposed by
Inch of Candle, set up at low Rates, where every Person is admitted to Buy: But
if it is meant Buying in India, it is clearly the Interest of England it should
be so; for by this means, the Commodities of England are Advanced, and those of
India bought at lower Rates, so as not only to supply England much cheaper, but
also the Foreign Markets as Cheap as their Neighbors. To which I Reply, That
if the Company are the only Sellers of East India Goods in England, they will,
or may, have of us what price they please, by bringing home fewer than the
Nation would expend, and feeding of it with no more than will yield them their
own Rates; as the Dutch do with their Spices, which cost them but little more
than Pepper, yet they Sell them at this Extravagant Price by public Sale, to
the highest Bidder; as is the Practice with us by the Candle.

If they are the Buyers of our English Commodities; a Joint Stock must buy in
Common with others; but they have a very great advantage over the Sellers,
which I will clear by this instance: Supposing 30000 long Clothes are made in
England, 20000 or more of them are bought up for the European Markets, the
Remaining must either be Sold for India, or lie on the Clothiers Hands. This
latter the Clothiers cannot suffer, and carry on their Trades, and Employ their
People, so they must Sell to this one Buyer for India at his own Rates; but if
there were 30 or 40 Buyers, instead of this single one, in a Joint Stock, it is
reasonable to believe, the Sellers would obtain both better Prices and Payments.

As for a Joynt-Stock's buying of Goods in India, upon the same advantage they
do our Goods in England, it seems to differ extremely; because in England, our
Manufactors make their Goods for a general Market, not knowing beforehand to
whom, or for what Trade they shall sell them. Whereas in India they do not make
Goods for an uncertain Market, but the European Buyers there do Contract with
the Indian Merchants for the quantity, quality, and prizes of the Goods they
want, and allowed time for their making, and delivery. By which means the
Indians are not at the mercy of a Joynt-Stock for their Commodities; for if the
Europeans will not give them their prices, they will not make them the Goods
they want.

Indeed, a Joynt-Stock may carry to India a few English Goods, and impose their
own Prices on them, making them too dear for the Indians; but if many Persons
carry our Manufactures thither, they must sell them cheaper, to introduce the
general use of them: And though the Merchant, by enlarging Exportation and the
Importation, should make the less profit, yet it is most evident the Nation will
get the more. Besides, the Companies Argument will hold as well for all the
Trades in Europe, as that of India; and then we must have but one Buyer and one
Seller for each Country.

Their Third Answer is, That the Years 1654, 1655, 1656. have given us a
Chargeable Experiment; that opening the India Trade is not the means to regain
it from the Dutch; for there were diverse Considerable Merchants that did then
break in upon that Joint Stock by way of Interloping; who having continued that
way of Trade for three or four years, found themselves so overmatched by the
United Joint Stock of the Dutch, and imposed upon by the Natives in India, in
the point of Buying and Selling, that they themselves, who had formerly broke
in as aforesaid upon that Company, were the Persons that first applied to
Oliver Cromwell for Establishing a Joint Stock, in order to regain the said
Trade, and were the Persons that first Subscribed the same. By which means the
Trade was regained to the Nation, when it was nigh lost.

And they also say, it is so far from obviating the inconveniences of the
Scotch Act, that this Nation will not only find by them (as now constituted in
a Joint Stock) the like Inconveniences they found from the Dutch, but rather
greater, by the nearness of their Neighborhood. Nor can any Nation cope, as to
the East India Trade, with others, unless Established in a like Joint Stock,
supported with the like Privileges and Immunities, etc.

To this I say, That the Dutch in those years of open Trade sunk greatly in
their Stock and Credit; by reason we then Imported great quantities of the
East India Commodities, and undersold them, whereby the Trade was enlarged, and
the Nation enriched, though the Adventurers made the less profit.

This indeed might cause our then Merchants, for their own private interest,
and not for the general good, to imbibe the Dutch Notion of entering into a
Joint Stock (for that Company was then apprehensive they should lose their
Trade, if we did continue to keep ours open and free to all) and therefore our
Merchants were induced to make their applications to Oliver Cromwell to exclude
their fellow Subjects from this Trade, because then they had the prospect of
getting as much by one Hundred Pound Stock, as in open Trade by three Hundred.

And since the Merchants of England could do so much in their Infancy, when
they Traded loose, and had nothing like the Experience and Stock they at
present have, what will they not be able now to do, after their Skill,
Experience, and Stock is more than trebled, and they Trade in a Regulated
Company, which can do all things for the defense and preservation of their
Trade, as well as a Company with a Joint Stock, and improve it abundantly more,
with a far less Charge. For the Company cannot pretend to oppose the Dutch in
India in time of War, and in Peace it must be our Treaties and Strength at
home, that must secure us against any of their Insults abroad. And if the
Natives impose any hardship upon us, it will not be our wisdom to make War upon
them, as the Company rashly did, but procure the removal of them by means of an
Ambassador, by Consuls, and the usual Presents: For the Indians are Men of that
Sense and Morality, that where they meet with honest and fair Dealing, there is
no fear of their displeasure. And at worst, our Merchants will have the same
security in all the Mogull's Ports, as the present Company have at Suratt, and
in the Bay, where they have no Forts, yet drive their Chiefest Trades, and
trust the Natives with their Money before hand.

And if all Englishmen have the freedom of Trade to India, it cannot be
supposed any of them will join with the Scotch, but every one will rather
employ his own Money, if he be a Merchant; and if of any other Condition,
entrust it with his own Countrymen, whom he can readily call to an account for
what he shall so commit to his trust.

Now if all the English decline the Scotch Company, they will want both Stock
and Experience to carry it on, and will sink of themselves.

Their Fourth Answer is, That all Persons may at any time hereafter come into
the Trade; for, notwithstanding upwards of seven Hundred New Adventurers came
into their Joint Stock upon their last Subscription in 1693. yet there has
been each year since great alterations of other New Adventurers. And it cannot
be denied, but the Scotch will change its Owners, as People have occasion to
Sell, or Buy.

To this I Reply, That any Man may Buy a Stock, if he will give them their
Price, which may be treble the intrinsic value of all the Company has, were
it sold, and divided. But, say they, every thing is worth what it is bought and
sold for, which may be so in the opinion of the Buyer; but what losses have
arisen thereby? the Copper, the Saltpeter, the Linen, and many other Stocks,
are sufficient Testimonies, which have been raised by the same Arts used to
mount the East India Stock upon many occasions, to the enriching the Great Men
of it, and to the ruin of many Families.

But a Man cannot always come into that Joint Stock, nor any other on the same
Terms with the first Subscribers. For instance, the present is now Sold at 60
per Cent. and upwards (although according to its intrinsic value it is not
worth 20.) Now suppose the said Company should to morrow be Established by Act
of Parliament Exclusive to others, no Person of what Degree soever, could Buy a
Share in their Stock the same night, under one Hundred Pounds, and perhaps not
under one Hundred and Fifty; and yet they would then have no more Riches than
they have now.

By this it appears, that what pother soever they make about the Nobility,
Gentry, Clergy, Widows, and Orphans, none can come into that Trade, if in a
Joint Stock, but upon great disadvantages, except those that are now actually
concerned in it, or shall upon opening the Books Subscribe to it. Whereas, were
the Trade open to all, in a Regulated Company, every Ship being in the nature
of a Joint Stock, all sorts of Persons might at any time, when they can spare
Money, or as they come of Age, be Interested in it upon the same Terms with any
whatever.

Having now done with their Answers, I proceed to their Reasons.

1st. It has been found by common Experience, That all Nations who have had a
desire to procure to themselves a Trade to India, have made Use of Establishing
a Joint Stock, for the gaining thereof, and upon Trial have found all other
means ineffectual, and therefore have continued the same; and certainly the
most proper means to preserve a Trade, is the same by which it was at first
acquired: And this was the Reason why the Scotch have chose this Method, rather
then a Regulated Company. To which I plainly Answer, That the main of this
Reason is untrue in fact, and in the Conclusson; for the Dutch did not procurre
the Trade to themselves by Establishing a Joint Stock; nor did they try any
other means to find them ineffectual. But they obtained the Trade by a kind of
War, the States Encouraging their Merchants by private Commissions, to look
into those Seas, Proposal^ for Selling the East India Trade.
that they might bring down the Power of Spain (which then had that sole Trade)
in which they obtained wonderful Success, as is at large set down in a Paper
Printed the other day, to which I refer you) and partly by War, and partly by
Trade, became so great, that they were in a manner another Commonwealth; after
which, they were Established as they have since continued: Now should the Dutch
have kept on a perpetual War, to have preserved their Trade, they would most
certainly have found the contrary Consequence, and have lost it, as our present
Company has done: And this Assertion is equally Ridiculous, as to persuade a
grown Person to be held by Leading-strings, because he had by those first
learnt to go.

I flatter my self, that all unbyassed Men will naturally Conclude, that were
this Trade a Mystery, the Masters and first Discoverers of that Mystery, they
ought to Enjoy it only but fourteen Years, as the Law has provided. But that
Time once expired, and the Mystery sufficiently made known; used and practiced
by many Numbers of their fellow Subjects, whose Right it is become, will any
Man in his Senses declare, that the only way to Improve and Enlarge their Art
or Invention, is to appropriate the Use of it to those Persons only for ever,
who first acquired it.

But the present Company have not been the first Discoverers of this Trade, and
yet have Enjoyed it above Forty Years.

Nor is that Assertion true, That the Scotch for that very Reason chose a Joint
Stock; for they have had no Experience of that Trade, the practical part is
still a Mystery to them; and they want Estates to undertake it: These are most
probably the Reasons why the Scotch Parliament accepted the Proposals of a
Joint Stock; though I am apt to believe that the Projector's chief Design was
the hopes of Gain by Stockjobbing.

2d. Reason, That in case of any Difference between the Traders and the
Indians, the strength a Joint Stock will Maintain in India, will enable them
better to preserve their Factories, and oblige the Indians to do them Justice.

3dly. That in case of any difference or dispute with any European Nation in
India, such Joint Stocks will be best able to preserve their Trade.

4thly. That it is very well known, the People of India, how Moral soever said
to be, yet their Forms of Government do not admit those open Ways to Justice,
practiced in Europe; wherefore the double Arguments of Force and Money to bribe
the Government, must be always ready, otherwise upon every little Dispute, they
will overrun and seize the Persons and Effects, of any Regulated or open
Trader, which will always be fomented by the Joint Stocks of other European
Nations.

To which three together I Answer. Brave and Boldly said, and had our Company
as much Conscience as they have Confidence to assert any thing makes for them,
whether Right or Wrong, they were worthy of a Mark of Distinction: Themselves
know that the two Ships, the Seamore and the Henry were admitted to Trade in
India, and kindly used in the Mogul's Dominions, although their Factors, by the
Company's own positive Orders, accused them as Pirates, and Prosecuted them as
such very Industriously, I may say, Unnaturally insinuated the Belief thereof
into them, because they knew there could not be a more provoking Crime for
those People to punish, by reason of their vast Losses they had sustained from
Pyracy; and yet neither their Persons nor Effects were seized and detained,
after they were undeceived; but on the contrary, preserved and well used. And
in Case of any difference that may arise between us and the Indians, or
Europeans in India, a Regulated Company can by the Prudence and Honesty of
their Factors, Commanders of Ships, and by Presents to the Indian Governors,
by an Ambassador at the Mogul's Court, and Consuls, etc. work the same, nay
better effect upon them, than this present Company; whose Forts and Castles are
to very little, if any purpose at all, on such occasions. Our Honest and Just
Dealing can only secure us amongst them; and our Wooden Castles and Powers at
Home can alone Protect us from the Affronts and Injuries of Europeans abroad.
So I enter upon their Fifth Reason.

That in case of any considerable Loss or want of Profit in the Trade, a Joint
Stock must still struggle with it; their whole Stock being apporpriated for the
Trade: whereas in a Regulated Company, or open Trade, every Man Trades as he
pleases, and Discontinues when he will; such will Trade no longer than he finds
the same to answer his Expectation, but will quit it upon the least
Discouragement.

To which I reply, This might have some Influence, could they give the World an
Instance where a profitable Trade (as we count this to India, in which is such
diversity) has been declined by the People of England, who are so far from
leaving it upon the least Discouragement. That I know no Trade (though it has
been carried on to loss for many Years successively, but it has been not only
maintained, but continued to be overdone. Witness formerly the Newfound-Land,
Mallaga, Virginia, and at present the Jamaica, Barbados, Leward-Island Trades,
none of these have been starved or neglected, notwithstanding the incredible
losses and disappointments many of those Merchants have sustained. We want only
scope and liberty to employ our industry and our Stocks against the Dutch, or
any other Competitors. And might this Nation but obtain so great a Blessing, as
to have this Trade open to them all in general, it would soon appear, that as
well in this, as in all other Trades, where the Dutch have a Company with a
Joint Stock, and we are left free, we shall greatly reduce their Trades, and
enlarge ours.

6. Whereas Joynt-Stocks have at a very vast Expense obtained many great
Privileges and Immunities from the Indians, as Coining of Money, Trading
Custom-free, and many others; which, if a Regulated Company, or open Trade be
introduced, will be utterly lost.

This, as all the rest, is but a specious pretense; for whatever that of
Coining of Money may be, by which they can have no advantage, the impression
they give adding nothing to its value; all the other Privileges they have,
Vide The Proposals.
were obtained, not by this Company, but by others, and for the benefit of the
English Nation; and so run all their Phirmaunds. And every private Ship that
hitherto Traded in India, has had the advantages thereof.

7. It Is very well known, that in the Year 1602. the Dutch seeing the Errors of
a losing Trade to India, did after some years Experience, reduce the whole into
one United Joint Stock, with such Privileges as they have enjoyed ever since;
which has carried that Trade to the height it now is. And it cannot be
denied, but the genius of Trade has appeared there in its utmost strength. And
it is to be feared, unless the like Methods be pursued in this Nation, the
East India Trade will pass to some other Country; Trade always taking its
Course where it finds the best treatment, and is allowed the greatest
Advantages.

8. But admitting a Regulated Trade might struggle with some difficulties, yet
in case of any Breach between the English and Dutch, certainly the whole Trade
will be lost, they being very strong in India in numbers of Subjects, and
Fortifications, which have not only been got by their being brought to a Joint
Stock, but are now maintained, and daily Improving, which a Regulated Company
can never withstand.

And it is to be doubted, unless great Encouragement be given to a Joint Stock,
they also will hardly be able, in such case to continue, and preserve the Trade
to this Nation.

To these, having in part answered already, I shall only add, that our
East India Company, with their Joint Stock, have not in time of War been able
by force to Resist the Dutch in the Indies; and if you will believe the Letters
from their own Chiefs and Consuls from thence, Vide the same Prop^sals.
there is no manner of appearance that they ever will; and the Dutch East India
Company, who have many Fortifications, never Erected any for such a purpose;
they know how pernicious War is, to any that are settled in a profitable Trade,
in a potent Prince's Country.

But their Forts are to oppress the Inhabitants of the Spice and Pepper
Islands, and force them to Trade with themselves only, upon their own Terms;
which yet turns to small Account, as appears by their Inconsiderable Dividents
(of 5 and 6. per Cent. per An. on the value of their Stock) in regard of their
many Rich Ships Yearly brought home by them of late: Such is their vast Charge
of maintaining a Trade by Force, That were the same set open to all the
Subjects of England in a Regulated Company; without being clogged with that
unnecessary Expense; it would soon appear, that when the English gain 30 to 40
per Cent. (which is a sufficient Encouragement in times of Peace, to extend
that Trade to the utmost) the Dutch East India Company must be reduced; for
nothing can so much bring down their Elevated Company, and discourage any other
Nation to fall into that Trade, than to Import the East India Commodities in
great quantities, and sell them Cheaper in our Markets; so that if the whole
Subsidy upon East India Goods Exported, were drawn back, as the whole
Additional Duty, and half the Subsidy now is; there needs, in my Opinion, no
other Encouragement (befides that) to be given to that Trade.

But if the Parliament shall, after all, think fit to Establish the Trade to
India in a Joynt-Stock, it may be hoped they will not Establish this present
Company, who have not merited so distinguishing a Favor; but take care to
preserve the Right of the Subject; that all, of what (...)


