A LETTER To a FRIEND in the COUNTRY, concerning his Grace the Duke of
Buckingham.
SIR,
I Do confess the late proceedings against the Duke of Buckingham surprises my
Understanding more than ever any thing yet has done (in our Nation) since his
Majesty's happy Restoration, and especialy when we pretend to no Arbitrary
Government; but since so infamous a person as Mrs. Le-Mar, and her Son can gain
such points of favorable advantage against so great a man; what shall we of a
lower degree expect, when any malicious Adversaries will please themselves to
be revenged? In my opinion, the Complement the Grand Seignior generally uses to
Favorites in disgrace, is much more tolerable, than to let such grand and
infamous Impostors reign in their Perjuries and Subornations; not that I speak
this in any reflection to his Majesty, whose innate principles of Justice is
well known to all the World; but the matter I complain of, is, that his
Ministers of State should have impudence enough, to dare to persuade him, to
lessen himself so much to appear their Property, for the sake of their own
Malice and Envy; and truly the proceedings at the Council Table have showed no
less, if we had not Testimonies of his Integrity and Love to Justice; for it is
not equal to hear one party and not another in any cause; and far more
abominable to encourage the Impostor, when lights have been so far offered, to
make them appear so visibly to all the World.

Sodomy no doubt is a very grievous sins, for it wrongs the intention of the
Creation and Generation of the World; and for that reason, our wise Laws have
provided a punishment fit for so horrid a sin; and I do not doubt, but this
Great Man detests the abominableness of it as much, or more, than those judging
people who wrong him in his Fame and Honor, in thinking and concluding him
guilty. I may offer an English Proverb in this Case, and I hope not improper,
That the old Woman have never looked for her Daughter in the Oven, but that she
had been there her self. If it be a reflection to any one, they have urged it
from an impartial hand, bribed to nothing but the Truth, nor for advantage
would take the pains to write this. But knowing Truth to be but one thing, and
that there is great variety in Wrong, makes me endeavor to defend that single
Excellence, seeing that silver Dams stem her course, and would make her obscure
her beautiful self, did not a courageous Innocence endeavor to pluck up the
Sluice, and let the world see her naked Beauty.

These cunning, yet silly managers have not wisdom enough to foresee the fatal
consequence of their own Ruin, and by the dangerous snare they have laid for
this great Duke, always make their own Estates and Lives insecure, when any
Enemy that has money enough to engage Subornations, will please to make their
lives their sports, to facillitate their own ends.

And it is too practicable a thing now in our Nation to swear people out of all
their beings; nor will it ever be otherwise while Money and Encouragement is
given to those sort of Hellish Caterpillars, who eat people out of their lives
in a formal pretense of Law, Swearing for the King, when every honest Subject
that is lost, is taking away both an ornament and a supporter of his Dignity.

There is another sort of Killing, besides taking away the Life, and that is a
taking away a man's Reputation and Honor; and that these Mushrooms have learnt
from their especial St. Machiavel, who tells you, Asperse and blacken much your
Enemy, and some thing, (though not true) which still is to his disadvantage.
This Course the Duke of Buckingham's back-friends have taken, and made several
Calumnious Reports of him, and endeavored to persuade his Majesty, that when
he retired from a dangerous prospect of Imprisonment into France, that he was
gone to break the Kings Measures there.

I would willingly know from any Learned man, whether his Grace would sell his
own Country, betray his Majesty, inslave himself to Popery, and be sure of his
own ruin, for revenge to the despicable Earl of D. because he contrived,
assisted, and assists this Villainy against him. --

But still the Snake lies underneath, and it is so cowardly a wickednedss, that
they which still under hand act, are ashamed to own it, though villainous, and
extrajudiciall proceedings daily are visible.

Otherwise, why did they trouble the King and Council Table with a business of
this Nature? Was it ever heard that Sodomy had a redress where there was no
power to give it, or that a Court of no Record ought to hear Crimes of this
nature? But I beg the Readers pardon, they would hear but one, and therefore
it is to be hoped, 'twas to entertain their leisure, vacated by want of knowing
what to do at that present time.

Yet the Consequences of it were very malignant; for a poor petty Sessions at
Westminster learnt them their Lesson by their proceedings; and so expert they
were, that the very Jury had papers in their pockets, to interrogate the Dukes
Evidences in matters not concerning what they came to evidence; and all to save
dear Mr. L. a Pillar of the Congregation of D.

The Justices looked themselves like Privy Counselors, and sweet Sr. F. like
President of the Board, the Crier thought himself no worse than Sr. P. L. but
much more impudent: for when the Dukes Witnesses desired to hear what Verdict
the chosen Jury brought in he told them fairly, they must remove.

Then when the victorious Triumph was obtained for honest Mr. L. though matter
of Subornation, was positively sworn by two untainted Witnesses, and the Bill
for all that, found Ignoramus. Presently the Hectors of the Cause run to an
Intelligencer, to let me Mobile see the innocence of the Young man, and
scandalously and falsely, (not I believe mistakingly) prints an Infamous Woman
brought to swear for the Duke, by Mrs. P. against Mr. L. when there was no such
Woman as mentioned in that Paper, nor well known to Mrs. P. but the Woman that
then swore before the Jury, was a worthy Widow of a man of great Reputation,
and not brought by Mrs. P. nor known to her, that she was to be there.

But they have nothing to support their scandalous Conspiracy against the D. of
Buckingham, but Lies and Perjuries, and they imagine, if they defame his
Evidences, they gain a point of mischief, and that pleases these silly
underhand Knaves.

But, Sir, you were pleased in your last to desire an account how this matter
came to be scanned before the Council; truly at the first I was as much to seek
in that matter, as I presume you are, but very lately enquiring into it, some
that Justice Barnsley having taken the Examination of Le-Mar, was sent for the
next day to the Tower, to the Lord D. who, although a Traitor under
Impeachment, having no just way to acquit himself, but by an illegal Pardon,
yet had he the impudence to chastize the Justice for doing but his Duty, and
withal, letting him know, he should come to trouble for doing that Act,
although it cannot be denied by every honest man, that it was a Legal Action:
however within some few days time (according to this Great Lords
Prognostication) the Council did interpose in the affair, and ordered the
Justice to be turned out of the Commission of the Peace, for daring to venture
to take a Confession from Le-Mar, wherein it did manifestly appear, the Lord D.
(as the chief Villain) was accused. I am sorry to be thus overtedious, and
therefore shall not further tire your patience, only this, that since the
printed Bawd took the boldness to tell the world of an Order for the
prosecution of the Justice, and others for doing their duty, it may not be
amiss to inform you, the Effect of that Order in Surrey, as well as Sr. W's
Jury in Westminster, the great Lord D. having by his own Attorney, got an
Indictment drawn against the Justice for tampering with Le-Mar, was at the
charge of a Coach and four Horses to carry Le-Mar, to the Sessions at Croyden
in State, there to swear the Indictment, which was so lamely done, that had it
not been for Sr. J. B's. Clerk, and the Order of Council, and several Clerks of
the Council that took the pains to bring Le-Mar's Examinations taken before
them formerly, and to give them for Evidence to the Jury, by the Chair-man's
express Order, the Knave in the Tower had lost both his labor and charge;
insomuch that the Jury themselves that were awed two or three times together,
refused to find the matter; but this silly, silly, as well as the Knave, got a
mighty point in this great Action, insomuch that the CRACK-FART of the Nation
ought to take especial notice. And here give me leave to observe the difference
of the two Sessions, one could not find the Bill with two positive Evidences;
at the other, there was not one but the Papers, and the power of the Justice,
telling the Jury, that a probability was enough, especially where the Council
had ordered the matter.

FINIS.

