A LETTER Giving an ACCOUNT Of the manner of choosing JOSEPH King of HUNGARIA TO
BE King of the Romans, On JAN. 21. 16889/90. By the eight Electors of the
Sacred Roman Empire.

LICENSED, Jan. 18. 1690.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, and are to be sold by R. Baldwin in the Old
Baily, 1690.

A LETTER Giving an Account of the choosing the King of the ROMANS.
WHEN Charles the Great had overcome Desiderius the King of the Lombards, and
put him to flight, the Pope Leo, the Senate, and the People of Rome, conferred
the Imperial Dignity with an unanimous consent upon him, with the Kingdom of
Germany, and in his Posterity it has continued by a hereditary Succession to
Louys the IV. or as some write by a mixed one, viz. by a hereditary and elective
Succession.

The Caroline Line being ended by Louys the IV. the Princes of the Empire did
offer the Imperial Crown with one consent to Otto Prince of Saxony, but Prince
Otto being of a great Age, did refuse that great Honor, and advised the
Princes to choose Conrad Duke of Franconia, commending him for a great Hero,
and a very expert Man in Wars, and worthy of the Imperial Crown: The Princes
approving of his counsel, offered the Imperial Crown to the said Conrad Prince
of Franconia, which he readily accepted of. To him succeeded Henry surnamed the
Fowler, and Henry was succeeded by Otto the Great, and Otto the Great by Otto
the XI. And after him the others came to the Crown by a mixed Succession, partly
by a Hereditary, partly by an Elective one, till Henry the Fourth's time. But
in his time the Princes of the Empire by the Popes instigation, whose interest
it was, that the strength of the Empire by a free Election might be lessened
and appaised, did wholly abrogate the hereditary Succession, and established by
a public Law, That no body should come to the Royal Power and Dignity by
Inheritance, as it formerly used to be; and that if the King's Son were never
so worthy and accomplished a Prince, yet he should not by Succession, but by
Election, come to the Throne. Notwithstanding this Law, according to the Custom
of the Germans, they always used to prefer the deceased King's Son, or his
nearest Relation, if they were worthy and qualified: They sometimes chose the
King's Son, or his nearest Kindred (the Parents living) and had also a great
regard to the Royal Line in their Election, because they did see, that the
neglect thereof, and the passing over the Royal Blood, commonly caused great
Troubles. And perhaps if this old German custom in the Election had not been
revived again, the Commonwealth would have fallen to a total decay; And this has
been the cause, that out of the most illustrious Austrian Family from Albert
the II. without any interruption, eleven Emperors have been chosen, Ferdinand
the IV. not comprehended, who dyed King of the Romans.

Yet this did not lessen or derogate in the least the liberty of Election, nor
did out of this long time accrue any right to the Family of Austria: For it is
not the Family, but the prudent choice of the Electors, that makes them Roman
Kings and Emperors; and it is by reason of the great Power and Honor, and the
Merits of their Ancestors, and because the Kingdoms which this Family
possesses, which are like a Bulwark to Germany against the Turkish Cruelty and
Fury, that the Electors have been pleased to choose out of it their Head, and
without some very great Reasons they will never leave the same. Now to assure
you of this free Election, we will see what the Capitulations provide in this
case, which they did swear to keep.

First of all, we neither shall nor will pretend to any Succession or
Inheritance of the Sacred Roman Empire, nor assume or attempt the same? Nor
shall we in no wise and manner aspire, or endeavor to attain to it, for our
selves, for our Heirs and Successors, neither for any body else.

But on the contrary, We as well as our Issue, our Heirs and Successors, will
maintain the Electors, their Heirs and Successors for ever, in their free
election of the King of the Romans, according to the Golden Bull; and the same
as often and in all cases, when they shall think it necessary for the
conservation of the Fundamental Laws and this Capitulation, as also when they
shall think it necessary and for the good of the Empire, to choose a King of the
Romans in the Roman Emperor's Life time, that they may do it as well without as
with his consent.

And as it has been of old, according to the Golden Bull, the ancient Rights,
and other Laws and Liberties, that if any thing should come to decay or be
infringed, so that the necessity and occasion should require, That the Vicars
of the Empire should meet and consult together about the Affairs of the sacred
Roman Empire, the said Vicars then shall in no wise be molested or disturbed.

This Election is twofold, Ordinary and Extraordinary.

The Ordinary is that of an Emperor, when the Empire is become vacant, either
by the Emperors Death, or by his Resignation, or else when he is deposed from
the Empire.

But the Extraordinary Election is that of a King of the Romans, when in the
Emperor's Life time, with or without his consent, the Electors of the Empire
choose a King of the Romans, who in the Emperor's absence, or when he is
indisposed, governs and manages the Empire: And who after the Emperor's Death
without any further Election, succeeds the Emperor in his Name, Dignity and
Power; and this is done to avoid an Interregnum, as a thing that is very seldom
prosperous.

The Persons that choose him are the Electors of the Sacred Roman Empire, who
enjoyed that Right of choosing, first, by custom; but after it was confirmed to
them by an express Law in the Golden Bull of Charles the IV.

A great many are of that opinion, That this extraordinary Election of a Roman
King is against the Constitutions of the Empire, and that the same Election
does repugn the Liberties of the Electors; and that under the pretense of the
said Election, the Emperors can aspire, and design a hereditary Succession.

It is true, that it is not conformable to the Golden Bull, although there are
many Examples, that thus has been chosen a King of the Romans, yet by right it
ought not to be so; because, when the Golden Bull speaks of such a King, it is
meant in case of necessity, when the Imperial See is vacant, and the Empire is
without a Head and Governor. For the words in the Golden Bull, as often as,
and whenever, are to be understood, as often, and when the Empire is vacant.

Besides, the Power, Right, and Authority of the Temporal Electors, to whom the
Government of the Empire, and the Vicarship in such cases, is entrusted by the
Golden Bull, is very much diminished and weakened, because they cannot exercise
their Rights, nor enjoy their Prerogatives; moreover, it looks as if the said
Electors were not capable of this Government, ad interim. There were great
contestations in the last Century at the election of Ferdinand the I. insomuch,
that in the same Business the Prince of Bavaria did join himself to the
Protestant Princes, fearing that this Election by little and little would turn
into a hereditary one, and deprive the Princes of the Empire of their free
Election, because the Emperor living will always strive to have some of his own
Children or of his Kindred about him, rather than any Prince besides; and as
they call the Emperor's Election a free one, so they style that of a Roman King
a forced one.

As for the beginning of it, it is very old. For not only in the time of the
Caroline Family, the Sons in their Parents Life time were assured of the
Succession, but were also admitted into the Communion of the Regal and Imperial
Dignity, and made partakers thereof; but this was done too hereafter in the
Families of the Emperors of Saxony, Suevia, and Austria, when the Sons in their
Fathers Life time were constituted Successors: As, By Otto I. in his life time
Otto II. By Otto II. in his life time Otto III. By Conrad II. in his life time
Henry II. By Frederic I. in his life time Henry VI. By Frederic II. in his life
time First Henry, and then Conrad. By Frederic III. in his life time Maximilian
I.


But all these Examples of those remote Centuries, as they did depend on those
Emperors Wills, so they are more a matter of Fact than of Right. Wherefore we
will not extend this modern Election of a Roman King beyond its true beginning,
which was in Ferdinand the First's time.

When Charles the V. desired the Princes of the Empire to choose his Brother
Ferdinand King of the Romans; there arose a very hot Dispute between the
Emperor and the Elector of Saxony, the Duke of Lunenbourg, the Landgrave of
Hess, the Prince of Anhalt, and the Count of Mansfeld; all which would not
consent to this Election as contrary to the Golden Bull Yet Charles V. obtained
it from the States of Germany, and Ferdinand King of Bohemia and Hungaria, was
proclaimed King of the Romans at Cologn in the Year 1531, on the 5th of
January. The Reasons which the Emperor his Brother proposed, were indeed
weighty enough; He told the Princes, That he did not know a better and fitter
Person for this, than his Brother the King of Hungaria and Bohemia, because his
Kingdoms and Frontiers were like a Bulwark to Germany against the Infidels.

Queen Elizabeth was quite of a contrary opinion; for when the States of the
Kingdom desired her to nominate a Successor, she did forbid it on pain of
Death, That no body should speak of a Successor during her life: For says she,
one must not dig himself a Grave as long as one does live.

The Emperor told them further, That he could not always be in Germany, because
of the several Kingdoms and Nations he Reigned over, and that all Christendom
were now in a very troublesome and desperate state, chiefly Germany, because of
the several Religions, and the greatness of the Turks and their Power, and then
because of the Sedition and the War that arose between the Peasants, etc.

But the Elector of Saxony and his Confederates disapproving this Election,
desired of the Emperor, that if nevertheless, Ferdinand being rejected, he
would have a Coadjutor; that he would then with the advice of the Princes,
interpret the Caroline Law, confirm and establish the same by an Edict as it
ought to be in this manner.

That for the future in the Emperors Life time, never a King of the Romans
should be chosen, before the Electors, with the six other Princes of the
Empire, having effectively approved of it that it may be done so.

Then the Elector of Mentz in the Quality of Arch-Chancellor in Germany, must
assemble his Colleagues, with the six other Princes in a fit place, to
deliberate further about this business; and when they have done all this
punctually, then the Electors only with the King of Bohemia shall have the sole
power to create a King of the Romans. When the King of the Romans thus is
created in the Emperors life time, he shall govern the Empire, not in his, but
the Emperor's Name, without arrogating, or attributing to himself any Power or
Government. The Princes and States of the Empire shall not be bound to him by
Oath, or otherwise, till after the Emperor's death. When the King of the Romans
is chosen, he is to be sworn by no other Form but by that of the Carolin Law,
neither shall it be in the power of the Electors to alter this Form. Whosoever
shall be convicted of having acted contrary to this Oath, or whosoever is
fallen under any suspicion, and has not cleared or excused himself of that
matter, he shall be deprived of all the Rights of Electorship for ever; neither
shall they henceforth choose out of one and the same Family three Roman Kings
one after another. None but one that is of a German Princely Family is to be
chosen King of the Romans; and whatsoever is established by the Carolin Law
concerning the Creation of a King, that shall neither the King of the Romans
nor the Emperor alter. Whenever the Electors think it fit to create a King of
the Romans, they need not to impart it to the Emperor beforehand; neither shall
it be lawful for the Emperor in this case to order the Elector of Mentz to call
the Electors together. But when for some weighty Reasons (as it ought to be) a
King of the Romans is to be chosen in the Emperor's Life time, then the Elector
of Mentz shall call his Colleagues together, and appoint them a certain day, on
which they shall appear at Francford upon the Mayn; neither shall it be in his
power to appoint any other place for this illustrious Meeting, except the
Electors for some great Reasons do grant it him. The Elector of Mentz shall not
demand the Crown and Scepter, with the rest of the Imperial Ornaments of the
City of Nurenberg, without the consent of the other Electors. The three Months
time (beginning from the denunciation thereof) within which the Electors ought
to appear, shall not be diminished; for it concerns the Empire and the
Commonwealth very much, if one or the other should not be present at that time:
In the mean time, when the Electors are thus a deliberating at Francford, all
the rest must be excluded. And when the least of these things is violated, the
Electors then are not obliged to come to that place, neither to stay there; and
if any thing had been done there, it shall be void and null.

Upon this the Elector of Saxony promised at the Transaction in Bohemia in the
year 1534, that he like the other Princes of the Empire, would acknowledge
Ferdinand the I. for the King of the Romans: And Ferdinand on the other side
did promise, That he would make, that the following Articles should be
confirmed by the Emperor and the Electors.

1. That for the future none should be chosen King of the Romans in the
Emperor's Life time, unless that the Electors have first met together, and
found it to be necessary, and for the good of the Empire. 2. When they have
found it necessary, and for the good of the Empire, then they shall proceed to
the Election, according to the Golden Bull. 3. And if any thing should be done
contrary to the Golden Bull, that it should be void and null. 4. If these
Articles by Ferdinand's intercession should not be approved of by the Emperor,
and the others; then the said Elector and his Allies, reserve and keep to
themselves their own Right.
When the Elector of Saxony did see that King Ferdinand made not fully good his
word concerning the said Articles, he continued in disowning him King of the
Romans till the year 1546, when in the month of May at the Diet at Spire, this
matter came to an agreement.

It was afterward very prudently inserted into the Capitulations by the
Emperor Matthias and his Successors, that it should be lawful to the Electors
to choose a King of the Romans, when the welfare and great necessity of the
Empire does require it, whether the Emperor will or no; and this for several
other Reasons too, chiefly that the Empire may be sure of a Successor, and
others in their vain and imaginary hopes cut off.

The words of Matthias his Capitulation in the 35 Article, run thus.

We will, and ought to maintain, etc. the said Electors, their Successors, and
their Heirs for ever, in their free election of a Roman King, as often as the
said Election tends to the Emperor's help and assistance, or else when the good
and the necessity of the Empire does require it, and this in the Roman
Emperor's Life too; and when upon the request of the Electors it should be
denied them without some very great Reasons, that the Electors then may choose
one against the Emperor's will. Nay, by virtue of the Leopoldin Capitulation,
the Electors are not obliged to have so much as the Emperor's consent herein.

This extraordinary Election is performed by the Electors as well as the
ordinary Election of a Roman Emperor; for it has been their business hitherto,
to see whether it is for the advantage of the Empire to choose a King of the
Romans, wherefore some refer the Reasons of choosing a King of the Romans
amongst the Secrets of the Electoral College.

But in the instrument of the Peace of Osnabruck, it was provided, That the
Election of the King of the Romans should be made in the Universal Assemblies,
with the general consent of the States of the Empire; and thence it is, that
the rest of the other States claim and attribute to themselves the right of
sitting in the Examination, and the taking cognizance of the causes of choosing
a King of the Romans. For thus the States of the Circle of lower Saxony at
Lunenbourg in the year 1652, did say,

Whereas the Election of the King of the Romans concerns all the States of the
Empire, and that the Empire may continue in its form and Fundamental Laws, it
is but right and reasonable, that when in the Life of an Emperor a King of the
Romans should be chosen, that the Reasons thereof should be made known to all
the States, and that they should have an equal share in the Consultations.

The end of this Election is two fold.

1. That the Empire for certain may have a Successor, and it is to avoid all
Troubles which may arise hereafter by an ambiguous or doubtful Election. 2.
That in the absence of the Emperor, he may supply his place in governing the
Empire; for the Emperor having then three Kingdoms, that of Germany, that of
the Lombards, and the Romish; he very often went there, as well to be Crowned
there, and to receive Homage, as to subdue them again when they were in
Rebellion.
This Election is carried by the majority of Voices; and every Elector shall
not have above 200 Horsemen in his retinue; yet this has not been observed so
strictly, but some had sometimes above 1000 with them. No Stranger is suffered
to stay in the City during this Election; and outlandish Ambassadors too must
retire out of the City; and wherever this Election is, that City guards the
City by its own Men.

The particulars of this Election are chiefly these.

If the elected King perhaps was the Roman Emperor's Son, then the Deputy of
the Electoral College makes the Emperor acquainted with his Son's Dignity.
Upon which the Emperor presents himself in an Appartment to the Electors, and
gives them first thanks for the love and affection they have for his Family,
and promises them, that he will do all his endeavors, as well in instructing
his Son in the Government and high Station they have been pleased to elevate
him to, as in helping and assisting them when and wherever the occasion
should require it, and then he admonishes his Son too, to be grateful to the
Electors. Thus the most glorious Emperor Ferdinand III. did exhort his Son
Ferdinand IV. after he was chosen King of the Romans at Ausbourg, May. 24.
1653, and Crowned at Ratisbonne June 18. 1653. and had thanked the Electors for
his Election: The Emperor then spoke to his Son the elected King, saying,

And you my Son, consider what a heavy burden you now have upon you, and
therefore how much need you have of their ^^^^^nesses the Electors counsel and
help, whose propense favor and good will toward Us, you ought gratefully to
acknowledge all the days of your life; and so wholly depending of their
counsel, you also must revere them.

To which the elected King presently answered, in a short and a most elegant
Speech to his Father the Emperor, and the Electors, which was very much to the
purpose.

And so having thus thanked the Electors, the elected King and the Electors go
out, then the Marshall shuts the door of the Apartment; and when the King has
taken his Oath in the Vestry, that he will keep the Capitulations, he is
conducted to the high Altar, upon which he is lifted up by the Electors; all
the Electors who are present assist in this, and if some are absent and have
their Envoys there, the said Envoys or Plenipotentiaries are not admitted to
that elevation: It is likewise so when they are of an odd or unequal number. As
for example, when three Spiritual and two Temporal Electors are there, then to
make the number even; one of the three Spiritual Electors is excluded, and the
two other Spiritual with the two Temporal Electors, perform that Office; in the
mean while there is heard an incomparable Music, and the Trumpets, Kettle
Drums, and Bells, applaud this Solemn Action.

The Elector of Brandenbourg takes then the Crown from the elevated Kings Head,
which the Elector Palatine lays aside. When the King is taken down from the
Altar, the Vicars approach to the Table, and take from thence the Imperial
Ornaments which they deliver to the Electors that are present, and they keep
the Ornaments of the absent Electors: And so they conduct the elected King to
the Throne in a competent order, every one taking his Princely Seat at the
usual side; and then one of the Canons of Mentz, and commonly the chiefest, the
Thumprobst proclaims the elected King, which they in a most ravishing manner
accompany to the Palace.

The King of the Romans that is thus chosen in the Emperor's Life time, differs
from the Emperor.

1. In his Coat of Arms; the Emperor has a two-headed Eagle, but the King of
the Romans has but a single one. 2. The Emperor makes use of Bulls, but the
King of the Romans only of a Seal. 3. The Emperor is called Always August, but
the Roman King is only called August* 4. The Emperor calls, and greets the King
of the Romans, Our Cousin, etc. or sometimes Majesty and Cousin together; but
the King calls the Emperor his Lord and Majesty. 5. The King of the Romans can
commit High Treason against the Emperor. 6. The Power of the Roman King is but
by the Commission of the Emperor, so that whatsoever he does, he does it by the
Emperor's Authority, which appears by the Capitulation prescribed to Rodolph
the II.
We will not assume to Us any thing of the Government, or Administration of the
Sacred Roman Empire, no further than as far as his Imperial Majesty will grant
and permit Us.

Neither shall or will we be in any way prejudicial to his Majesty's Highness
and Imperial Dignity, during his Majesty's Life.

But some say, that he has his Power by virtue of his Election, which Power is
limited, and only to be exercised at a certain time and manner. Such is to be
seen in R. J. Spir. 1542. instead and in the name of his Imperial Majesty, and
for Our Self. And in the Capitulation of Maximilian the II. and Ferdinand the
III. by Our Royal and future Imperial Government.

The King of the Romans on the other side, agrees with the Emperor in regard of
his Dignity, save the Emperor's Prerogative and Pre-eminence. And thence it is,
that the King of the Romans is called the Head of the Empire after the Emperor,
because he is in certain hopes to have it, as sure as the Dolphin in France is
to have the Kingdom of France, and a true Prince of Wales that of Great
Britain, and the Prince in Spain that of Spain.

Now the Elector of Mentz as Arch-Chancellor through Germany, did assemble the
Electors of the Roman Empire, according to the said manner; and the form of the
Golden Bull, entreating them, That they would come to the Election of a King of
the Romans at Augsbourg, within the space of three Months, which they did
accordingly, and appeared there.

And first of all, Leopold the Roman Emperor, and then the eight Electors.

1. Anselm Francis, Frederic Elector, and Archbishop of Mentz, and
Arch-Chancellor through Germany. 2. John Hugo Elector, and Archbishop of
Trier, Arch-Chance^lor through France. 3. Clemens Elector, and Archbishop of
Cologn, Arch-Chancellor through Italy. 4. Leopold King of Bohemia, Arch-Skinker
or Arch-Cup-bearer of the Sacred Roman Empire. His Person was represented by
the Chancellor of the Kingdom of Bohemia. 5. Maximilian Maria Elector of
Bavaria, and Arch-Sewer of the Sacred Roman Empire. 6. George the III. Elector
of Saxony, and Arch-Marshal of the Sacred Roman Empire. He was represented by
his Ambassador. 7. Frederic the III. Elector of Brandenbourg, and
Arch-Chamberlain of the Sacred Roman Empire, did not come in Person, but was
represented by his Ambassador. 8. Philip William Elector Palatin, and
Arch-Treas^rer of the Sacred Roman Empire.
They being assembled at Augsbourg, the Emperor in a fine Speech desired them
to choose a King of the Romans, to which hitherto the unhappy Division of the
Empire has put a stop, and now being united, he entreated them to proceed to
that Election for the good of the Empire, and then that the French King might
be frustrated in his imaginary and vain hopes he hitherto did feed himself
with, in aspiring to an Universal Monarchy, and recommended to them his own Son
Joseph King of Hungaria, as well for his Virtue as his Power.

This Prince Joseph, whose Youth promises great things, was born the 26th. of
June 1678. of Leopold the Emperor his Father, and of Eleonora the Empress his
Mother, the Elector Palatin's eldest Daughter.

Upon this the Electors continued in their Meetings and Consultations, and
fixed the 21/11 of January 1690, for that great Election, and formed the
Capitulation the King of the Romans is bound by Oath to keep, and then upon the
said day they proceeded to the Election, and with one consent they chose Joseph
King of Hungaria King of the Romans.

The Coronation is speedily to be performed, and great preparations are made
for it, and a great quantity of Medals coined: The confluence of Strangers of
all ranks which come from all parts of Christendom to see this unparalled
sight, is so great here, that we reckon above 3000 already come to this place.

FINIS.

