Belfast, May 8. 1690. A LETTER, to a Friend, concerning the present State of
the Army in Ireland, which bating the Relation of Charlemont, (which is since
taken) contains several things which will not be altogether unacceptable to
you. SIR,
YOU having a great mind to understand the state of things in Ireland, I Will
give you an Extract of a Letter which I have received from a Person of Quality
and Credit in the Army. There was a Detatchment out of the Regiment of Col.
Cutts consisting of 60 Men, commanded by a Captain, a Lieutenant, etc. who were
ordered to keep a Post which hindered any of the Garrison of Charlemont to go
out: On which about Five Hundred of the Garrison Sallied out to Attack them;
ours were reinforced by Twenty French, making but Eighty Men in all, commanded
by the Marquis de Rada, a Captain in that Regiment. They behaved themselves
with so much Bravery and Conduct, that they forced the Enemy back, killing and
wounding several: On our side only a French Officer was killed, and two
Soldiers, and a Drummer and Soldier taken Prisoner, which are since exchanged
for two others taken by us. Mr. Mede a Volunteer distinguished himself with a
great deal of Bravery; and the new-raised Cambridgeshire-men did incomparably
well. Duke Schomberg had advice the Night before last, that upon King James's
ordering Three French Regiments into Dublin, he commanded Col. Dorrington with
his Royal Regiment of Guards, and Mr. Fitz James with his Regiment of Foot to
march out: Upon which Col. Dorrington asked him, If he designed to make the
French his Guards. The King answered, He did. To which Dorrington replied, That
if his Majesty resolved on that, then he and 16 other Officers desired to
resign their Commissions; for they owned that they had rather submit to the
English, then be Slaves to the French. Upon this K. James called a Council, and
joined a Regiment of French and a Regiment of English which has dissatisfied
both. I write this word for word as the Duke told it us. The Army here is in a
very good condition; the Regiments that were so shattered are now recruited and
full; they are well clothed, and seem desirous to meet the Enemy. Our
Hospitals and Magazins are very carefully provided for; and any Colonel that
has a mind to Beef, Meal, Bacon, Pease, Bread, Cheese, etc. is furnished upon
account from several Storehouses that are settled in several Ports of the
Country, and in this I write but the naked Truth.

Captain King an Officer of King James's Army is this day come in to Duke
Schomberg; he has served there in the Horse all this while, and has given the
Duke a particular Account of the State of the Army: They put their chief
Confidence in their Horse and Dragoons, but their Foot is very inconsiderable
in every thing but their Number. Their whole Army, if their Regiments were all
full, consists of about 50000 Men, but few of them are complete. When the Army
comes to join, I shall be able to give you, if acceptable, a more particular,
larger, and quicker Account of things than I can now, because my Quarters are
upon the Frontiers, and I have not occasion of writing regularly. I am going to
my Quarters which are toward Charlemont.

I am Yours.

London Printed for Robert Clavell 1690.


