Irelands Sad Lamentation: Discovering its Present DANGER, in Some Remarkable
Passages Which have happened since the Discovery of the Horrid POPISH PLOT. In
a Letter from a Person of Honor to his Friend in London, upon the Dissolution
of the Late Parliament.
MY Pen is not able to represent to your view the Dusky Scene, which the
Dissolution of the Parliament has drawn on the Hearts and Countenances of all
Loyal Protestants in this Kingdom; from this great Sessions, we hoped some
Commiseration would have been had of us, considering the great and eminent
dangers we now lie under: But these hopeful Joys being frustrated, and
expecting neither Redress from or by the assistance of our present Governor,
nor any other part of the Government here, we do, as Men in a General Wreck,
give up our selves to the Protection of God Almighty, and the Mercy of those
incessant Billows that threaten us with Death.

We have little hopes, if at all any, of being secured from that Popish Cruelty
which most of us have felt in this Age. You of England may object, Your Danger
is equal to ours, that our Governor and other Magistracy are all Protestants,
the Arms ours, (or at least ought to be so) and all other strengths. This
indeed, were it so, might abate our Jealousies, but I shall make a Collection
of some remarkable Passages, such as at present will occur to my Memory, and
then I leave you to be the impartial Judge.

In the year 1677. at the height of the Plot, the Duke of Ormond, by the
interest of the Duke of York, received his Commission to supersede the Earl of
Essex in the Government of Ireland, and accordingly, on the 24 th of August, in
the same year, made his Entrance with great Solemnity.

The next Spring (being a time when the grand Consults were held for putting an
end to their Infernal Designs) he takes a Progress over the whole Kingdom, to
see in what posture the same lay, (for what design I know not;) in which
Journey he was much attended by Popish Gentry, freely conferring (I will not
say to make Proselytes) the Honor of Knighthood on many undeserving Persons,
as he passed through the Country.

The Plot being discovered in September 1678, there was little or no notice
taken of it here at Court, though it was proved those of the Plot of England
held a Correspondency with some in Ireland, and that many Black Bills, etc.
were, or was to be sent over for the Massacre intended, yet no means were used
by the Lord Lieutenant, with assistance of the Council, for the security of the
Nation, or prevention of that Horrid Design; but the vigorous Protestant
Magistracy of this City raised their Militia, both Foot and Horse, part of whom
were ordered to guard every night in their turns, but in the outward part of
the Town, so intolerable was the usage we received, they would not suffer our
Companies to guard in the City, (which must be the refuge in time of extremity)
alleging the King's Guards were appointed to defend the same; so that upon any
Attempt, our Voluntier Inhabitants must certainly have perished, before the
King's Soldiery, who receives Pay, had entered into any dangerous Engagement.
Of this City the Earl of Arran, Son to the Duke, is Governor.

Thus were we all exposed every man to provide for his own Safety: the first
vapor of Popish Venom which might give us occasion not to doubt what they
intended for us, was this, The Lord Mayor went in person, with some of his
Brethren, to demolish the Mass-Houses of this City, by removing the Altars, and
other Idols, locking up the Doors, and committing the Keys to the
Churchwardens of the respective Parishes: It happened that at one of those
obnoxious Houses an Officer of the Mayors, a waggish Fellow, taking some of
their Popish Trumpery, (and in derision of that Superstitious Religion) began
to act the Priest; then taking their Holy Water, and sprinkling part of it on
some of his Fellows, the rest on the Floor, like a Shopkeeper's Apprentice to
lay the Dust, he was told by one who stood by, He should dearly repent those
direful Actions. And that very Night going to his own house, about Ten a clock
was set upon by four or five persons, who stifling him, threw him down, then
wounded him in several places, crying, Kill the Rogue, Kill the Rogue; which
they had certainly done, had he not had Armor on, which he always wore for his
own safety in the execution of his Office: Yet this Assassination had no more
effect at Court, than a sport to laugh at, how the poor Catchpole was served in
his kind.

When the Duke received a Command to seize Colonel Talbot, the Colonel was
Revelling at the Duke's Table, sitting with him at Dinner; and most people
think if he had not been there at the Duke's receipt of the Commands, he had
not been Apprehended. The Reasons which induced them to that Opinion, is, when
the Colonel attained his Liberty upon Surety, the aforesaid Earl of Arran was
his Bail.

Not long after the Discovery, upon several Suggestions of the Protestants
against the Insolence of the Popish Clergy and their Assemblies, the Lord
Lieutenant and Council issue forth a Proclamation, For the Apprehension of
Priests and Jesuits; therein inserting a Reward of Five Pounds for a Priest,
and Ten Pounds for a Jesuit.

In Obedience to which, a Captain of the Trained-Bands, took several in one
Saints Eve, privately Celebrating Mass in their Popish Vestments, and the next
morning brought them before the Duke; where, upon Examination, some of them
produced the Duke's own Protection, some Protected by Colonel Fitz-Patrick, and
other Eminent Popish Gentry.

In fine, They were all dismissed, as well those who were Protected, as those
who were not, as was all who were afterward taken, the Apprehenders being
gratified with no other than a Reproof for their too much diligence, by which
means the Papists have found no discouragement nor obstruction in their
Proceedings; and I do believe their Hopes are raised to as great an Ecstasy as
ever, having so much influence on the present Government of this Kingdom.

When the Irish Plot broke forth, and Bourke Accused the Earl of Tyrone, all
Endeavors possible were used for the Vindication of the Earl; but when he was
cleared at Waterford, and Bourke did not appear, then had the Papists got
Cock-a-hoop again, and no man durst say within the Castle of Dublin, (or
anywhere else, if it came to the Duke's Ear) That there was any such thing then
on foot, or lately designed, as a Plot to invade this Kingdom, extirpate the
Protestant Religion, and subvert the Government thereof. I say, no man under
pain of gaining the Duke of Ormond's displeasure, durst speak his Apprehension
of such a thing as a Plot in this Kingdom.

The Inclinations of the Duke has been more visible of late, by the Actings of
his Son, (who, without doubt, did nothing without his Fathers permission) in
the Trial of the Lord Stafford, basely pledging his Honor, to Acquit that most
Culpable and Undeniable Traitor; which has given so great a wound to his
Reputation, that the Name of the Butlers is grown a Load to almost the
Generality of this Nation.

When Complaint was made against the Duke in England for his Misbehavior in
this Government, he applied himself to the Council for a Certificate, That he
had Acted nothing Unjust in his Station: But 'twas refused by several
Privy-Counsellors, who are good and just men, valuing the Protestant Interest,
and Abhorring all Foreign Jurisdiction or Authority from or under the Sea of
Rome.

I shall say little of our Chancellor, who, by the Duke of York's Interest, was
made Primate also of this Kingdom, the two only Places that can sway the
Government, and, without doubt, will not be so ungrateful to his Promoter, but,
when occasion shall serve, he may command his Service either as to
Ecclesiastical or Civil Matters, or what else will best tend to his advantage;
part of his Injustice has already appeared before His Majesty in Council,
which would seem but a Grain or Dram, were it weighed with his other
insulting Oppressions.

By this you may see the tender Care that has been taken of us; what strength
the Protestants can have in a Conscientious War, I mean, against the Papists or
Foreign Enemies; when we can judge no less but our Leader is our Opposite; when
we cannot enjoy the presence of our Dread Sovereign to awe those Rebels who
daily combine against us. We want an Essex again, whose Judgments and Justice
were so equally Balanced, that even his worst of Enemies without shame to
themselves cannot calumniate his Honorable Proceedings. I must tell you again,
we want an Essex, a Shaftsbury, that is to say, A Good and Zealous Protestant
that will stand up for us in this time of Eminent and scarcely-to-be-avoided
Danger. I can assure you, here is no man harbors an evil thought of his King,
no man doubts of his Excellency and Compassion toward us; but rather are given
to think He is under the same misfortune of some of His Predecessors, lead by
evil Counselors, which God of his mercy grant may not prove fatal: We only,
with sufficient cause, reflect on his Ministers and Officers here, and
unanimously say, with the Prophet Isaiah, His Watchmen are blind, they are all
ignorant, they are dumb Dogs that cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to
slumber; yea, they are greedy Dogs that can never have enough; they are
Shepherds that will not understand; they all look to their own way, every one
for his gain from his quarter. And now that His Majesty, with the Assistance of
his great Council of Parliament, would purge the Officers of his Dominions, and
those who shall be found defiled and unclean, to cast out; and those who are
pure and clean, prone to the advancement of His Honor, to Establish, ought to
be the Prayers of you and all good Protestants, as it is of,

Sir, Your faithful humble Servant, F. L.
Dublin, January 1680. POSTSCRIPT.
WE hear that Colonel Fitz-Patrick, a Manager of our Kingdom, and who married
the Duke of Ormond's Sister, is of late turned Protestant, and now in England:
I like no such Masquerade, turning upon an Exigent. One whose Generation has
been counted Primitives of the Romish Church, cannot surely forget his
Ancestors Fame: His Father a heinous Rebel, and his Mother Hanged for making
Candles of Englishmens Grease in the time of the late Rebellion.



LONDON: Printed in the year 1680.


