A LETTER Written out of the COUNTRY TO A PARLIAMENT MAN, In ANSWER to a
Quaere by him made, How the People generally stood inclined to the proceedings
against the KING, and the intended Change of GOVERNMENT.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1649.

SIR,
I Suppose, you have made choice of me to satisfy you in these great
particulars, as a man who (having in the late divisions of the Kingdom steered
in so equal a way betwixt the King and Parliament) may be more willing and
able impartially to discover the disposition and inclination of all parties
(and consequently of the Kingdom in general) then any other who has appeared
more concerned then my self. You have moved a question (I confess) wherein I
conceive my self bound to endeavor a satisfaction not only to your self, but
to the whole House whereof you are a Member, and all others who plead the
necessity of a change of Government; and if you still think me worthy of the
credit which you have heretofore given to my opinion in other matters, I dare,
without much arrogance, take upon me to give you as clear light herein, as most
men can, having ever since the publishing of the Armies Remonstrance, made it
my business to feel the pulse (and from thence conjecture the temper of all
men, with whom I could gain free discourse, and that chiefly, because the Army,
in that Declaration, usurpeth the name of the People of England.

But before I proceed to satisfy you, give me leave to undeceive you
concerning the way of neutrality which I have hitherto professed. I call God to
witness (before whom we must all, one day, give a just account of our actions)
when the unhappy and fatal occasions of discord betwixt the King and His two
Houses, were first (I determine not by whom) given, and those by the fiery
spirits of some on both sides soon kindled into a War, my duty and allegiance
to my Prince, and my natural love to my Country and it is liberty suspended so
the operation of my will, that like Buridan's Ass placed equedistautly betwixt
two bottles of Hay, my hunger carried me so strongly to both, that I had not
power to make choice of either: I was taught by the Word of God and Laws of the
Realm, not to lift up my hand against my Sovereign in any case, and it was
equally imprinted in me by the Law of Nature, that I ought not to contribute to
my own thraldom. Whether the Parliament had just grounds or not to suspect any
tyrannical designs in the King; or whether jealousies and fears were hereby
pretended to engage the people in rebellion: whether to remove the King from
his evil Counselors, signified, to take away his life, or His Majesty's
withdrawing from the tumults of the City, was an offensive war upon the
Parliament, it was not within my private cognizance: both were pretended, and
whilst the truth of each was equally uncertain, I chose rather to suffer the
insults, reproaches, and plunders of both parties, then to engage with either;
as supposing patience the safest way for a Christian, where action on either
side might have involved me in treason to my Prince, or treachery to my
Country. This was the true ground of my neutrality: and had the Parliament
continued their solemn Protestations to God and man, wherein they assertained
to us the integrity of their intentions; that they aimed at nothing but the
glory of God, the purity of Religion, the greatness of the King, the honor
and freedom of Parliament, and happiness of the People, who was there amongst
us that did not bid you ride on prosperously? But since by sad experience, we
find, that all this show of holiness is put on to disguise self ends: that the
glory of God is, as much as in you lies, turned into shame, by intitling him
to all your impieties, as so many acts of his Providence. Religion is profaned
by every frantic brain that can pretend the Spirit; and instead of the purity
of the Gospel, you have revived all the exploded Heresies of former Ages.

As for the King let us behold his greatness: it is almost three years since
you have kept him close prisoner, in which time (to satisfy the cry of the
people) you have thrice entered into a Treaty of Peace with him, but intending
surely nothing less, for your Demands have ever been so unbecoming the duty
and modesty of Subjects, as if your sole aim was to obtain a denial, and
then to lay the breach on his side; for when His Majesty has been upon the
point of condescending to all, you have thrice suffered (nay invited)
inferiourpersons in the Army audaciously to snatch him from your Commissioners,
and now are ready to sacrifice his life to your great Idol, for raising war
against his people: were you not once ashamed to acknowledge that you intended
any hurt to his Royal Person, when he was your Enemy in the Field, and can you
now legally try him for the same thing? But the inspired tell you, this must be
done, lest Samuel rise up and reprove you, as he did Saul for sparing the
Amalekites. Is this the honor and freedom of Parliaments, to sit and Vote the
results of a Council of War? to suffer your Members to be torn from the
House by your own Servants? It was the Kings great crime, which made you
pretend the War lawful on your side, and merely defensive, that He demanded
five of your Members to Answer the Law for matters of high Treason, and shall
five parts of six of the House of Commons be banished, imprisoned, or
affrighted from thence, and a handful of you continue the Session, and call
your selves a Parliament? if you can interpret the shaking of a Sword hilt,
freedom of Vote, what freedom, liberty, or property, shall the Subjects of
England expect, but such as a licentious; usurping Army shall afford them?

I believe (Sir) by this time, you perceive what account you are likely to have
from me, concerning the inclinations of the people; but if your superstition
leads you to enquire farther in them, by way of Augury, as the Romans did by
inspection, into the entrails of their beasts, it will be requisite for you to
clear 3. things, before you can gain their approbation (the necessity, the
lawfulness, and advantage of a change). The necessity of this change is urged
by the Army which cannot pretend to be so much concerned in the Government as
the least Corporation of England, and it is grounded upon the equity of
bringing offenders to Justice, by those who have not the legal power of a
petty Constable: The offense which calls for justice, is leavying war against
the Kingdom; now (not to question the jurisdiction and power which are so
ridiculously assumed) we enquire, if the Army are such severe chastisers of
waging war, why are they themselves such Enemies to Peace? This will be best
cleared if we observe, how squint-eyed they are in all their actions. The
Counties petitioned so earnestly, the last year, for a Personal Treaty, that
the Army suspected their kingdom almost at an end, and with sadness foresaw,
that they must return into their former condition; this made them look upon the
Petitioners as their only Enemies, and assault, and slay them accordingly
which must either divert them from their desires of Peace, or animate them to
revenge, and so make them lawful Enemies, either of which would conduce to
their ends. So now that the Counties are forced to lay aside their Petitions,
and all men betake themselves to their private groans, under the continuance of
an unsettled Government, these plausible pretenders to severity against the
occasioners of War, will arraign the King and murder him, thereby to perpetuate
the divisions of the three Kingdoms, and so continue all power in their own
hands; which is all that I can perceive of the necessity of a change.

As for the lawfulness thereof, by your enquiry into the inclinations of the
people, you seem to expect the decision of right from them, and the subject of
your curiosity is unjust, and you appeal to an incompetent Judge; for the
people jointly taken have no power to determine matters of that nature; nor
taken individually have they understanding: your quaere therefore is
preposterous in matter and form; and you might have saved your self and me a
labor, if you had made your application to the proper Oracles (the Scripture,
and the Laws) for information. I suppose then you desire not herein to know
what you ought to do, but what may carry applause (whether well or ill done)
and so seek not to please God but men. Not to leave you therefore unsatisfied
in this, I must tell you, that many Jesuiticall attempts have been made in this
and all the neighbor Counties, first by false suggestions, and scandalous
imputations to detract from the honor of the King, and represent him to the
abused multitude unworthy of the Government, and then the hands of some
vagabonds have been by the solicitation of factious Ministers, affixed to
Petitions, and tendered at the public Sessions to be countenanced as the
general Act of the County. But although it be an error in Politics to
suppose, any appeal ought to be made to a people once subjected to government,
I dare presume, if any such unjust way of trial were practiced in this part of
the Kingdom, an hundred voices for one (if not awed by force) would appear for
a peaceable settlement under our former Government, rather then to embroyl the
Kingdom in a perpetual War, for the secret ambitious ends of some few
particular persons, nowise qualified nor authorized to make a change. As for
your self and the rest of the Members now sitting, whilst you were two Houses,
and those entire, the People, although generally unsatisfied with your
proceedings, yet reverenced the name of Parliament, and therein was your
security; but now that the Lords House has deserted you (except some few
inconsiderable persons, notorious either for their pusillanimity, folly, or
ingratitude) and the greatest part of your own Members either banished,
imprisoned, terrified, or prudently forbearing to receive the Law from their
mercenaries, and bind the Kingdom with their Enthusiasmes, that an handful of
you should sit, and not only call your selves a Parliament, but exclude the
King, and Lords, and usurp to your selves the legislative power, and therefore
believe it properly your own, because you have so Voted it, is a frensy that I
once thought, could not have entered within those wais. Your arguments are, in
brief, these; That You represent the People: and That all Power is originally
in the People: and thence you raise your dangerous superstructures. The
misunderstanding, or mis-application at least, of that vulgar and true saying,
Salus populi suprema lex, has led you and others into error, from whence I am
sure, you have capacity enough to be rescued. Know therefore that Populus
fignifieth the whole State, that is, the King and Lords, as well as the common
People. Now, as the word People fignifieth the whole body of the Commonwealth,
the King is properly the sole Representative of the people, and all their power
is placed in him; as to make War or Peace, to raise Moneys for the maintenance
of War, to execute the Laws, to treat with foreign Princes, and the like. The
Members of Parliament are Representatives of the People for particular matters,
as to present new Laws to be made, or old to be repealed by the King, (which
plainly shows where the legislative Power resideth) to represent the
aggrievances of the people, or prefer their desires, and in short to appear for
the people of the respective Counties and Corporations summoned by the King to
consult upon matters of public concernment. These Counties and Corporations
they have not that power which you pretend, (for that were to make the
government Anarchicall under a Monarch) nor can they derive more to you then
themselves have.

Again, suppose the power were, as you pretend, in the People, it must be
understood in the major part of the people, and consequently in the major part
of the Representatives: but with what color of equity can an inferior number
of factious men invite an Army, to seclude their Fellow Members, and in their
absence, not only make Laws to bind the whole Kingdom, but alter the
Government already established, and refer us to the wandering expectation of
some others to be revealed hereafter in a dream? It has been the prudent care
of our forefathers so to respect the proper end of Government, (which is The
peace and safety of a people) as to make choice of Monarchy (the best of
Governments, because least subject to division and confusion). Now because
there cannot be that form of Government found out, which (by reason of the
inseparable corruption of man's nature) is not subject to abuse (and the abuse
of Regal power is tyranny) they have therefore, to secure their posterity from
the arbitrary power of Princes, erected that high Court of Parliament, which is
so happily composed, that we are thereby protected from all excess, for as the
King cannot Enact or Repeal any Law without the consent of the two Houses
(which preventeth all tyrannical attempts) so neither can the Houses without
the King (which secureth us from Anarchy and confusion): for if the legislative
power were singly in either, it might be misapplyed to the disadvantage of the
other, which would consequently discompose the peaceable constitution of our
Kingdom: so then if the Regal Power encroach upon our right, we have redress
by way of complaint in Parliament; But if you usurp the supreme Power to your
selves, and either you or your Army tyrannise over us, from whom shall we
expect relief?

Which seadeth me to the next Consideration of the advantage which can hereby
accrue to the generality of the Commons of England, and wherein that can
consist, I confess ingeniously I am not wise enough to understand. Our
Religion shall either be imposed at the will of the prevailing party, and
consequently be alterable with every variety of fortune, or else we shall be
left every one to the latitude of his own conscience, which will be apt to lean
and by as toward ambition, lust, and avarice, as by the sad experience of these
times we are too well taught. Our Laws, (you say) shall be purged, and digested
into a new Model, but to what end, I discern not, unless it be that our
ancient Laws (as likewise our ancient Religion) are diametrically opposite to
your usurpations; for the same cause it is thought fit to destroy our
flourishing Universities, to expose them to the Visitation of illiterate men,
to root out those hopeful Plants of Divine and Human Sciences; and in their
places to nourish spirits of ignorance and faction; hereby you endeavor, as
much as in you lies, to captivate the very understandings of us and our
posterity. This piece of Reformation you borrowed from Jack Cade, and Watt
Tyler, whose wisdom thought it not fit to suffer any pen and inkhorn-men to
live. Wherein then shall this change of Government appear beneficial to us? is
it, that you will have a greater care, of our protection? indeed Absolon
promised as fair, if he were king, and we are pretty well acquainted with your
performances.

But to clear the matter, we are not ignorant, That Government is to be
maintained by the same means by which is acquired; if then you usurp it from
the success of your Army, you must keep a constant Army on foot to defend your
possession, and then the benefit of the people is, in short, no other then
this, a perpetual Impofition upon their estates, to maintain this Army, a
lasting War with Scotland and Ireland, who being not concluded by your Votes,
will doubtless submit to their lawful Prince: a defyance of all the power of
Christendom, which (as it was wont to unite, by Croysades, against the Turk)
will without doubt look upon you as the greater usurpers, and the more
dangerous disturbers of all fundamental Government, in as much as you make way
to these your designs, by the height of Rebellion, Perjury, and forfeiture of
Trust; and finally an unavoidable danger to their persons and estates if they
resist your assumed power, and a contracting to themselves your guilt, and the
punishment due to it in this world and the next, if they tamely submit.

But you presume that the head City will be a leading case to the rest of the
Kingdom, yet this may possibly deceive you, for we cannot see why they should
so readily contribute Commissioners to sit upon the ^ife of their Sovereign,
and thereby perpetrate to the Kingdom an exhausting Civil War, (whose change
of fortune may by the trial of one single battle subject them to the
implacable fury of a revengefull Successor, who will punish their exemplary
defection with fire and sword) unless they had some assurance given them of
exemption from future disbursements, or at least the leading men a share of the
spoil; if they will act the coy Duck to betray the rest of the Kingdom into
slavery. Thus if we look upon their blindness, we cannot think them fit for
our example; or if upon their self ends, we shall not trust them. But you have
the Law in your hands, you have an Army that has wonit by the Sword, and shall
enforce it. I will not bestow the pains to show you, how improper it is for a
Kingdom to subdue it self, how ungodly it is for an Army (although composed of
Saints) to plead victory over the power that raised them: how impossible it is
to conquer those that fought not against you: such is my case, and I dare
affirm the same of one half of the Kingdom.

If for all this you are not to be turned from your purposes, consider, at
least, as rational men, with what difficulties you are to encounter in the
compassing of those ends which you propose. Your first obstacle is the Kings
life, but over that you plead a right, because a power; God has given him into
your hands, and your illuminations direct you to destroy him. Yet he delivered
Saul into the hands of David: you know the rest of the story, is it not
possible that the spirit which thus familiarly converseth with you, may be a
spirit of revenge, a spirit of ambition, aspirit of madness? The safest way to
try the spirit is by Gods Word; he never gave that Authority to the Israelites,
his own people, with whom he conversed face to face: nay the hand that cut off,
although a wicked King, never yet went unpunished: and if an Angel from heaven
should teach a Doctrine contrary to the revealed Word, we are commanded to
account him accursed. If the impiety of the act defer you not, yet as men who
would seem to represent the Nation, be more tender of its honor; remember that
the putting of the Q. of Seots to death in Q. Elizabeth's time, (although for
Treason pretended against her Majesty's Person) laid the foulest ignominy upon
this Nation that ever it sustained (because therein was violated the Law of
Nations): but how shall we stink in the nostrils of all the world, if contrary
to the direct precepts, manicipall, the national, the moral, and the Divine
Law, we shall attempt such a horrid and barbarous impiety? There is nothing, I
suppose, does more precipitate you into the gulf of desperation, then that
Machavillian rule of securing your former ills from punishment by attempting
greater; you think (as well you may) that you have offended beyond
forgiveness: I easily grant, that your forfeitures have been great, but
whether it is not more probable that His Majesty who (I am confident) has
made his peace with God (a principal step whereunto is forgiveness) should
pardon and forget your insults past, then that the Prince (who is tied in
honor to vindicate a Fathers death) should let you escape unpunished, I leave
to your own judgment.

If your prosperity has swelled you above all these respects, yet consider,
you must propose some way of engaging the affections of your Nation fast to
you, for forced obedience will deceive you. It is not probable that the Prince
and His Alleys will sit as idle spectators of these your extravagancies: that
the Nobility of England will tamely suffer themselves to be prostituted to
parity, with the unqualified rabble; or that the Commons will be fond of any new
Majesty's under whom they can hope for no improvement of condition. From these
you can have no other imaginable security but by oath, which being imposed by
force and terror, will peradventure be observed as long as that force is over
them; but whenever an Army shall appear in the behalf of the King and his
posterity, you will find your selves deserted, and all men return to their
original duty and engagements, and then you may be humbled to your former
conditions, and perish unpitied. Thus in observance of your command I have
delivered my mind freely; I hope you will make use of it to your good, and not
to the prejudice of

Your faithful Friend.

FINIS.

