A true Narrative of the CASE so much Controverted between Mistress Anna
Levingston, Daughter to Sir Charles Caesar, and one of the Grandchildren of Sir
Peter Vanlore the elder, and Niece to the Lady Powel, and Wife to Thomas
Levingston Esquire; and John Blunt and the Lady Sterlin his Wife, Sir Robert
Crook and his Wife, Henry Alexander alias Zinzan and his Wife, and one Abraham
Vandenbemde, and others; concerning the Estate Real and Personal of the Lady
Powel, late Wife of Sir Edward Powel both deceased; with the rise, growth, and
proceedings of the Differences touching the same.
SIr Peter Vanlore, the Father, 3 Car.
being owner of Two thousand five hundred pounds per annum, and possessed of a
great Personal Estate, did by Deed settle the Inheritance of part thereof
(which is now controverted by the Lady Sterlin, Lady Crook, and Mistress
Alexander, the (...) Daughters of Sir Peter Vanlore the younger, Son of Sir
Peter Vanlore the elder, now Petitioners in Parliament) upon his Daughter the
Lady Powel; the rest between her and young Sir Peter Vanlore his Son, for their
lives, and after to the Issue-male of his Son; and for want of Issue male of
his Son to his Daughter Powel, and the issues of his Son (which are those three
Ladies) and of his several other Daughters children: Of which Daughters, one
was the Lady Caesar (Mother of Mistress Levingston) an other the Lady Glemham,
and the fourth, the Wife of John Vandenbemde, in several fifth parts, with an
express Proviso, That if his Son (the Petitioners Father) or his Issues, shall
any way by Suits, etc. disturb that settlement, that the Uses limited to him
and his three Daughters the now Petitioners in Parliament should cease, and the
Estate go to the other four parts.

By his Will after his Legacies (whereof One thousand pound a piece was given
to these three Petitioners) he gave all the residuum of his Personal Estate to
the Lady Jacoba Vanlore his Wife and made her his Executrix (...) ^^^^dren; yet
he enjoyed it till his death, he dying (with (...) Issue-male) the Estate
limited to him, came between the Lady Powel and the Grandchildren in Fifth
parts, which she notwithstanding (the breach of the Proviso aforesaid)
permitted them quietly to enjoy. And these Petitioners have at this day
thereby, and otherwise; One thousand pound per annum of that Estate, besides
their One thousand pound a piece Legacy, and other benefits.

The Lady Vanlore was prevailed with, to make one Thomas Crump (then a Menial
servant to Sir Edward Powel, whom he took of a Boy) her sole Executor, in trust
for her Daughter, the Lady Powel, and that she should dispose of all that
Estate (which was very great) at her pleasure, excluding Sir Edward Powel her
Husband to intermeddle therewith, and died Anno 1636.

Crompton was too soon gotten unto a good opinion with the Lady; and soon after
a conspiracy was set on foot to procure a divorce between Sir Edward and his
Lady, upon pretense of his incontinency with a lewd woman; a prosecution was
thereupon by Crompton, and one Jane Bradbury, and Katherine Pretty, his Fellow
Conspirators in the High Commission Court (which was not a little countenanced
by the late Archbishop;) but Sir Edward cleared himself, and the Conspiracy was
discovered and confessed by the Woman before her death, that was hired to
condemn her self, that she might accuse Sir Edward Powel.

The next work was to procure the Lady to live apart from Sir Edward Powel at
Chelsey, where Crompton managed and disposed all her Estate at his pleasure;
was become the Master of Coach, Footmen and servants; put what servants about
her (of his poor kindred, and others) he pleased; purchased Land, Offices, and
many Friends or Adherents with the Loan of these great sums of money he was
entrusted withal.

Then he fell to vex Sir Edward Powel with Suits (as a person trusted for the
Lady Powel) at the Common Law, in Chancery, Court of Requests, and Council
Table; 1641.
amongst which, one came to hearing in Chancery, where his carriage was proved
to be such, that the Lord Keeper, assisted with four Judges, held him not a
person fit to be allowed to prosecute for the Lady Powel (in a Court of
Justice) against her Husband; and for that only cause dismissed the Bill.

Then he procured the Lady to make a Declaration of the Estate according to her
power, unto other persons (engaged to him) as Sir Jo. Danvers, Mr. William
Murrey of the Bedchamber, Secretary Nicholas, and others; to the end, that
(...) sue in their names, seeing he could not in his own, for the reason
aforesaid, and did so to Sir Edwards great vexation, against whom he obtained
in their names diverse Process of Contempt, and Sergeants at Arms.

1642.
Then he got from the Lady a Declaration under her Hand and Seal of her whole
Personal Estate (being all the residuum, both of Sir Peter Vanlores the elder,
and his Ladies, and her own) to his own use (after her death) which he kept
Dormant all her life time, but prosecuted violently against Sir Edward Powel
(to get part of it that was in his hands) yet always professed he was but a
Steward for Mistress Levingston, to whom he said he knew the Lady Powel her
Aunt intended all her Estate.

In this time Sir Edward Powel several times got access to his Wife (when
Crompton was in the Country) and diverse means were used by him to obtain a
reconciliation; which by means of Friends and godly Divines, was sometimes
gotten for a while; but no sooner was Crompton returned, but it was broken off
again; 1647.
and in Anno 1647. it proceeded to an agreement under both their hands; but
that also was frustrated by Crompton, and they separated again as soon as he
returned and Sir Edward so prosecuted with Process of Con^^^^^^ (...) to ^ay
(...) of his Estate, (seeing they could not or (...) a Petition was prosecuted
by Crompton and Kath. Pretty to the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal for
Alimony, (although they had that great Estate amongst them.) This brought Sir
Edward Powel back again; and keeping himself private, besought the Lords
Commissioners (by his Nephew Mr. W. Powel) That a Reference might be made to
some persons of integrity and honor, to compose and end all differences between
him and his wife; which was by their Lordships made to the Master of the Rolls,
and Lieutenant General Ludlow, who took pains therein, but through Crompton's
default nothing could therein be effected.

Sir Edward Powel thus miserably used and tired out with sui^s and troubles
Crompton thought it time now to attempt him (by means of one whom he employed
in his business) to join in a Fine with his Lady for settling her Real estate
also upon Crompton; with promise of an end of his troubles, and the Land for
his life, if he would so do. Which he abominating, and hearing also that his
Lady was then ill, and himself through age not like to live long, became
exceedingly desirous of a perfect reconciliation between him and his Lady, that
they might (as he declared himself) die in peace and Christian charity: And
therefore resolved to go himself to her to Chilsey where she lived (in a house
which he had bought about thirty years since) and to employ his said Nephew,
then, and yet a Justice of Peace, (upon whom he had settled most of his Estate)
to assist him in the compassing of that his intention; wherein he looked for
(as he had always found) opposition from Crompton, Katherine Pretty, Jane
Bradbury, and others, whom Crompton had placed about his Lady.

In order thereunto Mr. Powel, by his command and authority under his hand,
Sept. 3.
on the 3. of September. 1651. went to Chelsey to acquaint his Lady therewith,
and to provide accommodations for his reception. At which time Mr. Levingston
and his Wife were in the Chamber with her upon a Visit; but Crompton then out
of the house, upon notice thereof came suddenly in and endeavored with some
violence to hinder Mr. Powels access to the Lady, which begat a scuffle between
them: But at length she understanding of his being there, he was received by
her into her Chamber; where having kindly entertained him, and heard his
message, she told him she could not believe it, for that she was assured her
Husband, his Uncle, was dead; (For so she had been made by Crompton and his
Agents to believe, and he had entered upon the Lands which Sir Edward held for
her life in her right:) But being undeceived by relation of the truth thereof,
she in a very kind manner told him, That if her Husband pleased to come to her,
he should be welcome: And afterward desired him to persuade his Uncle to join
with her in the settling of her Estate according to her own mind, (which before
he would never be gotten to do.) Whereupon Mr. Powel returned; and Mr.
Levingston and his Wife, at her desire, (as they usually did) staid there that
night, and the next day returned to their house at London. Mistress Levingston
upon her return home, on Thursday September. 4. found there a Letter directed to
her from Sir Edward Powel (who till then had been much a stranger to him, not
having seen him in above three years before, and never thought herself in his
good opinion) acquainting her with his intention to go to his Lady, and wishing
her to acquaint some of her Kindred therewith, which accordingly she did
forthwith impart to Abraham Vandenbemde the Ladies Nephew; and the next day
(being Friday September. 5, 1651. Sept. 5.
) went again with him to her Aunt to acquaint her therewith; where the said
Katherine Pretty did in her hearing (with great asseverations) affirm to the
Lady that Sir Edward Powel was dead, and that she knew it to be so, and that
the pretense of the contrary was but some trick to deceive her. In which
confidence she continued, until that about five of the clock in the afternoon
Sir (...) being with her) retired herself out of a Gallery she was walking in;
and after a little discourse, they fell into a great kindness, which afterward
begat a perfect reconciliation, complaining themselves to each other of the
former unhappiness of their living apart; which kindness continued till the
death of the Lady.

Sir Edward Powel (who looked for Cromptons attempt to remove him from his Lady
again) caused his doors to be kept shut, and removed from his Lady the said
Katherine Pretty, Joan Bradbury, Joan Oswale (Crompton's Niece) Thomas
Southwick his Groom, and some others, whom he knew would join with Crompton to
his prejudice, and who had been active in carrying away his goods to a great
value out of his house, as soon as they heard of his intention to come thither:
and caused them, or some of them, to be arrested by Mr. Crook the Undersheriff
of Middlesex at his suit.

Sir Edward Powel had much the more reason to remove these people (being all
Adherents to Crompton, and disaffected to him, and to take care of his own
security) for that he found in the house upon his entry several Evidences under
Crompton's own hand, that he had been tampering with Sorcerers, and the like,
touching the Calculation of Sir Edward's Nativity, and the time of his death,
and found the Schemes and such like trumpery, which manifested that wickedness;
and withal a Deed of Declaration, whereby Crompton had contrived to himself
(after the Ladies death) all her Personal Estate aforesaid, wherein yet was a
power of Revocation.

Crompton and his Accomplices thus excluded, fall to practicing how to get in
again, and to remove Sir Edward Powel from his Wife per fas aut nefas.

First, Abraham Vandenbemde (who for some rudeness on the Lords day in Sermon
time, and abuse to Sir Edward Powel, the Lady would not admit any longer) he
gets to his party, and to become an Agent for him; seeing Sir Edward Powel
refused to admit him, albeit he offered him his service, and threatened, if he
denied him, he would adhere to Crompton; and Crompton sends also into the
Country for the Lady Crook to act for him, whom she called Son, and he her
Mother, as appeared by Letters under her hand.

Sept. 6.
Saturday six September, he procures Sir John Danvers (an old enemy of Sir
Edward Powels, and a great debtor to the state with which Crompton was trusted,
which he knew would be called in, if the Lady and her Husband agreed) to send a
Warrant, late on Saturday night, to the Sheriff of Middlesex to summon a Jury
to enquire of a forceable Entry on the fifth of September, and detainer of the
House at Chelsey, before himself and two other Justices of the Peace, with a
private Intimation to conceal the same from Sir Edward Powel, and Master Powel
his Nephew (although it were meant of that Entry of Sir Edward Powels into his
own House, and to his own Wife as aforesaid.) And on Monday morning the Jury
appeared, Sept. 8.
and an Indictment was accordingly preferred against Sir Edward Powel, and his
Nephew Master Levingston and his Wife (who were casually there that day, upon a
visit with the Lady in her Chamber, and others) prosecuted by Crompton and his
Accomplices (whom Sir Edward had turned and kept out of doors as aforesaid) and
after a full Evidence to the Jury, who knew the credit of the Witnesses, being
upon the place, and the business managed by eminent Counsel on the prosecutors
part, no force was found either as to Entry or Detainer: At which time the Lady
hearing of the Justices meeting, and of the scandal raised against her Husband,
of using her ill, in keeping out her servants against her will, and the like,
caused Mr. Levingston in the presence of several persons to write a Declaration
from her (who then was in Physic, and could not stir abroad) in testimony of
the contrary, and in approbation of what was done; which she put under her
hand, and sent to the Colonel was made acquainted therewith from Sir Edward
Power.

Next he attempted (for rewards) to engage some of his Highness (then Lord
Generals) Lifeguard, to quarter there and be instrumental to his purpose;
wherein by a security from his Highness under his hand and seal, that purpose
of his was also frustrated.

Afterward upon an old sleeping Contempt in Chancery (which was discharged) he
unduly got Process to a Sergeant at Arms, hoping that way to get Sir Edward
carried away: But Mr. Sergeant Middleton discerning the practice, continued him
a Prisoner with a Keeper in his own house, until the Lords Commissioners met,
who finding the abuse discharged him.

These practices caused Sir Edward Powel to entertain a servant or two more
then formerly he had in his family; both to secure himself from such attempts
of Crompton, and to keep out his Accomplices, whom he found to be the Lady Crook
and Vandenbemde (now deeply engaged with Crompton) Kath. Pretty, Joan Bradbury,
and some others; but free access was admitted to all others (as her Physicians,
Apothecary, and diverse of her Friends and other Visitants) save such as were
known to adhere to Crompton.

The Lady now perfectly reconciled to her husband (and that expressed by their
receiving the holy Sacrament together) and much complaining of the great wrong
and abuse she had suffered by means of Crompton and his Accomplices, particularly
that they had carried away most of the goods out of her house, and declaring
herself that she was glad those servants were gone, (for she meant to put them
away at Michaelmass) began to think of settling and disposing of her Estate.

Mrs. Levingston (her Niece and God-daughter) was then with her, as she
frequently was at other times, took care of her (with much duty and pains in
her sickness) was the only person of her Kindred whom she showed any tenderness
of affection unto. With Mrs. Levingston she often resided both in the Country
and at London, took special care of her from her childhood, and promised her
Mother (the Lady Caesar) on her deathbed, That (if she had no child of her
own) she would make her her heir, and often after declared the same, and that
she loved her as her own child.

About thirteen days after (having prevailed with Sir Edward Powel to join with
her in a Fine of the Devises Park in Wiltshire, Sep^
and that Fifth part whereof her Father had given her the Inheritance) she
caused Mr. Justice Warburton, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, to be
entreated to come to her to Chelsey to take the acknowledgment thereof, which
accordingly he did; where were present with the Judge Mr. William Gardener (the
Deputy-Secondary of the Common Pleas) Mr. Thomas Haughton (Clerk of the Fines)
and others, whom she kindly entertained with a Banquet, and cheerful
expressions at their parting.

She likewise about that time (having revoked the Deed which Crompton had
gotten of her Personal Estate) sealed another to the like purpose to Mistress
Levingston her Niece, charging it with several payments after her death, and
other dispositions in the nature of a Will; and both she and Sir Edward Powel
her husband sealed an Indenture declaring the Use of that Fine (of part after
her death, and of other part after the death of her and Sir Edward Powel) unto
Mrs. Levingston and her heirs. Which Fine and Deeds being now complained of to
be gotten while the Lady was under a force, and by practice with Sir Edward
Powel; it is remarkable that the force was invisible to the Judge and his
Attendants (as they have often testified and deposed) and Sir Edward Powel was
not in any thing bettered by the Fines or Deed, having no other Estate limited
to him thereby then an Estate for his life, in that part wherein he had so
before the Fines levied, and was gains in nothing thereby but in the (...)
g^^^ (...), and (...) October used, and (...) year after Sir Edward Powel died
also.

No sooner was the Lady dead, but strange practices were set on foot (by the
potency of Cromptons purse) who (as Executor to the Lady Vanlore, in trust for
the Lady Powel, and as manager for her) had all that great Personal Estate in
his hands, and all was to wrest from Mistress Levingston, both the Real Estate
settled upon her by the Fines aforesaid (by a Prosecution in the names of the
Lady Crock, Lady Sterlin, and Mistress Zinzan, as her Heirs at Law) and the
Personal Estate entrusted as aforesaid (by an old obliterated Deed which
Crompton set on foot, as made to himself for his own use in Anno 1642. long
before that which himself had caused to be made with power of Revocation, and
which was revoked as aforesaid.) And by color thereof, he detained the same to
his death, and so does yet Jean Oswald his sister and Administratrix (who was
the Widow of one Oswald, Sir Edward Powels Coachman) Mistress Levingston not
having been able through manifold delays to bring her cause to heating for the
same in Chancery.

First, A Proviso was (by the procurement of Sir John Danvers and some other
debtors to the Estate, with which Crompton was trusted) gotten to be inserted
into the Act of Oblivion, amongst the huddle of Provisoes that came in together
at the last passing of that Act, exempting from pardon Any offense that shall
or may be made appear in the obtaining of any Deed or Fine from the Lady Powel
in the month of September, 1651. Which was done purposely, and by design to
cast an aspersion upon Mistress Levingstons Title to the said Estate, and to
make way for that which followed; seeing that no Petition or Complaint had then
been in Parliament against these Fines or Deeds, and the Act it self (in the
Body of it) d^d not extend to pardon any offense committed within that time,
wherein the said Fines were levied, and Deed sealed.

Secondly, And in Michaelmas Term, 1651. before the said Fines, and the
Proclamations thereupon were past, Complaint was made in the Common Pleas (by
the said Coheirs) against them as gotten by force, fraud, and practice, to the
end to stay the perfecting thereof, and such was the earnestness of that
prosecution and the Affidavits of Crompton his Accomplices, that one of the
Judges began to resent ill the obtaining of them; but after, at least sixteen
days Examination, both of matter of Fact, and matter in Law, and of at least
fifty Witnesses in that Michaelmas and Hillary Term after, the said Fines were
by all and every one of the Judges of that Court, and (as they declared after
Advice taken with all the rest of the Judges of England) finally ordered to be
proceeded in, and perfected: As by the Records of that Court appears in these
words, viz.

^ary, Feb. 1.
THe Justices here upon Consideration and Advisement had touching the said
Fines, and the Matters complained of against the same, Do this day declare
their Opinions, and do order, that all former Rules for any manner of stay in
perfecting the said Fines, or the Proclamations thereupon be discharged; and
that the said Fines be proceeded in and perfected together with the said
Proclamations, any former Rule to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. By the
Court.

Thirdly, That in Hillary Term an Indictment was preferred for a Riot in Mr.
Powels coming the third of September from his Uncle to speak with the Lady
Powel (when he was opposed by Crompton as aforesaid) and by making Master
Levingston and his Wife (who were never out of the Ladies Chamber) and all
other (save the Accomplices of Crompton) Defendants, and their Testimony being
thereby taken away; and Crompton, Pre^^^ Bradbury, Oswald, and the rest

Fourthly, And the same (...) (...) (notwithstanding no (...) found by the Jury
upon the place, and immediately upon the Entry of Sir Edward Powel as
aforesaid) yet another Indictment of Forceable detainer was preferred by
Crompton against Sir Edward Powel, Mr. Levingston and his Wife, Mr. William
Powel, and about twenty others (who were all that were in the house, or had
relation to it) and about four years after, Sir Edward Powel being de^d, and
the Title of the house not then known to the other Defendants, a Verdict upon
the Testimony of the same persons was gotten against Mr. Powel, and Mr.
Levingston and his Wife, who justified (Mr. Powel under the Title of his Uncle,
and Mr. Levingston and his Wife by the invitation of the Lady Powel) and all
the rest acquitted.

This happened by a neat trick of Cromptons, who now that Sir Edward Powel was
dead (who could have cleared it) gave in Evidence a Title to himself in that
House, by virtue of a Fine which Sir Edward Powel had levied (to Bar an Intail
above Six and twenty years before) unto Crompton then a youth in his service,
and to Master Blake (afterward Sir William Blake, his Scrivener) both of that
house, and all other his Lands in Middlesex, and which was mearly in trust for
himself, and the Lands, notwithstanding always afterward enjoyed by him and
his Wife, and settled by him upon his Nephew in marriage; which propriety of
Cromptons (in point of Law) made the Detainer by Sir Edward of the House
(though his own in Equity) illegal, and so begat that Verdict.

Fifthly, To make all sure, then the life of Mistress Levingston was struck at,
April. 1652.
and an Indictment was preferred against one Joan Peterson, suggesting that she
(by the procurement of Mistress Levingston (who yet was made no party to it)
had bewitched the Lady Powel to death, upon which Peterson was tried and
acquitted. Howbeit upon another Indictment for bewitching one ^^^^son a Seaman
(who was hid in a Chamber, and found alive two months after, and verified by
Doctor Scarborough, and other learned Physicians, to have languished of nothing
but a sickness in nature of a Calenture, and had been under the hands of
Physicians for cure, eleven months before Peterston knew him) that poor woman
lost her life; and Vandenbemde and others were heard to say, That had it not
been to strike at Mistress Levingston life, she should not have been prosecuted
for that: And Vandenbemde further confessed, That he, Sir Robert Crook, and
others the Grandchildren of Sir Peter Vanlore, had made a Covenant and bound
it with an Oath, to live and die together in the prosecution of Mistress
Levingston, or else to have the said Estate from her.

Sixthly, June. 1652.
An Indictment was by the Conspiracy of Vandenbemde (and whereof he has been
since convicted) preferred against Mistress Levingston her self, suggesting,
That she had poisoned the Lady Powel to death, whereof she was also acquitted:
Dr. Bates, Dr. Goddard, Dr. Cullidon, her Physicians, Mr: Faucout her
Apothecary, Mr. Stamford and Mr. Page the Surgeons that dissected her, having
testified upon their Oaths, That the said Lady Powel's death was from natural
and common diseases, the Dropsy, Scurvy, Jaundies, and two Cancers in her
Liver, and not from any preternatural cause.

Seventhly, Yet (from the same malice) was there in Trinity, 1652. Trinity 1652.
another Indictment preferred against Mistress Levingston, and others,
suggesting, That she by Sorcery, Witchcraft, and Love-powder, and other
unlawful means, so obtained the love of the Lady Powel, that she settled her
Estate, both Real and Personal upon her; and was by those unlawful means
wrought upon, and pr^cured to levy several Fines, and execute several Deeds for
that purpose; (...) otherwise she would not have done. This Indictment being
traversed (...) special Jury returned for Trial thereof the Pros^cutors (which
were (...) (...) of Perjury to be framed against two of his own Witnesses first
produced by himself, and only cross-examined by Mr. Levingston, but thereby
discovering his and Vandenbemde's foul practices and conspiracies, viz.

One against Tho. Green, for swearing (as was pretended) that Vandenbemde put
on a Scarf upon one Margaret Austin (a Beggar) when she went to give Evidence
at a Trial against Mr. Levingston) to make her appear a more considerable
person then she was: Whereas it was confessed and proved that he did put on
such Scarf at another time, and so the question was only of the point of time;
and three of the Jury who tried that Cause, did depose, that they did not
apprehend that he applied it to any time certain, nor did regard it so; yet a
Ve^dict was given against the said Tho. Green, with which the Chief Justice
Roll declared himself to be so ill satisfied, and the man to be wronged, that
he would impose no imprisonment or other punishment on him, save some small and
inconsiderable Fine for form sake.

The other against one Mary Gibbs, his the said Crompton's own Witness in
Chancery, (and only cross-examined by Mr. Levingston) for deposing that one
Tho. Collet, Crompton's Solicitor, was at such a time at a Tavern with Mr.
Vandenbemde etc. Which although it was also deposed by oath, yet Crompton at
the Trial produced another very like Collet, and gave testimony to the Jury
that it was he, and not Collet; whereupon a Verdict was gotten, to the
dissatisfaction also of the said Lord Chief Justice Roll, as he openly declared.

In the interim the Lady Crook, Lady Sterling, and Mrs. Alexander, (who have
acted all along with Crompton, and he in Parliament with them; and some of
them, if not all, agreed to share with him the Estate, and make a prey of Mrs.
Levingston) have been Petitioners in several Parliaments, and with Crompton's
purse, and his sollicitings and Witnesses, have put Mr. Levingston to infinite
expense before several Committees, even to the exhausting of the Estate given
to Mrs. Levingston:

But in Michaelmas Term 1655. finding their Error in complaining to the
Parliament in matters remediable (if at all) by the ordinary course of Justice,
they did exhibit their Bill in the High Court of Chancery against Mr.
Levingston and his wife, setting forth all the force, found and practice
supposed to have been in obtaining the said Fines and Deeds, and praying relief
against the same; there (after a long Debate by Council on both sides, and
after a time taken and advisement had by the then, and now Lords Commissioners
of the Great Seal of England) that Court declared. That they were fully
satisfied that there was no such fraud or practice charged whereupon that Court
could ground a Decree; and thereupon the said Bill was dismissed, that
Dismission being signed enrolled and exemplified under the Great Seal of
England. And so the Judgment of both the Great Courts of Law and Equity being
passed therein, and above five years possession (after those and several other
Fines levied and Recoveries had of the premises) Mr. Levingston and his wife,
for payment of their Debts by them contracted (by the vexatious suits
aforesaid) in defense thereof, sold the Lands to several Purchasors for full
and valuable consideration.

And after all this, (And although the very words of their Bill in Chancery be,
and the truth is so, That it is the proper object of a Court of Equity to give
relief against all Conveyances obtained by practice, fraud and conspiracy by
ordering the parties to make a Reconveyance, and enjoining the Cognisees of
Fines and all claiming under them or such Deeds, not to give the same in
Evidence;) (...) the Judgment of that Court has passed thereupon as aforesaid:
Yet have (...) said Lady Crook and her sisters again exhibited another Petition
in this Par^^^^^^t against the said Fines and Deeds, upon the same suggestion
of force and (...) ^e obtaining thereof


