THE POLICY AND GOVERNMENT OF THE Venetians, Both in Civil and Military Affairs.

Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay, and Faithfully Englished.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleet Street, near
Temple Bar. 1671.

The Table of Chapters.
The First Book. Of their Civil Policy.
OF the Foundation of Venice. page 1 Chap. 1. Of the Duke. page 9 Chap. 2. Of
the Counsel of Ten. page 20 Chap. 3. Of the Sages Grands. page 30 Chap. 4. Of
their Procurators. page 34 Chap. 5. Of their Podestats. page 38 Chap. 6. Of
their Camerlingues. page 44 Chap. 7. Of their Ambassadors. page 46 Chap. 8. Of
the Nobility of this Commonwealth. page 54 Chap. 9. Of their Ladies. page 67
Chap. 10. Of their Citizens. page 75 Chap. 11. Of the Nobles upon Terra-firma.
page 80 Chap. 12. A particular Discourse upon some of their Maxims. page 90
The Second Book. Of their Military Policy.
Chap. 1. Of the Venetian Militia in general. page 97 Chap. 2. Of their
Generalissimo. page 100 Chap. 3. Of the General of the Gulf. page 109 Chap. 4.
Of the General of their Galeasses and their Governors. page 114 Chap. 5. Of
the General of the Gallions, and the Captains under his Command. page 119 Chap.
6. Of the Sur-Comites of the Galleys. page 122 Chap. 7. Of the General, or
Governor of Candia. page 129 Chap. 8. Of the General of Dalmatia. page 133
Chap. 9. Of the Grand-Captains. page 137 Chap. 10. Of their Foreign Generals.
page 145 Chap. 11. Of the Foreign General in Dalmatia. page 147 Chap. 12. Of
the General of the Forces drawn out of the Fleet upon occasion. page 15 Chap.
13. Of the Governor of Candia. page 156 Chap. 14. Of Reflections in manner of a
Recapitulation. page 158 Chap. 15. Of their Armies in general. page 162 Chap.
16. Of their Cavalry. page 166 Chap. 17. Of their Light Horse. page 172 Chap.
18. Of their Infantry. page 177 Chap. 19. Of their general Rules and Maxims in
War. page 188
THE POLICY AND GOVERNMENT OF THE VENETIAN, Both in Civil and Military Affairs.
The Introduction. Of the Foundation of Venice.
DUring the Wars of Attila, that Flagellum Dei, (as he was usually called)
there being no refuge or sanctuary against the fury of his Arms, the
demolishment of Towns, the desolation of Countries, the smoking and blazing of
whole Provinces set on fire on all sides by the multitudes of his insulting
Barbarians, being but a pastime and recreation to his tyranny, he left behind
him no other monuments of his victories wherever he came, but horror and
despair.

Aquileia being a Town more than ordinarily considerable, had a greater share
than ordinary of the calamities of the War, and the miserable remainder of the
Inhabitants which had survived them, choosing rather to expose themselves to
the infidelity of the Sea, than once more to fall into his merciless hands,
having embarked themselves upon the Adriatic in such lamentable Vessels as
their condition could supply, they sailed up and down for some time, but at
length growing weary, and unsatisfied with their wandering, they landed upon
certain little Islands, and laid the foundation of the most honorable
Republic in the World. Their first accommodation was Hurts, or Cabbins which
they built, and settled themselves in them when they had done, though not
without great difficulty, for having consumed the small stock of provisions
they brought along with them, they found themselves under a necessity of taking
up some trade, and profession, for their subsistence. Fishing and Navigation
appearing to them the most proper, they embraced them with both arms, and
trading into the neighboring Country they gained a reputation by degrees
suitable to their Traffic and Merchandise. Their Comportment from the first
was with so much amity and concord, that their manner of living alluring all
such as had conversation with them, their little Islands were grown insensibly
full of People submitting to their Government, who by little and little formed
themselves into a body that is now become considerable both for its grandeur,
and policy.

And forasmuch as those who outlived the destruction of their Country, were of
a mixed condition, consisting both of Nobility and Commons; to cement their
Estate, and make it more durable they agreed to have their Government mixed too,
in which the Nobility were to be the chief, but with such coherence and
dependence upon the Commons, they should do nothing without them To take away
all pretense of Emulation, it was concluded that the Citizens and Gentlemen
indifferently should be habited in the same fashion, which has been observed
through so many Ages, to this very day; it was ordained also they should all of
them wear a certain Bonnet of black Wool, (which they call Barrett) with a
fringe of the same stuff about it, to put them in mind of their former
condition, and rebate the edge of their pride, to which otherwise, young and
capricious People (as they were) might be too prone, and propense.

But envy and virtue being always concomitant, their Neighbors taking notice
of their increase, began to be jealous, and by degrees, resolved to oppose
them. However they thought it not fit abruptly to declare themselves their
enemies, but by a neater and more cleanly piece of subtilty they concluded to
interrupt them privately in their commerce, and by that means to force them at
last to begin the rupture themselves. If our new Planters, in the posture they
were in at that time, were defective in any thing, it was in their conduct and
discipline of War, which must be acknowledged was not so exact, as their
rudiments for Peace. But these great persons having but one soul (as it were)
and acting by one motion, in a short time established such Laws and Maxims for
War, that they were owned the principal Soldiers of that Age, and have been
ever since esteemed not only the ablest Politicians, but the most potent
enemies in the World.

This being the Cradle or Mould in which this great body was formed, and
continued till it grew stronger and adult, it has since not only ventured
abroad amongst its Neighbors, but acquainted it self with the most remote
corners of the Universe, for what Country is it which has not tasted of her
commerce, or what part is there of the Levant Seas that is not afraid of her
Arms, in spite of the protection of the Turk. It will not be amiss if I follow
their Method in my description of their Civil, and Military Policy, the first
being the basis and foundation of their grandeur, and the last that which has
advanced them to a miraculous height, and rendered them formidable all over the
World. I shall begin with their Civil Affairs, and when I have made relation of
what I observed (in my Travels) of that kind, I shall proceed to their Militia,
in which having served also for some time, I made my Observations according to
my Talent.

THE POLICY OF THE VENETIAN, Both Civil and Military.
The First Book. Their Civil Policy.
CHAP. I. Of the Duke.
THat a body without a head how vigorous and robust soever it may be, is
notwithstanding but an immovable Trunck, and inanimate Mass, is so clear, and
inexpugnable a truth, that being but alleged in a Fable to the people of
Rome, when in defiance of the tyranny of the Senate they were retired into the
Mount Aventini, it brought the numerous and unquiet multitude down again to
their obedience, and wrought upon them to submit to a domination they believed
before insupportable. Accordingly the Republic of Venice understanding of what
importance it would be, never thought themselves safe or complete, till they
had made themselves a Chief.

And this Election as I conceive was grounded upon three principal Reasons: The
first was to frustrate the hopes of the ambitious, who would not so readily
embrace any design against their Country, nor attempt the subversion of their
liberties, seeing a Prince already in possession of the place, (by the
universal consent of the Commonwealth) which he might otherwise desire to
usurp. The second, to cool and assuage that heat of dominion which reigns in
the breast of most of the Gentry, by giving every man hopes of arriving one day
at the Supremacy, it being most certain, there is not one amongst all the
Nobles but has his expectation, and sometime or other may pretend to it. The
third is to satisfy and fix the volatile spirit of the Commons, giving them an
appearance of liberty in their Republic, and in their Dukes the shadow of a
King.

I call it the shadow of a King, because in reality the Prince which they
choose has more of the Name than Authority, and is so strictly limited and
circumscribed, that in an hours time the Grand Council (which they call the
Council of ten) can call him to account, form a Process against him, and
cashier him. He is I must needs say accommodated well enough, and magnificently
lodged, yet he is but as it were an illustrious Prisoner, seldom permitted to
go out of his Palace, and when he does, it is incognito, without any Ensigns
of his place. That which is most strange, is, to oblige him to keep close and
at home, if the people have taken any disgust against their Doge or Duke, they
are allowed to throw stones at him, and to commit what insolences they please,
if they meet him in the Streets, or in his Gondolo, except it be upon Festivals
or public Ceremonies, when he is accompanied by the Senate, and all the
Ambassadors in the Town.

Being the most jealous people in the World of their liberties, they could not
find a better expedient than that, to keep their Prince low and dependant, and
to cut off all ways he might possibly take to make himself absolute. For not
being allowed to do any thing of himself, it cannot be apprehended he can
attempt or accomplish any thing of importance, besides the very Officers and
Servants of his Household, are recommended and paid by the Commonwealth, and by
consequence expecting nothing from him but the honor of his service, they are
not so weak, to hazard the preferment they may rationally hope for, by being
faithful to those which placed them in that Sphere.

Nevertheless in some things he has the reverence or resemblance of a Prince,
he has admission into all public Counsels, he has a double voice in respect of
his quality, he has precedence of all the Nobility, and the whole Senate, he
creates all Officers, and supplies all Offices, he gives out Orders and makes
most part (though not all) of the Ordinances, yet all this is with so much
dependence, that he may be said to do nothing alone without the assistance of
the said Number, some of which under pretense of attending him in point of
honor, are as so many Spies watching over his actions perpetually. They choose
their Dukes commonly the most ancient that they can, as well to satisfy many
in a short time, as believing the ardour of dominion to be dead and
extinguish't, in persons of their age.

In the four years time which I spent in their service, I was a spectator of
the Reigns and Funerals of Contarini, Valiero, and Pezaro.

The Ceremony in which the Doge appears in the greatest splendour and Majesty is
at the Celebration of the Ascension, upon which day he marries the Sea with a
Ring. At that time he makes a public Feast; to which (in great State) he comes
in very late, and makes but little stay, after which he marches in a most
triumphant procession from the place where he lands, to the Church of St. Mark.

Take him in his Gondolo, (which is called le Bucentaure) and he is a Prince
indeed, it is guilt all over to the very water, covered from the Poup to the
Stroud with a large Baldaquin or Cloth of State, of Crimson Velvet embroidered
with gold and silver, with a rich Fringe of the same: he is set upon a kind of
a little Throne, the Senate ranged on both sides of him, bare: he is in a
purple Vest with a Diadem upon his head, which is a Bonnet of an odd kind of
fashion, encompast with a Band Royal of white a l'antique, a habit which
nevertheless has something August and Majestic in it. In this manner, at no
great expense they suffer their Prince to reign for one day; yet it is
remarkable also that even in the midst of this Grandeur, they give him a
gentle remembrance of his dependence, and the hazard he will run if he exceeds
the bounds they have prescribed, and that is by conducting him betwixt two
pillars, which is to be the fatal place of his chastisement, if he attempts any
thing against their liberties.

Could any body with greater address restrain the imperious spirits of those,
who transported with the Grandeur of their dignity, are not contented with the
station and mediocrity in which the Rules of the Republic have placed them?
Could any more gently and more agreeably lull that furious passion asleep,
which not only disturbs, but subverts so many States?

But the excellency of their Politics consists in the Election of their Dukes,
it being a fundamental and inviolable Law amongst them, That no person how
qualified soever in respect of his Extraction, can be admitted to that dignity
if he be married, and if all their Chronicles be consulted from the very
foundation of the Commonwealth to this day, there will not be above two or
three to be found who have had Wives. For knowing very well the ambition of
that Sex, and their insatiate appetite to govern, they have excluded them by a
Law which allows them no pre-eminence though their Husbands be Princes. Knowing
likewise how violent the passion of that Country is toward them, and how
inclinable even to the most servile respects, and considering that a man though
otherwise very honest and devoted to the interest of his Country, may
notwithstanding be too weak to defend himself against the importunities of his
Wife, and it being contrary to the Laws both Humane and Divine to separate
those who they have mutually joined, by a singular dexterity they have avoided
both the one inconvenience, and the other, and decreed no person capable of
Election but such as are single, whereby it proceeds that neither their Sons,
nor Relations, are the more considerable amongst them, nor live in any greater
splendour than before, not being allowed the least privilege to signify their
alliance to the Prince. Nay so far is it from that, the Duke is not permitted
to converse privately with any of them unless some body be by, insomuch that as
soon as he is chosen to that dignity, he bids adieu to his Children, his
Friends, his Family, and all that is dear to him, none of them being suffered
to enter into the Palace with him.

CHAP. II. Of the Counsel of Ten.
TO speak properly, the Counsel of Ten are the very soul of that Liberty which
the Venetians have preserved immaculate for twelve hundred years. They are the
Poles upon which that potent Machine moves, in which the perpetual and
inexhaustible course of their Wisdom is to be admired. They are the Fountains
from whence those Maxims have sprung, which rightly pursued, have hitherto
succeeded, and advanced their reputation to the condition it is in. In short,
though the Senate of Rome exceeded them in number, they came short of that
refulgent puissance and address which imbellishes this little body.

They are chosen above-board, without any favor or underhand dealing, for the
most part persons experienced in public affairs from their very youth, and in
truth such as are elected into this Sovereign Counsel, are ordinarily well
advanced in years, it being but necessary a State of that importance should be
entrusted to no hands, but such as have been accustomed to the greatest
Negotiations. They are more Sovereign, than their Sovereign himself, for (as
has been said before) if the safety and advantage of the Commonwealth requires
it, they can pull him down, and degrade him as they please.

They have secret and unconceivable ways of discovering what is done in the
State, besides their private, they have public informations which give them
very considerable advice. They have one Denoncie (as they call them)
particularly for Oaths, which is a thing cannot be forbidden too strictly. They
have others for pompous extravagancies in apparel, and it is no more than is
necessary in so opulent a State, where the Youth and Nobility are as it were
glutted with riches, and doubtless was there not a severe hand kept over them,
we should see their Vests and their black Bonnets in a short time upon the
ground, and their Damoiselles clattering in their gold and their silvers, with
as much profusion and vanity as they do with us.

This Law against extravagance in their Clothes, is so rigid and austere, that
the Curtezans themselves, who in other things have great privileges, are not
exempted in this. And one of the greatest and most paenal charges can be
brought against them, is to accuse them of having their Gowns or their Clothes
too rich, and contrary to the prescription of that Edict. By this Policy it is,
the mediocrity (which was the principal aim of their Ancestors) is maintained
to this day. This it is which prevents the transportation of their Money into
foreign parts, and hinders the luxury of that Sex which most commonly
occasions it.

They have another Denoncie peculiar to the affairs of State, and this is the
most dreadful and dangerous of them all: for a person informed against by a
Billett or Ticket thrown privately into the mouth of this Denoncie, is
immediately apprehended, and clapped up close in a horrible Dungeon, where he
lies without any possibility of knowing the cause of his calamity, till after
some time he be confronted at a little Window by the person which accused him,
where he may apologize if he pleases, but being seldom believed, (such is their
extraordinary jealousy of their freedom) they are frequently condemned to the
Canal called Orphano, which is the place of Execution, where (let his condition
be what it will) they fasten him to a board, and tying Cannon Bullets to his
feet, and others to his head, they let him down bet^^xt two Boats into the
Water.

That which I call Denoncies are certain Mouths cut with a Chiffel on the
outside of the Walls of the Palace, which correspond to cer^ain Pipes falling
into Boxes of Stone within of which the Sena^ors of the Counsel of Ten keep ^he
Keys, and those that are in service do visit them every night, ^o see what
fatal information is given that day.

It was the design of the grave Politicians which established this Counsel, to
advance their number ^o Ten, to prevent combination ^r partiality in their
affairs, it being almost impossible in so many, ^ut one or other will prefer
the in^erest of the Commonwealth before his own, and because we cannot keep our
selves from certain ^hwartings and accerssions to such people as we have
always in our ^ye, the Senate did very wisely comply with the course of our
humane affections, and increase them ^o that number, to divide and balance
their sentiments, if not by a generous inclination to their Country, at least
by an insuperable instinct of Nature, which suffers us not to concur with the
judgment of every one.

This Counsel or Magistrate (for that is the name they commonly call it by) is
the same which is called in France the Privy Counsel of State, in which the
Prince himself does sometimes preside. But there is this difference between
them, in France all things are transacted according to the pleasure of the
King, and if he cannot be present amongst them himself, he substitutes another,
and he is called President of the Counsel, but the Doge is not always admitted
to their Assemblies himself, and so far from deputing another, that they will
no^ vouchsafe to communicate their transactions with him, but now and then.
This Counsel is the Eye that watches perpetually for the good and safety of the
State, the Eye which never fleeps, which divides their care and solicitude for
their Country with so much equality and proportion, that let one come to the
Palace when he pleases, he shall always find them ready to dispatch them,
forasmuch as there is not an hour in the night but they succeed and relieve one
another in order, that they may be always ready to act, and oppose themselves
against all the machinations of their enemies.

This is the Court of the highest Jurisdiction, which judges and determines
absolutely without appeal in all things, especially belonging to the Public.
They have the Authority of chastizing the Nobility, which they can extend very
far if they think good. The Generals receive all their Orders from them, and
when their Commissions are expired, they are obliged within six months next
ensuing to attend that Court, and to answer to such Questions as shall be
objected, in case they be accused of abusing their Commands. But whether there
be any information against them or not, it is their duty of course to present
themselves before them to give them an account of their Moneys, Magazines, Men,
and whatever else was under their Conduct and Authority.

The great Power which they exercise makes them not only venerable, but
dreadful, and their Prince himself not daring to contradict their Decrees,
they have gotten such an Empire upon the spirits of all people, that the very
name of the Counsel of Ten will make one tremble, though his offense be never
so small. The Parliaments with us, and even our Counsels of State, have not
that force and authority as they: in all our transactions, their motions are
but slow, their power bounded, and restrained, which hinders their dispatch,
and certainly could they exercise their zeal with the same privilege and
freedom as these, there would not be so many mutinies and conspiracies in
France, nor so many cruel Wars to destroy us.

CHAP. III. Of the Sages Grands.
THey are always Elected out of the Nobility, nor can a mere Citizen ever hope
to arrive at that honor. They are chosen for their merit and capacity, and
their places are never sold. In some respects they are like our Secretaries of
State. They are three principal persons which have a kind of super-intendancy
over the rest, and manage the springs and motions of that great Machine the
Commonwealth. They have each of them their peculiar Province which they
administer distinctly, and therefore there is the Sage de la Mer, the Sage de
la Terre-ferme, and the Sage de l' Ecriture.

The Sage de la Mer disposes of all Orders which are given, relating any ways
to Maritime affairs, there being nothing happens in that nature which passes
not through his hands. He has the care and provision of all Arms, Victuals, and
Ammunitions, and gives out all Commissions requisite thereunto. He gives
Patents and Commissions to all the Commanders and Officers in their Galleys and
Gallions. He Signs all necessary Orders, and conveys them to them, and in short
has full cognizance and authority over all their Navigation.

The Sage de la terre-ferme has the same inspection upon the Continent, takes
an account of all Chamberlains, and Treasures of the Armies. It is his office
to pay the Soldiers, to give all Orders to the Militia in Garrison in all
places under his dominion, and in a word it is he is to be applied unto, in any
thing relating to affairs upon land.

The Sage de l' Ecriture has the oversight of the Records and Registers of the
Counsel, Signs all Orders which pass there, sees the Letters Patents and
Commissions sealed which are given to the Magistrates sent abroad to govern and
command the Provinces, and nothing is received from the Senate, either
recompense, donative, or office, but must pass through his hands. Each of these
Grandees are allowed their Secretaries and Clarks under them for their
assistance, and they are Citizens.

The mark or ensign of their degree is a long purple Robe with large Sleeves.

They have separated these Offices, and made them three, though in most
Kingdoms they are commonly executed by one person, but their design was to
enfeeble and debilitate all dignities, which in one man's hand might be too
puissant and dangerous. They have each of them a Seal belonging particularly to
their Office, with which they seal their several dispatches, but all of them
have the same impression.

CHAP. IV. Of their Procurators.
THe Procurators in this Republic may be called Princes without a Solecism,
and they are of two sorts: One is chosen always by the Senate, and conferred as
a reward of some emiment piece of service, or else as an encouragement of
virtue and honesty. The other buy their Principalities, and for the most part
very dear, it being one of the readiest ways the Commonwealth takes to raise
money in their greatest and most important necessities.

They have their places in all Counsels, and Pregadis, but they have but a
single voice no more than the privatest Gentleman, and can do no more than any
of the rest; yet they have their perquisites and privileges, which makes them
many times very considerable, and enables them to oblige or gratify any one
for whom they have a kindness.

All Nations which have any commerce with the Venetian, are very sollicitous to
acquire one of these Procurators for their Patrons. The Towns upon the
terra-ferma, put themselves under their protections, and even the Nobility
themselves think it no small corroboration to have an alliance with one of
these Princes; and this is that which gives the greatest luster to that Office.

In the Senate they have their places above the rest, have the pre-eminence in
all debates, and are always the first in giving their judgments. Yet for all
these prerogatives, their train is no greater than theirs, nor are they
suffered to walk the Streets in greater Equipage, and the design is to keep
that happy mediocrity inviolate, which was established at the Commencement, and
has been continued so fortunately ever since. Nevertheless in their Houses they
appear like themselves, living with the greatest affluence and grandeur
imaginable. Strangers are not admitted to speak with them till they have
formally demanded audience first; and when it is granted them, they are
conducted by a long train of Officers of his Chamber to the place where they
are to be received. Most of them are very proud and morose, but some of them
civil and fine Gentlemen: In the time whilst I was in their service, one of
these Princes named Morosini managed his dignity so nobly, he gained the
affections of all people, and put them into an equal admiration of the
sweetness of his behavior, the nobleness of his extraction, and the charms
with which he attracted the hearts of all such as had occasion to approach him;
a virtue (to speak truth) with which the Venetian Nobility have but little
acquaintance.

They are distinguished from the rest by a Magistrale Robe, of the same color
with the Robe of the Sages Grands.

CHAP. V. Of their Podestats.
THe Dignities of the Podestats are of no long duration, continuing not above
two or three years in the Towns to which they are sent for the distribution of
justice. Their Office is properly to hear and dispatch all Suits or
Controversies arising either in the Towns where they preside, or the
Territories depending.

From the day of their departure from Venice, and their entrance upon the
Magistracy, they lay by the equality in which they lived before, and comport
themselves as Sovereigns. They have their Gentlemen, their Stewards, their
Officers of their Chambers, their Confessors, their Pages, their Footmen, and
their Guard, which consists commonly of thirty or forty persons, with a
peculiar sort of Bonnetts upon their heads, their Swords by their sides, and
their Snap-hanches in their hands after the manner of the Bressians, which is a
kind of Arquebuss, somewhat larger than our Musquetons. The Guards are always
drawn up, and in their Arms, at the Gate of the Court where the Podestats hold
their Assizes, and attend him constantly whenever he goes abroad.

Though the Senate allow their Podestats these privileges, yet they will not
suffer them in other things to behave themselves like Princes, lest the elation
of their heart might make them forget their station and dependence. Their
Jurisdiction seldom extending above four or five leagues, they cannot have
interest or power enough to attempt any innovation; yet what authority they
have given them, is to imprint a character of respect and obedience in the
people under their several jurisdictions, that the Majesty of these Presidents
may as a Copy represent the original Grandeur of that august body, of which
these are as it were, the most inconsiderable members.

Their Robes and their habits are red, their Vest is of scarlet with large
Sleeves, they are daily at Mass in their Chapels, with the usual Ceremonies,
and those of their Counsel accompanying them. Their Counsels consist generally
of Gentlemen of the Terra-ferma, who seem to be assistant and joined to these
Podestats, in the discussion of all occurrences which present themselves, but
indeed it is but a complement and shadow of liberty which they give them, for
in affairs of greatest importance they never are called; and if by accident
they be there, and their judgment contrary to the Podestats, they stop their
mouths, by showing them a Decree of the Senate, confirmed by the opinion of
the present Magistrate.

They have authority over all Prisoners, and judge in all Cases of life and
death, in the highest resort. They have the care of all Hospitals, Highways,
and Bridges. During the time of their Commission, they lay Tolls, and set
prices upon all things brought into the Markets, as necessary for the life of
man. The Innes and victualling Houses are obliged every night to bring to them
the names of all the Guests and Lodgers in their respective Houses, by which
means they understand not only the numbers, but the qualities of all persons
which come into their Towns. If they have any apprehension of the Plague, they
choose another Officer under them which is called the Magistrate of Health, who
suffers no man to enter whatever he be without a Ticket or attestation signed
by their Secretaries. No Nobleman (I mean of the Terraferma) is allowed to be
absent, but by their permission; and so strict is their eye over all numerous
Assemblies, there is seldom any sufficient to give them an alarm. They live
after the manner of the Gentlemen of that Country, yet though they converse
with them freely, and afford them familiar access, it is always with such
circumstances, as make them know them to be their Masters.

To insinuate however into the affection of the Gentry, and oblige them in some
measure, they vouchsafe them some little inconsiderable employment, where they
have the entire management of nothing, and yet they call this, (as I have heard
some of them my self) sharing their authority with them, and desiring earnestly
their assistance, when (in truth) they are but their servants, and led about by
the Noses, as they are pleased to direct.

CHAP. VI. Of their Camerlingues.
I Might add in this place an Officer they call the Captain Grand, but his
employment being Military, I shall reserve him till I speak of their Militia,
and pass to their Camerlingues, or Receivers, which for the most part are
Venetian Gentlemen of small Estates, who are put into those Offices on purpose
to recruit themselves, which they seldom neglect, by the several Receipts and
payments which they make; and the Senate has that kindness for them, they never
enquire too strictly into their behavior. They are habited in scarlet like the
Podestat, receive their Orders both from the Podestat, and Grand-Captain, and
discharge their Bills. When they hold a fair correspondency with these two
Magistrates, they make up their Markets the better, and they are continued in
this little (but advantageous) Office, till such time as they are supposed to
have got enough, to support their quality in the Commonwealth.

CHAP. VII. Of their Ambassadors.
THe principal aim of their Policy is to obtain and preserve an amity with all
the Princes of Europe by all possible means, of which they are so great lovers,
they have many times purcha'st it at a dear rate, of the cruellest of their
enemies. One of the most powerful and dexterous ways of maintaining this
union with foreign Kingdoms, is by this ancient mode of Ambassadors, which
they send to all Courts in Christendom with great equipage and splendour. They
choose them constantly out of the Patrician race, that is to say of the ancient
Senators, such as were the first of their State, and such if possible as have
merit and abilities added to the Nobility of their blood.

They are permitted to habit themselves according to the fashion of the
Country to which they are designed, and to live after another manner than they
do at Venice, which scarce one of the other Magistrates dare venture to do.

In these kind of Negotiations they are so subtle and accute, they can
penetrate the most secret Cabinets of Kings, and by a Key of gold which is
forged in the Senate, open and shut the most obscure and intricate Springs in
any sovereign Counsel. They spare no charges upon such an occasion, especially
where they have any suspicion.

These Ambassador (...) seem Plenipotentiaries, and to have a full power and
authority, but they are really circumscribed. They dare not come to a
definitive Conclusion upon any affair whatever, till they have given notice of
their progress at Venice, and received the directions of the Senate, which is
punctually to be observed. They have not the liberty to open and peruse any
Packets or dispatches alone: to prevent that, they appoint them certain
Citizens of Venice, selected out of the most judicious and experienced persons
of the City, who as Secretaries are always to be present at the opening and
reading of their Letters.

And this is no small check to the Nobility, for however glorious they may
appear in their station, we see them liable to be curbed, and that by one
single Citizen. With such admirable prudence do these great Statesmen confine
all their Grandees to their particular circuits and bounds, that it is
impossible for them to arrogate any absolute jurisdiction to themselves.

The reports which these Secretaries make, either by their Letters or word of
mouth, are of so great credit with the Senate, that they are not only
sufficient to destroy a man, but to create a jealousy, and interrupt that
harmony and consort which might otherwise be found amongst persons of the same
condition. The Republic names a Nobleman expressly, to whom it gives the
appearance of being chief of the Embassy, but when that is done, he is sure to
have a Citizen clap't at his Elbow, to peep into the most secret of his
actions. It is an incredible thing to see with what generosity these
illustrious persons the next day after they are returned from their Embassies,
lay aside all the Grandeur and Glory which they had taken upon them for the
honor of their Conntrey, and march up and down the Streets as it were
incognito, with the same modesty as an ordinary Citizen. This condescension of
theirs gains strangely upon the affections of their Subjects and disposes them
to obedience without violence or coersion, for observing how quietly their
Governors resign, they cannot think much to conform to the Government
themselves.

As to the Ambassadors which are sent to Venice, they are received with great
honors. The Senate in their Robes of scarlet go out in their Gondoloes to meet
them, in some of the Isles about the Town and having made their Complements,
they conduct them to the City with a great train of Boats attending, every
Senator taking a Gentleman of the Ambassadors Equipage into his Gondolo with
him.

But after this day they have no liberty to see or converse together more, nor
can the Ambassador himself speak or negotiate with any of them upon any
pretense whatsoever. All things afterward are transacted in full Senate, ^he
Duke and Counsel being pre^ent, where no immediate Answer ^s ever given to any
Proposition, ^ut the Ambassadors withdrawing, ^he business is debated, and then
put to the Vote what shall be replied.

The Laws are so jealous, and so ^evere in matters of Intelligence or
Correspondence, that if it be known a noble Venetian has had conference, not
only with an Ambassador, but the least person in his Retinue, he runs no less
hazard than of his life, insomuch that they run as fast and with as much horror
from any of them, as from a Basilisk. About twenty six years since, one of the
Family of the Contarini, and Nephew to the Doge that was then, was strangled in
Prison for having been seen in a Gondoloe with a Secretary of Spain. A Friend
of mine, one Labia a noble Venetian, who had spent much of his time in France,
when Monsieur du Plessis Besancon took his leave of the Senate, admiring the
beauty and accomplishment of the young Chevalier his Son, he could not contain
himself from accosting him, and paying his respects, but suspecting that one of
the Counsel of Ten (who are always about the Ambassadors) had observed him, he
was glad of his own accord to throw himself at the feet of those terrible
Judges, to acknowledge his fault, and implore their pardon, which at length
though with severe reprehension he obtained, because he had prevented their
Informers by accusing himself.

choose their Doge, their Counsel of Ten, their Senators, their Ambassadors,
their Sages Grands, their Podestats, their Captains-General, their
Provediteurs-General, their Governors, their Grand-Captains, their
Vice-Admirals of their Galleys, the heads of their Inquisition, (which is but
the shadow of a Court in Venice) because let the Inquisitors be as zealous as
they will, they can neither act nor undertake any thing, without the permission
of certain Senators appointed to assist, who commonly (like the rest of the
Nation) being not over-scrupulous or severe in such matters, do choke and
correct the ardour which your more refined Catholics are prone to. In short,
all the chief Offices depending upon the Senate, (whether Military or Civil)
are entrusted only with the noble Venetians, the rest of the Citizens, and the
noblest upon the Continent, never so much as hoping for them in their turns.

Till they be five and twenty years old, the noble Venetians are not admitted
into the Counsel, yet this severity is not so general, but some few which are
of their friends are received at twenty. Here it is they model and form their
young plants for the government of the State; here it is they are instructed in
their most refined policies, and prepared for public affairs. And though it
may seem strange that the heat of youth should accord with the coldness and
asperity of old age, yet there has been always observed so great ^n union and
concurrence resulting from their Counsels, that it must be acknowledged the
flame of the young Gentlemen has hitherto had no other effect but to correct
and qualify the frigidity of the more ancient, and on the other side the Ice
and gravity of the seniors have served only to cool and temper the juvenile
ebullitions of their juniors.

The Pregadis (which are the Counsels to which they are usually called, as is
implied by the name, for Pregadi in the Venetiau language is as much as invited
or convok'd) have their first meeting (all in a body) in the Place of St. Mark,
where every one driving on his own designs either for himself or such of his
friends as are ambitious of authority, they walk up and down promiscuously,
soliciting, and making their Cabals.

No body is suffered at that time to come near the place where they are
walking, and if by accident or presumption any stranger intrudes himself, he is
repulsed, and runs a great hazard of some public affront. The while they are
there, the place is counted as sacred, and called by the name of Pregadi, it
runs along all the front of the Palace, and takes up a full half of the
Marketplace in breadth. One custom they have, I know not whether more subtle
or pleasant: When any one who has stood for any dignity, comes out of the
Counsel, whether his ambition be prosperous or not, all people salute him with
their Complements, congratulate his advancement, and by a peculiar Oath which
they have on purpose, swear they have done their utmost to serve him, by which
means the poor rejected person, besides the affront he received being defeated
of his hopes, finds himself under a necessity of receiving a civility from him,
who perhaps was the principal destruction of his designs, for he can never be
assured, who were either his friends or his foes, because the Elections being
made by Tickets put into a Basin without any superscription, the whole conduct
remains so confused and obscure, it would be beyond the skill of an Oedipus to
resolve him.

This invention of Tickets is the most safe way was ever found out for giving
their judgments freely, for who is it will deny, but when one is to give his
opinion in a public Assembly, he is not liable to certain insuperable motions,
which oblige him many times to speak against his judgment, being to give his
Vote against some great person which he is afraid to displease, or against a
Friend which he is unwilling to destroy, against a man of parts which perchance
he has occasion to use, or against a man of power that another time may do as
much for him. But this occult way of Election defends them against those
dangers, and authoriseth them to be honest, without apprehension of any body.

If there be several Children in a Family, the elder seldom marry, but give a
good proportion of their patrimony to the younger: it is reported that the
youngest marryes for them all; but I cannot think them extravagant to that
point. This I know, they are in no great slavery to their consciences, they
manage their appetites with a loose rein, and indulge themselves in their
pleasures as much as any people in the world, yet they have a jealous and
suspicious humor, (which is born and dies with them) that persuades me the
good man of the house would not digest that kind of community. In my judgment
it proceeds rather from a Maxim of State if one only marryes, for the whole
Estate devolving by degrees upon him, he has wherewithal not only to support
his Family, but to maintain it in its opulence and splendour, which they are
principally solicitous of, not enduring with any patience to see any exceed
them, and by this means (I conceive) it is they preserve their Houses in their
ancient authority and lusture.

Under their black Vests they are habited in the French fashion, very handsome,
the young Nobility having no fancy for the long Robes which they are obliged to
wear, would willingly change them also, but in that they are obliged to
accommodate, and preserve the mode of their Country, which in all great Towns,
and in their Houses of pleasure, they retain to their dying day. But out of the
Towns, they are dressed a la Cavaliere, either when they are in their Coaches,
or on Horseback, and accompanied by a rabble of Hectors they call Bravi, many
times only in ostentation, but too often for a worse end, for being very proud
and vindicative, they are seldom without some mischief or other in their
designs. And for that in this Country courage does not lie in the gallantry or
generousness of a man's behavior, but in ridding himself of his enemy by what
ways he can. That they may be in no danger of being surprised themselves, but
rather have that advantage upon others, they are attended when they are in the
Country with these Mirmidons, but in the City they leave them in garrison,
sometimes in their Houses, but never appear with them in the Streets.

They never discourage their youth in their debauches, they seem rather to
excite them by the permission the Curtezans have to keep public Houses without
being disturbed, though to do them right it is in a Quarter by themselves. They
are not ignorant in the Senate, that a voluptuous person thinks of nothing but
his pleasures, and he which is inveigled by the artifice of a Curtezan, pursues
no bodies destruction but his own, and aims no further than to make himself
acceptable to her. By this means these grave Senators suffer the
inextinguishable flames of their youth, to evaporate betwixt the arms of these
Idols, and with this sweet poison correct the boiling of those spirits, which
uncajol'd might endanger, at least attempt the subversion of the State. But
since the famous Tiepolo's days, there has not been known any formed
Conspiracy sufficient to give that Republic any apprehension; what have
happened, have been immediately suppressed, and by their vigilance rendered
abortive.

They are generally much given to play, and very neat and subtle at all Games.
They have certain places on purpose which they call Redotti, where they meet,
and dispose of several hours without speaking a word. Their success is never
known by their behavior, for they win and lose, receive and part with their
money with the same temper and indifference. For the most part the place of
their play is at a Senators House, where they have always one of their Judges
in their eye. They are so far from using any corporal Exercise, that they
despise it; and I am of opinion they are brought up purposely in that laziness,
lest otherwise they should awake their Lethargick spirits, which by this means
lie buried in the contemplation and enjoyment of their pleasures.

CHAP. IX. Of their Ladies.
THe Ladies making no inconsiderable part of the Nobless in this Country, I
suppose it will be allowed me to make a small digression in their behalf, and
to speak a word or two of their Customs en passant.

They are naturally very proud, and of opinion there is no Nobility like
themselves in the whole world. They never match beneath themselves, and will
sooner throw themselves into a Nunnery, (where they have all fort of liberty)
than entertain the least motion of an unequal Marriage. In their Houses they
are very magnificent and rich, their Habits of Cloth of gold, or other costly
Stuff, made up a la Francoise. When they appear abroad they are dressed very
neatly, their Breasts bare, and commonly plump and white, their Heads are
usually dressed after our mode, and with as much curiosity as in France. When
Madam Besancon was at Venice they most industriously imitated her in all the
fashions she brought with her out of France.

Your languishing beauties being in no great request among them, they prefer
vivacity to sweetness, and a brisk aerie brown is more acceptable there than a
sleepy and dying aspect, though the fairest imaginable. They take much delight
to have their Necks and Faces something more sanguine than ordinary, which to
strangers is not so grateful. They are mightily reserved at home, but if you
will dispense with them there, they will invent ways enough to satisfy your
curiosity any where else. They have certain affected Feasts every Week, upon
which under pretense of public prayer, or particular devotion to some Saint or
other, they take occasion to be constantly at Church, where behind the Pillars
you may observe the young Gentlemen lying at catch for their Oeillades and
Glances, which they receive and retort with a slyness and dexterity suitable to
the cunning of that Nation.

They have most of them their Women absurdly and fantastically clad, which
attend and support them, by whose gracious assistance a man may be sometimes
admitted to converse with them, when they enjoy themselves most freely, or have
liberty to walk. From the Epiphanie to the first Week in Lent they keep a
continued Carnaval, during which time they have the freedom to go in their
disguises to the Place of St. Mark, to be present at all Balls, Plays or
Assemblies, where there is merriment or dancing. At their Masks they have a
particular care of refusing their hand to no body, lest it should prove some
Gentleman in Masquerade, which amongst them would be an inexpiable affront. At
these meetings they place themselves all in a row, without speaking a word,
and when they are taken out to dance, one must have a special care he does it
not with his Glove off, if he does, he not only runs a hazard of an affront,
but to be pistol'd or stabbed. Their Dance is nothing but a grave and stately
motion from one room to another, till at last they return to the place from
whence they were taken. They have no want of Music, but it is so disposed into
several appartments, that one is sensible but of one single Melody. In one
Chamber they have their Theorboes, in another their Lutes, in a third their
Viols, in a fourth their Violins, and so in every Chamber one comes, he is
presented with a new sort.

Their Play is a perpetual Tacet. You shall see fifty or threescore Ladies
about a long Table, shuffling and managing the Cards with as much silence as
they were Statues, and losing their money with as little concernment, as their
Husbands. I was many times at these meetings on purpose to have learned the
game, but they played so quick, and talked so little, 'twas impossible I should
do it.

Besides these Feasts, they have the same liberty at the Marriage of any of
their relations, upon certain days which they call Procuratici, and upon all
public solemnities for any victory obtained. When they are at home, their
entertainment commonly is making their Punti in aria, which are the Points de
Venice so much valued in France.

Their Coaches are their Gondoloes, which are a sort of Boats so easy and
swift, it is scarce possible to present them to your imagination. All the
Summer long their recreation is upon the Canal above the Pontrealte, and they
call this diversion taking the Air. Their Gondoloes are so swift, though the
Sea in the Canal be very gentle and calm, yet by the force of the Rowers, and
the agitation of the Vessel, it is swelled and incensed in that manner, it
seems with its waves and foam to threaten all people that had the audacity to
provoke it. But that which is most admirable is the dexterity of their
Watermen, who amongst so great a multitude and confusion of Boats, so many
turnings and windings as they make, are never known to fall foul upon one
another, but follow so exactly the Barque where the Lady of their affections is
carried, that without the least suspicion or disorder by all the crosses they
make, they will land you at the place where your Mistress appoints.

And ^here I might make some reflection upon the jealousy of this Nation, and
admire how upon certain occasions they can master a passion which amongst them
is predominant. But they understand the complexion of that Sex exactly, and
that their desire is more ardent of what is forbidden, for which reason they
remit something of the Italian severity, and allow them a certain image of
liberty, lest by their strictness they should kindle such a fire in their
veins, as should make their own Houses too hot for them.

CHAP. X. Of their Citizens.
BEfore I come to speak of the Estace upon the Continent, I think it not
improper to place the Citizens next to the Nobility, because they pretend to be
of the same number, and accordingly call themselves Noble Citizens. Unless a
man be very conversant amongst them, and takes more than ordinary notice, it is
no easy matter to distinguish them from the Gentry, they having the same
habits, and neither of them more than the other; but if one associates with
them, and observes strictly the difference of their genius and spirit, it is not
difficult to discern them, for the Citizens carry not their heads so high, nor
their forehead so open, their countenance is not so free, they have more
humility, and their salutations are with more submission.

They are generally men of parts, profound in their judgments, and have great
intelligence in foreign Countries. They are rich and frugal, and exercise no
particular Trade, only they are Partners with such as traffic in Gross, their
principal commerce is with the Jews, who have a Quarter in the City assigned
particularly to themselves. To speak properly they are the chief of the
Commons, and the Nobility complyes with them so far as to permit them to wear
the same habits for three reasons:

The first is, that by honoring them with the same Vesture the Senators
themselves wear, they may the better prevail with them to swallow their
Authority, and cajole the Commons with an opinion that in their Citizens they
do participate likewise with the Nobles in the management of affairs, whereas
indeed there is nothing common amongst them but their Clothes.

A second is, to conceal the number of their Gentry from the observation of
strangers, that by supposing them more numerous than they are, they might be
deterred from all plots and machinations against them.

The last, and (if I be not mistaken) the most prevalent is, that by
confounding themselves in that manner with the commoner sort, they might not
remain so open and easy a mark to such as should have designs against them,
for he which attempts them upon presumption of their habits, may find himself
mistaken, and involve himself in the ruin of a Citizen as soon as a Senator,
so that their destruction by this means being not so facile as otherwise, these
Citizens may be said to be the Bucklers of the Nobless, by which they are
covered and protected.

They are never employed in any great Office, and have the management of
nothing in the State, but under some of the Gentlemen of Venice. The highest of
their preferment is to be Secretaries to the Generals, Ambassadors, and
Proveditors-General. They are admitted to the Bar, and may go as Volunteers in
any of the Ships belonging to the Commonwealth; but that wherewith they are
most pleased, and which persuades them they have no small share in the
Government, is, that they are nominated to their places by the Counsel, and
indeed they are seldom employed about any person but as a spy upon his actions.

CHAP. XI. Of the Nobles upon the Terra-firma.
ONe of the most admirable things to all strangers, is the submission (not to
say abjectness and baseness) of these Nobles toward the Nobility of the
Venetians, which extends to so poor and servile a veneration, they will not put
on their Hats before any of them, but by their reiterated commands.
Notwithstanding in the Country they retain some little esteem, but in the City
they are no more regarded than the most inconsiderable Mechanics.

They are kept in so constant and so severe a servitude, they are never
admitted to any considerable dignity in the Commonwealth. They are never called
to any of the Counsels of State, of whose transactions they are usually as
ignorant as the meanest Fisherman of Moran. They are brought up in this
ignorance, and kept at this distance from affairs, to keep them under, and
prevent any competition with them who are to be their Masters; for being
naturally witty, quick; desirous of novelties, and no more faithful than
consists with their convenience, should they give an inch, they would take an
ell, and by the admission of one foot, work in their whole body, till at last
they would discover, that notwithstanding their masque and appearance of
liberty, they were really and in effect no better than slaves. And to speak
truth, this Republic have so great a diffidence and suspicion of these people,
there is no stone left unturned that may keep them from a fence of their
condition, or put them out of any capacity of relieving themselves.

Nevertheless that they might not provoke them to despair, the superior
Magistrates, sent over by the Senate to govern them, call them to them at their
arrival, entrust them (in appearance) with their affairs, give them the title
of Counselors, and perhaps the arbitration in some trifling difference.

The Orders which they receive from the Senate, they communicate with them
first, and they are obliged blindly to pursue them; they give them little
Offices besides, but they are not so honorable as servile: with which shadows
and delusions the poor Gentlemen march off with an Adio a Vosignoria, as
heartily as if they had advanced them to the highest dignity in their Dominions.

They are generally implacable, and hold this as an irrefragable Maxim, never
Fidarsi al nemico reconciliato; To trust a reconciled Enemy. They are so rooted
and habituated to revenge, that in all the Towns belonging to this State, there
is scarce any thing to be seen but perpetual Civil Wars. The Bressians and the
Inhabitants of Vincenza are so furious, and murders and assassinations so
familiar amongst them, it would scarce bring a Citizen out of his Shop, to see
a man killed before his face, and they are so little concerned at the execution
of any man, that if they hear a Gun go off in the Street, the most pious person
amongst them will pull off his Hat, and say a short Prayer for the murderers
escape. And as if this were not enough, the Parents add this way of revenge to
the education of their Children, showing them constantly every night and
morning the bloody Shirts in which their Predecessors were slain, inflaming
their young veins with desire of revenge, which increasing with their age,
never abates, but with the utter ruin and destruction of their enemy.

And yet this liberty would not be altogether unpardonable, if they took but
honorable ways to atchieve their revenge: I call them honorable ways,
because though there be Princes which have forbid Duels, yet upon any complaint
they cannot conceal the difference they make betwixt a man that challenges, and
one that refuses. But their ways are so barbarous, and base, they are not to
be recited but with horror. They entertain Garrisons of these Bravoes in their
Houses, who being armed exactly, are many times the perfidious instruments of
their death, which they ought in gratitude to have defended; and in truth there
is no people that I know more unhappy than these Nobles, the most severe Monk
of them all not enduring half so much pain with their Hair and their Sackcloth,
as these do with their Coats of Mail and their Corslets, which for greater
secrecy they wear commonly next their skin also. In short, their lives are so
disturbed and inquiet, by their passionate appetite of revenge on the one side,
and their immoderate apprehension of danger on the other, that the nearest of
their relations have many times fallen under their hands, in the fantastical
alarms harms they have created to themselves.

Their Wives (how virtuous and discreet soever they be) they use like the
greatest Criminals imaginable. They keep them locked up close in their
Chambers, which are fortified at all points, and not to be entered but through an
iron Grate. They do not allow them the conversation of mankind, nor suffer them
to be attended, but by their own Sex; and if they do not govern themselves with
the highest severity, they run no less hazard than of their lives. For in this
case they are so jealous, they will revenge the sin of the Father upon his
Children, and exterminate a whole Family for the offense of a single man: and
yet for all this their Wives are Women, and Italians too.

This (according to my best observation) is the life of the Nobless upon the
Terra-firma. Some will tell me perhaps they cannot but admire, so prudent and
potent a body as the Senate should permit such abominable disorders. But in
this lies the subtilty and neatness of their policy; for if they do not promote
them on purpose, they at least connive at their outrages, to the end that being
employed in mining and countermining at home, they may be taken off from any
public contrivances, to the prejudice of the State. They know very well where
there is a radicated and inveterate quarrel, there can never be an entire and
ingenuous union, which of all things in the world this State is most
apprehensive of, as the most probable way for its ruin and subversion. And
indeed considering how numerous and (in that respect) considerable they are,
should they be unanimous, and live in any correspondence, it were no hard
matter for them to be too hard for their Masters, and to tumble them down
headlong, that do now trample upon their necks. It is an ordinary saying at
Venice, that this great body being full of melancholy and corrupt humors,
nothing is more convenient for it than Phlebotomy, and that having that faculty
of opening their veins for one another, they save them the labor of applying
any other remedies. But besides the aforesaid advantages which the Venetian
draws from these animosities, there is another of which upon occasion they make
considerable use, and that is by declaring any of these Gentlemen of the
Terra-firma Rebels, if after they have satisfied their fury, and as it were
glutted themselves with the blood of their adversaries, they begin to appear
formidable in the Country, by the multitude of their Bravoes, or the quantity
of their crimes. In such case the Senate understands well enough that the
perpetiation of such and so numerous villainies, must of necessity create them
enemies ad infinitum, and therefore without more circumstance they banish this
terrible offender, degrade him from his honors, deprive him of his Estate, set
a price upon his head, and having craved the assistance of all the neighboring
Countries toward the execution of justice, and engaged their concurrence in so
equitable a Cause, they constrain the poor Tyrant to an unhappy dilemma, of
either living obscurely in some Cave for the future, or else in the highest
despair to betake himself to the Field: from whence it comes there are many
times so great parties of Banditi to be seen in their Territories. An
incomparable Maxim to give just so much rein to the vicious, as shall make
them insolent and odious, that they may afterward ruin them with universal
approbation, and besides possess the people with a most sacred opinion of their
justice, and secure their Provinces against the Grandees of the Continent.

CHAP. XII. A particular Discourse upon some of their Maxims.
THat which the World looks upon as their Treasure, is (really) no such thing.
Their wealth is supposed to consist in great heaps of money, crammed up in some
secret and secure place, from whence upon occasion they draw forth such immense
sums of gold and silver as they judge necessary for the conservation of their
State. Their chiefest riches in their greatest extremities, lies in the
affections of their Nobility and Citizens, there it is they meet with their
inexhaustible springs, it is they whose love to their Country, and
apprehension of foreign dominion, makes them post-pone all Considerations of
particular interest, and draw their swords as well as purses in defense of
their State. After the death of the valiant Marcello, the loss of Tenedos, and
the fatal allay to their victory in the death of M^ccinego, though the
Republic was almost dazeled with those blows, and as it were fainting with the
loss of such laudable blood, yet they disdained to supply themselves any where
but at home, and the generous Pesaro (since chosen Doge) was the first who in
that general Consternation raised up their declining courages, by a most
honorable example, offering the Senate his whole revenew for five years, which
was no less than sixty thousand Ducats per annum. This noble Proposition not
only confirmed the irresolute, encouraged the timorous, and supplied their
necessities for the present, but has put them into such a posture, they are not
probably to be destroyed by any but themselves.

For the more effectual execution of the Orders of the Senate, they have a
grand Provost in Venice who wears a long scarlet Robe, and is called by them
Contestabile, he is attended by certain Sbires, in the nature of our Archers,
and his Office is to suppress the insolence of such Rascals as disturb the
security of the People. Nevertheless these Sbires dare not lay hands upon a
Gentleman, and if at any time it be their duty to seize upon any of them, they
throw their Cloaks over their head, and muffling them up in that manner, they
carry them to Prison. The Office of these Sbiri is so slavishly miserable, a
Nobleman, Citizen, or Stranger, (let his condition be what it will) if he can
prove him guilty of the least offense, may stab or pistol any of them, without
any danger of being punished.

The Water and the Gondoloes are as so many Sanctuaries, no meddling with any
man there, no execution of Justice, a Criminal upon the Water is as secure
against the Sergants, as a man behind a Mud-wall, is against the stab of a
Penknife. The Houses of Ambassadors are in like manner so sacred, that if the
greatest Banditi in Italy but touch the threshold of their Door, he is exempt,
and secure against any kind of violence: besides these they have certain
priviledg'd places, in which no man is to be disturbed, and their privileges
are kept inviolable, but if they catch any of them out of their Asilum, they
are liable to the Lash, and away they go to Prison. Firearms are so
peremptorily forbidden in this City, that it is an unpardonable offense to wear
any there, and he that makes use of them, if he be taken, dies without mercy:
by which piece of severity they prevent many assassinations, which otherwise
would be too frequent in that place, The stab with a Stidetto (which is a kind
of Dagger the Italians wear behind their Robes) is not so criminal, for that
sport being acted man to man, and the blows mutual and alternate, the Venetian
concerns himself not so much where the combat is equal, and one may kill his
enemy, as soon as his enemy him.

Thus far I have entertained you with the pleasantness of that City, and other
Towns upon the Continent, as are happy and at peace, we have made some
Observations upon them, and concluded (according to our judgment) that
notwithstanding the diversity in their age, humors, and qualities, their Unity
and Concord is so great, there is no revolution to be suspected in that
Commonwealth.

But now the noise of Trumpets and Drums, the shouts and acclamations of the
Soldiers calling me away, I must fall down with them to the Island of Lio,
where they are usually embarked. The Galleys and Gallions tricked up with their
Banners and Penons, and as it were sunk and swallowed up in the smoke of their
great Guns, persuades me the General may be embarking himself, and all these
valiant men employed upon some extraordinary Enterprise. It would be a shame
not to be a Soldier amongst so many brave persons, and I that have formerly
learned my Trade amongst them, (cannot leave them in honor in any noble
Expedition: nevertheless while the Soldiers and Officers are preparing for
their Voyage, and the generous Cavalier taking) leave, of his Mistniss, I shall
have time to speak a word or two of their Military Policy.

THE MILITARY POLICY OF THE VENETIAN.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Venetian Militia in general.
THat War of all professions in the World is the most noble and honorable, is
a thing so undeniably clear, God Almighty amongst his Titles in the holy
Scriptures seems to affect none more than to be called the God of battle, The
Lord of Hosts, etc. and the weapon he most commonly used for the destruction of
his enemies was the sword, which to this day discriminates betwixt the
Soldier, and the rest of the people. Kings (which are his Vicegerents upon
earth) delighted with the Title of Invincible, prefer it to all other Epethites
whatever; and the Nobility would never be reckoned the right arm of their
Prince, if they were not naturally more valiant than ordinary.

The bravery which excites the Gentry of France, and makes them run voluntarily
into so many dangers, is in that respect more honorable than the Venetians,
the Nobility amongst these being obliged by indispensable necessity, (as being
the heads of that State) to do their own business themselves; for being
eternally jealous of strangers, and afraid to put the sword into their hands,
who may possibly make use of it to their prejudice, they seldom employ them in
any considerable Command, and if at any time they be forced, it is with such
caution and restraint, that they seem rather to tie up their hands, than to put
them in arms. But that their proceedings may be less obscure, and their
Military Methods transmitted more clearly, I shall begin with their chief
Officers, and give a description of them.

CHAP. II. Of their Generalissimo.
THe Authority of the Generalissimo is so absolute from the very moment of his
Embarkment, that during his Government (for three years) the Republic it self
can scarce take notice of his actions. His Cabin is like a little Senate, from
whence all Orders relating any way to the Wars do constantly issue; and in some
respects he might be called independent, were he not at the end of his Reign to
give an account of his behavior to the Counsel of Ten, to answer to such
Questions as shall be asked, to purge himself of such Crimes as he may be
accused of, and in defect of that, to suffer and be exposed to the same
punishment as the meanest of the people. And it is no extraordinary thing
there, if he has any enemy considerable, or has not demeaned himself with the
civility expected, to fall under the lash, and receive a severe chastisement
from the Counsel of Ten.

There are most commonly several Generals in the service of the Venetian, but
with such subordination and dependence upon this, they receive their Orders
from him, and his Command is their sufficient direction: and this is a custom
far from the practice of any other part of Europe, where frequently by the
multitude and independance of their Generals, they weaken their Armies, and
render them rather dis-membred than commanded. It is no easy matter,
(especially if they be persons of conduct and courage) to preserve a sincere
amity and affection betwixt two placed in equal authority. For the jealousy of
being less esteemed than his Partner, thrusts him violently upon all hazards,
and sets his wits upon the Tenter, to find out some way or other of depriving
him of honor, and working himself into the savor of the people: if they be
different in their humors, one brave and adventrous, the other slow and
deliberate, how is it possible such diversity should consist with any design,
or produce any thing to the honor of the State? And of this, in the late Wars
we have seen sundry examples, where these kind of divisions have been so
prejudicial, that more than one Army have been defeated, (or endangered at
least) for not being seasonably relieved by those who though they were distinct
by their Commissions, ought nevertheless to have made but one body, seeing both
had taken arms for the same interests. The satisfaction to see ones Competitor
beaten will not suffer a man sometimes to come in to his rescue, every one
triumphing in the misfortunes of his Rival. Battles at Sea are much more
dangerous and uncertain than the Engagements upon Land; in those, providence,
diligence, and the knowledge of the Country, are the three things which give
life and assurance to an Army, there upon any sudden, or unexpected accident or
advantage, their deliberation is short, and their resolution easy; but at Sea
if any thing be to be debated, they cannot run immediately to Counsel, and they
must attend the turning of the Wind, the coming in of the Tide, (which perhaps
is six hours too late) before they can be in a possibility of executing their
Orders, insomuch that many a fair Enterprise is lost, which two moments before
would have been glorious and successful. For these Reasons the Republic of
Venice commits all to the Generalissimo, who has full power of himself to
fight, retreat, or attempt any thing, that in his judgment may be honorable,
or advantageous to the State.

The principal business of this omnipotent Office, is to prevent or interrupt
the coming down of the Ottoman Fleet from the Euxine Sea, into the
Archipellago, to this purpose having got his Navy together, he places it behind
certain desert Islands, (of which that Sea is full) in manner of an Ambuscade,
or else takes his Post in a strait passage under the current of the two Castles
( Cestos and Abidos) by which the Turks must of necessity come, which is not to
be done without disorder, if the least opposition be added to the straitness
and rapidity of the Sea. Tenedos was formerly an incomparable advantage, where
their whole Fleet might ride securely at anchor, attend their motions with
patience, and assail them upon occasion with very probable success, but the
Treason of one of their own Countrymen deprived them of that, which was of
universal importance to all Christendom. I my self was at that time in their
service, when that accident happened, and could perhaps give a particular
account of the whole transaction, but I shall say no more, than that there are
the Heads of four or five hundred French still to be seen upon the Walls of the
Castles, which seem to cry out for vengeance, against the perfidiousness of
those who delivered them into their hands.

The place of the Generalissimo upon any considerable Engagement, is always in
the Van of his whole Fleet; no Ship being permitted before him but the General
of the Gulf, who always begins the Charge. The Generalissimo's Galley is
constantly very rich, and having served one General, never descends to his
Successor. The Ventian-Generals may (not improperly) be said to resemble the
ancient Consuls among the Romans, which History has described to us marching
always in their Robes, and not putting them off in the very Crisis of the
Battle. They are commonly persons of choice experience and resolution,
otherwise if they behave themselves dishonourably, they are sure to be punished
severely. They are not so precise and curious of their age, if they have merit
and capacity, it is sufficient for their Election. The brave Moccinego who died
with so much honor at the head of his Fleet, was not complete five and thirty
years old, and doubtless had he escaped that misfortune, the great designs he
had on foot, (which yet were easy with his conduct) would questionless have
succeeded, and advanced him to that height which his virtue deserved. To speak
the truth, there were many, and those considerable Errors in that Engagement,
which I have heard many grave Captains enumerate and prove. The Balott is the
way which they make use of in the Election of this Officer, every one giving
his Vote in a little Bowl. Upon these occasions, the young Gentlemen of the
City will endeavors all boldly as any of the rest; and though there was great
contest in the Election of Moccenigo, and the ancienter sort carried it at
first, yet the youth solicited so vigourously, in spite of all opposition
they created him at last.

This Command is not perpetual, but constituted by the Republic pro re nata,
when War is openly proclaimed, and the necessity of their affairs requires it;
when they cease, that Office ceases with them, and the principal Command
devolves upon the General of the Gulf.

CHAP. III. The General of the Gulf.
THe General of the Gulf is a perpetual Charge, and (as a man may say) never
expires, for the Venetians looking upon themselves as sovereign in the
Adriatic Sea, (which is called the Gulf of Venice) maintain a constant
squadron of Galleys, and men of War on foot, as well in peace as in war, to
keep their Subjects in the Isles of Dalmatia in obedience, to protect their
Frontiers upon the Mediterranean, and secure them from the surprises of the
Pirates and Corsaires, with which that Sea is grievously infested.

The War in the Gulf is prosecuted without quarter, no Prisoners are taken
there, and that Captain who for compassion or advantage gives any of them their
lives, loses his own most certainly for his labor. All the Renegadoes they
meet with, are hanged immediately upon the Main-yard, and if their Wives he in
their company, they never part them: if any Christians turn Pirates, and fall
into their clutches, they run the same destiny infallibly, and by this
impartial justice it is they preserve their Dominion in the Gulf.

This being the most ancient of all their Officers, he has upon that score the
honor of commanding (as it were) the forlorn, and making the first insult upon
the enemy, though otherwise he is commanded by the Generalissimo, and receives
his Orders without dispute. His Command is simply at Sea, and as soon as any of
his Soldiers are landed, they are out of his jurisdiction: yet among the
Venetians he is reputed a very considerable Officer, upon whose conduct and
integrity the peace of all Italy depends, that Country being (as every one
knows) bounded on one side by that Sea, as high as Capo-d' Histria.

His authority extends no further than Zant, Cephalonia, and Corfeu, (the most
remote Islands in the Gulf) he never sets foot on shore, but upon some
necessary, or very important occasion. His ordinary station in time of peace is
either at Corfeu, the Gulf of Catro, or Zant, which are three Ports of
necessity to be passed by all that go to Venice. This Squadron is a kind of an
Out-guard, placed on purpose to break the first effort of the enemy, to
obstruct their passage, and to give opportunity to the Countries under their
protection to put themselves into a posture of defense. When the Republic is
not engaged in any actual Wars, their young Nobless are sent constantly to the
General of the Gulf, to be educated in arms, and out of this Nursery it is they
are furnished with those illustrious Officers, who so frequently and
successfully attempt the vast Navies of the Turk.

By this policy they reap two very considerable Effects: one is, they bring up
their youth (as it were) in the lap of danger and War, and by a continual
custom of confronting them to the enemy, they give them such a habit of
valor, as is never to be dismayed either by the potentest enemy, or the most
terrible accident they can meet with. And yet the other is more considerable
than this, enuring them by degrees to an obedience to their Equals, and not to
mutiny against their Commands, by a sottish pretense, That they are as good,
and know as much as themselves. This I have seen in other places, but to speak
truth, it neither savours of a Soldier nor a gallant man, who whilst he lives
will never decline any honorable action upon any occasion whatever.

If the Generalissimo dies, or comes to any unfortunate accident, the General
of the Gulf succeeds him on course, and takes the Command of the Army without
any contradiction; a wise and prudent way to break the neck of all divisions
which might arise for the Command, which too often proves like a Plague in an
Army, and destroys more men than the enemies Sword.

CHAP. IV. Of the General of their Galeasses, and their Governors.
THis Command requires a man of resolution and judgment, the whole success of
their Battles depending principally upon him. He has the Command (as a man may
say) of the Bulworks which secure the Fleet, opposing his Galeasses as so many
impregnable Ramparts against the fury of all attaques, and whenever he forces
himself into the middle of his enemies, he breaks their Squadrons, disorders
their Battaliaes, and forces even victory it self to declare for his party.

The Captain of every Galeass under his Command is called the Governor, to
show the importance of the Charge with which he is entrusted, and that not
impertinently, seeing in effect they are as so many floating Castles, in which
they have commonly a thousand men in Garrison, who mount the Guards, and are
relieved, take their several Posts, keep their Sentinels, and go the Rounds
with as much order and punctilio, as they use in our Citadels. They have each
of them a hundred pieces of whole Canon, (which demonstrates their puissance
when they are in a body) and by the help of their Sails and their Oars, they
perform the service both of the Galleys and Gallions, making their way in a
calm by the force of their Oars, and by the benefit of their Sails, (with the
least gale of wind) they manage themselves as nimbly as any other of their
Ships.

These Ships being of an unimaginable expense, the Venetian entertains no great
number of them in his service; the most I ever saw at one time together in
their Fleet was but six, yet for fear of any accident, they have several more
in their Arsenal of this and all other sorts ready to put to Sea. Their
confidence in these Ships is so great, they conclude them invincible, and a
Town which has one of them to make good the entrance into its harbor, believes
it self secure, and despises all other protection. The famous Tenedos had two
of these Machines for the defense of its fortress, and certainly it had been
safe, had they been kept to their station, but the power of his money having
carried them away, the Bassa found a way to carry the Island.

Besides the Punctilio of honor which animates the Governors, they are under
a necessity of being brave, or dying with infamy. This is it which makes them
fight with resolution, and neither take nor give quarter to any, if one of
these Governors yields to five and twenty Galleys, (though the number be
sufficient to fright a whole Fleet) he must have a care of coming again into
the clutches of the Venetian, if he does, the best entertainment he can expect
is to have his head chopped off in his own Ship, in the sight of the whole
Armada.

Never was any stranger entrusted with the Command of the Galeasses not but the
Soldiers and Crew are generally foreign, and the Officers for the most part
of the same Countries with them; but all are subordinate to their Governor,
who receives no Orders but from his General, and the General none but from the
Generalissimo himself. I might in this place give a Character of the severity
of their Military Laws, which forgives no body that is either Coward or
Traitor: but it is scarce to be imagined, a man who has the ambition of putting
for so great a Command, can want courage and resolution to manage it when
obtained: and when any of them are executed, it is not so much for their
cowardice or fear, as for their Treason, in betraying the good opinion
conceived of their Conduct. If we were but half so rigid in France, it would
preserve many a Town, and people would consider very well how they engaged in a
Command, that abused never so little would cost them so dear. By this way the
Venetian reaches his Officers to know them, yet he seldom puts these Charges
into any man's hands, but such as they are sure are faithful, and capable to
manage them.

CHAP. V. Of the General of the Gallions, and the Captains under his Command.
THese Gallions are always commanded by a Gentleman of Venice, no other Nation
being admittable to that Charge; the roguery of some foreigners who ran away
with some of these Vessels ready rigged, having taught them more wit than to
trust them for the future: but their Workmen and Mechanics are indifferently
of all Countries. Sometimes they hire Ships of the Hollander or English, ready
equipped, and pay them every month, but they must be Commanded by a noble
Venetian.

The great Vessels which they take now and then from the Turk, they call
Sultans, and they are set out again at the expense of the public: though the
Commander of a Sultan be in reality no more than the simple Captain of a Ship,
yet he is more considerable, it being looked upon as the mark of a particular
esteem, when one is advanced to such an authority as that.

And this they do to diffuse an insensible jealousy among their Commanders,
recompensing him whom they judge to have deserved well, with the honor of a
Charge, which has nothing in it above the rest, but an innovated name. In this
particular they seem to imitate the example of the Romans, who (to animate
their Soldiers) presented them with rewards, very trivial and inconsiderable
to the eye, but (if measured with the honor they brought along with them to
the party) they were vast accumulations of glory.

This General having all the Magazines of the Fleet on board his Gallions, he
is of no mean importance amongst them, and to speak truth no man is ever
admitted to that Command till he has given undeniable evidence of his prudence
and Conduct. They seldom come to grapple, or to a very close fight with their
enemy, but with their broad sides they do terrible execution.

CHAP. VI. Of their Sur-Comites of the Galleys.
THat is the name by which they distinguish the Commanders of their Galleys
from their other Captains. They are generally young Gentlemen, who go on
purpose to enure themselves to the Wars, and make themselves eminent by some
remarkable service. The Hull, and materials of the Galleys are delivered out of
the Arsenal, with all manner of provisions both for the belly and the Wars, but
the Rowers, the Soldiers, and all manner of imbellishment, is at the charge of
the Officers. As to their pay, the Republic discharges it from the time they
are embarked, and to recompense the expense of the Captain in some measure, he
disposes of all inferior places in his Galley. There being always an
unsatiable emulation amongst the young Nobless, this is the occasion that every
one strives and contends with his whole force to outdo his companion, and
signalize himself by some remarkable action. In their Cabins and Quarters there
is no want of guilding or fine painting, and the rich Stuffs of which
their*Flags and Penons are made, demonstrates most clearly how unwilling they
are to be outdone. In this manner the Republic appears most pompously
splendid, at the charge of other people, and imploys the vanity and ambition of
her young Gentlement, to her own magnificence and glory.

Before these newly equipped Galleys venture out to Sea, they are exercised by
their Officers twice or thrice a day, betwixt the Place of St. Mark and Lio,
and when their Supervisors think them capable of doing service, within two or
three months they are sent away, not to the Fleet, but to the Squadron which
is left behind for the security of the Gulf, and there it is they complete and
perfect their discipline.

The expense of their setting out being but superficial, and the fancy they
have for their own contrivances, vanishing with the guilt and painting, which
in a short time the wind and the weather have defaced, all the ambition they
have left, is only to put themselves as forward as their companions dare go,
and it is no small excitement to their courage, to consider they hazard nothing
of their own but their lives, the Republic being ready to furnish them with
ten new Galleys for one that is lost. Whereas on the contrary if the Officers
be Proprietors, their whole fortune depending upon their Vessel, their interest
will make them decline those dangers, which perhaps their valor would attempt.

When these Galleys are Commanded out to any Engagement, to advance into the
Hellespont, and confine the Turks to the white Sea, they are re-inforc'd with
foreign Soldiers, besides what they had before. They are distributed so
politickly into the Galleys, they cannot possibly get to a body, and disposed
with that artifice, a Captain shall scarce ever have a dozen of his own
Soldiers aboard the Ship where he is himself.

Though this be a mark of their diffidence and distrust, yet by this expedient
they secure themselves against the worst; and it is possible they may do it to
animate their Soldiers, that by making them suspect they are jealous of their
courage, they might be pushed forward the more to convince them of their
mistake: for doubtless he who can nettle his Soldiers in point of their
honor, has no small command of the courage of his Army. We have seen in our
days several effects of this jealousy, and particularly in the first Wars in
Flanders, in which the animosity betwixt the Walloons and the Spaniards, was
the occasion of the loss of several Towns to the Hollander, which otherwise the
experience or gallantry of their General would never have taken. But this
variance amongst the Soldiers precipitated their pains, hastened their
assaults, and by a happy temerity thrust them upon that, which without those
Considerations they would have looked upon as desperate.

These Captains wear their ordinary Vestments constantly, and are habited in
their Galleys at the same rate as if they were in the Place of St. Mark, by
which means they preserve to themselves the same respect as if they were in the
Town. They retain the same pride and opinion of themselves also, for let things
go as they list otherwise, they will always be known to be Gentlemen of
Venice. Their Galleys are small and light, of that sort which they call Gall^e
Suttili, but something more nimble and easy to manage, and they have generally
aboard them the best Canoniers in the World. Their Canon in their Men of War
seldom carry above thirty or forty pound Ball. Besides the Canon aforesaid,
they have always upon the Prow of the Ship four small Guns, which their
Canoniers will discharge as certainly, and with as sure execution, as we can do
with our Fusils. Upon the sides and flanks of the Ship they have other Engines
of mischief, but the greatest hurt they do is with certain murdring pieces,
(which they call Mosquetti a Cavaletto) that are placed upon the Steerage.

Their Bonnevoglies or Rowers are of great use to them upon any extremity, for
being all of them Christians, and accustomed to danger, they arm them (against
any Engagement) with Stones and Cuttelasses, and promising to increase their
pay, they make them supply the rooms of such Soldiers as are killed. But the
Turks dare not do so, for most of their Oats being Christian Slaves, kept
constantly in chains, and most miserable captivity, they seldom dare hazard a
Combat, their apprehension of the Slaves they have on board, being as terrible
to them, as the enemy before their face.

CHAP. VII. Of the General or Governor of Candia.
THough his Command be strictly upon Land, yet I rank him amongst the Officers
of the Fleet, because being in an Island he may be said to be constantly at
Sea. His authority is much the same as that of a Viceroy with us: it is
continued only for three years, to prevent any ambitious designs which
otherwise might be suggested by so eminent a Government.

He gives a punctual account of whatever is done in the Island, and though the
principal Command be in him, he dares not enterprise any thing but by the
Counsel, and consent of such persons as the Republic have placed about him.
Before their late Wars with the Turk, this was one of the most illustrious
Commands belonging to this Commonwealth; but of late it is much lessened, and
reduced to some few Towns which the Articles of Candia have left them.

Since the taking of that, they have only two places remaining, not very
capacious, but considerable in their harbors and strength, the Governor of
each of them are nominated by the Governour-General. The Towns are called
Spinalonga and Suda, places of good retreat, in case of disaster. The situation
of Spinalonga is admirable, and it was strange to me to find it so ill provided
with men. But I suppose their great confidence is in the Sea on one side, and
the Rocks on the other.

In the Offices of Generalissimo, and General of Candia, they never put two
persons who are in perfect intelligence, lest having the two Keys of the
Commonwealth at their Girdle, they should open the way to any design, and
permit their ambition to enter.

Before the surrender of the Metropolis, his authority was not only in
Military, but in Civil affairs, and he Ordered them both at his pleasure,
insomuch that the ancient Majesty of the Kings of Crete seemed not to be
altogether extinct, the Generals Court, his Jurisdiction, and Habit,
representing no small resemblance of Royalty.

The foreign Generals who Commanded the Troops of the Island, had all of them
their Orders from him, which were to be constantly obeyed, if not, they were
left to his censure, but with appeal to the Senate, who are not subject to
those effluxions of passion, as their Viceroys may be. In short, they give him
this authority to render him the more respected, and enable him to see the
Orders transmitted to him, executed with more exactness. And doubtless were he
not supported by this absolute Command, which is no little terror to the
inferior Officers, who are generally such as have not been much acquainted
with the Field, those which have more skill in their profession, would possibly
undervalue his Orders, and from that negligence, grow by degrees insolent and
contumacious, which is the next step to rebellion.

CHAP. VIII. Of the General of Dalmatia.
THe General of Dalmatia has more Countries and more Towns under his Command,
than the General of Candia, and yet his Charge is not esteemed so honorable as
the other, for which cause I place him after the General of Candia, and amongst
the Officers of the Fleet, because his authority extends it self principally
along the Coasts of the Gulf.

The chief Towns under his Government are Zara, Clissa, Spalatro, Zebenico,
Cattaro, Dulcingo, and others, besides an infinite number of little Isles, the
Country of the Morlaiks, and the ancient Sclavonia. These Countries are
sufficiently inhabited with a laborious and warlike people, amongst which the
Morlaiks bear the Bell, and are especially eminent. I must confess in all my
Travels I never saw any Nation so subtle and dextrous at inroads and incursions
as theirs, nor that behaved themselves better upon any desperate rencounter,
but one of their greatest encouragements is their knowledge of the Mountains,
with which they are perfectly well acquainted. They usually incamp near some
considerable Town with their Families and Cattle, without any military Order at
all, and when they are threatened with a Siege, or find themselves unable to
keep the Field, they retire into the Town, and are no small re-enforcement to
the Garrison.

The places abovesaid are all of them considerable, and well fortified, only
Cattaro lies under the Command of certain great Hills, which they call the
black Mountains. Nevertheless the entrance into the Harbor is secured by a
strong Castle, which facilitates the access of supplies, and by consequence
makes it no easy matter to reduce.

This General has the oversight of all these Towns, he supervises, and supplies
all their Magazines, he gives all Orders, and sends out what parties or persons
he pleases, to make discovery of the Enemy. If at any time he conceives a
probability of performing any thing considerable, without being intercepted by
the Turk, he draws out what Soldiers he thinks fit out of his Garrisons,
(which are always well furnished) and forming them into a flying Army, he
pursues his design. He has foreign Generals under him, as the General of
Candia had formerly, and Commands them with the same authority. If any
considerable disaster happens within the compass of his Government, all is
imputable to him, which is that which quickens his vigilance, and makes him
more than ordinarily diligent and active.

The Bassa of Bosnia is a troublesome Neighbor of his, but he sweetens him
often with his Sequins. He pretends to have a great confidence in the people of
that Country, who are very stout, and by that confidence he acquires their
affection. He trusts such Governments and Garrisons in their hands, as he has
power to dispose of himself, yet he is always accountable to the State; a sure
way to have good Officers, for he who is to answer for such as he prefers, will
not readily admit any that are incapable, nor open his eyes to any thing but
desert.

CHAP. IX. Of the Grand-Captains.
HE who considers nothing but the duty of their places, will at first dash
believe these Captains but Officers of peace. But though the Sword be not in
their hands every hour of the day, yet they have no inconsiderable part in the
Militia of this State.

These are they who in their several precincts upon the Terra-firma receive all
the new Levies which are made in foreign parts, for the service of this
Republic; these are they which model and form them, and teach them their
duties; these are they who see them mustered constantly every month, and by
some little qualifications encourage them in the service. By the gravity of
their discipline and comportment, they enure them to a more regular life, and
more composedness in their manners: if they behave themselves otherwise than
well, they punish them as severely; but there is no quarter for one that runs
from his Colors.

They keep an exact eye over all the Cavalry in their Garrisons, and will by no
means suffer either Horse or Arms to pass Muster that is not punctually
passable. And as they are rigid on the one side, so are they as just on the
other, paying them to a day what is due, and supplying them faithfully with
whatever is Ordered them by the State. Being not much acquainted with the
management of Horse, upon any general Muster, or some such Parade, they
commonly are assisted by a Marshal, or other experienced Officer; for even in
those Shows only they are so precise, one of these Grand-Captains at Padua
would not believe me capable of Commanding the Gens d' Arms of the Chevalier
Gremonville, because my Beard and Mustachoes were not so large as he would have
had them.

Their principal aim is, in the name of the Republic to make themselves
Masters of the Towns where they are sent, but with the greatest sweetness and
insinuation imaginable; for taking always the most plausible pretenses that
are conducing to their ends, they quarter the Soldiers apart by themselves, to
prevent (forsooth) their insolences to the people, and the disorders might
otherwise arise, by the inextinguishable antipathy which continually reigns
betwixt a Soldier and a Citizen: but in truth it is for two other Reasons:

The first is, that they may have always a considerable body together, ready
to present themselves where the safety or advantage of the Commonwealth
requires, because when they are separate in several Streets, and remote places,
it is not easy to get them together in a short time, without giving the Enemy
advantage by this division and delay. Besides nothing being so natural to a
Soldier as debauchery, when they have no retreat or place to return to, where
they are afraid to be seen, nothing encourages them so much to be licentious,
or occasions more insolence and disorder.

The other is, to take away all means from the Nobility and Citizens of the
Town to conspire against the Soldiers, and (by surprising them) to commence a
Rebellion, and that with the more ease, in respect that they have cut off the
greatest part of their opposition. They have heard the Story of the Sicilian
Vespers and understanding well the Italian humor, (which is their own) they
are jealous of all the World, and for that reason they keep exact Guards within
their quarters night and day. In their Carnivals and days of Recreation, in
which they cannot plausibly hinder their Assemblies and Masquerades, that might
give opportunity perhaps to some pernicious design. Under pretense of
preserving the peace, and preventing particular quarrels and assassinations,
which in those disguises might be perpetrated without discovery, they draw what
Forces they have into the Town, clap Guards in the most important places,
secure the Avenews, and Commanding the remainder both of Horse and Foot to
follow, they go up and down the whole City visiting the Balls and Dancings,
where they observe the greatest Confluence of people.

By this admirable artifice they make themselves Masters wherever they come,
and divert the inclination of the most turbulent spirits from attempting any
thing against the State, by rendering it impossible for them to have any success.

For their Soldiers in the flat Country they have another policy, which is
both subtle and good: that they may be well disciplined, ready for service, and
their number known exactly, they have a general Muster every month, in every
Country upon the Terra-firma, they levy new men, appoint them their Officers,
deliver them arms, Command them to be Exercised, and treat them very graciously
with the Title of Signori Soldati, Gentlemen Soldiers: but they pay dear
enough afterward for those two honorable words, and I am persuaded they do it
on purpose to make them weary of the Wars. If the weather be worse than other
at any time either in Summer or Winter, they will be sure to Muster them in
that, and that they may be certain to have their share of it, they will appoint
their Rendezvous in some open and desert Plain, where the Sun (which in Summer
is very vehement in those parts) and the Snow and Cold (which is no less
troublesome in Winter) have their full play at them, and do so torture the poor
Peasant, that there is nothing they have in the whole World, but they will give
to have their Names put out of their Rolls. If (besides their arms which are
very heavy) they carry no Provant along with them, they may return a hungry,
for any care is taken of them, it being expressly forbid that any Victuallers or
Subtellers appear in the place of their Rendezvonz. Their arms are not
entrusted with them after their Exercise is done, they have only the privilege
of bringing them back upon their shoulders, and delivering them up to their
Grand-Captain at their return. By this severity they tire out those poor
Creatures, and make them abominate the Trade of a Soldier, which is indeed no
more than what the Venetian designs.

CHAP. X. Of their Foreign Generals.
THe Commanders which we have hitherto presented, are chosen out of the body of
the Venetian Nobility, for a long succession of time there having scarce one
other person been entrusted with those Charges. Nevertheless upon on occasion
they have been necessitated to have recourse to Strangers, and to give them
considerable Commands, either because they believe the Tramontani (which is the
name they call all Strangers by) more vigorous and active than their own
Countrymen, or else that they desire to preserve their own Nobility, keeping
them still for the chiefest and most honorable employments, and committing all
things of peril and danger to the conduct of Foreigners; in which respect they
are not very niggardly of the Title of General, of which sort they will create
several according to their necessities, and the quality or ambition of the
persons they entertain. And in this number there are three extraordinary, The
General of Dalmatia, the General of the Forces Commanded on shore, and the
General of Candia.

CHAP. XI. The Foreign General in Dalmatia.
NExt to the Proveditor-General, (which is a noble Venetian) this Foreign
General is the chief person both in the Country and Army, and has the Command
of all the Militia, but so as he can do or attempt nothing but by the consent
of the Proveditor, in whose absence he gives all Orders both in the Field and
the Garrisons: and it is remarkable, (whether they be chosen on purpose of
different humors, or that the jealousy inherent to their Command suffers them
not to agree) they are never in any great intelligence with one another, and
yet (which is most strange) never at so much odds as to prejudice the State.

One thing in my judgment is something strange in this Charge, and that is the
small authority this General has, for besides the honors and formalities paid
him by the Soldiers, he has not the privilege to gratify any of his men with
a days pay, or a loaf of bread more than their due, but by the express Order
of the Proveditor, and when he does, it is most certainly out of his own purse.

The Soldiers for the most part having greater difference and respect for the
person who in all dangers is constantly at their head, fights amongst them
perpetually, and bears his share in all the difficulties they endure, the
Proveditor (who thinks it beneath him to live in that Community) keeps a
constant eye upon the actions of his rival, and by the Sovereign authority with
which he is endued, restrains any exorbitance that might flow from their
affection.

In this manner they allow the Foreign General power enough to Command the
Army, and to March them out when he pleases, yet with such restriction, it is
clear they intend all should depend upon the Venetian, and that the honor of
all noble achievements should devolve upon him, as well as the power of
punishments and rewards, as he is Commander in chief. Hence it is that the
Soldier receiving nothing but from his hands, believes he is to serve nothing
but the Commonwealth, and obeys his Outlandish General for no other reason but
because he Commands for them; a policy by which they are sure to be Masters,
let who will Command, and secures them against any apprehension of making of
parties. Don Camillo Gonzague was General in this nature, the last Campagnia I
made in their service, he died as he was upon his return at Capo d'Istria, not
without suspicion of having taken a Pill.

I shall say nothing of the General of Candia, he being but another arm, which
receives its life and agitation from the same head as the other. Some of these
Generals have been punished severely, and particularly the late Monsieur de la
Valette, who was made an eminent example of the power of their Chiefs, when
they represent the body of their Republic, and it will not be long before the
Chevalier de Gremonville will be able to tell some Stories of his own.

CHAP. XII. Of the General of the Forces drawn out of the Fleet upon occasion.
THe most considerable strength of the Venetian are his Forces at Sea, which
may be called their great Outguards, placed on purpose to resist and repel any
sudden or impetuous insult, which their Enemy might make. In Candia and
Dalmatia they do but fence, and put by the Passes which the Turks make upon
them, and if they lose nothing in a Campania, they think themselves happy
enough: but in their Fleet it is clear otherwise, they fight, they attacque,
they search for their Enemy, and if they find him not at Sea, they invade him
upon Land, penetrating sometimes into the very heart of his Country, and
making the most remote corners of his dominions tremble for fear, as much as
those places which are adjacent to the Sea.

But forasmuch as all the Venetian Commanders have (as I said before) their
particular employments, which they dare not desert; and a Generalissimo cannot
abandon his Fleet, or leave it engaged in the middle of his enemies, they have
their recourse to their Foreign Generals, who have the Command of such Forces
as are to be drawn out of the several Ships, upon any emergent design. Monsieur
le Chevalier Gremonville served them in this capacity with as much honor and
success as his courage and virtue required. Natolia can very well witness what
I say, where we who were upon that action, saw him (though wounded with a
Musket Shot) showing and directing (with his Sword and his blood) the way to
overcome, to those who followed him at the siege of Schismeset.

The design upon Land being finished, or defeated, as soon as the Commanded
Forces are returned to their Ships, the General lays down his authority, and
retains no more than the Title of Excellence, which the proudest Venetian of
them all will not refuse him, and this is the only lenitive that makes him
swallow his degradation, and endure to walk cross-armed upon the Decks without
any Command. True it is, upon any new Expedition he has authority as before,
especially if he be in any favor with the Generalissimo, then he has much more
respect in the Army, and is caressed as a person likely by his experience and
conduct to procure great advantages to the Commonwealth, who to speak truth
seldom advances any to that Command, but such as are well skilled in military
affairs.

Their enterprises are commonly deliberate, but their executions very quick,
lest they should give the Turks (who swarm all along the Coasts of the
Archipelago) opportunity to put themselves in arms, and hazard the being
overlaid by their innumerable multitudes, and besides, they are unwilling to
have their Soldiers and Officers any long time out of their Ships, for fear
lest a good gale of wind should bring their enemies Fleet amongst them, which
they might think further off.

At the beginning of the Wars, these Generals were very well paid, but at
present they are not so punctual; either that the protraction of the War has
exhausted their treasure, or that they think to engage them the better to their
service, by keeping them in continual hopes of receiving a considerable sum
together: and peradventure to take away all means from them of ingratiating
with the Soldier by their largesses and presents, which considering the
greatness of their pay, they might possibly attempt, if it were constantly
paid them.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Governor of Candia.
BEsides the foreign General in Candia, there is a particular Governor in the
Town, who to speak properly has the only Command of the Town, the Generals
authority being in the Field, and the Governors in the Garrison.

The noble Venetian (who is as Viceroy of this Island) has these two Officers
under him in the nature of his Lieutenants, to whom he commits the care and the
danger, but retains the glory and reputation to himself. He derives his Orders
to the Governor, and the Governor to the Officers under him. His jurisdiction
reaches no further than the Walls of the Town, and his business is to have an
eye over the Gates, to see his Guards accommodated, and in good order, to keep
his Petrols constantly in the night, to keep his Soldiers to their duty, to
fortify where it is wanting, to repair what is decayed, to prevent or suppress
all disorders, and give an exact account of occurrences to the Viceroy.

In fine, all these Charges how great and considerable so ever they may appear,
are notwithstanding so subordinate and depending, that those who enjoy them may
be said to pay as much obedience to some people, as they receive from others
themselves upon emergency or necessity. There are other Generals chosen to
Command the Horse; and to gratify the ambition of their suitors, they divide
their Infantry into two bodies, (the Italian, and Foreign) and make a distinct
General over each of them. The Artillery likewise has its proper General, and
indeed when they have occasion for good Officers, and can be sure to keep them
under, they do not scruple to give them what Titles they desire.

CHAP. XIV. Reflections in manner of a Recapitulation.
THese variety of Generals would make one at first sight expect more confusion
than order in their Militia; but all is managed with the same justice and
exactness, as they were but so many members moved and actuated by one head.
Their Territories being large and remote, they are forced to divide their
Commands, and according to the example of the first Commonwealths, they give
the same authority to their Generals in Candia and Dalmatia, both in Civil and
Military affairs, as the Romans in ancient times granted to the Pro-Consuls in
their several Provinces.

The Generalissimo at Sea seems to entrench somewhat too much upon the Liberty
of the Republic, his immense power relishing more of the Sovereign than the
Subject. But if we reflect upon the people about him, (who yet behave
themselves toward him with all visible submission) we shall find them so great
sharers in his authority, that should he meditate the least mischief imaginable
to the prejudice of the State, or go about to insist upon his own force and
authority, he would be deserted in a moment, and not one considerable man left
with him to carry on his design. Moreover, not being Master of any one Town, he
must be constrained to keep the Sea perpetually, or at length in the highest
despair, to cast himself for protection into the hands of the Enemy, which
would be a sad effect of an exorbitant ambition.

The private lives which these great persons are to lead when their Commissions
are expired, and the strict account they give to the Counsel of Ten, keeps them
continually in awe. They know very well that Court is inflexible, and when
those great Titles and nominal Ornaments are taken away, they shall be liable
to the censure of every Mechanic. For this reason every man looking upon his
Neighbor as his enemy, they grow to such a habit of jealousy, they distrust
all the World, and not daring to deviate for fear of being impeached, they
regulate all their actions for the good of the Commonwealth.

When they admit any Stranger to their principal Commands, it is rather to
participate of the peril than the honor, which they are tender of to the
highest degree, and therefore they require so ready and so rigid a submission
to all their Orders, that it is capital either not to execute them at all, or
not to give them the glory when they have. Raillery and jesting, though
innocent in it self, and the most common diversion of the Cavaliers in other
parts, is so peremptorily forbidden here, that it is looked upon as a great
want of respect, and provokes these hot-Spurs (who are puffed up with their
authority) so highly, that it requires a great deal of submission and address
to recover their favors.

CHAP. XV. Of their Armies in general.
THese Armies, governed and regulated by their military Laws, may without a
Solecism be said to be moving Cities, wall^d about with their swords, their
shields, and their arms; for as in a City they live not in confusion or
disorder, but the diversity of Charges distinguishes betwixt the sovereign
Magistrate and the inferior, as likewise betwixt them, and the rest of the
people: and for the better harmony and motion of affairs, a Chief is commonly
chosen, upon whose shoulders they repose the whole care of the Public; so in
Field they take the same measures. The General is the first Mover which gives
the swing and twirl to the rest of the great Officers, who convey it to the
inferior, and so it goes round. In this last military Order we have observed
the most considerable effects, but honor not being always the aim of all
people, most part of the Soldiers having taken themselves to that course of
life for their interest and profit, it falls out sometimes, that failing of
their pay, and the rewards they expected, they complain, they threaten, and at
last run into an absolute defection. The length of the War is the thing many
times which produces these divisions, the excessive expense they are at,
disables them to keep their word with their Soldiers, and puts them upon a
necessity of substracting themselves from their service. The conversation they
have with the Women of the Country where they are, debauches them, and
prevails with them to marry, in hopes of having a Camarade, and fellow-sufferer
in their sorrows, but they find themselves removed out of Gods blessing into
the warm Sun, and that they have but augmented their misery, by obliging
themselves to provide for their Families, when they were not able to provide
for themselves. Nevertheless among the Venetians there is no such unhappiness,
they pay their own Soldiers exactly, and have by that means hitherto prevented
such disorders.

In the Garrisons upon the Terrafirma they pay their Soldiers every month,
and they are so far from having any Debentures, they are always in arrear to
the Commonwealth. In Candia and Dalmatia it is possible they are not so
punctually paid, but at long run, if they do it not in money, they pay them in
such Commodities as will pass in those Countries at a certain rate. The
Generals ears are open to the complaint of a Soldier against his Officer, and
redresses him where he is injured, but it is with so admirable equity, that he
maintains the rights of the one, without destroying the respect and distance of
the other. Their Armies consist principally of Foot, for having had experience
of how little importance their Cavalry was to them in such mountanous and
unpassable places, they entertain some few Companies, more for the name of
having Horse, than for any great service they expect from them.

CHAP. XVI. Of their Cavalry.
THeir Cavalry is divided into two sorts, Their gross Cavalry, or Cuirassiers,
which are like our Gens d' Arms, and their Capelets a Cheval, like our light
Horse, and the Commands of these two bodies are never sold. In the time when I
was in their service, they had three Companies of these Gens d' Arms, which
were called Ultramontani, and not one Italian allowed to be amongst them.
Commonly this Republic confers these Commands upon some of their Foreign
Generals, in lieu of some considerable pay, or in recompense of some
remarkable piece of service. These Governors of the Cuirassiers (for so it is
they are called) have the nomination of their Captain-Lieutenants, their
Cornets, and other inferior Officers, but they first present them to the
Senate for approbation, which method Monsieur le Chevalier Gremonville used,
when he gave me my Command under him.

The Italian Cuirassiers are reduced to four Companies, every one of them is
obliged to keep his Horse and his arms fixed and in good order, and such as are
lazy and negligent are sure to be punished at the next Muster, which for the
most part is every forty days. They have always a constant Guard about their
Standard, wherever they are quartered, and to speak truth, these are like
Soldiers indeed, perpetually in the same posture, as if they were in the very
face of their Enemy. Their Discipline is the same with the Germans, they march,
wheel, and draw off very close and entire. Each Company consists of sixty men
so brave and well ordered, there is scarce any attempt so difficult, but may be
thought feasible by them. That Officer which among us is called a Marshal des
Logis, is termed by them a Quartermaster, and every Brigade has its Corporal
to overlook it. They are armed Cap-a-pied when they go to the Wars, their
Carbines and Swords by their sides, and their Pistols at their Saddle-Bow. The
firmness and constancy of these Gens d'armes is sufficient to discompose the
most resolute of their enemies; but the principal use of them is to keep their
ground, and secure their Foot, not being able to keep pace with the light Horse
in their inroads into the Country, by reason of the weight of their arms, and
the heaviness of their Horses.

They are never sent all of them to the Army, but they go according to their
ranks, and are there more for show than any thing else. The Turks are
nevertheless very fearful of engaging them, by reason their close and firm way
of fighting admits no impression, how furious soever their Charges be made.
Being covered with good arms, the Turkish Sabre does but little execution, and
their attacks being short, they are quickly repelled. They stand their ground,
and receive the Enemy very steadily, never discharging their Carabines till
they be within ten or twelve paces. When they fall in, the service grows
bloody, for having fired their Pistols, they fall to it with their Swords,
which being broad and long, does the mischief both of a Coutelas and a Tuck.

That they might not nourish a plague in their bowels, which might be able at
length to corrupt the whole body, they cashier all Soldiers which do not live
honorably, and in order. They use no other way of chastisement, lest they
might irritate their old Cavaliers by the ignominious spectacle, if they should
hang one of their Camarades. The old Generals have a great esteem for them, and
use them very kindly, which ties their affections inseparably to them, and
their pay being more than ordinary, it is not ordinarily known that any of
these Soldiers forsakes his Company.

For their conveniences upon all long marches, the Towns, Buroughs, and
Villages where they pass, are obliged to furnish them with Wagons for their
Baggage and Train, and they do it the more willingly, because their marchis so
innocent, one would take it rather for a Religious Procession, than the motion
of an Army, they never deviating from the Highway, and where there is a
necessity of passing through the Corn, they make the loss good to the Proprietor
immediately. The name of a Plunderer is so horrid amongst them, it is known
only by hearsay. They are very well accommodated wherever they come, and they
behave themselves to their Landlo^ds as to their particular friends.

CHAP. XVII. Of their Light Horse.
THeir Light Horse at present consist of Sclavonians, Dalmatians, or Morlaicks,
and are divided by Companies, not by Regiments, as in other parts of Europe;
all of them are Subjects of this Commonwealth, as well as their Officers. They
are all very stout, but not so well disciplined, never keeping any ranks upon a
charge, but falling on pell mell, after the manner of the Croats. True it is,
they rally with great dexterity, but in the heat of the charge they consider
nothing but their passion, and advance or retreat according to their own humor
and fancy.

So many heads of the Turks as they bring home, so many Sequins are punctually
paid them, and being naturally very covetous, they expose themselves
desperately to catch them. They are a people will endure much hardship, and
their Horses (though small) will endure as much as their Masters. The most
usual way of their fighting, is by making inroads upon the Enemy, and infesting
those Countries which lie nearest their borders. The Prisoners they take,
belonging to the Republic, and the Soldier having no propriety in them, is
the occasion they give no quarter, and the War is so inhumane.

Our Dragoons have borrowed the fashion of their Caps from these Capelets,
their ordinary arms are Carabines, and broad Swords, some of them have Pistols,
but the generality two or three Coutelasses, one fastened under each of their
thighs, and another by their sides. They never were acquainted with the use of
Boots, and that which supplies them is a sort of Trowses, buttoned up close to
their legs, which serves them with less inconvenience.

It is a policy of no little importance to the Venetian, to set this price upon
the heads of the Turks: two considerable advantages accrue to them by it; by
the hopes of a pitiful gain these Nations are excited to a continual pursuit
of the Enemy, and by giving no quarter to them, brought to a condition of
expecting none themselves, by which means all the commerce that might be
apprehended from such neighboring Nations, is prevented or broken. Nor is the
other inferior, this manner of proceeding rendering them desperate and
formidable wherever they come. This kind of War may seem barbarous at first,
but if the difference in Religion be considered, that it is Empire they fight
for, and that nothing is expected on either side but utter destruction, no
wonder if their measures be so rigid and pernicious.

Not long since they made use of foreign Horse in Dalmatia and Candia, but to
speak truth, besides the excessive expense in which they involved themselves
thereby, they received but little effects, for the Countries being barren and
mountainous, and by consequence unfit to sustain them, many of them perished
betwixt the legs of their Horses, by the quality of a Climate to which they had
never been accustomed. The inconvenience of furnishing them both with Straw and
Hay for their Horses by Sea, made the Venetian weary of so unprofitable a
Squadron, especially when they found the advantages they received by their
Capelets, more considerable than all the great noise of their Calvary; for
knowing the Country, being brought up, and accustomed to the Mountains, and
acquainted with all the turnings and by-ways that belong to them, they are
upon the backs of the Enemy, before the old Cavalry could be got to their
Colors.

CHAP. XVIII. Of their Infantry.
THe principal strength of the Venetian Army consists in their Foot, and the
reason that makes them of greater esteem, is the same that makes them entertain
so few Horse. The Infantry have their Mestres de Camp, and distinguished
Regimentally, as they are among us: it is made up of all Nations indifferently,
but divided into two bodies, Italian, and Strangers, which is principally
contrived, when they have a person of more than ordinary merit which they would
Create General. Their arms are Musket and Pike, and each Regiment beats its
March according to its own Country. These Forces are for the most part French,
and Swisses; and it is not a little remarkable, that notwithstanding the
fierceness and almost intemperate zeal which the Spaniard professes for the
Catholic Religion, there has not been one of them seen in the late Wars, which
has assisted this Commonwealth against the Turks, or ventured the least drop of
their blood in the defense of Christianity.

Under pretense of making new Levies continually, they keep most of their
Colonels upon the Terrafirma: I could not readily apprehend the reason of it,
but at length (recollecting how jealous they were) me thought it was to take
away or prevent the Regiments having such Officers as they fancied themselves,
and on the other side to keep them in their hands, (as it were so many
hostages) that they might not be able to act any thing contrary to Orders. It
may be also they were unwilling to disgust their Camp Masters, by drawing out
too many of their men, and give them occasion to complain, that of their whole
Regiment, they have not sometimes above thirty left.

Generally-all their Soldiers are in Garrison, either in Candia, or Dalmatia,
and they have no other Forces constantly in pay, besides their Army at Sea,
which is re-enforc'd out of the said Garrisons as they have occasion. The
Commands amongst their Foot are most commonly sold, and yet they do not forbear
rewarding any person who has served them faithfully and long. Their pay is
exact, and if they make them attend sometimes by accident, they have it
faithfully at last. Besides a proportion of bread, and eight pence a day, they
have a sufficient quantity of wine allowed to each man: but that which
qualifies all, is, whenever they are Listed, (unless they have very good
fortune indeed, or more subtilty than ordinary) they many bid adien to the
liberty of ever seeing their own Country again.

In this particular I cannot approve their Politics, for without doubt if they
would give their Soldiers more liberty, though at first more of them might run
away, than do at present, nevertheless it would extinguish the ill report they
have all over Europe, of keeping their Soldiers in chains; and their good and
punctual pay would invite them more strongly, than their freedom would
encourage them to escape. Nay, notwithstanding their vigilance and severity,
they lose good quantities of them sometimes, who choose rather to turn
Renegadoes, and throw themselves into the arms of the Turks, than to see
themselves under such violence and restraint, by the loss of their liberty,
which perhaps (had the way been open) they would never have thought on: so
ungovernable and ill-natured are the passions of Mankind, they desire nothing
with that vehement impatience so much, as what is most strictly forbidden.

Lio is a place not far from Venice, where they put their Soldiers on
Shipboard as soon as they arrive, and where they first begin to be sensible of
their bondage. They put them all together in a large room, the windows
fortified without with great bars of Iron, and the Sea encompassing them quite,
gives them the first prospect of their imprisonment, and makes them (by its
impossibility) not only apprehensive, but desperate of their liberty. If any
man's relation or curiosity carries him to see them, he looks upon them (as they
do upon the wild beasts at Vincennes) through an iron Grate, and instead of
finding them jocund and merry, he meets with nothing but sadness upon their
faces, and lamentation upon their tongues. Nevertheless the receipt of some
small advance-money, and the consideration of their Commons, (which is probably
better than they have at home) renders these poor Creatures insensible of what
they would otherwise abhor.

The service of this Commonwealth being under such a scandal, they are many
times necessitated to put their invention upon the rack, for ways of supplying
themselves when they want any men. They buy them very dear of their Colonels,
who (if it be no Solecism) are no better than Horse-coursers of men. The
Princes their neighbors furnish them also at their own rates, but they are
fain to wheedle them in, and to persuade them they are to lie perpetually in
Garrison, and never to be exposed to the hardships of the Field. Among the
rest, the Dukes of Parma and Modena drive the principal Trade: they embark them
upon the Po, in their great close Boats they call Bourchij, clap good strong
Guards upon them at both ends of the Vessel, and in this posture without any
arms they are conducted to Lio, (as so many Criminals) to be distributed into
Companies when they come there.

They never put any of their Soldiers to death, because they will not
willingly lose one man they may have occasion to use: if they commit any crime
considerable, they are condemned to the Galleys, and if their offenses are
smaller, their punishments are proportioned. Their Capelet Infantry is the only
Foot they trust with the keeping of such Towns as are on the Coast of Italy,
and if there be any Strangers to be seen there, it is only in such Towers as
lie conveniently for their transportation to Lio. They make use of their own
Subjects but very seldom, for a Levy in their own Country is rarely to be
seen, perhaps they are apprehensive that enuring them to the Wars, or
accustoming them to Arms, may sometime or other contribute to their ruin, and
if at any time they employ their Capelets, (under pretense of a particular
confidence in them) they are sure to send them far enough for doing any
misehief.

To caress and cajole the Morlaicks, (which is a resolute and active Nation)
they give them leave in the winter time to retire into the Plains, and to
quarter themselves as near the Towns as they think convenient, pretending to
secure them against the Turks, but the truth of their design is nothing but to
have them under their power, and to re-enforce their Garrisons with them upon
any sudden irruption. These Morlaicks live generally after the mode of the
Tartars, having no fixed residence or retreat, they are perpetually upon
service, and have little other subsistence but what they gain by the Wars. When
they change their quarters, they carry all along with them, their Family,
Baggage, and Cattle, which they defend against the weather by little Huts or
Cabbins which they set up immediately. Most of their Officers are Priests,
which they obey very civilly, for people of their rudeness. They are very
inconstant, and have often changed their sides, but the cruelty of a late Bassa
of Bosnia, who brake his promises with them, has so exasperated them, as I am
told, they are come over wholly to the Venetian, and given him no small
corroboration: for though they are but as it were Volunteers, they secure the
Plains, open the passages of the Mountains, make continual incursions into
their Country, and keep the Enemy in a perpetual alarm.

The Capelets (whom I have mentioned before) are more civilized than these, and
not at all inferior in their courage. They have always been very faithful to
this Republic, and are employed by them very frequently as Guards to the
Magistrates, in the same manner as the Swisses are in France. They are born and
brought up in an implacable antipathy against the Turks, (which may be compared
to that betwixt the French and the Spaniard) for they cannot forget they are
descended from those excellent Soldiers, who under the Command of the
incomparable Scanderbeg, performed so many noble exploits, routed so many of
the Ottoman Armies, and filled the great Amurath both with indignation and
despair.

There is little difference (unless in their Turban) betwixt their habit and
the Turks, when they come to be of any considerable age they let their Beards
grow: they are very curious in their hair, wear it very long behind, but cut it
and trim it before. And yet notwithstanding the opinion the Venetian has of
them, they are never allowed to be in any considerable body, but distinguished
into free Companies, and kept always asunder, that by dividing the authority
into several hands, (which would be united in one man, were it kept in a
Regimental way) they might render them less dangerous.

CHAP. XIX. Of their general Rules and Maxims in War.
THey never create any enemies to themselves, and when they cannot avoid them,
they will never quarrel with above one at a time, choosing rather to
accommodate with one, than to be driven to a division of their Army, when they
are engaged in a War. They have a greater esteem for the Tramontani, or
Northern Soldiers, than for the Italian, there being but very few of them
either Officers or Regiments to be found among them, whereas they refuse not
any price almost for the service of the other.

Besides the bravery and courage, which is much more eminent and conspicuous
among the Septentrional Soldiers, than those of the warmer and more effeminate
Climates, without doubt they have another reason of no less weight and
authority, for these people being so remote from their own Countries, and
passing so many Mountains and Seas, cannot hope for any supplies from home,
should they design any thing for themselves: whereas should they entertain any
Forces from their neighboring Princes, who knows what plots and conspiracies
may be managed privately amongst a throng of Soldiers and Officers raised in
their Territories, and how far they may prevail toward the subversion of the
State.

In their extremities indeed they throw themselves sometimes into the arms of
their allies, yet it is with such caution, they never suffer them to be either
so numerous, or well armed, as to give them apprehension. A great supply to
them is no less dreadful than an Enemy, for whenever they be considerable,
they begin to be jealous and afraid of them. If they have received any numbers
extraordinary of late years our of France, it is more to terrify the Ottoman
Officers with the name of the French, than any design they had to make use of
them long, and this has been sufficiently demonstrated by the success.

Were they as well provided with them, as they are with all other necessaries
for the War, it would be no great difficulty for them to overpower their
enemies, for it is almost a prodigy to behold the vast Piles of Ammunition
heaped up in their Arsenal: in one single Gallery there are arms enough for
thirty thousand men, by which pattern one may guess at the rest. They have
three thousand men continually at work there, and they have such multitudes of
Canon, they are forced to pile them up three rows high above one another, in a
great large Hall they have built on purpose.

Their Frontier Towns are as well furnished as the Arsenal, and when they are
in any apprehension of a siege, they take such excellent order, they have all
things in the same plenty as in times of peace. Their greatest force being upon
the Sea, and most of their Garrisons upon the Coasts, they put in what supplies
they think good without interruption, and their Galleys reenforce what places
they please. At the siege of Cataro they did the Enemy so much mischief with
their Canon, that they secured the Town in spite of forty thousand men, and the
Bassa of Bosnia at the head of them, and defended it, though they had made a
considerable breach, and assaulted it with eight thousand Janissaries and
Spaihis, which were the flower of their Army, our Cuirassiers throwing
themselves into the Trenches, with their Pikes in their hands, and making them
good during the whole Leaguer: if Don Camilla Gonzague had acted alone, or the
General Bernardo had answered his experience, our success had been much better,
and they had not advanced upon us as they did; but obedience must be given to
the Commander in chief.

To engage and retain the foreign Officers to their service, besides their
ordinary pay they give them certain Pensions, which they call Conduct-money,
and proportion it according to the time of their service, which sometimes
amounts to a considerable sum; a thing that works much with such as are
devoted to their interest: yet for all these advancements, their Soldiers are
not very true to them, they treating them with so much pride and inequality,
that unless they will utterly renounce their own interest, and live as
reclusely as in a Monastery, the Town is not secure where they are in Garrison.
There are few persons of quality in their pay, which have not sufficient reason
to complain of this usage, and amongst the rest, that honorable Commander
Monsieur Gremonville, who was (as a man may say) born in their Armies, and
would have died there before he would have forsaken them, had they not been so
insufferably ungrateful. I can tell very well how much he suffered by his
modesty, and though he was so tender of their honor as never to complain, I am
sure he was not insensible of the injustice he received. It Is one of their
Maxims, not to make too much of any man of extraordinary experience or esteem.
Gildas was the man for their turn, their principal Caresses being for those who
have qualifications sufficient to execute their Orders, but not to pry too far
into the intrigues of their State.

Thus Sir have I presented you, with what a man of my small age and experience
was able to collect, during my employment in foreign parts. Though the Style
participates nothing of the Dialect of the Court, or the politeness of our
Language, yet being written like a Soldier, I made no scruple to direct it to
a Prince, who is resolved to be so whilst his age will permit him. For such
errors as have passed either the Press, or my Pen, I humbly beg your excuse, as
proceeding from a person more ambitious of doing, than speaking well, my
greatest aim and most passionate design being nothing but to dedicate my life
to your service, and that little experience I have been able to acquire in the
Wars of the Venetian.

FINIS.

