William Cavendish DUKE OF NEWCASTLE AND HIS DUCHESS Engraved by J. (...) From
a Rare Print by Clouet.


LETTERS AND POEMS In Honor of the Incomparable Princess, MARGARET, DUCHESS
of NEWCASTLE.

In the SAVOY: Printed by THOMAS NEWCOMBE, M.DC.LXX.VI.

LETTERS, etc.
Hague, the 28th. of November, 1658.
MADAM,
ACcording to your Excellencies command, I have been of purpose at Leyden, and
there delivered your Present into the hands of the Rector Magnificus (as we
call him) of the University, who some days after has made a solemn exhibition
of it to the Lords Curators, in a public meeting of the whole Academical
Senate, and, in their name, has sent me the Letter here enclosed; by which I
hope the faithful discharge of my Embassage shall be testified, and give your
Excellency occasion of further Employment to bestow upon the unworthy person,
This Letter came but even now from Leiden, so that I hope your Excellency will
not suspect any negligence in me.


Madam, of Your Excellencies Humble and Obedient Servant, Huygens de Zulichem.

ILLUSTRISSIMA DOMINA,
OBtulit Bibliothecae publicae Zulichemi Dominus Divinum ingenii vestri foetum,
qui sive pro sa sive Carmine omnem admirationem excedit. Princeps ingenii,
Princeps terrarum, Princeps foeminini sexus merito diceris. Abripitur foecunda
tua erudito, per coelos, terras, maria, and quicquid in natura, vel civili
vita, ullove Scientiarum genere, nobile occurrit. Ipsa Pallas Academiae nostrae
praeses Tibi assurgit, gratiasque immensas pro vestro munere agit, and cum
Imaginem vestram aspicit, se ipsam veluti in speculo intueri videtur. Vale

Datae Lugduni Batavorun XXVIII. Novem. MDCLVIII. Illustrissima Domina Virtutum
vestrarum Admirator and Cultor summus, Anthonius Thysius, Academiae Rector.

EXCELLENTISSIMA DUX,
ALter fere mensis est quod votis omnibus expetitum munus Epistolas tuas
accepimus: neque tamen interea temporis ab officio cessavimus, sed vel in
honor Nuncupationis nos jactavimus, vel obstupuimus in admiratione Operis, in
quo multa tam acute, tam apt, tam eleganter exponis, ne nec Venus, aut Lepor
aliquid addant. Scilicet hoc demum animi, hoc consilii, hoc ingenii tui, hoc
ejus est spei, quam annos aliquot jam sustines amplificandae Philosophiae. Nam
cave Te quaesumus, ne Cantabrigiae quenquam esse credas tam infacetum, and a
Gratiis alienum, quem non mirifice delectent Literarum istarum amoenitates;
Propterea, (quae felicissime recludis) arcana Naturae non aliter atque
secretiores Sacrorum ritus, and ceremonias Universi inspicimus, laudamus,
amplectimur, and inter legendum etiam per paginas dispensamus oscula, sed ea
quae soli Philosophi dare, and accipere Vestales ipsae nequaquam erubescerent.
Nondum (quod scimus) Annalibus excidere, neque certe per nos unquam excident
erudita nomina, Aspasia Periclis, Odenati Zenobia, Polla Lucani, Boethii
Rusticiana; quae tamen, si reviviscerent hodie, adeo tecum (Inclyta Dux) de
eruaitionis palma non contenderent, at famae tuae potius ancillantes, solam
Margaretam, consummatissimam Principem and agnoscerent, and posito genu
certatim adorarent. Illae namque pluvias tantum hic illic aquas collegere: Tu
perenni gurgite passim exundas: Illis interdum adspiravere Musae, quae suam in
Te potestatem omnem ostendere: Illae denique partitae sunt doctrinam: Tu
studiorum omne genus versu, and prosa non modo tetigisti, verum etiam
tractasti: nec alios tandem indagationi tuae fines proposuisti, quam quos ipsa
rerum Natura admittit; quamobrem, etsi (velut Aquila in nubibus) quicquid
venaris, capis, nusquam tamen major nobis, aut illustrior videre, quam in
nuperis istis Sapientiae commissionibus etenim invidenda plane dexteritate vel
Tirones semitam ingressos reducis in viam; vel nitedulas e senticetis suis
extrahis; vel hosts veritatis destringis and defricas, Heroina monstris ex
orb Scientiarum averruncandis genita. Perge (Dux invictissima) and (quo
incoepisti successu) in hac immortalitatis Palaestra Te (si placet) diutius
exerce; Nos quidem ut antea semper, ita nunc quoque tanto tibi studio ubique
favemus, ut majori non possimus.

Cantabrigiae e frequenti Senatu 3 Nonas Maii. 1665. Celsitudini tuae
addictissimi Procancellarius, reliquusque Senatus Academ. Cantabr.
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,
WE have lately with extraordinary joy received the two testimonies of Your
great mind and favor toward us, namely your Epistles and Poems, with which
your Grace has been pleased to honor us, both which we embrace with the same
mind with which we do all Sublime and Excellent things, which so long as there
is any Curtesy among men, do bring Fame to their Authors. In your Poesy we
praise that Life and native Verdure, every way consistent with it self,
Castalian like, it stands not still, nor boils over, but with a gentle Stream
does touch our Ears, and slide into our minds. In your Philosophy we praise
that lightsome and piercing accuteness, nothing constrained, nothing obscure;
you render all things clear and genuine, indeed nature truly natural: So
difficult to men is nature and truth. Alas how do they vex and pursue her
fleeing from them; others suppose her to be swallowed in Whirlepools, (as
another Scylla or Charibdis) such a one indeed as they do commonly find to be
of report or opinion: others grope for her in a vain Vacuity with the like
success: yea, some there are which seek her among Ghosts and Goblings, as if
she were some Witch, or Sorceress; some offer violence to her, and put her to
the rack, and make her rather Lie then Confess. To your Grace she does freely
open and unbowel her self, fearing to be branded with incivility if she should
deny; Your Grace only amongst Women owes nothing to Nature: for how much soever
she has graced you with an incomparable luster in your Feature, or pregnancy
of Wit, your Grace has returned all of it in these Elegancies of Philosophy
and Poesy, with a most excellent retaliation. Lastly, lest we should be
further troublesome to your Grace, we wish we could speak out and publish to
the World, what Thanks we conceive in our Minds for this so genuine and proper
a Gift, so fraught with sweetest Elegancies; Then, though there be so vast a
disproportion between your Graces Favors and our Merits, our distance would be
so much the less: Farewell most Noble Princess, long may your Grace live, who
are an ornament to Learning, and a Patroness to the Learned and us, who are,

Your Graces most devoted Servants in all Duty and Reverence, The Master and
Fellows of the College of St. John the Evangelist in the University of
Cambridge.
ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,
LIbros tuos eximios illos opido and felicissime Ingenii partum excepit nostrum
hoc Collegium eadem gaudii magnitudine, qua olim Illustrissimi Principis
Conjugis Tui adventum nos hic convictu suo non dedignantis. In fatis est
scilicet, aut potius haereditarium quoddam jus est Tuae familiae de Collegio
nostro been mereri. Dilatata Collegii Pomoeria, and pulcherrimo opere explicata
murorum facies testantur eximium in literas amorem nobilissimae Salopiensis
Comitissae, jam tunc virtutes tuas and Gentilitiam erga Musas bonitatem
praeludio quodam augurantis. Illustrissimus quoque Conjux Tuus nos hic
Consortio suo cohonestavit, atque quantum gloriae nobis inde defluxisse putes,
quod illa quae hic posuit Virtutum rudimenta in tam inviolatam Majestati Regiae
etiam in adversissimis fidelitatem omniumque artium tanto illo Ordine dignarum
scientiam excreverunt! Sed haec Tibi cum aliis Communis laus est, favere
literis. At quod Tu, Foemina scilicet Illustrissima, Aulae deliciis innutrita,
non solum faveas, sed and doceas qui sibi videntur eruditi: quod non tantum
calleas omnes Tui Ordinis elegantias, sed etiam ingenuas nosiri sermonis
Veneres, and nihil insuper little nescias quae scire laudi est; denique, quod
prima omnium non solum Philosophiae spinosissimos calls pervagata es, sed
emolliisti Sermonis Tui nitore, id quod doctissimis virorum minima fere cum
laud pertentatum; hoc Tuum solius decus est, hoc praeteritorum seculorum
Foeminis, and praesentis hujus Heroinis exprobabit hoc nostrum seculum: Unum
tantum deest bellissimis Tuis scriptis, ut nimirum inter Cultissimas Orationes
Tuas inscribatur una, quae gaudium nostrum ob honorem hunc a Te Collegio
nuperrime Praestitum satis digne eloqui possit. Digna enim es sola, quae cum
Philosophiam tantopere exornasti, Teipsam exprimas: nos certe non possumus,
quibus praeripuisti omnes Vernaculae linguae Elegantias, quosque adeo
conjecisti in Latini sermonis antiquam, sed incultam Majestatem, ut Te, quam
coram alloqui erubescimus, e longinquo tuto veneremur. Vivas ergo,
Illustrissima Princeps, in hujus seculi gloriam, Tui Sexus honorem, nostri
Invidiam, admirationem utriusque; and felicissimos annos exigas etiam ultra
spem, non vota.

Dat. e Coll. D. Joan. Cantab. 14 Call. Jul. 1663. Obsequentissimorum
Illustrissimae Excellentiae Tuae Cultorum Magistri and Sociorum Colleg. D.
Joannis Evangelistae in Academia Cantabrigiensis.
Excellentissimae Honoratissimaeque Dominae, Dominae Margaretae, Marchionissae
Novo-Castrensi.
EXCELLENTISSIMA DOMINA,
Qvanta sit, quamque severa nobis ex dignatione Vestra concepta laetitia, si
non aliunde testando simus, liceat exinde potissimum indicari, quod in hoc
jucundissimo nobis officio gratitudinis exprimendae, and serius aliquanto
versemur, and solliciti etiamnum simus. Ea siquidem est natura Beneficii, ut
remunerandi vices desideret, Vestri autem nec fortuna reposcit, nec patitur
Amplitudo. Quo fit, ut, munifici alias qui sumus, tantumque honoris rependere
soliti, quantum ipsi accipimus, eo quod viros, caetera probatissimos, nostro
qualicunque testimonio auctiores reddere videamur; Vestro tandem tam
praecellenti munere donati, tenuitatem ultro nostram fateamur. Hoc interim
gratulari nobis liceat felicitatis nostrae, eam esse Tibi cum Literis communem
causam, ut nemo laudare beneficia Vestra, aut etiam exprimere pro dignitate
possit, qui non and ipse commendatior exinde fuerit; adeo conjunctam habemus
cum officio laudem, ut nec testari quantum debemus, ingrati possimus, nec
quanta accepimus intelligere, nisi literati. Quae Tua singularis est been
merendi ratio, non solum Amplitudine Vestra digna largiris, sed and simul
efficis, quo tantis Tuis Auspiciis digni and nos aliquando simus: nec vero
literis tantum, quod una potes, patrocinium praestas, sed and arts Ipsa
illustras, and quantum est ullibi scientiarum promoves feliciter, and exornas.
Ignosce nobis Illustrissima Marchionissa, si mirari identidem subeat, cui demum
Tu, nosque adeo debemus pulcherimas istas and Tuas dotes; qui factum fuerit, ut
nullo imbuente studiorum arbitrio, nulla obstetricante Academia, in Foemina
tandem conveniant, res caetera desjunctissimae, Eloquentia, Poesis, and
Philosophia. Sane, qui antiquos adeo miramur, eandem artium armorumque
praesidem Deam veneratos, quid de Te tandem sentiemus, quae Ipsa Tibi Minerva
es and Athenae simul, Musae omnes juxta and Helicon, Aristoteles pariter ac
Lycaeum? Profecto, ii sumus, qui felicitatem citius nostram intelligere, quam
exponere Tuam possumus, quae tam supra nostram est exprimendi copiam, quam est
praesens ista qualiscunque adumbratio, extra fingendi necessitatem. Quo magis
nostra refer credimus, quibus Te proprius sentire datum est, testari aliqua,
pro genio nostro, locique hujus (quo non est alius Tui studiosior) quo tandem
animo, quibus studiis, quibusque amplexibus Clarissima Tua opera excipimus and
exosculamur. Quod quidem officii nostri tam sincere praestamus, quam vere in
amplissimam laudem cedit, magnae huic and florentissimae Societati, Te nobis
habere propitiam, quam and tota commendat eruditio, and literatorum universus
ordo suspicit, and veneratur. Tanti erat Excellentsssima Domina, Te primam
exemplo Tuo ostendere, posse and Foeminas Philosoaphri. Unum illud reliquum, in
auctiorem Nominis Vestri famam optamus, testatioresque virtutes Tuas, ut tot
tamque erudita Opera, tali aliquando idiomate donata exeant, quali inter
Romanos Tullium and Maronem, inter Graios Platonem, and Demosthenem legimus,
and miramur. Quod si contigerit usquam, Te facili in vota nostra, proventumque
literarum uberiorem, speramus, etiam and spondemus, brevi fore, ut ex ipso
scientiarum incremento sentiat orbis, quam consecuta es Gloriae Aeternitatem.

Dat. e Coll. Sanctae and Individuae Trinitatis, 2 Call. Feb. 1663. Johan.
Pearson, Magist. Coll.
Clem. Nevil.
Theod. Crosland.
Geo. Chamberlain.
Fran. Barton.
Guliel. Lynnett.
Gualt. Catsby.
Richardus Stedman.
Robertus Scott.

To the Most Excellent and Most Honorable Lady, the Lady Margaret, Marchioness
of Newcastle.
MOST EXCELLENT LADY,
HOw great and serious a joy does arise to us from Your Excellencies
Condescension, though we cannot otherwise make it appear; yet hence chiefly it
may be showed, because in this most pleasing Duty of expressing our
Thankfulness, we have been somewhat tardy, and are yet solicitous; for such is
the nature of a good turn that it calls for a requital; but your Excellencies
Fortune and Greatness does neither require nor brook it, whence it comes to
pass that we who are otherwise Bountiful, and are wont to return as much as we
have received, because we may seem to render persons in other things most
approved by our testemony, such as it is, more allowable; at length being
endowed with your most excellent Gift, we do freely acknowledge our deficiency.
In the mean time we may justly pride our selves in this, that your Excellency,
as well as our Learning, is so much the cause of our Happiness, that none can
commend your Gifts, or express their worth, but will himself thereby grow more
commendable: therefore have we Praise and Duty joined, that we may not avouch
how much we owe being unthankful, nor understand what we have received unless
Learned: Your Excellency does not only bestow Gifts worthy your Nobleness, but
also thereby make way that we our selves may, in time, be worthy of your so
great Favors: which is a reason of well-deserving, proper only to your self:
neither indeed does your Excellency only afford Patronage to Learning (which
you only can do) but also make Arts more famous; and whatsoever there is any
where of Sciences you do happily promote and adorn. Pardon us most Illustrious
Marchioness if we often wonder to whom, at length, your Excellency, and we our
selves, do so much owe those excellent Arts, and your Excellencies Endowments;
how it came to pass that Eloquence, Poetry, Philosophy, things otherwise most
different, should without the help of a Tutor, without the Midwifery of an
University, at length, agree in a Woman: Indeed we who wonder that the Ancients
should adore the same tutelar Godess both of Arts and Arms, what shall we think
of your Excellency, who are both a Minerva and an Athens to your self, the
Muses as well as an Helicon, Aristotle as well as his Lycaeum? Indeed such is
our condition that we can sooner understand our own happiness then express
yours, which is so far beyond the highest of our expressions, as this present
Description, such as it is, is beyond the necessity of a Fiction. We think it
concerns us very much (who have the happiness to understand so much of your
Excellency) some way to testify, according to our genius and that of this
place, then which none can admire you more, with what mind, withwhat desires,
with what real affections we do receive and embrace your most Excellent Works;
which part of our duty we do as sincerely perform as it does truly tend to the
great honor of this flourishing Socitey, that we enjoy your Excellencies
undeserved favor, whom all Learning does commend, and all degrees of the
Learned adore and honor. So much beyond Expectation it was (most Excellent
Lady) that you the first of all, by your own example, should make it appear
that even Women may be Philosophers. One thing we wish for, the enlargement of
the fame of your Excellent name, and more signal virtues, that your most
learned Works may appear in such a language in which we read and admire Tully
and Maro amongst the Romans, Plato and Demosthenes amongst the Grecians. Which
if it ever come to pass, we hope and also promise (your Excellency being
willing) according to our desires, and the greater increase of Learning, that
in a short time, by the very augmentation of Sciences the World may be sensible
what Eternity of Glory your Excellency has obtained.

Given from the College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, the second of the
Calends of Febr. 1663. John Pearson, Master.
Clem. Nevill.
Theod. Crosland.
George Chamberlain.
Francis Barton.
William Lynnet.
Walter Catesby.
Richard Stedman.
Robert Scott.

MADAM,
THe University of Cambridge, in their full Senate, have judged it a necessary
duty to make known their sense of the high Favor which they received in the
Present made to them of your most Excellent Volumes. This, expressed by their
public Orator, approved by themselves, is committed to my care to convey, as
being their unworthy Vicechancellor: under which title, also as Master of a
small College, I stand in a double obligation for the same Present, to be

Cambridge. S. M. Magd. Coll. July 13. 1663. Your Excellencies most Humble and
most Devoted Servant, EDWARD RAINBOWE.

ILLUSTRISSIMA MARCHIONISSA,
ETsi nobis in more familiarius nihil est, quam ut homines omnes eruditionis,
and virtutis fama florentes, cura, studioque nusquam non prosequamur: singulari
tamen, and praecipuo quodam impetu non modo gloriae tuae favemus, verumetiam
Excellentissimam Heroinam, tanquam Coelo delapsam Sibyllam veneramur. Quippe
foemineae sortis egressa terminos, long ultra mundum muliebrem sapis, and
quicquid uspiam Egregium, aut Divinum est intra mortales, id tuo Tibi jure
vindicas. Sive stas in acie, sive exerces tribunalia, sive Carmen fundis, sive
nodos explicas, nusquam haeres, nusquam succumbis, Dux, Miles, Senator; Poeta,
Philosophus, ac (ut verbo expediamus) Una omnium instar. Tot igitur, and
tantas, and tam exquisitas animi dotes admirata Cantabrigia nec tacere facile
nec ulterius se continere potest, quin exclamet.

O Soror, o doctum quae sola es Foemina Nomen! (carmen enim effluit
imprudenti.) Quod nisi nolueris, interrogare Te porro cupimus, Ista tam laetae
indolis, tam felicis ingenii, tam excelsi judicii flamma quo primum incensa
Numine, quibus adjuta flatibus, aut enutrita fomitibus effulget? An virili
vest induta Marchionissa annos fortasse aliquot, idque Athenis inter
Philosophos delituisti? An Regina rerum Phisophia (quae virorum conspectum
verecunde fugit) soli Tibi se visendam exhibuit, virgineosque sinus omnes
exposuit? An denique tuis in Aedibus sedem posuere Gratiae, ne dubitemus alibi
jam in Anglia, quam Cantabrigiae, vel Oxonii tertiam vigere Academiam, ubi
dictata, instillataque Tibi ab Apolline Oracula, quasi sitientibus auribus
ebibamus? Sed quoniam Te vel conditio Naturae, vel modestiae stola cohibet a
Rostris, and Cathedra, Libros edis, quos partim nuncupas, partim dono Sororibus
Academiis mittis. Nos quidem de magnitudine and animi, and beneficii tui Nobis
gratulamur, geminumque munus in Sacrario Sapientiae reponimus, ut in Sexus
honorem evolvant Posteri, habeantque quod Socraticarum omnium, and
Pythagorearum Mulierum fragmentis praeferant.

Dat. Cantab. e frequenti Senatu, quinto Idus Julii 1663. Amplitudinis, and
honoris vestri studiosissimi Procancellarius, reliquusque Senatus Acad. Cant.
LECTOR IN ALMAE MATRIS Armario DUM LIBROS EXCUTIS, Hic illic ingenia
pervestigans sedulo, Non potes non EXOSCULARI Foetum PULL CHERRIMUM
INCOMPARABILIS Et (supra quam cuidam credibile est) PHILOSOPHANTIS HEROINAE, D.
MARGARETAE, MARCHIONISSAE Novo-Castrensis, Cui Suada Linguam, Pallas animum
imbuit. Sed, quoniam Ipsa (per ingenuae frontis molitiem) inter Viros
Sententiam dicere non sustinet, in imagine saltem, and hac altae Mentis Effigy
aeternis debet interesse Nominibus.
Illustrissimo Excellentissimo Nobilissimoque Principi Gulielmo Marchioni, and
Comiti de Newcastle, etc.
ILLUSTRISSIME PRINCEPS,
MErito olim jactavimus, Te hasce aliquando Aedes, atque haec Musarum sacra
coluisse. Cumque ea, ut par erat, long maxima, quae studiosis hominibus
contingere possit, gloria videretur; vicisti ultro spei votorumque nostrorum
fidem, and ad tantam superbiendi materiam amplius aliquid adjicere voluisti.
Tibi utique parumer at nos prima praeludentis ingenii, and tenera adhuc
Virtutis incunabula ostentare potuisse; nisi ex Te etiam teneremus clarissima
adultae jam confirmataeque Indolis monumenta. Dedignata est Men's illustris and
generosa rebus argutis ac levibus nimium temporis absumere; quod facit tamen
hodie maxima scribentium pars, in opprobrium (ut videtur) ac contumeliam
literarum: Tibi vero displicuit otiosa sedulitas: Meditatus es aliquid viro
nobili ac strenuo non indignum, opusque concinnasti seculis omnibus profuturum.
Opposuimus olim Gallis peditatus vim, ac virorum robora; nunc Tua, Princeps
Illustrissime, industria, equitandi etiam peritia superiores sumus: Tuillos
suas, quibus unice sibi placebant, arts edocuisti. Nec tamen aegre fert
Equestris natio Te hanc ei palmam praeripuisse; neque enim tantum se in
certamine minorem profitetur, verumetiam suo ore atque Lingua se victam esse
gloriatur. Et quidni illa Tibi ambo se cederet, qui nihil unquam mediocre
potes? Poetarum miraculis fidem fecisti; Primus utique Pegasum, alatosque nobis
Equos ostendisti, qui tandem humum spernunt, Tuaque penna in altum levati, per
Virorum ora, ac super astra volitarunt. Vivent, atque in omni Seculorum memoria
vigebunt Excellentiae vestrae scripta nobilissima, quantumque honoris Platoni
suo atque Aristoteli tribuunt homines umbratici, tantum Tibi concedent, Reges,
virique toto orb Illustrissimi. Gratissimis nuper animis Nobilissimae Conjugis
Tuae labores accepimus: nunc Tuos pari ardore complectimur. Est hoc optandum
maxim beneficiorum Conjugium; haec summa est animorum Concordia, quibus unicum
est de nobis been merendi Certamen. Exultantes recipimus Illustres Libros,
eosque inter Sacratiora Bibliothecae Monumenta recondemus. Interea, propter
iterata benevolentiae ac benignitatis indicia, Vobis gratias quas possumus
maximas habemus, cunctaque long felicissima omni votorum Religione exoptamus.

Dat. e Coll. D. Joan. Evang. Cantabr. 6 Idus December. 1663. Illustrissimae
Vestrae Excellentiae Humillimi ac Devotissimi Clientes, Magister ac Socii
Collegii D. Joannis Evang. Cantabr.
ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,
DUo magnae mentis summaeque erga nos benevolentiae specimina Epistolas and
Poemata (quibus nos Excellentia vestra redhonestare dignata est) nuper pleni
gaudio accepimus: quae Utraque eo animo amplectimur, quo Sublimia solemus and
praeclara omnia, suis Auctoribus, donec inest homimbus humanitas meretissimam
famam reportatura; In Poesi spiritum illum laudamus, leporemque nativum undique
and aequabilem; nec stagnat Castalis, neque exaestuat, leni fluore lambit
aures, atque animis illabitur. In Philosophia lucidum and penetrans acumen nil
coaclum, nihil mysticum liquida das omnia and genuina; vere Naturalem Naturam.
Difficilis vicis Natura, and Veritas: beu quamvexant illi per sequunturque
fugientem: Alii rapi eam fingunt in vorticibus, Scyllam quasi; aut Charibdim
alteram, qualem etiam revera esse famae and existimationis non raro
experiuntur: alii in vacuo palpunt and inani parili fortuna: imo sunt qui inter
Daemones querunt and Genios, quasi sagae quaedam esset, aut venifica: nonnulli
vim tentant, in igne torquent, coguntque seipsam mentiri potius, quam fateri:
Tibi se ultro pandit and denud at penitus, rusticitatis notam, si negaret,
reverita, sola videns (Illustrissima Domina) inter Foeminas quae Naturae nihil
debes: quantum quantum enim Te decoravit, aut luce formae, aut indole ingenii
id omne eidem rependisti in hisce Philosophiae and Poeseos elegantiis,
pulcherrima talione. Denique Tibi porro molesti simus pro genuino hocce quo nos
deceras pleno Venerum and gratiarum pignore utinam eloqui possimus gratias,
quas mente concipimus; tunc ab ejus merito longo quamvis nihilo minus
intervallo, minori tamen distaremus. Vale (Nobilissima Heroina) and vive diu
quae literas ornes and foveras literatos, and nos

Illustrissima Excellentiae Vestrae Cultu omni and officio observantissimos
Magistrum and Socios Collegii D. Joannis Evangelistae in Academia
Cantabrigiensi.
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS.
WE lately received, with abundance of delight and Complacency, those two
tokens of your favor, with which your Grace has been pleased, to honor us;
Your Poems, and Philosophical Letters, both which we entertain and embrace with
that careful respect, which is due to those high and noble undertakings, which
will procure in all ages (while men have any humanity) condign fame and renown
to their Authors. In your Poems we admire that Life and Spirit, as also that
Native, and Even Fancy, which, every where, is Conspicuous. Your Helicon is
neither Pond nor Sea, but like a fair and deep River gently slides, and flow's
in upon your Readers. In your Philosophy there appears, every where, a clear
and searching acuteness of Judgment, nothing forced, or Mysterious: All is
plain and genuine, mere and natural Nature. We men find Nature and Truth very
coy and sullen, alas how we vex, persecute, and chase her, who yet still
outruns us: Some imagine her to be in Whirlpools and Quicksands, like another
Scylla or Charybdis, and they find Her so now and then, in their shipwract
Credit and Reputation. Some grope for her in Vacuums and empty spaces, with a
success not unlike their supposals. Some fancy her among Demons and Spirits,
as if she were a Witch: Others torment her in the Fire, or Rack her, and force
her rather to Belie, then Confess her self. But she willingly shows herself all
bare and naked to your Grace; Madam, you are one, if not the only one of your
Sex, that owe Nature nothing; for whatever luster and beauty of body or mind,
she has decked and enriched you withal, your Grace has largely recompensed her,
and are perfectly quit with her in these your elegant Poems, and Philosophy. In
a word, to be no longer troublesome to your Grace, we would we could but express
what thankful acknowledgements we, in mind and thought, do conceive, for this
twin-pledge of your Love, full of all Muses and Graces; then we should fall
less, though still continually, short of so high a favor. May you live long,
most Virtuous and Heroic Lady, to adorn, maintain, and nourish Learning, and
Learned men, and Us, who are, in all offices of Honor and observance.

Your Graces bounden Servants, The Master and Fellows of St. John's Coll. in
Cambridge.
Excellentissimae Nobilissimaeque Principi, Margaretae Novi-Castriae Ducissae.
ILLUSTRISSIMA HEROINA,
PAllida and exanguis haec chartula Sacratissimos Tuos amplexus summa eaque
debita veneratione solicitat, unde Promethei ad instar vitam and vigorem (Quae
soles dare) ambitioso and laudabili furto surripiat: Quin haud vitio vertenda
erit pia nosta nec inhonesta fraus, Quum spirare, and vivere oportet eam
Epistolam, quae tanto Nomini inscripta aeternitatis aemula, and particeps
affinitatis jure facta est. Nempe Tu Ea es divinior Artemisia, Quae Mausolo tuo
non perpetuum certissimae mortis indicem, and monumentum solummodo extruere,
sed vitam ipsam aeternitati inserere Praeclaros Animi motus sacri calami
Impulsu continuare, Limpidos Corporis humores, and nobilem sanguinem ex benigna
Ingenii Tui vena aeternum supplere, nec non eximia gesta and facinora ad vivum
exprimere, coram sistere, and denuo agere valuisti: Exhibuisti nobis talem
Principem qualis ipse solus est, Cujus Imaginem a Te unica vel effingi, vel
digne delineari posse fateatur universus Philosophorum Chorus. Exbibuisti
gratissimum orbi munus, praesentis saeculi decus and ornamentum, faturi
Archetypum and elaboratum exemplar. Insuper videre est quam mirabili artificio
(Laudatissimi Phidiae jure) conjunctissimo numini Illustrissimam Tuam
intexuisti Imaginem, usque adeo intemperanti mortis occursu fabricam faciens,
ut perpetuum Vestrum conjugium ab ipsa haud sejungi possit aut divelli. Quanta
animi devotione Ornantissimae Heroinae egregium munus amplexamur, sentire
possumus, apt exprimere (Quae Tua and propria Laus est) neutiquam confidimus:
Digneris, quaesumus, ut donum Tuum tanquam caelitus delapsum ancile duraturae
felicitatis augurium and tesseram silentio (uti par est) veneretur Collegium
nostrum, vel, quod majus, Vestrum.

Johan. Pearson, Magist. Coll
Geo. Chamberlain. Vm
Clem. Nevil.
Anth. Marshall.
Guliel. Baylie.
Richardus Stedman.
Rob. Crane.
Guliel. Lynnet.
Rob. Scott.

EXCELLENTISSIMA PRINCEPS,
HIstoriam Viri tui quantivis pretii, Geniique plenum opus non modo exertissima
manu accepimus, verum etiam a capite ad calcem incredibili voluptate, uti omnia
tua jamdudum evolvimus. Inter legendum vero non semel hic, illic circa numeros,
periodosque substitimus, nunc stili, nunc argumenti, nunc denique compositionis
elegantia detenti: ac quia togatis hominibus tuam illam tam artificem dextram
tetigisse non licet, quod proximum est, audemus: hoc est Theatrum honoris,
bipatensque pugillar (in quo paginam utramque facit Heroes Novo-Castrensis) plus
millies amplexamur. Neque tamen Chartae saepius imprimimus oscula, quam omnibus
illa, singulisque Musis ingeminare nos existimamus. Nullum enim ingenii tui
faetum exponere potes, quem non in usus suos, deliciasque and tollet Alma
Cantabrigia, and (ut in partem quoque muneris admittat posteros) 'Bibliothecae
Publicae tholo suspendet. Vivet igitur domi, militiaeque clarissimus Imperator,
Teque (dum literis honor constabit) non impar gloria sequetur: ita raro,
singularique exemplo facta dictis ubique aequas, and invictissimi Ducis res
tanto scribis Spiritu, quanto pridem ab ipso gestae fuerunt. Quodsi forsan
Bellatores in arce Pallados olim quaerent (tam ad Historiae sidem, quam ad
exempli norman) consummatissimi Imperatoris imaginem, adumbratam illam
invenient non in Cyro Xenophontis, sed in MARGARETAE GULIELMO. Hoc nomine Tibi
nos debemus plurimum Eruditissima foeminarum; at non hoc uno nomine. Etenim in
Studiis ubicunque jam nobis haeret aqua, praesentissimum Numen occurris: in
Oratione si laboramus, verba dictas: si Poeticas fores pulsamus, recludis: Si
condimus Historiam, a memoria es: Si Philosophos inter ambigimus, and
involvimur, extricas: postremo, si studemus modo, fers opem supra verticem
semper adstans Mulier divini admodum vultus, atque inexhausti vigoris. Hoc
autem totum quid aliud est, quam modis omnibus addictam Tibi Cantabrigiam non
solum exercere, sed obruere beneficiis? Tot ergo magnificentiae tuae radios
(quibus illustramur) qua Nos unquam gratiarum action, quibus Musarum opibus
redimemus? Nisi forte quae D. Margaretae pectus, mentemque illam homine
sublimiorem nunc habitant, huc bona tua cum venia remigrent Veneres,
Gratiaeque. Id si principali indulgentia concedas (Heroina) tuis vestigiis pro
modulo insistemus, nervos omnes intendemus, totumque Helicona ciebimus, ne Mars
ille tuus sine vate, ac virtutum tantarum Latino praecone pugnasse videatur.

Cantabrigiae e frequenti Senatu 14 Call. Januar. 1667. Eminentiae tuae
addictissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senate. Acad. Cantab.
MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS,
THat incomparable and most desired Book of your Grace's, containing the
History of his Grace's Actions, in the late War, we have not only readily
received but also perused and read over, as we are wont to do with whatsoever
you write; yet in reading it we must acknowledge that we stopped often, because
we could not but admire, every where, both the lostiness of the argument, and
elegancy, and spruceness of the Style, and Composition; and in regard that at
so great a distance we could not be admitted to the favor of kissing your
Hand, we cease not to bestow ten thousand embraces upon every page of that
Book, which has so noble and immortal a subject as is his Grace the Duke of
Newcastle; although your Grace can neither dictate nor publish any Work which
the University of Cambridge will not own, and esteem, yet for this last Essay
of your Graces we retain a most singular affection, and, in testimony thereof,
lodge it in the richest Cabinet that we have, our public Liberary; for the
perusal of the present, and succeeding generation, long therefore shall the
most valiant, and renowned General live, and your Grace too with him, seeing
you have written his enterprises with as great a spirit as he himself performed
them; hereafter if generous and high born men; if men of War search our Library
for a Model of a most accomplished General, they shall find it expressed to the
life, not in Xenophon's Cyrus, but in the Duchess of Newcastle's William. Most
Excellent Princess, you have unspeakably obliged us all, but not in this
respect alone, for whenever we find our selves non-plus'd in our Studies we
repair to you, as to our Oracle, if we be to speak you dictate to us; if we
knock at Apollo's door, you alone open to us; if we compose an History you are
the Remembrancer; if we be confounded and puzzled among the Philosophers, you
disentangle us, and assoil all our difficulties: in a word, whatsoever we
attempt your Grace now vouchsafe's to stand by us, and suggest as a Lady of a
most Princely personage, and of an inexhaustible vigor; and thus you do not
only exercise, but oppress us with your nobleness; nor can we devise what
return of thanks to make, unless those Muses and Graces (which have taken up
their residence in your Breast) may, with your Graces leave, retreat for a
while to us. If your Grace think good so to favor us, we shall all of us,
jointly and severally endeavor that hereafter his Excellency the great Duke of
Newcastle may not want a Latin Poet, for the perpetuating of his Honor, and
your Graces in foreign Countries,

Cambridge Dec. 16. 1667. Most renowned Princess, Your Graces most devoted
Servants, The VICECHANCELLOR and the whole Senate of the University of
CAMBRIDGE
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,
WE have received your Excellencies incomparable and most beneficial books with
such grandeur and reverence of mind, as it is very fit we should, as a pledge
and warant of our future security; for seeing we are to Contend in a brutish
world for life, much more for honor, with the reproaches of an illiterate age,
as it were now desparing of attaining to any perfection in our weighty affairs,
lest Cambridge, and Philosophy, and Learning should grow infamous, Your
Excellency has only brought it to pass, that we have hopes yet to live; the
memory of our name being perpetuated in your Excellencies Books, which will not
only survive our Universities, but hold date even with Time it self; and
doubtless we shall live, for as much as it pleases you, most Excellent
Princess, so long as either Name or Honor remains, either to Virtue or Books;
and incontinently this age, by the reading of your Books, will loose its
barbarity and rudeness, being made tame by the Elegancy both of your style and
matter: and moreover it will not judge us to be no-bodies whom such an
accomplished Princess has not refused to make not only the Perusers, but even
the Moderators, and Judges of her Works. So as the very worth of your
Excellencies Books, has brought us, being willing, altogether persuaded and
convinced into a just admiration of your Excellency. However your Grace may see
how much your Praises are impaired, not so much by the default of our Wit
(though that be very great) as because you have the hap to live in such an
unfortunate age. Ancient Greece it self, the sole Governness of all just merits
and rewards, in the cause of such unparalled virtues, would have spent her
self in ten years Panegyricks; neither would there be any cause why Isocrates
should prefer his Athenians (though they were Minerva's Scholars) before
Cambridge; to whom your Excellency (for such honor does your Grace procure)
does kindle a new, yet never perishing, Light: Ancient Rome it self would have
resolved all your Praises into Statues and Monuments of your name, by which
there might arise continually Cornelia's, and if there were any other,
therefore the Glory of their Age, and the Honor of your Sex, because your
Excellency had not then a being, but reserved by the Author of all things, and
born in after times for the honor, and ornament of this age in which we live.
The Titles and Triumphs are long since obsolete, and worn out, the honor of
Greece and Rome lives only in a little slender fame, and those Marbles
inscribed with the names of so many of the Learned, are mouldered into dust,
and yet all these live, and flourish in their due Praises, and are the
survivors of all their admirers, and this Glory is only common to your
Excellency, with those famous Worthies, that as neither the famous Statues, nor
the applause of their admirers, nor the popular vote, but the solid Grace of
their Works, and Virtue which is its own best Herald, does declare their
merits: So your Excellencies most unparalleld worth, and our thankful
acknowlegment without the furniture of tumultuous applauses, has set apart a
place in our Library, that faithful Depository of Wits, for your Grace, where,
according to our slender provision, which also the Custom of our Ancestors, by
whom we are the better enabled, and our own ingenious confession, we do with
great earnestness desire; we henceforth with acclamations that such an
Illustrious Princess (reason being now restored, Philosophy confirmed, Envy
conquered) does esteem that in others which she honors in her own person; We
will therefore that this, whatsoever it is, be the argument of a Grateful mind.

Dated from our Coll. October. 6. 1667. Most Illustrious Princess, Your
Excellencies most humble Servants, devoted to your Clemency and Honor, The
Master and Fellows of St. John's Coll. in Cambridge.
Eminentissimae, Celsissimaeque Principi D. Margaretae, Duci Novocastrensi.
NOn mutamus Excellentissima Princeps; de Lucubrationibus tuis universis idem
sentimus, quod de singulis; Singulas autem quantopere miremur, ut Quamque
beneficio tuo vidimus, aut perlegimus, neque Ipsa nescis, and nos alias
judiciis certis non modo notum fecimus, verum etiam in omnem occasionem intenti
porro faciemus. Hoc in Literas voluntas, hoc (quae tam late se jam diffundit)
Eruditio tua singularis a togatis Hominibus dudum exegit: Hoc Orationes, hoc
Epistolae, hoc Numeri, Salesque, hoc Fundamenta; hoc postremo (quae
Cantabrigiae tuae inscribis) subacti judicii, and lectionis pene infinitae
Pericula meruere. Quamvis enim ubique viget, and dum (humanitati locus ullus
erit) vigebit Cantabrigia, tamen Illius perpetuitati multum adjiciet Librorum
tuorum Aeternitas. Non igitur immerito Te (doctissima foeminarum) de scriptis
editis and amamus, and suspicimus, in illa Contemplationum Arce nos jactamus,
quam Tu Posteritati stupendis operibus extruxisti. Clarissime quidem inter
Cives ad altissimum honoris apicem evecta micas; Sed (quod adhuc augustius est)
omnem illam fortunae magnitudinem immortalis ingenii felicitate ita superas, ut
quae versare solemus exemplaria Graeca, Latinaque miss a jam facere, and tua
Unius sapientia contenti esse possimus. Quoties enim in Philosophiam secedis,
sola Magistri nullius in verba juras, sed in omni Doctorum familia laborans and
subtiliter expendis, and acute discernis, and ad unguem castigas quicquid aut
risit Democritus, aut flevit Hereclitus, aut deliravit Epicurus, aut tacuit
Pythagoras, aut intellexit Aristoteles, aut ignoravit Arcesilas, nec omittis
siquid Majorum inventis addidere novi homines, Verulamius, Harvaeus, Cartesius,
Galilaeus. Hoc (Eminentissima Dux) hoc demum est heroice Philosophari. Sed quo
Nos Tecum rapis? Nam Principatum in Literis, tenes, nullis finibus
circumscriptum; nec usquam Tibi desinit Natura rerum: at ultra Oceanum Mundus
alter exurgit. Mundum illum flamantem loquimur, quem and luce tua incendis, and
accuratius multo, quam olim, in Critia, Plato, describis. Ad eum modum in omni
scientiarum genere si pergas sapere, certe mox id consequere, ut in posterum
Margareta non amplius Heroinae, sed ipsius Philosophiae nomen habeatur. Sic,
velut in antecessum audent sperare.

Cantabrigiae e frequenti Senatu 5 Idus Octobr. 1668. Eminentiae tuae
addictissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senate. Acad. Cantab.
MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS:
OUr opinion is not in any wise altered; of all your Books in general we judge,
as in reason and equity we must of every one of them: and what unspeakable
esteem we have for every one of them, neither are you ignorant, nor may we (as
we did, or hereafter shall receive any of them severally) forbear to publish to
the World. This we think, and this, upon every occasion, we profess to be a
return, that your Graces affection to the Commonwealth of learning (together
with your Personal advancement in all manner of Knowledge) has, long ago,
called for from all ingenious Scholars: This is a debt, which men of several
professions pay you daily, in consideration of the pleasure and profit they
reap from your Orations, your Epistles, your Comoedies, and your Grounds: but
especially we of Cambridge remember, and, with exceeding delight, peruse (the
greatest Honor that of late has been done by a Dedication to this Community)
your most judicious and elaborate Observations upon Experimental Philosophy.
For although we nothing doubt, but the University of Cambridge will flourish,
whilst there is any regard in the World had to Learning, and Modesty, yet to
the Perpetuity of so famous, and ancient a Corporation, we cannot but hope for
an addition from the Eternity of your Labors. It is not therefore for nothing
(most learned Princess) that far beyond what we can express, we renown and
admire your Grace, looking ever and anon upon, and glorying in that immortal
stately Fabric of Contemplation, which you have erected for the Wonder, as well
as for Instruction of Posterity. It Is true, our eyes are almost dazzled, when we
presume to look up to that height of National honor, wherein you shine above
most of your Sex. But (which is yet far more noble and Princely) the luster of
your Wit has so surpassed the greatness of your Fortune, in glory, that we may
now very plausibly throw away our other Greek, and Latin Authors, and be
content to learn only, what you teach in proper and good English. For, when you
retire to Study, you take (as we see) nothing at all upon trust; you sit down
at no Philosophers Feet, but enquiring into the Mysteries of every Sect, you
most exactly weigh, distinguish; and correct whatsoever Democritus laughed at,
or Heraclitus wept, or Epicurus raved, or Pythagoras concealed, or Aristotle
understood, or Arcesilas was ignorant of. Nor do you neglect, or omit, in case
the Lord Verulam, or Harvey, or Des Carts, or Galilaeus has pretended to add
to the achievements of the Ancients. This indeed, this it is (most eminent
Duchess) to study, to resolve, to determine, like a Royal and Impartial
Professor: But whither on the sudden have you transported us: For that
Principality (which is yours) in Learning admits (it should seem) of no bounds,
but in your happy and pregnant imagination alone. Nature is infinite; and you
your self, having nothing further to know in this, first discover, and then
travel into another, World. we mean your Blazing World, which you enlighten
with your own luster, and describe to us far more accurately, then ever Plato
in his Critias attempted. After this manner in all sorts of Sciences, if your
Eminency proceed, Margaret will shortly pass, not only for the name of the
Duchess of Newcastle, but also for the Cognizance of Philosophy. So we dare,
as it were, before hand, hope, and promise our selves, who study continually to
be more and more (if it be possible) then we are already.

Cambridge Oct. 10. 1668. Most renowned Princess, Your most humble and devoted
Servants, The VICECHANCELLOR and the rest of the Senate of the University of
CAMBRIDGE.
Illustrissimae Excellentissimaeque Principi Margaretae Novo-Castrensi Ducissa.
ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,
CUm jampridem nobis explorata penitusque perspecta, sit singular is
Amplitudinis Tuae natura quae sic est and multiplici eruditione ornata and
insita humanitate imbuta, ut and possit propter maximam facultatem, and soleat
propter summam benevolentiam de Literarum Cultoribus optime mereri, committere
certe noluimus quin utroque nomine obstricti alacriores hasce literas
sempiternae observantiae indices Celsitudini Tuae offeremus; cujus eximia
bonitas praeclar um hoc and peculiare habet, quod nec ab amicis solicitando,
nec precibus nostris rogando evocata est, sed sua sponte effusa and ex se tota:
rapitur nimirum ad quamvis sui similitudinem excellens quaeque indoles, and
quicquid aliqualis praestantiae opinionem sustinet, veluti cognatum sibi,
invitat, amplectitur, tuetur. Quam magnificum hoc atque Tuum quod disciplinas
nostras Tuae jam venerationis exemplo augustiores reddidisti? Quanto illud
cunctis titulis speciosius ibit in secula, quod in ea generis claritate
fortunaeque opulentia studia fic amas, ut pauperes solent? In quibus tam
feliciter versaris, ut nemo ita literaturae vel deservire vel sufficere
videatur, ut quotidie novi aliquid miraculi parias, ut Foemina Viris, Aulica
Academicis doctrinae palmam praeripueris, ut singulis denique in sua cujusque
laud praestantior evaseris. Ignosce obsecramus, si minum aliquem, ne Principem
quidem nostram ipsa natura tantopere valere, aut propriis viribus in
multiformes istas altissimasque cogitationes excitari atque erigi non credamus:
amplissimam, illam mentem, per omnigenae disciplinae seriem latissime patentem,
necesse est divinitus illustrari, docet nos ea tot tantarumque rerum pene
infinita comprehensio quantus Te coelestis spiritus habitator intrarit, and
quam non simplex numen unicum hoc pectus ad universa scientiarum spatia
laxaverit. Cumque his auspitiis quicquid unquam volueris in artibus consecuta
sis, cum liquidae veritatis notionem melior aliquis genius Principis nostrae
beneficium fore decrevit, cumque Tuum fuerit non argumentari, sed pronuntiare
oracula; nihilominus (quae est Amplitudinis tuae verecundia) exquisitis
rationibus asserere Tua placita and confirmare dignaris tanquam Tibi fides non
debeatur, quasi assensum nostrum non aliqua religio constringat. Posthac certe
nobis in isto genere vigiliarum ferias destinamus, and Philosophiae tandem
metam prehendimus, cum Celsitudo Tua speculationem istam dignam existimaverit,
cujus le curis imbueret, sibique propius addiceret: Etenim nihil non investigat
um pleneque comprehensum dabit istius accuminis felix perspicatia, nihil non
inventum cum Cantabrigiensibus suis communicabit istius candoris par atissima
propensio. Ne tamen ignobilem interim quietem agere, aut desidiae litare
videamur, reliquisti nobis difficillimam sane Provinciam, gratulationem. Quippe
divinum quiddam Literarum Alumnis quod certo sequantur nunc adeptis
lucubrationes Tuae jamdudum praestiterunt, in studiis scilicet tranquilitatem;
ideoque nec cuiquam veterum Regum aut Imperatorum honestiorem unquam titulum
erectum fuisse opinamur quam nos hic Gratiae Tuae ponendum cogitamus,

MARGARETAE I. PHILOSOPHORUM PRINCIPI. Ob profligatos errores, sublata dogmatum
dissidia and pacem reipublicae literariae restitutum. Dat.e Coll. S. S. and
Individuae Trin. 3 Non. October. 1668. Johan. Pearson, Magist. Coll.
Anth. Marshall.
Guliel. Lynnet.
Richardus Stedman.
Rob. Scott.
Isaac Barrow.
Joannes Hawkins.
Robertus Moyle.
Guliel. Corker.

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,
ACcepimus, ea, qua par fuit animi reverentia and honor tam grandis beneficii,
Libros Tuos, id est, Incolumitatis nostrae archas and argumentum. Nam, quum in
hac ultima obrutescentis mundi barbary dimicandum sit nobis de Vita, nedum de
Honor, cum tot illiteratis seculi dehonestamentis; ac quasi desperandum esset
de summa rerum nostrarum; ne vilissimi nominis forent Cantabrigia, Philosophia,
Eruditio; Effecisti Unica, ut putemus nos etiam porro posse vivere, consignata
nostri nominis memoria in Libris Tuis, etiam ultra Academias, and cum tempore
aequabiliter duraturis. Vivemus certe, quandoquidem ita Tibi placuerit,
Illustrissima Princeps, quamdiu Virtuti and Libris constabit Honos; and simul
ac Libros Tuos legendo Feritatem exuerit Isthoc seculum, tanta rerum
verborumque elegantia cicuratum; aestimabit insuper, neque nihili prorsus nos
fuisse, quos ut Operum suorum Arbitros non recusaverit, Ornatissima Princeps,
Ita ipsa Librorum dignitas volentes, persuasos omnimodo, victos bona fide
traduxit in Justissimam Tui admirationem. Utcunque tamen vides quantum laudum
Tuarum deterendum sit, non tam ingenii nostris culpa (licet nimium buc! and
immane quantum tanta Dignitati imparit) quam quod Nata sis in infelici hoc
seculo Tantae Virtutis ergo exiliisset Graeciae antiqua illa, justissima
meritorum aestimatrix in Panegyrica decennalia; neque esset cur Athenas suas,
licet Minervae alumnas, praeponeret Isocrates Cantabrigiae, cui Tu tantum
quippe bonorem concilias, cui novem nec evenidam lucem accendis. Omnia sua
Elogia Roma illa vetus explicasset in statuas and Tui nominis Titulos, quibus
assurgerent quotidie Corneliae Liviae, and si quae aliae tunc fuerunt ideo
seculi sui Decus, and sexus Tui Gloria, quoniam Tu tunc temporis nec dum nata
eras, sed Reservata a summo rerum Authore, and quasi comperendi nata in aetatis
nostra felicitatem and ornamentum. Sed obsoleverunt dudum Tituli and Triumphi:
periit quicquid fuit Graecia and Romae, nisi tenuis quaedam Fama: etiam ipsa
quae magis durare putantur marmora, tot doctorum nominibus inscripta, dilapsa
sunt in vagum pulverem, Vivunt tamem adhuc vigentque ipsi Authors debitissimis
suis laudibus superstites, and admiratoribus suis vivaciores. Et communis haec
Tibi cum celeberimis illis mortuis constabit Gloria; quod, ut illos non jam
demonstrant statuarum elogia, admirantium applausus, and secunda populi
admurmuratio; sed solidum doctrinae decus, and virtus ipsa suimet Nomenclatrix:
sic and meritissimum Decus Tuum and gratissima animi nostri attestatio, absque
operoso illo gratulationum and applausuum apparatu, seliget Tibi locum in
Bibliotheca nostra, fidissima illa ingeniorum custodia, and depositaria, ubi,
quod tenuis res nostra nobis permittit, quod and mos majorum and per quos
profecimus ingenua Confessio deposcit, nos subinde acclamabimus, Quod and
(restitula in integrum Ratione, firmata Philosophia, victa Insidia) Literas in
aliorum aestimet, in sua Persona nobilitet Illustrissima Heroina. Hoc igitur
non ingrati animi indicium qualecunque esse voluimus.

Cantabrigiae Eid. October. 6. 1668 Illustrissima Princeps, Clementiae Tuae and
Honori Devotissimi Clientuli, Praefectus Sociique Collegii D. Joannis
Evangelistae.
MADAM,
BY the Bounty of several Benefactors, our Liberary is furnished with many
large Volumes; yet we have none we so highly esteem, and are more proud of,
then those written and given us by your Graces own hand. Jewels have their
value crowded in a little room. The Sybills Leaves as they became fewer
advanced their price. Among pieces all so perfectly excellent, we dare not
otherwise offer at a Comparison, then as the Subject leads and determins us.
The Greatness and Miracle which has appeared in the Life of the most
Incomparable Duke of Newcastle, could not but raise, in your Grace thoughts
answerable to so glorious a Theme, and give us at the same time, both Wonder
and Delight, to read the History of that full-blown Virtue and Glory, which
with us appeared first in their bud and Blossom. The next Glory to that of
having done such Wonders, is to have writ them so well and exactly. And, had
the Sex allowed it, Your Grace had done the same Actions, and left Despair to
any other Pen to have reached, their height. A grateful mind, which we desire
to Express, is the Prologue to our new Request: but our chief Trust and
Confidence is in your own ready and natural inclinations to all Acts of Bounty
and Charity. They that are cunning in the Art of Begging, are so well versed
and studied in Faces, that among an hundred, they know which to let pass, and
where to fix: they read at first sight the Characters and Dispositions of a
ready and willing Goodness: and will sometimes pity them they Beg of, as
carrying Faces apt to undo them into as low poverty as they themselves suffer.
Though perhaps we have not so particular knowledge af those outward Lineaments
which might encourage this confident address; yet the general Fame, besides our
own knowledge, will not suffer us to be ignorant, of those of your great and
generous Soul, which stays not for opportunities offered, but seeks them, and
to know where it is wanting, is all the argument necessary to your noble
Bounty. We are so unhappily engaged in Building, that we can neither leave off,
nor go on without the help and assistance of others. Yet we could be content to
change our design, and wholly leave what we have in hand, to erect a Statue to
your Graces Name and Memory. That as one Margaret stands with us famous to
Posterity for her Zeal to promote the growth of Knowledge, which was then upon
its recovery from a long and dark ignorance: so now your Grace appears with
fairer advantage, being your self, to the shame and reproach of our Sex, the
great pattern and example of Learning. We despair of raising any more lasting
Monument to your Name, then what already your Grace has left with us. But, you
will oblige here very many Beads-men and Votaries, who will make it a great
part of their study, that the famous Acts of your Charity and Bounty, may be
read not only in Stones, but Men, who shall for ever bless your Memory, and
pray for your Happiness. In which number your Grace will find at present

Feb. 28. 1671. MADAM, Your Graces most obliged and devoted Servants, The
Master, Fellows, and Scholars of St. John's Coll. in the University of
CAMBRIDGE.
To the most Illustrious and Excellent Prince, the Lord Duke of Newcastle, etc.
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,
THat your Grace Might not want fresh occasions to oblige us, our College was
not hitherto a finished Building, and we owe the perfection of our College to
the late generous obligements of your Grace, when you honored us with the
Picture of the late Right Honorable Mary Countess of Shrewsbury, your most
noble Aunt, and our second Found'ress. It Is true, we here have lodged hitherto
with Conveniences, enough to attest the Generosity of your thrice noble Family,
above as well our Expectations as Merits; and beyond what Learning durst
promise it self from this Barbarous Age. Our College Walls are as strong, as
our Noble Foundresses Designs were generous: and the Sun looks upon us still,
but as he should, through no Crevices or Chinks, nor makes more day than we
permit him to our melancholy Retirements. Nor would your Grace's Illustrious
Aunt be now ashamed of that fair addition she made our College, if the
durableness of the work can reflect any honor upon that generous Effort of her
Charity. But we wanted the last advantage our present Buildings could rereive:
the Effigies of the Noble Countess of Shrewsbury, which would at once, ennoble
her Foundation, and our acknowledgements; and remind the curiosity of
Strangers, that this Age has not been barren of Illustrious Instances of
Charity, and of our thankful resentments of so great Encouragements to
Learning. Yea, my Lord, your Grace has now instructed us, and may
undeceive-others: and the Statue of your Illustrious Aunt shall now encourage
our Studies, and superintend over our Proficiency as her own Deputy: and we
shall be ashamed to have lived unprofitably, and unanswerably to so noble a
Benefaction; or that the Illustrious Countess of Shrewsbury should, amidst the
Joys, wherein She is surrounded by a blessed Immortality, have the
dissatisfaction to have loved Learning in vain, and have built us a Synagogue,
and so nobly seconded the designs of the late most Serene Mother of K. Henry
the seventh: It Is true we ought to have owned the Honor to have set up ere now
the Statue of the most Noble Countess of Shrewsbury, but that which excuses all
Immoralities, that which involved Kings, and Kingdoms, your most noble Family,
and Learning, in one Common Desolation, the late Rebellion, hindered us till
now: We could only look on with Sorrow, the place designed for the Effigies of
your Grace's most Noble Aunt, and sigh that the barbarous wickedness of the
times, which allowed no visible remembrance of Saints or Kings, should be able
to defeat our Design, to perpetuate, in this nature, Her Memory, and our
Acknowledgements: But, we dare be bold humbly to conceive, this our late
thankfulness will be no disadvantage to her happy Memory, and that the
Inscription of St. John's College upon her Statue, will hold even with the
latest Date of time: and that it may not be the only miraculous Privilege of
some Rivers, after they have enricht their neighboring Banks, to dive suddenly
into the Earth, for the space of some miles, and rise again into their former
greatness, and acquire a newer, and more lasting glory, by being, so long,
undiscovered: thus shall the most Noble Countess of Shrewsbury be not
disadvantaged (as far as our weak pretenses can reach) by this our post fact
Acknowledgements, but, like Majesty, by this distance of Years, command a
greater Veneration. But if we dare pretend so much to honor the Memory of the
Blessed now in Heaven, how shall we pay the Living, those that by so great
Obligations have deserved all that we can pretend to of Gratitude and Esteem,
amongst which, your Grace's Favors to our College has entitled you the
Principal. My Lord, to such we are poor in every thing but Prayers: and that
your Grace may long live to be (as you are) the honor of this Age, your most
Noble Family, and (which we take the boldness to be proud in) this College:
that, by that Civility, whereby you have made even your misfortunes
Illustrious, and Crowned Heads your Admirers, you may long unteach this
Barbarous Age that brutish disaffection to Learning; that you may survive that
envy which your Grace's Excellent Accomplishments as well as our little
Learning has attracted, is the Desire of

May it please your Grace, Your Graces most Devoted, Obliged, and humble
Servants, The Master and Fellows of St. John's College.
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE,
IT would be a matter of great difficulty to recount your great Praises, but it
would be an endless undertaking to set forth your Merits; how great your Graces
worth is in all parts of the World, especially this of England, may be
conjectured, even from hence, in that although we may endeavor to reckon up
your Graces particular Favors toward us, yet are we no way able to express
them: And yet to pass by your Graces benificence in silence, because we are
altogether unable to answer the worth of it, would be to excuse our selves from
a less, and incurr upon our selves the gilt of a greater Crime; and so lest we
should betray our ignorance in speaking or writing to be professedly
ungrateful, something we must offer to your Grace though we fall never so much
short of the greatness of your Merits; our devotion in attempting, may in part
excuse our inability in performing, what we owe to your Grace: Pardon us great
Sir if we devoutly admire those singular perfections, for the knowledge of
which we are beholding to your Grace alone, whom when we admire for your
Excellency in other Arts, we find that you alone are able to make your Horses
if not altogether equal, yet but little inferior to their Keepers, we are
convinced that your Industry together with your Skill is so available, that
they almost seem worthy of the society of Men, and if they could but speak, as
men do, we should hear them complaining that they are injured in not being
accounted rational Creatures; when being taught by your Grace they are a
safeguard in War and the greatest ornament of a Commonwealth in Peace. Go on
therefore Great Sir who only art able to bring such great things to perfection:
Long may your Grace live like your self, that you may grace the World with your
Inventions, assist the King with your Counsel, preserve your Country by your
aid and Valor, and continue to honor us your most humble Servants with your
Patronage.

Given from our College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, the fifth of the
Calends of April 1663. John Pearson Master of the Coll.
Geo. Chamberlain Vice-Master.
Clem. Nevill.
Robert Boreman.
William Baylie
Robert Crane.
Humphrey Babington.
Richard Stedman.
Robert Scott.

Excellentissimo Honoratissimoque Domino, Domino Gulielmo Marchioni
Novo-Castrensi, etc.
EXCELLENTISSIME DOMINE,
PUlchre and prudenter Reges Clarissimos, solns qui refer potes, imitaris,
cum eodem optime merendi studio, tum nec minore largiendi sacultate: Illis
utique debemus amplissima haec Musarum sacraria, and reditus quibus fruimur,
amplissimos: Quod optandum erat reliquum, Tunobilissima nos art donasti, and
humanis usibus long commodissima. Eximiam proinde Nominis gloriam, utrique and
meriti estis, and consequuti, and transmittendam in posteros felicissimam
memoriam, in quantum durabunt marmora and eruditio. Patere, Vir Illustrissime,
quantum Vestra potest insignis Humanitas, ut in lauds tam cumulatas, hoc
insuper accedat debitissimum Tibi, quod inter Heroas omnes, quos ab interitu
certior Historicorum fides, aut Poetarum vindicat ingenium, vix Tibi unum in
art Tua imitandum habueris, neminem omnino conferendum habeas. Sane, inter
Deos, Antiqui celebrant Apollinem, ob isthanc forte peritiam, praepositum Equis
Solaribus custodem juxta ac moderatorem; At ille demum is erat, a quo perperam
edoctus Phaethon tristissimas imprudentiae poenas dedit; quanto feliciorem
habiturus exitum, si in Tua tempora incidisset. At etiam Apolline prior
Neptunus, tutelaris idem Oceani and Equorum Deus, magno cum dedecore istius
artis, praelatam sibi Pallada dolebat, and posthabitum oleae Pegasum suum,
scilicet uno victus suffragio, clarissimam Athenas Urbem, Minervae reliquit
insigniendam. Quam Tu Marino Numine dignior es, a quo, si contigisses medius,
magna sua cum gloria tulissent, and insignem Pallas repulsam, and felicius
nomen Athenienses. Nec vero est, cur imperitos prorsus hac in re fuisse
Veteres, aut minus industrios, credamus; magna quidem ea sunt, quae de Pegaso,
Cyllaro, Bucephalo, aliique, non oppido multis, accepimus: Verum illi solum
perficienda fuit res Equestris, qui efficere primus potuit, id quod Tu facis,
ut nobilislimum animal, and post homines, omnium sagacissimum, rationis
quodammodo particeps esset, and tantum non humana dignum societate: Quod, si
Poetarum Princeps nudum Equitis epitheton, consultissimo fortissimoque Viro
dignum decus, and Nestori suo par crediderit, quo Te nomine insigniemus,
Clarissime Marchio, eosdem and annos meritum quos (...) transegit, and
meliorem, si contigerit usquam, famae Tuae praeconem. Quod solum nostrae opis
est, magnos inter scientiarum instauratores Te merito suspicimus, and post
divinam illam sanctissimi Regis, proxime reponimus Icones Tuas; Optimo quidem
jure, ut, qui strenuus olim Regiae Majestatis assertor eras and vindex, eidem
esses cum Rege Tuo, quantum in nobis est, aeternitati sacer: Id insuper vovemus
alacres, magna nos and amplitudini Vestrae devotissima Societas; Ita Tu nobis
usque faveas, Illustrissime Heroes Apollinaris. and Musae omnes Marchionissa Tua.

Dat.e Coll. S. S. and Individuae Trin. 4 Call. Febr. 1663. Johan. Pearson,
Magist. Coll.
Clem. Nevil.
Theod. Crosland.
Anth. Marshall.
Georgius Chamberlain.
Franciscus Barton.
Robertus Crane.
Guliel. Lynnet.
Gualterus Catsby.

MY LORD,
BEsides the public acknowledgement of the great honor done to the
University, in adorning their Library with your Excellencies own most exact,
and renowned Works; The Duty of my place calls upon me to let your Honor know,
that as this singular Grace, and Favor is highly resented by all; so by none
more particularly acknowledged, and admired then, by

K. C. C. Jan. 16. 1663. My LORD Your Excellencies most observant Servant James
Fletewood.

ILLUSTRISSIME MARCHIO,
MIrifice tenemur immensae laudis and Artis opere, quod nuper imputasti seculo,
and Almae Cantabrigiae, dono dedisti; tantum enim, ac tam certum eruditionis
argumentum and Academiae pergratum, and gloria tua dignum uno omnes ore
agnoscimus: Nec alio fortasse Nobis, Posterisve opus erit Theatro, quo summa
cum veneratione tam Fortunae, quam Animi tui magnitudinem intueamur. Nomen
quidem aliquod, decusque olim in hoc studio fuit Xenophontis, and Balbi, and
Simonis Atheniensis; ceterum ex quo luculentissima res, Novo-Castrensis
Methodus in lucem prodiit, Autores istos nec miramur admodum, nec desideramus,
ne Veterum faeces cum hodierno flore miscere videamur. Si vero merito suo
celebretur Thessalia, quod Marti sacrum Animal effudit, Vllane unquam Oration
Excellentissimo Marchioni par esse poterit, cujus ingenio non Equum jam aliquem
singularem, sed Equestrem Scientiam totam debemus? Nondum nobis (Invictissime
Domine) nondum excidere discrimina, quae toties in acie Regiarum copiarum
Ductor subiisti: Verum quia virtutem, and fidem, and triumphos tuos abunde
loquuntur, quotquot Heroas, and arma frequentant, nos Academicis spaciis
innutriti, ac literarum omnium amantes in Equestri Apparatu toti sumus, ubi
cuncta subtiliter accurate, expresseque arbitraris: Appellamus Aelios, ac
Persios nostrates; appellamus etiam (si placet) Exteros, qui posthabitis ubique
suis Magistris, Unum Te consulunt, unum audiunt, unum versant, and suum quisque
Quadrupedem ad nutum, obrussamque tuam castigant. Quantum ad Alumnos togae, and
si fere (quae fortunae nostrae malignitas est) vix ultra jumentum sapimus
meritorium; tamen extremum Discipulorum tuorum agmen claudere non erubescimus,
ab Hipparcho long omnium humanissimo moniti, hodie primum in alieno foro
peregrinamur, Circum ingredimur, in quatuordecim sedemus, equiria spectamus;
neque tamen aut Xanthum, aut Cyllarum, aut Incitatum, aut Pegasum ipsum
amplius, sed quem Tu seligis, alis, instruis, absolvis, Caballum admiramur,

Cantabrigiae e frequenti Senatu 9 Call. Februar. 1663. Excellentiae tuae
addictissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senate. Acad. Cantab.
ILLUSTRISSIME PRINCEPS,
UT Tibi usque suppetat nova nobis benefaciendi materia, deerat quippe Collegio
nostro necdum absoluto and ad fastigium bona fide perducto ultima manus, and
exacti probe operis Complementum. Habitavimus quidem hucusque, maxima cum Tuae
Illustrissimae Familiae Gloria, eleganter and splendide satis, quantum e re
nostra esset, and liceret per temporum Literis infensorum incuriam. Sustinent
se fortiter satis muri nostri, nec ruinam minitantur, aut admittunt (nisi qua
decet) solemn: nec dispuderet Illustrissimam Comitissam Salopiensem sui Operis,
cujus firmitati in tam grande Collegii nostri Ornamentum tot anni suffragantur.
Sed deerat adhuc, quae transeuntibus memoriam tanti beneficii refricaret;
Honoratissimae Principis Effigies, and quasi Vicaria Inspectrix tanti
aedificii, nostraeque in bonis studiis profectionis. Et nostri nos puduit vesci
frugibus, nec arborem suspicere, unde tanta nobis beneficia decidebant. Ergo
per Te licuit, Illustrissime Princeps, nobis non jure impingi posse
Ingratitudinis notam: and jam ex voto collocata in Collegii nostri tholo
nobilissimae Amitae tuae Effigies, nos animabit indies, quasi novus loci
Genius, and tantae praesentiae Conscientia urgebit nos porro in hoc literarum
certamine, ne inutiles vixisse videamur, aut poeniteret olim Illustrissimam
Heroinam, inter tot gaudia, quibus in Coelo jam fruitur, fecisse nobis haec
otia, hanc Domum, alteramque a Serenisima P. M. Principe Margareta Fundatrice
nostra habuisse hujus Collegii Procurationem. Et quidem, ne fecerimus hoc ante,
and obsignatum Testati simus tanti beneficii gratitudinisque nostrae nomen,
obstitit bellorum rabies infensa Principibus, Familiae Tuae, Literisque (Heu
nimis) in universum omnibus. Licuit nobis tantum inspicere defossum sat alte in
sacris hisce aedibus locum Illustrissimae Mariae Salopiensis Statuae
destinatum, and ingemiscere, tantum potuisse delirans in rabiem usque isthoc
seculum in pientissimam Nobilissimae Foeminae memoriam, in Literas bonas
nostramque omnium Gratitudinem. Nec tamen deteretur aliquid de Illustrissimae
Comitissae Gloria, dum nobis (sero licet) detur esse Gratis, dum perennaverit
Collegium nostrum, Honoratissimae Principis Statuae inscriptum: Et ne sola sint
Fluviorum quorundam miracula, discurrere scilicet lato alveo in lascivientem
riparum viriditatem, deinde subducere se ex oculis, and acto per oculta
aliquorum millium cursu emergere rursus, and vindicare sese in superiorem
magnitudinem: emicabit melius post tot annorum intervallum Illustrissimae
Comitissae fama, and quantum licet per gratissimam nostram beneficii in nos
Ejus Commemorationem, majorem sibi conciliabit elonginquo Reverentiam. Si
audeamus haec tantaque spondere in Mortuorum memoriam, quo ergo Tibi,
Illustrissime Princeps, superstiti adhuc (bono cum Deo) satisfiet a nobis, cui
tam solenne est, and haereditarium tot beneficiis Collegii nostri vota, and
omnia Honoris suffragia demereri? Ut autem serum sit Lacrymosum illud alterum
defuncti olim Herois celebrandi, and posteros nostros potius maneat officium;
ut diu faveas nostro nomini; dedoceatque haec tempora immanem illam in Literas
feritatem summa illa Comitas Tua, qua tot exteros Principes Tibi conciliasti,
expugnasti Invidiam, nullum Tibi infensum reddidisti, nisi communem omnium
hostem, in votis sum est,

Illustrissime Princeps, Clementiae Tuae devotissimis Clientibus Magistro and
Sociis Collegii D. Joannis Evangelistae in Academia Cantabrigiensi.
MOST EMINENT PRINCE,
ON whom to father the rare, and admirable Method of Horsmanship, that
singular, and useful Invention, which hitherto so many Nations, and so many
several Societies of men, and so many Commanders in chief, have earnestly
desired, though Strangers peradventure may, yet of all men alive We of the
University cannot be to seek; because every single line, that Apelles draws,
serves us for a sufficient Character, and Cognizance of the Artificer: But in
regard of our unfeigned, and unalterable Zeal for the Duke of Newcastles
honor, We did heretofore (if your Highness remember) now and then entreat, and
beseech you not to suppress any longer (than necessity required) so learned,
and useful, and complete a Work. In that humble petition of ours whether we did
as became us, or no, we determine not: only (with leave) we suppose that the
reasonableness alone of our importunity prevailed at length with, and overcame
a General otherwise absolute, and altogether invincible. Whereupon at this day
(by your Princely favor) we see and with exceeding delight (as occasion is)
peruse a second demonstration of your abilities, exposed now to public view,
for the benefit of all generous and high-spirited men in Europe, so that no man
hereafter may dream of any Person in any Place whatsoever, more Noble, or (in
what part of Learning you please) more an accomplished Master, than your most
Excellent self: for, as if in the former Volume you had only vouchsafed us a
taste to whet our Stomachs, you now spread, and furnish a Royal Table with all
sorts of Delicacies; you now gratify the appetite of your Contrymen; you now
encounter, and answer the enquiry of Cambridge Philosophers, in whose judgment
your last adventure seems always to be the most Glorious. If they will enter
the Lists, and compare, we challenge not only these old Professors,
Bellerophon, Sesostris, and Sarmenes, but also the later Authors of greatest
account in France, and Italy, Pignatellus, Labrovius, and Grison. Let them
altogether appear, and either they must immediately vanish, or else ingenuously
blush that they are but once named in the same day with matchless Cavendish.
And although they may seem, at first, somewhat more than ordinarily concerned,
to be thus at length reduced, yet as soon as ever they hear the Name of Duke
William, they bow to your Sovereignty, and falling infinitely short of your
Glory, they confess you the most absolute and only Master, and themselves your
Pupils. But why do we mention these several Dressers, when as (if we look
abroad) we may daily see both Kings and Princes resorting to your Palace,
condescending to sit at your Feet, and entreating you as their Oracle to
declare unto them, first where and of what Race to choose a Horse for the
Manage, and then how to Feed, and Order, and Mount, and to Work, and Raise,
and Stay, and Ride in all Voltoes, and Corvetts, Forward, Backward, Side-ways,
on both hands, just as the Rider directs. For this same purpose, and in order
only to be Matriculated into the Duke of Newcastle's Academy, the renowned
Cavaleers of all Orders attend, whether they be Knights of the Golden Fleece,
in Burgundy, or the Knights of of St. Michael, in France, or the Knights of the
Annunciation in Savoy, or the Knights Batchelors, the Knights of the Bath, and
the Knights of the Garter, in England: for all agree to learn of you, to Back,
to Sit, and Ride, as you direct; and whenever at a loss, or puzzled, or in
dispute to acknowledge you the only Governor, and Dictator, and Umpire, and
such a Master of Horse, as can (when you please) infuse sense, and reason not
only into Men, but also into Brutes. Most deservedly therefore shall you (Great
Sir) in your Book entertain, and exercise the Studies not only of this, but
likewise of succeeding Generations, as we confidently presage, and promise our
selves, who are

Cambridge, March. 13. 1667. Your Graces most Humble and most Devoted Servants,
The VICE CHANCELLOR and the whole Senate of the University of Cambridge.
EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,
UNde sit equestris Methodus, Illa tot Gentibus, tot hominum contuberniis, tot
Imperatoribus expetita Gaza, minime omnium miramur; nam Apellem statim ex
lineae subtilitate. Verum, quia Te singulariter adamamus, quod elucubratus es,
laboriosum, and doctum Opus ne semper intra Vestae penetralia concluderes,
saepe (si meministi) pluribusque verbis interpellavimus: rectene, an per peram,
Ipse videris; certe postulationis nostrae aequitate victus es, and expugnatus
tandem Dux alias insuperabilis; hinc alterum videmus, and beneficio tuo
obtinemus excellentis ingenii periculum, quod in Europae totius Theatro facere
dignaris, Ne quis in posterum imaginetur Uno Te quicquam esse uspiam aut
generosius, aut (qua part velis) eruditius. Etenim quasi superiori Volumine
salivam tantum nobis movisses, Mensam nunc instruis aberiorem, nunc Civium
quoque desiderium exples, nostraeque Philosophorum expectationi satisfacis,
quibus proxima quaeque tua non possunt non videri consummatissima. Conferant se
(neque enim repugnamus) non modo Veteres illi Bellerophon, Sesostris, Sarmenes;
sed hesterni (si placet) Domitores Itali, Gallive, Pignatellus, Labrovicus,
Grison; quid? Velut Umbrae diffugiunt; and quamvis in argumento nobili dolent
sibi palmam praeripi, tamen, ubi Nomen audiunt Gulielmi Ducis, agnoscunt numen,
longeque infra Cavendishi lauds jacentes, summum Illum, unicunque Magistrum,
se vero contra fatentur. Sed quorsum tergeminos, Agitatores loquimur? Cum Reges
etiam, and Terrarum Domino cernamus ad Te convolantes, Te (praestantissime
Moderator) affectantes, Te consulentes, interrogantesque, ut ab Origin prima
repetas, discernas, expendas qua Regione, stirpeque veniat Bellator Sonipes,
quomodo parandus, alendus, erudiendus, curandus, insiliendus, erigendus,
admittendus, compescendus, and in omnem partem pro arbitrio flectendus; nec
alio fine, quam ut in tuam Unius Academiam adscribantur, limen jam tuum
obsident sacri (quotquot in honor) Collegae, sive Aurei Velleris apud
Burgundos, sive S. Michaelis apud Gallos, sive Annuntiationis apud Sabaudos,
sive denique Periscelidis, aut Balnei, aut Ordinis Aurati in Patria: Nam tuum
ad nutum se componunt, tuis auspiciis inscendunt, and equitant, and
quotiescunque vel delirant, vel abditum aliquid, abstrusumque quaerunt,
omnibus, and singulis Tu Rector, Tu Thesaurus, Tu Dictator es, and Princeps
juventutis, qui non hominibus jam amplius, sed Brutis ipfis mentem, animumque
inspiras. Quocirca tuis laboribus non solum hujus seculi, verum etiam omnis
aevi studia exercebis, quemadmodum in antecessum sibi pollicentur.

Cantabrigiae e frequenti Senatu 3 Id. Martias 1667. Eminentiae tuae
cupientissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senate. Acad. Cantab.
Eminentissimo Illustrissimoque Principi, Gulielmo Duci, Marchioni, Comiti
Novo-Castrensi, etc.
EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,
REcensere singulos quos nactus es Titulos operae res esset difficilioris, quos
autem merer is prorsus infinitae; Publica Tua in Universum Orbem merita hunc
nostrum praecipue Britannicum quanta sint vel hinc licet conjicere, quod
privata in nos Tua pro dignitate exprimere soliciti etiamnum simus neutiquam
valeamus: Silentio tamen praeterire beneficia satis quia laudare non possumus,
a leviori nos esset culpa expedire majorisque criminis reatum contrahere,
ingratos palam profiteri, ne in dicendo rudes videamur. Tentandum igitur est
aliquid etsi parum succedat, in magnis utique voluisse sat est; Voluntati licet
impar sit potentia, impotentiam officiosa excusabit voluntas. Ignoscas itaque,
Princeps Illustrissime, sidevoti suspiciamus virtutes Tuas, quas vel novisse
tibi uni omnes acceptum referimus; si mirari subeat tuae in caeteris potentiae
praestantiam, qui vel Equos potis es reddere ipsorum custodibus si non omnino
pares, parum saltem inferiores; Tua in ipsos usque adeo cum art valet
industria quod tantum non efficias ut humana societate digni videantur, quos
nisi sola deficeret loquela, conquerentes audiremus se injuria rationis
participes non haberi, quum a Te edocti maximum in Republica sint Belli
praesidium, maximum ibidem Pacis ornamentum. Solus ergo qui potes, tanta pergas
perficere, Vive diu, tibimetipsi soli diuque similis, Ornes inventis Orbem,
Consilio Regem juves, Patriam auxilio incolumen praestes, and nos Tui
studiosissimos Tuo usque Patricinio tuearis.

Dat. e Coll. S. S. and Individuae Trin. 5 Call. April. 1668. Johan. Pearson,
Magist. Coll.
Georgius Chamberlain, Vm.
Clem. Nevil.
Rich. Boreman.
Guliel. Baylie.
Robertus Crane.
Humph. Babington.
Rich. Stedman.
Robertus Scott.

Excellentissimo Invictissimoque Principi, Gulielmo Duci Novo-Castrensi, etc.
ILLUSTRISSME CELSISSIMEQUE PRINCEPS,
QUam gratum animi cultum affectumque, cum universa togatorum gens, tum Musae
presertim DEO Triuni sacrae, Familiae Tuae debeant and enixe devovent, ut non
tam ex verbis, quae longo post linquis intervallo, quam ex caufis, quarum Ipse
Author es aestimare velis, a Clementia Tua demisse obsecramus. Enimvero, ut
taceamus ingentia dona in literatos jugiter collata, tum praeclara ista,
quibus, und cum forulis nostris tantum non succumbimus, volumina, novis nos
urges and oner as gratiaum argumentis, beneficia beneficiis pertegis, and quo
majus plene excogitando non poteras, Teipsum donas. Quo quidem introeunte,
videtur Bibliotheca nostra, Vestrae veluti Magnitudinis aemula, augustiorem
multo speciem inducere; and ne quid adventus defit solennitati, sponte sedibus
suis se movent minorum gentium Heroes, certatim ad unum omnes assurgunt, and
facto agmine in angustias ruunt, ut Tibi locum officiose cedant. Quos inter
Antesignanus CAESAR, Britannorum olim hostis acerrimus, herbam Tibi
promptissime porrigit, priorem lubens agnoscit, and sero tandem intelligit
difficilem fuisse de Insula nostra victoriam, utpote quae Tui similes, and Te
tulerit. Sed defunctorum istae gratulationes, and superstiti etiamdum Principi
minus accommodatae: Quod vero per or a hominum domi forisque volitas, quod
celebria Tua dicta, and res palam gestae, omnium oculos auresque trahant, and
tanquam syderum influxus ubique praesto sint, id imprimis Excellentissimae
Heroinae MARGARETAE Tuae, tum fidelissimo Illius Interpreti meritissimo ferimus
acceptum. O factum been ut quae posteris aeternum profutura sunt, ab oculata
test, and individua rerum Tuarum Socia exarata transmitterentur; ut quae orb
Terrarum conscio perpetrata sunt, lingua gentibus communi celebrentur; ut
totius denuo Europae Magnates Novo-Castrii Vitam tanquam virtutis omnigenae
Exemplum, legant, suspiciant, imitentur. Quod nostrum est interea, DEUM Opt.
Max. suppliciter oramus, Ut aetati Tuae quam plurimos porro annos propitius
adjiciat, quibus veneranda Principis Senectus, quasi reddita juventute,
revirescat, and uberrimam novae insuper Historiae materiem posteris suppeditet.

Ita vovere indies non desinimus,

Dat. Cantab. a Coll. S. S. atque Individ. Trin. Junii 19. 1669. Celsitudini
Vestrae devotissimi Joann. Pearson, Magist. Coll.
Geo. Chamberlain, V. M.
Clem. Nevill.
Guliel. Baylie.
Rob. Crane.
Humph. Babington.
Guliel. Lynnet.
Rich. Stedman.
Jo. Hawkins.

QUod usque adeo inclarescas, Illustrissime Princeps, quaeque dudum Nominis
Vestri celebritas merito videbatur summa, major quotidie^ fiat, serio illud
Tibi, illud and nobis, si per Te liceat, Collegium nos Vestrum Superbe
gratulamur. Quin pateris, Heroes Amplissime, otia Vestra nunquam non
occupatissima and a nobis interpellari, inque tanta omnium adeundi vos
salutandique contentione, ne Tuorum, ne domesticos, humiles licet, applausus
dedigneris. Dum famam Vestram omnes ubique praedicant rapiuntque suas ad parts
Nominis Vestri gloriam, dum Britannia sibi Te dum Academia vendicat, quidni and
nos, quibus, utpote minoribus, tantum Patrocinium and deesse and deberi
videatur, Te nostrum (quale nobis Decus and Ornamentum!) gloriemur? At nec fas
est credere Amplitudinem Vestram ablatam nobis velle tam justam gloriandi
Ansam, quumillud solum summis Vestris in nos Beneficiis egisse hucusque
videaris, ne Tantus e nobis prodiisse Heroes difficulter nimis olim crederetur.
Versabamus manu animoque sedulo quae apud nos sui Ingenii Vestraeque vitae
Gestorum Elegantissima Monumenta deposuer at, Serenissima Princeps Consors
Vestra Praeclarissima, moramur singulis Paginis, Summa quaeque, hoc est, omnia
notamus, haurimus oculis quae olim fama nobis plurimum, non tamen satis
innotuerant, dumque vivi vivum legimus, placide perfruimur, and nostro and
posterorum bono; and cum illa in Re toti sumus opportune supervenit
Praestantissimum Tui Testimonium Egregium illud hodie Bibliothecae nostrae, imo
Vestrae, Ornamentum. Accepimus Clarissime Ducum, hoc honoris and amoris Vestri
Argumentum ea, qua par erat and reverentia and gratitudine. Reposuimus Librum
Illum inter reliquam Musarum supellectilem; nec erit in posterum quod male
audiamus quasi ex literis emollescerent nimium hominum animi, and non e nobis
prodiret quis quam nisi rebus gerendis ineptior, cum Tu, Fortissime Dux, ducis
Musarum Choros, exerces juventutem Academicam, excitas animos, regulasque
ponis, quibus ad ardua quaeque obeunda vel interlegendum assuefiant. Profuisti
hucusque Patriae populoque Vestro factis usuque rerum, quod cum ulterius nec
licet nec opus est, ea Tu inter Pacis otia documenta tradis, quibus transeunt
ad posteros Utiles arts; and ad quae hujus Saeculi homines per Exemplum, ad ea
posteri ex praecepto vestro instituantur: nec ullum profecto magno Principe
Immortalitatem merituro dignius benefaciendi genus quam quod in posteros
erogatur:

Nondum Senuisti Praestantissime Dux, etsi emeritus, mereris tamen: Aciem
instruis, disponis militem, exercitum ducis, and quicquid ad Victoriam docti
Equi fortesque equites valuerunt unquam, and valuerunt plurimum, illud. Tu vel
inter otia and ludos meditaris: firmasti imperium hominum, Animalque nobis
impar and Potentissimum ad usus nostros Amplitudo vestra feliciter efformavit.
Quin macte virtute Vestra Dux Optime; instrue Tu tua tempora, ut deponant hodie
homines omnem morum feritatem, vel se fateantur ultro ipsis Brutis immaniores.
Haec sunt otia Vestra; fruaris itaque Pace and Recessu illo, Serus in Coelum
redeas, Sisque diu quod hodie experimur, Ingens Britanniae decus, literarum
praesidium, and perillustre antiquae virtutis exemplum pariter and firmamentum:
Illa, prosperaque omnia Amplitudini Vestrae precamur.

Dat. e Collegio praedicto 3 Call. Aprilis, 1668. Devotissimi Tibi Magister and
Socii Collegii D. Joannis Evangelistae in Academia Contabrigiense.
VEstris imprimis auxiliis debemus, Illustrissime Princeps, quod Nobilissima
Domina, Salopiae Camitissa, justis suis apud nos honoribus, quibus diu fraudata
est, gaudeat jam tandem, and triumphet. Te autem, cui merito in Bello maximi,
in pace optimi contigit titulus, apud Reges, summosque Principes Equestris
statuae manet seeds, and expectat gloria. Tam magna praestitit Celsitudo Tua,
ut in sola virtute sperari possint praemia, and contenta sit tantum meruisse.
Nulli autem rectius sciunt, aut digniores sunt, qui respublicas administrent,
quam qui vehementius aversantur and minime volunt. Perduellium in Anglia
nullibi fiet mentio sine vestri nominis virtute and summa laud, nec vel in
dissitissimis terris tam horrificum belli fulmen latere potuit. Non mediocris
nos honoris and superbiae tangit sensus, cum cogitemus ea apud nos olim
scientiqe, prudentiae, and invicti animi se prodidisse specimina, quae body
pleno elucescunt jubare. Magnus ex Illustrissima Familia contigit honos, qui
autem e propria virtute sequitur long adhuc major est. Clarum virtutis and
gloriae facem, quam Celsitudini Tuae Parents praetulerunt, lucidiorem tradet
posteris. Superiores nostri ad nos detulerunt, quo animo and studio nos simul
and bonas literas, dum hic moram traheres, prosequebaris; id insuper nos in
posterum unice curabimus, ut ea, quae hodie de Te habetur opinio, incorrupta ad
seros usque nepotos descendat, and diutissime vivat. Ut autem egregia illa, qua
maxim gaudes et fulges inclarescat indies benefaciendi indoles, eam ipsis
parietibus nostris inscribi obnixe petimus, utpote quae hac ratione ultra
mortalitatis fatum sit duratura. Eorum in numero nos sumus, quibus stultitiae
nota inuritur, quod aedificare caeperint, nesciunt autem perficere. Utinam non
ita verum esset infortunium, quod vetat quo minus hoc in nos quadret insame
dedecus. Nobis enim non contemnendam pecuniae summam testamento suo legavit vir
quidam Optimus, quam huic usui destinavimus, ille autem, cujus fidei commissa
erat fatis nuper cessit, and an cum illo sepulta prorsus sit, nondum satis
intellegimus. In luto igitur relicti, a Te, aliisque quibus propentior ad
benignitatem animus est, ostiatim emendicare cogimur, ut misere claudicanti jam
operi aliquale saltem praestetis auxilium. Non magna meditamur, non invidiosa
art extructa, non excelsis and variegatis columnis suffulta, non caelatis
laquearibus elaborata, nec marmore fulgentia designamus tecta. Quod aggredimur,
non superbiae aut luxus, sed necessitatis opus est. Extremi enim Collegii
parietes misere nutant, and hianti ore ruinas minantur, ita ut hoc quod novum
est quasi fulcrum and pulvinar sibi postulasse videantur. At angustiores
insuper seeds nostrae sunt quam ut succrescenti Musarum soboli sufficiant.
Quare, si benevolentia Vestra lapides cum Deucalione post tergum jaectt,
numerosiores exurgent juvenes, atque adco plures vestri Cultores. Det Deus
integrum semper, quo jam gaudes, animum, corpus agile and vividum, senectutem
tardam, vel quae nihil habeat senectutis praeter ipsam prudentiam. Sic
Precantur,

Call. Mart. 1671. Celsitudinis Vestrae humillimi Oratores, Magister, Socii and
Scholares Collegii Divi Johannis Evangelistae in Academia CANTABRIGIENSI.
EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,
NOn ubique locorum negliguntur, aut algent Musae; nam Tu foves indies, and
Almae Parenti studes adhuc: imo vero, constanter adeo, prolixeque studes, ut
quo voluntatem istam egregiam in aevum retineres, propter incredibilem naturae
tuae benignitatem ne quidem (is admonendus; etenim sponte tua ruis in amplexus
Academiae, nec ullum officii genus omittendum tibi censes. At in Literis
honestandis, in exornanda Virtute dum ita tempus omne tuum traducis, ad summam
profecto laudem, gloriamque contendis: contendis autem (ut soles) magnis
itineribus, and expedito plane cursu, quoniam Armarium Cantabrigiae non
Hipparcho jam amplius, aut Effigy tua vernacula solum, verum etiam Latinis
Commentariis locupletas: Commentarios illos intelligimus (si placet) accuratos,
and sane quam venustos, in quibus excellentissima Margareta perpetuam Rerum
gestarum, Eventorumque tuorum Historiam condit. Quanti vero apud nos ponderis
sit exquisitissima Lucubratio, noli quaerere Dux eximie; neque enim Ipse
nescis, and nos certe Oratione nostra nequimus explicare. Id potius nunc
agimus, ut Theatrum illud Honoris eadem opera Cantabrigiae, Tibi Seculoque
gratulamur: Cantabrigiae primum, nihil jucundius esse potest, quam Pericula and
Labores evolvere Imperatoris tanti, quantus Ipse non Unius jam Britanniae, Sed
omnium consensu gentium and es, and haberis: deinde. Tibi been ominamur, quia
Tibi (quod nec Achilli Homerico, nec Hectori Naeviano, contigit) ad memoriae
dignitatem abunde sufficit a laudatissima Principe laudari, Quae Te non ita
tamen Immortalitati commendavit, ut non ipsa quoque in Te commendando propriam
Ingenii gratiam sit consecuta: postremo, gratulamur huic Seculo, quod pene
solus illustras, qui vel solus (consummatissime Dux) quodlibet seculum
illustrare posses.

Cantabrigiae e frequenti Senatu 10 Call. Junii 1669. Eminentiae tuae
addictissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senate. Acad. Cantab.
MOST EMINENT PRINCE,
THat Scholars are not every where, nor altogether neglected, your Grace is one
of our greatest Instances; for as occasion serves you condescend, and vouchsafe
both to countenance, and encourage us. And this you do, as with all imaginable
success, so likewise with such wonderful obligingness, and constancy, that for
a continual instigation thereto (we see) you need not the least item from us;
for that purpose the goodness of your own Nature, and the nobleness of your
Spirit is abundantly sufficient. But whilst in this manner you regard
Learning, and embellish Virtue, you give the World to know, that you are
neither a Stranger to, nor unacquainted with the direct Road to Honor, and
Glory; And thither indeed only you march with such expedition and conduct, that
you have already (beyond what an University can write) enriched our public
Treasury with some lasting Monuments of your Skill and Gallantry. Shall we beg
leave to remember your Book of Horsmanship, which we love to peruse and boast
of to Strangers? Or will you permit us, with all thankfulness, to name your
last Favor, that accurate and faithful History (which the most Excellent
Margaret has writ) of your Life, and Actions? In what esteem the former Work
is among us all, we have already declared; and what we think of the letter, ask
us not (we pray you) most incomparable Duke; for you know very well, and we
cannot, in any words of ours, sufficiently express. Only we presume at present
to congratulate so fair a Theater of Honor to the University of Cambridge, and
to your self, and to this whole Generation of men altogether: First, to the
University, which cannot but with exceeding satisfaction read over the
Atchivements, and Hazards of so famous a General, as you are, and as all Brave
Men acknowledge you to be: for your own sake in the next place we rejoice,
because (which neither Homer's Achilles, nor Xenophon's Cyrus, nor Naevius his
Hector attained to) your Actions are registered by an unparrelled Princels, who
yet has not so transcribed your image, as not therein to interline, and insert
a very legible Portraiture of her own Wit, and Parts: Last of all, we must
needs be glad for the luster, and advantage of this present Generation, which
now almost shines alone in You, most accomplished Prince, who of your self
alone are sufficient to have ennobled any other Generation of men whatsoever.
Long therefore may you live in this reputation. So we Pray, and remain,

Cambridge, May 22. 1669. Most Excellent Prince, Your Graces most Humble and
most Affectionate Servants, The VICE CHANCELLOR and the whole Senate of the
University of Cambridge.
MADAM,
THe worthy present which your Excellency has been pleased to make me by Mr.
Slaughter, has stricken me into new admiration of your goodness and knowledge.
The first, that you are pleased to retain so obliging a memory of a Person that
can no ways merit so huge a Favor: And for the second, every Page in your
excellent Book, affords abundant matter. I think my self exceeding happy that
I live in the age which is blessed with the presence of so brave a Person as
you are, Madam; who as you are the Ornament of this, will be the Envy of all
future ones. But your Excellency loves as little to hear your own Praises, as
you do much to deserve the greatest. Therefore I will not adventure upon that
impossible task, but shall reduce my self into my own Orb of Humility and
thankfulness, for this great Honor you have been pleased to do me, assuring
your Excellency with all, that you could not have deigned it to any man living,
who is more than I am,

Paris, June 9. 1657. MADAM, Your Excellencies most Humble and most Obedient
Servant, Kenelme Digby.

I Crave leave of your Excellency, that I may present here my most humble and
obliged Respects, to my Noble Lord, my Lord Marquis your Husband.
MADAM,
I received your Honors Letter, and the Books according to your Command, and
had not a fatal Sickness for a long time confined me to my Chamber, and made me
unfit for any business, (and much more to Write to so Illustrious a person) I
had long e're this returned my most humble, and hearty Thanks for that infinite
Honor you were pleased to do me (a poor impertinent thing in Black) in
deigning to write, and trust me with the distribution of your Favors (or
magnificence rather) to the University. Your Books were received (as indeed
they ought) with very much respect, and gratitude, and I am commanded by the
several Colleges to return their humblest Thanks to your Honor. I inscribed
every Book before I gave it to the respective Colleges, with such an
Inscription as Posterity might know who was their Benefactor. For instance,
that to Magdalene College, thus,

.... Liber Collegii Divae Magdalenae, ex Dono Illustrissimae Heroinae
Margaretae Novo-Castrensis Marchionissae, Authoris.

What this signifies your Honor may easily know. I humbly beg your Honors
Pardon for this confident, and (I fear) impertinent Scrible of,

Q. Coll. OXON. Mar. 24. 1655. MADAM, Your Honors most Obliged Humble Servant,
Thomas Barlow.

MADAM,
YOur Honor pleased to Command two Books (lately composed by your Excellency)
to be sent to Cambridge, one to be placed in the Public Library there, and the
other to be bestowed upon my self, your Honors meanest Servant; It is and
shall be my Care that this, together with that other formerly sent, may remain
a Monument to Posterity of your Excellencies great worth and singular affection
to our University, which I doubt not but will, for ever, be most gratefully
acknowledged, by such as shall frequent the Common Library, and especially by
him whom this great Favor has rendered

Cambr. October. 22. 1656. Your Excellencies most Humble and Thankful Servant,
William Moore.

MADAM,
I have received, from your Excellence, the Book you sent me by Mr. Benoist;
which obliges me to trouble you with a short expression of my thanks, and of
the sense I have of your extraordinary Favor. For tokens of this kind are not
ordinarily sent but to such as pretend to the title as well as to the mind of
Friends. I have already read so much of it (in that Book which my Lord of
Devonshire has) as to give your Excellence an accout of it thus far, That it is
filled throughout with more and truer Idea's of Virtue and Honor than any Book
of morality I have read. And if some Comique Writer, by conversation with ill
People, have been able to present Vices upon the Stage moreridiculously and
immodestly, by which they take their rabble, I reckon that amongst your
Praises. For that which most pleases lewd Spectators is nothing but subtle
Cheating or Filch, which a high and noble mind endued with Virtue from it is
Infancy can never come to the knowledge of. I Rest

Febr. 9. 1661. Your Excellencies most humble Servant Thomas Hobbes.

ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,
I Received (by the hand of your ingenious Servant) that most noble Present,
(those excellent Books) you were pleased to send our College, and (the meanest
of your most obliged and thankful Servants) my self. I confess I am (and for
ever should be) amazed at your Excellencies condescension, your great charity
and magnificence to things so far below you, did I not well know that the
greatest goodness is most diffusive; that those Glorious Heavenly Bodies (even
the Sun it self) dispense their Rays and benign Influences to Valleys and
little Villages, to Shrubs and Molehills, as well as Mountains, or the tallest
Cedars. I shall not call your Excellencies Books an addition to our private
Library, but this a little accession to them; they being (like their
Illustrious Author) a far greater Library of Arts and Ingenuity. Sure I am,
even Bodlies Library cannot boast of any such Donation, since King James sent
his Royal Works, and those of his late Martyred Majesty were placed there, nor
is like to do, till Kings and your Excellency, write and send again: whose
parts are not (in a tedious way acquired, but infused; not got by Study, or a
laborious industry, but given by the immediate and propitious Hand of Heaven,
and therefore more Divine, like that first principle from whence they flow. We
have a Manuscript Author in Bodlies Library, who endeavors to show, That Women
excel Men: your Excellency has proved what he proposed, has done what he
indeavored, and given a demonstrative argument to convince the otherwise
unbelieving World. Your Works will be a just foundation of a lasting and
immortal Honor to your self; (but I fear) a reproach to our Sex and us, when
Posterity shall consider, how little we have done with all our Reading and
Industry, and how much your Excellency without them. I shall not endeavor (what
this and after ages will) to commend your Writings (they are their own best
Panegyrique) he that would do this well, should have the genious and elocution
of their great Author. My only aim is, humbly to acknowledge a Debt I can
never pay, and return the unfeigned thanks and gratitude of

Q. Coll. OXON. May 21. 1663. (Most Illustrious Princess) Your Excellencies
most devoted and most humble Servant, Thomas Barlow.

MADAM,
I received (a fortnight ago) your Honors Letter, and the Books you sent; one
to the University Library, one to the Vice Chancellor, and another to my self.
Mr. Vice Chancellor received your Book (as indeed he ought) with very much
thankfulness, and sense of the great Civility you had done him, and commanded
me to return his respects, and hearty Thanks, which he would have done himself,
but that both he and his Family has been fore visited with Sickness (for
almost a whole year) so that he has not been (nor now is) in a condition to
write. The like thanks, and (if possible) infinitely more, I must return in
behalf of the University, and my self; being amazed at your goodness, and
undeserved Kindness, that a person so Illustrious, and (for place and parts so)
Eminent, should look upon so unconsiderable, and impertinent a thing in black,
as I am, but that I know the Sun does shine on Shrubs, as well as Cedars, and
Princes many times cast their Favors upon persons infinitely below them;
whence they can expect no return but gratitude; and when I fail to pay that
Tribute (so justly due to your Honor) may I have your hate, which will be the
greatest curse I am capable of. I have as yet only read one Story in your Book,
and the Language, and Ingenuity of it, to me seems such, that I am persuaded
the famous Monsieur Scudeny would wish himself the Author of it. If I mistake
not I think I told you in my last, that I had a Manuscript Book in my keeping
(for it was never yet Printed) which the Author intitles thus -- Women's Worth,
or a Treatise proving by sundry reasons that Women excel Men. Many of my Sex
will hardly believe it, yet I believe your Honor may prove the best Argument
in the World to convince them of their infidelity. I humbly beg pardon for this
rude and impertinent Scrible. That God Almighty would be pleased to bless you
and all yours, is, and shall be, the constant Prayer, of

Q. Coll. Oxon. Sept. 3. 1656. MADAM, Your Honors most Obliged, Humble
Beadsman Thomas Barlow.

MADAM,
THat I have not long e're this made at least some slender return of the
meanest Gratitude, a verbal acknowledgement, I take the greater boldness now at
length to Apologize; for that it is in no small measure justly chargeable upon
the Chain of those grand Favors, wherewith (as the Roman Lady of old, with
Bracelets and Jewels) I have been, by your Excellency, overwhelmed into an
Ecstasy. The truth of which is too much evidenced by an undeniable argument,
that like such as are newly rowsed out of a Trance, not yet fully returned to
my self, I now begin to talk Idly. Indeed I could not but deplore my own
unhappiness; as equally racked between two hateful extremes, Ingratitude and
Presumption, that can neither be silently grateful to so Noble a Benefactress,
without too palpable and disingenuous unworthiness, nor verbally thankful to so
Illustrious a Princess without a Solaecism; but that I am well assured your
Excellencies Heroic Candor will at least connive at the most rude, if cordial
and humble, expressions of a most devoted mind. And such (Madam) is that, I
here with all submission present unto you, loaded with such various Instances
of your signal Favors, as never can (except we could suppose your Illustrious
self may) find out a Parrallel. That so mean, so obscure a Person should have
the Honor of receiving first into his custody so rich a Treasure, as the
genuine Product and Issue of so Noble a Mind; and then be commanded to divulge
this his Glory, by presenting them to a whole University in so Glorious a Name;
that this Honor (a high Reward it self) should yet be further enhaunced by a
splendid Gift, truly worthy the Grandeur of the Donor, and that transmitted by
that Golden Pen, which has enricht the World with such excellent variety of
inimitable Writings; that a poor scanty Study should swell into a Library, and
become a Repository for such rich Volumes; -- Pardon me (Madam) if at these
reflections I wax proud, and be transported beyond the narrow compass of my
contracted self. Your Excellencies Bounty (a true Transcript of the Divine)
creates, what it cannot find, a worthiness in the Receiver, and ennobles him,
whom it makes the object of generous Beneficence.

What Honorable reception your Excellencies former Works (in the possession
whereof each private Colledge-Library, as well as that public one of the
University, justly prides it self, and boasts its riches) found amongst us, as
(indeed) by very few Acknowledgements then signified: How much more acceptable
these latter Volumes are, silence alone can best tell. Few durst before
adventure upon so difficult a Task: and the Reason since that is more apparent
and confirmed (if I may without profanation make use of the most Illustrious
Lord Marquess his Expression) -- None now dares write a Letter. --

What concerns my most unworthy self, is, that I shall, in Testimony of my
thankfulness, and as a perpetual monument of your Excellencies munificence to
me when I die, transmit your noble Gift as a sacred Heyre-loom to my Family,
and whilst I live, show your Princely Hand as the LettersPatents of my
greatest Honor, which is to have this leave of wholly devoting my self ever to
be

Illustrious Madam, Your Excellencies most Humble most Obedient, Obliged, and
Unworthy Servant, and Vassal David Morton.

Madam,
SInce my last, I received by the hands of (your Grace's faithful Servant, and
my worthy Friend) Dr. Main, two Copies of my Lord Duke's life, (writ by your
Grace) one for our College, and another for my self. I cannot but admire your
Graces great goodness and condescension, your continued munificence and charity
to us (excellent Virtues which I wish in all, but find in very few) which with
all humility, and a deep sense of the very many Obligations laid upon us, we
thankfully acknowledge. He who thinks to requite, undervalues your Grace's
Favors; which (like your eminent parts and place) are too great to admit any
proportionable returns from us, besides our constant Prayers and Gratitude;
which (as in duty we stand bound) we shall duly pay. I have read your Graces
Book, which is writ with so much evenness and prospicuity of Style, so much
truth and generous impartiallity, as well becomes the (Illustrious persons most
concerned, the) great Subject and Author of it. His Grace's high Birth and
Fortune, his unstained Royalty to his Prince, his great Courage, and prudent
Conduct, and such other his Graces eminent Virtues have deserved, and your
Grace's Hand has built him a lasting Monument, which (when Pyramids of Brass
and Marble perish, or, being Sacrilegiously removed and stolen, disappear) will
transfer both your Names and Honors to all Posterity. That the good providence
of Heaven would long preserve and prosper your Grace (the honor of your Sex,
and by your unparalleled Virtues the reproach of ours) is the Prayer of

Q. Coll. Oxon. Feb. 2. 1667. MADAM, Your Grace's most Obliged, Faithful and
Humble Servant, Thomas Barlow.

MADAME,
JE ne puis attribuer l'honneur que Vous m'avez. fait de m'envoyer Vos oeuures,
qu'a ceque vous avez sceu qu'autres fois j'avois apporte icy d Angleterre que
ce qu'il y en avoit d'eja de publie. C'est, Madame, que j'honore infiniment la
Virtue partout ou je la descouvre, and qu'elle est encore plus a admirer en
Vostre Sex and dans les Persons de Vostre qualite, que dans le nostre, and
parmis les scavants; Je la propose en exemple a toutes les Dames don't ja'y
l'honneur de m'pprocher, and je prens maintenant la liberte, Madame, de vous
feliciter du plaisir que vous avez d'eslever si fort vostre ame par dessus les
autres, and de vous mesler si avaunt dans toutes les intrigues de l'Univers.
C'est bien autre chose que de n'studier que celles d'une Cour, and que de ne
choisir des ornamens que surune toilete. Dieu veuille, Madame, qu'un si noble
divertissement vous occup'e tousjours, and que vous croyez ausi tousjours que
je suis,

A Paris le 3 d'Octob. 1669. MADAME, Vostre tres Humble and tres Obeissant
Serviteur SORBIERE.

Tres Haut and Puissant Prince
CRoiroiton qu'il est possible que vostre tres-Illustre Altesse se pouvoit
encore souvenir d'une si inutille creature que moy? depuis 25 ans que je suis
retir'ee de Paris, and parmis les plus rudes attaques de la Fortune qu'avoient
agitee vostre Altesse comme les tonneres and les Vents qui taschoient debrayler
les forts Cedars du Lebanon, en maintenant la saint cause, d'un des plus
justes Rois que jamais a estes ou que jamais y sera. En li sant ceste histcire
veritable de la vie de vostre Altesse faite par ceste Tresillustre, and
Tres-verteus Princess, Madame la Duchess, j'avois de la pain a retenir mes
larmes, ayant este moy mesme une triste spectateur de toute ce que passa a
Paris and fidel intelligencier de tout ce que passoit en Flandre and la Holland
jusques au retour de vostre Altesse en Angleterre; and je veu que toute ces
travers de la Fortune, ne consista en autre chose qu'a une perpetuel combat,
enter le voulloir and le pouvoir de vostre Altesse; L'une combattant pour
l'establishement du Roy, par le depence inevitable qu'il falloit pour maintenir
la just cause, presque aux abois, non seulement, par le sequestration des
immenses revenues des biens de vostre Altesse, mais par le constraint qu'on
vous fit de vous retirer, a fin pour ensuitte de ruiner la cause du Roy par le
ruin qu'on vous fit le premier; mais Dieu vous a suscitee des amys, and vous
avez un pouvoir plus ample qu'auparavant, and il a faite de vostre Altesse come
Dieu fait a Job en restituant le decouple son saint nom soit louee and vous
continue sa paix, and sa saint Grace. Je leu aussy la Philosophy de la Haute
and verteuse Princess Madame la 'Duchesse, veritablement Tres-curieuse; and en
estate de fair honte a nostre miserable Philosophy de l'ecolle que n'est
autre chose qu'un vray jeu des Carts; consistantes en Sophismes and Authorites
mal citees, la quelle a perdue la Theology, and rendue la Medicine la Risee du
Monde, et pire que l'Emperice: Et quoy que je n'entend pas l'exercise du manage
des chevaux non plus que le haut Almand; toutefois ces precepts me semble si
Majesteux que touts les maistres du monde en doibt prendre example. C'est pour
quoy je metteray ces Divines escrites dans le frontispiece de ma 'Bibliotheque,
a fin que les enfants des mes enfants profiteroient de tout ces riches
enseignments. Il rest maintenant que je remercie Tres-humblement vostre
Tres-Illustre Altesse de la souvenance qu'elle volut avoir de moy, qui n'est
pas tant triste de me voir reduitte a une si age que me devroit donner craint a
mourir cito, come de me voir approchant a un age si grand qui me pourroit fair
incapable de render a vostre Altesse les services dignes de la memoire que je
dois conserver dans mon ame pour demeurer eternellement,

De Vostre Tres. Illustre Altesse le Tres-humble and Tres-obeissant Serviteur,
D. AUISSONE.

MADAM,
WHen, in the Book which your Ladyship has been pleased, by Mr. Benoist, to
honor me with, I read so many Orations, upon so many several occasions,
appropriated to so many several Persons, my admiration rises to so great a
height, that I know not how to express it, yet when I consider that you, Madam,
are the Author of them all, my Wonder then abates, the fight which I have had
of your former Works, having raised my thoughts to anexpectation of as great a
product, from your Ladyship's Pen, as this is: but when I think what thanks to
return, for so great a Favor, I am quite at a stand, for were I as good a
Poet, or Orator, as ever was, it were impossible, either in Prose or Poem, to
set forth a sufficient gratitude. I find my self therefore, who have no Skill
in either, obliged to say no more, but only to beg your Ladyship's acceptance
of the Humble Thanks of,

Bridgewater-house, Dec. 30. 1662. MADAM, Your Ladyship's most humble Servant
J. BRIDGEWATER.

MADAM,
YOu have convinced the World, that your Sex can as well propagate Learning as
our Species, and taught us justly to own all, from our Mother-Wit; It Is without
the help of Classick Authors, Schools, or Languages, that you Madam, have
composed your most excellent Poems, Plays, Fables, The World's Olio, Opinions
Philosophical and Physical, which are the greatest Prize the Invention of
Printing can boast of: That Admiration and Praise, which your Excellency
merits, must be the study of Ages to come; which, by your Works, may be made
more knowing. Hitherto the stolen Tales of Learning, which Scholars, painfully
disingenious, have, in several Ages, Translated from lost Languages, and
entitled themselves the Authors, are not Rules to try the truth of your
notions, nor means to clear them to us, but skreen them from our captivated
Apprehensions. Who means to Improve, Madam, by your discoveries, must study
them alone, and freeing themselves of the Pains of Grammar Rules, tedious
Methods, and the Fallacies of unproved Maxims, may arive early at Truths, may
know and be able to discourse things, not senceless Distinctions; and
Philosophating, your way, from the visible effects of Nature, may soon know
more than the Schools, make their Learning useful, and Bankrupt the Trade of
Pedantry: That you have received, Madam, a Tribute of Applause from the Persons
of most fame this Age affords; that Universities have done you Homage as the
Queen of Sciences, will be the least of your Glory, whilst you instruct not
them, but the Universe, not this alone, but succeeding Ages; and will have your
Fame as often renewed, as fresh Generations come to spy this World, by the light
you leave them; which cannot be traduced, for it is Parentage, being sprung from
your Rational Soul alone, that borrowing naught from others, can have no Rival
in Renown, but may challenge that singular Honor which all Ingenious Persons
publish, and will be made Sacred to your memory, by the most learned, while I
among the meanest shall live and dye,

Chelsey, Sept. 4. 1662. MADAM, Your Excellencies Highest Honourer and Humblest
Servant CHARLES CHEYNE.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,
I have, according to your commands, read your Excellencies Orations, and will
not disobey your Excellence, in concealing my Opinion of them. Was it to
condemn any thing, either in matter or the language, having your Excellencies
Warrant for it, I would freely express it, and if it be otherwise, I beg your
Excellencies Favor, that Truth may not pass for Courtship, as being to so
great a Lady from so mean a man, it is in danger to be suspected, which your
Excellence has been pleased to foresee and forbid. I am, I confess, no great
reader, of late, of new Books, having tried formerly, that to find in them the
least Jewel it must be sifted out of a great deal of Rubbish, and the worst is,
that their Authors take up Errors upon trust one from another, which the better
they adorn with new dresses, the greater injury they do to mankind. To make up
such Volumes out of Collections, as Bees gather Honey from this and that Flower,
is rather laborious Industry than fine Wit; But to spin out of one's own
Bowels, not Cobwebs as Spiders do, but rich Tissues of Gold and Silver,
expresses a great Fancy well improved, with much thinking. As every man is not
capable of so extraordinary Productions, so is not every Woman; but that Women
are naturally as capable of it as Men, if not more, may easily be proved by
making an exact comparison of both their Temperaments and Organs, which would
be a discourse too long to be inserted in a Letter, and your Excellence has so
clearly decided that Question by your unimitable Works, that it saves
sufficiently that trouble. The greatest Masters in Oratory having been
necessitated to acknowledge, that the best art consists in hiding of it, it may
be inferred, that it is yet better to have none at all, as a natural Amble is
to be preferred to that which is got with Tramells, or the graceful Walking of
a Gentleman more esteemed than the affected Demarch of a Dancer: and it is
truly a very rare thing to be a great Scholar without being acquainted with the
Universities, and Learned without the help of Teachers. As there is variety of
Sciences, so there are several sorts of Capacities to acquire them, some
proving excellent in one kind, some in another; but to be capable of all, as
well Philosophy as Plays, and Poems as Orations, belongs only to a very few,
whose Statues should be erected in all the eminent Places in the World, for
their Glory, and our Admiration. I can hardly stop my Pen from describing what
I have marked in general; for to set down my particular Observations, they are
of so many extraordinary Things, that ordinary Terms (and I am capable of no
other) cannot make them to be understood, and I am extreme sensible, that even
what is commonly called Defect, here becomes comely, like some Moles in a
beautiful Face, and that what seems strange at first, because it crosses the
usual Methods of our Studies, gives at last occasion of amazement, to see your
Excellency go so far in the way of knowledge, with standing still, in a manner,
and that others should run continually like Squerils in a Cage, without
advancing forwards; which happens, I believe because they dare not, or cannot
go one step without Stilts, and your Excellence trusts to the goodness of your
Legs, having been pleased to allow me the honor to read your Manuscript, I
make no doubt but your Excellency will afford the patience to read this tedious
Letter, which though it makes a very small sound, and a weak clapping of Hands,
is a part of that great Applause the whole World gives to your Excellency, and
a certain testimony, that I am out of Inclination, as well as Duty,

London, Sept 4. 1662. MADAM, Your Excellencies most Humble most Obedient and
most Faithful Servant, BENOIST.

MADAM,
HAd I returned you this Letter of Thanks, for the great Honor you did me in
sending me your Plays, before I had read them, it would have looked like a piece
of Flattery, and my Praise of you would have made me like a Blind man, who fell
in love with a Beauty which he never saw. But having taken time to read them
all over, and some of them more than once, I can now upon a clear Judgment
assure your Ladyship, that my entertainment was so great, that I know not
whether I read them or saw them Acted. For though the Plots, Acts, and Scenes,
be dressed in several shapes, and have that which is the life of Pleasure, a
musical variety, yet the Wit, and rich Composure of them is so much every where
the same, that I fancied my self a Spectator in the perusal, and was doubtful,
whether your Ladyship with your Book had not sent me the new Theater too. I
never in any Dramatick Writings met with more Honor and Virtue matched with
more Sharpness and delight. Which had it come from such a Pen as Ben Jonson's,
who was always pouring Oil into his Lamp, and owed most of his Excellencies to
his laborious Industry and Art, I should the less wonder. But coming from a
Quill held by a Ladys Hand, who made it not her Toil but Recreation to do
rarely, confirms me in an Opinion which I have long held, That the best Art is
nothing but the best Imitation of Nature; and that your Books are the true
face, and others but the painted. Madam, as I look upon you as a great
Princess, (for you are so) so that which renders you to be the Glory and
happiest of your Sex, is that you can bring forth such Children of your Mind in
a Wilderness, and in your Country Walks can choose all the Muses to be your
Maids of Honor. And, truly, when I consider one part of your happiness more,
which is, That you have a Noble Lord to be your Fellow-Poet, whose Harmonious
Soul and Wit, is exactly tuned to yours, I have nothing left to wish, but to be
allowed to remain

Oxford, May 6, 1662. Your Ladyships true Honourer, Jasper Main.

MOST HONORED,
I have waited long for a convenience to return my very humble gratitude to
your Excellency, that the poor Church of Litchfield has some hope in due time
to receive some furtherance in it is Reparation, from your noble munificence. I
am one of those many, that are persuaded, that your Excellency spent more
Treasure to maintain the Royal Cause, in the late Wars, besides the hazard of
your Person, than any Subject in the three Realms; and am at wonder that it is
not most eminently rewarded and repayed. My gracious Lord; I having been one
from my youth addicted to the ingenuity of Poetry, whereof your Honor has
been a great Patron, did betake my self, thirteen years since, to write three
Books in Verse, Latin and Heroic, to bewail the most barbarous murder
committed upon the person of King Charles the Martyr. The work is longsince
finished, and shall in due time be published; In the third Book thereof, mention
being made of his Majesty's most Heroic Champions, these Verses following, set
forth your Excellency as I was able;

Quid Neo-Castrensis parat, audentissimus Heroes, Musarum, Martisque decus,
Mensaeque benignae? Cogit ab egelidis Boreae regionibus agmen Intrepidum,
laethumque volens pro Rege pacisci.

Receive this Testimony, my very gracious Lord, from him that is willing to
embalm your memory with due praise.

Litchfield, Feb. 10. 1663. Your Excellencies Most Devoted Servant, Joh. Lich.
and Coven.

MADAM,
I Gave your Grace not long since the trouble of a very large Letter, and know
not whether I may wish it came safe, being afraid there was some kind of
rudeness in so tedious a Scrible. I now send this to crave Pardon for the bold
importunity of that; and to desire another addition to your Graces Favors,
which is, to honor the last Edition of my Witchcraft with your Illustrious
Eye, and Acceptance. I suppose I have in it answered some of your Graces
Objections, and have added a Relation or two, which I am well assured of, and
believe them good evidence of Fact. I have ordered that Book I have so long
spoken of to be sent with it, if it can yet be procured; and implore your
Graces ingenious Candor in judging the faults of both. For that of Preexistence
I have many things to say more about it, which I think not fit publicly to
expose; your Grace may command my inmost sentiments of those matters which I
shall be proud to impart to a Person of so great Honor and Judgment, being
really

Bath, Dec. 22. MADAM, Your Grace's Most Humbly Devoted Servant, Jos. Glanvill.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOR,
I held a long dispute within my self (most Noble, and most Honorable Madam)
whether I should not incurr the just censure of Condemnation, by this bold
presumption of writing to your Ladyship, a person so noble, so courted, so
admired, and I so obscure, that I could never brag of the happiness once to
have seen, much less of being known to your Honor: my low condition on this
hand, deterred me much, and on that your Illustrious Place, balanced with a
gallantry of Spirit, well becoming your true Nobility, in birth and match: yet
when I considered, in my mind, that your Honor was pleased to appear now in
another dress, under the Veil of Books, I thought my self unworthy that
exceeding Honor you have vouchsafed me, if I should not, at least,
acknowledge, what I could never retaliate or express: And who can express the
merit of that noble favor? The Heavenly Raptures of your Soul, composed with
that elaborate skill, and beams of pure Wit, that your lines pass admiration?
Were those Ancients now alive, who first discoursed of Atoms, Matter, Form,
and other Ingredients of the Worlds Fabric, they would hang their Heads,
confounded to see a Lady of most Honorable Extraction, in Prime of youth,
amidst a thousand fasheries of greatness, say more of their own Mysteries, than
they with all their worldly contempts, long Lives, Cells, and Solitary
Retirements. Gteat Souls in the light of conversation, gain far more Knowledge,
than mewed up Cloysterers, and show more to the World; their Inventions shine
more Orient, their Illuminations more Refulgent, though clothed in vulgar
terms, their own peoples Dialect: Few mount Fames Chariot with borrowed Wings:
and those old Philosophers too knew only their own Tongue Greek, as your Honor
complains you only speak your Native English. Wherein they had some advantage
of you, a Language more copious, round, and full, though the English can want
no Elegance, Propriety, or Sweetness, when it flows from such a Mouth as yours,
or drops from such a Pen. Go on then (most Honorable Madam) to bless the
World, with these noble Infants of your Brain; give Posterity an example for
after Ages, since former have given you none, but what you have outstript: It
were Impiety, to wish you less great, that Courtships might not defraud us of
your Immortal monuments: No, be great still, Diminutions would but cool those
Heroic Fires within you; let Fortune confer all her Gifts on you as Nature
has all her endowments,

That you may raise your Muse to such a Pitch As all shall Gaze and Wonder at,
none reach.

And I assure you (most Noble Madam) you can never stand higher, or greater in
the whole Worlds esteem than you now are, and ever shall be in the most
deserved Veneration, of him who glories, to subscribe himself,

Utrecht, Dec. 2. 1653. Most Honorable, and most Virtuous Lady Your Honors
most Humble and most Devoted Servant Robert Creyghtone.

May it please your Excellence, My ever Honored, Most Noble Lord.
WHen I last had the honor to kiss your Excellencies Hands at Antwerp, you
were pleased to bestow on me, The Passions of the Soul, Written by the Noble Du
Carts, in Token of your singular Love and Respect to me: The Work Learned, the
Author Renowned, rendered the Gift Eminent, but much more, conferred by so
Honorable a Peer, upon so unconsiderable a creature, as my self: and all ought
to have been vehement incentives to a thankful acknowledgement: yet hitherto
your splendour, even in this your Eclipse, has so prevailed over my modesty,
that I buried your Favor not in Oblivion but Silence; thinking it well became
my condition, rather to hold my peace, than speak below the merit, or flat the
sublime dignity of the Person to whom I should speak. But now your Excellencies
late accumulation of excessive Charity, in sending me by Dr. Morley, the Works
of your most Honorable, Virtuous, and Learned Consort, has chidd my
Ingratitude unto a Blush beyond Confusion; and made me feel some of Du Carts
Passions, transferred from your first gift to your second: I should have
consecrated all my pains, to your never dying Fame, as to a prime Patron of
Learning, and I receive Books from you; Books rare and transcendent, distilled
from the Brain of a most Noble Minerva, a Lady, your own Lady, whom delicacy of
Education, height of Birth and Place, might well have exempted from such
inferior employments: yet composed with so curious art, quick style, refined
airy notions, Words so proper elegant and delightful both in Verse and Prose,
that I must ever admire the Harmony of her inspiring Soul: And thence
reffecting on my felf, blame my own unworthiness, who have spent more time a
Universities, without any benefit to Posterity, than her Honor has lived
years in the World: so fresh and vigorous is her Fancy, so dull and
superannuated mine: yet in this dejection of Mind, I am much refreshed, that
your Excellence accounts me worthy to read her lines; you cast me down, and
raise me up; cast me down by her Writings, which as I never expected, so I
never hope to parallel, and you raise me, by the uncancelled estimation, which
you still bear in memory of my mean self. It is your goodness (my ever Honored
Noble Lord) to peruse low things with Grace and Mercy, and the method of all
Honorable Souls, to shine on Shrubs, that their Favors may higher advance in
Prospect. You subjugate my Affections, as you do great Horses to your Managery.
Napoli gli putedri, Roma scozzona gli huomini, the Italian Proverb goes; Naples
tames Horses, and Rome Men: The Virtues of both reign in you: In the rare art
of taming Horses you excel all mortals, and subdue Men by a no less wonderful
Affability: that he must be out of the light of reputation, whom you have not
particularly obliged, or pointed out with some mark of Honor: I triumph much
in your respect of me, not that I have deserved it, but that you have
vouchsafed it; and shall wish no longer to be blessed, then I shall evermore
endeavor to express my self in all things.

Utrecht, Dec. 2. 1653. My ever Honored most noble Lord, Your Excellencies
most Obliged, and most affectionate Servant, and Beadsman. Robert Creyghton.

MADAM,
I was very much surprised when your Servant saluted me from so Illustrious a
personage; but when he produced those noble Volumes as an intended Testimony of
your Ladyships respect, the unexpectedness of so great an honor made me
suspect the Messenger of a mistake, and that he presented me with what was
meant fitter for the College, or at least to some more worthy and considerable
person than my self. But he persisting still in the same story, my doubts were
swallowed up into admiration of your Ladyship's singular and unparalleld
goodness; which seems to me to be Corrival with the excellency of your Wit, and
to seek an equal share of Glory in searching out Objects of such condescending
Acts of Civility, and Bounty, in these obscure corners of Academical
Retirement, as the other in piercing into the greatest difficulties and the
most dark and obstruce Recesses of Philosophy. Madam I humbly crave Pardon for
my boldness, and impatience that I offer so hastily to return thanks for so
eminent a Favor, before I have well computed the value thereof, nor as yet
fitly polished and adorned my Style, by a longer converse with your Ladyships
most Elegant and Ingenious Writings. But the cause of defects in this kind
being so freely confessed, your noble candor will be pleased to accept the rude
reality of those speedy acknowledgements made by

C. C. C. June 9. Thrice-Excellent Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble and
Thankful Admirer, Henry More.

MADAM,
IN you, the World has an Illustrious Example of the truth of their Opinion,
who hold, that no Virtue is single, but always accompanied with some (if not
all) of its Fellows. For (to omit those many other Virtues, which seem to
contend each with other, which shall render you conspicuous) to that general
Charity of yours, whereby you daily oblige all mankind, in supplying the
poverty of their Understandings with the Spiritual Alms of Knowledge; you have
added an extraordinary Generosity, by enriching with your choice Volumes, the
Libraries of some particular Persons, whom you are pleased to think capable of
comprehending your curious Speculations therein contained. And in the number of
these your Bouuty has given me a right to account my self. For which eminent
Grace and Favor while I strive to show my self Grateful, I find my Faculties
wholly taken up with Admiration: and that Reason I should make use of, to help
me express my sentiments decently, is dimmed with the Glories of the Person to
whom I address, If, therefore, I am not able to acquit my self of that Duty, as
I ought; you are to reflect on the exceeding difficulty of it. Justice
requires, you should pardon the Effects of that Transport and Astonishment, of
which your Excellencies are the cause: and when I cannot advance the due
Tribute of Thanks, you ought to admit my Homage of Acknowledgements.

Your Wit, Madam, is above all Commendations; your Industry above Belief; your
Labors, in Writing, above humane patience; your Curiosity above Imitation;
your Notions above any, but your own Subtlety; and all above your Sex. Your
Collections by the improvement they receive from your fertile Brain, become
your own Productions: and those obscure Hints delivered to you in the
Discourses of others, by passing through your lightsome Imagination, are turned
into bright and full Discoveries. You solve Problems with more ease than others
have proposed them: and your Pen has this particular advantage, that it leaves
no Darkness on the Paper besides that of the Ink. Where you treat of Arguments
formerly handled by others, you either give them more light, or contract what
they had before into a narrower and more familiar Compass; and upon all
occasions you either produce new things, or speak old ones after a new manner;
so that you stagger the truth of that saying of the wise Man, That nothing is
new under the Sun. Your Expressions for the most part are Natural, yet Select;
at once explaining and adorning your Matter: and they who read your Books with
design to be informed in points of Philosophy, find themselves at the same time
introduced also in Rhetorique. In a word; while you bring Reasons for the most
admirable Works of Nature, you show your self to be her greatest Miracle: and
your prodigious Sagacity inclines even the Envious to believe, that all you
need do to comprehend the most obstruse things, is only to think on them.

This Language, Madam, is but the imperfect Echo of your merits; nor can any
thing, but your modesty, hinder you from owning it so to be. However, I most
humbly beseech you to hear it, as most proper to that high Honor and
Veneration due to you from,

London, May 3. 1663. Most incomparable Madam, Your Excellencies most humble
Servant, Walt. Charleton.

MADAM,
YOur Books have here had a very honorable, and public Reception, and are not
only placed in the private Libraries of every single College, but in the
public also. Not without the Applause and Admiration of the Learned men of
this Place, that one of your Sex, a great Princess, and not bred to the Arts
with labor, and toil, as they are, should with so much excellent variety
appear among us. And truly Madam when I consider the various Subjects you have
past through, it would pose me something to find a proper place in any Library
for your Works to stand in, whether among the Orators, Poets, Philosophers,
Statesmen, or Politicians, since every one of these may be ambitious to stand
next you. Nor can I forbear to let your Ladyship know, that the two last Books
which you were pleased to send to me, added to the former, which I had the
honor to receive from you, are for their number my lesser Library, but for the
value which I put upon the Noble Hand which drew the Li^es, far the greater.
Your Servant tells me you would willingly have some of them translated into the
Catholic Language. Though it will be hard to make them speak so good Latin as
they now do English, yet I have prevailed with an Ingenious Person of this
College to undertake the Work when ever you shall please to assign his Task,
whereby your Writings will be enabled to travel beyond the Seas, and spread
themselves, both to your Honor, and the Honor of your Nation, as far as the
Commonwealth of Learning reaches. How far your Ladyship will be served in this
particular, when you are come to a resolution with your own Noble Thoughts, you
may please to signify to

Christ Church in Oxford, May 20, 1663. MADAM, Your Ladyships real Honourer,
And most Obliged Servant, Jasper Main.

MADAM,
I Have the ill Fortune when I am bound to acknowledge a very high Obligation
to your Excellence, at the same time also to stand in need of your Pardon, that
I have done it no sooner. However, I wish. I had the Skill to perform the one
part as answerable to your merit and my duty, as I am confident of your
goodness to give success unto the other. The Books you condescended to bestow
upon me have turned a sorry Study into a rich Library, which are so much their
own commendations (besides the gloss your Honorable Name must give them) that
mine I fear may look like Injury and Rebatement to their Worth. I must not,
Madam, be too bold with your hours, which you have devoted to better uses than
the reading of such Papers; but with the tender of my humblest Thanks to your
Excellence for the high Honor you have vouchsafed me, wishing you all the
happiness of this, and the better life to come, I Rest,

Edm. Hall, Oxon. June 30. 1663. MADAM, Your most humble Servant, Thomas Tully.

MADAM,
IN obedience to your Commands sent me by your Servant in his last Letter, I
have put your Book of Tales into the Hand of a fit person to translate them
into Latin as I think either University can afford. Being an exact Master of
both Languages, and enabled with a Genius fit for such an undertaking. I have
also read as much of your Poetry translated by a young Scholars as has
hitherto past his Pen. In some parts where of I find him happy enough. But your
Excellent Fancy expressing it self sometimes in Terms of Art, and Words only
known to Philosophy, he tells me the hardest part of his Task will be how to
find out current Roman Words to match them. To remove which difficulty, I have
directed him to read Lucretius before he proceed farther; who having softened
the most stubborn parts of Natural Philosophy, by making them run smoothly in
his tunable Verses, by an easy Imitation will teach him to do the like. Having
in these two particulars most readily served you, I should return you my
Studied Thanks, for the several Books you are pleased to send me, if they did
not make me unhappy, by conversing with the Children of your Mind at so great a
distance from the incomparable Parent. For I do assure your Excellency, I look
upon Welbek, as long as you are there, not as a Noble House seated among
solitary Groves, but as a perfect Court of Wit and Learning, where you have all
the Muses for your Maids of Honor; and the best Philosophers, Statesmen,
Orators, and Historians for your Counselors: And all these for the Glory of
your Sex, created from your self. Had I the Art, like some here, to teach Birds
to Speak, All the Fowls which fly in your Woods should presently be transformed
to Nightingales, and taught Music enough to sing the praises of so great a
Mistress. To whose Virtues I shall always remain,

London, April 21. 1664. A most real Honourer And Devoted Servant; Jasper Maine.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,
HAving received a Copy of your Works, for the use of the Library of
Christ-Church, and another as a particular favor to my self; I hasten to make
my acknowledgments for both: and must beg leave to say that your Excellency has
found the way to make the Arts truly liberal, while you not only adorn them by
your Culture, but propagate them by your munificent distribution. So that it
will rest a Problem not easily to be resolved, whether you appear greater in
your acquisitions or obligings: whether you instruct the World, or enrich it
more? But it were an envious piece of curiosity, to labor in the Heraldry of
your Virtues which are all greatest, because Yours: and are not to be the
Subject of Contest, but Argument of Praise and Admiration: In particular manner
they are such, to

Your Excellencies Most Humble and Obliged Servant Jo. Fell.

MADAM,
I Am very sorry that my unhappy Fate has necessitated an unbecoming Slowness
in acknowledging a Favor, that requires all possibilities of Gratitude, and
exceeds them. But yet, had I nothing else to say in excuse of my no earlier
return to the last Noble effects of your Graces goodness, it were sufficient;
That my sense of that mighty Honor was too big for my Pen; and when I began to
speak my resentments of it, I found my self as unable to express them, as to
deserve their occasion. Bet yet, Madam, this is not all the reason, for I was
from home when your Grace's Present came, and have been so almost ever since;
otherwise I had not added to my want of merit on other accounts, that also of
appearing insensible, and defective in endeavors of acknowledgment; I must say
endeavors, for my Gratitude can rise no higher. Since my receipt of your
Grace's ingenious Works, I have, as my occasions would permit, cast my Eyes
again into them, and I am sorry they cannot dwell there, where I find so
pleasing, and so instructive an entertainment. And though I must crave your
Pardon for dissenting from your Grace's Opinion in some things, I admire the
quickness, and vigor of your Conceptions, in all: In which your Grace has this
peculiar among Authors that they are, in the strictest sense, your own, your
Grace being indebted to nothing for them, but your own happy Wit, and Genius; a
thing so uncommon even among the most celebrated Writers of our Sex, that it
ought to be acknowledged with wonder in yours. And really, Madam, your Grace
has set us a pattern, that we ought to admire, but cannot imitate. And whereas
you are pleased sometimes to mention your being no Scholar, as an excuse of
defects, your modesty supposes; By that acknowledgment you show our
imperfections that pretend we are so, rather than discover any of your own.

As for the last Trifle I was bold to present to your Graces Eye, it is much
indebted to the obliging reception you were pleased to afford it; and the re is
nothing that sets such a luster on your Graces great Wit, and Intellectual
Perfections, as that sweet candor of your Spirit that renders you so
accessible, even to your meanest admirers. Whereas your Grace is pleased to
object against some part of the design of my Discourse, that it sets the
perfection of the sense higher than that of Ratiocination; I humbly desire that
your Grace would consider, that there are two sorts of Reasoning, viz. Those
that the Mind advances from its own imbred Idaea's and native Store, such are
all Metaphysical Contemplations. And those natural researches which are raised
from experiment, and the objects of sense. The former are indeed most perfect
when they are most abstracted from the grosness of things sensible, but the
others are then most complete when they are most accomodated to them; and when
they are not, they are Aerie, and Fantastic. Now what I have said about those
matters is to tie down the mind in Physical things, to consider Nature as it
is, to lay a Foundation in sensible collections, and from thence to proceed to
general Propositions, and Discourses. So that my aim is, that we may arise
according to the order of nature by degrees from the exercise of our Senses, to
that of our Reasons; which indeed is most noble and most perfect when it
concludes aright, but not so when it is mistaken: And that it may so conclude
and arrive to that perfection, it must begin in sense: And the more experiments
our reasons have to work on, by so much they are the more likely to be certain
in their conclusions, and consequently more perfect in their actings. But
Madam, I doubt I begin to be tedious, and therefore, at present dare add no
more, but that I am,

Illustrious Madam, Your Grace's most Humble and most devoted Servant, Jos.
Glanvill.

MADAM,
I Had not thus long deferred my dutiful Acknowledgments to your Ladyship for
the Honor which I received, with your Ingenious Book of Orations; if I had not
been in hopes to recommend my Gratitude by presenting your Ladyship with this
Poem, lately Printed; and though it ought not to be ranked amongst those
pollished Pieces, which are derived to the World from your fair hands; yet,
Madam, I cannot doubt of your candid Reception of it; since in that shining
Circle of Graces, which Illustrates your Character, there is not any one more
conspicuous, than your Generous Humility; which I am confident, will obtain my
Pardon of your Ladyship for presuming to return you such a worthless Present,
and Diverting you from those solid Entertainments, by which you so improve your
Heroic Spirit, and honor the Commonwealth of Letters.

Norwich, May 12. 1663. MADAM, I am with profound Respect Your Ladyships most
Humble and most Obedient Servant S. Tuke.

To the worthily Honored Dr. Charleton, Physician in Ordinary to his MAJESTY.
HONORED SIR,
HAving received the noble Present from Dr. Yerbury's hand, which you were
pleased to recommend to his care; and with it, the very signal Favor of your
obliging Letter; I hereby hasten to render my acknowledgments in reference to
both, which yet must needs fall short, of being in any degree, a just return to
either. I have in the enclosed attempted to speak mine, and the Universities
Duties, and most grateful recognitions to my Lord Duke: but can only hope they
may become acceptable from the advantage your Hand and Recommendation will give
them: and indeed I shall the more need your Friendship herein, because I
understand some Persons have, according to the method of ill Nature, pleased
themselves in doing me unhandsome Offices, with the Excellent Princess her
Grace. Whose great and piercing Understanding will, I hope, unravel their vile
Arts, who can only recommend themselves by traducing others. Sir you will speak
a great Truth, and do no less an Obligation both to this Place and me, if you
shall be pleased to assure my Lord Duke and his incomparable Princess, that
this University and my self have all imaginable gratitude for their Favors,
and Veneration for their Persons: I shall with the same sincerity make
profession of the just regard I bear your self, and desire to be esteemed

Dec. 26. SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, J. FELL.

MADAM,
I Received the Honor of your Graces last Letter; but have not time now for so
large a return, as so ingenious a Discourse might justly require, only I cannot
forbear intimating to your Grace, that I am not so fond a mechanist, as to
suppose all the Phoenomena of the World to be raised merely by those Laws; but
most of them perhaps by a Principle that is vital; And the Anima Mundi I take
to be a very likely, and convenient Hypothesis. Of this I am ready to give your
Grace an account, that you shall be pleased to permit it. But the business of
this is somewhat of another nature, being to implore a Favor from your Grace,
not upon mine own, but a public account. There is in this Place a Library
erected, chiefly for the diversion of Gentlemen that come hither upon the
occasion of the Bath. There are in it several worthy Authors, but it wants the
great Honor and Ornament of the Illustrious Duchess of New-Castle's Works. I
know, Madam, your Grace has always writ out of a Principle of Noble
Generosity, and Charity toward Mankind; and are very ready to dispense your
Influence to those that need your Informations: To this I understand most of
the considerable Libraries of England can bear a Testimony; and therefore I am
bold upon the confidence I have in your Grace's goodness, to become an humble
Solicitor in the behalf of ours, which will be very much ennobled by so
glorious an Instance of your Grace's Favor, if you shall please to Honor it
with those Ingenious Works, by which your Grace does so much outshine your Sex,
and many, that would be thought the greatest Wits, of ours. You see, Madam,
what an apprehension I have of your Grace's Benignity and Candor, in that I can
appear before your Grace in a request for a Favor to others, when I am my self
so infinite a Debtor to those many obligations your Grace has been pleased to
lay upon me, for all which I have nothing to return, but the most humble and
devout Acknowledgments, of,

Bath, October. 13. Illustrious Madam, Your Grace's most Obedient And most
Obliged Servant, Jos. Glanvill.

MADAM,
I Received a fresh obligation from your Grace in the excellent History you
were pleased to order for me. In which your Grace has done right to one of the
most Illustrious Hero's of our Age, and erected a lasting Monument to his
Virtue. And in it, Madam, your Grace has sweetly and wonderfully twisted the
Faithfulness of an Historian, with the Affections of a Wife; And your
Illustrious Lord has in this an Honor beyond the other great Subjects of
History, That his Grace has not only as much deserved to be Celebrated as
they, But has moreover the happiness of the nearest Relation to an Heroine,
whose Pen is as Glorious as his Sword. And it is not easy to say which is really
the greater Wonder, the Famous Loyalty of that great Person, or the uncommon
Excellence of the Pen that described it. But I must take up from a Subject, in
which, when I have said all I can, I shall be defective; and return to the last
Letter wherewith your Grace was pleased to Honor me. For the business of
Witches upon which your Grace reflects again in this, I have spoken many things
more about it in some Additions to my Considerations, which I am now sending to
the Press. As soon as that Discourse is extant, I shall beg your Graces
acceptance of it. In the interim those things may be superseded.

By Lower Nature in my last, Madam, I meant, the mere Animal, and Plastic
Faculties, whose violent Impetus is the cause of many of our irregularities and
vices. As to the rest, I acquiesce in your Grace's Determinations; And whereas
your Grace is pleased to Excuse the liberty of Arguings; it is Madam with me
that which least of all things needs to be excused. For I profess the largest
freedom of Discourse and Inquiry. As for violent and captious Disputes and
Oppositions, I indeed much dislike the immodesty, and immoralities of them; But
for free and ingenious exchange of the Reasons of our particular Sentiments,
it is that which discovers Truth, improves Knowledge, and may be so managed as
to be no disinterest to Charity. Your Grace Madam, I know is a Person of so
much Honor and Judgment, as not to take any thing amiss from my liberty in
expressing my apprehensions, which I use not to obtrude upon any, but to
propose to their Consideration and Enquiries; and for my self there is nothing
obliges me more than the knowledge of variety of Conceptions. There is a
Discourse of mine extant upon a Subject not very ordinary, which contains
Notions which some excellent Persons have not despised, and are not usually met
with in other Writings. I am inquiring after it for your Grace, and as soon as
I can procure one (which is not very easy, that being out of Print) I shall
submit it to your Grace's Judgment. I never saw that Book of Experimental
Philosophy, which your Grace mentions. And to this, Madam, I have no more to
add at present, but that I am

Bath, Aug. 25. Your Grace's most Humble Honourer and Servant, Jos. Glanvill.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,
IT was most fit and equal that as your great Name and Merit transcends the
glories of other Persons; it should be also as singular in its Description; and
have an Historian some way proportioned both in Honor and unparalled
Capacities to its self: which just felicity having happened to your Grace, by
the Pen of your Illustrious Princess, it remained that one narrow dialect,
should not confine that Relation to this our Island, which was to give Example
to the Heroes of all Nations. And now that in this respect also, your Name is
happily Consecrated to Eternity, We of this Place, are to look upon it as a
signal Honor, to be made Sacrists to it: and to think it a particular Reward
of our suffering in that cause, which you so gloriously asserted, and
accompanied in its fall, to be judged a proper repository, for the Noblest
History of its greatest and most busy transactions, and of the Person most
gloriously concerned in them. And certainly while Oxford is an University of
Loyalty, as well as Learning, which I hope it will never forget to be, your
Graces virtues and achievements, will be their equal argument of Study, and
Imitation: as now your Favors are of their most grateful recognition and
acknowledgment: which in their behalf, with all possible Devotion, are laid at
your Graces Feet, by

Dec. 26. Your Grace's Most Obedient most Humble, And most Faithful Servant, J.
Fell.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,
IT was my misfortune to be abroad in Kent when the Letter wherewith your Grace
vouchsafed to Honor me, came to London. And therefore as I came late to taste
the Pleasure of so high a Favor, I hope your Grace will permit me to plead
that delay in excuse of this slow return of my most humble Acknowledgments and
Thanks for it. My most Noble Lord (were it not known by experience that great
Persons, and great Minds, are most apt to stoop from their own height, and own
mean and inconsiderable services offered to them) I should say it was too low a
Condescension in your Grace, to take notice of my readiness to comply with your
Desires: Wherein (beside the discharge of my Duty) I did likewise serve the
ends of my Ambition; it having ever been the Vanity of Soldiers to think
themselves dignified by the Honors done to their General. This made me with
great Delight employ my self in Designing that for your Grace, which I should
be sorry to live to accomplish, being already unhappy enough, in Burying too
many Princes. For the thing it self I am glad to see the King do that which is
so decent and worthy of him, as to order your Grace a Tomb among the Kings, who
have always been so near to him, and who stood up so close to his Father in
extremity of Danger, and so bravely, that had not God designed to restore the
Crown, in his own Miraculous way, it had certainly been done before by your
Hand. However your Grace has prepared for your self a more Noble, and more
lasting Monument, in the Fame of your Heroic Actions, of some of them I had
the happiness to be an Eyewitness, upon which pretense I humbly beg the Honor
to retain unto your Grace in the Quality of

Bromley in Kent, July 2. 1671 My LORD, Your Grace's most Obedient Soldier and
Servant, Joh. Roffen.

To the Incomparable Princess, MARGARET, Duchess of NEW CASTLE.
MADAM,
AMong many other things, by which your Grace is pleased to distinguish your
self from other Writers, this seems to be not the least remarkable; that
whereas they employ only their wit, labor, and time, in composing Books, You
bestow also great sums of Money in Printing Yours: and not content to enrich
our Heads alone, with your rare Notions, you go higher, and adorn our
Libraries, with your elegant Volumes. To that general Charity, which disposes
you to benefit all Mankind, you have added a singular Bounty, whereby you
oblige particular Persons: and out of a Nobleness peculiar to your Nature, you
cause your Munificence to Rival your Industry.

This, Madam, among many other your Excellencies, Gratitude commands me to
acknowledge; Your Grace having been pleased to number me among those, whom you
vouchsased to honor with such extraordinary Presents. For which I know not how
to show my self duly thankful, otherwise than by celebrating your Generosity,
and returning you some account of the good effects they wrought in me, while I
perused them. Which considering the Noble End for which you wrote them, and my
inability to make you a more proportionate retribution; will not, I hope, be
unacceptable to you. To this purpose, therefore, I am bold to send your Grace
this rude Paper. Which yet I design, not as a Panegyric of your worth (for what
affects us with admiration, strikes us also with dumbness: and Stars are best
discerned by their own luster) but as a short Scheme of my own grateful
Sentiments. And if I be not so happy, to deliver them in Language agreeable to
the dignity of the Subject, I humbly beseech you to consider, that such
occasions offer themselves very rarely; and that nothing is more difficult,
than to make the Pen observe Decorum, where Reason is put into disorder,
Justice, Madam, requires you should pardon the effects of that astonishment,
whereof your Wonders are the cause.

They tell us, that the End of all Books is either profit, or pleasure: but I
think that distinction (as many other in the Schools) might well be spared:
because, in truth, profit supposes pleasure; and pleasure is the greatest
profit; nor am I ashamed to profess, that in all my reading I have no other aim
but pleasure. It will not then, I hope, Madam, be thought derogatory to the
Profitableness of your Grace's Books, If I acknowledge my self to have received
very great pleasure in reading them. And this pleasure was so charming, it so
far transported me, as often to make me wish, you might never entertain a
resolution of causing your works to be Translated into any other Language: that
so all Ingenious Foreigners, invited by the Fame of your most delightful
Writings, might be brought to do Honor to the English Tongue, by learning it
on purpose to understand them. For I am zealous for the Reputation of my native
Language, and of so communicative a temper, as to desire all men should
participate of what I find delectable. Besides, I could not but remember, that
I had known a great Man of our Nation, who studied Italian, only to acquaint
himself with the Mathematiques of Galileo, in his Del Movimento, and
Saggiatore; and Spanish, merely out of love to the Incomparable History of Don
Quixot: and was thereupon the more apt to promise my self that your Grace's
Works, no less admirable in their kind, than either of those, would have the
like influence upon some of the Bons Esprits beyond Sea. But this, Madam, was
only my Wish: it is not now my Counsel. Should I here particularly recount to
you, what the things were, that raised this so great delight in me, I should
both offend by prolixity, and tacitly cast disparagement upon the rest. For,

Pauperis est, numerare Pecus,

He is but poor, who can account his Wealth:

And what the witty Roman Stoic said of the excellent sayings of Zeno,
Cleanthes, Chrysippus and other Princes of that Sect, may be conveniently
accommodated to the delightful Remarks every where occurring in your Books,
viz. That no choice can be made, where all things are equally Eminent. However,
because there is no satisfaction in Generals, and that Order is necessary to
plainness: give me leave to divide my Text into three parts, your Natural
Philosophy, your Morals, and your Poctry.

For your NATURAL Philosophy; it is ingenious and free, and may be, for ought I
know, Excellent: but give me leave, Madam, to confess, I have not yet been so
happy, as to discover much therein that is Apodictical, or wherein I think my
self much obliged to acquiesce. But, that may be the the fault of my own dull
Brain: and Oracles have been after found true, that were at first Dark and
Enigmatical. Again I am somewhat slow of belief also; a continual seeker: as
conceiving, I have too much cause to be of Seneca's opinion, that Men may,
indeed enquire and determine what is most probable, but God alone knows what is
true, in the things of Nature. Nor am I single in this Skeptical Judgment. The
ROYAL SOCIETY it self (the Tribunal of Philosophical Doctrines) is of a
constitution exceedingly strict and rigid in the examination of Theories
concerning Nature; no respecter of Persons or Authorities, where Verity is
concerned; seldom, or never yielding assent without full conviction: and that is
the Reason why it made choice of these three Words for its Motto, Nullius in
verba.

This Madam, can be no discredit to your Philosophy in particular, because
common to all others: and he is a bold Man, who dares to exempt the Physics of
Aristotle himself, or of Democritus, or Epicurus, or Des Carts, or Mr. Hobbs,
or any other hitherto known. For my part, Seriously, I should be loath to
affirm, that they are any other but ingenious Comments of Men's Wits upon the
dark and inexplicable Text of the World; plausible Conjectures at best; and no
less different, perhaps, from the true History of Nature, than Romances are
from the true actions of Heroes. Nor will I adventure to determine, which of
the two, Aristotle or your Grace, has given us the best definition of the
Humane Soul: He, when he calls it Entelechia; or you when you say, it is a
Supernatural something, etc. So difficult is it to make a judgment of what
seems incomprehensible.

Nor are you to be discouraged, Madam, If your Philosophy have not the fate to
be publicly read in all Universities of Europe, as your Grace, doubtless out
of amost Heroic ambition to benefit Mankind, desires it should. For, while Men
are Men, there will be different Interests, and consequently different
Opinions: nor is the multitude of Followers a certain sign of the Soundness,
but of the Gainfulness of any Doctrine. If, therefore, the World, which is
obstinate (you know) and governed by prejudice, will not be induced to esteem,
what you think useful; the blame lies not at your Door, and you ought to
consolate your self with this reflection; that you have sufficiently testified
your good intentions, and done more than your Duty, in publishing your
Conceptions. Befides, the Virtuosi of our English Universities have, of late
years, proclaimed open War against the tyranny of Dogmatizing in any Art or
Science: and as for those of the Roman Religion; there is, I fear me, but
little hope, of making them your Proselites. Because those canting Politicians,
called Schoolmen, having made a new and party-colored Vest for the Church, of
a kind of Drugget, consisting of the Thrums of Peripatetic Philosophy,
cunningly interwoven among the Golden threads of the Christian Faith; and
prevailed, upon Princes to make it Piacular for any Scholar to appear with his
Judgment clad in any other Livery: it is not very unlikely, the Professors
there will soon be brought to offend their Superiors, by laying aside the
defense of Aristotle's Maxims, to assume the Patronage of New. So that in my
silly conceit, as the Cabbage is observed to starve the Vine, if set too near:
so the Philosophy of Thomas Aquinas and others of the same mystical Tribe, will
hinder the growth of yours, in the same Ground.

For your MORAL Philosophy (for so I take liberty to call your occasional
Reflections upon the Actions, Manners, and Fortunes of Men) Your Grace has not,
indeed tied up your Pen to the laborious rules of Method, or the formality of a
new Systeme in Ethics: but (what is as well) you have opportunely, and under
various heads, dispersed many useful remarks, concerning Prudence, as well
Civil, as Domestic, in most of your Writings. And this, it may be presumed, you
were pleased to do, not for want of Skill to reduce your rules of life into the
order of dependence and connection; but with design, to show your plenty, and
surprise your Readers with good counsel even where they least expect it. You
chose rather to regale us with delicate Fictions, under the veil whereof
wholesome instructions are neatly contrived, than to embarass and tire us with
the observation ofa long train of Precepts, which are never so effectual, as
when naturally flowing from agreeable Instances and Examples. Your very
interludes contain adviso's, and your digressions are seasonably instructive:
like wise Husbandmen, you plant Fruit Trees in your Hedge-rows, and set
Strawberries and Rasberries among your Roses and Lillies. This, Madam, is a
piece of no small art, though not obvious to common Eyes: and if any dislike
the course you have taken in thus scattering and disguising your Morals; I
would have him asked this Question, Whether or no it be folly for a man to
refuse to gather Oranges and Citrons, only because the trees that offer them,
are not ranged in the Order of Cyrus's Quincunx? or whether a Nosegay be less
fragrant, because plucked from Flowers growing dispersedly? To all who have
read your Comical Tales, with the same purity of Mind, with which you wrote
them; and are withal qualified to search into the Mythology of all your
imaginary Dialogues: to all such, I say, it is evident, that you have drawn the
Images of all the Virtues, on one hand, and their opposite Vices, on the other,
so much to the life; that men, beholding them, must be, by grateful violence,
compelled to love the Pulchritude of those, and abhor the deformity of these.
Now, this, Madam, you could not have done had you not first had the Idea's of
all Virtues within your self: it being absolutely necessary for a Painter,
first to conceive the form or similitude of the thing he intends to represent,
in his own Imagination; and then to make the resemblance according to that
form. So that in strictness of truth, those Pictures we call Originals, are but
Copies, yea Copies of Copies: as being first drawn from the life in the
Phantasy, and after pourtrai'd upon Tables. Besides this, your Grace is further
happy, in that the Morals of your Pen are clearly exemplified in those of your
Life; in which I have never heard any thing blamed, any thing disputed, unless
whether it has been more Innocent, or more Obliging. In fine, the Documents of
both your Pen and Life seem to be so good, that whoever is able to moderate his
Passions, and regulate his Actions by them, needs not to seek further after
Happiness: nor need I fear to pronounce him arrived at such perfection, that it
will not be easy for him to be brought to do ill, either out of Weakness, or
out of Design.

For your POETRY; therein your Grace has more than a single advantage above
others.

First, Your Vein appears equally facile, equally free, and copious upon all
occasions, in all sorts of arguments. The Buskin and the Sock are equally fit
for your Muses Legs. Your Phansy is too generous to be restrained: Your
Invention too nimble to be fettered. Hence it is, that you do not always
confine your Sense to Verse; nor your Verses to Rhythme; nor your Rhythme to
the quantity and sounds of Sillables. Your Descriptions, Expressions, Similies,
Allegories, Metaphors, Epithets, Numbers, all flow in upon you of their own
accord, and in full Tides: and Verses stand ready minted in the Treasury of
your Brain, as Tears in some Women's Eyes, waiting to be called forth. So that
in you is verified the Doctrine of Plato, in his Dialogue entitled Io; that
Poesy is not a faculty proceeding from judgment, or acquired by labor and
industry; but a certain divine Fury, or Enthusiasm, which scorning the control
of Reason, transports the Spirit in Raptures, as Jove's Eagle did Ganymed, or
as Witches are said to be wafted above the Clouds on the wings of their
Familiars. Which is, perhaps, the ground of that old saying, nemo fit Poeta, no
Poet is made, but born so: as the rage and liberty of a Poetic Genius gave
occasion to paint Pegasus with Wings, in a flying posture, and without a Bridle.

Secondly, In your whole Oglio of Poems, I find nothing which is not entirely
Your own. Like good Housewifes in the Country, you, make a Feast wholly of
your own provisions: yea, even the Dressing, Sawces, and Garniture of the
Dishes are Your own. And were Perilius Faustinus revived (he, who out of envy
to the Glory of Virgil, made and published a large Catalogue of his Thefts from
Homer and Hesiod) he could hardly discover so much as a single Verse borrowed,
by you, from any Poet, ancient or modern. So circumspect you are to avoid being
thought a Plagiary, that you walk not in beaten Paths, but decline even the
rules and methods of your Predecessors, and scorn Imitation, as a kind of
Theft. A commendation, Madam, due to very few, perhaps to none besides your
self. As your Grace, therefore, owes all your Poesy to the inspiration of your
own happy Genius alone; so we owe all the Pleasure we are sensible of in
reading your Poems, to you alone. I may have many rivals in these my thankful
acknowledgements, you can have no Competitor in the Glory of their occasions.

This double Felicity is augmented by the accession of two others, no less
worthy admiration. One is, that as you have made your self an Original, so are
you likewise secure from being Copied. You have indeed, given the world an
illustrious Example; but you have given what it cannot take, the Example being
of that height, that it is hardly attainable. You provoke our Emulation, and at
the same time cast us into despair. Your Poetical Fancies rather brave, than
instruct our capacities: and by setting before our Eyes things inimitable, you
vex our ambition, and oblige us to an unprofitable trouble.

Another is, that you exceed all of your delicate Sex, not only in this age,
but in all ages past. It would puzle the best Historian to find your Parallel
among the most famous Women: and in the Monuments of the Roman greatness, even
while that Glorious Nation held the Empire as well of Virtue and Wit, as that
of the World, I cannot meet with an Heroine, to whom I dare to compare you.
There are, I confess, who tell us of a Noble Roman Lady, one Sulpitia, who
composed a History of Domitian's times, in Hexametre Verses, and wrote many
Elegant Poems besides; and who has been highly celebrated by Martial,
Tibullus, Sidonius Apollinaris, and of late by Scaliger also, as an eminent
Pattern both of a Chaste and Immaculate Life, and of a neat Poetical Wit: and
once I had some thoughts of drawing a Parallel betwixt that Lady and your
Grace. But, upon a second examination of the particular Remarks, wherein I had
fansied the resemblance chiefly to consist; and a more serious review of the
Story of her Life, and the remains of her Pen, (extant among the Fragments of
Latin Poets, and usually annexed to Petronius Arbiter) I perceived, I could
not proceed in that resolution, without disadvantage on your part, by a
conference so unequal; and thereupon resumed my former cogitation, that your
Grace's Statue ought to be placed alone, and at the upper end, in the Gallery
of Heroic Women, and upon a Pedestal more advanced than the rest. We read not
that Nature has been so Prodigal of her choicest Largesses, as to produce two
Cicero's, or two Virgil's, or two Ben Johnson's: why, then, should we seek
after your Equal? It was their glory to be single: and it must be yours, to
have no Peer, for ought we know, you are the First great Lady, that ever Wrote
so much and so much of your own: and, for ought we can divine, you will also be
the Last.

These, Madam, are a few of those swarms of thoughts that crowded into my
unquiet Head, when I proposed to my self to express some part at least of the
great Honor and Reverence I owe your Grace. If I have so far obeyed the
impulse of my Gratitude and Devotion, as to put them into Words, and offer them
to your knowledge; it was not, I assure you, out of a vain conceit, that they
were answerable either to your vast Merits, or to my Obligations; but merely
upon Confidence, you would descend to exercise your Goodness and Candor, in
receiving them as a simple recognition of both. And if I have suppressed the
rest; it was out of good Manners, and a due fear of farther offending your
Patience. I am not ignorant, Madam, that our Prayers to God, and our Addresses
to Princes ought to be short. Resigning you, therefore, to the conversation of
your own more ingenious and useful thoughts, and to the Tranquil Fruition of
those intellectual pleasures, that continually spring up in you from the
Virtues of your Life, and the Fame of your Writings; I most humbly beg your
favorable Interpretation of what I have here weakly said, and with all
Submission imaginable, cast my self at your Feet, as becomes

From my House in Covent Garden May 7. 1667. Your Graces, Just Honourer, and
most Entirely Devoted Servant, Walter Charleton.

MADAM,
I Had the Honor to hear so good Solutions given by your Excellency upon
diverse Questions moved in a whole Afternoon, you was pleased to bestow upon my
unworthy Conversation, that I am turning to School with all speed, humbly
beseeching your Excellence may be so bountiful toward my Ignorance, as to
Instruct me about the Natural Reason of those Wonderful Glasses, which, as I
told you, Madam, will fly into Powder, if one breaks but the least top of their
tails: whereas without that way they are hardly to be broken by any weight or
strength. The King of France is, as yet unresolved in the Question,
notwithstanding he has been curious to move it to an Assembly of the best
Philosophers of Paris, the Microcosme of his Kingdom. Your Excellence has no
cause to apprehend the cracking blow of these little innoxious Gunns. If you
did, Madam, a Servant may hold them close in his Fist, and your self can break
the little end of their Tail without the least danger. But, as I was bold to
tell your Excellence, I should be loath to believe any Female Fear should reign
amongst so much over-masculine Wisdom, as the World does admire in you. I pray
God to bless your Excellence with a daily increase of it, and your worthy self
to grant, that among those Admirers, I may strive to deserve, by way of my
humble Service, the Honor to be accounted,

Hague, March 12. 1657. MADAM, Your Excellencies most Humble and most Obedient
Servant Huygens de Zulichem.

I have made bold to join unto these a couple of poor Epigrams I did meditate
in my Journey hither, where your Excellencies Noble Tales were my best
entertainment. I hope Madam, you will perceive the intention of them, through
the Mist of a Language I do but harp and ghess at.
MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS,
THe Obligations by which your Grace has eminently engaged your Servants in
particular, and in General the whole world, or at least the Judicious and Civil
part of it, are so many and great, that to ennumerate them to this present Age
may seem a large History, and to Generations to come a real Romance. The
happiness was so great we received the last year, when we had, by your Graces
Permission, the Honor to pay our Duties to your happy self, that the
Contemplation of it by your Grace's absence, adds the more to our Infelicity.
But we shall not wholly despair to be restored to the same capacity of waiting
on your Grace, which we are extremely ambitious of: In the mean time presenting
my Wifes most humble Service to your Grace, I take the confidence to subscribe
my self,

April, 22. 1668. MADAM, Your Graces very great Honourer, And most Devoted
Humble Servant, BERKLEY.

MY LORD,
IT is not Strange to me that your Grace is pleased to surprise me with such
obliging civilities which are so essential to your Nature, and made customary
by so many frequent Habits, that it were as difficult for your Grace not to do
Acts like your great self, as it is for others (especially in this degenerating
Age) to imitate yours. I return your Grace my most humble Thanks for the high
Honor and Favor of your Books, received by my self, and Son, which are much to
be valued by judicious Persons, for the worth contained therein, and rendered
most Illustrious, for the great Authors sake, who will be much admired, not
only by the present Age, but by all succession of Ages, as long as Loyalty,
Sincerity, and high Acts of Honor are esteemed by Men, and have any attractive
Power, My Lord, I most humbly beseech your Grace to believe me to be

Berkeley-House at St. John's, April 22. 1668. Your Grace's high Honourer, And
most Obedient Servant, BERKELEY.

MY LORD,
THe Right your Grace has to be a Supreme Patron of Poesy, is given you, from
your Affection to the Muses, and the excellent merit of your own Compositions,
which have so many ways beautified Poesy, and delighted our Theaters, as they
have received from your Wit (if possible) equal Glory with your other
Gallantries and Actions, which have so much honored our Nation; for this Cause
I must beg your Graces Pardon, that I presume, to present you with this
inconsiderable Poem of mine, of which (though I wanted not Inclination) I durst
not adventure a direct Dedication to your Grace, with whom I had not the Honor
of an Acquaintance sufficient to encourage such a boldness, as also some doubt,
it might not deserve a Patronage from so excellent a Poet, which made me rather
venture its public Dedication to this Honorable Person of my Alliance, I have
mentioned before my Book, though this my private Address to your Grace, must be
my greater Ambition, since you are not only a most accomplished Judge, but an
Author: yet I presume to say that your Grace may challenge some concernment in
this Poem, as it treats of the past Glory of our Ancestors; in which the
Antiquity, and Honor of your Blood, could not but have a high Renown: and as
your Grace has scarce a Parallel, in all Acts of Generosity, and Nobleness, so
your Incomparable Lady, does no less excel in her Quality, and Sex, (the
unequaled Daughter of the Muses) besides all other her voluminous Productions,
which complete the Wonder of her Name, to whom I have presumed to present,
likewise, with your Lordship, a Book of my Poem, as an expression to both your
Graces, how much you are Honored by,

May 3. 1669. My LORD Your Graces Very Humble Servant, Edward Howard.

MADAM,
I Owe it to your Graces singular condescension, and goodness, that my Letters
are not displeasing, and I see a great deal of Generosity, in your Graces
acceptance, of such mean things, as my slender stock of Knowledge can impart.
As for your Inquiry about the Plastic Faculties; I Answer, that they are
those, whereby the Body is formed at first, and by which the Alimental Juices,
are after, through the whole course of Life, orderly distributed for the
purposes of growth and nutrition: But whether, as your Grace inquires, they are
Faculties inherent, in the Soul, or are only Mechanical Motions of the Body I
cannot determine certainly. But I rather incline to the Platonists, who will
have the Soul to be the Bodies Maker, and they affirm (as is ordinary; though
with some diversity in the Names and Presentation) That there are three sorts
of Faculties, which they Fancy as Analogous parts, or Regions in the Soul,
(Viz.) The Mind, so they call the highest Faculties of abstract Reason, and
Understanding, which is the First. The Second they call the Soul, (Viz.) as it
is united to the Body, and exercises the operation of Sense. The Third, is the
Image of the Soul, which is those Faculties, that are called Plastical, that
move and turn the Body, but are devoid of Understanding, or Sense; Now how the
Soul, which is Immaterial, can manage and order Corporeal Motions is a
difficulty of which Philosophy as yet has given no account, as I have
particularly taken notice, and proved in my Sceptis Scientifica, but yet the
thing ought not therefore to be denied, because the manner of the most obvious
sensible things is to us unknown; And by this we can only prove, that we have
yet nocertain Theory of Nature: And, in good earnest, Madam, all that we can
hope for, as yet, is but the History of things as they are, but to say how they
are, to raise general Axioms, and to make Hypotheses, must, I think, be the
happy privilege of succeeding Ages; when they shall have gained a larger
account of the Phoenomena, which yet are too scant and defective to raise
Theories upon: so that to be ingenious and confess freely, we have yet no such
thing as Natural Philosophy; Natural History is all we can pretend to; and that
too, as yet, is but in its Rudiments, the advance of it your Grace knows is the
design and business of the Royal Society; from whom we may reasonably at last
expect better grounds for general Doctrines, than any the World yet has been
acquainted with; but this, Madam, is an excursion. I therefore return to your
Graces Letter, which inquires some things, about my Notion of the Souls
Original: As to this I would not be understood to affirm peremptorily a thing,
which the greatest part of Men, neither have, nor can receive, only I consider
it as an Hypothesis, that may be taken up to satisfy those minds that are much
troubled at the seeming inequalities of Providence; and whether true, or false,
this I will take the boldness to be confident in, That the Doctrine of the
Souls Praeexistence, does best suit with the appearances of the World. And best
Answers for the Divine Justice and Goodness, in all the affairs of Providence;
In this Madam, I am a little Dogmatical, and this step further, I think I may
take, without immodesty; That the Doctrine has so much to say for it self,
from Reason, and the highest Antiquity, as to render it fit to be considered,
and indeed, since the two other ways, are confessedly desperate, methinks
there should be no harm in examining this; which is all I pretend to. But
particularly to your Grace's Quaery, Whether were Souls Created or Uncreated? I
Answer, no doubt Created: But then I do not see how that follows, which your
Grace is pleased to infer, Viz. That Sin was then Created, For our Souls in
their State were Spotless and Innocent, as the Angels of God. That Mankind was
so first, and fell by a voluntary Transgression, is the common Doctrine; and
how we may suppose it was particularly in the way of Praeexistence, your Grace
will see easily, when I shall have procured that Book of mine, I have
mentioned, and promised your Grace, but cannot yet light on. The other part
also of your Graces Division: Viz. That if those Souls were Eternal, they are
Gods; is I humbly conceive a mistake likewise, since though the World, had been
Created from Eternity (which even the Schools confess possible) it had
nevertheless been a Creature, by reason of its dependence upon another, for its
being, and to have been produced, and yet from Eternity, is no absurdity, our
Faith affirms it, in the Eternal Generation of the Son, and Procession of the
Holy Ghost, and to take an instance with which we may make more bold: If the
Sun had been from Eternity no doubt it would have shone Eternally, and yet it is
Beams had been effects and dependent; And whereas your Grace says again, That
what is Immaterial is a God: I must here also take the boldness, to enter my
Dissent to your Proposition; Indeed Mr. Hobbs denis all Immateriality to
Created Beings, but I think upon grounds precarious and unsafe, That our Souls
are Immaterial in their Natures, has been sufficiently proved by some late
Philosophers; particularly by the most learned Dr. H. Moore, and I also have
done something about this, in my Book of Praeexistence, If your Grace demands
my Reasons; they shall be ready at the least intimation, of those commands
which I shall ever account a singular Honor to observe. For the antiquity of
Praeexistence, which your Grace rightly observes, to be no certain Argument of
the truth of it, I humbly say I have not alleged it, for a demonstration of
the thing, but to take off the prejudice we are apt to have against all
supposed Novelties, and to show that it is not so despicable, an Hypothesis but
that several great minds of former times, even in the Ages of the best
Antiquity have owned a kindness for it, and consequently that we cannot,
without some immodesty, deny it a favorable hearing, But madam, I forget my
self, and the consideration I ought to have of your Grace's Time and Patience,
and therefore only add, that I am,

Bath, October. 13. 1667. Illustrious Madam, Your Graces Most Obedient Servant,
Jos. Glanvill

MY LORD,
HAd I not been out of Town a great part of the last Summer, and almost all
this Winter, I had written to your Grace long since. The Town might have
furnished me with occasions of writing that had not been impertinent. For only
to say that I am the humblest of your Graces Servants, and that no man has a
greater Honor for you than I have, would be Impertinent, since all that know
me, know it of me already, and I hope your Grace believes it. But (my Lord) the
Printing of the Humourists has given me a new occasion of troubling you, and
desiring your Favor to be an Advocate, for me, to my Lady Duchess, to procure
me her Pardon, and a favouroble reception of that little Comoedy. My Lord, (as
long asyou are so great a Mecaenas) it will be impossible to defend your self
from the Importunate Addresses of Poets: And Poetry is in such a declining
condition, that it has need of such Noble Supporters as are at Welbeck: Your
Grace saw this Comoedy (before the Sting was taken out) and was pleased to
approve it, which is to me more than the Plaudit of a Theater: As it is, it
stands more in need of Pardon, and Protection, which I hope your Grace, and my
Lady Duchess will have the Mercy to afford it. I have (in this Play) only
shown what I would do if I had the liberty to write a general Satyr, which
(though it should really reflect upon no particular persons, yet) I find the
Age is too faulty to endure it. If, for this reason, I were not tied to too
great a strictness for a Poet, I should not despair of presenting you with
something much more worth your view than this mangled Play; but all that I can
do can never make any proportionable return to the favors, received from you,
by,

London, April 20. 1671. My LORD, Your Graces most Obliged Humble Servant, Tho.
Shadwell.

MADAM,
IAm to beg your Graces Pardon for my felf, and this imperfect Piece, for which
I have borrowed the Patronage of your Name; I am not ignorant of the
disadvantage that Name might appear with (before such a Trifle as this Play) if
it were not too well known, and had been too often prefixed to excellent Pieces
of your own to suffer any detraction now: This Dedication will only in some
measure express the Honor that the Humblest of your Servants has for your
Grace, and the Power you have to protect so defenseless a Poem. But (Madam) I
confess it is too great a Presumption, for me, to hope that your Grace (that
makes so good use of your time with your own Pen) can have so much to throw
away as once to read this little offspring of mine: And (but that before I
found not only Pardon for an Offense of this kind but encouragement) I should
despair of having this forgiven. When none of all the Nobility of England gives
encouragement to Wit, but my Lord Duke and your excellent self, you are pleased
to receive favorably and encourage the very endeavors toward it: and under
that notion this poor Play begs your Pardon and Reception. Though it met with
opposition from the Malice of one party, yet several men of Wit were kind to
it. But whatsoever opposition threatens that, or me, it can never prejudice
either, if that be Protected by your Grace, and I be thought what I really am,

London, April 20. 1671. MADAM, Your Graces most Humbly Devoted Servant, Tho.
Shadwell.

MADAM,
BEing an Hundred and fifty Miles from London, at a place called Chaddeston,
near Manchester: I had an account, but the last Post, of the receipt of your
Graces Noble present: otherwise you had received a more early Acknowledgment
with my humble Thanks; which are all the return I can make for that, and many
other Favors I have received from Welbeck: It had been Bounty enough (and as
much as I could have expected) for your Grace to have Pardoned the presumption
of my Dedication, which entitled you to the Patronage of so slight a thing:
but to reward my Crime, is beyond expression Generous. Thus your Grace, like
Heaven, rewards the intention without considering the imperfection of the Act.
My Design was, in some measure, to testify my Gratitude, and the Honor I have
for your Grace: but even this Acknowledgment has run me more in debt. Your
Grace is thus resolved to be beforehand with all your Servants. Let them be
never so dilligent, your Benefits will out-go their Services; and they can
never over-take your Bounty. I, for my part, am in despair of ever coming near
it: But nothing shall ever hinder me from making use of all occasions, I can
lay hold on, to testify the great Honor I have for my Lord Duke, and your
Grace, and that I am,

May, 25. 1671. MADAM, Your Graces most Humble, and most Obedient Servant Tho.
Shadwell.

MADAM,
COnsidering that the Divine Gods accept of Offerings, though never so trivial,
when that their poor and obliged Creatures offer them with true Devotion,
incourages me here, by your Favors and Goodness, to believe alike of your
Ladyship, and to hope your Pardon and acceptance of this Sacrifice of Thanks,
which in all Humility I thus Dedicate for the Honor of your Book, of which I
dare not say I am now unworthy, since I find where it comes, it has the
Efficacy of Great Seals, and Patents, to meliorate both Persons and Places, and
such Esteem and Reverence as they come welcomed with, I must always and much
more account due to your Ladyships Orations, and to be Eternally paid by,

MADAM, Your Ladyships Most Devoted, Humble, and Obliged Servant Bullingbrooke.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,
THough deprived so many years of your most Noble Presence, yet left your Grace
so perfect an Idea in our Thoughts of your great Virtue, and those rare
faculties of your Understanding, wherewith Nature has adorned your Grace, so
that we ever do admire the same, it being often our most pleasing delight to
discourse thereof, besides the remembrance of your many great and undeserved
Favors formerly received; and though we stand infinitely Obliged for the same
unto your Grace, yet you are pleased to increase our Obligations, by Honoring
us with the Noble Gift of five several Books together, of your Graces last
Edition, which especially for what belongs to those Sublime matters of Natural
Philosophy are only for the most Learned, and Judicious Understandings, and for
us to admire, and keep them as a singular mark of your Graces great Benevolency
toward us, and an Emblem of your high Perfections, after our Lives to be left
as a Testimony of the same. In the mean time we humbly entreat your Grace to
preserve us all in your good Opinion, and Honor me with a belief that I am as
long as I live, to the utmost of my weak Ability,

Antwerp, October. 20. 1671. Your Graces, Most Humble and most Obedient Servant,
J. Duartes.

My Sisters with the tender of their most Obedient Service, Humbly kiss your
Graces Hand.
MADAM,
UNto the Rich and Incomparable Present of your Excellencies Works, wherewith
you have been pleased to Honor the University, I have, by the special
appointment of Mr. Vice Chancellor, given a just reception; which word I
confess we could not use without being guilty of great rudeness, but that we
have placed them by that Illustrious Piece wherewith his Excellency your
Renowned Lord had before Honored us, which is it self Incomparable. Indeed
Madam, the University finds her self oppressed herein with so many Obligations
in one, that She knows not where to begin her Acknowledgments; as considering,
that not only her Repositories are dignified to be the Cabinet of so rich a
Jewel, but that She is singled out by your Excellency, and valued above the
rest of the World for her Approbation, and (as your Excellency pleases to style
it) to be a Judge of it. Alas, Madam, that is an Office we dare not assume, not
only without censure of Arrogance, but even of Impropriety; for seeing that
every one is to be judged by their Peers, who shall undertake to be Judge of
that that has no Peer? We may see other things by the Light, but to perceive
the Light it self we cannot call for another Light; so neither may this gallant
Work be Judged but by its own Innate Excellency, and the splendour it self
carrys in it. No, Madam, it is Honor enough for us that we are taught by it, we
will not usurp upon it; and shall count it our Pride and not our Shame to be
outdone by so Transcendent an Example. We acknowledge that we are become
instructed in the Sciences which our selves profess; Philosophy, Oratory,
Physic, Poetry, we write them over our Doors, but we find them herein at a
far cheaper rate sent home to those Doors, and that by a hardiness of
Invention which your Excellency first has showed unto the World, and that an
easy one too, by sending us to that common and neglected Mistress, even Nature
her self, to whose Benignity if we would confide (as your Excellency has done)
we should make far greater Progresses in the ways of Knowledge and Wisdom (as
likewise your Excellency has done) than through all the tedious Disciplines
wherewith we are detained and vexed in our rugged Nurseries. Two things do
justly leave us, Madam, under a surprise and admiration of your Excellencies
great Production; First, that it should proceed from a Person of so high Honor
and Fortune; for Ignorance in such things as those is appointed by the World
unto such Estates, and thought a kind of Prerogative belonging unto Wealth: And
next, that it should proceed from a Sex unaccustomed to, and commonly excused
from such painful and elevated Inquisitions. For (as your Excellency has
observed) men do assign to your Sex nothing but vanities, and Trifles for their
Portion, and under color of Courtship do confine them in their Education only
to some inferior Qualities, and so in effect but to a kind of delicate
Barbarism: But herein your Excellency has showed great Courage in breaking
through that Obstruction, and by a Female and unusual Chevalry have rescued
your whole Nation and Sex from the oppression and injury in this point, and of
that great Giant, the World. For our part of your University, we must needs
subscribe to your Excellencies judgment herein, for it is the Muses were
esteemed our best Genius's and Sciences did choose unto themselves for their
Deities not Patrons but Patronesses: and our Corporation of Learning, though it
consist all of Men, yet when we would express it in the Abstract and in Picture
we represent it by a Woman. And in fine, my self, Madam, (who am allowed the
Honor to be the Custos of your immortal Donary) must be obliged to borrow from
a Woman's Eloquence exemplified in the Work it self, whereby to express worthily
the Resentments due unto it by those that have employed me, and particularly
mine own, who am,

May 20. 1663. MADAM, Your Excellencies most Humble and Devoted Servant, Thomas
Lockey, Keeper of the Public Library.

MADAM,
EVer since I had the happiness to see any of your Graces most ingenious
Writings, I have felt a mighty Desire to speak my particular gratitude for
those singular Composures to all which the World is obliged; And had attempted
something toward it more than three years since, but that my acknowledgments
miscarried in the way. I am, Madam, an Admirer of Rarities, and your Grace is
really so great an one, that I cannot but endeavor some Testimony of a
proportioned respect and wonder, though perhaps there may be Indecorum in the
boldness of such unknown Addresses. I am sensible it can contribute nothing to
your Graces great stock of Fame to be acknowledged by inconsiderable Persons;
But yet we must be just, and it is Religion to celebrate the Virtuous. And I
know your Grace is too generous to contemn the offerings of the meanest
Devoto's, upon the encouragement of which Belief I am bold to beg Favor and
acceptance for a Trifle of mine that was designed for your Grace, as soon as it
saw the Light, but could not find it is way into the North. I should not have
the confidence to present so mean a thing to so deep and Sagatious a Judgment,
had I not an opinion of your Graces Candor and Goodness, equal to my
apprehension of your other Celebrated Perfections; and these are so Illustrious
and so great, that our Sex would envy, did they not admire, and your own too,
Madam, were they not universally concerned in the Honor. For your Grace has
convinced the World, by a great instance, that Women may be Philosophers, and,
to a Degree fit for the Ambitious emulation of the most improved Masculine
Spirits.

But, Madam, it is time to beg your Graces Pardon for the rudeness of this bold
intrusion; and I know, that grandeur and generosity of Mind that occasioned the
fault, will forgive it to

Bath, April 22. Illustrious Madam, The Humblest of your Graces Admirers, and
Servants, Jos. Glanvill.

MADAM,
THe greatest Favor I could have expected in Answer to my boldness, was but a
pardon for the confidence of that intrusion; But that your Grace should so
generously accept my Trifles, and make me so Glorious a return as I received in
your most ingenious Letters, this, Madam, was an Honor as much beyond my
expectation, as desert; and exceeds all my possibilities of acknowledgment. But
if ever any thing happen within the reach of my endeavors, by which I may
serve or gratify your Grace, I shall then give evidence of the great resentment
I have of this condescension, and the Veneration which is due to a Person of so
obliging and so unusual a Virtue. Your Grace, I know, is Nobly inquisitive, and
has a rich stock of generous Apprehensions; and Persons of this Character use
to be pleased in the persual of the variety of others Conceptions; And on this
account I presume, that those notions I sometimes entertain my self with, may
not be unacceptable, being not altogether of the road and common track. And if
your Grace please to permit, and pardon my Importunities, I shall take occasion
to give you my sense of some things that are not of the meanest concernments.
For the present I am obliged to answer the particulars of your Grace's Letter,
in which your Grace has very much obliged me by those arguments you are
pleased to excuse; and to them I make this humble return.

1. That whereas your Grace calls the Inducements to the belief of Witches,
probable Arguments, I am apt, with submission, to think some of them to be as
great demonstrations as matter of Fact can bear; being no less than the
evidence of the Senses, and Oaths of sober Attestors, and the critical
inquiries of Sagacious, and suspicious Persons; which Circumstances of
Evidence, your grace knows, some of those Relations have to prove them. And
there is a particular Story which is sufficiently famous, and of part of which
I my self was a Witness, which I think is not subject to just Exception. It Is
that of the Drum in the House of Mr. Mompession of Tedworth in Wiltshire. Of
this, Madam, I shall take an occasion to give your Grace a particular account,
if you have not yet been acquainted with the circumstances of that unusual
disturbance. But to confine my self now to your Grace's considerations on the
subject; The second thing I observe, is,

The intimation of an Argument against the Existence of Witches, because they
are not mentioned by Christ, and his Apostles, concerning which I humbly desire
your Grace to consider.

1. That Negative Arguments from Scripture use not often to be of any great
signification or validity. Our Savior spoke as he had occasion, and the
thousandth part of what he said, or what he did, is not recorded, as one
Evangelist intimates. He said nothing of those large unknown Tracts of America,
gives no intimations of the Existence of that numerous People, much less any
instructions about their Conversion. He gives no particular account of the
affairs and state of the other World, but only that general one, of the
happiness of some, and the misery of others. He makes no discovery of the
Magnalia of Art, or Nature, no not of those whereby the propagation of the
Gospel might have been much advanced; viz. The Mystery of Printing, and the
Magnet. And yet no one uses his Silence in these Instances as an Argument
against the being of things, which are the evident Objects of Sense. I confess
the omission of some of these particulars is pretty strange and unaccountable,
and an argument of our Ignorance of the Reasons and Menages of Providence, but
I suppose of nothing else; or if it were, I crave leave to add,

2. That the Gospel is not without intimations of Sorcery, and contracts with
evil Spirits. The malicious Jews said our Savior did his Miracles by their
assistance, He casts out Devils by Beezebub. And he denis not the supposition
or possibility of the thing in general, but clears himself by an appeal to the
Actions of their own Children, whom they would not so severely criminate. And
besides this,

3. The Apostles had intimations plain enough of the being of Sorcery and
Witchcraft, as seems to me evident from Gal. 3.1. Gal. 5.20. Rev. 9.21. Rev.
21.8. Rev, 22.15.

It Is very true as your Grace suggests, that Superstition and Ignorance of
Causes make Men many times to impute the Effects of Art, and Nature, to
Witchcraft and Diabolick Contract. And the Common People think God, or the
Devil to be in every thing extraordinary. But yet, Madam, your Grace may please
to consider, That there are things done by mean and despicable persons,
transcending all the Arts of the most knowing and improved Virtuosi, and above
all the Essays of known and ordinary Nature. So that we either must suppose
that a sottish silly old Woman has more knowledge of the intrigues of Art, and
Nature, than the most exercised Artists, and Philosophers, or confess that
those strange things they perform, are done by confoederacy with evil Spirits,
who, no doubt, act those things by the ways and applications of Nature, though
such as are to us unknown. This, Madam, is, I conceive, as much as is necessary
to be said to the Argumentative part of your Graces excellent Letter.

As for the following Periods, I am mostly of the same Opinion with your Grace,
in the way that I understand them. Nature is in a continual motion (for there
is no such thing as Rest in the World) and perhaps that is not purely
Mechanical, but may, in great part (at least as to the beginnings and
directions of it) be ascribed to the Soul of the World, which possibly is the
great Archeus that forms Plants, Animals, and other more curious Phoenomena.
And there is no doubt but (as your Grace suggests) that much wickedness is
caused by the mere impulse of Lower Nature; and I believe several Men are
determined to Actions of Vice by the odness of their particular make and
contexture. But whereas your Grace says that nothing but God himself can be
perfect, I cannot so well understand that. Absolutely so, and in all kinds,
it is true, I grant it, but your Grace does not seem to intend the proposition
in that sense. And to be Perfect in a lower kind is but to have all the parts
and faculties that are requisite to such a being, in that order, disposition,
and all other circumstances which are suitable to its Idea, and proper for its
respective ends. And in this sense I think all things are perfect in their
first constitution; according to what your Grace says afterward, That [God
cannot create any Imperfection, being absolute Perfection himself] which
appositely fits mine, but I can not see how it so well consists with your
Graces former assertion, except it be intended to infer, That God made nothing;
a Proposition which methinks your Grace should not own; but some things that
follow seem to look that way, when you are pleased to say [Neither can I
conceive how God could actually make or act any thing, either in a Mechanical
manner, or a Free, being not locally moving] To which I humbly say that if your
Grace doubts the possibility of the Creation out of nothing, I think I can
speak some things as a Philosopher, that may render it reasonable. Nor is
actual motion in the Deity necessary to his actions, since he is Immense and
needs not local motion to render him present by his Essence, or his Virtue, to
any place of the great Universe, being Eternally there by the Infinity of his
being, and his Power. And whereas your Grace is pleased to say, that God is no
Mechanic, I consent that He is not so properly, in that he needs not material
Instruments to act by. But yet he has made all things by a kind of Geometry;
in Number, Weight, and Measure, says the Holy Oracle. And there is a sort of
Mathematics in all the Works of Nature.

Thus, Madam, I have made bold with your Graces Patience, in confidence of your
Candor, and your goodness, which I implore, for the Pardon of this Voluminous
Trouble. And in order to it, I have this to say, that I could not well have
said less without having been wanting in some of your Graces Periods; and there
is something else, in which I despair of being ever able to say enough, and
that is, to express how much I am,

Bath, July 8. Illustrious Madam, Your Graces Humble Admirer, and Devoted
Servant, Jos. Glanvill.

To the Right Honorable, the Lady MARGARET, Marchioness, of New Castle.
EXCELLENT MADAM,
I Well know that the Generous never propose to themselves any other End of
their Favors, besides Content, which necessarily results from the pursuance of
their own Noble Inclinations, but only the Benefit of the Persons, upon whom
they choose to confer them: and that therefore they usually select such
Subjects, whereon to exercise their Beneficence, that seem more likely to
husband it, by a silent Devotion, and modest Acknowledgment, than to abuse it,
by attempting a Retribution. And this, Madam, both teaches and assures me;
that though the Favor you were pleased to do me, in sending me one of your
admirable Books, newly published, under the Elegant and most accommodate Title
of The WORLDS OLIO; be so eminent an one, as to require from me a more
significant Expression of my Gratitude, than either my Wit, or Fortune, or
Interest can ever be able to make: yet none can be more acceptable to you, than
this, That I intend ever to continue your Debtor. So much, therefore, I here
solemnly profess; and most faithfully promise you, that I never will, so much
as in a wish for a Capacity of Retaliation, profane the Freedom of the
Obligation your goodness moved you to lay upon me.

But, not to state the Particulars of my Debt, at least in brief; might give
you just cause to suspect, that I understand not the Value of what I have
received. And, therefore, I humbly ask your leave, that I may acknowledge to
you, that you have highly benefited me, in my Reputation, in my Understanding,
in my Affections.

First, I say you have benefited me in my Reputation; in that you have declared
me capable of so singular an Honor, as to be in the number of those Persons,
whom you thought worthy to receive so rich a Present, from so Noble a Hand. For
me to have sat among the Multitude, whom your Stationer invites to feast upon
your OLIO, had been proportionable enough to the degree of so ordinary a
Judgment, as mine: but to be among those few, whom your self had nominated for
your Chief Guests, was a Grace infinitely above my Ambition.

Secondly, You have benefited my Understanding; in that your Philosophical
Phancies have furnished me with variety of such Novel Conceits, concerning
sundry the most difficult Problems in Nature; as that if my Memory be but
faithful enough to retain them, I shall never be unprovided of somewhat that is
poynant and grateful, to entertain Curiosity withal: and whenever my own
Reason is at a loss, how to investigate the Causes of some Natural Secret or
other, I shall relieve the Company with some one pleasant and unheard of
Conjecture of yours. So that by reading of your Philosophy, I have acquired
thus much of advantage; that where I cannot Satisfy, I shall be sure to
Delight: which is somewhat more than I dare promise from any other Discourses
of the same Title; in so much as they generally leave the Mind in a kind of
Anxiety and Regret, when ever they fail to afford it Satisfaction. And,
certainly, if it be (as some hold) reasonable to allow, that the Fictions of
Poets, and Romancists do usually take as strong hold of men's Minds, and Charm
their Affections as powerfully, as the most Authentic Narrations of
Historians; though the Reader well understands the Passages related by these,
to be certain Truths, and the adventures described by Those, to be merely
Imaginary; and this, because Delight is equal on both sides: if this, I say, be
justifiable, that man can run but little hazard of his Judgment, who shall
affirm, that your Supposition of Fayeries in the Brain, and of our Thoughts
being their Consults and Suggestions; and your opinion that the Fayeries
digging for Stones in the Quarries of the Teeth, to repair their decayed
Tenements in the Head, is the Cause of the Toothache; are as worthy the
hearing, as the most solid demonstrative Theory of any Philosopher whatever;
insomuch as these may yield both as high and lasting a Delight as that. I say
Delight as High and Lasting; for, to speak my Thoughts clearly, the Pleasure
that arises from the comprehension of the most perfect and laborious
Demonstration in Geometry, I never could find, either in height or duration,
much to exceed that, which I have sometime been affected withal, at the
recital of a Facetious Poetical Extravagancy, of which I had not before heard.
Nor do I believe, that the Raptures, and Exultations of Don Quixot were much
inferior to that famous one of Archimed, which transported him out of himself,
as well as out of the Bath, into a loud Exclamation, I have found it, I have
found it. And the Reason of this Equality may be well enough thought, to
consist chiefly in the unsatisfiedness of our Nature, which always hurrying our
Minds on to Novelties, causes us to put an equally cheap rate upon all things
we think already in the possession of our Understanding; and to value acquest
of a fresh, though perhaps useless, and absurd Opinion, above the calm fruition
of ancient and irregular Maxims. But, this (Madam) being a Paradox, ought to
have more room, than can be spread in a Letter, whose designed Argument is
Thankfulness: and besides, should I adventure further, to avouch it, the same
could not but much redound to my disadvantage; insomuch as it might render me
suspected for something of a Scholar, and consequently incapable of the Honor
and Pleasure of sometimes attending you, and hearing your more than ingenious
Discourses. For as I remember, in one of your Prefaces, or Epistles to your
Readers, you have been pleased expressly to declare; That you never Conversed,
so much as one Hour, with any Philosopher, or Professed Scholar, in your whole
Life: and that, doubtless, must have proceeded from your constant Aversion to
such blunt Company; not from your want of opportunities to hear what they could
say. Because, being always Educated among the Noblest, and most Knowing Persons
of our Nation; you could hardly escape the Conversation of the most Learned in
all the Arts and Sciences; unless you purposely withdrew your self from their
Society, or shut your Ears against their Discourses.

But, Madam, among those, who have perused your Writings, I meet with a sort of
Infidels, who refuse to believe, that you have always preserved your self so
free from the Contagion of Books, and Book-men. And the Reason they give me, is
this; that you frequently use many Terms of the Schools, and sometimes seem to
have Imp'd the Wings of your high-flying Phansy with sundry Feathers taken out
of the Universities, or Nests of Divines, Philosophers, Phisicians,
Geometricians, Astronomers, and the rest of the Gowned Tribe. For instance, of
Divines, when you speak of Praedestination, Free will, Transubstantiation, etc.
Of Philosophers, when you mention Quantity, Discrete and Continued, the
Universal and First Matter, Attoms, Elements, Motion, Dilatation, and
Contraction, Rarefaction, and Condensation, Meteors, etc. Of Physicians, when
you distinguish of Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, and Blood, and speak of the
Circulation of the Blood, of Venricles in the Heart and Brain, of Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves, and expatiate upon Fevers, Apoplexies, Convulsions,
Droqsies, and diverse other Diseases, with their particular Causes, Symptoms,
and Cures: Of Geometricians, when you touch upon Triangles, Squares, Circles,
Diameters, Circumferences, Centres, Lines, straight and crooked, and their
proportions each to other, and that invincible Problem, the Quadrature of the
Circle: Of Astronomers, when you speak of the Horizon, Meridian, Equator,
Zodiac, Ecliptic, Tropicks, Poles of the World, and of the Ecliptic, and in
a manner run over the whole Doctrine of the Sphere, representing the model of
the Universe, and cast some transitory glances also upon the Doctrine Theorical
concerning the Motions of the Orbs, and Planets. Nor can I, indeed, hope to
dissolve the stifness of these men's unbelief; until I shall be better able to
convince them, that all these Scholastical Terms and Notions may be brought
into the World with us, and afterward drawn forth of the Soul, by solitary
Meditation, and the labor of ones own Thoughts; and are not rather instilled
into it, and impressed upon it, by often Hearing, or Reading the Discourses of
others, who profess those Arts and Sciences to which they belong, and for the
more plain and methodical teaching whereof, they were first Invented and
Recorded. But I fear me, while I insist thus particularly upon the Reason
alleged by these men, in defense of their Diffidence; I may fall into the
same danger, for the avoidance of which, I even now left my Paradox destitute
of Assertion: and therefore I lay by that subject, and take up another more
opportune and considerable, as to the discharge of my Duty, and confessing how
many ways you have obliged me.

I acknowledge, therefore, in the last place; that my Affections must own you
for their Benefactress. For those many Moral Apothegms, and Satirical Remarques
upon the Manners of Men and Women, which you have frequently inspersed upon the
Leaves of your Book, are so pathetically delivered, and with such vigor of
proper and familiar Language pressed home to the Bosom of every man; as that
that person must be irrecover ably lost in the darkness of Vice, who does not,
through thhm, clearly discern the Luster and Amiableness of Virtue, and
thereupon instantly abominate his former Deformities, and become your perfect
Proselite. When a Young, Noble, Beautiful, Witty, and Sprightly Lady, one on
whom all the Pleasures of the World seem to be Enamoured, and in throngs offer
themselves to be accepted and commanded by her; when such an one, I say is
heard to Preach up Temperance, Abstinence, Modesty, Chastity, Solitude, and the
suppression of all irregular sensual Appetites. What Sardanapalus is there, who
must not blush at the memory of his Vicious Acts, and being convinced, that the
delights of a Soul, well ordered according to the rules of Virtue and Honor,
are infinitely more charming and desirable, than the most magnified Pleasures
of the Body, swimming in an Ocean of Luxury, and Laciviousness; firmly resolve
with himself, thenceforth to seek for Felicity, not in the short Titillations
and Blandishments of the Senses, but in the Purity and constant Serenity of the
Mind. Is it possible, that any of our Ladies, should retain her pretenses of
Platonic Love, or continue the practice of her petty Arts of Daubing and
Painting, of Dissembling, Medisanse, and Detraction: after she has once read
your smart Invectives against them, and solid Arguments to show, that they may
all be justly suspected for Bawds to procure and conceal the fruition of that
Pleasure, which does not consist in the admiring conversation of Souls, but in
the close Conjunction of Bodies, and the satisfaction of that rank Appetite of
the Flesh, commonly called Lust? In a word; what Sex, Age, Constitution,
Condition is there, whose most secret Ulcers, the sharpness of your Wit and Pen
has not launced open to the bottom; and afterward prescribed most easy and
certain Remedies for the Cure of them? So that I may well conclude this
Paragraph with saying that your Moral Essays contain wise Precepts enough in
them, for the Reformation of the Age we live in, and that, certainly, is so bad
that no Man need ever fear a worse.

And, now, Incomparable Madam, having done my Homage to you, in token of what I
hold by the tenure of your Wit and Bounty, it remains, that I humbly beg your
Pardon for the rude and tedious manner of it. And that, I hope, you will grant
me, when you have considered, that the Devotion may be sincere, where the
Ceremonies are imperfect; and I have assured you, that I will never omit to pay
you those Dues of Thanks, and constant Observance, that belong to you, from me,
as one whom your Goodness has made,

London, January 1. 1654. Your Eternal Honourer, and Faithful Servant, W.
Charleton.

To the most Illustrious, and most Excellent Princess, Margaret Duchess of
New Castle.
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,
SEeing your Graces singular Genius, has long since been experienced, and
fully discovered to us; for such as is both accomplished with all various
Learning, and furnished with a Native Courtesy; that for its high abilities, it
is able; and for its eminent Candor, it usually obtains infinitely upon the
favorers of Learning: We obliged on both these accounts, were unwilling to
incurr so great a Crime, as not cheerfully to Consecrate to your Grace, these
our Acknowledgments, as Arguments of our Eternal Observance. Your Graces
goodness having this, peculiar and above others, that it is neither forced by
Solicitations of Friends, nor Importunities of Petitions, but voluntary and of
its own accord flows out, and delivers it self. Truly every more than
ordinary Spirit is powerfully drawn out to what is like it self, invites,
embraces, and preserves, whatever bears the name of any kind of Excellency, as
allied to it. But how truly Magnificent is this of your Grace, that the Arts
themselves, by your Graces Example, are rendered more August and Venerable? How
shall future Ages stoop under the weight of your Graces Fame, that your Grace
in that Nobility of Extract, and confluence of Fortune, should yet outvie in
the Methods of Learning, even those, whose necessities must prompt them to
diligence? Wherein your Grace has made so happy a progress, that never any can
more appear, a Devotist to, or Proficient in Learning: so that your Graces
teeming Brain is ever bringing forth some new Miracle: and though a Woman, yet
has merited the Diadem of Learning before Men; though a Courtier, yet before
the Academicks: In a word, wherein any one, is in any thing Excellent, yet is
your Grace in that thing far more excellent. Nor can we believe, that any
mortal Man, no not your Grace our Princess (with your Graces Pardon) can from
Natures instinct, or humane strength be excited and raised to so manifold and
profound Speculations. It must necessary, be that that most capacious Soul of
your Grace, expatiating it self so far into all sorts of Learning, is Divinely
inspired; that almost Infinite Comprehension of so many and so great Notions
informs us, how great a measure of the Heavenly Spirit has possessed your
Grace; and that no single Deity has enlarged this one Soul unto the Immense
Tracts of all the Sciences. With these happy Omens has your Grace reached
unto, whatever in the Arts seemed good unto your Grace when some Diviner Genius
of your Grace our Princess, judged the Notion of any clear Truth, would be
beneficial. And whereas it was your Graces Work, not to give Reasons, but
Magisterially to Prononce, as from an Oracle; (yet such is your Graces
condescension) that all your Graces Tenets are asserted and confirmed with most
Cogent Arguments: as if we did not owe a Belief, and had not a certain Devotion
obliging our Assent to your Graces bare Assertion. Henceforth therefore do we
Destine our spare hours unto these kinds of Studies, and are reaching unto the
perfection of Philosophy, seeing your Grace has judged these Speculations such
as are worthy your Graces Intentions, and nearer Approximations: for such an
happy clearness of Wit shall render every theng discoverable and fully to be
comprehended, and that most free inclinination of your Graces Candor will
communicate every thing discovered to your Graces Cantabrigians. Yet lest we
should give our selves up to unworthy Ease, and Consecrate our selves to Sloth,
your Grace has left us one very difficult Task, namely Thankfulness. Forasmuch
then, through your Graces Labors, Minerva's Pupils have now obtained that
Divine thing, which they may, without error, pursue, to wit a calm repose in
all our Studies; we therefore judge that a more Honorable Monument was never
at any time erected, to any of the ancient Kings or Emperors, than what we
here humbly dedicate to your Graces worthy name and memory.

To Margaret the First: Princess of Philosophers: Who has dispelled Errors:
Appeased the differences of Opinions: And restored Peace, To Learnings
Commonwealth, From the College of the Sacred and Individual Trinity. October. 5.
1668.
POEMS, etc.
To the most Illustrious and most Excellent Princess, The Marchioness of
NEW CASTLE. After the reading of her Incomparable POEMS.
MADAM,
WIth so much Wonder we are struck
When we begin to read your matchles Book;
A while your own excess of Merit stays
Our forward Pens, and does suspend your Praise;
Till time our minds does gently recompose,
Allayes this Wonder, and our Duty show's;
Instructs us how your Virtues to Proclaim,
And what we ought to pay to your great Fame;
Your Fame which in your Country has no Bounds!
But wheresoever Learning's known, it sounds.
Those Graces Nature did till now divide,
Your Sexes Glory, and our Sexes Pride,
Are joined in you, and all to you submit,
The brightest Beauty, and the sharpest Wit;
No Faction here, or fiercer Envy swayes,
They give you Myrtle, while we offer Bays;
What Mortal dares dispute those Wreath's with you?
Armd thus with Lightning and with Thunder too.
This made the great New-Castle's Heart your prize;
Your Charming Soul, and your Victorious Eyes,
Had only power his Martial mind to tame,
And raise in his Heroic Breast a Flame;
A Flame, which with his Courage still aspires,
As if Immortal Fuel fed those Fires:
This mighty Chief, and your great self made One,
Together the same Race of Glory run;
Together on the Wings of Fame you move,
Like yours his Virtue, and like his your Love.
While we, your Praise endeavring to rehearse,
Pay that great Duty, in our humble Verse,
Such as may justly move your anger; you
Like Heaven forgive them, and accept them too:
But what we cannot, your brave Hero pays,
He builds those Monuments we strive to raise;
Such, as to after Ages shall make known,
While he Records your deathless Fame, his own;
So when an Artist some rare Beauty draws,
Both in our Wonder share, and our Applause;
His Skill, from time, secures the Glorious Dame,
And makes himself Immortal in her Fame.
George Etherege.

To her Excellency the Lady Marchioness of NewCastle, on Her Incomparable Works:
MADAM,
WHen with stolen Metaphors we would display
Those Glorious Lights which rule our Night and Day,
We call them Lamps and Spangles, and suborn
Our Wits t'obscure, what we cannot adorn:
But when some fading Beauty haunts our Eyes
Tempting to Praise, what Greatest Souls Despise,
We can advance the Phrase all smoothly runs,
Her Cheeks are Roses, and her Eyes are Suns.
Great Virtues only by themselves are praised;
What Is highest higher by no Art is raised:
It Is proper only to our Imperfections
To need, or to admit, our Wit's Protections.
Were your Pen's Noble Issue such small things,
As the fine Poet to his Mistress sings:
Or else such pretty Babies as are sent
Out from the laboring Press, to Complement
Our Childish Age; which nothing so well pleases
As Lispings, Weakness, and Wit's Diseases:
Then I, perhaps amongst the rest might wast
Some Paper, to be your Encomiast;
And, in the present mode; pick Crumbs and Scraps
From Sirs that wear their Phancyes in their Caps,
And Cook a Mess of Bumbast to delude
And glut at once the gaping multitude.
But it is your Wit's prerogative to be
As far above all Praise as Flattery:
And since you have said All, we boldly may
Excuse our selves, you have left us naught to say.
In every Line you give us we descry
Your Panaegyrick, our Apology:
Where all is so well like you, that to conceive
Ought but our wonder may admittance have,
Is to suppose, you either cannot see
Our meanness, or will veil your Majesty.
Then he betrays your Name whoever essays
To load it with vain Epithets of Praise:
Who seems to understand all you have writ,
To Advance his own, does much abase your Wit.
Madam we are in a maze: such Glorys can
Not be beheld by what is only Man.
When you are pleased to work new Miracles
We'll see and read what is yours and nothing else:
When you give Eyes as well as Light, when you
With Language will on us new Tongues bestow,
When you can make us write just as you do;
We'll learn to praise your Works: But sure it is
Impossible; you can do all but this.
It Is equally absurd for us to guess
We e're should do so much or you ought less.
Thanks for our Freedom from the learned Thrall
Of thrice-three Mistresses; you're One and All:
Those antique wits which erest would not be seen,
But in a mist of obscure Tongues which Screen
More Follies far than Phansies, are become
Like their own Pump'd-out Oracles all dumb;
Great Aristotle and his greater Plato:
Master
With their long rabble have the same disaster.
These Paper-Armies Bodly's Goal contains
Your Captives are, fretting in Iron Chains.
One Lady's pregnant Brain has slain whole hosts
Of Rabbys, and quite laid their Paper ghosts,
Which haunted all our Studies, and perplexed
Our wearied thoughts with a Moth-eaten Text.
Who would not give a life that he might live
In the next Age, to see the Learned strive
Whose Margin should strut biggest with your Name
Who raise up highest Pyramids of Fame
Over your peaceful Ashes; may it be
Such Phoenixes can know mortality.
Was it her modesty (for she is a Woman)
Made Nature Coy, and show her self to no man?
She walked in Vizors till she met with you.
What wonder if she did retir'dness vow
And to our Ruffian Sex showed Nun that late
Unveiled to your Sex; and but one of that?
You need not fear to die, she needs must live
Her self, whose Noble Office it is to give
Life to our late Posterity: each line
Of yours must be their Oracle, your Shrine.
Your Images the work of your own Pen
Shall frustrate all the courteous Cheats of men,
Pronouncing all your true adorers blessed
Without the help of Conjuror or Priest.
Be merciful to Captives (Madam) and
Kill not all those that bend at your Command.
Your softest Sex your Noble Order shall
Vote all such cruelty Apocryphal.
You have subdued the World of Learning, spare
At least so much alive as may declare
Who was the Conqueror, that all may know
VVhate're survives is owing all to you.
You have outdone what is mortal; Imitate
Those Powers above which to maintain their state
Let some poor vassals live, and worshipped are
Not by whom they destroy, but whom they spare.
Then sheathe your Conquering Pen since nothing now
Remains unvanquish'd but your Works and you.
On her Grace the Duchess of New-Castles Closet.
WHat place is this? looks like some Sacred Cell
Where holy Hermits anciently did dwell,
And never ceased Importunating Heaven
Till some great Blessing unto Earth was given;
Is this a Ladys Closet? 'tcannot be,
For nothing here of vanity you see;
Nothing of Curiosity nor Pride,
As all your Ladies Closets have beside;
No mirror here in all the Room you find;
Unless it be the mirror of the Mind,
Nor Pencil here is found, nor Paint again
But only of her Ink and of her Pen.
Which renders her an Hundred times more fair
Than they with all their Paints and Pensils are:
Here she is Rapt, here falls in Ecstasy
With studying high and deep Philosophy:
Here these clear Lights descend into her Mind
Which, by Reflection, in her Books you find,
And those high Notions and Idea's too,
Which, but herself, no Woman ever knew,
Whence she is their chiefest Ornament and Grace,
And Glory of our times: Hail Sacred Place!
To which the World in after times shall come,
As unto Homer's Shrine, or Virgil's Tomb,
Hon'ring the Walls in which she made abode,
The Air she breathed and Ground whereon she trod,
Counting him happy, who but sees the Place
And happier who least Relick of her has;
For whose Sole Inkhorn they as much would bid
As once for Epictetus's they did.
Thus Fame shall Celebrate, and thus again
The Arts shall honor her, who honored them,
Whilst others who in other things did trust
Shall, after Death, lie in forgotten Dust.
To the Illustrious Princess, Margaret, Duchess of New Castle, on Her
Incomparable Works.
Virtue, and Wit's great Magazine,
Accept an Offering to your Shrine,
Whose wondrous Raptures needs must raise
All Souls to Poetry or Praise:
With such Amazement I was struck,
(Madam) when first I read your Book,
To see your Sex with so great Parts,
Treat of all Sciences and Arts,
As if Inspired in the Times of Old,
When Poetry all things foretold.
That Waller, Denham, and the Wits,
Who write such mighty things by fits;
I did expect should all at least,
Have sent in Presents to the Feast,
But that they choose to write no more,
Shows they are outdone and so give over,
Though it is allowed their luck was such,
They did Coin Mettle that held Touch,
Like Min'ralists, they sprung a Vein
Of Oar, they could not long maintain;
Your Pregnant Brain does every day
Spring Mines of Gold, without allay,
The Dross you so Refine that we,
Only the purer Mettle see,
Yours is th'Elixar of true Wit,
Because it finds all Subjects fit.
Had Spencer lived your Works to have seen,
You must have been his Fairy-Queen.
Great Virgil would have thought it due,
Not to name Dido Queen, but You.
And had you lived when Ovid writ
You Would been the Subject of his Wit;
He would have made a richer Piece
Of you, than Helen fair of Greece.
You Have all that is blessed in humane kind,
In outward form, and in your mind:
When you with Beauty do invite,
Your Virtue checks proud Appetite.
Some Ladys think they are born in vain
Unless they Teem; your fruitful Brain
Brings better issue; here is the odds,
They please but Men, you please the Gods.
Strange Power it is you Govern by,
What Nature asks you can deny:
Great Miracle in what you do,
That can Charm Men and Angels too;
The Honor and envy of our Age,
That write for Gown-men, and the Stage;
Though you speak to us in one Tongue,
You seem all Languages to have known,
And Secrets to the World reveal,
As if the Gods did sometimes steal,
To tell you News, and from above
You knew all passages of Love,
We must conclude it is only thence
You can have your Intelligence,
By which our Knowledge you so raise,
You merit Crowns, that ask but Bays.
To the most Accomplished and Incomparable Princess, The Duchess of New Castle
her Grace.
MAdam, it is you whom both in Form and Mind,
Nature has favored 'bove all Female kind,
You have been constant from the first of Youth
To Friendship, Justice, Chastity and Truth,
Wit in your Childhood did begin to reign,
And like the Tide came flowing in amain,
Wherein such high Conceptions did lie,
As raised a new and true Philosophy.
Things Natural and Moral you have writ,
And both in Scenes and Poems showed your Wit,
Letters and Dialogues declare your Fame,
In History you Eternalize the Name
Of your Dear Lord, when truly you relate
His Loyal Actions for the King and State;
All this makes you admired and envied too,
'Cause you have done more than any yet could do,
In you the Glory of your Sex does shine,
And all perfections in your Soul combine,
What ever is thought Virtue's found in you,
Your mind is high, and yet it is humble too;
Not Pride (as Envy styles it) but a Flame
More noble strives t'immortalize your Fame,
For you do stoop to those of low descent,
And with compassion to their Case resent,
Which Fortune Frowns upon: How can there be
A nobler Mind and nearer Deity?
Nay Fortune seeing how Nature favored you,
To her Perfections added Honor too;
Thus Honor, Beauty, Wit, and Virtue joined,
Made you the greatest Wonder of your Kind,
Let none presume to draw your Picture then
For you surpass all thou art and Skill of Men,
Who e're looks on you with a stricter view
Sees Natur's chiefest masterpiece in You.
To the Glory of her Sex, the most Illustrious Princess, the Lady Marchioness
of New Castle, upon her most admirable Works.
NOw let enfranchiz'd Ladies learn to write,
And not Paint white, and red, but black, and white,
Their Bodkins turn to Pens, to Lines their Locks,
And let the Inkhorn be their Dressing-box:
Since, Madam, you have Scaled the walls of Fame,
And made a Breach where never Female came.
Had Men no Wit, or had the World no Books,
Yet here is enough to please the curious looks
Of Every Reader: such a General Strain,
Would reinstruct the School-boy-world again,
Philosophers and Poets were of old
The two great Lights, that humane minds controlled;
The one t'adorn, the other to explain,
Thus Learnings Empire then was cut in twain.
But Universal Wit and Reason joyn's
To make you Queen: nor can your sacred Lines
Without a Paradox be well expressed
Truth never was so naked, nor so dressed.
Majestic Quill! that keeps our minds in Awe,
For Reasons Kingdom knows no Salique Law,
Or if that Law was ever framed 'twas then
When Women held the Distaff not the Pen.
The Court the City, Schools and Camp agree,
Welbeck to make an University,
Of Wit and Honor, which has been the Stage,
Since 'twas your Lords the Hero of this Age;
Whose Noble Soul is Steward to great Parts,
And does dispense his Reasons and his Arts,
His Wit and Power, his Greatness, and his Sense,
With as much Freedom, and Magnificence,
As when our English Jove became his Guest,
And did receive a more than Humane Feast.
With Arts of Wit, he mixes those of Force
And Pegasus is his old Managed Horse.
No wonder he excells all other Men,
They but Nine Muses had, and he has Ten.
A Lady whose Immortal Pen transferrs,
To our Sex Shame and Envy, Fame to hers;
Whose Genius traces Wit through all her ways
In abstruse Notions, Poems, and in Plays.
Then why should we the moldy Records keep
Of Plautus, or disturb Ben Johnson's Sleep?
The Silent Woman Famous heretofore
Has been, but now the VVriting Lady more.
On the Duchess of New Castle her Grace.
MADAM,
WHilst others study Books, I study you,
And can b'Experience this affirm for true,
Of all your Sex you have the greatest worth
As ever yet these later times brought forth,
And I have Studied many, and some such
As former times could hardly better much,
Your Soul so Spiritual it does appear
Framed for some Angel of a higher Sphere,
However 'twas infused, I know not how,
Into a mortal Body here below,
Aspiring restlesly like Fire and Flame
To mount again to th'Sphere from whenc it came,
So nobly active as it does by Truth,
As by the World the Macedonian Youth,
As soon as you have overcome and Conquered one,
You grieve there are not more to overcome,
There being nothing so Sublime and High
But you can reach in all Philosophy;
Nor so profound and deep again, but you
With ease, can dive and penetrate into,
Your Virtues being so infinite, I find
When I consider but your Soul and Mind,
'Twere easier for me never to begin
Than ever to give over when once l'm in;
Which whosoever should go about to tell,
Might number all the Stars of Heaven as well,
The blades of Grass upon Earth's spacious Plain,
Or Sands the Sea's vast Bosom does contain.
But as your greatest Beauties have their moles,
So some small faults are still in greatest Souls,
And I shall tell you, Madam, what they be,
T'acquit my self, o'th Crime of Flattery:
It Is an Ambition above mortal state,
And Mind with Glory never satiate,
Without which Glory and Ambition
No noble Action yet was ever done,
So avidious and so Covetous of Fame,
As only for Eternizing their Name
They, as the Phoenix life to's young does give,
Would be content to die that that might live.
But now I Will tell what my opinion is
Of Fame (and pardon if I Judge amiss:)
Fame's but a shadow of great action,
And but the Echo often when we are gone,
Than whose Trumpet no Music is more sweet
Nor none's alive more pleased with hearing it,
But I do'nt know what pleasure I should have,
When I am dead with Music at my Grave.
An Elegy upon the death of the Incomparable Princess Margaret Duchess of
New Castle.
HEnceforth be Dumb, ye Oracles of Wit;
Ye humbly must to Fate submit:
How soon must ye decline! How low must fall!
Since She is gone who did Inspire ye all?
Her Books are the best Patterns for the Pen,
Her Person was the best of Subjects too;
In Wit and Sense She did excel all Men;
And all her Sex in Virtue did outgoe.
Though Grief affords some Eloquence,
Henceforth expect but little Sense;
For, since she is gone, all we can do
Will but the Pangs of Dying-writers show.
When the bright Ruler of the Day
Th'Horizon of his Presence has berest
Some feeble streaks of Light are left,
Yet darkness soon must come, and all that light decay.
Our Sun's forever set, we have no hope
Of this as of the other Sun's return:
We all in Darkness must forever grope,
And we for ever must in Tears her absence mourn.
Philosophers must wander in the dark;
Now they of Truth can find no certain mark;
Since She their surest Guide is gone away,
They cannot choose but miserably stray.
All did depend on Her, but She on none,
For her Philosophy was all her own.
She never did to the poor Refuge fly
Of Occult Quality or Sympathy.
She could a Reason for each Cause present,
Not trusting wholly to Experiment,
No Principles from others she purloyn'd,
But wisely Practice she with Speculation joined.
None was more good, and once none was more fair:
She was not as most of her frail Sex are;
Who ave Fruitful Wombs but Baren 'Brains,
She left the best Remains:
Though we no Issue of her Body find
Yet she has left behind
The Nobler Issue of her mighty Mind;
Learning she needed not, nor yet despised:
Though from herself all Arts she knew;
The truly Learned she nobly Patronized,
And every Artist, she encouraged too.
Let all her Sex fashion by her their Lives:
She was the best of Women, best of Wives.
T'her Lord Sh'was warm and loving as the Spring,
But to all others cold as Winters lce,
Her sight on all a shivering awe did bring,
And nipt, at first, all vain attempts of Vice;
But though in Love she bore a Noble pride,
She to each Skilful man of Art
Her Conversation freely does impart,
And to all others civil was beside.
But we by praising thus provoke our Grief
Which never can expect Relief,
Nor can the most luxurious Praise
(Though penned with Art that might deserve the Bays.)
Nor all which we can think afford
Ease to her much lamenting Lord:
Whose loss does now by far outvye
All he yet e're sustained
Yet he once lost much more for Loyalty
Than any Subject, and much less has gained;
This noble half she left behind
Who by her much lamented death must find
Too great a Trial for the greatest Mind.
Oh what Expedient can there be
Found to support his Magnanimity!
The best of Husbands, and the noblest Peer;
The best of Generals, best of Subjects too,
Whose Arts in Peace as well as War appear:
He knows how to advise, and how to do;
His Prudence and his Courage might uphold
The most decayed and crippled State,
And rescue it from the Jaws of Fate:
His Body may, but Mind, can never be old;
Him she has left, and from our sight is hurled
And Gloriously shines in the true Blazing World.
Thomas Shadwell.

An Elegy on the Death of the Incomparable Duchess of NEW CASTLE.
IF with due honor you would Solemnize
The great New-Castles Funeral Obsequies
Let every Science in close-mourning stand
About the Hearse, with Cypress in her hand:
Philosophy herself shall hold the Pall,
(She Is the chief Mourner at this Funeral)
Philosophy which well the Poets drew
With Women's Features; here we find it true,
Nature, whose Lovers (in their Courtship rude)
Into her Privy-Chambers did intrude,
Out of her own Sex modestly one chose,
To whom her self she naked did disclose:
Who all her wonders did so well explain,
That she the only wonder did remain.
Let Rhetoric, the powerful Siren there
Dressed in her richest Livery appear;
Dressed in those Robes which Tully to her gave
When the Worlds Mistress Rome, he made her Slave;
Or the strong Reason of New-Castles Books,
VVeav'd with the Charming sostness of her Looks:
But yet her weakness let her here confess,
Her Silence best this Sorrow does express.
The Muses Her in lasting Tears shall steep,
The Graces mourn, and Comoedy shall weep:
And thousand Cupids sigh forth mournful Airs,
And wish for Eyes, to ease their Grief by Tears.
Let them their Bows in sign of honor wave,
And with their Torches light her to her Grave.
Nor will they this attendance her deny,
Those Torches first were lighted at her Eye.
Who now their un-arm'd Deities will dread?
Their Magazine is now demolished.
Yet did not her Muse kindle unchaste Fires,
That Heavenly Cupid Heavenly Thoughts inspires:
No Kitchin-flames before her Beams would burn,
And wanton Love did to Devotion turn.
Thus Sol at once lifts up the Lamp of Day,
And warms at once, and bids the Persian Pray.
Great Issue of Natures united Powers!
Glory of your Sex, and Disgrace of ours!
Which shall I call the greater Prodigy,
That you were such, or being such could Dye?
Did Nature fear lest that thy boundless Mind
For future search should nothing leave behind?
Or did you take this flight to Heaven to see
How it with Thy fair Model did agree?
Whatever the cause; Joy rings through every Sphere;
And Heaven more Heaven is since you came there.
None in it with more Native Luster shine,
Or livelier do reflect the light Divine.
Such spotless Innocence in that Bosom lies,
Eve thinks she brought you forth in Paradise:
For that first crime lest not a lesser trace
On any Breast of all her numerous Race;
Excepting one, whom you sit next to there,
Who her Creator in her Womb did bear:
And with her too almost you may contend,
What He Created you did Comprehend.
Blessed Soul, who dwell in Essential Light,
Direct us lost in Ignorance, and Night!
Whilst we with grateful Offerings, what before
We ail admired, do humbly now adore.
Knightly Chetwood, Coll. Regal. Cant.

In Obitum Margaretae Ducissae Novo-Castrensis.
BArbara jam sileat, sileat quoque Graia vetustas,
Nec jactet fidas Itala terra nurus:
Hanc unam attonitum non mendax Fama per Orbem
Centeno potius debuit ore loqui:
Dulce cava Sappho testudine flebat amorem,
Sed nec pulchra a satis, sed neque casta fuit:
Haec toto numeris animoque, and corpore constat,
Vita etiam castis consonat ipsa modis.
Arsit fida suum Letho quoque Portia Brutum,
Caesaris at tinctus Sanguine Brutus erat:
Hujus dum Regem sequitur per Bella Maritus,
Per medios lgnes Ipsa sequuta Virum.
Mausolum epotum taceat Regina subimo
Viventem vivens Haec qu^que cord tulit:
Pensile nec Tumuli jactet; Vitam ejus descripsit.
monumenta Mariti
Duratura magis condidit sta sui.
Natorum numero Niobe non provocet Illam;
Nec specie, Nobes quae Dea stravit opes:
Bis septem e gravido, ceu Jupiter, Illa cerebro
Pignora dat; (decuit sic peperisse Deam)
Pignora ceu speculo totum referentia mundum,
Non nisicum Mundo pignora digna Mori.
Ah! cur non placuit Tibi vivae Academia seeds,
(Ceu Qui fuit e Coll. Johannes Cantabr.
Ducis) ut jactet nomine Granta tuo!
Invidit sexus; jam Filia non potes esse,
E Fama titulus nec foret ille Tua.
At dum pauperibus legasti Scripta Camoenis
Ditia, dum Mammas exeris usque Tuas,
(Nunc eniam super Astra faves) Academia Matter
Te Matrem posthac est habitura suam
Knightly Chetwood, Coll. Regal. Cantabr.

Upon the Death of the Illustrious and Incomparable Lady, Margaret Duchess of
New Castle.
1.
DEath! thou have done thy worst, we dread not now
The threatenings of thy angry Brow.
By thy last victory we are hardened grown,
Learnt to despise thy malice, scorn, and frown.
Thy saucie Power is so great,
That we like Slaves are become desperate.
2.
Since brave New-Castles Duchess thou have slain,
We baser Mortals to complain
Think it a crime, dye we would rather all,
That so we might attend her Funeral,
VVait on her, when her Soul takes flight
Into the Mansions of Eternal Light.
3.
Within her Breast such throngs of Virtues grew
That they their Prison overthrew,
And being vexed at this same sottish Age
Where dull Impertinence so much does rage,
Their Fetters broke they upwards hie
In hopes to find there better company.
4.
She scorned those trifles which her Sex adore,
Which they vain Fools do value more
Than inward worth, would not like them mispend
That little time which God to her did lend.
It was her only business here
To dress her Soul, and make it fine appear.
5.
Her powerful reason awed enticing sense,
Taught Rebel-thoughts Obedience.
When stupid matter would unruly prove,
Instructed it, more calmly how to move.
External Pleasures she thought Sin,
Compared with those Delights which dwell within.
6.
So vast a knowledge never was yet confined
Within one single Woman's Mind.
Her Fancy it was strong, so great her Wit,
That nothing but her Judgment equaled it.
When e're she spoke the winged crew
Of pretty Notions straight about her flew.
7.
What e're she pleased with ease she overcame,
Learning before her time was lame,
Nature was dressed but slovenly till she
Made it so spruce by her Philosophy.
It heretofore in Tatters went,
Is grown Gentile now, and can Complement.
8.
Had she but lived when blind Antiquity
Called what it pleas'da Deity.
She would have quite engrossed the Worship Trade,
Jove and his Kindred had been Bankrupts made.
They must have Starved without Relief,
Pined to Mortality, and Died with Grief.
9.
Rome where Divinity was sold so cheap,
Who Temples built on every heap
Of dirt and rubbish, would have quickly sent
It Is Mungril-Gods all into Banishment.
Told them 'twas manners to give place
To one of a more noble Heavenly Race.
10.
How well did Providence her real worth
Declare to The World and set it forth,
When it in ties of Holy Wedlock joined
The best of Men to the best of Womankind.
And suffered fair Lucasia's Charms
To vanquish and subdue the God of Arms.
11.
The mighty Cavendish could only prove
A Husband to the Queen of Love,
Heaven would have had her sooner, 'twas in strife
Whether she should Dye first, or be his Wife.
At length resigned its right to show
How much to his great merits it did owe.
12.
What Joy above at her arrival there?
The Angels crowd to welcome her.
And big with wonder all pay Reverence
Unto a Soul of so much Excellence,
A Soul so pure, so bright all over,
That they the like had never seen before.
To the Duke.
YOur pardon, Sir, if striving to express
Perfections which in her were numberless,
I vainly mine own weakness do betray,
And show how little foolish Rhithms can pay
To her vast Merits, which like The Ocean stretch
And drown what ere dares come within their reach.
For if to tell of with due Praise her Fame,
And as I ought her Virtues to Proclaim:
She would have had me rightly understood
She must have been less Worthy and less Good.
On the Death of the most Illustrious Princess, the Lady Duchess of NEW CASTLE.
An EPITAPH.
She Is Dead, and here she lies; the vulgar cry:
Fools know not that great Wits can never dye.
She sleeps; nay, that is too much: As well could she
Admit of Death, as such a Lethargy.
Yet say she Sleep, her very Dreams outvie
All our Grave Lectures of Philosophy.
Perhaps she Rests; it is time for her: but O!
What Fates attend her Rest poor Mortals know.
Tired with this World's Impertinence, she is come
For privacy to this Retiring-Room:
The place we call her Tomb, where she does lie,
But it is her Closet, our great Library.
However, she has withdrawn her felf from hence,
And our Wits Freez, robbed of her Influence.
Like breathless Statues, here we stand all dumb,
Not one wise word to set upon her Tomb.
The brightest Sun blind Moles must never see;
So she seems dead because we senseless be.
Her sprightly Soul, full of Ethereal Fires,
Up far above our Regions now aspires,
To seek new Game, since all things here below
Grew stale, and nothing left she did not know.
Her Phant'sies heat had scortch't all Subjects, hurled
The Universe into the Blazing-World:
And having naught out of her self do do,
She soon too active for her Body grew.
Spirits are not confined, out thence she flashes,
And leav's her house consumed to these few ashes.
Puff then broiled Chemist, wrangle out thy Fire,
Th'Elixyr's fled: and till thou can inspire
These silent Ashes with new Form, restore
Us such a Phoenix as we had before;
In spite of thy big words, we standers by
Shall call thee fool, and thy fine Art a Lie.
Be gone thou silly Poet, and invoke
The Destinies, thy Muses all are broke,
Cannot inspire thee longer, but by stealth
Out of her Books the Muses Commonwealth.
This Ladies learned Dust which here does lie
Has drunk thy boasted Helicon quite dry.
Bring, old and new Philosophers, your Art,
Rip up Dame Natures Bowels, pierce her Heart.
Alas, all is now too late, here is nothing left,
Her early Industry has you berest
Of all her Jewels, and your Wits at once;
And bids you this new title wear, Grave Dunce.
She could not else have gone to rest so soon,
Who never paused before her work was done.
All Natures Treasure in this Tomb does lie,
If you would find it. Fools despair and dye.
Here lies that noblest Lady, whose great name
Has choked the Muses, and has glutted Fame.
A Name! All Poetry is mute to hear it,
This hardest Marble here does sweat to bear it.
And did not yet the Sacred Ashes live,
And better words to Stones, than Men have, give.
We could not know that here enclosed lies,
The wonder of admired Mysteries.
Arts, Sciences, Muses, and Graces all
Comprised in one Golden Manual.
If thou would know more of her, search for it
Amongst the many Wonders which she writ.
If out of those thou can not spell and frame
The Illustrious Duchess of New-Castles Name,
Thou have but one help left thee, in a word,
Consult the Living-Oracle, her Lord.
It Is Treason against Wit for any one
To speak her name at length, but him alone:
Seeing in him, and him alone, we find
Whatever she of Wit has left behind.
And Wit this Lady-Wonder shall survive
Whilst this great Prince of Honor is alive.
Yea, may He live, till we can weary grow
Of all that Nature in one piece can show;
Wit might seem larger whilst in Two it shone,
It Is stronger now contracted into One.
Whilst by his Curtesy she had ingros'd
So much, the honor of our Sex seemed lost:
Wit was Hermaphrodite, when One in Twain;
But now it is only Masculine again.
Clement Ellis, Minister.

Tumulus Nobilissimae, Illustrissimaeque Principis, Margaretae Ducissae
Novi-Castri.
QUis Deus extremum possit prohibere dolorem,
Cum Dea sublimi tendit in Astra fuga?
Pectore lacteolo condatur ferreus ensis,
Et non purpureo Sanguine tinctus erit?
Alta cadat ^edrus, nemorosae gloria Sylvae,
Non tamen ad Coelos diriget or a fragor?
Quid vetet, ut Saevi perculsus imagine fati
Non gemat, and nubes dissipet usque suas?
Lampade victrici dum transfert Foemina morti,
(Foemina, cui nomen non nisi gemma fuit,)
Unica, virtutum comitatus, vita, salusque,
Graviter officiis consuluisse suis.
Hoc fuit innuptae decus, observasse parents;
Uxoris, Domini non violasse torum.
Non dolus aut ferrum, mollis facundia, nec vis
Surripuit nuptam Conjugis e gremio.
Sed sitiens mortis telum divortia fingit,
Et, quod non poterant caetera fata, facit.
Occidit illa, suis-decus, omnibus altera Pallas,
Deliciae Musis, Coelitibusque comes,
Nunquid in aeternum vivet post Funer a Virtus?
Nunquid eruditi fama superstes erit?
Qui poterit vivae tolli virtutis Imago?
Ardentem Pallas non super are rogum?
Number febris calor insanae praeordia vellit?
Et Canis aestivus viscera caeca vorat?
Nostrarum extinguet Lachrimarum copia morbum,
Mortis and immerget spicula saeva dolor.
Frigida Sublimem repetunt Cruciamina Mentem?
Vitalesque aurae deseruere focum?
En nostri in tantam Dominam flagrantia Zeli
Scintillas reparat, Religioque fovet.
Certe igitur fatis nondum concessit iniquis
Foemina, quae nullo crimine tincta fuit.
Nonita jampridem divinitus acta Creatrix
(Unius est summi, posse creare, Dei.)
Ex nihilo finxit diversa volumina Coeli,
Mundum alium, stabiles fixit utrinque Polos.
Huic se transmisit Solio, quia pulchrior illi
Virtutum est facies, formaque lucidior;
Quam quae vel lippis vulgus dignetur ocellis;
Aut nostro immeritos praebeat Orb dies:
Sic nimia Phoebus ne vi perstringeret Orbem,
In Clymenis gremium nocte silente redit.
Huc se transmisit, ne longa absentia Mundum
Jam tum constructum verteret in cineres.
Istum dura Fames torqueret, crapula nostrum,
Aequales si non tendat utrique manus.
Ne tantam invidiam pariat, quod inhospita tecta
Linquat, pernici Pectore summa petens;
Haec non contineat spatiosam angustia mentem,
Quae velit influxum reddere utrique solo.
Indulsit nostris sua quaeque Volumina terris,
Nunc alios Orbs hisce bear cupit.
Utque sciant omnes, quantum sciat omnia, sese
Transtulit, expressam Numinis effigiem.
ANDERTON.

In Illustrissimam Dominam Margaretam, NoviCastri Ducissam,
EPITAPHIUM.
SIste Paulisper gradum, Viator,
Non longum moreris erit necesse:
Legenti licet currere,
Currenti licet legere,
Utrique intelligere,
Quod hic sita est
Lectissima Foemina,
Domina Margareta,
Neo-Castrensis Ducissa.
Nobilitate vere Aulica,
Eruditione vere Academica,
Pietate vere Coelica,
Praedita and dotata.
Animo virili, super sexum,
Sapientia senili supra aetatem,
Ingenio entheo, supra sortem,
Afflata and imbuta.
Quam licet ex hoc nostro discas Vixisse,
In suis tamen scriptis edisces Vivere,
Scilicet in Vita quam scripsit, Mariti,
Suam quoque perpetuare.
Quam licet Bona Opera,
Moralia, Evangelica,
Ad arces Coelorum avolantem secuta sint.
Literata tamen
Philosophica, Historica, Poetica,
In Terris spirantem and commorantem reserunt,
Servabuntque superstitem.
Fuit
Florentissimi Mariti, Uxor Splendidissima,
Bellicosi viri, Doctissima Matrona,
Armati Ducis, Togata Ducissa,
Quam si habuisset Socrates Uxorem,
Plato ejus Philosophiam, non literis mandasset.
Quae si habuisset Caesarem Maritum,
Ille non sua Gesta sua manu scripisisset.
Illa ipsa Socratis Dicta Enarrasset.
Illa ipsa Caesaris Facta Enarrasset.
Illa ipsa Fideliter, Feliciter, Enarrasset.
Qualem si Martialis mordax speravisset sibi,
Nunquam non Doctissimam Conjugem optasset.
Quam modo, Historias omnes callentem,
Curtumque torquere Enthymema potentem,
Rebusque honestis Finem Ultimum imponentem,
Cumque Homero Maronem comparantem.
Utrumque imitantem,
Vidisset Satyricus, non frontem corrugasset,
Non intollerabilem Uxorem,
Sed Raram in Terris Avem, dixisset.
Vitam In Aula Regia, Honoratam, Egit.
Vitam In Minervae Castris, Eruditam, Egit.
Vitam In Ecclesia Dei, devotam, Egit.
Vitam Domi, Contemplativam, Egit.
Vitam Foris, Activam, Egit.
Vitam Pie, Placide, Pacate Egit.
Mortem Mortali natae, Expectatam, Obiit.
Mortem Philosophiae diditae, non formidatam, Obiit.
Mortem Ad Christianam spem vocatae, exoptata^, Obiit.
Mortem Laete, Tranquille, Beat, Obiit.
Qua translata est Obiit.
A meditatione pura, ad Perfectam Visionem,
A creaturis contemplandis ad intuendum Creatorem,
A Poetarum camoenis, ad Angelorum Hymnos,
Ab Aula Terrena, ad Curiam Coelestem.
Libros Suos, sobolem Suam, ad utramque Academiam
Misit, at ad dandam non capiendam doctrinam.
Quibus Bibliothecas publicas ditavit,
Quae Ipsa Bibliotheca Animata fuit.
Opera illius fuere suum pretium,
Labores illius suum praemium.
Dedit, ut Herodotus unum Librum,
Singulis Musarum unum volumen.
Quae cum sunt ingressa Bibliothecam Joannensem,
(Solam nobis ex officio memorandam Bibliothecam)
Quam densum obviam venit agmen salutantium?
Quae cum sua ibidem subsellia petebant,
Quam grande fuit certamen locum cedentium
Vitam Conjugis, quam scripsit, ad suas Parallelas
Apposuit Plutarchus, and locum apparavit.
Philosophia, quam scripsit, se Veteribus adjungi
Modeste non dignata, ad Recentiores concessit.
Poetas omnes singulosque unice dilexit,
Omnesque singulosque suo ordine visit avit.
Indigna est loco isti catena alligari,
Ad quem sibi adeo libere accessum rogavit.
Anima Ejus regnat in Choro Beatorum,
Corpus (vides) jacet hic in Choro Poetarum.
Illa Ipsa,
Ut in Annulo gemma, utrobique refulget.
At Tu, quisquis es, Viator,
Orandus es Lachrymulis
Tuis, pro merito, novum
Heliconis hic Rivum dare,
Ubi Musis jam fecerunt novum
Tot Poetarum tumuli Parnassum.
Tho. Brown, Coll. Joan. Cantab.

FINIS.

