A LETTER to the Author of the DVTCH Design, Anatomized.
Written by a Citizen of LONDON, for the Promoting of His MAJESTY'S Service.
Quis Coelum Terris non misceat and Mare Coelo
Si fur displiceat Verri, homicida Miloni,
Clodius Accuset Moechos, Catilina Cethegum.
Juvenal. Sat. 2.
SIR,
I Have read your Anatomy of the Dutch Design, with as much patience as a true
Member of the Church of England could be supposed to have on such an Occasion,
and I cannot forbear telling you I am a little Dissatisfied with it, and in
part the Reasons why. First, I would gladly have known the Name of this true
Member of our Church, and of his Person of Quality too, for whose satisfaction
this piece of Anatomy was composed. 2ly. Why it comes out with ALLOWANCE rather
than with a License, which is our legal word. And Thirdly, Why Randal Tailor,
and not H. H. is the Publisher? These are small Queries, but you know we Church
of England-men have been so long haunted with Ghosts and Hobgoblins, and Wolves
in Sheeps clothing, that we are apt to Anatomize all Papers that come forth
with ALLOWANCE; and if the inside do not answer the outside, we cry a Jesuit
in Masquerade; and then all the World is on the Gaze to observe what the
Bontefeu would be at.

Well, Sir, I have rubbed my Eyes this morning, and I am ready to hear what it
is you have to say, To Enquire into the original Causes of the Discontent of
the Church of England at some late Proceedings, or to search into the Grounds,
why His Majesty desires to Establish Liberty of Conscience, was so stiffly
opposed, were to re-kindle Intestine Contests, which ever were, and much more
NOW are to be Avoided? Why, Sir, is it even so? Must all that has been done by
the Red-Letter-men since the Defeat of the Western Rebellion, be so cleverly
conveyed away Now as never more to be thought of? Some few late proceedings and
Liberty of Conscience are soft Words, and surely these Church of England-men
are not so hard-hearted, as to remember Now such small matters as these, how
stiffly soever they opposed them. In truth, Sir, you are a pleasant Gentleman,
and ought to be recommended to his Holiness for his Confectioner. An Irish
Massacre, or a German Design to subvert the Laws of a Nation, or a French
gentle re-establishment of Catholic Religion thus softly and sweetly worded,
would go glibly down with a good-Natured Heretic.

The Jealousies, the Ferment, and the Commotions in the next Section are shown
in such an huddle of confusion, as I know not what you mean, only I perceive it
is so expressed, because you were upon the Wing for Holland, and had no leisure
to talk of what had been done in England; but Discontents there were, and the
Plaguey Dutchmen were told of them by a Party of English and Scotch Male
contents. Why had it not been for them, the Reverend Fathers of England might
have done what they had pleased, and the Hollanders have so little sense of
Religion, that they would never have regarded us, or at least not have put
themselves to the charge of a dozen Flyboats or Herring-Busses, to Propagate
it, especially the Church of England as by Law Established, page 8. But these
Malcontents told them that Protestantism was to be Ruined here under the
pretense of Liberty of Conscience; and besides, they had a mighty pair of
Bellows, and the Rogues kept such a tooting and blowing, that at last they
kindled a Fire in that Wet Country, and a Flame of Zeal burst out; for you must
know the Hollanders have some Compassion, and a little Zeal, though they have
not one dram of Religion. Why, who can help this?

Well, What did the Reverend Fathers in the mean time in England? Why, they
made use of Re-enforcements, when they perceived neither His Majesty's Word,
now the Weight of their Reasons could prevail. Now, Sir, What do you mean by
Re-enforcements? Why, they Turned all that would not Comply, out of all
Employments, sent Soldiers to Quarter in all places that would not Address;
Reformed the Corporations once and again; and sent Seven of the Bishops to the
Tower, and they would have sent all the Fellows of Magdalen College to the
Devil too, but when they would not go, they sent them a begging as much as in
them lay; and were going to Administer the self same Physic to all the
Inferior Clergy of England. I pray, Sir, were not these your Re enforcements?
Are not these Excellent Remedies against the Fumes of Discontent?

Well, all this was in order to gain it ain Parliamentary Way, but then the
Malcontents in Holland, plied their Correspondente here with subtle
well-penn'd Treatises, and made such an Allarm, that neither Churchmen nor
Dissenters would close with them. Alas, alas! We had taken such care of the
English Presses, that never a Malcontent in England durst whisper; and we had
purchased Honest Henry Care, and many --, another Doughty Scribler, to plague
the Nation with fulsome Declamations against the Penal Laws and the Tests; we
had also hired some Preachers to instruct the Brethren in their Sermons; and
William Pen wrote, and preached, and traveled, spent himself, his money, and
his time in this Weighty Affair: We had sent Commissioners to inspect the
Levies made by Justices of the Peace, and others to reform the Corporations,
and some Horse loads of Pamphlets we had distributed into several Counties of
England, and Suborned Men to Address in behalf of themselves and others; and
after all, two or three paultery Malcontents in Holland, put out now and then
a single Sheet of Paper which was well Penned, and spoild all again. In truth
Reverend Father this is a sad Story.

You must know the Hollanders are a sort of Pagans who Worship nothing but
TRADE, and the Rogues took up a conceit that the Jesuits were going to set up
such a Liberty of Conscience in England, as they had lately Erected in France;
and this would prove very prejudicial to them in their Traffic, and draw away
their people. Now as soon as the Butter-Boxes perceived the Wind was in that
Door, they smelt out our Designs; and immediately were for obstructing all good
Correspondence between the Fathers of the Society and the People of England,
and fearing the Church of England Party were in the Plot with the Jesuits,
their Politicians, to Out-wit us, procured some Extremities of Trial and
Disrepute to be inflicted upon the Church of England-men. But who were the
Instruments employed, the Lord knows. And besides, they buzzed the Dissenters
in the Ear that the Jesuits had no real kindness for them, and that the
Severities heretofore used by the Church of England Party against the
Dissenters, were very great, and that there was a Lady in Holland who might one
day be Queen of England, and then it would be a fitter Season to set up Liberty
of Conscience. Thus all our Proffers were slighted, and it was believed the
holy Fathers were mere Cheats: And the Hollanders in all probability will keep
their Trade and their People too, which poor England so much wants.

Just about this time you must know the Prince of Wales was born, and thereupon
the Prince of Orange and the States being very Jealous that a Parliament would
settle Liberty of Conscience merely to prevent that Project, they raised a
Report the Prince was a Counterfeit, and not Content with this, they took
speedy Resolves for the Security of their several Interests, and immediately
laid the design of this Invasion from that very period. In truth, Reverend
Father, the Hollanders are a parcel of Lewd People, but seeing your Interest is
very great in France, Spain atd Italy, I would advise you to get a Liberty of
Conscience Settled in those Countries by way of Reprisals; and I dare Warrant
you that you will Seve^ely revenge their Perfidity, and have many Thanks into
the bargain; and go very near to Ruin Holland, which is a little, wet, dirty,
cold Country, and not worthy your Reverences regard.

You must know this Design was carried so closely that our Society not having
the custody of their Conscience, we heard nothing of it till the French Kings
Ambassador fonnd out the Project, and thereupon we fell to Work, and getting a
fat Dutchman into the Savoy, we Dissected him, in one of the Ventricles of his
Heart we found Trade, and in the other Liberty of Conscience; and thereupon we
ordered our Secretary, who is a true Member of the Church of England, to
publish it in his Anatomy, where you may find it, page the 7th. We discovered
at the same time that the P. of O. was Ambitious; That he had Assumed the
Glorious Title of Protector of the Protestant Religion, and Defender of the
English Liberties. And lastly (which is a Secret) That he designed to set
England and France at a Variance, and by an Invasion by force or stratagem, to
get some of our Ports. Now, Reverend Father, I return you my thanks for these
important Discoveries. But for what follows about Invading and Conquest, and
what dangerous things they are, your Reverence might have spared your Pious
labor, for I have read of them elsewhere before. Only I am glad there is no
danger of having any of my Neighbors hanged for reading the Prince's
Declaration, because it seems he has not vouchsafed to give any previous
intimation of the Grounds of the War, as the Laws of Honor oblige, page 10. So
that the Fathers are forced to dissect his Designs, to find out the Reason, and
to hang out the Bloody Towels and Napkins they wiped their Knives and Fingers
on, to stir up the Courage of the English Sythes and Plow-shares to oppose him.
Very Elegant!

Your Transcript out of Cotton, concerning the Sufferings of the English by the
Norman Conquest; and out of Camden concerning the Saxons, I have no occasion
for. But that about Gustavus Adolphus, is very Edifying, if your Reverence had
been pleased to have assigned the Cause as well as the Effect. Which was this,
The Jesuits of Dillinghen in Germany, persuaded Ferdinand the Second, Emperor
of Germany, that the Doctrine of the Protestants of Germany, was not that which
in the Year 1530. was exhibited to Charles the Fifth: That therefore they were
not to enjoy any Liberty of Conscience which was only granted to those who
embraced that Confession which was then exhibited. The Emperor hereupon
endeavored to re-setle the Romish Religion Vi and Armis, but Gustavus came
into Germany, as you say, and made foul work: And at last the Emperor was
forced to Acknowledge these Protestants had a Right to the same privileges had
been granted to their Ancestors. So here, dear Sir, the Jesuits were neither
for Liberty of Conscience, nor keeping Faith with Heretics, though our English
Fathers have more Grace, thanks to the Virgin Mary and St. Loyola.

Page the 17. you tell us they (the Hollanders) were never known to have any
more than the outside and show of a Religion, that whilst they make long
Prayers that God would prosper them to destroy Idolatrous Worship (i. e.
Popery) they commit the Highest Sacrilege, and design not only to devour
Widows Houses, but already have divided amongst themselves the Estates of all
such as they know are the Eminentest in Loyalty to the King. In truth, Sir, I
will neither question your Sincerity, nor your Affections to the English, but I
would be glad to know where you had your Intelligence, and who those Eminent
Gentlemen for Loyalty are, whose Estates are so much more sacred than the
Widows Houses? This and the Division too, may be true, but where did your
Reverence learn it?

Your Politic Considerations, from page 17. to page 20. I return you again
just as I received them, because I have no Commission to enter into a Treaty
with you about things which perhaps shall never exist any where but in your
luxuriant Fancy. But your Reverences Harangue to the Citizens of London, is so
very pleasant, I cannot forbear transcribing a little of it. These come not to
bring us Rich Commodities, but Fire and Sword, and the Hands and Claws of
Harpyes. Now what are these same Harpyes that have Hands and Claws too?
Reverend Sir, I think I have seen a Picture of a Jesuit with bloody Hands and
Claws instead of Feet. Now if the Hollanders should bring us a Cargo of these
Animals, we should e'n desire them to carry them back again, no Monky, nor Fire
and Sword being half so Mischievous. Consider, I pray you, Oh! Grave and Rich
Citizens, what you shall barter with them, do they offer you Security of the
Protestant Religion? This you enjoy already and may so without their carnal and
cruel Swords. True, Reverend Sir, to your great Grief we do enjoy it; and may
still do so, though neither our Penal Laws nor our Tests are repealed, which by
the grace of God neither their Carnal Swords nor your Spiritual Shams shall
deprive us of. What is it then you expect from them? Is it not much better that
you are defended by the Trained Bands, a part of your Selves, than by Swedes
and Germains filling your Streets, and possessing your Houses and Stores? I
pray, Sir, How old is your Reverence? If you are one of the Schoolboys of the
Savoy, you may in time prove a pretty tolerable Popish Orator at the rate
things now are; but if you are above the discipline of a Ferula, I despair of
you. We know very well the Convenience of our Trained-Bands, and have not
forgot they should have been taken away as useless soon after Monmouth's
Rebellion, and that they were suppressed when Liberty of Conscience was
granted, and restored with the Charter the other day: As for the Swedes and
Germains possessing our Houses and Stores, it is an Irish Insinuation, and
worthy of your Reverence. But, dear Sir, did we enjoy all our Privileges when
our Charter was in the Kings hands, have your Reverence forgot the late Changes
in October and February last, and the Reasons of that? Is it a part of our
Privileges to be turned out because we will not promise to repeal our Laws and
Tests which are our best Securities against the holy Society?

A new Set of Traders will fill the Exchange. Sir, I believe you are much more
concerned for the Savoy than the Exchange. Page 21. You say they have watched
the Critical Season of our Discontents, which they have fomented to Wound us on
our Blind-side. I pray, Sir, who caused these Discontents? Why should the
Church of England be more suspected now than in the beginning of his Majesty's
Reign? Why, you will say they are discontented, who has done this, they are not
discontented without great cause; private persons may, Bodies of Men never do
take pet at small things, never was Prince received with more Loyalty, or
defended with more Bravery than this King was by the Church of England-men; his
Brother only Excepted as to the first, whose many years absence contributed to
the Enhancing the value of his Restitution. Whence then comes this Cloud of
Discontents? What, has your Reverences occasioned it? Why then a little Justice
done upon you, I will undertake, shall appease the Church of England-men. God
and their King are the only beings they worship. And I am confident they of all
the World never will have a quarrel against the King, it is only a few small
Politico's, such as your Reverence, F. P. R. B. etc. small Cattle for which a
Crown ought not to be hazarded, and some others not to be Named by me, but by
the Three Estates.

If any ill Treatments has been given (to the E. C. men) upon Mistakes or
Suspicion that some encouragement had been from Holland, that had occasioned
some Obstinacy, yet since now by several Acts of Grace, the King has made a
reparation upon the full discovery of the Dutifulness, etc. page 22. If any ill
Treatments? Are we still at Ifs and Ands whether we have been ill Treated or
no? But it was for our Obstinacy. Your humble Sevant Sir, We might have been
more pliant to your Reverences, and then we should have been better treated.
But we were suspected to have borrowed this Obstinacy from Holland. Yes, we did
not know the value of our Religion and our Laws till Monsieur Fagel set the
price, and G. B. sent over an Apology. Well, But we have had reparation. Why,
Sir, who was Hanged for this Attempt upon us, who was tried? Is the Dispencing
Power, or the Ecclesiastical Commission, or the Mock Trial declared Illegal;
may not all be Acted over again (...) Morrow? Sir, we do not desire reparation
from our King, but We think it reasonable nevertheless, that we should be well
secured for the future.

When this is done Sir, you may assure his Majesty (if you can come so near
him) that the English Loyalty, Valor, and Bravery, are not dead. But to fight
our selves into eternal Slavery; to ruin all the hopes of Redress for ever at
one blow in one day, will need a better Orator than you to persuade as: We are
no Strangers to either your faith or practices. We remember Q. Marys days, and
the maxims of another Mary, who was Regent of Scotland in her time: That
Promises was not to be kept with Heretics, and that if she could make an
honest excuse after the fact was committed, she would take it upon her
Conscience to kill and undo all that Sect, Spotswood. page 123. And accordingly
she broke her Faith so often, that at last they eased her of that trouble, by
refusing evermore to trust her. The same maxim was used in the Low-Countrys, by
Philip the II. In France, in Germany, in Hungary, and indeed where not: So that
we shall have good reason to expect something more than a bare Promise.

Sr. you are not to think that the Wheede in your 23. page will signify much:
But whereas you tell us, there has been no blot upon his (the Church of
Englands Man's) Scutcheon upon that account since the Reformation: That is, they
were never disloyal to the Crown: I must refer you to the NEW TEST of the
Church of Englands Loyalty, printed with Allowance; the whole design of which
Paper is to brand us, with Setting up Jane Seymore and Q. Elizabeth, whom he
called a Known Bastard. I suppose the Church of England has good reason to
demand Repairations for that Slander. If there be indeed no blot in her
Seutcheon since the Reformation. I assure you Sir, that infamous Libel will one
day be reckoned for, if you do not prevent Justice, by an Examplary and
Voluntary Correction of the Author, the Allower, and Publisher of it.

Page the 24th. you tell us it has hitherto been reputed an Unjust and
Scandalous Censure, that We would be no longer Loyal, than whilst we had a
Prince of our own Religion. But then this has been thrown in our Dish several
times since his now Majesty came to the Crown, by R. C. with Allowance,
notwithstanding all our Zeal and Fidelity to him; and has any Repairation been
yet made for this Injury? Methinks before you teach our Clergy what they are to
Preach, you should have taken care of this. It has been reputed injurious, etc.
By whom? Oh by Church of England Men, and not by R. C's, you may be sure. So
that we ^ust still be contented; the Devils insinuation against Job, should
stand good against us, if we will not put our Selves, our Lives, and our
Fortunes entirely into their power, and Hang or Burn as they think fit.

Page the 25. he tells us Liberty of Conscience and the Church of England are
already Settled: True Sir, and that is the very very reason of all the Strugle;
to get our Laws and Tests Repealed, because they secure both these things, though
not alike to all Protestants. Now these Gentlemen pretended to give the
Dessenters more Liberty to obtain their Assistance against the Church Party for
the Repeal; but the Dessenters knew these Hucksters, and would not Bite: Hence
all the Rage against the whole body of Protestants, especially against the
Dissentes.

But Sir, they know very well you have given them what you can never re-call,
and they laugh at your Rage.

As to the Reports, page 26th and your Answers, I have nothing to say to them:
As for what you affirm, that some of these things the King had resolved to have
granted before the sitting of the intended Parliament, and before he had the
least intelligence of the Dutch Preparations, as testimonies that he designed
the Protection of the Church of England; And that this was known to some
persons of Honor and Credit, page 27. This is the best thing in all your Book,
and might perhaps have been believed, if these worthy Persons had been named.
page 28th. We are told the King Judges that Liberty of Conscience is the very
Fundamental of that happiness which he wishes to his People; it is very odly
worded, but let that pass; His People may enjoy this Liberty without Repealing
either Laws or Tests, as they now do: And it is probable many refused to join
in the Repeal out of Conscience, since they parted with All to keep them: Why
then should they not have the Liberty of their Consciences too? Not to mention
the Case of the Bishops and Inferior Clergy.

Page 29th. As to the Forged heads of the Princes Declaration, and the Bishops
Proposals, as they are known to be the contrivance of the Kings Enemies, framed
on purpose to amuse the People, and make them believe the setting us at rights,
is the only Design of the Dutch, and till those Proposals be granted, We are
not safe. Reverend Sir, your Passion here has made you lift your Gown so high,
that I can plainly see your Tallons, and know you are an Harpy. I know no more
of the Princes Declaration, than his Majesty has been pleased to insert in his
Declaration, of the 7th. Instant; But I have seen the Bishops Proposals, and
none but an Enemy to the Protestant Religion, can be so Severe against them as
you are. But dear Sir, the Suppressing the Jesuits Schools, in the 5th. Sending
Inhibitions after the four Apostolic Vicars in the 6th. And to admit the
Bishops to lay such reasons before his Majesty, as might by the blessiing of
God bring back his Majesty to the Communion of the Church of England, etc. In
the 11th, together with the Ecclesiastical Commission in the 2d. and the
Dispencing Power in the 9th. your two great Ingines, by which you have already
wrought such Wonders in England; and by which you hope to Retrieve all those
Advantages, the Invasion have forced you to Disgorge: These, Reverend Sir, are
the things which so violently moved your Cholar, that you quite forgot you were
to Act the part of a true Member of the Church of England; and in your Passion
against the Bishops, those dreadful Heretical Bishops; you discovered your
Claws so very plainly, that I cannot but pity your Indiscretion; and Advise the
Men of Allowance not to suffer you to appear any more upon the Stage, since you
can Act your part no better.

Page the 30th. you are pleased to confirm my Conjecture; What the King change
his Religion, and part with an inseparable Prerogative of the Crown: And the
Rest of those Impudant Proposals in that Paper? what good Catholic can endure
this? No Gentlemen, you are plainly for bringing the King to Ca^e^bury Castle;
as good no King, as no Jesuits Schools; no Apostolic Vicars, no Dispencing
Power to take off the Tests; no R. C. Zeal. Why dear Sir, are these things so
indispensably Necessary, that all is to be ventured for them? are these the
things for which we must Fight it out to the last Man. Truly Sir, General Monk
was a great man, and a good Subject, but I believe he would not have lost one
Ounce of Blood on this Score. And his Majesty came as freely to the Crown as
his Brother, and none of these things were suspected then. But now great Sir,
do not insist too violently on any of them if you love the Church of England.
It is good reason, all our New Grants, and all our Old Rights, should be
secure, before you can expect we should be so wonderful thankful as you are,
who seem contented we should have any thing, if you may be in a capacity to
pluck it away again when time serve.

Page the 31. As to those who decline Acting in Commission with Roman
Catholics, or mixing with them in the Militia; It is a Sullenness little
becomes worthy Men: Is it now a time to remember former Piques, and refuse
joining all hands for our Defense, when Hanibal is at the Gates? Dear Sir, your
Foot, your Foot: I wonder you should thus forget your self, and the person you
are to Act. In the time of Monmouth's Invasion, one of your Society, put out a
Remonstrance by way of Address, from the Church of England to both Houses of
Parliament, in two Parts; and in the Conclusion of the last, thus he bespeaks
them.

My Lords and Gentlemen:

It depends wholly upon your Generous Action, to see this great Thing (the
bringing the R. C. to Act freely with the Protestants, without taking the
Tests) effected. We see his Majesty is not willing to infringe the Laws, or
alter any thing without your Counsel; nor give occasion to the Discontented, to
esteem him Arbitrary: But you methinks, should prevent him in this, and before
you break up this Assembly, freely desire him to employ any that are known to
be his Friends.

The Style, Genius, and Temper of those Remonstrances, are so very like this
Anatomy, that I believe firmly, one person wrote both. But that be as it will,
we may observe the Dispencing Prerogative was not then in being; and therefore
a true member of the Church of England, was forced to Address to both Houses to
Wheedle them into a Petition, for you know Sir, Hanibal was then at the Gates
too. The Houses however did not think fit to take the Advice of this Wizard;
but however his Majesty used his Discretion; and in the next Session of
Parliament, those very Loyal Gentlemen, were against the Dispensing Powers, yet
they were willing to Pardon all that had been so employed contrary to Law, but
that would not satisfy; so that Parliament was first Prerogued, and then
Dissolved; and the Dispencing Power set on foot. And now in time of War, you
must Act with them because Hanibal is at the Gates; and in the time of Peace
you shall do so too, or turn out. Surely Sir you conceive we have very ill
memories.

There is a very great difference betwixt times of Peace and War, in
Administration of Affairs of Law and Justice. Some that would keep strictly to
the Letter of the Law, in time of Peace may scruple to act with a R. C. etc.
But in a time of Invasion, this scruple ought no way to concern any man, etc.
Page 31. Reverend Sir, you may be pleased to teach your Grandame to P -- your
Politics are now too thin, to deceive a Leather Jacket, or a pair of Canvas
Breeches.

Page 33. you tell the Dissenters the Power they had got in the time of the
Rebellion, under K. Charles the I. necessitate^ the Government after the late
Kings happy Restoration, to continue a standing Army for its defense; and to
enact Penal Laws against them. Why Sir, they have been told another story of
late; that the Church of England, out of a Bloody, proud, persecuting and
implacable Spirit extorted these Penal Laws from Charles II. contrary to his
Inclination. Now, Sir, when your Affairs are in any disorder, you presently
borrow a Church of England Cassock, and with much Gravity bespeak them in
favor of the Government, and in excuse of the Church, because you need her
assistance; but so soon as even you have got what you want, off goes the
Disguise, and then the poor Church of England must Answer both for the standing
Army and the Penal Laws. The Dissenters do so perfectly understand you and your
Arts now, that I have no temptation, to interpose between you and the New
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and Magistrates of Corporations, which the
King in kindness to them has made out of them of late, and it may be, set aside
by this time.

Whether the Dissenters are obliged on the score of Gratitude to assist the
King on the account of the Tolleration, or whether the present War has arisen
purely upon the account of this Indulgence, as you say, page 34. is no part of
my business to inquire. The Dissenters are a grateful sort of Gentlemen, and if
you had appeared in your own Shape and Clothes, you might have said what you
had pleased to them, and they might have done what they had pleased for all me.

The rest of your Exhortation I leave to the Consideration of all Men as I find
it, my design not being to deprive His Majesty of the Assistance or Hearts of
His People, God forbid I should, but to pluck off your Mask, and to show you to
all the World what you are. Shall the Disciples of that Halting Hypocrite
Ignatius Loyola, the younger Mahomet, Teach us Loyalty? Shall they print their
Schoolboy Rhetoric in the Name of the Church of England, with the ALLOWANCE
of the Apostolic Vicars? You that have imbroild so many Kingdoms, been the
occasion of so many Rebellions, Massacres, Plots, Persecutions, breaches of
Faith, etc. Shall you pretend to be so Zealous for Liberty of Conscience,
Trade, and the peace of the World? You that have brought us and His Majesty
into this Distress by your Little Arts and Shams; Shall you now, like Solomon's
Wanton, Wipe your Mouth, and say you have done no Evil? Well Sir, if it must be
so, I am contented; And so farewell.

November the 8th. 1688.
FINIS.

