THE LETTER Writ by the last Assembly General OF THE Clergy of France TO THE
PROTESTANTS, Inviting them to return to their Communion. TOGETHER With the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
Examined By GILBERT BURNET, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC LXXXIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE fate of most that Answer any particular Book or Treatise, is such, that,
one may be justly discouraged from undertaking it: For besides the great
trouble the Answerer is put to, in following his Author in all his Digressions,
and perhaps Impertinences, and the small game he is often engaged in, about
some ill-sounding expression, or some misunderstood period; the issue of the
whole business in matters of Controversies, comes at best to this, That it may
be confessed his Adversary has been too unwary in some assertions, or
unconcluding in some of his Arguments: But still men retain their old
persuasions: And if one whom they had set up for their Champion, should happen
to be baffled, they will only say that they mistook their man; and be being
made quit the Stage, another is set in his room. So that at most their
engagement proves to be of the nature of a single Combat, in the issue of
which only two Individuals, and not two Parties are concerned. But when a whole
Body speaks in one Voice, here the undertaking of a single person, in
opposition to them, may be thought indeed too hardy and bold; but yet the
debate becomes of more consequence, at least to the one side, because the
Credit of those against whom he writes, is so well established, that a
satisfactory Answer to what they offer as the strength of their cause, must
needs have great effect on these who examine those matters Critically, and
judge of them Impartially.

The World has been filled with the noise of the Conversions lately made in
France; but it has been generally given out that the violences of Monsieur de
Marilliac and the Soldiers, and the Payments dispensed by Monsieur Pellisson,
have been the most prevailing Arguments hitherto made use of. That Great King
has indeed interposed in this matter, with a Zeal, that if it were well
directed, might well become one who reckons these to be his most esteemed
Titles, that he is the Most Christian King, and the Eldest Son of the Church.
But amidst all this noise of Conversions, we have heard more of the Temporal
than Spiritual Sword; and except in the violences and outrages of some of the
Clergy, we have not heard much of any share they have had in this matter. It is
true, the Celebrated Explication of their Faith, written some years ago by the
then Bishop of Condom, now of Mea^x, has made a great show, and most of the
Conversions are esteemed the effects of that Book: And the eminent Virtues of
the Author, joined with that great gentleness, by which he insinuates himself
much into the Hearts of all those that come near him, have perhaps really
wrought much on some, whose Consciences were by other motives, disposed to be
very easily persuaded. Soft words and good periods, have also had some weight
with superficial Enquirers. But that Explication of his, which may be well
called a good Plea, managed with much Skill and great Eloquence for a bad
cause, has been so often, and so judiciously answered, that I am confident such
as have considered these Answers, are no more in danger of being blinded with
that dust, which he has so ingeniously raised: For it must be confessed, That
his Book deserves all the commendations that can be given it, for every thing
except the sincerity of it, which (I am sorry to say it) is not of a piece with
the other excellent qualities of that great Prelate.

But now we have before us a work of much more importance, in which we may
reasonably conclude the strength of the Roman cause is to be found: Since it is
the unanimous voice of the most learned and soundest part of that Communion:
For while the Spaniards have chiefly amused themselves mith the Metaphysical
subtilties of School Divinity, and when the Italians have added to that, the
study of the Canon Law, as the best way for preferm^nt; the French have now for
above an Age been set on a more solid and generous pursuit of true Learning:
They have labored in the publishing of the Fathers Works, with great
diligence, and more sincerity than could be expected in any other part of that
Church; where the watchful Eyes of Inquisitors might have prevented that
Fidelity which they have observed in publishing those Records of Antiquity: So
that the state of the former Ages of the Church is better understood there than
in any other Nation of that Communion. Nor has the Secular Clergy, or Laity,
only labored with great faithfulness in those enquiries, such as Albaspine, De
Marca, Godeau, Launnoy, Huetius, Rigaltius, Valesius and Balusius; to name no
more; but even that Order, which is not so much admired over the World for
great scrupulosity of Conscience, has produced there several great Men, that
are never to be named but with Honor, such as Fronto Ducaeus, and Petavius;
but above all, Sirmondus, through whose Writings there runs such a tincture of
Candor and Probity, that in matters of fact, Protestants are generally more
inclined to acquiesce in his authority, than those of his own persuasion are;
which made them afraid at Rome to give him free access to their Manuscripts.
Nor is the Learning of the Gallican Church that for which they are chiefly to
be esteemed: It must also be acknowledged, that from the study of the Ancient
Fathers many of them seem to have derived a great measure of their Spirit,
which has engaged diverse among them to set forward as great a Reformation as
the Constitution of their Church can admit of. They have endeavored not only
to discover the corruptions in Morality and Casuistical Divinity, and many
other abuses in the Government of the Church, but have also infused in their
Clergy a greater Reverence for the Scriptures, a deeper sense of the Pastoral
Care, and a higher value for Holy Orders, than had appeared among them for
diverse Ages before. Some of their Bishops have set their Clergy great Examples:
and a disposition of Reforming men's Lives, and of restoring the Government of
the Church according to the Primitive Rules, has been such, that even those
who are better Reformed, both as to their Doctrine and Worship, must yet
acknowledge that there are many things among them highly Imitable, and by which
they are a great reproach to others, who have not studied to copy after these
patterns they have set them. The World will be for ever bound to Honor the
Names of Godeau, Paschall, Arnauld, and the Author of the Essays of Morality;
and those thoughts which they have set on foot are so just and true, that
though their excellent Bishops are now almost all gone off the Stage, and are
not succeeded by men of their own tempers, yet it is to be hoped, that these
seeds so sown do still grow where they find a soil disposed for them. For
though such Notions are not very grateful to some whose Interests biass them
another way, or to others whose ill lives make them look on all Books of a
severe Piety, and that design a strict Discipline, as so many Satyrs writ
against themselves; yet to such as are not prepossessed nor corrupted, nothing
does so easily enter, and continue so fixed as those Maxims which they infuse;
particularly those of the necessity of a Vocation of the Holy Ghost before one
enters into Holy Orders, and a strict application to the care of Souls, after
one has engaged in them.

Truth and Goodness are in their Natures so Congenial, that there is no way so
certain to lead men to the knowledge of the Truth, as to form their minds
inwardly to such a sense of Piety and Goodness, as may make them fit
receptacles of Truth. Thus did the Heathen Philosophers begin at the purging
their Auditors minds, by their cleansing Doctrines before they communicated to
them their sublimer Precepts. Among the Jews, the Sons of the Prophets were
long prepared in a course of Mortification and Devotion, that so they might
become capable of Divine illapses* and our Savior began his Instructions with
the correcting the ill Morals of his Followers and Hearers; and did not
communicate the higher Mysteries of his Doctrine to them till they were well
prepared for it; since, as he said himself, the way to know his Doctrine,
whether it was of God or not, was to do his will, which makes the sense of the
Soul become as exact in judging of its object, as a sound state of Health makes
the Organs of our Bodily Senses fit to represent their objects distinctly to
us. And therefore that Church that has advanced so far in the reforming the
Morals of the People, and the Conduct of the Clergy, may be very justly
esteemed the best, as well as the most learned part of the Roman Communion:
Though it is not to be denied, but the Jealousy that those men of better
Notions have fallen under, what by the Interest the Jesuits have gained both
at Court and in the Sorbonne, what by the willingness that is in the greatest
part of Men, particularly of corrupt Ecclesiastics, to love looser Principles,
and what by the odious names of Innovators, of Men inclined to Heresy, Schism
or Faction, is such, that as on the one hand they are looked at with an ill Eye,
as a sort of men that are neither good Subjects to the King nor to the Pope; So
they on the other hand, to free themselves from these imputations, have perhaps
departed too much from these sincere principles which they had at first laid
down, and have betaken themselves to some Arts and Policies that do not become
men so enlightened as they are. But I will not enlarge more on this, because I
honor them so much, and have learned so much from them, that I will rather
bewail, than insult over their failings. But though they themselves are thus
suspected, yet such is the force of Truth, and the Evidence of those Maxims
which they hold, and the World is so possessed with them, that even their
greatest Enemies are forced to yield to them, rather perhaps because they dare
not scandalize the World, by keeping up abuses, of which all people are
convinced, than out of any inward affection they bear to a severe or Primitive
Discipline. By this means it is that there is now nothing more common in all
the parts of France, than to talk of a Reformation of abuses, even in those
places where the Prelates Example is perhaps one of the most conspicuous of all
the Abuses.

To what has been said this may be added, That their Glorious and Conquering
Monarch being now possessed with this Maxim, That he will have but one
Religion in his Dominions, every one there looks on the reducing many of those
they call Heretics, as a sure way to obtain his favor, and so to attain to
great Dignities in the Church. It is certain, the most refined Wits there are
now set on work to bring out the strength of their cause with the greatest
advantage that is possible. Therefore the Assembly General of their Clergy
being called together, (and being so much the more engaged to show their Zeal
against Heresy, that they might cover themselves from the Reproaches of some
that are more bigoted, for their compliance with the King in the matter of the
Regale,) has now made an Address to all the Calvinists of France, inviting
them to return to their Communion; to which they have added Directions to those
that shall labor in these Conversions; which they call Methods, by which their
minds are in general to be wrought upon, without entering into the detail of
these Arguments, by which the Controversies have been hitherto managed. I
confess, when I read these first, I was astonished at most things in them, and
could have almost thought that a Veron or a Maimbourg had published their
Visions in the name of that August Body; but I know the Press there is so
regulated, and the Constitution of that Kingdom is such, that so gross an abuse
could not be put upon the World. Besides, when I had over and over again laid
all these methods together, I found that indeed all the strength of their Cause
lay divided among them: So that if there is no extraordinary force in them, it
is because the Cause can bear nothing that is more solid or more convincing. I
doubt not but the Letter, and these Methods will be examined in France, with
that clearness and exactness that may be expected from the many extraordinary
Pens that are there. But I being earnestly desired to write somewhat concerning
it, have adventured on it, I have first begun at home, and since here we have
the concurring voice of so great and so learned a Church concerning the methods
of converting Protestants, I hope it will be no unacceptable thing to this
Nation to put these in English, together with such Reflections on them as may
be more easily apprehended by every Reader that has but a due measure of
Application and Judgment, though ^e has not amused himself much with deep
studies of Divinity. I shall hold in the general and to the Rational part as
they do, without going further in any particular Enquiry, than shall seem in
some sort necessary.

I ought to make great Apologies for so hardy an Enterprise, but I cannot do
that without giving the Reasons that determined me to it, which is not at
present convenient. Therefore I must only in general beg the Readers Charity,
and that he will not impute this attempt to any forwardness of mine, or to any
extravagant opinion I may have of my self, as if I were fit to enter the Lists
with such great persons, to whom I pay all that Reverend esteem which becomes
both to their Characters and Qualities, and to whom I know better what is due,
than to presume to say any thing in contradiction to them, if I were not led to
it by that which I owe to Truth, and to the God of Truth: After I have examined
both their Letter, and the Methods added to it, I will venture further, and
offer on the other hand such Considerations as are just and lawful prejudices
against that Communion, and are such as ought, at least, to put all men in
doubt that things are not right among them, and to dispose them to believe that
matters in Controversy between them and us ought to be examined more exactly
and impartially, and that upon a general view, the prejudices lie much stronger
in our favors, than against us.

The Letter writ by the Assembly of the Clergy, to the Calvinists in France.
The Archbishops, Bishops, and the whole Gallican Clergy, assembled at Paris by
the Kings authority, wish to their Brethren of the Calvinist Sect, Amendment,
and a return to the Church, and an Agreement with it.
Brethren,
THE whole Church of Christ does now of a great while groan, and your Mother
being filled with holy and sincere tenderness for you, does with regret see you
rent from her Belly, her Breasts, and her Bosom, by a voluntary Separation,
and continue still to stray in the Desert.

For how can a Mother forget the Children of her Womb, or the Church be
unmindful of her love to you that are still her Children, though you have
forgot your duty to her? The Infection of Error, and the violence of the
Calvinistical Separation having drawn you away from the Catholic Truth, and
the purity of the Ancient Faith, and separated you from the head of the
Christian Unity. From hence is it, Brethren, that she groans and complains most
grievously, but yet most lovingly, that her bowels are torn: She seeks for her
Sons that are lost, she calls as a Partridge, as a Hen she would gather them
together, as an Eagle she provokes them to fly; and being again in the pangs of
travel, she desires to bear you a second time, ye little Children, that so
Christ may be again formed in you, according to Truth, in the way of the
Catholic Church.

Therefore we the whole Gallican Clergy, whom the Holy Ghost has set to govern
that Church in which you were born, and who by an uninterrupted Inheritance
hold the same Faith, as well as the same Chairs, which those Holy Bishops held,
who first brought the Christian Religion into France, do now call on you, and
as the Ambassadors of Christ, we ask you, as if God did beseech you by us, Why
have you made Separation from us?

For indeed, whether you will or not, such are your circumstances, that you are
our Brethren, whom all our Common Father did long ago receive into the adoption
of Children, and whom our common Mother, the Church, did likewise receive into
the hope of our Eternal Inheritance. And even he himself who first bewitched
you, that you should not obey the Truth of the Gospel, the Standard Bearer of
your profession, did at first live amongst us as a Brother, in all things of
the same mind with us. Were we not all of the same household? Did we not all eat
of the same Spiritual meat? And did not he perform among us the mutual Offices
of Brotherly Charity? See if you can find any excuse either to your Father,
your Mother, or your Brethren, to take off the Infamy of so wicked, so sudden,
and so rash a flight; of this dividing of Christ, the renting the Sacraments of
Christ, an impious War against the members of Christ, the accusing the Spouse
of Christ, and the denial of the Promises of Christ? Excuse and wash off these
things if you can: But since you cannot do it, then confess that you are fallen
under that charge of the Prophet, An evil Son calls himself righteous, but he
cannot wash off his departure.

Wherefore then, Brethren, have you not continued in the root with the whole
World? Why did you break the Vows and the Wishes of the Faithful, with the
Altars on which they were offered? Why did you intercept the course of Prayer
from the Altars, from whence was the ascent to God? Why did you then with
Sacrilegious hands endeavor to remove the Ladder that came down to those
Stones, that so Prayers might not be made to God after the customary manner.
Other Sectaries hitherto have indeed attempted that, not that they might
overthrow the Altar of Christ, but that they might raise up their own Altar,
such as it was, against the Altar of Christ. But you, as if you had designed to
destroy the Christian Sacrifice, have dared to commit a crime unheard of before
these times. You have destroyed the Altars of the Lord of Hosts, in which the
Sparrow (Christ) had chosen to himself an House, and the Turtle (the Church) a
Nest, where she might lay her young.

It was this Schismatical fury that brought forth these things, and allhat has
followed since, either of Wars against the Church, or of Errors against the
Ancient Doctrine: Nor would we have those things ascribed so much to your
Inclinations as to the nature of Schism. But this is that upon which we
expostulate with you in particular, and which we ask of you without ceasing,
Why have you made the Schism? And unless you answer this, how well soever you
may speak or write of other things, it is all to no purpose.

We do not doubt, but in answer to this, you will make use of that old and
common defense of all Schismatics, and that you who upon trial, know that it
is not possible to shake the Doctrines believed by us, will begin to inveigh
against the Morals of our men, as if holier persons, who love severer Laws,
could not hold it creditable for their reputation, or safe to their
Consciences, to live with such men. These are the things forsooth, Brethren,
for which the Unity of Christ is rent by you, the Inheritance of your Brethren
is blasphemed, and the Virtue and Truth of the Sacraments of the Church are
despised: Consider how far you have departed from the Gospel in this.

These things that you object were less considerable both for number and
weight, or perhaps unknown, and may be not at all true. But if they had been
true, and acknowledged, and worse than they were, yet those Tares ought to have
been spared by Christians, for the sake of the Wheat: for the vices of the bad
are to be endured, because of the mixture of the good. Moses endured thousands
that murmured against God. Samuel endured both Eli's Sons and his own, that
acted perversely Christ himself, our Lord, endured Iud^s that was his Accuser,
and a Thief, and also his Betrayer. The Apostles endured false Brethren, and
false Apostle^ that opposed them and their Doctrine* And S. Paul, who did not
seek his ow^ things, but the things of Jesus Christ conversed with great
patience among those that sought their own things, an^ not the things of Jesus
Christ. But you* dear Brethren, not only have not endured the Church, your
Mother, and the Spouse of Christ, but have rent, torn and violated her Unity:
And that yo^ might thus rend, tear and violate he^* you have charged the
blemishes of private persons on her, whom Christ has cleansed with the washing
of Water through the Word of Life, that he might present her glorious to
himself, without either spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.

What remains then, Brethren, but that for your sakes we follow that advice of
the Holy Ghosts, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Sons of God. And that by the Bowels of Mercy, which you have hitherto torn; by
the Womb of the Church, your Mother, which you have burst; by the Charity of
Brethren, which you have so often violated; by the Sacraments of God, which you
have despised; by the Altars of God, which you have broken; and by every thing,
Sacred or Divine, that is worshipped either in Heaven or Earth; we exhort you
with the Hearts of Brethren to amend, to return, and to be reconciled. And what
indeed remains, but that you, forgetting the Schism, and remembering your
Mothers Breasts, should again come home, where there are so many hired Servants
that have bread enough, while you cannot gather up crumbs for satisfying in any
sort your Spiritual hunger, being in a dry and untrodden Desert. Why then do
you delay or withstand this? Are you ashamed to be reckoned Children with
those, among whom the eldest Son Lewis is daily erecting new Trophies to the
Church his best Mother: Who, by reason of your wilfulness, is in this only not
entirely happy, that although he is daily decreeing many things both
religiously and piously for maintaining Christianity, yet he sees some of his
own Subjects, who have of their own accord, forsaken the Religion of their
Country, and have betaken themselves to foreign rites, being Apostates from
Religion, and deserters of the Ancient Warfare, to continue still in their
Error. And this Most Christian King did lately in our hearing say, That he did
so earnestly desire to see all those broken and scattered parcels brought back
to the Unity of the Church, that he would esteem it his Glory to compass it
with the shedding of his own Royal blood, and even with the loss of that
Invincible Arm, by which he has so happily made an end of so many Wars. Will
you then, Brethr^n, envy that Palm of Victory to this most August Prince, and
your King that has subdued so many and such mighty Enemies, that has taken so
many strong Towns, and has conquered such great Provinces, and is eminent in
his Triumphs of all sorts, and yet would prefer this Victory to all the rest?

But, Brethren, while we thus call upon you, and exhort you to the Counsels of
Peace, do not you say, Seek us not, for this is the language of Iniquity, by
which we are divided, and not of Charity, by which we are Christians. Remember
that the Spirit of Truth and Peace has commanded us by the Prophet not to cease
to say to those who deny that they are our Brethren, You are our Brethren.

What time can offer it self more fitly for calling you back to the Roman
Communion than this, in which Pope Innocent governs the Roman Church; whose
life and manners being formed according to the ancient and severe discipline,
present a perfect pattern of Holiness to the Christian World: So that it will
be both for your Honor as well as for your Happiness, and a mark of great
Virtue in you, to join your selves to him who is such an eminent cherisher of
all Virtue.

Therefore as for you that need a Physician, that are the members of Christ,
and noble ones too, bought with the same price, but are torn from the Head and
Body of the Church, through the wicked fraud of all our common Enemy, we pray
you by the Eternal God suffer your selves to be healed, receive this
admonition, and this humble Prayer of ours: For such is our gentleness and
compassion toward you, that we can confidently use the lowest expressions
possible. And do you in a Brotherly manner take hold of this occasion, that we
offer you with such brotherly love, that so at last, through the grace of our
God, the night of stupifying Error being dissipated, the Light of Divine Truth
may shine daily more and more; suffer nor the weak and ignorant part of the
Christian flock to perish, because of some Jealousies that you have rashly
taken up against our Faith* Do you think it unseemly to discover your Disease
to the Physician? Give place both to Repentance and Physic* and address your
selves humbly to God, and esteem this to be that which is chiefly, and only
honorable in Christians.

But if you will with obstinate minds refuse to do this while we thus exhort
you, if you will not be overcome by Prayers, nor bended by Charity, nor wrought
on by Admonitions to a Reconciliation, the Angels of Peace will weep bitterly;
but yet for all that we will not leave you to your selves, though that were but
just to be done to persons so excessively obstinate; we will not give over our
seeking for the Sheep of Christ among the Hedges and Thorns; and when we have
done all by which your minds ought to have been reconciled to us, at last our
Peace, which is so earnestly and sincerely offered to you, when it is rejected
by you, shall return to us: Nor will God any longer require your Souls at our
hands. And as this your last error will be worse than your former, so your
last end will be worse than any thing you have formerly felt. But Brethren, we
hope better things, and things which accompany salvation.

Francis Archbishop of Paris, President. Charles Maurice Archbishop and Duke
of Rheims. Charles Archbishop of Ambrun. James Archbishop and Duke of
Cambray. Hyacinth Archbishop of Alby. Mi. Phelipeaux Archbishop of Bourges.
James Nicholas Colbert Archbishop of Carthage, Coadjutor of Rouen. Lewis of
Bourlemont Archbishop of Bourdeaux. Gilbert Bishop of Tournay. Nicholas Bishop
of Riez. Daniel Bishop and Earl of Valence and Die. Gabriel Bishop of Autun.
William Bishop of Bazas. Gabriel Bishop of Auranches. James Bishop of Meaux.
Sebastian Bishop of St. Malo. L. M. Ar. de Simiane Bishop and Duke of Langres.
Fr. Leo Bishop of Glandeves. Lucas Bishop of Frioul. I. B. M. Colbert Bishop
and Duke of Mountauban. Charles Bishop of Montpellier. Francis Bishop of Mande.
Charles Bishop of La Vaur. Andrew Bishop of Auxerre. Francis Bishop of Troyes.
Lewis Bishop and Earl of Chalons. Francis Bishop of Triguier. Peter Bishop of
Bellay. Gabriel Bishop of Conserans. Lewis Bishop of Alet. Humbert Bishop of
Tulle* I. B. D' Estampes Bishop of Marseilles. Fr. de Camps designed Coadjutor
of Glandeves. De St. George designed Bishop of M^scon. Paul Phil. de Lusignan.
Lud. d' Espinay de St. Luc, C. Leny de Coadelets. La Faye. Cocquelin. Lambert.
P. de Bermund. A. H. de Fleury. De Viens. F. Feu. A. de Maupiou. Le Franc de la
Grange. De Senaux. Parra Dean of Bellay. De Boshe. M. de Ratabon. Clement de
Pouudeux. Bigot. De Gourgues. De Villeneuve de Vence. I. F. de l' Escure. Peter
le Roy. A. de Soupets. A. Argoud Dean of Vienna. Gerbais. De Bausset. G.
Bochart de Champigny. Courcier. Cheron. A. Faure. F. Maucroix. De la Borcy. De
Francqueville. Armand Bazin de Besons, Agent-General of the Clergy of France.
I. Desmaretz Agent-General of the Clergy of France.


REMARKS On the former LETTER.
THE tender expressions with which this Letter begins, give the World some
hopes that the Gallican Clergy have bowels of Compassion, for those they call
their Brethren and Little Children, though the figures of a Partridge or an
Eagle are too forced to flow from affections much moved. But the severities now
exercised in mos^ parts of France look like Esau's hands, while the Clergy
speak with Jacob's voice.

The many terrible Edicts that come out daily against those of that persuasion,
and the much greater severity with which they are executed, do not very well
agree with this melting language. Perhaps some may think those Edicts are Civil
things, and that the Intendants or other Officers who execute them, being of
the Laity, therefore the Clergy are no way concerned in it. But if the blame of
this is taken off from them, it must be laid somewhere else. It is notoriously
known that the King himself is not at all of a bloody disposition, but is
merciful and gentle: So that for all the hard measure that many of those who
are forced to fly hither for refuge, feel, yet they do acknowledge that they
owe it to the Kings tenderness to his people, and aversion from Cruelty, that
it is not worse with them; and that they are not massacred and destroyed to be
the effect of his Clemency and Protection. And of this he has lately given the
World a double assurance, both in the Letters he sent to the Bishops of France,
and in those he sent with them to the Deputies in the several Provinces,
Printed together with this Letter of the Clergy. In the first are these words,
Recommending to you above all things the managing the Spirits of those of that
Religion with Gentleness; and to use no other force but that of Reason, for the
bringing them again to the knowledge of the Truth, without doing any thing
against the Edicts and Declarations, by the virtue of which the exercise of
that Religion is tolerated within my Kingdom. This is a little varied in the
second Letter thus, I recommend to you above all to manage the Spirits of those
of that Religion with gentleness, and to hinder the doing of any thing that may
be an Invasion on that which is granted them by the Edicts and Declarations
made in their favors.

We will not have so criminal a thought of so glorious a Prince, as to suspect
his sincerity in this: and therefore when it ^is as visible as the day, that
those Edicts are broken almost in every branch of them, we must conclude that
either the King is not well informed of the nature of those Edicts, or is not
acquainted with the violation of them: And since no King, how great soever, can
see but with other men's Eyes, and that it is not to be imagined that a Prince
so employed, as he is, can have read and examined the Edicts granted by his
Ancestors in favor of that Religion, it must be concluded, that those who have
procured the passing those late Edicts that contradict the former, have either
flatly imposed on him, by making him believe they were not contrary to them, or
have found out some slight Equivocation in the words of the former Edicts, upon
which that Great King has been induced to pass those Edicts, which have come
out of late so frequently against them. In this whole matter no political
consideration is so much as pretended, the Interests of State lie clearly
against it. The design is well enough understood. A Zeal for extirpating
Heresy, and the advancement of the Kings Glory is all that we hear given out
for warranting those severities, which lie so heavy on such great numbers of
the best Subjects that France has.

The Interest that some of that Assembly, the President in particular, has in
the management of the affairs that concern the Spirituality, and the high
Panegyricks which that body both offer to the King, and give of him for his
proceedings in that affair, show that as some of them set them on, so the rest
approve of them: So that upon the whole matter, all the hard usage the poor
Protestants meet with, lies at their door.

It is hard to persuade the World that they can have such Bowels, while they
thus tear those they call their Little Children with their Paws: Suppose their
Children were mistaken, and in Errors, yet they should be Fathers still, and
not starve them to death, because they cannot either change their thoughts, or
become so impious as to join in a Worship which they think is not only
Superstitious but Idolatrous. Men's opinions are not in their own power, their
understandings are necessary Agents, and are determined by the evidence of
things set before them: Our wills can indeed engage our understandings to make
enquiries with more application: they can also biass us with some partiality,
for that in which we find our Interests; they can likewise command our actions,
so that we may disguise and dissemble our opinions: But their dominion goes no
further. It is not to be doubted but a small part of that hard usage which
those oppressed Frenchmen have met with, has more than determined them to
enquire narrowly into those opinions, which were infused in them by their
education: And has wrought so effectually on them, as to make them wish they
could be of another mind; but after all, if they see nothing but force to work
on them, and manifestly discern the weakness of those Reasons that are offered
for their Conviction, what remains but that either they must do violence to
themselves, and so join in that monstrous Idolatry of a worshipping as a God,
that which they believe to be only a piece of Bread; or that they must still
groan under those miseries to which they see themselves condemned; which must
needs possess them with such an opinion of the Cruelty of those that call
themselves their Fathers, that all the tender expressions they read in this
Letter cannot root it out: For Deeds are much surer evidences of men's
affections than Words. The Title of a Father agrees ill with the Rage of an
Enemy.

The Members of this Assembly pretend they go in the traces of those who first
brought the Christian Religion into France; and that they hold the same Faith,
as well as they possess the same Chairs. It were to be wished, that they were
also acted with the same Spirit of meekness and gentleness toward those who
differ from them, and that they had the same aversion to Cruelty that we find
among the Ancients. I shall not here allege what Tertullian and Cyprian have
said in general against Cruelty on the account of Religion, nor what Lactantius
has more copiously enlarged on. But since they mention those that first
established the Christian Religion in France, I shall offer to them what the
first of the Gallican Bishops (who had an occasion given him to write of such
matters, Hilary of Poictiers) said against the Arians, who were persecuting the
Orthodox under Constantius; though their greatest severities were not equal to
those that the Protestants are now made to suffer. It will be unreasonable to
allege that what Hilary said against that Persecution cannot quadrate with the
present case, the one being done by an Heretical Emperor, and the other by a
Most Christian King. I shall avoid the making any odious comparison in this
matter; but this must be acknowledged, that it is to beg the question to say,
the one persecuted to advance an error, whereas the other does it to suppress
error; and it will appear that he wrote not sincerely, if he did not condemn
that way of proceeding in what cause soever it were employed: For he plainly
says, the Bishops would have opposed such methods even to advance Truth. Ad
Constable. Permittat lenitas tua populis ut quos voluerint, quos pu^averint, quos
elegerint, audiant docentes, and divina mysteriorum solennia concelebrent and
pro inco^umita^e and beatitudine tua offeran^ preces. Non quisquam perversus
aut invidus maligna loquatur. Nulla quide^ suspicio eri^ non modo Sedi^ionis,
sed nec asperae murmurationis. -- Deus cognitionem sui docuit potius quam
exegit, and operationum coelestium admiratione praecep^is suis concilians
au^hori^a^em, coactam confitendi se aspernatus est, voluntatem. Si ad fidem
veram istiusmodi vis adhiberetur, Episcopalis Doctrina obviam pergere^,
dicer^^que, Deus universitatis est, obsequio non eg^t necessario, non requirit
coactam confessionem. Non fallendus est sed promerendus; nostr^ potius non sua
causa venerandus est. Non possum nisi volentem recipere, nisi orantem audire,
nisi profitentem signare. -- At vero quid istud quod Sacerdotes timere Deum
vinculis coguntur, poenis jubentur; Sacerdotes Carceribus continentur, plebs in
custodiam catenati ordinis disponitur?
Hilary addressed himself to Constantius, that he would slacken his severities,
and Suffer the people to hear those Preach, and celebrate the Holy mysteries,
and pray for his safety and success, whom they liked best, and esteemed most,
and had made choice of; then he promises that all things would be quiet, and
that not only there would be no Sedition, but not so much as any murmuring. And
as a reason for enforcing this, he says a little after; God has taught, but not
imposed on us the knowledge of himself, and conciliated authority to his
Commands by the Miracles that were wrought; but he despises that Confession
that flows from a compelled mind. If such force were used to draw men to the
true Faith, the Episcopal Doctrine would interpose and say The Earth is the
Lords, and he needs not an enforced Obedience, nor does he require a
constrained Confession. He is not to be deceived, but his favor is to be
desired, and he is to be worshipped for our caus^, not for his own. I could not
receive any but such as were willing, nor hear such as did not entreat me, nor
confirm such as did not profess (the Faith.) To this he adds, "But what is this
that Priests are forced by Chains to fear God, and commanded by the terror of
punishments? That Priests are kept in Prisons, and the people are delivered
over to the Jaylors? And upon this he runs out more largely than is necessary
to transcribe.

But let us also hear how he addresses himself to those Bishops that were the
chief Procurers and Instruments of all the sufferings of the Orthodox: And
indeed, what he says to them does serve as so apposite an Answer to a great
part of this Letter, that I hope it will not be irksome to translate a large
quotation out of it. Idem contra A^ian^s in prin^i^i^. Sp^ciosum quid^m nomen
est pacis, and pulchra est opinio unitatis; sed quis ambigat eam solam
ecclesiae atque Eva^geliorum unicam pacem esse, quae Christi est? Quam ad
Apostolos post passionis ^uae gloriam est locutus, quam ad mandati sui aeterni
pignus abiturus commendavit. Hanc nos, fratres dilectissimi, ut amissam
quaerere and turbatam componere and repertam t^nere curavimus. Sed hujus ipsius
fieri nos v^l participes ^el authors n^c temporis nostri pecca^a meruerunt,
nec imminentis Antichris^i pr^^ vii* ministrique sunt passi: Qui pace su^, id
est Impietatis suae uni^ate se j^ctant* agen^es se non ut Christi Episcopos sed
(...) ^ntichristi Sacerdotes. Ac ne maledicis verborum in eos uti convitiis
arguamur, cau^am perditionis publicae ne cuiquam ^gnorata sit, non tacemus*
Antichristos plures etiam Apostolo Joanne praedicante cognovimus. Quisquis enim
Christum qualis ab Apostolis est praedicatus, negavit, Antichristus es^.
nominis Antichristi proprietas est. Christo esse contrarium. Hoc nunc sub
opinione falsae pietatis efficitur, ho^ sub specie praedicationis Evangelicae
laboratur, ut dominus Jesus Christus dum praedicari creditur denegetur.
Ac^primum mis^reri licet rostrae aetatis laborem, and praesentium temporum
stul^as opin^ones congemiscere, quibus patrocinari Deo humana creduntur, and ad
tuendam Christi Ecclesiam ambitione seculari laboratur. Oro vos Episcopi qui
hoc vos esse creditis, quibusnam suffragiis ad praedicandum Evangelium Apostoli
usi sunt? Quibus adjuti potestatibus Christum praedicaverunt, gentesque fere
omnes ex Idolis ad Deum transtulerunt? Anne aliquam sibi assumebant e Palatio
dignitatem, hymnum Deo in carcere inter catenas and post flagella cantantes?
Edictisque Regiis Paulus cum in theatro spectaculum ipse es^et Christo
Ecclesiam congregabat? Nerone se credo aut Vespasiano aut Decio patrocinantibus
t^ebatur, quorum in nos odiis confessio divinae predicationis eff^oruit? Illi
manu atque opere se alentes, intra coenacula secretaque coeuntes, vicos and
castella gentesque fere omnes terra ac mari contra Senatus consulta and Regum
Edicta peragrantes. Claves credo regni Coelorum non habebant? Aut non manifesta
tum Dei virtus contra odia humana porrexit, cum tanto magis Chris^us
praedicaretur, quanto magis praedicari inhiberetur? At nunc, proh dolor!
Divinam fidem suffragia terrena commendant, inopsque virtutis suae Christus,
dum ambitio nomini suo conciliatur, arguitur. Terret exiliis and carceribus
Ecclesia, credique sibi cogit, quae exiliis and carceribus est credita: pendet
a dignatione communicantium, quae persequentium est consecrata terrori. Fugat
Sacerdotes quae fugatis est Sacerdotibus propagata: diligi se gloriatur a
mundo, quae Christi esse non potuit nisi eam mundus odisset. Haec de
comparatione traditae nobis ollm Ecclesiae, nunc quam deperditae, res ipsa quae
in oculis omnium est atque ore, clamavit.
The name of Peace (says he) is specious, and the opinion of Unity is
beautiful: But it is past all doubt, that that Peace only which is the Peace of
Christ is the Peace of the Church and the Gospels: We have desired to recover
that same Peace that is now lost, of which he spoke to his Apostles after his
glorious sufferings, and which he being to leave them, recommended to them as a
pledge of his Eternal Laws. And we have desired to compose the disorders now
made in it, and having again recovered it, we have also desired to maintain it.
But so prevalen^ have the sins of this age been, and the sore-runners and
Ministers of Antichrist that is approaching, have been so active, that we could
neither procure this Peace, nor partake of it: While those who boast of the
Unity of their Peace, that is, of their impiety, behave themselves not like the
Bishops of Christ, but like the Priests of Antichrist. But that we may not be
blamed for using reproachful words, we will not conceal the cause of this
common ruin, that so none may be ignorant of it. We know from what S. John the
Apostle has delivered, that there are many Antichrists, and whosoever denies
Christ, as he was preached by the Apostles, is an Antichrist. It is the
property of Antichrist, marked by the very name, to be contrary to Christ. Now
by the opinion of a mistaken Piety, and under the pretense of preaching the
Gospel, this is effected or endeavored, that the Lord Jesus Christ while he
seems to be Preached, is denied. In the first place, we must pity the labor of
this age, and lament the foolish opinions of those times, in which God is
thought to be protected by Men, and by Secular ambition the Church of Christ is
labored to be defended. I pray you, O you Bishops, who believe your selves to
be such, what were the assistances which the Apostles made use of in preaching
the Gospel? By what Earthly powers were they supported when they preached
Christ, and converted almost all Nations from Idols to God? Did they derive any
authority from the Palace, when they were singing Hymns to God, in Prison, in
Chains, and after they were whipped? Did Paul gather a Church to Christ by
virtue of Royal Edicts, when he himself was exposed as a spectacle on a
Theater? Did he secure himself by the protection of a Nero, a Vespasian or a
Decius, by whose hatred of us the Confession of that Divine Preaching did
flourish? They maint^ining themselves by their own handiwork, and assembling
in upper rooms and secret places, went over all Countries, both Villages and
strong places, through Sea and Land, notwithstanding the Decrees of Senates and
Royal Edicts against them. And I suppose it will not be denied, that they had
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Did not the Divine power exert it self
manifestly against the hatred of men, when Christ was preached so much the more
as the preaching of him was prohibited? But now, alas, humane aids are employed
to recommend our Divine Faith, and Christ is accused as having lost his former
power, while his name is promoted by ambition. The Church now terrifies others
by banishments and imprisonments: She depends on the favor of her
Communicants, who was consecrated by the terror of her Persecutors. She
banishes Priests who was propagated by the banishment of her own Priests: and
now boasts that she is beloved of the World, who yet could never have been
Christ's, if the World had not hated her. The present state of affairs, which is
in all men's Eyes and Discourses, gives us this parallel of the condition of the
Church, as it was anciently conveyed down to us, and as it is now ruined in our
days.

There needs no application of these words to the present purpose, they express
the Plea of those persecuted men so fully, that it may be well concluded that
the Spirit that acted in Hilary, is not the same with that which now inspires
the Reverend Prelates of that Church. To this I might add the known History of
the Priscillianists that fell out not long after. Sulp. Sev. l. 2. Sacr. Hist.
and Dial. 2. de vita Martini.
I shall not presume to make a parallel between any of the Gallican Church, and
Ithacius, who persecuted them; of whom the Historian gives this Character, That
he was a vain, sumptuous, sensual* and impudent man, and that he grew to that
pitch in vice, that he suspected all men that led strict lives, as if they had
been inclined to Heresy. And it is also to be hoped, that none will be so
uncharitable as to compare the Priscillianists with those they now call
Heretics in France; whether we consider their opinions, that were a revival of
the blasphemies of the Gnostics, or their morals, that were brutal and
obscene, even by Priscillian's own confession. Now Ithacius prosecuted those in
the Emperors Courts, and went on in the pursuit, though the great Apostle of
that age, Martin, warned him often to give it over. In conclusion, when
Ithacius had set it on so far that a Sentence was sure to pass against them, he
then withdrew from it: Sentence was given, and some of them were put to death,
upon which some Bishops excommunicated Ithacius, yet S. Martin was wrought on
to communicate with him very much against his mind; being threatened by the
Emperor Maximus that if he would not do it, Troops should be ordered to march
into Spain, to destroy the rest of them. This prevailed on that good man to
join in Communion with those that had acted so contrary to the mercifulness of
their Religion, and to the sacredness of their Character.

But no Arts could work on S. Martin to approve of what they had done. The
effects of this were remarkable, for when S. Martin went home, if we will
believe Sulpitius, an Angel appeared to him, and reproved him severely for what
he had done; upon which he with many tears, lamented much the sin he had
committed by his communicating with those men, and would never after that
communicate with any of that party: And during the sixteen years that he
survived that, Sulpitius who lived with him, tells us that he never went to any
Synod, and that there was a great withdrawing of those Influences and Graces,
for which he had been so eminent formerly.

And thus if S. Martin's example and practice is of any authority, the Cruelty
of that Church that has engaged all the Princes of Europe, as much as was in
their power, to do what Maximus then did, and the present practices of the
Bishops about the Court, might justify a Separation from them. But we do not
proceed upon such disputable grounds.

To this I shall only ^dd the a^thority of another Father, who t^o^gh he was
none of the Gallican Bishops, (...) since he is more read and esteemed in that
Church than any other of all the ^athers, it is to be hoped that his authority
may be somewhat considered. It is S. Austin. He was once against all sorts of
severity in matters of Religion, and delivered his mind so pathetically and
elega^tly on that subject, that I presume the Reader will not be ill pleased to
hear his own words, writing against the Manicheans, whose impieties are too
well known to be enlarged on; so as to show that even in the account which the
Church of Rome makes of things, they cannot pretend that the Protestants are as
bad as they were. He begins his Book against them with an earnest Prayer to God
that he would give him a calm and serene mind, so that he might study their
conversion* and not seek their ruin; to which purpose he applies those words
of S. Paul to Timothy, the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be meek
toward all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing them that
oppose themselves: To which he adds these words, Illi in vos saeviant qui
nesciunt quo cum labor verum inveniatur, and quam difficile caveantur errores.
Illi i^ vos saeviant qui nesciunt quam rarum and arduum si^ carnalia
phan^asmata piae mentis fere^itate superare. Illi in vos saeviant qui nesciunt
cum quanta difficultate sa^ietur oculus interioris hominis ut possit intueri
solemn suum. Illi in v^s saeviant-qui nesciunt quibus suspiriis and gemitibus
fiat ut ex quantulacunque part possit intelligi Deus. Postremo, illi in v^s
saeviant qui nullo tali errore decepti sunt, quali vos deceptos vident. Contra
Epist. Fund. cap. 1, and 2.
Let them exercise Cruelty upon you, who do not know with what difficulty truth
is found out, and how hardly errors are avoided: Let them exercise Cruelty
upon you, who do not know how rare and hard a thing it is to overmaster carnal
imaginations with the serenity of a pious mind. Let them exercise Cruelty upon
you, who do not know with what difficulty the eye of the inward man is healed,
that so it may behold its Sun. Let them exercise Cruelty upon you, who do not
know with what groans and sighs we attain the smallest measure of the knowledge
of God. And in the last place, let them exercise Cruelty upon you, who were
never themselves deceived with any error like that with which you are now
deceived*

It is true, it may be pretended, that he became afterward of another mind,
but that will not serve to excuse the severities now on foot, the case being so
very different. The Donatists in his time very generally fierce and cruel, one
sort of them, the Circumcellionists, acted like mad men: They did lie in wait
for S. Austin's life; they fell upon several Bishops with great barbarity,
putting out the eyes of some, and cudgelling others till they left them as
dead. Upon this, the Bishops of Africa were forced to desire the Emperors
protection, and that the Laws made against Heretics might be executed upon the
Donatists, Ep. 48. and ep. ^0.
and yet even in this S. Austin was at first averse. It is true, he afterward
in his Writings against the Donatists justified those severities of fining and
banishing, Lib. 3. cont. ^etil. c. 47. and 50.
but he expresses both in his own name, and in the name of all those Churches,
great dislike not only of all Capital proceedings, but of all rigor; Ep. 60,
127, 158, 160.
and when the Governors and Magistrates were carrying things too far, he
interposed often and ^ith great earnestness to moderate their severity: and
wrote to them, that if they went on with such rigor, the Bishops would rather
bear with all the violences of the Donatists, than seek to them for redress;
and whole Synods of Bishops concurred with him in making the like Addresses in
their favors; And though there were excesses committed in some few instances,
yet we may easily conclude how gentle they were, upon the whole matter, from
this that he says that the Fines imposed by Law had never been exacted, Lib.
cont. Don
and that they were so far from turning the Donatists out of their own
Churches, that they still kept possession of several Churches which they had
violently invaded, Lib. 1. cont. Parm. cap. 7
and wrested out of the hands of the Bishops. It is plain then, since he
justified those severities only as a necessary restraint on the rage to the
Donatists, and a just protection of the Bishops, that this has no relation to
the hardships the Protestants now suffer, it not being pretended that they have
drawn it upon themselves by any tumultuary or irregular proceedings of theirs.

So much seemed necessary to show how different the Spirit of the present
Clergy o^ France is from that which animated the Church in the former and best
ages.

The Reverend Prelates say in their Letter, That they hold the same Faith with
their Predecessors. If this were true in all points, it were indeed very hard
to write an Apology for those that have separated from them: I shall not engage
in a long discussion of the sentiments of the Ancient Bishops of the Gallican
Church; yet that the Reader may not be too much wrought on by the confidence
and plausibleness of this expression^, I shall only give a taste of the Faith
of the first of all the Gallican Clergy, whose works are yet preserved, and
that is Irenaeus: I shall instance it in two particulars, the one is the hinge
upon which all our other Controversies turn; that is, whether the Scriptures or
Oral Tradition is to be appealed to, for determining matters of Controversy:
The other is the most material point in difference among us, concerning the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Contra Haeres. lib. 3. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5.
whether in it we really receive the substance of Bread and Wine, or only the
Accidents. As to the first, he directly appeals to the Scriptures, which he
says were the Pillar and ground of Truth; and adds, that the Valentinians did
appeal to Oral Tradition, from which he ^urns to that Tradition that was come
from the Apostles; on which he insists very copiously, and puts all the
authority of Tradition in this, That it was derived from the Apostles: And
therefore says that if the Apostles had delivered nothing in Writing, we must
then have followed the Order of Tradition: And after he has showed that the
Tradition to which the Valentinians pretended was really against them, and that
the Orthodox had it derived down from the Apostles on their side, he returns to
that upon which he had set up the strength of his cause, to prove the truth
from the Scriptures. Now the Scriptures being the foundation on which the
Protestants build, and Oral Tradition, together with the authority of the
Church, being that on which the Church of Rome builds, it will be easy to
every one that considers those Chapters referred to in Irenaeus, to gather upon
which of those he grounded his belief.

As for the other particular, he plainly calls the Sacrament that Bread over
which thanks have been given; and says, ^ib. 4. cap. 34. and lib. ^. cap. ^.
our flesh is nourished by the body and blood of Christ; and concludes that our
flesh by the Sacrament has an assurance of its Resurrection and
Incorruptibility. More particularly he says, Our blood is increased by the
blood of Christ, and that he increases our body by that bread which he has
confirmed to be his body, and that by these the substance of our body is
increased; and from thence he argues, that our bodies receive an increase not
by any internal or invisible way, but in the natural way of nourishment; and so
concludes, that our bodies being nourished by the Eucharist, shall therefore
rise again. Every one that considers the force of these words, must conclude
that he believed our bodies received in the Sacrament a real substance which
nourished them, and not bare Accidents. If then upon this essay it appears,
that the first Writer of all Gallican Bishops does agree with the Protestants,
both in that which is the foundation upon which they build their whole cause,
and also in that particular opinion which is believed to be of the greatest
importance, then the Reader has no reason to believe that the present Bishops
of France hold the same Faith which their Predecessors taught who first
preached the Christian Religion in that Kingdom.

But now I come to answer the main Question, which is indeed the whole
substance of the Letter, Why have they made the Schism? If such a Letter with
such a demand in it, had come from the Abassin or Armenian Churches, or perhaps
from the Greek Churches, whose distance from us is such, and the oppressions
they groan under are so extreme, that they have little heart and few
opportunities to enquire into the affairs or opinions of others, it could not
have been thought strange; but to hear it from these: among whom those live,
who have so often both in Writings and Discourses answered this question so
copiously, is really somewhat unaccountable: Yet this is not all, but it is
added, That the Protestants, upon trial finding they could not shake their
Doctrine, have charged them only for their ill lives, as if that were the
ground of the Separation. This it must be confessed, had better become the
affected Eloquence of a Maimbourg, than the sincerity of so many eminent men;
of whom the mildest censure that can be past in this particular is, That some
aspiring Priest being appointed to pen this Letter, that was better accustomed
to the figures of a clamorous Rhetoric, than the strict measures of Truth,
gave it this turn, hoping to recommend himself by it, and that the Bishops
signed it in haste, without considering it well. Who of all the Protestants
have made that Experiment, and found that the Faith of the Church of Rome was
not to be attackt, and that she can only be accused for the ill lives of some
in her Communion? If this were all we had to object, we do not deny but that
all that the Fathers retorted on the Schismatics, particularly the Donatists,
did very justly fall on us; and that we could neither answer it to God, to the
World, nor our own Consciences, if we had separated from their Church on no
other account: And this is indeed so weak a Plea, that the Penner of the Letter
showed his skill at least, if he was wanting in his sincerity, to set up a
pretense which he knew he could easily overthrow, though the reasons he brings
to overthrow it, are not all pertinent nor convincing: But this in conclusion,
is so managed as to draw an occasion from it to complement the present Pope,
some way to make an amends for their taking part with their King against him.
All that is to be said on this Head is, That Protestants are not so unjust as
to deny the Pope that now reigns, his due praises; of whose virtue and
strictness of life they hear such accounts, that they heartily wish all the
Assembly of the Clergy, from the President, down to the Secretaries would
imitate that excellent Pattern that he sets them. A Zeal for converting
Heretics does not very well become those whose course of life has not been so
exemplary, that this can be imputed to an inward sense of Religion, and to the
motives of Divine Charity. But in this point of the corruption of men's lives,
we may add two things more material: The one is if a Church teaches ill Morals,
or at least connives at such Casuistical Doctrines as must certainly root out
all the principles of moral virtue and common goodness out of the minds of men,
then their ill Morals may be improved to be a good argument for a Separation
from them. How much the Casuistical Doctrine of those who are the Chief
Confessors in that Communion has been corrupted of late, we may learn from what
has been published by many among themselves, particularly by their late Address
to the present Pope, and by the Articles condemned both by Pope Alexander the
Seventh, and by the Pope that now reigns. But yet how faint those censures are,
every one that has read them, must needs observe. This is not all: The
dissolving of Oaths and Vows, the dispensing with many of the Laws of God, the
authorizing Subjects to shake off their Princes yoke, if he does not extirpate
Heresy and Heretics, the butcheries of those they call Heretics, and that
after Faith given to the contrary; having been for some Ages the public
practices of the Court of Rome; in which several General Councils have also
concurred with them, are things both of such a nature, and have been so openly
avowed as well as practiced in that Church, that this argument from the
corruption of their Morals, may be well fastened on their whole Church. If
likewise many opinions are received among them, which do naturally tend to
slacken the strictness of holiness, and give the World more mild Ideas of sin,
and make the way to the favor of God accessible even without a real
Reformation, then there will be more weight in this argument than may at first
view appear. The belief of the Sacraments conferring Grace, ex opere operato,
the Virtue of Indulgences, the Priestly Absolution, the Communication of
Merits, the Virtue supposed to be in some Pilgrimages, in Images and
Privileged Altars, in Fraternities, and many consecrated things, together with
the after-game of Purgatory, and of Redemption out of it by Masses; these with
many more devices, are such contrivances for enervating the true force of
Religion, and have such effects on the lives of men, who generally are too
easy to hearken to any thing that may make them hope well, while they live
ill* that when we complain of a great dissolution of men's Morals that live
under the influences of that Religion, this charge is not personal, but falls
on their Church in common.

In the next place, that vast corruption of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and of
all the Primitive Rules, occasioned chiefly by the exorbitant power the Popes
have assumed, of dispensing with all Laws, the gross sale of such Graces at
Rome, the Intrigues in the Creation of the Popes themselves, the universal
neglect of the Pastoral care among the superior Orders of the Clergy, do give
men just and deep prejudices against a Church so corrupt in her ruling Members,
and do raise great dislike of that extent of Authority which the Bishops of
Rome have assumed, that have cut all the Banks, and let in such an inundation
of ill practices on the World. And if once in an Age or two a Pope of another
temper, of better Morals, and greater strictness arises, we are notwithstanding
that, to judge of things not upon rare and single instances, but upon their
more ordinary and natural effects. Thus laying all these things together, it
will appear that our exceptions to that Church upon the account of their
Morals, is not so slight as the Penner of that Letter has represented it; and
that his Instances for living among ill men have no relation to this matter.

But this is the weakest Plea we have for our Separation, and as strong soever
as it may be in it self, we build upon solider foundations.

In order to the opening this, I shall premise a little of the true end and
design of Religion, which is to beget in us so deep a sense of the Divine
nature and perfections a^ may most effectually engage us to become truly Holy.
There are two Inclinations in the nature of men, that dispose him to corrupt
the Ideas of God; the one is an Inclination to cloth him in some outward
figure, and present him to our senses in such a manner, that we may hope by
flatteries or submissions, by pompous or cruel services to appease him: And the
other is a desire to reconcile our notions of Religion to our vicious habits
and appetites, that so we may some way pacify our Consciences in the midst of
our lusts and passions: And thus the true notion of Idolatry is the
representing of God to us so as that we may hope to gain his favor by other
methods than our being inwardly pure and holy: And the immorality of this
consists not only in the indecency of such representations, and their
unsuitableness to the Divine nature, but likewise in this, that our notions of
God which ought to be the seeds of Virtue and true Godliness, by which our
natures are to be reformed, are no more effectual that way, but turn only to a
Pageantry, and spend themselves in dressing up our worship, so as we think will
better agree with one that is like our selves: Now we find the chief design of
the Gospel was to root this out of the World, and to give us the highest and
perfectest Ideas of the purity and goodness of the Divine nature, that might
raise in us that inward probity of Soul, comp^ehended in the general name of
Charity or Love, which is the proper Character of the Christian Spirit: We have
also the Divine Holiness so presented to us, that we can never hope to attain
the favor of God here, or Eternal happiness hereafter, but by becoming
inwardly and universally holy. Now our main charge against the Church of Rome
is, That this which is the great design of the Christian Religion is reversed
among them, and that chiefly in four things.

1. In proposing visible objects to the adorations of the people, against not
only the current of the whole Scriptures, but the true Idea and right notion of
God; and this not only by Precept in the Images of our Savior and the Saints,
but by a general tolerance in the Images of the blessed Trinity it self. Thus
the senses having somewhat set before them on which they may work, do naturally
corrupt the mind, and convert Religion, which is an inward and spiritual work,
into an outward gross homage to these objects.

2. In setting up the Intercession of Saints, as if either God had not a
capacity of attending to the whole Government of the World, or were not so
merciful or good, but that as Princes are wrought on by the interposition of
their Courtiers, so he needed to have such importunities to induce him to be
favorable to us: The very Plea commonly used for this from the resemblance of
Earthly Courts, is the greatest debasing of the Divine Nature that is possible:
And when the Addresses made to these Saints in the public Offices of the
Church, are the very same that we make to God or our Savior, That they would
pardon our sins, give u^ ^race, assist us at all times, and open the Kingdom
of Heaven to us; and when after those things have been complained of for above
an Age, and that upon a general review of their Offices, they are still
continued among them, we must conclude that the honor due to the Creator is
offered to the Creature. I need not bring Instances of these, they are so well
known.

3. In ^The many Consecrations that are used among them of Images, Crosses,
Habits, Water, Salt, Oil, Candles, Bells, Vessels* Agnus Dei's, and Grains;
with a vast deal more, by which those things are so consecrated, as to have a
virtue in them for driving away Devils, for being* a security both to Soul and
Body, and a remedy against all Temporal and Spiritual evils. This way of
Incantations was one of the grossest pieces of Heathenism, and is now by them
brought into the Christian Religion: And the opinion, that upon these
Consecrations a Virtue is conveyed to those things, is infused into the people
by their authorized offices: In which if in any thing it is not to be believed
that the Church lies and deceives her Children: This is plainly to consider God
as the Heathens did their Idols, and to fetch down Divine Virtues by charms, as
they did. And

4. Their worshipping with Divine Honor, that which by all the Indications
that we can have of things, we know is no other than what it appears to be,
even Bread and Wine in its substance and nature: Thus Divine Adoration is
offered to those Elements, contrary to the universal practice of the Christian
Church for 1200 years; and this passes among them as the most important piece
of their Worship, which has almost swallowed up all the rest. Thus the true
Ideas of God, and the chief design of the Christian Religion is overthrown in
that Communion; and what can we think of a Church that in the most important of
her Offices, adds this Prayer to the absolution of Sinners, The passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of the blessed Virgin, and all the Saints, and
whatever good thou have done, and whatever evil thou have suffered be to thee
for the pardon of sin, the increase of Grace, and the reward of eternal life;
where we see clearly what things they join in the same breath, and in order to
the same ends with the passion of Christ. When they have cleansed their
Churches of these objects of Idolatry and Superstition, and their Offices of
those Impious Addresses to Saints, and that infinite number of Enchantments,
then they may upon some more advantage ask, Why have we made the Schism? It is
because they have corrupted the Doctrine of Christ and the Gospel; and if those
things upon which the Separation subsists were removed, it could no more
subsist than Accidents can do without a Subject.

The next thing upon which we ground our Separation is, That not only the
Church of Rome would hearken to no Addresses nor Remonstrances that were made
to her for reforming those abuses, but that by Anathema's and the highest
censures possible, all are obliged to believe as she believes in those very
particulars, and are bound to join in a Worship in which those things which we
condemn, are made indispensable parts of our public Devotions: So that we must
either mock God, by concurring in a Worship which we believe Impious and
Superstitious, or we must separate from them. None can be admitted to Benefices
of Cure or preferment, without swear^ng most of these Opinions which we think
are false: Nor can any Eminent Heretic be received among them, without
swearing that he in all things receives the Doctrines of the Church of Rome,
and that he thinks all that do not receive them worthy of an Anathema. If the
Errors of the Church of Rome had been only speculative opinions, or things of
less moment, we could have better born with them, or if they had only held to
their own customs without imposing them on us, we could have held in several
things a sisterly Communion with them, as we do with the Greek Churches; but
when they have not only brought in and obstinately maintained those
corruptions, but have so Tyrannically imposed them on the World, it is somewhat
strange to see men make such grimaces, and an appearance of seriousness, while
they ask this question, of which they know so well how to have resolved
themselves.

One thing is likewise to be considered, that in the examination of the
corruptions of that Communion, it is not sufficient to say somewhat to sweeten
every one of them in particular, but it is the complication of all together
that we chiefly insist on, since by all these set together we have another view
of them, than by every one of them taken asunder.

This then is our answer to the question so often repeated: We have not made
the Schism from the Church of Christ, as it was settled by the Apostles, and
continued for many ages after them, but they have departed from that, and have
refused to return to it. On the contrary, they have condemned and cursed us for
doing it: Upon this, all that they obj^ct against the first Reformers, as
having been once of their Communion, falls to the ground: For if these things
which we object to them are true, then since no man is bound to continue in
Errors, because he* was bred up in them, this is no just prejudice against
those men. All the flourishes raised upon this ground are but slight things,
and favor more of a monastic and affectate Eloquence, than of the weight and
solidity of so renowned a Body. What is said of pulling down the Altars, and of
that elegant figure of Christ's being the Sparrow, and the Churches being the
Turtle, that loved to make their Nests in them, is really very hard to be
answered; not for the strength that is in it, but for another reason, that in
Reverence to that Assembly I shall not name. The Sacrifice of the death of
Christ we acknowledge, as that only by which we come to God, and in a general
sense of that term, the commemoration of it may be also called a Sacrifice, and
the Communion Table an Altar, and such we still retain: and for any thing
further, either of Altar or Sacrifice, till they give a better authority for
it, than a fanciful allusion ^o an ill-understood Verse of a ^salm, we shall
not be much concerned in it.

If Wars and Confusions have followed in some places upon the reforming those
abuses, they were the effects of the Rage and Cruelty of those Churchmen, that
seemed never like to be satiated with the blood of those that had departed from
them. And if the specious pretense of Edicts, Princes of the Blood, the
preserving the House of Bourbon, the defending France from Foreigners, joining
with that natural appetite that is in all men to preserve themselves, engaged
some in Wars under the minority of their Kings, it is nothing but what is
natural to man: and these who condemn it most, yet ought to pity those whom
their Predecessors, in whose steps they now go, constrained to do all that they
did. And the Rebellions in England and Ireland, in King Henry the Eighth,
Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth's time, when no Persecutions provoked
them to them, and no Laws gave them any color for them, are a much stronger
prejudice against their Church, chiefly since these were set on by the
Authority and Agents of Rome, so that they may well give over the pursuing this
matter any further. As for the argument set before them from the Greatness and
Glory of their King, and his Zeal to have all again reunited into one Body,
how powerful soever it may be to work upon their fears, and to touch them in
their Secular concerns, it cannot be considered as an argument to work on their
reasons. They expressed their Zeal for their King in his greatest extremity,
while he was under age; and after all the heavy returns that they have met with
since that time, they have continued in an Invincible Loyalty and submission in
all things, except in the matters of their God: If the Heroic greatness,
Glorious success, and the more inherent qualities of a Princely mind, are good
Arguments to work on Subjects, they were as strong in the times of a Trajan, a
Decius, or a Dioclesian, to persuade the Christians to turn Heathens: But it is
very probable this is the strongest of all those motives that have produced so
many Conversions of late, while men, either to make their Court, or to live
easy, are induced to make shipwreck of the Faith, and of a good Conscience.
And I shall not add, that it seems those who are so often making use of this
Argument, feel the mighty force it has on themselves, and so imagine it should
prevail as much on others, as they find it does on their own Consciences, or
rather on their Ambition and Covetousness.

I will prosecute the matter of this Letter no further, and therefore shall not
show in how many places the Secretary that penned it has discovered how much he
is a Novice in such matters, and what great advantages he gives to those who
would sift all the expressions, the figures, and the periods in it. But the
Respect I pay to those that subscribe it, as well as the importance and gravity
of the subject stop me: So from the reviewing this Letter, I go next to
consider the Methods laid down by the Assembly for carrying on those
Conversions.

A MEMORIAL, Containing diverse Methods, of which very great use may be made
for the Conversion of those who profess the pretended Reformed Religion.
The first Method Is that which Cardinal Richelieu used for reducing, either in
the way of Disput^ or Conference, those of the P. R. R. and to persuade them in
an amicable manner to reunite themselves to the Church.
THis Method is to attack them by ^ Decree of a Synod of theirs tha^ met at
Charenton, 1631. by which the^ received to their Communion those of the
Ausbourg Confession, who hold the Rea^ Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in
the Eucharist, together with diverse other Articles that are very different
from the Confession of Faith of those that are the P. Reformed. Upon which the
Minister Dailee in his Apology says, That if the Church of Rome had no other
error besides that, they had not had a sufficient reason for their separating
from her.

It is certain, that none of all the other points of our Belief that are
controverted, are either of greater importance, or harder to be believed than
this which has been ever esteemed even by themselves one of the chief grounds
of their Separation, and is that by which the people are most amused. As for
that which the Minister Dailee says for eluding the force of this Objection,
That the Lutherans do not adore Jesus Christ in the Sacrament: It is altogether
unreasonable, Call. lib. de vera participatione co^poris. Christi in coena.
since Calvin himself reproves the Lutherans for that, and is forced to
acknowledge that adoration is a necessary consequence of the real Presence.
What is more strange (says he) than to put Jesus Christ in the Bread, and not
to adore him? and if he is in the Bread, then he ought to be adored under the
Bread.

Thus since, according to the Calvinists in the same Synod, one does not
overthrow the grounds of Salvation by the belief of the Real Presence, and the
other points of their Confession concerning which they dispute, that Cardinal
thought he could convince them of their error, in separating faom the
Communion of the Church of Rome, in which, according to their own Maxims, one
could be saved.

It was by the like reasoning that the African Fathers convinced the Donatists,
called the Primianists, that they had unjustly separated themselves from the
Catholic Church, because it received Cecilian i^to its Communion, since they
had made a decree of Union with the Maximianists, whom they had formerly
condemned. It was in the Council of Carthage, held under Anastasius, that the
Fathers used this against those Heretics, and in the Fourth Canon they set
this before them, Ubi eis divinitus demonstratur si attendere veli^t, tam
inique illos ab Ecclesiae unitate praecisos, quam inique clamant Maximianistas
a se Schisma fecisse. Council. Carth. sub Anast. Can. 4.
That they might see if they would but open their eyes a little to the Divine
Light, that they had as unjustly ^ut themselves off from the unity of the
Church; as the Maximianists according to what they said, had separated
themselves from their Communion,

Remarks.
IF Cardinal Richelieu had not ^een an abler Statesman, than as it appears by
this argument, he was a Divine, the Princes of Europe would not have such cause
as they have at present, to dread the growth of the French Monarchy, of which
he laid the best and strongest foundations. It is a common Maxim, That no man
can excel but in one thing; so since his strength lay in the Politics, no
wonder he had no great Talent for Divinity: But if this at first view seemed to
him to have somewhat in it to amuse weak minds, especially when it surprised
them with its novelty; yet it is a little unexpected to find it taken up by so
great a Body, and set in the front of their Methods for making Proselytes,
after the weakness of it has been so evidently discovered.

1. Great difference is to be made between a speculation that lies in the mind,
and is a man's particular opinion, and that which discovers it self in the most
solemn acts of Worship; for the former, unless it is such as subverts the
foundations of Religion, we can well bear with it: These are errors in which
the person that holds them is only concerned, whereas the other errors become
more fruitful, they corrupt the Worship, they give scandal, and infect others.
Therefore we will without scruple own, that whether a man believe
Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation, so long as that lies in his brain as a
notion, we may conclude him a very ill Philosopher, and a worse Divine, for
holding it; but still we will receive him to our Communion, that being a solemn
stipulation of the New Covenant made with God through Christ: And therefore
since such a person acts nothing contrary to that Covenant, we ought to admit
him to it: But Idolatry being contrary to the Laws upon which that Covenant is
grounded, we cannot receive an Idolater, though we do admit such as are in
errors, that produce no other effect but mistaken apprehensions and
judgments. It is unreasonable to say that if the Presence is acknowledged,
Adoration ought to follow; for we will excommunicate none for a consequence,
were it never so well deduced, so long as they hold not that consequence: And
if Calvin argued as he did from that absurdity, it was not that he thought they
ought to adore, because they believed Consubstantiation; but rather to let them
see how unreasonable it was to believe it, since they did not adore it; and yet
it must be confessed the argument is not unanswerable: For it may be said, that
as Princes when ^^ey are in any place Incognito, even though they are known,
yet their being Incognito shows that they will not have that respect paid them
which is otherwise due to them: So that Christ being present in an invisible
manner is not to be adored. I shall not determine whether the Argument or the
Answer is stronger, yet this must be confessed, that upon so dubious a
consequence, it were a very unreasonable Cruelty to deny the holding Communion
with those that believed such a presence, though we refuse to communicate with
those that join Adoration to it.

2. There is a great difference to be made between the receiving men that hold
erroneous Tenets, to our ^ommunion that we believe is pure and undefiled, and
the joining our selves to a Communion in which we must profess those very
errors which we condemn; and by solemn acts of Worship must testify before
God and the World that we believe that which inwardly and in our Consciences we
think false. The former is only a tolerating or conniving at the errors of
others, without any sort of approbation of them; whereas the other is the
fullest and most public contradiction to our Consciences that is possible.

3. As long as any Errors do not strike against the foundations of the
Christian Religion, we own that we will bear with them, at least not oblige
others, especially the Laity, in whom there is not that danger of spreading
them to renounce them, before we admit them to the Sacraments: But the case of
the Church of Rome is very different, among whom this opinion is but one of
very many opinions, that we think reverse the whole nature and design of
Christianity, of which some short hints were given in the Remarks upon the
Letter of the Assembly General.

4. It is a very ill Inference to conclude, because that we think a man can be
saved that believes the Corporal Presence, therefore we have done amiss to
separate from their Communion. We may think men may be saved though they are in
some errors, that in us were damnable, after the illumination we have had;
especially if we should profess that we believe them when we do not believe
them, and therefore if we cannot continue in their Communion without professing
that we believe those Errors, they were to blame for imposing them on us, and
not we for separating from them, when they had imposed them.

5. That which the African Fathers objected to the Donatists was very
pertinently urged against them, who grounded their Separation only upon this,
That there were some corrupt members in the Communion of the Church: And this
was very justly cast back on them, upon their receiving the Maximianists, whom
they had formerly condemned as Schismatics, to their Communion. But it has no
relation to us who have not separated from their Church upon any such personal
account: Therefore since the chief grounds of our Separation are the
corruptions in their Worship, and our being obliged to bear a share in those
corruptions, it is clear that our receiving to our Communion those who have not
corrupted their Worship, and come to join with us, has no relation to that
dispute b^tween the African Fathers and the Donatists.

6. There is one thing in the Method which we freely confess to be true, That
there is none of the controverted points that are harder to be believed than
this of the Real Presence. It is no wonder it should be so, since it has the
strongest Evidences both of Sense and Reason against it: But if it is so hard
to be believed, it is very severe to prosecute those who cannot bring
themselves to believe it, in so extreme a manner as that Church has done and
still does. Upon the whole matter, this Method is so weak in all the parts of
it, that its being set first, gives no great hopes of any thing extraordinary
to follow.

The Second Method
IS to lay this before them, that according to the light of Nature, and their
own Confession, in the matters of our Salvation, which is the one thing that is
needful, we ought always to choose the surer side: Now it is certain, that
according to that Decree of the Synod of Charenton, it is indifferent to them
whether one believes the Real Presence, or whether they believe it not; and we
hold it necessary to believe it, therefore it is the surer side to believe it:
and if they could but disengage themselves a little from their prejudices, they
would follow this way. The same may be said of all the other points in dispute.
Mestresat the Minister, in his Treatise of the Church, says that things
necessary to Salvation are only those that are so expressly set down in the
Scriptures, that no doubt can be made of them. Such as are the Articles of the
Apostles Creed. If there is any thing that is obscure (says he) then I assert
it is not necessary, and therefore one may be a very good Christian without it,
and may have both Faith, Hope and Charity.

It is evident that the points in dispute which they maintain against us are
not so clearly expressed in the Scripture, that one cannot doubt concerning
them: Since we maintain on good grounds, that they are not there: So that
according to their own Doctrine, one can disbelieve them, without endangering
his Salvation. But we say that it is necessary, under the pain of damnation, to
believe the contrary opinion, and therefore if they will take the surest side,
they ought to submit to us.

Remarks.
1. IT is something odd to see so great a Body use this Logic, That because we
think an error is not damnable, and such as obliges us to excommunicate all
that hold it, therefore we think it indifferent to believe it or not. We judge
it an error, and while we think it so, it were a lie for us to say that we did
believe it, and this, especially in such public Acts of Worship of God, which
are grossly Idolatrous, by their own Confession, while we hold this persuasion,
is so far from being a thing indifferent, that we know nothing more damnable*
For this were to lie every day to God and the World, and to commit Idolatry in
a manner more absurd, than the most barbarous Nations have been guilty of,
which is to worship that as a God which we do believe is only a piece of Bread.

2. In this very Article it is plain that our Opinion is the surer side: For as
to the Spiritual efficacy of the Sacrament and due preparation for it, which is
all that we hold concerning it, by their own Confession there can be no sin in
that: whereas if their opinion is false, they are guilty of a most horrid
Idolatry. So there is no danger in any thing we do, whereas there may be great
danger on their side; all the danger that is possible to be on our side, is,
that we do not adore Christ if he is present, which may be thought to be want
of Reverence: But that cannot be reasonably urged, since we at the same time
adore him, believing him to be in Heaven; and if this objection against us had
any force, then the Primitive Church for twelve hundred years must have been in
a state of damnation, for none of them adored the Consecrated Elements, nor has
the Greek Church ever done it.

3. It is clear this general Maxim of taking the surer sid^ is against them.
There is no sin in not worshipping Images, whereas there may be a sin in doing
it. They confess it is not necessary to invocate the Saints, and we believe it
is sinful. They do not hold that it is necessary to say Masses for redeeming
Souls out of Purgatory, and we believe that it is an impious profanation of the
Sacrament. They do not hold it is necessary to take away the Cup in the
Sacrament, we think it Sacrilegious. They do not think those Consecrations, by
which Divine Virtues are derived into such a variety of things to be necessary,
we look on them as gross Superstitions. They do not think the Worship in an
unknown tongue necessary, whereas we think it a disgrace to Religion. So in all
these, and many more particulars, it is clear that we are of the surer side.

4. We own that Maxim, That nothing is necessary to Salvation but what is
plainly set down in the Scriptures; but this is not to be carried so far, as
that it should be impossible by sophistry, or the equivocal use of words, to
fasten some other sense to such passages in Scripture; for then nothing can be
said to be plain in any Book whatsoever: But we understand this of the genuine
meaning of the Scriptures, such as a plain well-disposed man will find out, if
his mind is not strongly prepossessed or biassed with false and wrong measures.

5. The Confidence with which any party proposes their opinions, cannot be a
true Standart to judge of them; otherwise the Receipts of Mountebanks will be
always preferred to those prescribed by good Physicians; and indeed the modesty
of one side and the confidence of the other, ought rather to give us a biass
for the one against the other, especially if it is visible that Interest is
very prevalent in the confident party.

The Third Method
IS to confer amicably with them, and to show them our Articles in the
Scriptures and Tradition, as the Fathers of tbe first Ages understood both the
one and the other, without engaging in reasonings, or the drawing out of
Consequences by Syllogisms, as Cardinal Bellarmin, and Perron, and Gretser, and
the other Writers of Controversy have done; which ordinarily beget endless
disputes. It was in this manner that the General Councils did proceed, and thus
did S. Austin prove Original sin against Julian: To this end (says he) Ut
senrentiis Episcoporum qui Scripturas ^acras ingenti g^oria tractaverunt, tua,
juliane, machinamenta subvertam. Lib. 2. contr. Iul. c. 1.
O Julian, that I may overthrow thy Engines and Artifices by the opinions of
those Bishops who have interpreted the Scripture with so much glory. After
which he cites the passages of the Scripture, as they were understood by S.
Ambrose, S. Cyprian, S. Gregory Nazianzene, and others.

Remarks.
1. WE do not deny but amicable Conferences, in which matters are proposed
without the wranglings of Dispute, are the likeliest ways to convince people:
And whenever they show us their doctrines directly in the Scripture and
Tradition, we will be very unreasonable if we do not yield upon that Evidence.
When they give us good authorities from Scripture and Tradition for the Worship
of Images and Saints, for adoring the Host, for dividing the Sacrament, for
redeeming Souls out of Purgatory, for denying the people the free use of the
Scriptures, for obliging them to worship God in a Tongue not understood by
them, we will confess our selves very obstinate men if we resist such
Conviction.

2. The showing barely some passages, without considering the whole scope of
them, with the sense in which such words were used, in such ages, and by such
Fathers will certainly misguide us, therefore all these must be also taken in
for making this Enquiry exactly. Allowances also must be made for the heats of
Eloquence in Sermons or warm Discourses, since one passage strictly and
philosophically expressed is stronger than a hundred, in which the heat of Zeal
and the Figures of Rhetoric transport the Writer. And thus if the Fathers
disputing against those who said that the Humane Nature of Christ was swallowed
up by his Divine Nature, urge this to prove that the Humane Nature did still
subsist, that in the Sacrament after the Consecration, in which there is an
Union between the Elements and the Body and Blood of Christ, they do still
retain their proper nature and substance; such expressions used on such a
design le^d us more infallibly to know what they thought in this matter, than
any thing that they said with design only to beget Reverence and Devotion can
do.

3. The Ancient Councils were not so sollicitous as this Paper would insinuate,
to prove a Tradition from the Fathers of the first Ages. They took great care
to prove the truth, which they decreed, by many arguments from Scripture; but
for the Tradition, they thought it enough to show that they did innovate in
nothing, and that some Fathers before them had taught what they decreed. We
have not the acts of the two first General Councils, but we may very probably
gather upon what grounds those at Nice proceeded, by what S. Athanasius wrote
as an Apology for their Symbol, Lib. de decret. Conc. Nic.
in particular for the word Consubstantial, which he proves by many
consequences drawn from Scripture, but for the Tradition of it he only cites
four Fathers, and none of those were very ancient: They are Theognistus, Denis
of Alexandria, Denis of Rome, and Origin; and yet both that Ath. Epist. de
Senten. Dion. Alex.
Father, Lib. de Syn.
Hilary, and Epist. 41.
S. Basil acknowledge that Denis of Alexandria wavered much in that matter; and
it is well known what advantages were taken from many of Origen's expressions.
So here we have only two undisputed Fathers that conveyed this Tradition. Conc.
Ephesians. act. 1.
We have the Acts of the third General Council yet preserved, and in them we
find a Tradition indeed alleged, but except S. Cyprian and S. Peter of
Alexandria, they cite none but those that had lived after the Council of Nice;
and Pope Leo's Letter to Flavian, to which the Council of Chalcedon assented,
is an entire contexture of authorities drawn from Scripture, without so much as
any one citation of any Father. It is true, there is added to the end of that
Letter a Collection of some sayings of six Fathers, Hilary, Ambrose,
Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Austin and Cyril, who had all except one, lived within
sixty years or a little more, of that time. So it is certain they founded their
Faith only on the Scripture, and not on Tradition, otherwise they had taken
more pains to have made it out, and had not been so easily satisfied with what
a few late Writers had said: And thus it may be presumed, that all the end for
which they cited them, was only to show that they did not broach new and
unheard of opinions. And S. Austin could no^ think that S. Cyprian's opinion
al^ne was a sufficient proof of the Doctrine of the first three Centuries for
Original Sin, and yet he cite^ no other that lived in those Ages. No^ could S.
Ambrose, and Nazianzene that had lived in his own time, be cited t^ prove the
Tradition of former Ages And whereas it is insinuated that he cited others, one
would expect to fin^ a Catalogue of many other Father^ wrapped up in this plural,
whereas al^ resolves into Hilary alone. And we have a more evident Indication
of S. Austin's sense, as to the la^t resort in matters of Controversy, than
this they offer in that celebrated saying of his, when he was writing against
Maximinus the Arian Bishop. Sed nunc nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debes Ariminense
tanquam praejudicaturus proferre Concilium; nec ego hujus authoritate, nec tu
^llius detineris. Scripturarum authoritatibus non quorumque propriis sed
utriusque communibus testibus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione
concerter. Lib. 3. co^t. Max. cap. 14.
But neither may I make use of the Nicene Council, nor you that of Arimini, as
that which ought to pre-judge us in this matter; for neither am I held by the
authority of the one, nor you by the authority of the other. Let the one side
and cause, and their reasons, be brought against the other from the authorities
of the Scriptures, that do not belong to either side, but are Witnesses common
to both.

The Fourth Method
IS to tell them that their Ministers can never do this, nor show in the
Scriptures any of their Articles that are controverted, and this is very true.
For example, they can never bring any formal Text to prove that Original Sin
remains, as to the guilt of it after Baptism, that we receive the Body of Jesus
Christ only by Faith; that after the Consecration, the Sacrament is still
Bread; that there is no Purgatory, and that we do not merit any thing by our
good works. And to this it may be added, that among all those passages that are
on the Margent of their Confession, there is not one that says that which they
cite it for, either in express or equivalent terms, or in the same sense. This
is the Method of Mr. Veron, which he took from S. Austin, who says to the
Manichaeans, Show me that that is in the Scripture; and in another place, Let
him show me that that is to be found in the Holy Scripture. We must then boldly
tell them, That they cannot prove any of their Articles that are in dispute,
nor dispute against any of ours by any passages of Scripture, neither in
express terms, nor by sufficient consequences, so as to make their Doctrine be
received, as the Faith, and ours pass for Error.

Remarks.
THe first part of this Article proceeds upon Veron's Method of putting us to
prove our Doctrines by express words of Scripture, but some more cautious
person has added in the conclusion a Salvo for good consequences drawn from
them; upon which we yield that this is a very good Method, and are ready to
join issue upon it. If they intend still to build upon that notion of express
words, we desire it may be considered, that the true meaning of all passages is
not to be taken only from the bare words, but from the contexture of the
Discourse, and the design upon which they are made use of; and that Rule of
Logic being infallibly true, That what things soever agree in any third thing,
they do also agree among themselves, it is certain that a true consequence is
as good a proof as a formal passage. Thus did our Savior prove the
Resurrection from the Scriptures by a very remote consequence, since God was
said to be the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and was the God of the Living
and not of the Dead. So did the Apostles prove Christ's being the promised
Messiah, and the obligation to observe the Mosaical Ceremonies to have ceased
upon his coming, by many consequences, but not by the express words of
Scripture. All the arguings of the Fathers against the Hereti^ks run on
Consequences drawn from Scripture, as may appear in all their Synodical
Letters, more particularly in that formerly cited of Pope Leo to Flavian, to
which the Fourth General Council assented. This Plea does very ill become men
that pretend such reverence to Antiquity, since it was that upon which all the
Ancient Heretics set up their strength, as the most plausible pretense by
which they thought they could cover themselves. So the Athan. de Syn. Arim. and
Sel^uc. Hilary de Synod. Aueust. lib. 3. cont. Maxim. cap. 3. and Ep. 74, and
78.
Arians at Arimini give this reason for rejecting the word Consubstantial,
because it was not in the Scriptures. The Nazianz. Orat. 37.
Macedonians laid hold of the same pretense. Act. Syn. Ephesians. Action 1.
Nestor^us gives this as his chief reason for denying the Virgin to be the
Mother of God: And Act. 6. Syn. Constable. in Act. 2. Syn. Chalced.
Eutyches covered himself also with this question, In what Scripture were the
two Natures of Christ to be found? And his followers did afterward insist so
much on this Plea, that Theodoret wrote two large Discourses on purpose to show
the weakness of this pretense. So that after all the noise they make about the
Primitive Church, they follow the same tract in which the Heretics that were
condemned by the first four General Councils, went; and they put us to do the
same thing that the Heretics then put on the Orthodox: But we make the same
answer to it which the Fathers did, That the sense of the Scriptures is to be
considered more than the words: So that what is according to the true sense, is
as much proved by Scripture, as if it were contained in it in so many express
words. And yet this Plea had a much greater strength in it, as it was managed
by those Heretics; for those contests being concerning mysteries which exceed
our apprehensions, it was not an unreasonable thing at first view to say, that
in such things which we cannot perfectly comprehend, it is not safe to proceed
by deductions or consequences, and therefore it seemed safer to hold strictly
to Scripture Phrases, but in other points into which our understandings can
carry us further, it is much more absurd to exact of us express words of
Scripture.

2. Most of the points about which we dispute with the Church of Rom^, are
additions made by them to the simplicity of the Christian Religion. So much as
we own of the Christian Religion they own likewise. In the other particulars,
our Doctrine with relation to them is made up of Negatives, and theirs is the
affirmative; and since all Negatives, especially in matters of Religion prove
themselves, it falls to their share to prove those Additions which they have
made to our Faith, and to the Doctrine contained in the Scriptures.

3. Though this is a sure Maxim, yet our Plea is stronger, for there are many
things taught by them against the express words of Scripture; as their
worshipping Images, their no^ drinking all of the Cup, their worshipping of
Angels, their not worshipping God in a tongue which the unlearned understand,
and to which they can say, Amen; their setting up more Mediato^^ between God
and us than one: Whereas S. Paul exhorting us to make Prayer^ to God, tells us
there is one M^di^tor, which shows that he spoke there his single Intercession
with God on our behalf.

4. We do not only build our Doctrine upon some few passages of the Scripture,
in which perhaps a Critical Writer might easily raise much dust, but upon that
in which we cannot be so easily mistaken, which is the main scope of the whole
New Testament, and the design of Christianity, which we believe is reversed in
their Church by the Idolatry and Superstition that is in it.

5. As for the particulars which they call on us to prove, as they are very
few, so scarce any of them is of the greatest consequence. The first is a
speculative point, about which we would never have broke Communion with them.
For the second, that we receive Christ only by Faith, if the third is true,
that the Sacrament is still Bread, then that must be also true: Now S. Paul
calls it so four several times, as also our Savior calls the Cup the Fruit of
the Vine. As for our denying Purgatory, it is a Negative, and they must prove
it. Nor should we have broken Communion, for their opinion concerning it, if
they had not added to that, the redeeming Souls out of it with Masses, by which
the Worship is corrupted, contrary to the institution of the Sacrament. And for
the last, in the sense in which many of them assert it, we do not raise any
Controversy about it, for we know that God rewards our good works, or rather
crowns his own Grace in us.

The fifth Method
IS the Peaceable Method, and without dispute founded on the Synod of Dort,
which all the pretended Reformed Churches of France have received, and which
has defined according to the Holy Scripture, that when there is a dispute
concerning any Controverted Article between two parties that are both within
the true Church, it is necessary to refer it to the judgment of the Synod, and
that he who refuses to submit himself, becomes guilty of Heresi^ and Schism.
Now if we will run back to the time in which the dispute began concerning any
Article, for instance that of the Real Presence, both the parties in the
debate, as well the Ancestors of those of the P. R. Religion as ours, were in
the same Church, which was the true Church; for there was no other before the
S^paration, which was not then made: Then their Ancestors, who would not submit
to the Judgment of the Church, and have separated from her on no other account
but because she had condemned their sentiments were Schismatics and Heretics:
And those who at this day succeed them are in the same manner guilty, since
they follow their opinions: And to this they can make no other Answer, but that
which the Heretics that have been condemned in all Ages might have made. This
Method is proved in all its parts in the little Treatise that has been made
about it.

Remarks.
IT is not unwisely done to call this a Method that is to pass without dispute,
for it will not bear one: And 1. There is this difference between the
principles of Protestants and those of the Church of Rome, that whereas the
latter are bound to justify whatever has been decreed in a General Council as
a rule either of Faith or Manners; the sormer are not so tied, and much less
are they bound by the decision of a National Council, though never so solemn.
It is natural for all Judicatories to raise their own authority as high as they
can, and so if any Synod has made any such Declaration, it lies on them to
justify it, but the rest of those who have separated from the corruptions of
the Church of Rome are not concerned in it.

2. The principle of Protestants, with relation to the majority even in a
General Council, is, That when any Doctrines are established or condemned upon
the Authorities of the Scriptures, those who differ from them, and do think
that the Council misunderstood the Scriptures are bound to suspect themselves a
little, and to review the matter with greater application, and not to adhere to
their former opinions out of pride or obstinacy: They are also bound to
consider well of their opinions, though they appear still to be true, yet if
^hey are of that importance that the publishing them is necessary to Salvation;
for unless it is so, the Peace of the Church is not to be rent by them: Yet if
they are required to profess that they believe opinions which they think false,
if they were never so inconsiderable, no man ought to go against his
Conscience: But if a man after his strictest enquiries, is still persuaded that
a Council has decreed against the true meaning of the Scriptures, in a point
necessary to Salvation, then he must prefer God to Man, and follow the sounder,
though it should prove to be the much lesser party: And if any Company or Synod
of Protestants have decreed any thing contrary to this, in so far they have
departed from the Protestant principles.

3. Difference is to be made also between Heresy and Schism in a Legal and a
Vulgar sense, and what is truly such in the sight of God. The Sentence of a
Supreme Court from which there lies no Appeal, makes one legally a Criminal:
But if he is innocent, he is not the less innocent because a hard Sentence is
past against him. So Heresy and ^chism may take their denominations from the
Sentence of a National or General Council: But in that which is the sense of
those words that makes them Criminal, Heresy is nothing but an obstinate
persisting in errors, contrary to Divine Revelation, after one has had a
sufficient means of In^truction: and Schism is an ill grounded Separation from
the Body of the Church: So it must be the Divine Revelation, and not the
authority of a Synod that can prove one who holds contrary opinions to be an
Heretic, and the grounds of the Separation must be likewise examined before
one can be concluded a Schismatic.

4. Though the Conclusions and Definitions made by the Synod of Dort are
perhaps generally received in France, yet that does not bind them up to
subscribe every thing that was asserted in that Synod: Nor do they found their
assent to those opinions on the authority of that Synod, but upon the Evidence
of those places of Scripture from which they deduced them.

5. Since those of that Communion object a National Synod to the Protestants,
this may be turned back on them with greater advantage, in some points
established by Councils, which they esteem not only General but Infallible. In
the Third Council of the Lateran it was decreed, That all Princes who favored
Heretics did forfeit their Rights, and a Plenary Indulgence was granted to all
that fought against them. In the Fourth Council at the same place it was
decreed, That the Pope might not only declare this forfeiture, but absolve the
Subjects from their Oaths of Obedience, and transfer their Dominions upon
others. In the First Council at Lions they joined with the Pope in thundering
the Sentence of Deposition against the Emperor Frederick the First, which in
the preamble is grounded on some places of Scripture, of which if they were the
Infallible Expositors, then this power is an Article of Faith. And in the last
p^ace the Council of Constance decreed, That the Faith of a Safe Conduct was
not to be kept to an Heretic, that had come to the place of Judgment relying
on it, even though he would not have come without it. When Cruelt^, Rebellion
and Treachery were thus decreed in Courts, which among them are of so sacred an
authority; It is visible how much gre^ter advantages we have of them in this
point than any they can pretend against us.

6. For the Synod of Dort I will not undertake the Apology neither for their
Decrees nor for their Assertions* and will not stick to say that how true
soever many of their Conclusions may be, yet the defining such mysterious
matters as the order of the Divine Decrees, and the Influences of Gods Grace on
the wills of men, in so positive a manner, and the imposing their Assertions on
all the Ministers of their Communion, was that which many as sincere
Protestants as any are, have ever disliked and condemned, as a weakening the
Union of the Protestant Church, and an assuming too much of that authority
which we condemn in the Church of Rome. For though they supposed that they made
their definitions upon the grounds of Scripture* so that in this sense the
authority of the Synod was merely Declarative; yet the question will still
recur, Whether they understood the passages which they built on, right or not?
And if they understood them wrong, then according to Protestant principles,
their Decrees had no such binding authority, that the receding from them could
make one guilty either of Heresy or Schism.

The Sixth Method
IS to show them that the Roman Church, or that Church which acknowledges the
Pope or the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of S. Peter, to be her Head all the
World over, is the true Church: Because there is no other besides her that has
that undoubted mark, which is a perpet^al Visibility without Interruption,
since Christ's time to this day. This is a Method common to all the Catholics,
and is very well and briefly set forth in the little Treatise of the true
Church, joined to that of the Peaceable Method. This is that of which S. Austin
makes most frequent use against the Donatists, and chiefly in his Book of the
Unity of the Church; and in his Epistles, of which the most remarkable passages
relating to this matter, are gathered together by the late Archbishop of
Rouen, in the first Book of his Apology for the Gospel, in which he handles
this matter excellently well.

One may add to this Method the Maxims, of which Tertullian makes use in his
Treatise of Prescriptions against the Heretics, and also Vincentius Lyrinensis
in his Advices. It is enough to say on this occasion that those two Treatises
may satisfy any that will read them without prepossession, in order to their
forming a just Judgment of the true Church of Jesus Christ, and of all those
Societies that would usurp that name*

Remarks.
THis Method is so common that there was no reason in any sort to give Mr.
Maimbourg the honor of it, unless it was that the Assembly intended to do him
this public honor to balance his disgrace at Rome: But let us examine it.

1. This asserts that no other Church has a perpetual Succession without
interruption, but that which derives it from Rome, which is so contrary to what
every one knows, that Mr. Maimbourg was certainly inspired with the Spirit of
his Order when he writ it. Do not all the Greek Churches, and all the Churches
that have their Ordination from them, all from the Northern Empire of Muscovy
to the Southern of the Abassines, together with all those in the East, derive
from the Apostles by an uninterrupted series? For till the Authority of the
Church of Rome is proved, which is the thing in question, their being declared
Schismatics or Heretics by it, does not interrupt this Succession.

2. The Church of England has the same Succession that the Church of Rome had
in Gregory the Great's time (to wave the more ancient pretensions of the
British Churches) and the Bishops of this Church being bound by one of their
Sponsions made at their Consecration, according to the Roman Pontifical, to
instruct their flock in the true Faith according to the Scriptures, they were
obliged to make good this promise. Nor can it be pretended that they have
thereupon forfeited their Orders, and by consequence their Succession.

3. The Succession of the Church of Rome cannot be said to be uninterrupted, if
either Heresy or Schism can cut it off. It is well known that Felix, Liberius,
and Honorius, to name no more, were Heretics; and if Ordinations by
Schismatics or unlawful Usurpers be to be annulled, which was judged in the
case of Photius, and was often practiced at Rome, then the many Schisms and
unjust usurpations that have been in that See* will make the Succession of
their Orders the most disputable thing that can be, especially during that
Schism that lasted almost forty years; all the Churches of that Communion
having derived their Orders from one or other of the Popes: and if the Popes at
Avignon were the Usurpers, then let the Gallican Churches see how they can
justify the series of their Ordinations: To all which may be added the
impossibility of proving a true Succession in Orders, if the Virtue of the
Sacraments depends on the Intention of him who officiates, since secret
Intentions are only known to God.

4. The ground on which the Donatists separated from the Orthodox Churches
being at first founded on a matter of Fact, which was of the pretended
Irregularity of those who ordained Cecilian, which they afterward defended
upon this, that the Church could be only composed of good men, and that the
Sacraments were of no Virtue when dispensed by ill hands; all that S. Austin
says is to be governed by this Hypothesis, against which he argues: And it
being once granted that the Church was not corrupted neither in Doctrine nor
Worship, we are very ready to subscribe to every expression of his; and do
freely acknowledge that the making a rent in a Church, that is pure both in
Doctrine and Worship, upon any particular or personal account, is a sin that
cannot be sufficiently detested and condemned. I shall not enter into a
particular discussion of every passage of S. Austin's, but if in some he seems
to go too far for the authority of the Church, I shall only offer two general
considerations concerning these. The first is, That it is a Maxim with
Lawyers, That general words in Laws are to be restricted to the preambles and
chief design of these Laws: And if this is true of Laws that are commonly
penned with more coldness and upon greater deliberation, it is much more
applicable to warm discourses, where the heat of Contradiction, and the Zeal of
a Writer, makes that things are often aggravated, and carried too far; but
still all those expressions are to ^e molli^ied and restricted to that which
was the subject matter of the debate; therefore those expressions of S.
Austin's, supposing that the Church was still sound in her Doctrine and
Worship, are to be governed by that Hypothesis. The second is, That many of
those who urge these passages on us, do not deny but S. A^stin in the disputes
about Grace and Original Sin was carried too far, though those were the
subjects on which he employed his latest years with the greatest application:
If then it is confessed that he wrote too warmly against the Pelagians, and in
that heat advanced some propositions that need a fair construction, is it
unreasonable for us to say that he might have done the same, writing against
the Donatists?

5. As for Tertullian, he that might have conversed with many that could have
known S. Pol^carp, who was both instructed and ordained by the Apostles, so
that he might have been the third person in the conveyance of the sense of what
the Apostles had left in Writing, could reasonably argue as he did against the
Heretics; but certainly no man that considers the distance we live at from
those ages, and the many accidents that have so often changed the face of the
Church, can think it reasonable to argue upon that ground now. And yet it were
easy to bring many citatious out of that very Book of Tertullians, to show
that he grounded his Faith only on the Doctrine of Christ, delivered in the
Scriptures, how much soever he might argue from other Topics against the
Heretics of his time, who indeed were bringing in a New Gospel into the World.

We willingly receive the Characters that Vincentius Lyrinensis gives of
Tradition, that what the Church has at all times and in all places received, is
to be believed, and are ready to join issue upon this, and when they can prove
that the Church at all times and in all places has taught the Worshipping of
Images, the Invocation of Saints and Angels, the adoring the Sacrament, and the
dividing of it, with many more particulars; we will yield the whole cause, and
confess that we have made a Schism in the Church.

The Seventh Method
IS to let them see that those who at first pretended to Reform the Church in
which they were amongst us, neither had nor could have any Mission, either
Ordinary or Extraordinary, to bring us any other Doctrine but that which was
then taught; and that by Consequence none ought to believe them, since they had
no authority to Preach as they did. How can they Preach if they are not sent.
This is the ordinary Method that puts the Ministers to the necessity of proving
their Mission, which is a thing that they can never do. This cuts off all
disputes, and is one of the Methods of Cardinal Richelieu.

Remarks.
1. IF the first Reformers had delivered a new Doctrine which was never
formerly taught, it had been necessary for them to have had a very
extraordinary Mission, and to have confirmed it by very extraordinary signs,
but when they grounded all ^hey said upon that very Book, which was and is
still received as the unalterable Law of all Christians; then if every man is
bound to take care of his own Salvation, and is in Charity obliged to let
others see that same light that guides himself, then I say an extraordinary
Mission was not necessary when the thing in dispute was not a new Doctrine, but
the true meaning of those Writings which were on all hands acknowledged to be
Divine.

2. If notwithstanding the necessity of not raising War in Civil Government,
without an express Commission from the Prince or Supreme Authority, yet in a
General Rebellion, when the ways of intercourse with the Prince are cut off, if
it be not only a lawful but a commendable action for any subject, even without
a Commission, to raise what force he can for the service of the Prince: Then if
it be true, that the Western Churches had generally revolted from the rules of
the Gospel, that was a sufficient warrant for any person to endeavor a
Reformation.

3. The nature of the Christian Religion is to be well considered, in which all
Christians are a Royal Priesthood: And though it be highly necessary for all
the ends of Religion to maintain peace and Order, and to convey down an
authority for sacred administrations in such a way as tends most to advance
those ends; yet this cannot be looked on as indispensable and absolutely
necessary. Among the Jews, as there were many services in which none but
Priests and Levites could officiate, so the Succession went in the natural
course of Descent. But in the Christian Church there are no positive Laws so
appropriated, and therefore in cases of extreme and unavoidable necessity every
Christian may make use of that dormant privilege of being a Royal Priest, and
so this difficulty must be resolved, by examining the merits of the whole
cause, for if the necessity was not extreme and unavoidable, we acknowledge it
had been a Sacrilegious presumption for any that was not called in the ordinary
manner to meddle in Holy things

4. It is but a small part of the Reformed Churches that is concerned in this.
Here in England our Reformers had the ordinary Mission; and in most places
beyond Sea the first Preachers had been ordained Priests: And it will not be
easy to prove that Laymen, yea, and Women may baptize in cases of necessity,
when that is often but an imaginary necessity, and that yet Priests in a case
of real necessity may not ordain other Priests. For all the Rules of Order are
superseded by extraordinary cases, and in Moral as well as in Natural things,
every Individual has a Right to propagate its kind, and though it may be
reasonable to regulate that, yet it can never be wholly cut off.

The Eighth Method
IS to tell them, You do not know that such or such a Book of the Scripture is
the Word of God but by the Church in which you were before your Schism: So that
you cannot know what is the true sense of those passages that are in dispute,
but by that same Church which conveys it to you. This is S. Austin's method in
many places, but above all in his Book De utilitate Credendi, and in his Book
Contra Epistolam fundamenti: Ego vero evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae
Catholicae moveret authoritas Cont. Epist. Fund. cap. 5.
In which he says, I would not believe the Gospel, if the authority of the
Church did not oblige me to it. This Method is handsomely managed in the
Treatise of the true Word of God, joined to the Peaceable Method.

Remarks.
1. GReat difference is to be made between the conveyance of Books and an Oral
Tradition of Doctrine. It is very easy to carry down the one in a way that is
Morally Infallible: An exact copying being all that is necessary for that:
Whereas it is morally impossible to prevent frauds and impostures in the other,
in a course of some Ages, especially in times of Ignorance and Corruption, in
which the Credulity of unthinking people, has made an easy game to the Craft
and Industry of covetous and aspiring Priests. Few were then at the pains to
examine any thing, but took all upon Trust, and became so ready of belief, that
the more incredible a thing seemed to be, they swallowed it down the more
willingly.

2. If this way of reasoning will hold good, it was as strong in the mouths of
the Jews in our Saviors time; for the High Priest and Sanhedrim might have as
reasonably pretended that since they had conveyed down the Books in which the
Prophecies of the Messiah were contained, they h^d likewise the right to
expound those Prophecies.

3. A Witness that hands a thing down without Additions, is very different from
a Judge that delivers things on his own Authority. We freely own the Church to
be such a Witness that there is no color of reason to disbelieve the Tradition
of the Books, but we see great cause to question the credit of her decisions.

4. In this Tradition of Books we have not barely the Tradition of the Church
for it. We find in all ages since the Books of the New Testament were written,
several Authors have cited many and large passages out of them: We find they
were very quickly translated into many other Languages, and diverse of those
are conveyed down to us. There were also so many Copies of these Books every
where, that though one had resolved on so Sacrilegious an attempt as the
corrupting them had been, he could not have succeeded in it to any great
degree. Some additions might have been made in some Copies, and so from those
they might have been derived to others, but these could not have been
considerable, otherwise they had been discovered and complained of, and when we
find the Church engaged in contests with Heretics and Schismatics, we see
both sides appealed to the Scriptures, and neither of them reproached the other
for violating that Sacred Trust. And the noise we find of the small change of a
Letter in the A^ian Controversy, shows us how exact they were in preserving
these Records: As for the Errors of Transcribers that is incident to the
Nature of Man, and though some Errors have crept into some Copies, yet all
these put together do not alter any one point of our Religion; so that they are
not of great consequence. Thus it appears how much reason we have to receive
the Scriptures upon the credit of such a Tradition. But for Oral Tradition, it
is visible how it might have been so managed as quickly to change the whole
Nature of Religion. Natural Religion was soon corrupted when it passed down in
this Conveyance, even during the long lives of the Ancient Patriarchs, who had
thereby an advantage to keep this pure, that after ages, in which the life of
Man is so shortened, cannot pretend to. We also see to what a degree the Jewish
Tradition became corrupted in our Saviors time, particularly in one point,
which may be called the most essential part of their Religion, to wit,
concerning their Messiah, what the nature of his Person and Kingdom were to
be. So that they all expected a Great Conqueror, a second Moses, or a David;
so ineffectual a mean is Oral Tradition, for conveying down any Doctrine pure
or uncorrupted.

The Ninth Method
IS to tell them the Church in which they were before they made the Separation,
was the true Church, because it was the only Church; so that they could not
Reform the Doctrine without making another Church: For then she must have
fallen into Error, and by consequence the Gates of Hell must have prevailed
against her, which is directly contrary to the Promise of Jesus Christ that
cannot fail, Portae Inseri non prae^aleb^nt adv^rsus eam. Ma^th. 1.16.
The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her

Remarks.
1. A Church may be a True Church, and yet be corrupted by many Errors, for a
^rue Church is a Society of men, among whom are the certain means of Salvation,
and such was the Jewish Church in our Saviors time: For their Sacrifices had
still an Expiatory Virtue, and the Covenant made with that people stood still,
and yet they were overrun with many Errors, chiefly in their notions of the
Messiah. And thus as long as the Church of Rome acknowledges the Expiation,
made by the Death of Christ, and applied to all that truly believe and amend
their lives, so long she is a True Church. So that those of that Communion who
adhere truly to that which is the great fundamental of the Christian Religion
may be saved: But when so many things were added to this, that it was very hard
to preserve this fundamental truth pure and entire, then it was necessary for
those who were better enlightened, to call on others to correct the abuses that
had crept in.

2. It is hard to build a great super-structure on a figurative expression, of
which it is not easy to find out the true and full sense: And in this that is
cited there are but three terms, and about every one of them great and just
grounds of doubting do appear. 1. It is not certain what is meant by the Gates
of Hell, which is an odd figure for an assailant: If by Gates we mean Councils,
because the Magistrates and Courts among the Jews sat in the Gates, then the
meaning will be, that the Craft of Hell shall not prevail against the Church,
that is, shall not root out Christianity: or if by Gates of Hell, or the Grave,
according to a common Greek Phrase, Death be to be understood, it being the
Gate through which we pass to the Grave, then the meaning is this, that the
Church shall never die or be extinguished. Nor is there less difficulty to be
made about the signification of the word Church: Whether it is to be meant in
general of the body of Christians, or of the Pastors of the Church, and of the
majority of them. The Context seems to carry it for the Body of Christians, and
then the meaning will be only this, That there shall still be a Body of
Christians in the World. And it cannot be proved that any thing else is to be
understood by the word Church in that place. A third difficulty may be also
raised upon the extent of the word Prevail, whether a total overthrow, or any
single advantage is to be understood by it; or whether this prevailing is to be
restrained only to the fundamentals of Christianity, or is to be extended to
all sorts of truth; or whether it is to be understood of corrupting the
Doctrine, or of vitiating the Morals of Christians? Thus it is apparent how
many difficulties may be started concerning the meaning of those words. So that
at best the sense of them is doubtful, and therefore it will be a strange and
rash adventure to determine any thing in matters of great moment upon the
authority of such a figurative expression.

3. Though the Roman Church had been corrupted, that will not infer that the
Gates of Hell had prevailed against the Church, for that being but the Center
of the Union of some of the Western Nations, a corruption in it does not prove
that the whole Church was corrupted, for there were many other Churches in
other parts of the World besides those of that Communion.

The Tenth Method
IS that of the Bishop of Meaux, lately of Condom, in his Book entitled, The
exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church. In which he does in every
Article distinguish between that which is precisely of Faith, and that which is
not so; and shows that there is nothing in our belief that may give distaste to
a reasonable Spirit, unless they will look on the abuses of some particular
persons which we condemn, as our belief, or impute Errors to us falsely, or
charge us with the explications of some Doctors that are neither received nor
authorized by the Church. This method is taken from S. Hilary in his Book of
Synods. Damnemus in commune vitiosam Intelligentiam, non auferamus fidei
securitatem. -- Sed Homoousion potest male intelligi, constituatur qualiter
possit been intelligi. -- Potest inter nos optimus fidei status condi, ut nec
ea quae been sunt constituta vexentur, and quae male sunt Intellecta
resecentur. Hill. lib. de Syn. page 394, and 396. of the Paris Edition. 165^.
Let us (says he) altogether condemn false Interpretations, but let us not
destroy the certainty of the Faith. -- The Word Consubstantial may be ill
understood, but let it be established in a sense in which it may be well
understood. -- The right state of the Faith may be established among us, so as
we may neither reverse that which has been well establishedpunc; nor cut off
those things that have been ill understood.

Remarks.
SOmewhat was said in the Preface, with relation to this, which shall not be
here repeated. It is not to be denied but in the management of Controversies
the heat of Dispute has carried many too far, and some have studied to raise
many Imaginary Controversies, which subsist only upon some misunderstood terms
and expressions of the contrary party: And things have been on all hands
aggravated in many particulars out of measure: So that they have deserved well
of the Church that have brought matters as near a Reconciliation as may be. But
after all this, it were a strange imposition on this and the preceding age to
persuade the World that notwithstanding all the differences of Religion, and
the unhappy effects that have followed upon them, that they really were all the
while of the same mind, but were not so happy as to find it out till that
excellent Prelate helped them to it, by letting them see how near the
concessions of both sides are to one another; so that a little conversation and
dexterity i^ putting the softest construction that may be on the contrary
persuasion might bring them to be of the same mind. But if in order to this,
the sense of both sides is so far stretched, that neither party can own it for
a true account of their sentiments, then this must be concluded to be only the
Ingenious Essay of a very witty man, who would take advantage of some
expressions, to persuade people that they have opinions which really they have
not. I shall not enter into a particular disquisition of those things which
have been already so fully examined, but refer the Reader to the Answers that
have been given to that famous Book.

2. The received and authorized Offices of the Church of Rome, and the Language
in which they do daily make their Addresses to Heaven is that on which the most
unanswerable and the strongest part of our Plea for our Separation is founded,
and it is not an ingenuous way of writing to affix some forced senses to those
plain expressions, because they being so gross as they are, all wise or learned
men are ashamed to defend them, and yet know not how to get them to be
reformed, or thrown out: Therefore it is that they set their Wits on work to
put some better construction on them. But this is a clear violence to the plain
sense of those Offices, extorted by the evidence and force of Truth, and gives
us this advantage, that it is plain those that so qualify them, are convinced
that their Church is in the wrong, and yet for other ends, or perhaps from a
mistaken notion of Unity and Peace, they think fit to continue in it.

3. It is to be hoped, that those who have cited this passage out of S. Hilary,
will consider those other passages cited out of him against Persecution, though
a great Error made in the Translation of this citation, makes me fear that
they who rendered it had read him very cursorily.

The Eleventh Method
IS drawn from those General Arguments which Divines call the Motives of
Credibility: It is that made use of by Tertullian, in his Book of
Prescriptions; and by S. Austin, Contr. Epist. Fund. cap. 45, Paris* Edit.
who reckons up the Motives that held him in the Catholic Church.

Remarks.
1. AS for the Case of Tertullian and S. Austin, a great deal was said formerly
to show the difference between the Age they lived in, and the grounds they went
on; and the present state of the Western Church.

2. When it is considered that a course of many Ages, which by the Confession
of all were times of Ignorance and Superstition, has made a great change in the
World, that the gross Scandals and wonderful Ignorance of those that have
governed the Sea of Rome, that the Dissolution of all the Rules of
Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline both among Clergy and Laity, that the
Interest the Priests, particularly the Popes and the begging Orders that
depended on them, had to promote those, was so great and undisput^d, that it is
notorious, all the worst methods of forgeries, both of Writings to authorize
them, and of Miracles and Legends to support them, were made use of. When, I
say, all these things are so plain to every one that has looked a little into
the History of former ages, it is no wonder if the Church of Rome is so much
changed from what it was formerly, That the motives made use of by Tertullian
and S. Austin do not at all belong to the present state of the Churches of that
Communion: But on the contrary, instead of motives to persuade one to continue
in it, there appear upon a general view, a great many just and well-grounded
prejudices to dispose a man to forsake that Communion.

The Twelfth Method
IS both very short and very easy: It is to catch them in this Dilemma. Before
Wickliff, Luther and Calvin (and one may say as much of the Waldenses that
lived in the Twel^^h Century) the Church of those of the P R. Religion was
either made up of a little number of the Faithful, or was not at all in being.
If it was not at all in being, then theirs is a False Church, since it is not
perpetual, as the True Church ought to be, according to the promise of Jesus
Christ, Portae Inferi non praevalebunt adversus ^am.
The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, and Ego vobiscum sum usque ad
consummationem seculi.
I am with you even to the end of the World. If their Church was in being, it
must have been according to their own principles Corrupted and Impious: Because
they cannot show that little number of the pretended Faithful, who before the
Reformation did condemn, as they now do, Art. 31. of their Confession of Fait^.
all the Assemblies of the Popish Churches, as overrun with Idolatry and
Superstition. They behaved themselves, at least as to outward appearance, as
others did. And thus their Church which was composed of that small unknown
flock, was not Holy, and by consequence was not the True Church.

Remarks.
1. TO the greatest part of this, answer has been already given: We acknowledge
the Church of Rome was a True Church, and had in it the means of Salvation
though it was overrun with Errors, and Christ is truly with his Church as
long as those means of Salvation do remain in it. So was the Jewish Church a
True Church after she was in many points corrupted in her Doctrine.

2. In those dark Ages many might have kept themselves free from the
defilements of their Worship, though no account is given of them in story. So
seven thousand had not bowed their knees to Baal in Elijah's time, who were not
so much as known to that Prophet, though it might have been expected that they
would all have willingly discovered themselves to him: And since he knew
nothing of them, it is very probable they concealed themselves with great care
from all others.

3. All good men have not all the degrees of Illumination, for there might have
been great numbers that saw the corruptions of their Church, but were so
restrained by other opinions concerning the Unity of the Church, that they
thought it enough to infuse their notions into some few Disciples, in whom they
confided: and on some perhaps that which Elisha said to Naaman the Syrian,
being wrong understood by them, had great influence. Others observing that the
Apostles continued to worship at the Temple, and offer Sacrifices, which S.
Paul and those with him that purified themselves must have done, might have
from that inferred that one might comply in a Worship, though they disliked
many things in it; which, if I am not much misinformed, is a Maxim that
governs many in the Roman Communion to this day. I do not excuse this
compliance, but it is not so criminal as at first view it may appear to be: If
it is truly founded on a mistake of the mind, and not on a baseness in the
will, or a rejecting of the Cross of Christ, especially in men that had so
faint a twilight as that was which they were guided by in those blind times.

4. But to make the worst of this that can be, and should we grant that through
fear they had complied against their Consciences, this only must make the
conclusion terrible to them, if they did not repent of it. But God might have
ordered the conveyance of truth to be handed down by such defiled hands, and
their not being personally holy, must not be urged too far, to prove that they
could not be the true Church. This will come too near the Doctrines of the
Donatists, and many of S. Austin's sayings which they unreasonably object to
us, may be turned upon them. And it will very ill become a Church that
acknowledges the Succession of the Bishop of Rome to have been the chief
conveyance of Tradition, which is a much greater matter in their principles
than it is in ours, to urge the Holiness of the Members to be essential to the
being of a Church, when it is acknowledged what a sort of men the Heads of
their Church have been for diverse Ages.

The Thirteenth Method
IS taken from the nature of Schism, which one ought never to make, what
reasons soever may be pretended for it, for according to the Minister*
themselves, no other reason can be given for their Separation, but the Errors
which they pretend had crept into the Church. But those who were in it as well
as they were, did strongly assert, as we do to this day, that these were no
Errors at all but Truths. And it is certain that of opinions which are so
different, the one must be the true Doctrine, and the other must be Error and
falsehood; and by consequence the one must be the good grain, and the other must
be the Tares. Now it does not belong to particular persons by their private
authority to pluck up that which they pretend to be Tares. There is none but
God, who is the true Father of the Family, that has this authority, and can
communicate it to others. It is he who appoints the Reapers, that is the Pope
and the Bishops, who are represented by the Angels, to separate the Cockle from
the Wheat, and to pluck out the one without touching the other till the time of
Harvest, that is in a Council, or by the common consent of the whole Church,
and in that case a Council is not necessary. Vis imus and colligimus ea? Non;
ne forte eradicantes Zizania, eradicetis and triticum; sinite utraque crescere
usque ad messem.
Will thou then that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay; lest while ye
gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with them, let both grow
together until the Harvest. Therefore one ought never to s^parate upon what
pretense soever it be, but he must bear with that which he thinks is an abuse
and error, and stay till the Church plucks up the Cockle. Lib. de unitate
Ecclesi^e, and Psalm. con. par. Don. and Epist. 162 and 171.
This is one of the Methods of S. Austin in his Treatises against the
Donatists, in which he shows from the Examples of Moses, Aaron, Samuel, David,
Isaiah, Jeremy, S. Paul, who tolerated even the false Apostles, that we ought
never to separate from our Brethren, before the solemn condemnation of the
Church. Non enim nobis displicent quia tolerant m^los, sed quia intolerabiliter
mali sunt propter Schisma, propter Altar contra Altar, propter Separationem
ab haereditate Christi toto orb diffus^, f^cut tanto an^e promissa est. A^g.
Ep. 162.
He says purs^ant to this, that the Donatists were intolerably wicked for
having made a Schism, for having erected an Alta^ against an Altar, and for
having separated themselves from the Inheritance of Jesus Christ, which is
stretched ou^ over all the Earth, according to the promise that was made to it.
He add^* that if they thought that was but a sm^^ matter, they had nothing to
do but to s^ what the Scripture teaches us by the examples we find in it of the
punishment of s^ great a crime; for says he, Those that made an Idol of the
Golden Calf were only punished by the Sword, whereas those who made the Schism
were swallowed up by the Earth: Diversirate poenarum, Diversitas agnoscitur
meritorum. Ibid.
So that by this diversity of the punishments, one may know that Schism is a
greater crime than Idolatry.

We may likewise see how upon the same subject he exhorts the Donatists to
renounce their wicked Schism in his ^71 Epistle, in which among other things he
has those excellent words. Quare divisores vestimentorum Domini esse vultis?
and tunicam illam Charitatis desuper tex^am, quam nec persecutores ejus
diviserunt, terere cum toto orb non vultis? -- Fingi^is vos ante tempus messis
sugere permixta Ziz^nia, quia vos es^is sola Zizania: Nam si frumenta essetis,
permixta Zizania tolerare^is, and a segete Christi non vos divideretis. Aug.
E^. 171.
Why will you tear the Lords garments? and why will you not with the rest of
the World leave that Coat of Charity entire, that is all woven of one Thread,
which even his Persecutors themselves would not rend? And a little after this,
You pretend that you would avoid that Cockle, that as you allege, is mixed
among us, and that before the time of Harvest; whereas indeed it is you your
selves that are this Cockle, for if you were the good grain, you would bear
with it, and would not separate your selves from the Corn of Jesus Christ.

We need only change the name Donatists into Calvinists: This is it that shows
to what degree the Church ever was and ever must be acknowledged to be
Infallible, since we must submit to its Decisions; and the Fathers have
established this so strongly that one ought never to separate from her, and
that one is by so much the more obliged to continue united to her, because she
never refuses to hear the Remonstrances made to her by her Children.

Remarks.
1. IT was observed before how unreasonable it was to build much on ^n
Allegory, but on this occasion the Allegory is so clearly forced, that it gives
just cause of Suspicion that the cause is weak that must be supported by such
Arguments. For our Savior makes it so plain that the Harvest is the end of the
World, that the Reapers are Angels, and that upon his last coming they shall
gather together the wicked, and cast them into Hell, and that the Righteous
shall shine in Heaven: That the applying this to a General Council, in which
Heresy shall be condemned, is such a fetch, that it must be confessed they
have as easy Consciences as they have warm Fancies, that are wrought on by it.

2. As for that which S. Austin drew from this against the Donatists who
justified their Separation on the account of the sins of those who were in the
Communion of the Church, it was as pertinent as this is strained; for the
ground of the Schism being only the mixture of the Cockle with the Wheat,
nothing could be more strongly urged against them. But it is quite out of the
present Controversy between them and us, who do not separate for this mixture,
but finding the Wheat it self so much corrupted, took care to cleanse it.

3. We freely acknowledge the great sin of Schism, and the severe punishment
due to it, but for all the severity of the punishment inflicted on Corah and
his Partners, we do not doubt but when the Temple was so defiled by Idolatry,
under the Kings that polluted the Altar and the Courts of the Lords House with
Idols, it was not only no sin, but a commendable piece of Religion in such
cases to have withdrawn from so impious a Worship. This is our present case,
and if what we object to their Worship is true, then our Separation from it is
as necessary a Duty as is the preserving of our lives from Poisons or
Infectious Diseases.

4. The true scope of that Parable seems to be a reproof to the Violence of
such Churchmen as are too apt to condemn and pluck up every thing that they
think to be Cockle; and when the declaring what is Cockle is lodged with them,
they will be sure to count every thing such that does not please them. And then
that same heat that makes them judge those opinions to be Cockle sets them on
to root them out with such violence, that much good Wheat is in danger to be
plucked up. Therefore to repress this, our Savior commands them under that
figure, to let both grow till the end of the World, that is, not to proceed to
extremities and to rigorous Methods, but to leave that to God who will judge
all at the last day. If this were well considered, it would put an effectual
stop to that Spirit of Persecution which ferments so violently in that Church:
The language of which is always this, Let u^ go and pluck up the Tares, or that
of the two Disciples who would have called for Fire from Heaven; and because
Heaven will not answer such bloody demands, they try to raise such Fires on
Earth as may burn up those whom they call the Tares: Not knowing what the true
Spirit of Christianity is, and that the Son of Man came not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them: And forget that our Savior commanded them to let the
Tares grow till the Harvest. But this is one of the mischiefs that follows the
humor of expounding the Scriptures fancifully. That the plain meaning of clear
Texts is neglected, while forced and Allegorical expositions are pursued.

5. When it is clearly proved that the majority of the Pastors of the Church is
Infallible, then we shall acknowledge that all Separation from them is simply
unlawful: But till that is done we can no more think it a sin, when in
obedience to the Rules of the Gospel we withdraw from such false Teachers as
corrupt it; Then it were for Common Subjects to refuse to obey the Subordinate
Magistrates when they clearly perceive that they have revolted from their duty
to their Supreme Authority. And since we are warned to beware of false
Teachers, we know no other way to judge of them, but the comparing their
Doctrine with that which is delivered to us in Scripture.

The Fourteenth Method
IS for the Confirmation of the former: In order to which we must ask the
Calvinists upon all their Articles, that which Si autem tunc non erat Ecclesia,
quia Sacrilegi Heretici sine baptismo recipiebantur, and haec universali
consu^tudine tenebatur, unde Donatus apparuit?
S. Austin asked of the Donatists, when the Church reconciled to her self
Heretics that were penitent without re-baptizing them: For Example, Whether
was the Church still a True Church or not, when before the Schism was made,
Jesus Christ was adored in the Holy Eucharist? If she was the true Church, then
none ought to have separated from her for any practice that was authorized by
her. De qua terra germinavit? De quo mari emersit? De quo coelo cecidit? Lib.
5. de Bapt. cap. 2.
If she was not the true Church, from whence came Calvin, out of what soil did
he grow, or out of what Sea was he cast, or from which of the Heavens did he
fall? From whence are these Reformers come? From whom have they received their
Doctrine, and the authority to Preach it? Ipsi considerent ubi sint qui neque
unde propagati sint, possunt dicere. Sed nos in Ecclesiae communione securi
sumu^, per cujus universitatem ^d nun^ agitur, quod and ante Agripinum, and
inter Agripinum and Cyprianum, per ejus universitatem similiter agebatur. Ibid.
Let those who follow them consider well where they are, since they can mount
no higher than to those for their Original. For us we are secure in the
Communion of that Church, in which that is to this day universally practiced
that was also practiced before Agripinus 's time, and also in the interval
between Cyprian and Agripinus: And afterward he subjoyns these excellent words
that are Decisive, Et cujus universitatem neque Agripinus deseruit, neque
Cyprianus, neque illi qui iis consenserunt, quamvis aliter quam caeteri
saperent, sed cum iis ipsis a quibus diversa senserunt, in eadem unitatis
Communione manserunt. Ibid.
But neither did Agripinus, nor Cyprian, nor those that have followed them,
though they had opinions different from others, separate themselves from them,
but remained in the Communion and Unity of the same Church with those from whom
they differed. That is to say, they waited till the Church should have decided
the difference; and after he had resumed a little of what he had formerly said,
he concludes thus, Quapropter si temporib^s Cypriani perdidit Ecclesia Malorum
Communionem, non habent isti suae communionis origin^m. Si autem non perdidit,
non hab^nt praecisionis suae aliquam desensionem. Ibid. lib. 3. co^tra
Donatista^ de Bapti^mo.
If then the Church was lost for holding that the Baptism of Heretics was
good, they cannot show the Original of their Communion. But if the true Church
did still subsist, they cannot justify their Separation, nor the Schism that
they have made. One may say all this against the Waldenses, the Lutherans, the
Calvinists, and the other Heretics who cannot mount higher than to Waldo, to
Luther, to Calvin, or their other Heads. This Method of S. Austin's is most
excellent.

But if our Brethren, the pretended Reformed, will defend themselves by saying,
as in effect they do say in some of their Books, That it was not they who made
the Separation, but rather that it came from us, and that we have cut them off
from our Communion. To this it must be answered, That there are two sorts of
S^paration, the one is Criminal, the other is Judicial. In the first, one
separates himself from his Pastor by a manifest Disobedience; in the second,
the Pastor separates him from the Flock who is making a party, and refuses to
submit to the Orders of the Church. The one is a Sin, and the other is the
Punishment. The one is a voluntary departure, the other is the being cut off by
a S^ntence, even as the Judge pronounces a Sentence of Condemnation against one
that has killed himself.

The proof of those two different Separations is to be found in the Thirty
eighth Letter of S. Cyprians, where he speaks of one Augendus, who had gone
over to the party of Felicissimus the Deacon, and it appears that that great
Saint had suspended and excommunicated him for having withdrawn himself from
his Obedience, and for having engaged others in the same Separation. Interim
cum Felic^ssimus comminatus sit non communicaturos in morte secum qui nobis
obtemperassent, id est, qui nobis communicarint, accipiat Sententiam quam prior
dixit, ut abstentum se ^ nobis sciat quisquis se inspirationi and factioni ejus
se adjunxerit. Sciat se in Ecclesia nobiscum non esse communicaturum, qui
sponte maluit ab Ecclesia separari. Cypr. Ep. 38. Quod nunc hi Ecclesiam
scindentes, and contra pacem atque unitat^m Christi Rebels, Cathedram sibi
constituere, and primatum assumere, and baptizandi atque off^rendi licentiam
vindicare conantur. Idem ^p. 76.
Let every one, says he, that has folfollowed his Opinions and Faction, know
that he shall communicate no more with us in the Church, since of his own
accord he has chosen to be separated from the Church. In his Seventy sixth
Epistle he says the same thing of Novatian, and those who had joined with him
in his Revolt; Because they leaving the Church by their Rebellion, and breaking
the Peace and Unity of Jesus Christ, have endeavored to establish their
authority, and to assume a Supreme Jurisdiction to themselves, and to usurp
power to Baptize, and to offer Sacrifice.

This Distinction is also clearly stated in the fourth Action of the Council of
Chalcedon, where those two Ancient Canons of the Council of Antioch that were
drawn out of Canons of the Apostles, were cited. The first is concerning those
that were separated, the other is concerning those who of their own accord did
separate themselves. The Greek is (...).

Council. Chal. ^ct. 4. Can. 83. Si quis Epis^opus a (...) deposi^us, (...)
Pr^s^^ter, (...) Diaconus, (...) omnino qui est sub regu^^* a proprio Episcopo,
ausus suerit amplius aliquid Sacri Ministerii ge^^re, sive Episcopus juxta
Superiorum consuetudinem, sive Presbyter, sive Diaconus, postea non liceat ei,
ne in altera quidem Synodo, spem restitutionis nec satisfactionis locum habere:
Sed and omnes qui ^i communicent, ^jiciantur ex Ecclesia, and maxim si
postqaam cognoverint sententiam in praedictos latam, iis communicate ausi
fuerint. Can. 84. De iis qui seipsos separant, si quis Presbyter aut Diaconus
contemp^o proprio Episco ^o, se ab Ecclesia segregaverit, aut seorsim
congregationem habuerit, and altar constituerit, si commonenti Episcopo non
acqu^everit, nec consentire vel obedire voluerit, semel and iterum, ac t^r^ium
vocanti, is omnino Deponatur, nec ultra remedium consequi, ^ec proprium honorem
recipere possit: Quod si perseveraverit tumultuari and Ecclesiam perturbare,
per potestatem externam tanquam seditiosus. corrigatur. These two Can^ns were
read and reported in the Fourth (...) of the Council of Chalcedon, in the
Process of those two Monks Caroze and Dorothee, that had made a Schism, and
having joined themsel^es to Eutyches, did separate from the Church, as Luther
and Calvin, and thos^ who have followed them, have separated themselves in
these latter Ages.
It was thought proper for this purpose to transcribe here those two Canons,
which are the fundamental Laws of the practice of the Church, with regard to
Heretics and Schismatics whom she throws out of her bosom, and who have
separated themselves from her.

These Canons are the Fourth and Fifth of the Council of Antioch, and the
Twenty seventh and Thirtieth of the Apostolic Canons, and the pretended
Reformed cannot reject their Authority, since they observe among themselves the
same Discipline, when any particular persons, whether Ministers, or others of
their Communion, will not submit to the Decisions of their Synods.

Remarks.
1. FOr the first branch of this Method the Reformed are not at all concerned
in it, for they do not deny the Church of Rome to be still a True Church; and
that her Baptism and Ordinations are valid, and that they are not to be
repeated, and therefore though it was very pertinent to urge the Donatists as
S. Austin did, who held that the Sacraments in an ill man's hands had no virtue
at all, and that the Church had every where failed, so that there was no Church
but that which was among them. Yet all this is foreign to the state of the
Controversy between us and the Church of Rome, and we do freely acknowledge
that in such a matter as the Re-baptizing Heretics, it had been a very great
sin to have broken Communion with the rest of the Church.

2. Yet upon this very head P. S^ephen did excommunicate S. Cyprian, who yet
for all that did not depart from his former opinion or practice: So here was
such a Schism as they object to us, S. Cyprian thought the Rebaptizing
Heretics was well grounded; Stephen thought otherwise, and did excommunicate
him. If upon that a lasting Schism had followed in the Church, S. Cyprian might
have been held the fountain of it by those who condemned his opinion, but if
his opinion was true he could be no Schismatic: So we desire the grounds of
our Separation may be examined: if they will not bear such a Superstructure, we
confess we deserve the severest censures possible; but if they are solid, then
the guilt of the rent that is in the Church, must lie somewhere else than on us.

3. We do not deny but there are two sorts of Separation which are here very
well distinguished; and without seeking for any proof in so clear a matter, We
confess that when any separates himself from the Church, upon any unjustifiable
account, those Canons, and the highest severities of Church Censures ought to
be applied ^o them: but all this is upon supposition that the departure is ill
grounded, and therefore all those Rules that have been said down in general
against Heresy and Schism must still suppose the Church to ^e pure and
uncorrupted.

4. It is plain by these very Canons, how much that power of the Church may be
and was abused. The Council of Antioch, being composed of the favorers of
Arius, deposed Athanasius, and resolved to silence him, and such other
Churchmen as received the Nicene Doctrine, in such a manner that they should
be no more able to withstand their designs: And therefore they made those
Canons according to former customs, which in the style of that Age was called
the Canon or Rule (for none that has considered things, will believe that the
Canons that are called Apostolical, were made by the Apostles) and their chief
design was levelled against Athanasius and the Orthodox party. But at that same
time as the Orthodox in the East did not submit to this* so neither did the
Bishops (...) the West take any notice of it; an^ Chrysostom, who was bred up
at A^tioch, and so could not but know in what esteem those Canons were held,
did not look on himself as bound by them, an^ made no account of them when they
were objected to him. Thus, though i^ general these are goo^ Rules* and such a^
ought to be obeyed where the Synod or the Bishop do not abuse their power, yet
when the power of the Church is used not to Edification but to Destruction,
then the obligation to obedience is not to be too far extended. And as in Laws
that oblige Subjects to obey Inferior Magistrates, a tacit exception is to be
supposed, in case they should become guilty of Treason, so there must be
supposed likewise in this case the like exception, in case a Synod deposes a
Bishop, or a Bishop censures his Clergy, for asserting the true Faith. And as a
Separation from an uncorrupted Church is a very great wickedness, so the
separating from a corrupted Church, in whose Communion we cannot continue
without being polluted in it, is but a part of that care which we ought to have
of our own Salvation.

The Fifteenth Method.
TO all the former Methods a Fifteenth may be added, by letting our P. Reformed
see that many Articles are to be found in their Confession of Faith, in their
Catechisms, in the Articles of their Discipline, in the Decisions of their
Synods, and in the Books of their Chief Ministers who have writ upon the
Controversies; from which, Arguments may be drawn against them to prove the
truth of our belief, even by their own Confession: For Example, Their
Discipline allows the Communion in one kind only, to such as cannot drink Wine:
From which one may infer that the Communion under both kinds is not an Article
of necessity, and that they are in the wrong, to allege that as they do, to be
a lawful ground for their Separation.

The Minister Dailee, and many others confess, that in the time of S. Gregory
Nazianzene, S. Chrysostom and S. Jerome, the Invocation of Saints was received
in the Church: John Forbes adds to this, That the Tradition of the Church was
uniform concerning Prayer for the Dead: And since he denies that the Books of
the Maccabees are Canonical, he says the Scripture speaks nothing of it. But
without engaging into the difficulty concerning the Books of the Maccabees, in
which they have no more reason on their side, than in the rest; It is easy to
conclude from their own principles, that it was no ways to be allowed to
separate themselves for matters, that according to themselves, were established
by so great an authority, and so constant an union of all Ages.

Remarks.
1. IT is not an equal way of proceeding, to object to the Protestants what
some particular Writers have said, or to strain Inferences too far, at a time
when the Celebrated Book of the Bishop of Meaux is in such high esteem. The
chief design o^ which is to set aside all the Indiscretions of particular
Writers, and to put the best colors on things that is possible. Now Tradition
being of such authority among them, whatsoever passes down through many of
their approved Writers, has a much greater strength against them, than it can
be pretended to have against us: And therefore though particular Writers or
whole Synods should have written or decreed any thing against the common
Doctrines of the Reformed, they ought not to object that to us: If they will
allow us the same Liberties that they assume to themselves.

2. It is not a consequence becoming so great an Assembly to infer, that
because in some few extraordinary cases the general rule of Gods desiring Mercy
and not Sacrifice is carried so far, as to give weak persons so much of the
Sacrament as they can receive, and not to deny that to them because a natural
aversion m^kes them incapable of receiving the Wine: That therefore a Church
may, in opposition to Christ's express command, Drink you all of it, and the
constant practice of Thirteen Centuries take this away. It is not of necessity
for Salvation that every one drinks the Cup, but it is of necessity to the
purity of a Church that she should observe our Savior's Precepts.

3. It is confessed that some Fathers used the Invocation of Saints; yet that
being but a matter of fact, it is of no consequence for the Decision of any
point of Doctrine: For we found our Doctrine only on the Word of God, and ^ot
on the practices of Men, how eminent soever they might otherwise be. But in
relation to these Fathers, these things are to be observed, 1. They lived in
the end of the Fourth Century: So this is no competent proof for an Oral
Tradition, or conveyance of this Doctrine down from the Apostles days. 2.
Figures and bold Discourses in Panegyricks are rather to be considered as
raptures and flights of warm affections, than as composed and serious
devotions. Therefore such Addresses as occur in their Funeral Orations, are
rather high strains of a daring Rhetoric, than Instructions for others, since
in their expositions on Scripture, or other Treatises of Devotion, they do not
handle these things by way of Direction or Advice.

John Forbes is mis-cited for William Forbes, Bishop of Edinburgh: John was not
of such yielding Principles. It is true, William though he was a man Eminently
Learned, and of a most Exemplary Life, yet he was possessed with that same
weakness, under which Grotius, and some other great men have labored, of
thinking that a Reconciliation with the Church of Rome might be obtained by an
accommodation on both sides; and this flowing in him from an excellent temper
of Soul, he is to be excused if that carried him in many things too far: But he
is a Writer that has been taxed by all men, as one that had particular Notions.
And we may object Erasmus to those of the Church of Rome, as well as they may
argue against us from Bishop Forbes.

5. If the Church of Rome used only a General Commemoration of the Dead, with
wishes for the completing their happiness by a speedy resurrection, and went
no further, we might perhaps differ in opinion with them about the fitness of
this, but we would not break Communion with them for it. But when they have set
up such a Merchandise in the House of God, for Redeeming Souls out of
Purgatory, and saying Masses for them; this is that we except to, as a
disgracing of the Christian Religion, and as a high profanation of the Holy
Sacrament. And it is plain that the Fathers considered the Commemoration of the
Dead rather as a respect done to their Memory, and an honorable remembrance of
them, than as a thing that was any way useful to them in the other state; which
may appear by this single Instance: E^. 34.
S. Cyprian was so much offended at a Presbyter, when it appeared after his
death that he had left another Presbyter Guardian of his Children; that he gave
order that no mention should be made of him in the Commemoration of the Dead
that was used in the Holy Eucharist; because, by the Roman Law, such as were
left Guardians were under some obligations to undertake the trust: And that
Saint thought such a trust might prove so great a distraction to a man that was
dedicated to the Holy Ministry, that no Honor ought to be done to the Memory
of him that had so left it by his Will. Certainly if that Commemoration was
believed to be of any advantage to the Dead, this had been an unreasonable
piece of Cruelty in him to deny a Presbyter that comfort for so small a fault:
And therefore we may well infer from hence, that by this Remembrance, and the
Thanksgivings they offered to God for such as had died in the Faith, they
intended only so far to celebrate their Memories as to encourage others to
imitate those Patterns they had set them.

6. I shall not engage in any Dispute concerning the Canonicalness of the Books
of the Maccabees, only as this general prejudice lies against all the Books
called Apocryphal, that the Council at Laodicea, which was the first that
reckoned up the C^non of the Scripture, does not name them: So as to the Book
of the Maccabees, it is hard to imagine that one who professes that he was but
an Abridger of Iason's Five Books, and gives us a large account of the
difference between a Copious History and an Abridgement, could be an Inspired
Writer.

The Sixteenth Method.
TO Conclude, one may solidly confute our Innovators by the Contradiction that
is in their Articles of Faith, showing them the Changes that they have made in
the Ausburg Confession, as also in all the different Expositions of their Faith
which they have received and authorized since that time; which shows that their
Faith being uncertain Regula quidem fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis and
irreformabilis, caetera jam disciplinae and conversationis adm^ttunt novitatem*
Tertull. de Virg. ^el. c. 1. lib. 1. adv^rsus Marc. c. 21. and almost in his
whole Book of Prescriptions.
and wavering, cannot have the Character of Divine Revelation, which is certain
and constant. There is nothing but the Faith that admits of no Reformation.

Tertullian made use of this Argument in many of his Books, and Hilary handles
it excellently well against the Emperor Constantius, upon the occasion of the
new Symbols, which the Arians published every day, changing their Faith
continually, while the Catholic Church continued firm to that of Nice.

One may likewise use another Method, which is to make it appear that there is
a Conformity between the Roman and Greek Churches, in the chief Articles of
Faith, that are in dispute between us and the P. Reformed, and that in these
the Roman Church does likewise agree with those Soci^ties which separated
themselves from the Church, for Errors which the P. Reformed condemn with her,
such as the Nestorians and Eutychians.

To these Methods it will be necessary to add particular Conferences, solid
Writings, Sermons and Missions, and to use all these means with a Spirit of
Charity, without bitterness, and above all, without injuries. Remembering that
excellent saying of S. Austin's, Non ago ut efficiar homini convitiando
superior, sed errorem convincendo salubr^or.
I do not endeavor to reproach those against whom I dispute, that I may seem
to have the better of them, but that I may become sounder by convincing them of
their Error. And following the Canon of the Council of Africa, that appointed
that though the Donatists were cut off from the Church of God by their Schism,
yet they should be gently dealt with, that so correcting them with meekness, as
the Apostle says, God may give them the grace of Repentance to know the truth,
and to retire themselves out of the snare of the Devil in which they are taken
Captives.

Remarks.
1. IF we did pretend that the first Reformers, or those who drew the Ausburg
confession were inspired of God, in compiling what they writ there were some
force in this Discourse: But since we build upon this principle, that the
Scripture is the only ground on which we found our Faith, then if any person,
how much soever we may honor his memory on all other accounts, has
misunderstood that, we do not depart from our principle when we forsake him,
and follow that which appears to be plainly delivered in the Scriptures.

2. We freely acknowledge that the Faith admits of no Reformation, and that we
can make neither more nor less of it than we find in the Scriptures; but if any
Church has brought in many Errors, we do not think it a Reforming the Faith,
to throw these out. The Faith is still the same that it was when the Apostles
first delivered it to the Church; nor was it the Faith, but the Church that was
pretended to be Reformed: And if after a long night of Darkness and Corruption,
those that began to see better, did not at first discover every thing, or if
some of the prejudices of their Education, and their former opinions did still
hang about them; so that others who came after them saw further and more
clearly: This only proves that they were subject to the Infirmities of the
Humane Nature, and that they were not immediately inspired of God, which was
never pretended.

3. Great difference is to be made between Articles of Faith and Theological
Truths. The former consists of those things that are the Ingredients of our
B^ptismal Vows, and are indeed parts of the New Covenant, which may be reduced
to the Creed and the Ten Commandments. The other are opinions relating to
these, which though they are founded on Scripture, yet have not that Influence
either on our Hearts or Lives, that they make us either much better or much
worse. Among these we reckon the Explanation of the Presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, and the Influence of the Divine Grace upon our Wills. If some of the
Confessions of Faith among the Protestants differ much in these matters* that
is not concerning Articles of Faith, but Theological Truths: In which great
allowances are to be made for difference of opinion. And as particular Churches
ought not to proceed too hastily to decisions in matters that are justly
disputable, so the rigorous imposing of those severe definitions on the
Consciences of others by Oaths and Subscriptions, and more particularly all
rigor in the prosecution of those that differ in opinion, is both disagreeing
to the mildness of the Christian Religion, and to the Character of Churchmen;
and in particular, to the principles upon which the Reformation was founded.

4. As for the Greek Churches, together with the other Societies in the East,
we do not deny that many of those corruptions for which we condemn the Church
of Rome, are among them, which only proves that the beginning of these is elder
than the Ninth or Tenth Century: In which those Churches began to divide, such
is the worshipping of Images, the praying to Saints, and some other abuses.

5. To this it must be added, that for diverse Ages the oppression under which
those Churches have fallen, and the great Ignorance that has overspread them,
have be^n such, that no wonder if those Greeks that have been bred up in the
States of the Roman Communion, and so were leavened with their opinions, have
found it no hard task to impose upon their weak and corrupt Contrymen,
whatsoever opinions they had in charge to infuse into them: So that we may
rather wonder to find that all those abuses for which we complain of the Church
of Rome are not among them, than that some have got footing there.

6. But after all this, the main things upon which we have separated from the
Church of Rome, are not to be found among those Churches: Such as the adoring
the Consecrated Elements, the denying the Wine to the People, the saying Masses
for Redeeming Souls out of Purgatory, the having Images for the Trinity, the
immediate Invocation of Saints for the pardon of Sin, and those blessings which
we receive only from God: Besides an infinite variety of other things. Not to
mention their denying the Popes authority. And to turn this argument on them,
Those parts of their Worship, in which they differ so much from the Eastern
Churches, do afford us very good arguments to evince that they are Innovations,
brought in since these ages, in which those Churches held Communion with the
Roman Church: And do prove that at the time of their Separation they were not
introduced in the Western Church: For when we find such a keenness of dispute
concerning one of the most indifferent things in the World, as whether the
Sacrament should be of Leavened or Unleavened Bread; can we think that if the
Latins had then worshipped the Sacrament, they had not much rather have
objected to the Greeks their Irreverence upon so high an occasion, than have
insisted on the matter of unleavened Bread?

As for the conclusion, we do acknowledge it is such as becomes an Assembly of
Bishops. But whether it becomes men of their Characters, of their Birth and of
their Qualities, to pretend to such gentleness and meekness, when all the World
sees such notorious proofs given to the contrary, I shall not determine; but
will leave it to their own second thoughts to consider better of it. We find
both the King and the Clergy of France, expressing great tenderness toward the
persons of those they call Heretics, togetherwith their resolutions of gaining
them only by the Methods of Persuasion and Charity, and yet the contrary is
practis^d in so many parts of France, that considering the exact Obedience that
the Inferior Officers pay to the Orders that are sent them from the Court, we
must conclude these Orders are procured from the King, without his being
rightly informed concerning them: And since we must either doubt of the
sincerity of the Kings Declarations or of the Assemblies, we hope they will not
take it ill, if we pay that Reverence to a Crowned Head, and to so illustrious
a Monarch, as to prefer him in the competition between his credit and theirs;
and they must forgive us if we stand in some doubt of the sincerity of this
Declaration, till we are convinced of it by more Infallible proofs than words
or general Protestations.

The Conclusion.
THus I have made such Remarks on these Methods as seem both just and solid: I
have advanced no assertion either of Fact or Right concerning which I am not
well assured, and which I cannot justify by a much larger series of proofs
than I thought fit to bring into a Discourse, which I intended should be as
short as was possible. But if that be necessary, and I am called on to do it, I
shall not decline it. I have with great care avoided the saying any thing
merely for contentions sake, or to make up a Muster of many particulars; for I
look on that way in which many write for a cause, as some Advocates plead for
their Clients, by alleging every thing that may make a show, or biass an
unwary hearer, as very unbecoming the profession of a Divine, and the cause of
Truth which we ought to assert: And there is scarce any thing that shows a man
is persuaded of the truth he maintains, more evidently than a sincere way of
defending it: For great subtilties and deep fetches do naturally incline a
Reader to suspect that the Writer was conscious to himself of the weakness of
his cause, and was therefore resolved to supply those defects by the quickness
and nimbleness of his parts.

But having now said what I think sufficient in the way of Rem^rks upon the
Letter, and the Methods published by the late Assembly General of the Clergy of
France: I now go on to some Methods which seem strong and well grounded for
convincing those in Communion with the Church of Rome, that they ought to
suspect the ground they stand on. In which I shall observe this Method: First,
I shall offer such grounds of just suspicion and jealousy, as may dispose
every considering man to fear and apprehend that their Church is on a wrong
bottom; from which I shall draw no other Inferences, but that they are
reasonable grounds to take a man a little off from the engagement of his former
Education and Principles, and may dispose him to examine matters in dispute
among us with more application and less partiality: And then I shall show upon
more demonstrative grounds how false the foundations are, on which the Church
of Rome is established, both which I shall examine only in a general view, and
in bulk, without descending by retail unto the p^rticulars in Controversy
between us.

1. And first, It is a just ground to suspect any Church or Party of men, that
pretend to have every thing pass upon their word or authority; and that
endeavor to keep those who adhere to them in all the Ignorance possible; that
divert them from making Enquiries into Religion, and do with great earnestness
infuse in them an Implicit Belief of whatsoever they shall propose or dictate
to them. The World has found by experience that there is nothing in which fraud
and artifices have been more employed than in matters of Religion: And that
Priests have been often guilty of the basest impostures. And therefore it is a
shrewd Indication that any sort of them that make this the first and grand
principle which they infuse into their followers, that they ought to believe
every thing that the majority of themselves decree, and do therefore recommend
Ignorance and Implicit Obedience to their people, and keep the Scriptures out
of their hands all they can, and wrap up their Worship in a language not
understood by the vulgar, are not to be too easily believed: But that they may
be justly suspected of having no sincere designs, since Truth is of the nature
of Light: And Religion was sent into the World to enlighten our minds, and to
raise our understandings.

2. It is a just ground of Jealousy of any Church, if she holds many opinions
which have a mighty tenden^y to raise the Empire and Dominion of the Clergy to
a vast height. A Reverence to them for their works sake is due by the light of
Nature: But if Priests advance this further to such a pitch that every one of
them is believed qualified by his Character to work the greatest Miracle that
ever was: The change of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood
of Christ, besides all the other Consecrations, by which Divine Virtues are
brought down on such things as they bless: If it is also believed necessary to
enumerate all secret sins to them; and if their Absolution is thought to have
any other Virtue in it, than a giving the Peace of the Church, with a
Declaration of the terms upon which God pardons Sinners: If the Virtue of the
Sacraments, upon which so much depends, according to their principles, is so
entirely in the Priests power, that he can defeat it when he pleases with a
cross intention; so that all men's hopes of another state shall depend on the
Priests good disposition to them, by which every man must know how necessary it
is to purchase their favor at any rate: If likewise they pretend to an
Immunity from the Secular Judge; and do all enter into Oaths which center in
him whom they acknowledge their Common Head, whose authority they have advanced
above all the powers on Earth, so that he can depose Princes and give away his
Dominions to others: It must be confessed that all these have such Characters
of Interest and Ambition on them, and are so little like the true Spirit of
Christianity, or indeed the Common Principles of Nat^ral Reason and Religion,
that a man is very partial who does not think it reasonable to suspect such
proceedings, and a Church that holds such Doctrines.

3. It is likewise reasonable to suspect any Church that holds many opinions
that tend much to a vast increase of their Wealth, and to bring the greatest
Treasures of the World into their hands. The power of redeeming Souls out of
Purgatory has brought more Wealth into the Church of Rome, than the discovery
of the Indies has done to the Crown of Spain. Such also was the power of
Pardoning, and of exchanging Penances for Money, by which the World knew the
price of Sins, and the rates at which they were to be compounded for. The Popes
power of granting Indulgences, the virtue of Pilgrimages, the communication of
the merits of Orders to such as put on their Habits; and in a word, the whole
authority that the C^^r^ of Rome has assumed in these latter ages, that tend so
much to the increase of their Revenue, are all such evident Indications of
particular ends and private designs, that he must be very much wedded to his
first impressions, that does not upon this suspect that matters have not been
so fairly carried among them, that nothing ought to be doubted which is defined
by them.

4. It is a very just cause of suspecting every thing that is managed by a
company of Priests, if they have for several Ages carried on their designs by
the foulest methods of Forgery and Imposture; of which they themselves are now
both convinced and ashamed. When the Popes authority was built on a pretended
Collection of the Letters, which the Popes of the first ages after Christ were
said to have writ; and their assumed Jurisdiction was justified by those
precedents which are now by themselves acknowledged to be forgeries. When the
Popes Temporal Dominion was grounded on the Donations of Constantine, of
Charles the Great, and his Son Lewis the Good, which appear now to be notorious
forgeries: When an infinite number of Saints, of Miracles, Visions, and other
wonderful things were not only read and preached to the people, but likewise
were put into the Collects and Hymns used on their Festivals, which wrought
much on the simplicity and superstition of the vulgar; many of which are now
proved to be such gross impostures, that they are forced to dash them out of
their Offices, and others against which there lies not such positive proof, yet
depend on the credit only of some Legend, writ by some Monks. When many Books
past over the World as the Writings of the most Ancient Fathers which were but
lately writ, and many of their genuine Writings were grossly vitiated. When all
those things are become so evident, that the most Learned Writers amongst
themselves, particularly in the Gallican Church, have not only yielded to the
proofs brought by Protestant Writers in many of these particulars, but have
with a very Commendable Zeal and Sincerity, made discoveries themselves in
several particulars, into which the others had not such advantages to
penetrate. There is upon all these grounds, good cause given to mistrust them
in other things, and it is very reasonable to examine the assertions of that
Church with the severest rigor, since an Imposture once discovered, ought to
bring a suspicion on all concerned in it, even as to all other things.

5. There is likewise great reason to suspect all that are extreme fierce and
violent; that cannot endure the least contradiction, but endeavor the ruin of
all that oppose them. Truth makes men both confident of its force, and merciful
toward such as do not yet receive it: Whereas Error is Jealous and Cruel. If
then a Church has decreed that all Heretics, that is, such as do not submit to
all her decisions are to be extirpated; if she has bound all her Bishops by
Oath at their Ordinations to Persecute them to the utmost of their power. See
the Oath in Pontif. Romans
If Princes that do not extirpate them, are first to be excommunicated by their
Bishops, and after a years Contumacy, are to be deposed by the Popes, and their
Kingdoms to be given away. If all Heretics upon Obstinacy or Relapse are to
be burnt; and if they endeavor in all places as much as they can, to erect
Courts of Inquisition with an absolute authority, in which Churchmen,
forgetting their Character, have vied in Inventions of Torture and Cruelty with
the bloodiest Tyrants that have ever been: Then it must be confessed, that all
these set together present the Church that authorizes and practices them with
so dreadful an aspect, so contrary to those bowels and tendernesses that are in
the nature of man: Not to mention the merciful Idea's of God, and the wonderful
meekness of the Author of our Holy Religion; that we must conclude that under
what form soever of Religion such things are set on foot in the World, such a
Doctrine is so far from improving and exalting the nature of man, that really
it makes him worse than he would otherwise be, if he were left to the softness
of his own nature: And certainly it were better there were no revealed Religion
in the World, than that mankind should become worse, more cruel, and more
barbarous by its means, than it would be if it were governed by Nature or a
little Philosophy.

Upon all these grounds laid together, it is no unreasonable thing to conclude,
that a Church liable to such imputations ought justly to be suspected, and that
every one in it ought to examine well on what grounds he continues in the
Communion of a society of men, against which such strong prejudices lie so
fairly, without the least straining or aggravating matters too much.

I proceed now to the second part of my undertaking, which is to show, that the
grounds upon which that Church builds, are certainly weak if not false. And

1. They boast much of a Constant Succession, as the only infallible mark to
judge of a Church, and as that without which we can never be certain of the
Faith. But if this is true, then into what desperate scruples must all men
fall? For the resolution of their Faith turns to that which can never be so
much as made probable, much less certain. The efficacy of the Sacraments
depending on the intention of the Priest, none can know who are truly Baptized
or Ordained, and who are not: And it is not to be much doubted but that many
profane Priests may have, in a sort of wanton Malice, put their Intention on
purpose cross to the Sacrament: For the Impiety of an Atheistical Churchman is
the most extravagant thing in the World. Beside this, what Evidence can they
give of the Canonical Ordination of all the Bishops of Rome? The first Links of
that Chain are so entangled, that it is no small difficulty to find out who
first succeeded the Apostles: And it is not certainly known who suceeeded them
afterward; for some few Catalogues gathered up perhaps from report by
Historians, is not so much as of the nature of a Violent presumption. If we
consider Succession only as a matter of Order, in which we go on without
Scrupulosity, I confess there is enough to satisfy a reasonable man: But if we
think it indispensable both for the conveyance of the Faith, and the virtue of
the Sacraments, then it is impossible to have any certainty of Faith; all must
be sounded on conjecture or probability at most. It is but of late that formal
Instruments were made of Ordinations, or that those were carefully preserved
and transmitted. In a word, difficulties can be rationally enough proposed
concerning Succession, that must needs drive one that sets up his Faith on it
to endless scruples, of which it is impossible he should be ever satisfied.

There is one thing of great consequence in this matter, that deserves to be
well considered: Under the Mosaical Law God limited the Succession to the High
Priesthood, so that the firstborn was to succeed; and the great Annual
Expiation for the whole people was to be performed by him. Yet when in our
Saviors time this was so interrupted, that the High Priesthood was become
Annual, and wassold for money, God would not suffer the people to perish for
want of such Expiation; but the Sacrifice was still accepted, though offered up
by a Mercenary Intruder: And Caiaphas in the year of his High Priesthood
prophesied: So that how great soever the sin of the High Priest was, the people
were still safe in him that was actually in that Office. And if this was
observed in a dispensation that was chiefly made up of positive Precepts and
carnal Ordinances, it is much more reasonable to expect it in a Religion that
is more free from such observances, and is more Spiritual and Internal.

2. Another ground on which those of the Roman Church build is this, That a
True Church must hold the truth in all things: Which is so Sophistical a thing,
that it might have been expected wise and ingenious men should have been long
ago ashamed of it.

It is certain the Jewish Church was the true Church of God in our Saviors
time, for their Sacrifices had then an Expiatory Virtue in them: So that they
had the certain means of Salvation among them; which is the formal notion of a
True Church: And yet in so great a point as what their Messiah and his Kingdom
were to be, we find they were in a very fatal error. The opinion of his being
to be a Temporal Prince had been handed down among them so by Oral Tradition,
that it had run through them all, from the Priests down to the Fishermen: For
we find the Apostles so possessed with it, that at the very time of Christ's
Ascension, they were still dreaming of it: And yet this was a gross Error, and
proved of most mischievous consequence to them: Of this they were so persuaded,
that the Supreme Judicature or Representative of their Church, the Sanhedrim,
that had much more to show for its authority, See Deu^. 17. from 8, to 14.
than a General Council can show in the New Testament, erred in this
fundamental point, and condemned Christ as a Blasphemer, and declared him
guilty of Death. So that while they continued to be the True Church of God, yet
they erred in the point which was of all others the most important; upon which
it is evident, that it is no good Inference to conclude, that because a Church
is a True Church, therefore it cannot be in an Error.

3. Another pretense in that Church, on which they build much, and which makes
great Impression on many weak minds, is the Churches Infallibility in deciding
Controversies, by which all disputes can be soon ended, and they conclude that
Christ had dealt ill with his Church, if he had not provided such a Method for
the end of all Disputes.

But it is certain they have lost this Infallibility if they ever had it,
unless it be acknowledged that it is lodged in the Pope* against which the
Gallican Clergy has so lately declared: And yet it can be no where else, if it
is not in him; for as they have had no General Council for about one hundred
and twenty years, so they cannot have one but by the Popes Summons; and if the
Pope is averse, they cannot find this Infallibility: so at best it is but a
Dormant Privilege, which Popes can suspend at pleasure. In the Intervals of
Councils where is it? Must one go over Europe, and poll all the Bishops and
Divines to find their Opinions? So in a word, after all the noise about
Infallibility, they can only pretend to have it at the Popes Mercy: And indeed
he that can believe a Pope, chosen as he generally is, by Intrigues and Court
factions, to be the Infallible Judge of Controversies; or that a Council
managed by all the Artifices of crafty men, (as that at Trent appears to have
been, even by Cardinal Pallavicini's History) was Infallibly directed by the
Holy Ghost, is well prepared to believe the only thing in the World that is
more Incredible, which is Transubstantiation.

There was as good reason for lodging an Infallible Authority among the Jews as
among Christians; for their Religion consisting of so many External Precepts
concerning which Disputes might rise, it seemed more necessary that such an
authority should have been established among them, than under a Dispensation
infinitely more plain and simple. And the Supreme Authority was lodged with the
Sanhedrim in much higher expressions under the Old Testament than can be
pretended under the New, as will appear to any that will read the fore cited
place in Deuteronomy. There was also a Divine Inspiration lodged in the
Pectoral, by which the High Priest had immediate Answers from the Cloud of
Glory; and when that ceased under the Second Temple, yet, as their Writers tell
us, that was supplied by a degree of Prophecy; which is also confirmed by what
S. John says concerning Caiaphas's Prophesying; and yet after all this, that
In^allibility was not so obstinately lodged with them, that a company of lewd
and wicke^ Prie^ts could not mis-lea^ the people, a^ they did in the Doctrine
concerning the Messiah. From all which it may be well inferred, that how large
soever the meaning of those disputed passages that relate to the authority of
the Church may be supposed to be, yet a tacit condition must be still employed
in them, That while Churchmen continue pure and sincere, and seek the truth in
the methods prescribed by the Gospel, they shall not err in any point of
Salvation. And it is not reasonable to expect that our Savior should have left
a more effectual provision against Error than he has done against Sin; since
the latter is certainly more pernicious and destructive of those ends for which
he came into the World* So that as he has only left sufficient means for those
who use them well to keep themselves from Sin, in such a manner that they shall
not perish in it; so has he likewise provided a sufficient security against
Error, when such means of Instruction are offered that every one who applies
himse^f to the due use of them, shall not err damnably.

4. Another foundation on which they build is Oral Tradition, which ^hey reckon
was handed down in every Age since the Apostles days. This some explain so as
to make it only the conveyance of the Exposition of the Scriptures, though
others stretch it further, as if it might carry down Truths not mentioned in
Scripture: And for finding this out two Methods are given: The one is
Presumptive, when from the Doctrine of the Church in any one age, it is
presumed from thence, that those of that age had it from the former, and the
former from those who went before them, till we run it up to the Apostles days.

The other Method is of particular proof, when the ^onveyance in every age
appears from the chief Writers in it. I shall not here run out to show upon
either of these hypotheses, the unfitness of this way of conveying Doctrines,
nor the easy door it opens to fraud and imposture; but shall only show that
they cannot prove they have a competent Evidence of Oral Tradition among them.

And first, it is certain that we have not handed down to us a general
exposition of the Scriptures, and that almost all the Ancient Expositors run
after Allegories, according to the way of the Greek Philosophers* For some
whole ages we have not above two or three Writers, and those lived very remote;
and what they say, chiefly in the passages that are made use of in the later
Disputes, fall in often on the by, and seem rather to have dropped from them, than
to have been intended by them; so that this cannot be thought decisive. And
when it is likewise confessed, that in their Disputes with the Heretics of
their days, they have not argued so critically from those places of Scripture,
which they considered more narrowly* It will not be reasonable to conclude too
positively upon those things that rather fell in their way occasionally, than
were the designed subjects of their enquiries. So that it is not possible to
prove an Oral Tradition by the Instances of particular Writers, in all the ages
and corne^s of the Church: For almost an age and a half we have not one copious
Latin Writer but Tertullian and Cyprian, that both lived in Carthage: And it
is not very clear of what persuasion the former was when he wrote the greatest
part of his Treatises: That he was a Heretic when he wrote some of them is
past dispute: Now can one think that if God had intended that the Faith should
have passed down by such a conveyance, there would have been such uncertain
prints left us by which we might trace it out?

As for the other Method of Presumption or Prescription, it is certainly a
false one; for if in any one particular it can be made appear that the Doctrine
of the Latin Church has been in these latter ages contradictory to that of the
primitive times, then this of Prescription is never to be any more alleged;
and of this I shall give two Instances that seem demonstrative. The first is
about the worshipping departed Saints or Martyrs, which has been the practice
of the L^tin Church for several ages: And yet in the second Century we have the
greatest evidence possible that it was not the Doctrine of that age; and that
not in any occasional word let fall by some single Writer, but in a Letter writ
by the Church of Smyrna, concerning the Martyrdom of their late Biship S.
Polycarp: In which there appears that warm affection for his person, and honor
for his memory, that we cannot think they would have been wanting in any sort
of respect that wa^ due to the ashes of so great a Saint. And what they say to
this purpose is deliberately brought out; for it being suggested by the Jew
that had set on the Heathens against that Martyr, that it was necessary to
destroy his Body, lest the Christians should worship him* They reject that
imputation in these words: They being Ignorant, say they, that we can never
forsake Christ who died for the salvation of the World, nor worship any other,
for we adore him as the Son of God. But for the Martyrs, we do worthily love
them, as the Disciples and Followers of our Lord, for their unconq^ered love to
their King and Master, and therefore d^s^re to be their Partne^s and Disciples.

To this I shall add another Instance that is no les^ evident* which is
concerning the presence of Christ in the Sacrament. The Tradition of the Church
can be best gathered from the Liturgies, Ambro^. ^o. 4. de Sa^ram. c. 5. Fac
nobis h^nc oblationem as^riptam, rationabilem, accept^bilem* quod est figura
corporis and s^nguinis Domini nostri ^esu Chr^sti (...) pridie ^^am (...)
which are the publickest, the most united and most solemn way in which she
expresses her self. In S. Ambros^'s time, or whosoever else was the Author of
the Book of the Sacraments that goes under his name, we find that the Prayer of
Consecrations, as it is cited by him, differs in a very essential point from
that which is now in the Canon of the Mass: In the former they called the
Sacrifice that they offered up in it, the figure of the Body and Blood of
Christ; but since that time they have changed that phrase, and instead of it
they pray, The same Prayer (...) thus varied in the Canon of the Mass. Quam
oblationem tu Deus in omnibus quaesumus benedictam, ascriptam, ratam,
ration^bilem accep^abilemque facere digneris, ut nobis corpus and s^nguis fiat
dilectissimi ^lii tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi.
that It may be to us the Body and Blood of Christ. We cannot tell in what age
this change was made, but we may certainly conclude that the Latin Church in S.
Ambrose's time, had a very different opinion concerning the presence of Christ,
from that which is now received among them; and that then she only believed a
Figurative Presence. And thus it is certain that the Presumptive Method for
finding out Oral Tradition is a false one, and that the particular proof of
Tradition by enquiring into the Doctrine of every age is impossible to be made.

5. I shall enlarge a little further upon one particular Instance, which is
concerning one of those propositions lately condemned by the Assembly G^neral:
In which I intend to show that they have departed from the Tradition of the
Church, much more evidently than they can pretend that we have done: And this
is concerning the Popes power o^ Deposing Kings, which they who live under so
mighty a Monarch have very prudently renounced: But whether they have not more
plainly contradicted the Tradition of the Church than the Reformers did, shall
appear by the sequel of this Discourse.

In order to which I shall lay down two grounds that seem undeniable in their
own principles; The one is, That the Tradition of any Age or Ages of the
Church, when it is universal and undisputed, is of the same authority with the
Tradition of any other Age whatsoever: For the promises made to the Church last
continually, and have the same force at all times: And therefore a Tradition
for these last six hundred years is of as strong an authority as was that of
the first six Ages.

The second is, That a Tradition concerning the measures of men's Obedience and
actions, is of the same authority with a Tradition concerning the measures of
their Belief. The one sort are practical, and the other are speculative points;
and as more are concerned in a practical truth than in a speculative point, so
it has greater effects and more influence on the World; therefore it is as
necessary that these be certainly handed down as the other: And by consequence
a Tradition concerning any Rule of Life is as much to be received as that
concerning any point of Belief; for the Creed and the Ten Commandments being
the two Ingredients of the positive part of our Baptismal Vow; it is as
necessary that we be certainly directed in the one as in the other; and if
there were any preference to be admitted here, certainly it must be for that
which is more practical, and of greater extent.

Upon these two grounds I subsume, that all the Characters of Oral Tradition,
by which they can pretend to find it out in any one particular, agree to this
Doctrine of the Popes power of deposing Princes that are either Heretics, or
favorers of them. The way sof searching for Tradition are these four: First
what the Writers and Doctors of the Church have delivered down from one age to
another. The second is what the Popes have taught and pronounced ex Cathedra,
which to a great part of that Communion is Decisive, their authority being held
Infallible; and to the rest it is at least a great Indication of the Tradition
of such an Age. The third is, what such Councils as are esteemed and received
as Ecumenical Councils have decreed as General Rules. The fourth is, the late
famous Method of Prescription, when from the received Doctrine of any one Age
we run a back-scent up to the Apostles, upon this supposition that the Doctrine
of the Church, chiefly in a visible and sensible thing, could not be changed.
These are all the ways imaginable to find out the Tradition of past Ages; and
they do all agree to this Doctrine.

All the Writers for five or six Ages, both Commentators on Scripture, the
Schoolmen, the Casuists and Canonists agreed in it; so that Cardinal Perron
had reason to challenge those of the contrary persuasion to show any one Writer
before Calvin's time, that had been of another mind. We do not cite this as a
proof, because Cardinal Perron said so, but because the thing in it self cannot
be disproved; and in the Contests that fell in between the Popes and those
Princes against whom they thundered, no Civilian nor Canonist ever denied the
Popes power of deposing in the case of Heresy. It is true, when the Popes
pretended to a Temporal Dominion, and that all Princes were their Vassals, some
were found to write against that; other Princes contended about the particulars
laid to their charge, and denied that they were either Heretics or favorers
of Heretics. But none ever disputed this position in general, that in a
manifest case of Heresy the Pope might not depose Princes; and it is too well
known what both the Sorbonne determined in the case of Henry the Third, and
likewise how the body of the Clergy adhered to Cardinal Perron in the
opposition he made to the condemnation of that opinion.

The next mark of Tradition is the Popes pronouncing an opinion ex Cathedra,
that is, in a solemn Judiciary way, founding it on Scripture and Tradition. If
Popes had only brutally made War upon some Princes, and violently thrust them
out of their Dominions, this indeed were no mark by which we could judge of a
Tradition: But when we find Gregory the Seventh, Lib. 8. Ep. 21^
and many Popes since his time, Extravag. d^ Major. and Obed. cap. 1.
found this authority on passages of Scripture, as that of the Keys being given
to S. Peter, Jeremiah the Prophet's being set over Kingdoms to root out, to
pluck up and destroy, and that all power in Heaven and Earth was given to
Christ; and his bidding his Disciples to buy a Sword, we must look on this as
the declaring the Tradition of the Church. So that it must eit^er be confessed
that they are not faithful conveyers of it, or that this is truly the Tradition
of the Church. And this has been done so often these last six hundred years,
that it were a needless imposing on the Readers patience to go about the
proving it.

The Third Indication of Tradition is the Declaration made by Synods, but
chiefly by General Councils. I need not here mention the many Roman Synods that
have concurred with the Popes in the Depositions which they thundered out
against Kings or Emperors, since we have greater authorities confirming it.
Later. 3. c. 28.
The Third Council of Lateran declared that all Princes that favored Heresy
fell from their Dominions, and they granted a Plenary Indulgence to all that
fought against them. Later. 4. cap. 3.
The Fourth Council of the Lateran vested the Pope with the power of giving
away their Dominions, if they continued for a year obstinate in that their
merciful disposition of not extirpating Heretics. The first Council of Lions
concurred with the Pope in the deposition of the Emperor Frederick the Second,
which is grounded in the preamble on the power of binding and loosing given to
S. Peter.

After these came the Council of Constance, Constable. S^ss 11, 13, 17, 19.
and they reckoning themselves superior to the Pope, looked on this as a power
inherent in the Church, and so assumed it to themselves; and therefore put this
Sanction in many of their Decrees, particularly in that for maintaining the
Rights of the Church, and in the Passports they granted, which had been often
added in the Bulls that confirmed the foundations of Monasteries, that if any,
whether he were Emperor, King, or of what Dignity soever he might be, opposed
their Order, he should thereby forfeit his Dignity. The Council of Sienna
confirmed all Decrees against Heretics, and the favorers of them, that had
been made in any former Councils, and by consequence those of the Third and
Fourth Councils in the Lateran. The Council of Basil put that threatening
clause of forfeiture, used by those of Constance, in their Decree for a General
Council: Tid. (...) ^^. c. 19.
And at Trent it was declared, That if any Prince did suffer a Duel to be
fought in his Dominions, he was thereupon to forfeit that place in which it was
fought. Now by the same authority that they could declare a forfeiture of any
one place, they could dec^are a for^eiture of a Princes whole Dominion; for
both those Sentences flow from the same Superior Jurisdiction: And thus we see
seven of those Councils which they esteem general, have either decreed,
confirmed, or assumed this right of Deposing Kings, for Heresy, or indeed for
breaking their Orders and Writs.

4. The fourth mark o^ Tradition is that which has been of late so famous by
Mr. Arnauld's endeavors to prove from thence that the belief of the Corporal
Presence in the Sacrament is a Doctrine derived down from the Apos^les days,
which is this: If any one Age has universally received an opinion as an Article
of Faith, it must be concluded that that Age had it from the former, and that
from the preceding till we arrive at the Apostles days: And this he thinks must
hold the stronger, if the point so received was a thing obvious to all men, in
which every one was concerned, and to which the nature of man was inclined to
make a powerful opposition. I shall not examine how true this is in general,
nor how applicable in fact it is to the Doctrine of the Corporal Presence; but
shall only say that allowing all these marks to be the sure Indications of
Apostolical Tradition, the Doctrine of Deposing Princes for favoring Heresy,
has them all much more indisputably than the other has. Take any one Age from
the eleventh Century to the sixteenth, and it will appear that not only the
Popes, the Bishops, and all the Ecclesiastical Order received it, but that all
the Laity likewise embraced it: Though this was a matter obvious to sense, in
which many were much concerned. It might have been hoped that Princes upon
their own account for fear of an ill Precedent, would have protected the
^eposed Prince: But on the contrary, they either entered into the Croisades
themselves, or at least gave way to them: vast Armies were gathered together to
execute those Sentences, and the injured Princes had no way to keep their
people firm to them, but by assuring them they were not guilty of the matters
objected to them, which showed that had their people believed them guilty, they
had forsaken them: And yet as it was, the terror of a Croisade was such, and
the Popes authority to depose Princes was so firmly believed, that they were
for the most part forced to save themselves by an absolute submission to the
Popes pleasure, and to what Conditions or Penances a haughty Pope would impose
on them. So certain it is that this Doctrine was universally received in those
ages.

And thus it appears that all the Characters by which it can be pretended that
an Apostolic^l Tradition can be known, agree to this Doctrine in so full and
uncontestable a manner, that they cannot bring such Evidence for the points in
dispute between them and us. So that the Assembly General by condemning this
Doctrine, have departed from the Tradition of their own Church more apparently
than it can be pretended that either Luther and Calvin did in any of those
Doctrines which they rejected; and therefore they ought not any more to
complain of us for throwing off such things as they found on Tradition, when
they have set us such an Example. From which I shall only infer this, That they
themselves must know how weak a foundation Oral Tradition is for Divine Faith
to build upon, and that it must be established upon surer grounds.

FINIS.
ERRATVM.
Page 85. line 21. for First read Second.

Books Printed for, and Sold by RICHARD CHISWELL.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.
Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol. Dr. Cary's Chronological
Account of Ancient Time. Wanley's Wonders of the little World, or Hist. of Man.
Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holyoak's large Dictionary, Latin
and English. Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle of England. Wilson's Complete
Christian Dictionary. B. Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language.
Pharmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis. Judge Iones's Reports in
Common Law. Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobbs's Leviathan. Lord
Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Sir Will. Dugdale's Baronage of England in two
Vol. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. Winch's Book of Entries. Isaac Ambrose's
Works. Guillim's Display of Heraldry with large additions. Dr. Burnet's History
of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2. Vol. -- Account of the
Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire Thynn. Burlace's History
of the Irish Rebellion. Herodoti Historia Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect. Rushworth's
Historical Collections the 2 d. Part in 2. vol. -- Large account of the Trial
of the Earl of Strafford, with all the circumstances relating thereunto. Bishop
Sanderson's Sermons, with his Life. Fowlis's History of Romish Conspir.
Treas.andUsurpat. Dalton's Office of Sheriffs with Additions. -- Office of a
Justice of Peace with additions. Keeble's Collection of Statutes. Lord Cook's
Reports in English. Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World. Edmunds on
Caesar's Commentaries. Sir John Davis's Reports. Judge Yelverton's Reports. The
Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments, and resolutions of
the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by Will. Cawley Esquire. William's
impartial consideration of the Speeches of the five Jesuits executed for
Treason. 1680. Iosephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews with Fig.
QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English. Bishop Nicholson on the Church
Catechism. The Complete Clerk: Precedents of all sorts. History of the late
Wars of New England. Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from
Popery. Spanhemii Dubia Evangelica, 2 Vol. Dr. Gibbs's Sermons. Parkeri
Disputationes de Deo. History of the future state of Europe. Dr. Fowler's
Defense of the Design of Christianity against John Bunnyan. Dr. Sherlock's
Visitation-Sermon at Warrington. Dr. West's Assize Sermon at Dorchester 1671.
Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain French Gentlemen
charged with aRobbery 1671. The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon, By
James Paston. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary. Mr. James Brome's two
Fast-Sermons. Dr. Iane's Fast-Sermon before the Commons. 1679. Mr. John James's
Visitation Sermon April. 9. 1671. Mr. John Cave's Fast-Sermon on 30. of Ian.
1679. -- Assize Sermon at Leicester July 31. 1679. Dr. Parker's Demonstration
of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature and the Christian Religion. Mr.
William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor 1679. -- History of the Powder Treason
with a vindication of the proceedings relating thereunto, from the Exceptions
made against it by the Catholic Apologist and others; and a Parallel betwixt
that and the present Popish Plot. Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against
Baxter. Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections. Dr. Burnet's Relation of the
Massacre of the Protestants in France. -- Conversion and Persecutions of Eve
Cohan a Jewess of Quality lately Baptized Christian. -- Letter written upon
Discov. of the late PopishPlot. -- Impiety of Popery being a second Letter
written on the same occasion. -- Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Fast for
the Fire, 1680. -- Fast Sermon. before the House of Com. Dec. 22.80. -- Sermon on
the 30. of January 1681. -- Sermon at the Election of the L. Mayor. 1681. --
Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Houblon. 1682. -- Answer to the Animadversions on
his History of the Rights of Princes, 1682. -- Decree made at Rome 1679.
condemning some Opinions of the Jesuits and other Casuists. Published by Dr.
Burnet, with a Preface. -- A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of
the difference between the French K. and the Court of Rome. Bibliotheca
Norfolciana, sive Catalogus Libr. Manuscript. and ^mpress. in omni Art and
Lingua, quos Hen. Dux Norfolciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro scientia
naturali promovenda donavit.
OCTAVO.
ELborow's Rationale upon the English Service. Bishop Wilkin's Natural
Religion. Hardcastle's Christian Geography and Arithmetic. Dr. Ashton's
Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy. Lord Hollis's Vindication
of the Judicature of the House of Peers in the case of Skinner. -- Jurisdiction
of the H. of Peers in case of Appeals. -- Jurisdiction of the H. of Peers in
case of Impositions. -- Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases.
Duporti Versio Psalmorum Graeca. Dr. Grew's Idea of Philological History
continued on Roots. Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. Dr.
Brown's Religio Medici: with Digbies Observations. Dr. Salmon upon the London
Dispensatory. Brinsley's Posing of the Accidence. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales
of Eaton. Bishop Sanderson's Life. Dr. Tilletson's Rule of Faith. Dr. Simpson's
Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of the Original of
Hot Springs and other Fountains. -- His Hydrological Essays, with an Account of
the Allum-works at Whitby, and some Observations about the Jaundice. 1 s. 6. d.
Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient, in reference to Physic and
Physicians. Organon Salutis: or an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach. With
diverse New Experiments of the Virtue of Tabaco and Coffee: with a Preface of
Sir Hen. Blunt. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts. A Discourse
of the Nature, Ends, and difference of the two Covenants, 1672. 2 s. Ignatius
Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness. 1 s. 6 d. A free Conference touching
the present State of England, at home and abroad, in order to the designs of
France. 1 s. Mystery of Jesuitism, Third and Fourth Parts. Doctor Sanway's
Unreasonableness of the Romanists. Record of Urines. Doctor Ashton's Cases of
Scandal and Persecution. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary. The Trials of the
Regicides in 1660. Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments
Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large account of all his Works, by Dr. Tho.
Tennison. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England.
Dr. Saywel's Original of all the Plots in Christendom. Sir John Munsons
discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on
select Texts. Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the
three first Centuries. The Country-mans Physician; for the use of such as live
far from Cities or Market Towns. Dr. Burnet's account of the Life and Death of
the Earl of Rochester. -- Vindic. of the Ordinations of the Church of Engl. --
History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices
and Church Lands. -- Life of God in the Soul of man. Markam's Perfect Horseman.
Dr. Sherlock's Practical Disc. of Religious Assemblies. -- Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation. -- A Vindication of the defense
of Dr. Stillingfleet in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob about Catholic
Communion. The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of
York, Octavo. Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings. Mr. John
Cave's Gospel to the Romans. Dr. Outram's 20. Sermon. preached on several
occasions. Dr. Salmon's new London Dispensatory. Lawrence's interest of Ireland
in its trade and wealth stated.
DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christianae. Bishop
Hacket's Christian Consolations. The Mothers Blessing. A Help to Discourse.
New-Englands Psalms. An Apology for a Treatise of Human Reason, written by M.
Clifford Esquire. The Queen-like Closet, both parts.
VICESIMO QVARTO.
VAlentine's Devotions. Guide to Heaven. Pharmacopoeia Collegii Londinensis
reformata.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
AN Historical Relation of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Together
with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author, and diverse other
Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's miraculous Escape:
Illustrated with fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By
Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20 years, Fol. Mr. Camfield's two
Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation, Octavo. Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons
never before extant. Mr. John Cave's two Sermons of the duty and benefit of
submission to the Will of God in Afflictions, Quar. Dr. Crawford's serious
expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland, Quarto. A Letter giving a Relation
of the present state of the Difference between the French King and the Court of
Rome; to which is added, The Popes Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy, and
their Protestation. Published by Dr. Burnet. Alphonsus Borellus de motu
Animalium, in 2 Vol. Quarto. Dr. Salmon's Doron Modicum, or supplement to his
new London Dispensatory, Octavo. Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military
Essays of the Ancient, Grecian, Roman and Modern Art of War, Fol. Mr. Tanner's
Primordia: or the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God described, Octavo.
A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion; together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English and
Examined by Dr. Gilb. Burnet, Octavo. Dr. Cave's Dissertation concerning the
Government of the Ancient Church by Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs:
more particularly concerning the ancient Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishops
of Rome, and the encroachments of that upon other Sees, especially
Constantinople, Octavo. -- His History of the Lives, Acts, Death, and Writings
of the most eminent Fathers of the Church that flourished in the fourth
Century: (being a Second Volumn) wherein amongst other things is an Account of
Arianism, and all other Sects of that Age. With an Introduction containing an
Historical account of the state of Paganism under the First Christian
Emperors, Folio.
Books in the Press.
DOctor John Lightfoot's Works in English, Fol. Mr. Selden's Ianus Anglorum
Englished, with Notes: To which is added his Epinomis, concerning the Ancient
Government and Laws of this Kingdom never before extant. Also two other
Treatises written by the same Author: One of the Original of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of Testaments; the other of the Disposition or Administration of
Intestates Goods; now the first time Published, Fol. Mezeray's History of
France, rendered into Engl. Fol. Gul. Ten-Rhyne Med. Doct. Dissertat. de
Arthritide, Mantyssa Schematica, and de Acupunctura. Item Orationes tres de
Chemiae ac Botaniae Antiquitate and Dignitate. De Physiognomia and de Monstris.
Cum Figuris and Authoris notis illustratae, Octavo. D. Spenceri Dissertationes
de Ratione Rituum Iudaicorum, etc. Fol.

