THE PRINCESS OF Monpensier.

Written Originally in French, and now newly rendered into English.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1666.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THough generally all Translations merit an excuse, and though I am not so much
a stranger to my own inabilities, and to the modern Mode of Writing, as to be
ignorant, how requisite it is for me to make an Apology for my self, and to beg
Pardon for this attempt; yet I shall at present take the liberty upon me,
neither to perform the one, nor the other: since, if good, the Translation
deserves no excuse; and if bad, it merits no Pardon. I shall only inform the
Reader, that this Translation is owing to some vacant hours, and to a Friends
request, who having commended the Book to me, and desiring me to translate it,
I confess at first (through the small esteem which I have ever had for
Romances, since I understood better Books) I made some difficulty to grant his
request; But being informed (though the French Stationer, out of his respect to
persons descended from those mentioned in this Relation, endeavors to persuade
us to the contrary) that this Story was real, and no fiction; I resolved at
length to condescend to his desire, and to adventure upon the Translating of a
Book, which I heard had received such general commendations; how deservedly
(since Men's fancies are so different) I shall not take upon me to determine,
but shall leave that, together with the Translation, to be either approved of,
or condemned, by the judicious Reader.

THE French Bookseller TO THE READER.
THE respect which we owe to the Illustrious Name which this Book bears for its
Title, and the consideration which we ought to have for the Eminent Persons
which are descended from them who have born it, obliges me to say (not to fail
of respect either toward the one, or the other) that it has not been taken
from any Manuscript which is remaining to us of the Time wherein those Persons
herein mentioned Lived: The Author being willing only for his diversion to
write Adventures, invented to please his fancy, has judged it more proper to
take names known in our Histories, then to make use of those which are found in
Romances; believing that the Reputation of the Princess of Monpensier would not
be at all blemished by a relation which in effect is fabulous. If this be not
his opinion, I have endeavored to make an amends for it by this Advertisement,
which will prove as advantageous to the Author, as it will appear respectfull
from me, both toward the Dead, who are interessed in it, and toward the
Living whom it may concern.

THE PRINCESS OF Monpensier.
Whilst the Rage and fury of a Civil War (during the reign of Charles the
ninth) rent France in pieces, Love was not wanting to find room amidst those
disorders; and to cause as great in his own Empire, as the Ambition, and
self ends of some Great Ones caused in that Dominion.

The only Daughter of the Marquess of Mezieres, an Heiress very considerable,
no less for her great Estate, then for her alliance to the Illustrious House of
Anjou, from whence she was descended; was promised in marriage to the Duke of
Maine, a younger Brother to the Duke of Guise (since called Balafre.) The only
want of years in this great Heiress seemed to retard her marriage: during which
time the Duke of Guise, who saw her often, discovering in her the early
appearances of a Beauty (which age in a short time was like to render most
accomplished) grew exceeding amorous of her, and fortune proved so favorable
to him that he received a reciprocal return of his affection.

They long (with care) concealed their Love, the Duke of Guise (who was not
then possessed with so much ambition, as since) ardently wished to marry her; but
the fear to displease the Cardinal of Lorrain, who served him instead of a
Father, hindered him from declaring his intentions.

In this condition were affairs, when as the House of Bourbon, who could not
but with envy behold the rise of that of Guise, perceiving the advantage which
they would receive by this marriage, resolved to deprive them of it, and to
make it advantageous to themselves, in procuring this Heiress to marry the
young Prince of Monpensier.

Endeavors were used to execute this design with such success, that the
friends of Mademoiselle de Mezieres, contrary to the promises which they had
made to the Cardinal of Lorrain, resolved to bestow her in marriage on that
young Prince. The whole house of Guise were extremely surpised at their
proceedings, but the Duke, above the rest, seemed to be orewhelm'd with grief;
the interest of his Love made him receive this breach of their word as an
unsufferable affront; and in spite of all the persuasions and endeavors u^^d
to the contrary (by the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Duke of Aumale, his
Uncles, who would not appear too obstinate in a business which they perceived
beyond their power to hinder) his resentment soon appeared, and with such
violence too in the very presence of the Prince of Monpensier, that from thence
proceeded a hatred between them, which finished not, but with their Lives.

Mademoiselle de Mezieres, importuned by her Relations to marry that Prince,
and perceiving otherwise that 'twas impossible for her to marry the Duke of
Guise, besides her virtue prompting her, that 'twas dangerous to have that
Person for a Brother-in-Law, whom she had wished for as a Husband, in the end
resolved to follow the inclination of her friends, and conjured the Duke of
Guise no longer, by any new obstacle to divert their marriage.

In fine she married the P^^nce of Monpensier, who shortly after carried her to
Champigni (the usual seat belonging to the Princes of his family) withdrawing
her from Paris, where the burden of the war was like to fall heaviest; that
great City being menaced to sustain a siege from the Huguenots Army, of which
the Prince of Conde was General, who now for the second time had begun to
declare War against the King.

The Prince of Monpensier even in his childhood had contracted a firm, and
particular friendship with the Count of Chabanes, who was a man far more
advanced in years then himself, and a person of extraordinary merit. This Count
had been so sensible of the esteem, and of the confidence which this young
Prince reposed in him, that contrary to the engagements which he had made to
the Prince of Conde, who gave him hopes of considerable employments in the
Huguenots party, he declared himself for the Catholics; since he could not
resolve to be opposite in any thing to a Person, that was so dear to him. This
alteration of Party having no other known foundation, it was doubted whether it
were real or no; and the Queen Mother, Catherine de Medicis, had such great
suspicions of him, that the War being declared by the Huguenots, she had a
design to arrest him, and to secure his Person, had not the Prince of
Monpensier endeavored to hinder it, and carried Chabanes to Champigni, in
company with his Wife.

The Count being of a very pleasant, and very agreeable humor, he soon gained
the esteem of the Princess of Monpensier, and in a short time she reposed no
less confidence in him, and had no less amity for him, then had the Prince her
Husband. Chabanes on his side beheld with admiration so much Beauty, Wit, and
Virtue; which appeared in this young Princess, and making use of the friendship
which she showed him to inspire her with the principles of an extraordinary
Virtue, and worthy of the greatness of her birth; he in a small time rendered
her one of the most accomplished Persons in the world.

The Prince being returned to Court, (called thither by the continuation of the
War) the Count remained alone with the Princess, and began to have a respect,
and an amity for her, proportionable both to her quality, and merits. The
confidence which they reposed in each other, augmented on both sides, but grew
so great on the Princess of Monpensiers part, that she acquainted him with the
inclination and affection which she had had for the Duke of Guise: but she
informed him also at the same instant, that her Love was now almost extinct,
and that there remained no more at present, then what was requisite to defend
her heart, from any such other inclination; and that her Virtue, joining it
self to the remainder of this impression, she was not capable to have any thing
but disdain and aversion for all those who should dare to have any Love for her.

The Count, who knew the sincerity of this fair Princess, and who perceived in
her, dispositions so contrary to be ensnared with the enticing baits of
gallantry, and courtship, doubted not at all of the verity of her words; Yet
notwithstanding his Reason proved too weak a defense to protect him from the
assaulting charms of a Beauty, in whose company, 'twas his fortune to be every
day, so that at length he became passionately enamored of this Princess, and
whatsoever shame at first possessed him to be thus vanquished, yet in the end he
was forced to submit, and to affect her with the most sincere, and violent
passion, which perhaps ever was; And though he was not Master of his heart, yet
he proved so of his actions. The alteration of his mind changed not at all his
humor, so that none suspected him to be in Love.

He took great care, during the space of a whole year, to hide it from the
Princess, and he believed that he should always have had the same desire to
have concealed it from her. But Love produced the same effects in him which it
generally does in all Lovers, causing in him a desire to reveal his affection,
and after all those difficulties which are wont to perplex Lovers on the like
occasions, he at last took on him the boldness to acquaint her with his
affection, being before well prepared to endure the violence of that storm,
wherewith the haughty humor of this Princess seemed to menace him. But he
found in her a tranquillity, and a coldness worse a thousand times then all the
rigor, and ill usage, which he had expected.

She took not so much pains, to put her self in a Passion for what he had
said; she only in few words represented to him the difference between their
Qualities, and Age, the particular knowledge which he had of her virtue, and of
the inclination which she had had for the Duke of Guise, but, above the rest,
what he owed to the friendship of the Prince her Husband, and to the confidence
which he reposed in him. The Count (at these words) thought he should have dyed
at her feet, through shame and grief; but she endeavored to comfort him in
assuring him, that she would never remember what he had told her, and that she
would never be persuaded to believe a thing which was so disadvantageous to
him, and that she would ever still regard him, as her best friend.

These assurances (as may be imagined) were some consolation to the Count; but
yet he made a sensible discovery of the disdain, and aversion, which the
Princess had for him through her words; and the next day, though he beheld her
with a countenance as unconcerned as formerly, yet his grief and affliction
much increased. The Princess on her part lessened not at all the esteem which
she before had for him, she used him with the same affability as she was
accustomed to do: and often (when occasion served) took an opportunity to
discourse of the inclination which she formerly had for the Duke of Guise: and
Fame beginning then to publish to the world those great and excellent qualities
which appeared in that Prince, she confessed to him that she was extreme glad
to hear it, and that she much rejoiced to find that he merited the affection
which she had had for him.

These signs of confidence, which had been formerly so dear to the Count,
became now insupportable to him; yet he durst not show his displeasure to the
Princess, though sometimes he presumed to put her in mind of that which he had
had the boldness to declare to her.

After two years of absence (Peace being made) the Prince of Monpensier
returned home to visit the Princess his Wife, covered over with the Laurels,
and honor which he had gained at the siege of Paris, and at the Battle of St.
Dennis. He was surpised to find the Beauty of this Princess arrived to so
great a perfection, and through an inclination of Jealousy (which was natural
to him) he seemed to be troubled at it; foreseeing well, that he should not be
the only Person, to whom she would appear fair. He much rejoiced to see the
Count of Chabanes, for whom his kindness was not at all diminished: he demanded
earnestly of him a character of the humor, and conditions of his Wife, who
appeared almost a stranger to him through the small space of time which he had
lived with her.

The Count with a sincereness, as exact, as if he had not been at all in Love,
declared to the Prince all what he knew of this Princess capable to make him
Love her; and he also advertised the Princess of Monpensier of all things which
she ought to perform fully to gain the heart and estimation of her Husband.

In fine, the Counts Passion so naturally inclined him to think of nothing
else, but what might augment the prosperity, and happiness of this Princess,
that he easily forgot how much it concerns Lovers to hinder Persons they are in
Love withal, from keeping a perfect correspondence with their Husbands.

Scarce was the Peace concluded, but the War began to be renewed again,
occasioned by the design which the King had to arrest at Noiers the Prince of
Conde, and the Admiral of Chastillon; and this design having been discovered,
they began on both sides to make new preparations for War, which constrained
the Prince of Monpensier to leave his Wife, and to make his appearance there,
where both his honor, and his duty called him. Chabanes followed him to Court,
having fully justified himself in the Queens opinion. It was not without
extreme grief that he departed from the Princess, who on her side remained much
perplexed with the thoughts of those dangers which her Husband was going to
expose himself to, in the War.

The Chiefs of the Huguenots party retiring themselves to Rochel, Poictu, and
Xaintonge being on their side, the War grew hot, and the King assembled
together all his forces to suppress their Rebellion. The Duke of Anjou his
Brother (who was since styled Henry the Third) acquired much honor by several
gallant actions which he performed, and amongst the rest at the Battle of
Jarnac, where the Prince of Conde was killed. In this War, it was that the Duke
of Guise began first to have considerable employments, and to make it appear
that he surpassed by much the great hopes which had been conceived of him.

The Prince of Monpensier, who hated him, both as his particular enemy, and as
that of his Family, beheld with Jealous eyes the Glory of the Duke, as well as
the kindness which the Duke of Anjou showed him.

After that both Armies had tired themselves by several small encounters; by a
common consent of both Parties, the Troops were licensed for some time, to
retire to their several Garrisons. The Duke of Anjou remained at Loches to
distribute orders to all those places which in probability were like to be
attacq'd by the Enemy; the Duke of Guise tarried with him, and the Prince of
Monpensier accompanied with the Count of Chabanes returned to Champigni, which
was not far distant from thence.

The Duke of Anjou went often to visit the Places which he was about to
fortify, and one day as he returned to Loches by a by-way unknown to those of
his retinue, the Duke of Guise, who bragged that he knew it, placed himself at
the head of the Troop to serve them instead of a Guide; but after that he had
rid some time, he lost himself, and found that he was upon the bank of a small
River, which was unknown to him. The Duke of Anjou rallied with him, and jear'd
him for his ill conduct, and making a stop there (being disposed to mirth, as
usually young Princes are) they perceived a small Boat which stood still in the
midst of the River, which not being very broad, they could easily distinguish
objects, and perceive in the Boat three or four Women, and amongst the rest,
one who appeared to them very fair, who was in rich apparel, and who
attentively regarded two men, who were in the same Boat with her, and were a
fishing. This adventure caused a new joy both to these young Princes, and to
those of their Train. It appeared to them as a Romance-like accident, some
telling the Duke of Guise that he had purposely lost them only to make them
have a view of this fair Person, others saying that (after what Fortune had
done for him) he must of necessity grow amorous of her; and the Duke of Anjou
maintained, that he was obliged to become her Lover.

In fine, being resolved to see the conclusion of this adventure, they caused
some of their followers to ride into the River, as far as possible, and to call
to that Lady, and tell her, that the Duke of Anjou was there, and that he would
willingly cross the Water, and entreated her to come, and take him in. This
Lady (who was the Princess of Monpensier) hearing it said that the Duke of
Anjou was there, and not doubting at all (through the quantity of people which
she saw on the Rivers-side) but that it was he, caused her Boat to advance
toward that side of the River, where he was; His graceful Mine made her soon
distinguish him from the rest, but yet she sooner took notice of the Duke of
Guise, whose sight wrought in her such an alteration that it caused her to
blush, which rather augmented, then decreased her Beauty, and made her appear
to the Eyes of these Princes, as a Person supernatural, and wholly divine.

The Duke of Guise (in spite of that advantageous alteration which two or
three years, since last he saw her, had made in her) immediately knew her, and
informed the Duke of Anjou who she was, who was at first ashamed of the Liberty
which he had taken, but perceiving the Princess of Monpensier so fair, and this
adventure so much pleasing him, he resolved to complete it, and after a
thousand excuses, and a thousand complements, he invented a story of some
considerable business, which he said he had to do on the other side of the
River, and accepted of the proffer which she made him to carry him over in her
Boat; he entered it alone acompanied only with the Duke of Guise, giving order
to those that followed them to go, and cross the River at some other place, and
to come and meet him at Champigni, which the Princess informed them was not
above two Leagues distant from thence.

As soon as they were in the Boat, the Duke of Anjou inquired of her, to what
propitious Fate it was they owed so fortunate an adventure; and what detained
her there in the midst of the River. She answered him, That she came from
Champigni in company with the Prince her Husband, with a design to hunt; but
finding her self too much tired, she came for refreshment to the Rivers side;
where the curiosity to see a Salmon taken (which had entangl'd it self in a
Net) had caused her to enter the Boat. The Duke of Guise did not at all
interest himself in this discourse, but feeling that Passion began to revive
again in his breast, which he had formerly had for that Princess, he suspected
that he should find it a difficult task to escape from this adventure, without
becoming again her captive.

They soon arrived to the other side of the River, where they found the Pages,
and Servants of the Princess of Monpensier, who there attended her. The Dukes
of Anjou and Guise assisted her to get on Horsback, where she comported her
self with an admirable grace. During the way, she entertained them with most
exquisite discourse upon several subjects; so that they were no less surpised
and charmed with her excellent parts, then they had been before with her
Beauty, and they could not forbear to acquaint her how extremely they were
amazed with those extraordinary perfections which they discovered in her. She
answered to those commendations which they gave her with all the modesty
imaginable, but a little more coldly to those which came from Duke of Guise;
being willing to use a reserv'dness toward him, which should hinder him from
building any hopes upon the inclination which formerly she had for him.

Arriving at the outward-most Court at Champigni, they found the Prince of
Monpensier, who but then returned from hunting. His amazement was great to
behold two men ride on each side of his Wife, but it augmented extremely, when
(approaching nearer) he perceived that they were, the Duke of Anjou, and the
Duke of Guise. The hatred which he had for the last, joining it self to his
natural jealousy made him find something so unpleasant to him to see these
Princes in company with his Wife, without knowing what accident had brought
them together, nor what they came to do at his house, that he could not conceal
the disorder which it caused in him, though cunningly he rejected the cause of
it upon the apprehension which he had, that he should not be able to receive so
great a Prince, both according to his quality and to his own wishes.

The Count of Chabanes appeared yet more perplexed to see the Duke of Guise with
the Princess of Monpensier than seemed the Prince himself. The adventure which
Fortune had made use of to bring these two Persons together appeared to him as
an unlucky Omen, from whence he prognosticated that this Romance-like beginning
would be followed by other accidents of the like nature.

At Night the Princess of Monpensier entertained these Princes very generously,
and with a civility which was natural to her. In fine, she pleased her Guests
but too well. The Duke of Anjou, who was a Prince of a comely personage, and
very accomplished, could not behold a person so worthy of him, without ardently
desiring to enjoy her; soon became infected with the same Disease which possessed
the Duke of Guise, and always feigning extraordinary affairs, he remained two
days at Champigni, without being obliged to stay by any other motive, then by
the charms of the Princess of Monpensier; the Prince her Husband not using any
entreaties to retain him there.

The Duke of Guise, before he departed, took an opportunity to acquaint the
Princess, that he was still the same, which he had ever been, (and since his
Passion had never been revealed to any) he often told her in public (without
being overheard by any, but her self) that there was no change in his
affection, but that at present he retained as much adoration, and respect for
her, as ever.

In fine, the Duke of Anjou, and he at length departed from Champigni with much
regret. They rid a long while without speaking one to the other, and remained
in a profound silence, till at last the Duke of Anjou, imagining that perhaps
their silence might proceed from one and the same cause, demanded briskly of
the Duke of Guise, if he meditated upon the beauty, and perfections of the
Princess of Monpensier. This brisk demand, joined to what the Duke of Guise had
already observed, concerning the inclinations of the Duke of Anjou, made him
perceive, that infallibly he would become his Rival, and that it extremely
imported him, not to discover his Love to that Prince; but to deprive him of
all suspicion, he answered him smiling; That he appeared himself so much taken
up with the imagination, wherewith he accused him, that he had judged it
uncivil to interrupt him; That the Beauty of the Princess of Monpensier was no
new thing to him; That he had accustomed himself to gaze on the Luster of her
charms, without being dazel'd with them, ever since she was designed to have
been his Sister-in-Law, but that he perceived very well, that all persons were
not so well prepared against them as himself. The Duke of Anjou ingeniously
confessed to him, that he had neyer yet seen any thing, which in his opinion,
seemed comparable to this young Princess; and that he found very well, that her
presence might prove dangerous to him, if he should often expose himself in her
company: he would fain have made the Duke of Guise confess, that he apprehended
the same Fate himself too: but the Duke (who began now to make a serious affair
of his Love) would confess nothing to him.

These Princes returning to Loches entertained themselves often with a very
pleasing discourse of the adventure which had caused them to discover the
Princess of Monpensier: but it proved not a subject of so great diversion at
Champigni. The Prince of Monpensier was discontented at all which had happened,
without being able to give a Reason wherefore. His Wifes being in the Boat,
appeared to him as an unlucky accident: It seemed to him, that she had
entertained these Princes too kindly; and that which displeased him most, was
to have observed that the Duke of Guise had regarded her very attentively.

These thoughts caused him from that instant, to conceive a furious jealousy,
which made him to remember the passion, and resentment, which that Duke had
shown against his Marriage, and he had some thoughts, that, from that very time
he had been amorous of her. The ill humor which these suspicions put him into,
caused sometimes but ill usage to the Princess of Monpensier. The Count of
Chabanes (according to his custom) took care to hinder, that their private
discontents, broke not out into an open quarrel, endeavoring through that, to
persuade the Princess how great, and real the passion was, which he had for
her, and how disinteress'd from all self ends.

Yet he could not refrain from asking her the effect which the sight of the
Duke of Guise had produced in her. She acquainted him, That she had been
troubled at it, through the shame which she had, to remember the kindness which
she had formerly showed him: she confessed that she had found him far more
accomplished now, then at that time; and that his discourse seemed to intimate,
that he would persuade her to believe, that he still affected her; but she
assured him, that nothing was able to force her to relinquish the resolution
which she had taken never to engage her self in so perilous an Affair.

The Count of Chabanes was much rejoiced to hear this resolution; but nothing
could secure him against the suspicion which he had of the Duke of Guise. He
represented to the Princess, that he extremely feared, that the first
impressions of her Love would soon return, and made her apprehend the mortal
grief which (for their common intrest) he should have, if one day he should see
her change her present resolutions. The Princess of Monpensier (always
continuing her reserv'dness toward him) scarce answered to what he said
concerning his passion, and never considered him, but in the Quality of her
faithful'st friend, without doing him the honor to take notice of him as her
Lover.

The Armies having quitted their Garrisons, and being again upon their march,
the Princes returned to their several Commands, and the Prince of Monpensier
found it convenient, that his Wife should come to Paris, to be no more so near
those places which were the seat of the War. The Huguenots besieged the City of
Poictiers, and the Duke of Guise cast himself in the Town to defend it, where
he performed such actions, during the Siege, which alone were sufficient to
render for ever famous any other person, but himself.

Soon after, was fought the Battle of Moncontour, and the Duke of Anjou, after
he had taken St. John d' Angely, fell sick, and immediately quitted the Army,
either through the violence of his distemper, or through the desire which he
had to return and take his ease, and to participate of the pleasures and
recreations enjoyed at Paris, where the presence of the Princess of Monpensier
was not the least attracting object that drew him thither.

The Army continued under the command of the Prince of Monpensier, and soon
after, Peace being concluded, the Court, returned to Paris where the Beauty of
the Princess eclipsed the Luster of all those, who till then had been admired;
and the charming perfections both of her Wit and Person soon attracted the eyes
of all the Court upon her, who considered her as a person that surpassed
humanity. The Duke of Anjou changed not at all, at Paris, the inclinations
which he had conceived for her at Champigni; and he took an extreme care to
acquaint her with as much through all his actions, taking notwithstanding great
heed not to render her too apparent testimonies of his affection, through fear
to give jealousy to the Prince her Husband.

The Duke of Guise, was now become passionately enamored of this Princess, and
being willing (for several reasons) to conceal his passion, he resolved with
the first opportunity to declare it privately to her, thereby to avoy'd all
those various reports, which generally springs from public Courtship. Being
one day at the Queens appartment at a time when there was small company there
(the Queen being retired to discourse about business with the Cardinal of
Lorrain) the Princess of Monpensier coming in, he resolved to make use of that
opportunity which Fortune presented him with, to speak to her; and approaching
to her, I go about to surprise you Madam, (said he) and to displease you, in
acquainting you, that I have ever preserved and cherished that passion which
formerly was not unknown to you, but which since (through again seeing of you)
is so much augmented, that neither the severity nor hatred of the Prince your
Husband, nor the Pretensions, and Rivalship of the first Prince of the Realm,
are able to reprieve me one moment from its violence. It would indeed have
showed more respectful from me, to have revealed it to you by my actions; but
Madam, my actions had discovered it to others, as well as to your self; and I
only desire, that you alone should know, that I am so presumptious to adore you.

The Princess was at first so surpised with this discourse, that she had no
power to interrupt him; but recollecting her self, and going about to answer
him, the Prince of Monpensier entered the Room, whose presence, with what the
Duke of Guise had said to her, so disordered and perplexed the Princess, that it
possessed him with greater suspicions, then if he had overheard the Duke of
Guise's discourse. The Queen came out of her Closet, and the Duke retired
himself, to cure the Prince of jealousy.

The Princess of Monpensier at night found her Husband possessed with the
greatest melancholy imaginable, and he behaved himself so passionately toward
her, that he forbid her evermore to speak to the Duke of Guise, which caused
her to retire to her appartment; much possessed with sadness, for the adventures
which had happened to her that day.

The next following, she saw the Duke of Guise at the Queens Lodgings; but he
kept at a distance, and came not near her, but contented himself to go out of
the Room presently after her, to make it appear to her, that he had no business
there, when she was absent.

Scarce a day past in which she did not receive a thousand concealed assurances
of this Dukes passion, without that he ever so much as attempted to mention it
to her, but at such a time when none could take notice of it, and as she was
well assured of the reallity of this passion, she began (notwithstanding all
the resolutions which she had made at Champigni to the contrary) to feel
something of that passion return in her heart, which had formerly possessed it.

The Duke of Anjou on his part forgot nothing which might declare his Love to
her in all places where 'twas his fortune to see her, and made it his business
continually to follow her, when she rendered visits to the Queen his Mother.

About this time, it was taken notice of, that the Princess Margaret his Sister
(who much affected him, and who was since Queen of Navarr) had some kindness
for the Duke of Guise, and that which discovered it more, was, the reservedness
which the Duke of Anjou showed to the Duke of Guise. The Princess of Monpensier
soon learned this news, which seemed not indifferent to her, and which made her
more sensible of the concern which she had for the Duke of Guise, then she
thought she had been. Monsieur de Monpensier (her Father-in-Law) then marrying
Mademoiselle de Guise (Sister to that Duke) she was constrained to see him
often in those places, where the presence of both Parties was requisite to
celebrate the Nuptial Ceremonies.

The Princess of Monpensier no longer able to endure a man for her Servant,
whom all France believed in Love with the Princess Margaret, resolved to take
on her the boldness to acquaint him, how much she thought her self injured. And
being offended, and grieved that she had deceived her self, One day, as the
Duke of Guise met her at his Sisters, being separated from other company, and
being about to speak to her concerning his passion, she briskly interrupted
him, with a tone that signified her displeasure, and replied, I cannot
comprehend why you should build such hopes upon the weak foundation of a folly,
which I was guilty of at thirteen years old, as that you should have the
boldness at present to make Love to such a person as my self, but above all, at
such a time, when in the view of the whole Court, you appear engaged to an
other.

The Duke of Guise, that had a great deal of Wit, and was much in Love, had
need to consult with no Oracle to understand the meaning of the Princesses
words, answered her with much respect; I confess Madam, that I have been too
blame, not to despise the honor of being Brother-in-law to my King, rather
then to let you suspect one moment, that I could desire to possess any other
heart, then yours; but if you will do me the favor as to hear me, I am
confident I shall justify my self in your opinion.

The Princess of Monpensier replied nothing, but she remained still, and went
not away from him, and the Duke perceiving that she granted him the audience,
which he had demanded, and wished for; acquainted her, That, without any
endeavors of his own, used to gain it, the Princess Margaret had honored him
with her affection; but that having no Love for her, He had but very ill
recompensed the favor which she did him, until such time that she had given
him some hopes to marry her; that in truth, the grandeur to which this match
might raise him, had obliged him to render her more observance and respect,
then usual, which it seemed had given cause of suspicion both to the King, and
to the Duke of Anjou; That the opposition both of the one, and the other
dissuaded him not from his design; but if that design displeased her, he would
from that very instant abandon it, and never think on it more, during his Life.

This oblation which the Duke of Guise made of his own intr'est to please the
Princess, soon made her forget all the rigor, and displeasure wherewith she
had entertained him, when he first began to speak to her. She soon changed her
discourse, and began to entertain him with the weakness which possessed the
Princess Margaret to Love him first, and of the considerable advantage which he
would receive in marrying her. In conclusion, without saying any thing obliging
to the Duke of Guise, she discovered to him a thousand charming perfections,
which he had formerly adored in Mademoiselle de Meziens: and though they had
not long discoursed together, yet they found themselves so accustomed to one
another humors, that Love which was no stranger to their breasts, soon found
out a way to return again into its ancient Channel.

They thus finished this agreeable conversation, which left a very sensible
impression of Joy upon the Duke of Guise; nor did the Princess participate a
less share than he, to learn that he yet really affected her. But when she was
retired to her Closet, what reflections did she not make upon the shame which
she had, in suffering her self to be so soon or'ecome by the Duke of Guise's
excuses; upon that Labyrinth of trouble, which she was agoing about to involve
her self into, by engaging her self in a business, which she had regarded with
so much horror, and detestation, and upon the dismal misfortunes, wherewith
the jealous humor of her Husband seemed to threaten her, but these unpleasant
thoughts were the next day soon discipated by the Duke of Guise's presence.

He failed not to render her an exact account of that which past between the
Princess Margaret and himself, the new alliance of their Houses, often
presented him with opportunities to speak to her; but he had no small trouble
to cure her of the jealousy which the Beauty of the Princess Margaret gave
her, against which all his Vows were to weak to secure her from suspicion. This
jealousy served the Princess of Monpensier to defend the remainder of her
heart, against the endeavors used to gain it by the Duke of Guise, who already
possessed its greatest part.

The Kings marriage with the Princess Isabella (Daughter to the Emperor
Maximilian) filled the whole Court with feasts and rejoycings. The King gave a
Ball, where the Princess Margaret, and the rest of the Princesses danced, the
Princess of Monpensier appearing the only person that could dispute the prize
of Beauty with her. The Duke of Anjou, with the Duke of Guise, and four others,
which were of their company danced an Antick-dance in the shape of Moors, their
Habits were all alike, and such as are generally used on the like occasion.

The first time that the Ball was danced, the Duke of Guise before he danced
(not having put on his vizard) said something in passing by to the Princess of
Monpensier, she soon perceived that the Prince her Husband had taken notice of
it, which much disturbed her. Soon after seeing the Duke of Anjou, with his
Vizard on, and dressed like a Moor, coming to speak to her* perplexed through her
disorder, she believed that it was still the Duke of Guise, and approaching to
him, Have no respect too night (said she) but for the Princess Margaret. I
shall not be jealous, it is my command, I am observed, approach me no more. As
soon as she had finished these words, she retired, and the Duke of Anjou
remained as surpised, as if he had been Thunderstruck, he perceived at that
instant that he had not only a Rival, but a Rival too beloved; he soon
apprehended by the name of the Princess Margaret, that that Rival was the Duke
of Guise, and he made no question, but that the Princess his Sister was the
oblation which had rendered the Princess of Monpensier favorable to the vows
of his Rival.

Jealousy, Despite and Rage joining themselves to the hatred, which he had
already for him, caused him to be possessed with whatsoever may be imagined of a
most violent, and impetuous passion, and which had immediately produced some
bloody Effect of his displeasure, had not that dissimulation which was so
natural to him (and which at present was so requisite) soon rescued his Reason,
from those violent motions of his passion, and obliged him, for several
prevalent reasons, (as affairs then stood) not to attempt any thing against the
Duke of Guise. Yet nevertheless he could not deprive himself of the
satisfaction which he took to tell him, that he knew the secret of his Love;
and accosting him in going out of the Room where they had danced, It Is too much
(said he) to dare at once to raise your ambitious thoughts, to pretend to my
Sister, and to deprive me of my Mistress. The respect which I bear the King,
hinders me at present, from declaring my resentment; But remember that perhaps
the loss of your life, shall be the smallest punishment wherewith, some time or
other I shall chastize your temerity. The Duke of Guise, though unaccustomed to
such menaces, yet he had no opportunity left him for an answer, because the
King who went out at that instant, called them both, to speak to them, but they
imprinted in his heart a desire of revenge, which he endeavored all his life
time to satisfy.

From that very Night the Duke of Anjou began to render him all sort of ill
turns (that lay in his power) with the King: he persuaded him that the Princess
his Sister would never consent to marry the King of Navarre (with whom it was
then propounded to marry her) so long as the Duke of Guise was suffered to come
near her, and that it was a shame to suffer that one of his subjects (to
satisfy his own Ambition) should bring any obstacle to a business, which (in
probability) might give peace to France. The King bore already ill will enough
against the Duke of Guise, and this discourse so augmented it, that seeing him
next day, as he was about to enter the Room, designed for the Ball, at the
Queens Lodgings (adorned with an infinite number of Jewels, but yet more
adorned by this graceful mine) he placed himself before the entrance of the
door, and tartly demanded of him, where he went. The Duke without being
daunted, answered, That he came to wait on him (and as it was his duty,) to
render him his most humble service; to which the King replied, that he had no
need of it, and so turned from him, without taking any further notice of him.

The Duke of Guise, though for all this, did not forbear to enter the Room,
enraged in his heart both against the King and the Duke of Anjou, but his grief
served but to augment his natural fierceness, and through spite he oftener
approached the Princess Margaret, then he had been accustomed to do, since what
the Duke of Anjou had said to him concerning the Princess of Monpensier
hindered him from regarding her.

The Duke of Anjou carefully observed both one and the other: the countenance
of that Princess (though she endeavored all she could to conceal it)
discovered the displeasure which she conceived, when the Duke of Guise spoke to
the Princess Margaret. The Duke of Anjou, who through what she had said to him,
when she mistook him for the Duke of Guise, had perceived that she was jealous,
hoped to cause a misunderstanding between them, and setting himself down by
her; It Is for your intrest, Madam, more then for my own (said he) that I go
about to acquaint you, that the Duke of Guise merits not that you should make
choice of him to my prejudice; let me entreat you not to interrupt me to tell
me the contrary of a truth, which I but too well know. He deceives you Madam,
he sacrifices you to my Sister, as he has made an oblation of her, to you. It Is
a man that is only capable of Ambition, but since he has had the good fortune
to please you, it is enough. I will not hinder him to enjoy a happiness, which
without doubt I merited better then he: I should render my self unworthy of it,
if I should strive longer to obtain the conquest of a heart, which another
possesses, it is enough that I have not hitherto, but incurred your dislike, and
I would not willingly cause hatred to succeed, by any longer importuning you
with the most ardent, and faithful passion that ever was.

The Duke of Anjou, who was very sensibly wounded both with Love and grief, had
scarce power to finish these words, and though he had begun his discourse
through a malicious intent, and through a desire of vengeance; yet he grew so
mollified in considering the Princesses Beauty, and the loss which he received
in loosing the hopes of ever being beloved, that without attending her answer,
he went out from the Ball, feigning that he found himself indisposed, and went
home to his own appartment to muze seriously upon his misfortune.

The Princess of Monpensier remained afflicted and perplexed, as may be easily
imagined, to see her reputation, and her most important secret, remaining in
the hands of a Prince, whom she had treated ill, and and to learn from him
(what she could now no longer doubt off) that she had been deceived by her
Lover. Which added together, proved things that did not leave her so much
Mistress of her passions, as was requisite she should be, in a place destined
only to mirth and jollity, Yet she was forced to remain there, and afterward
to go and sup at the Duchess of Monpensier's (her Mother-in-laws) who took her
along with her.

The Duke of Guise who languish'd with impatience to relate to her what the
Duke of Anjou had said to him the day before, followed her to his Sisters, but
how great was his amazement, when going about to entertain this fair Princess
with discourse, he found that she replied not to what he said, but only made
him most fearful reproaches; and her passion caused her to make those
reproaches so confusedly, that he could comprehend nothing from them, but only
that she accused him of infidelity and Treason.

Orewhelm'd with despair to find cause for so great an augmentation of grief,
where he had hoped to find consolation for all his discontents; and affecting
the Princess with a passion so violent, which left him not that liberty to
remain dubious, whither he were again beloved, or no; he resolved to hazard all
at once and to give her an infallible proof of his his affection. You shall be
satisfied Madam (said he) I will do that for you, which all the Royal-Authority
should not have obtained from me, nor have forced me to perform. It will cost
me my Fortune, but that is a thing too inconsiderable to be vallu'd, to
satisfy you.

Without remaining any longer at the Duchess his Sisters, he went immediately
to find out the Cardinals his Unkles, and under pretext of the ill treatment
which he had received from the King, he represented to them so great a
necessity, to secure his fortune, for him to make it appear, that he had no
thoughts to marry the Princess Margaret, that he engaged them to conclude his
marriage with the Princess of Portia, who had already been propounded to him.

The news of this marriage was soon known throughout all Paris, every body
seemed amazed at it, and the Princess of Monpensier was possessed at the hearing
of it, both with joy, and grief; she was much pleased to see the power which
she had over the Duke of Guise; but at the same instant, she was as much
displeased to have caused him to relinquish a design so advantageous to him, as
was his marriage with the Princess Margaret.

The Duke of Guise who had a mind that Love should recompense him for what he
lost by Fortune, pressed the Princess to grant him a private audience, to clear
himself of the unjust reproaches which she had made him, and he obtained from
her a promise that she would be at the Duchess of Monpensiers (his Sisters) at
such a time when that Duchess should be absent, and when he might entertain
her in private.

The Duke of Guise soon received the effect of this promise, and had the
happiness to prostrate himself at her feet, and the freedom to declare to her
his passion, and to inform her how much he suffered through her suspicions. The
Princess, who could not forget what the Duke of Anjou had told her, (though the
Duke of Guises proceedings ought sufficiently to have secured her from
jealousy) acquainted him with the just cause which she had to believe that he
had betrayed her, since the Duke of Anjou knew that, which it was impossible
for him to have learnt from any other, but himself. The Duke of Guise knew not
what defense to make for himself, and appeared as much perplexed as the Princess
of Monpensier, to divine who (in probability) had discovered their
intelligence. In fine, in the remainder of her discourse, as she represented to
him that he had been too blame to precipitate his marriage with the Princess of
Portia, and to abandon that of the Princess Margaret, which would have proved
so advantageous to him, she told him that he might well judge that she was not
at all jealouse of it, since that at the Ball she her self had conjured him to
have no respect for any there, but for that Princess.

The Duke of Guise replied, that 'twas possible that she might have had an
intention to impose that command upon him, but assuredly that she had not done
it. The Princess maintained the contrary; and in conclusion, at length with
disputing, and examining one an others arguments, they found that of necessity,
she must have deceived her self, through the resemblance of their habits, and
that she her self had revealed that to the Duke of Anjou, which she accused the
Duke of Guise to have acquainted him with.

The Duke of Guise, who was almost justified in her opinion, through his
marriage, became entirely so, through this conversation. This fair Princess
thought she could not with justice refuse her heart to a man who had formerly
possessed it, and who but lately had abandoned all his amambitious pretensions
for her sake, she soon consented to accept his services, and permitted him to
believe, that she was not insensible of his passion. The arrival of the
Duchess of Monpensier (her Mother-inlaw) put a conclusion to this discourse,
and hindered the Duke Guise from declaring to her the transports of his joy.

Shortly after the Court removing to Bloys, the Princess of Monpensier followed
it thither, where the marriage of the Princess Margaret, with the King of
Navarre was concluded. The Duke of Guise knowing nothing more of grandeur, and
good fortune, then to be beloved by the Princess of Monpensier, beheld, at
present, with joy the conclusion of that marriage, which perhaps at another
time had overwhelmed him with despair: but yet he could not so well conceal his
Love, but that the Prince of Monpensier discovered something of it, who being
no longer Master of his jealousy, commanded the Princess his Wife to depart
for Champigni. This command seemed very harsh to her, but yet she was forced to
obey it. She found means to take her leave in private of the Duke of Guise, but
she was much perplex't to find out a sure way for him to convey Letters to her;
in fine, after she had ruminated on several, she at last fixed her thoughts upon
the Count of Chabanes, who she always accounted for her friend, without
considering that hewas her Lover.

The Duke of Guise, who knew to what degree the Count was a friend to the
Prince of Monpensier, was amazed that she chose him for her confident: but she
assured him so much of his fidelity, that she secured him from suspicion. This
discourse ended, he parted from her possessed with all the grief which absence
and separation (from the beloved Person) can cause in the breast of an
afflicted Lover.

The Count of Chabanes, who, during the time of the Princess of Monpensier,
being at Blois, had been sick at Paris, hearing that she went to Champigni, met
her upon the way, to wait on her thither: She now began to show him several
tokens of kindness and good will, and testified to him an extraordinary
impatiency to discourse with him particularly in private. But what was his
surprizal and his grief when he found, that this impatiency only signified to
relate to him that she was passionately beloved by the Duke of Guise, and that
she had a reciprocal kindness for him: his grief and his astonishment was so
great, that it permitted him not to return a reply to what the Princess had
said, who was so taken up with her passion, and who found her mind so much
eased to discourse to him of it, that she took no notice of his silence, but
went on with her discourse, and related to him what had happened to her, with
such exactness, that she forgot not the least circumstance material to her
story. She acquainted him how the Duke of Guise and her self were agreed to
receive through his means the Letters which they had engaged to write to each
other.

These words proved like mortal wounds to the Count of Chabanes, to see that
his Mistress would have him serve his Rival, and that she her self propounded
this to him as as a thing which would be very pleasing to her. Yet he was so
absolutely Master of himself, that he concealed from her his resentment, and
only acquainted her how much he was surpised to perceive in her so great a
change. He hoped at first that this alteration of her humor, which deprived
him of all his hopes, would deprive him of his passion too: but he found this
Princess so charming, her natural Beauty being lately much augmented by a
certain graceful air and carriage which she had learnt at Court, that he was
very sensible that he loved her more then ever. The great confidence she
reposed in him, in acquainting him with her secret kindness and tenderness she
had of the Duke of Guise's respect made him discover of what an inestimable
value the affection of this Princess was, and caused in him an ardent desire to
possess it. And as his passion was extraordinary, so it produced in him the
most extraordinary effect imaginable, for it made him undertake to deliver to
his Mistress the Letters of his Rival.

The Duke of Guise's absence caused the Princess of Monpensier to become
exceeding pensive, and not hoping to receive any comfort, but from his Letters,
she incessantly importuned the Count of Chabanes to know if he received none,
and grew almost passionate with him, that he had not yet delivered her any. At
last he rereceiv'd one, brought him by a Gentleman belonging to the Duke of
Guise, which he immediately carried to the Princess, not to retard her Joy one
moment, which was excessive at the receiving of it, and she took no care to
conceal it from him, but inviting him to participate of that which was as
pleasant as poison to him, she favored him with the reading of the Letter to
him, and the affectionate and witty Reply which she made to it; this answer he
carried to the Gentleman that brought the other, with the same fidelity with
which he had rendered to the Princess the Letter which he had received, but
with far more grief. Yet he comforted himself a little with thoughts that this
Princess would make some reflection upon what he did for her, and hoped that
she would prove so grateful to acknowledge it, but finding her aversion to
increase more, and more every day against him, through the ill humor which she
was in for the Duke of Guise's absence, he took the liberty upon him to entreat
her to be mindful a Little of what he suffered for her. The Princess whose
inclinations were soly fixed upon the Duke of Guise, and who found none (in her
opinion) but him alone worthy to adore her, resented so ill that any other
should dare to pretend Love to her, that she treated the Count of Chabanes
worser on this occasion, then she had done at first, when he mentioned Love to
her. And though his passion, as well as his patience, was extreme, and had
appeared to be so upon all occasions, yet he departed from the Princess, and
went to a friends house (not far distant from Champigni) from whence he writ to
her with all the passion, which so strange a procedure could inspire him with,
but yet too with all the respect that was due both to her Quality and Person,
and by his Letter took an Eternal farewell of her.

The Princess began to repent her self to have disobliged a man, over whom she
had such power; and being unwilling to loose him, not only through the amity
which she had for him, but also through the interest of her Love, (to serve her
in which his friendship was extremely requifite) she sent him word that she
desired yet once more to speak with him, and that afterward she left him the
liberty to dispose of himself as he pleased.

Lovers are generally very weak, and are soon overcome by any thing that bears
but the least shape of encouragement when once in Love. The Count obeyed her
message, and returned, and in less then in the space of one hour the Beauty of
the Princess of Monpensier, her Wit, and some obliging words, rendered him more
submissive, and more her slave then ever. Nay he gave her too immediately the
Letters, which he had but then newly received from the Duke of Guise.

About this time, the desire which they had at Court to cause the chief of the
Huguenot-Party to come thither, to effect that execrable design, which was
executed on St. Bartholomewes day, made the King (the better to delude them) to
send away from about him all the Princes of the house of Bourbon, and of the
house of Guise. The Prince of Monpensier returned to Champigni, where his
presence served but to o'rewhelm the Princess his Wife with grief.

The Duke of Guise retired himself in the Country to the Cardinal of Lorrain's
his Unkles, where Love, and want of employment, caused so violent a desire in
him to see the Princess of Monpensier, that without considering what he did
hazard both for her and himself, he feigned a journey, and leaving all his
train at a small village on the way, he took only with him that Gentleman, who
already had made several journeys to Champigni, and took Post thither: and as
he had no other Person to make his address to, but to the Count of Chabanes he
caused his Gentleman to write him a Note, by which the Gentleman entreated him
to come and meet him at a place which he appointed him.

The Count of Chabanes, believing that it was only to receive Letters from the
Duke of Guise, went and met him, but he was extremely surpised, and no less
afflicted, when he saw the Duke of Guise, his affliction equalling his
amazement. The Duke, prepossest with his design took no more notice of the
Counts perplexity, then the Princess of Monpensier had done of his silence,
when she related her Love to him. He began to exagerate his passion to him, and
to make him believe that he should infallibly die, if he did not obtain for him
from the Princess, the permission to see her. The Count of Chabanes answered
him coldly. That he would acquaint the Princess with all that he desired, and
that he would come and return him an answer.

Their discourse ended, he returned to Champagni assaulted by such various
passions, that sometimes their violence deprived him of his Reason, and he
often took a resolution to return to the Duke of Guise without acquainting the
Princess of Monpensier with his being there; but the exact fidelity which he
had promised her soon changed that resolution.

He arrived at Champigni, without knowing what he had best to do, but being
informed that the Prince of Monpensier was gone out a hunting, he went directly
to the appartment of the Princess, who seeing him troubled, caused her women
immediately to retire, to know the subject of that disorder: he told her
(moderating his grief as much as possible) that the Duke of Guise was within a
league of Champigni, and that he passionately desired to see her.

The Princess at the relation of this unexpected news gave a great cry, and
her disorder seemed to be little less then that of the Count. Her love at first
represented to her the joy, which she should have to see a man whom she so
tenderly affected; but when she considered how contrary this action was to
those strict rules of virtue which she always practiced, and that she could
not see her Lover, but by suffering him at midnight to enter her appartment,
she found her self perplexed extremely.

The Count of Chabanes (who attended her answer as an Oracle to pronounce to
him either Life, or Death) judging of the incertainty of the Princesses
resolution by her silence, ventured to speak to her, to represent to her all
those dangers which she would through this interview expose her self too, and
being willing that she should perceive that he made her not this discourse upon
the account of his own interest he told her. If Madam, after all which I have
represented to you, your passion is yet more prevalent with you then my
Arguments, and that you desire to see the Duke of Guise, let not my
consideration (if that of your own interest does not do it) hinder you from
obtaining your wishes. I will not deprive a Person I adore of so great a
satisfaction, nor cause her to search for persons less faithful then my self to
procure it for her. Yes Madam if you consent, I will go this very Night, and
find the Duke (since it is too hazardous to leave him longer where he is) and
bring him here to your appartment. But by what way, and how, said the Princess,
interrupting him. Ah Madam (cried the Count) it is done already, since you only
deliberate upon the means, that fortunate Lover shall come Madam: I will bring
him through the Park, give order only to one of your Women (in whom you most
confide) that she should let down precisely at midnight, the little drawbridge
which reaches from your Antichamber to the Garden, and do not disquiet your
self about the rest. Finishing these words, he rose up from his seat, and
without attending any further consent from the Princess of Monpensier, he went
out and took horse, and went to find out the Duke of Guise, who with an extreme
impatiency expected him.

The Princess of Monpensier remained so troubled at what had happened that it
was some time before she came to her self again; but as soon as she had
recovered the use of her reason, her first intention was to have had the Count
of Chabanes called back, and to forbid him to bring the Duke of Guise thither,
but it lay not in her power to put this thought in execution. She imagined that
without calling of him back again, it was only requisite not to let down the
Drawbridge to spoil their design, and she believed that she should have
continued in that resolution, but when the hour of appointment was come, she
could no longer resist against the Desire which she had to see a Lover whom she
judged so worthy to adore her; and she instructed one of her woman with all,
that was requisite to introduce the Duke of Guise into her appartment.

In the interim that Duke and the Count of Chabanes approached near to
Champigni, but in a very different condition; the Duke abandoned his mind only
to Joy, and to whatsoever hope and good success, inspires of most agreeable,
and pleasing into a Lover: but the Count, on the contrary, abandoned himself
over to despair and rage, which moved him a thousand times (had not his honor,
and the Baseness of the action prevented him) to have thrust his Sword through
the body of his Rival. At last they arrived at Champigni, where they left their
horses with the Duke of Guise's Page, and passing through the breaches, which
were in the wall, they ent'red in the Garden.

The Count of Chabanes, amidst his despair, always retained some hopes that
the Princess of Monpensiers reason would at length return, and aid her against
her passion, and that in the end she would take a resolution not to see the
Duke of Guise: but when he saw the Drawbridge let down, he could then no
longer doubt the contrary, and at that instant his passion grew so violent, and
so unruly that he was ready to have executed the last effects of his despair;
but recollecting himself, and thinking that if he made a noise, he should
apparently be heard by the Prince of Monpensier (whose appartment looked out
upon the same Garden) and that all that confusion would in the end light upon
the persons whom he most affected, his rage (no longer agitated by the violence
of his passion) immediately grew calm, and suffered him to accomplish his
design, and to conduct the Duke of Guise to the feet of his Princess: where not
being able to be a witness of their discourse (though the Princess testified to
him, that she desired it, and though he wished it himself) he retired into a
small passage (which was contingent to the Prince of Monpensiers Lodgings)
being perplexed with the most sad and dismal thoughts, that did ever possess
the mind of a disconsolate Lover.

In the mean while, though in their passage over the Drawbridge they had been
careful to make but small noise: yet the Prince of Monpensier, (who through
misfortune) awak't at that instant, heard them, and caused one of his
Gentlemen, belonging to his chamber, to rise, to see what it was. The Gentleman
put his head out of the window, and though the night was dark, yet through its
obscurity, he could discover light enough to perceive that the Bridge was let
down: he advertised his Master of it, who presently commanded him to go into
the Park, and see what was the matter. Immediately after he rose up himself,
being disquieted, with thinking that he heard some body walk about, and came
directly to the appartment of the Princess his Wife, which was opposite against
the Bridge.

At the very instant when he approached that small passage, where the Count of
Chabanes was, it chanced that the Princess of Monpensier who was ashamed to
find her self alone with the Duke of Guise, entreated the Count several times
to enter in her chamber, but he always excused himself, and as she continued
still pressing him, (possessed with grief and passion) he answerd'd her so loud,
that he was heard by the Prince of Monpensier, but so confusedly, that the
Prince only heard the voice of a man, without distinguishing that of the Count.

An adventure of the like nature had given cause of suspicion to a mind possessed
with more tranquillity, and less jealousy then this Prince: so that it soon
produced in him an effect both of rage and fury, which made him knock with
impetuosity at the Princesses chamber door, and calling aloud to cause it to be
opened, he gave the greatest surprise imaginable to the Princess, the Duke of
Guise, and to the Count of Chabanes, and this last hearing the Princes voice,
soon apprehended that it was impossible to hinder him from being persuaded, but
that there was some body in the Princess his Wives Chamber, and the greatness
of his passion representing to him, that if he found the Duke of Guise there,
the Princess of Monpensier would have the affliction to see him murdered before
her Eyes, and that the very life it self of this Princess would not be secured
from danger (these thoughts inspiring him with a resolution worthy of himself)
he resolved by an unparalled Generosity, to expose himself to the Princes
fury, to save from ruin an ungrateful Mistress and a Beloved Rival; and
whilst the Prince gave a thousand knocks at the Door, he went to the Duke of
Guise, who knew not what Resolution to take, and committed to the care of the
Princess of Monpensiers Woman, who had assisted them to enter by the
Drawbridge, to conduct him out by the same way, whilst that he opposed
himself to sustain the Princes fury.

Scarce was the Duke got out of the Antichamber, but the Prince, having forced
the passage door, entered in the Chamber as a man possessed with rage and fury,
and who sought an object against whom he might vent his displeasure. But when
he saw no body but the Count of Chabanes, and that he saw him remain unmovable,
leaning upon the Table, with a countenance in which sadness was represented in
its lively colors, he remained unmovable as the other, and his surprise was so
excessive to find alone, and at midnight in his Wives Chamber, the only man
for whom he had the greatest kindness in the world, that it so disordered him,
that it left him not the power to speak. The Princess was laid down upon some
Cushions, in a condition ready to faint away, and perhaps Fortune never
represented three Persons in a state more worthy of Commiseration.

In Fine, the Prince of Monpensier who could scarce believe his Eyes, and give
credit to what he saw, but imagined it to be some fallacy, or some illusion,
and who had an intent to disengage himself from that Chaos of confusion in
which this adventure had invellopp'd him, and addressing his speech to the
Count in a tone which showed that he yet retained a kindness for him; What is it
I see (said he) is it real, or is it some illusion? Is It possible, that a man
whom I have loved so dearly, should choose my Wife above all others to seduce
her? And you Madam (said he) turning to the Princess, was it not sufficient to
deprive me of your heart, and of my honor, without depriving me of the only
man capable to comfort me in these misfortunes. Answer me either the one, or
the other (continued he) and clear me from the suspicions that I have conceived
of an accident, which I cannot believe to be such as it appears.

The Princess remained unable to answer, and the Count of Chabanes opened
several times his lips, without being able to bring forth a word, but at last,
I am criminal (said he) as to what concerns you, and unworthy of the
friendship which you have shown me, but it is not after the nature, which
perhaps you may imagine. I am my self more misfortunate, and in a more
desperate condition then you. My death shall revenge you, of what I have been
culpable of toward you, and if you will deprive me of Life presently, it is the
only favor which you can bestow upon me that will be acceptable, and welcome
to me.

These words (uttered with a mortal grief, and an air which sufficiently
declared his innocence) in stead of clearing the Prince of Monpensier from his
suspicions, persuaded him more, and more to believe that there was some hidden
mystery concealed in this adventure, which surpast his imagination to divine,
and his despair augmenting through this incertainty. Either deprive me of life
your self (said he) or give me some explanation of your words. I comprehend
nothing, you owe this satisfaction to my moderation, since any other, but my
self, before this, would have imprinted characters of vengeance upon your heart
for so sensible an affront, and have sacrifiz'd your life, to expiate your
crime. The evidences are very false (answered the Count in interrupting him,)
Ah they are too visible and too apparent (replied the Prince) I must revenge my
self first, and then search out the mystery of this adventure at leisure.

In saying these words he drew near to the Count of Chabanes with the action of
a man possessed with rage and fury. The Princess fearing some mischief would
follow (which though could not well happen, since her Husband had no Sword
about him) rose to cast her self between them, but her faintness was so great,
that it forced her to sink under this endeaovur, for as she approached the
Prince her Husband, she fell down in a swound at his feet.

The Prince was yet more concerned at his Wives fainting, then he had been at
the tranquillity which he found possessed the Count when he approached him, and
not being able longer to endure the sight of two persons who gave him such
cause for grief and discontent, he turned his head on the other side, and threw
himself upon his Wives bed, orewhelm'd with an unimaginable grief.

The Count of Chabanes penetrated with repentance, to have abused a friend from
whom he received so many tokens of kindness, and finding that he could never
make amends for what he had committed, departed hastily out of the Chamber, and
passing through the Princes appartment, of which he found the doors open, he
descended into the Court, took horse, and guided only by his despair, he
wandered up and down the Country till at length he arrived at Paris.

In the interim, the Prince of Monpensier, who saw that the Princess returned
not from her swound, left her to the care of her Women, and retired into his
Chamber, possessed with a mortal grief.

The Duke of Guise, who was got safe out of the Park, without almost knowing
what he did (so much he was troubled at what had happened) departed some few
Leagues from Champigni, but he could go no further, without hearing some news
of the Princess; which caused him to stay in a Forest, and to send his Page to
enquire of the Count of Chabanes, what had succeeded that misfortunate
adventure.

The Page could not find the Count of Chabanes, but he learnt from others, that
the Princess of Monpensier was extraordinary ill. The Duke of Guises disquiet
was much augmented by what his Page related to him, but without being able to
hinder it, or to receive any comfort, he was constrained to return to his
Unkles, least he should give them cause of suspicion through his longer absence.

The Duke of Guises Page had indeed related to him the truth, in telling that
the Princess of Monpensier was extreme ill, for the truth was, that as soon as
her Women had got her to bed, she was seized with so violent a Fever, and
withal began to grow so lightheaded, that from the very second day of her
sickness, her Life was in extreme danger, and her recovery was much feared.

The Prince feigned to be sick too, to the end that none should be amazed why
he entered not into his Wives Chamber, but the order which he received to
return to Court, whither all the Catholic Princes were summoned to exterminate
the Huguenots, hope him out of the perplexity into which this adventure had
plunged him, and he returned to Paris not knowing what he ought either to hope,
or fear concerning the Princess his Wives distemper. He was but scarce arrived
there, when they begun to attacque the Huguenots in the person of one of the
Cheifs of their Party, the Admiral of Chastillon, and two days after was
performed that horrible Massacre, for its execrableness, so famous throughout
all Europe.

The poor Count of Chabanes, who came with an intent to conceal himself in one
of the remotest parts of the Suburbs of Paris, there to abandon himself over
entirely to his grief, was invellop'd in the Huguenots ruin. The Persons where
he lodged having known him, and remembering that he had been suspected to be of
that Party, murdered him that very night which proved so fatal to several
persons. In the morning the Prince of Monpensier going out of Town to
distribute some orders to keep all in peace and quietness, past through the
Street where the murdered body of Chabanes lay. At first he was seized with
astonishment at the sight of this deplorable spectacle, but afterward his
friendship reviving, it caused in him some grief, but the remembrance of the
affront which he besiev'd he had received from the Count at length gave him
joy, and he seemed contented (without any endeavors of his own) to see himself
revenged by Fortune.

The Duke of Guise's thoughts being taken up with a desire to revenge his
Fathers death (and soon after being overjoyed to have accomplished it) his
affection by degrees began to diminish, and to grow less and less for the
Princess of Monpensier, and he began to be less concerned to hear from her then
formerly, and finding that the Marchioness of Noirmoustier, a Person possessed
with a great deal of Wit and Beauty, gave him more encouragement and hopes then
that Princess, he engaged himself entirely to her, and loved her with an
unexpressable passion, which endured till death (which at last frees us from
all our passions) put an end to their affection.

In the mean while, after that the Princess of Monpensiers disease was arrived
to the height, it began to decrease, she recovered again the use of her reason,
and finding her self somewhat comforted through the absence of the Prince her
Husband, she gave some assurance, and hopes of her recovery, her health
notwithstanding returned not to her but with great trouble, through the ill
disposition of her mind, which was again of a new perplexed, when she bethought
her self, that she had heard no news at all of the Duke of Guise, during the
whole time of her sickness. She inquired of her Women, if they had seen no body
that came from him, and if they had received no Letters, and finding nothing
which answered her expectations, and which she had wished for, she imagined her
self to be the most unhappy Person in the world to have hazzarded all, for a
man who in the end forsook her, and it yet proved a new addition to her
misfortunes, to learn the death of the Count of Chabanes, which she soon heard
of (through the care which the Prince her Husband took to have her acquainted
with it) and the Duke of Guises ingratitude made her more sensible of the loss
of a man whose fidelity was so well known to her.

Such heavy discontents soon forced her to sink under their weight, and reduced
her into a condition far more dangerous then that from which she was but lately
escaped, and as the Marchioness of Noirmoustier was a Person who took as great
care to have the addresses which were made to her taken notice of, as others
did to conceal them: those of the Duke of Guise soon became so public, that at
as great a distance, and as sick as the Princes of Monpensier was, she heard
them confirmed from so many hands, that she could no longer doubt of her
misfortune.

This news proved fatal to her life, and now her courage grew too weak longer
to sustain the weight of her misfortunes, she could no longer resist against
the grief which she had to have lost the estimation of her Husband, the heart
of her Lover, and the most faithful'st friend that ever was. She dyed in few
days after in the prime of her age, one of the most Beautiful'st Princesses of
the world, and who without doubt had been the most happiest, if Virtue and
Prudence had but had the conduct of her actions.

FINIS.

