A LETTER TO AN HONORABLE MEMBER Of the HOUSE of COMMONS; In the Vindication
of The Protestant Reformed Church, (as Established by Law) in Opposition to the
Superstitious and Idolatrous CHVRCH of ROME.

Licensed,

March 1. 1679.


LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by the Booksellers. 1679.

A Letter to an Honorable Member of the House of Commons, etc.
SIR,
IN Obedience to your Commands, I take the boldness to present you with this
Paper, giving you a small rough draught of the Nature, and several Models of
Government, in a general Notion; and more particularly of the most Excellent
Constitution of Parliaments, in which, after some sort, all Governments are
Comprised: And how at this Juncture of time, this Parliament may be managed
with the greatest Advantage to the Nation, by the unanimous Concurrence of both
Houses, in order to Enact such good Laws for the Glory of God, and the
Preservation of our Church of England (as Established by Law) and of His
Majesty's Royal Person and Government, and Kingdoms: craving your pardon for my
great freedom in presenting you, as my worthy Trustee, with my meaner
Sentiments, not any way presuming to speak my Dictates, but my most humble
Addresses, which I submit to your more mature Judgment.

All Government (consisting in the due Administration of Justice, and the
Subordination and Obedience of Inferior Persons to Superior, till we come to
a Supreme Authority, accountable to no body but God himself) is of Divine
Institution, as derived from God himself, the Fountain of all Power and
Authority, Commanding Reverence and Obedience to the Sanctions and Persons of
Governors, who are more or less God's Vicegerents, as they are entrusted with
more or less Power.

Whereupon, they being in some sort particles of the Divine Nature, are styled
Gods in Holy Writ, in reference to their Royal Functions of their Remunerative
and Vindicative Justice. And it were to be heartily wished and prayed for, that
all Governors, and especially the Supreme in all Nations, may truly so
participate of the Divine Nature, that they may be like God in those most
Excellent Characters of Sanctity and Power, to Influence as well the Souls with
virtuous and pious Inclinations, as to Command the Bodies of others by Coereive
Laws.

The Supreme Power has diverse Qualifications; and is Founded in one in
Monarchy, in the best in Aristocracy, and in the People in Democracy, which is
the worst of Governments, as it is most near to Anarchy and Confusion: and
therefore Monarchy is judged the best, as it has most of Unity in it, because
all Subjects unite in one King, as all Members in one Head, or as Lines in one
common Center: and Aristocracy is of a middle nature, more degenerate than
Monarchy, in that it consists of many Governors; and more exalted than
Democracy, because it is framed of the Best.

And these being premised, I beg the favor to speak mine own Sense, which (as
I conceive) is that of our Nation, That Parliamentary Government is the best
Constitution of all, because in it all these are Comprised, in the King, and
the two Houses of Parliament, as his Great Council. First, the Government is
constituted in the King, as Supreme, and so it is Monarchical. Secondly, in the
Lords, as his greatest Ministers; and so in some degree the Government may be
styled Aristocratical. Thirdly, it is in the House of Commons, as the
Representatives of the People, and so the Parliamentary Government in some
manner may be called Democratical.

Whereupon this kind of Government being united in the King, as the Head and
Fountain of it, is most excellent and satisfactory; because all Interests
having a share in Government, as they are concerned in the Legislative Power,
can give such an account of, and make such an Inspection into the general
Grievances of the Nation, and recrisie them by making such sober Debates, and
by deliberate Councils, in the matter of wholesome Laws; which being stated,
are made first Bills by the Approbation of both Houses, and are afterward
recommended to his Majesty for his Royal Assent, as the Essence of the Law: The
Bills of the Lords and Commons, being only preparatory, as giving the rough
Draught of Laws, which are afterward finished, as receiving their Form, Birth,
and Life, from the Kings Royal Signature.

Wherefore it is most just and equitable for the Lords and Commons to pay their
Duty and Reverence to the King in their humble Addresses to his Majesty, as
their Supreme. And I verily believe that the King will again condescend (out of
his Royal Inclination to do good to his people) to speak his Returns in his
Gracious Concessions to gratify the just Desires of his Lords and Commons: who
I hope by all means possible will endeavor to approve themselves true Sons of
the Protestant Church, in bring Pious to God, Loyal to the King, and Just to
their Trust reposed in them, in the Maintenance of the truly ancient reformed
Religion of the Church of England, as the most excellent for Purity of
Doctrine, according to Holy Writ, and for Uniformity of Discipline as now
established by Law, according to the Practice of the Primitive Church, under
which the Church of England, has been rendered most happy, (even to the
Admiration, if not the Envy of other reformed Churches) in the Reign of Edward
the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the first of Blessed
Memory, and I hope it will yet continue for many years, under the Gracious
Protection of our now Sovereign Lord the King; as assisted with the Wise,
peaceable and healing Councils of the Lords and Commons, now assembled in this
Parliament, which I shall pray may be made effectual, as so many wholesome
Applications to heal this distracted and bleeding Church and Kingdom; which
must be now bound up by skilful and tender hands, lest the Wounds grow wider by
their roughness and by unexperiensed Medicines, which if improperly applied,
will prove destructive to the ancient and well approved Constitutions of the
Church and Kingdom.

At this juncture of time, it is humbly conceived to be very dangerous to raise
Disputes concerning the Secular and Ecclesiastical Polity, which is the same or
at least the nearest to that, immediately succeeding the Holy Apostles.

And I deem it also very unreasonable and of ill Consequence, to charge the
humane frailties of the Governor, upon the Government it self; if this
Argument were good, a Subversion (which God forbid) might be attempted upon the
most excellent Constitutions of Monarchy and Episcopacy, the Pillars by which
the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom are supported in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government. Nay, if it were lawful to take away the Use for the
Abuse of things, Christianity it self, and its most holy Ordinances, instituted
by our most Blessed Savior, may be established, if the great Immorality and
Impiety of the profane, atheistical Professors, should be imputed to that most
Holy and Divine Profession.

Wherefore it is desired by all I converse withal, that the King's Great
Council of Lords and Commons would be pleased at this Juncture to make no
Dispute with the Governors or Government settled by Law, laying aside all
private Differences which (is generally conceived) will tend to the Confusion
and Destruction of the Public Peace; and it is to be wished, they would
emulate the wise Economy of Nature, whose Parts are so well disposed by an
Essential Wisdom, in so Excellent a Frame and Order, that upon all occasions
they use their utmost Endeavors for a mutual Preservation; whereupon peculiar
Bodies move contrary to their private Inclinations, Heavy things mounting
upward, and Light pressing downward, to preserve the Universe, in securing its
continued Order from all Interruption and Vacuity.

Wherefore it is most humbly desired by Sober men, that the Lords and Commons
would be pleased to quit all private Picks and Animosities against each other,
waving at this time all Disputes of Privileges; that the Commons would be
pleased to give the Lords the right hand of Fellowship, as their Elder Brother,
and as a High Court of Judicature, consisting of great Persons of Honor and
Fortune, the Prime of the Nation; and on the other side, that their Lordships
would be pleased to give the Commons their due Esteem, as Persons of Honor and
liberal Education and Fortune, and principally as the Representatives of the
Body of the Nation.

And when any Bills shall be offered from the Lords to the Commons, or from
them to the Lords, they may have a fair Reception with a mutual Candor and kind
Compliance in all Proposals consistent with Justice; and that all Debates,
arising between the two Houses, may be speedily determined by candid
Conferences, that each of them always espousing Justice and the Public Good of
the Kingdom, by laying aside all Faction, and ill Humor may speak themselves
great and good in the Esteem of this and other Kingdoms by a Dutiful and
Amicable Concurrence with his Majesty, and with each other; may disappoint the
Expectation of our deadly common Enemies, who have no better Game to play, than
the Contriving and fomenting Divisions, as well between the Lords and Commons,
as the Members of each House; for it is very much feared that the Jesuits
should so blow up the Wildfire of our indiscreet Zeal, and first put the two
Houses, and then the whole Kingdom into a Flame, which is feared, that nothing
but great torrents of Blood can quench, which God of his infinite Mercy Avert,
that we may not be made a Prey to our Foreign Enemies: And the prosecution of
Justice against the bloody Roman Criminals may not be obstructed, who have most
barbarously and ungratefully designed to murder a most gracious King, who out
of his great Clemency has highly indulged them, who have spoke no better
returns than their horrid Endeavors to destroy his Sacred Person and
Authority, and subvert his Government, and thereby pull down the best
constituted and most Apostolic Church in the whole World.

And it is very much hoped and earnestly prayed for that his Majesty and his
high Court of Parliament would be graciously pleased unanimously to join
together in a well tempered Zeal, acted with Knowledge and Meekness to preserve
this once flourishing Church and Kingdom in laboring with all Might and Main
to oppose and countermand, through Gods great Power and Grace, Hell and Rome,
the Devil and the Jesuits, and their Party: In order to maintain the Purity of
Religion, in the true Profession of Christ's holy Doctrine, and Ordinances
instituted by him and his Apostles, and revealed in the Holy Scripture.

And to Enact such sound and effectual Laws, to corroborate and reinforce by
reducing into Execution, those former most excellent Sanctions of Parliament,
and when they are deficient to make a Suppliment of one or more well digested
new ones, to render the Popish Recusant Convict. And in reference to it, your
Honorable and Learned late Predecessors, had prepared diverse good Bills, which
were rendered fruitless by their last unhappy Debates, which is hoped you will
avoid, as Shelves and Rocks, which occasioned their Shipwreck.

And it is humbly conceived it may speak a great Advantage to the Public, to
make an Inspection into those Bills, which cost so much Pains, Time and
Consideration before they were digested; giving all due Respect to your
Predecessors in all which is well done; wherein you will gain a good Opinion
for the present, and render your selves honorable to succeeding Parliaments,
because sober men are highly affected with the Recommendation of their
Ancestors, when they have espoused things of Honor and Justice: And when they
are deficient in these, it will become you as, ingenious Gentlemen to be silent
in not making severe Reflections upon dead or absent men, who are in no
Capacity to vindicate themselves.

Whereupon it is again and most humbly desired by prudent men, who pray for
your good Success, that the most honorable Court of Parliament would improve
their utmost Power, and most careful Endeavors, accompanied with Meekness and
Charity to each others Persons, in making candid Interpretation of the Sense of
others, not abounding too much in their own, in giving sharp Reparties, upon
the more grave and profound dictates of others, not receiving with Drollery
these rational and sober Discourses, which cannot otherwise be answered by
their more shallow parts.

And it is to be wished that all due Encouragement be given to those, whose
minds are acted with great Honesty and Integrity, though their meaner Education
has denied them the Advantage of clothing their hearty and ingenuous
Sentiments, with polite and elegant Language.

That every Member may speak himself a Gentleman, and a Christian, by
entertaining an humble Opinion of his own, may give a due value to the Parts
and Persons of others, that by an inoffensive Deportment to one another, and by
abstaining from all ill tempered Zeal, you may keep so fair with Government and
Governors established by Law, that all the Members having a great Agreement
and good Understanding, may most vigorously and unanimously unite against the
most dangerous, insolent, and malicious Romanists, acted with Jesuitical
Principles, holding the third Literan and other more modern Councils, who give
a Power to the Pope to excommunicate and depose Kings, and conferr their
Kingdoms on whom they please; assuming a Power of murdering Kings and Princes,
or any Magistrate and Persons of a dissenting Faith, to promote their Phanatick
Religion, contrary to the holy Precepts and Practice of our Blessed Savior,
who gave his Commands to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, paying
Tribute to him through an infidel Emperor, thereby consuming his own Ordinance
of Magistracy as God, and by paying his Homage of Tribute (due from him as man)
to Caesar the supreme Power.

But these Ignatian Loyolists do very much derogate from Gods Great Attributes
of Justice and Sanctity, while they contend to promote their pretended
Catholic Cause and Religion, by most prodigious Enormities of Immorality and
Impiety, running quite country to our Blessed Savior's Holy Evangelical
Precepts, which Refine, and Establish, and no way Vitiate and Destroy the Moral
Law.

These horrid Supererogators do seem (with Reverence be it spoken) to out-act
the most Holy Lawgiver, while by different Rules and Practices, they set up
their Own, and not His Kingdom; while they enlarge the straight gate of Heaven,
by forcing their Disciples and Proselytes to Enter in by Treason and Murder,
and other horrid Crimes, and by giving Absolution without Repentance, and
damning them Eternally (as they make them believe) if they make Public
Confession of their Crimes at the time of their Suffering as Malefactors;
making themselves just, do in a manner most impiously condemn their Maker) as
putting upon him to receive the unjust Criminals into his Glory without public
Confession and Repentance; whereupon they make their Works meritorious, and
canonize Miscreants, for Saints, who are justly condemned and executed as
Traitors and Murderers.

Wherefore it is most suitable to the Principles of Reason and Religion in a
holy Faith and a flaming Zeal to offer our own Hands, and Hearts to Almighty
God our heavenly Father, and the Holy Jesus, our most gracious Redeemer, so to
fortify us with the supernatural Assistance of his Holy Spirit, that we may
choose rather to embrace the gentler flames of Fire and Faggot here, than enter
into more horrid everlasting Burnings hereafter; and by his Grace rather to
resist unto Blood, than enter into Communion with those Monsters of Religion
who eat their God; and most patiently to submit our selves to the highest
Torments imaginable, rather than prostitute our selves to the Idol of Mass,
wherein they contrary to divine Writ offer up the Holy Jesus many times a day,
as a propitiatory Sacrifice, who was once for all offered upon the Cross, for
the Sins of the whole World.

And I do most truly profess, from my very Heart and Soul, I had rather be
Massacred ten thousand times, if I had so many Lives to lose, and be
barbarously made an Example of their most severe Malice expressed upon me in
the highest Torture imaginable, (ever resigning my self by Faith and Patience
into my Redeemer's hands) rather thou forfeit my Soul, Conscience, and
Religion, in a base Compliance with them, in their gross Superstition and
Idolatry, in the Adoration of the Host, and in holding the Element of Bread and
Wine in the Holy Eucharist (after Consecration) to be the Natural Body and
Blood of Christ, contrary to all Sense and Philosophy, and the Words of our
Blessed Savior, who calls the Wine the fruit of the Vine, after
Consecration; whereupon we have great Authority to believe, that the Bread and
Wine do not so lose their own Nature, as to be turned into most different
Natural and Corporeal Substances, but after a most Divine manner made the Body
and Blood of Christ, which is most really and Spiritually conveyed to a Worthy
Communicant by Faith.

And perhaps they of a different Persuasion will rashly judge me not to be a
Worthy Communicant, because I am so Uncharitable; which is their harsh Censure
(as I humbly conceive) and not my just Error, because at the Reception of the
Eucharist, I do strictly Examine my Conscience, according to rectified Reason,
and the more Excellent Sanctions of Divine Writ, as the most exact Rule to
Examine and Inform our Consciences by. And if they shall please in Fraternal
correction to Convince me of my Errors, out of those most pure and solid
grounds of Religion: I do here most faithfully promise, that I will readily
submit my self to the Truth, ever praying, that God my Heavenly Father, would
be pleased in his Grace to Direct, Govern, and Sanctify me with his most Holy
Spirit, in the great Moments of his Glory, and my own Everlasting Salvation;
that I may learn to quit all my Private Interest, and Judgment, and Prejudice
whatsoever, that stands in opposition to his most Holy Will.

And I am sure, that all the Sons of the Church of England have so great a
Charity for the Roman Dissenters, a great, if not the greatest part (the
Jesuits and their Disciples excepted) being Persons of great Honor and
Justice, and would not do a base thing to gain the World: therefore let us
heartily pray, and use our utmost Interest and endeavors, to promote their
Conversion to the truly C^^holick Apostolic Faith, much better than the Roman,
falsely so called; and it is highly hoped and prayed for, that the High Court
of Parliament would be pleased to Order some most able Clergy to instruct them,
as their Spiritual Guides, and to make provision for poor Converts, that they
may have all due encouragement to enter into Communion with our Church, and
that all true Converts may freely enjoy all the Liberties and Privileges
belonging to this, and most fervently praying that they at last may participate
of the Eternal Glory of that more Excell^nt Kingdom.

And because Christ, the most Just and Holy Lawgiver, has commanded us to
render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, let us pay the King the Tribute
of our Fortunes, it being our Interest as well as Duty, to support his Stat^,
and our selves in his Government; that he bear not the Sword in vain, let us
strengthen his Arm, and render him able to Protect us in our Extremity: let us
therefore give his Majesty, with a loyal Heart, and an open Hand, such Supplies
that are suitable to his Just and Great Occasions, that he may be made capable
to Defend the True Catholic Church and Faith, His Royal Person and Authority,
and the Laws and Liberties of his People committed to his Charge, in opposition
to all Domestic and Foreign Enemies, who threaten Fire and Faggot, and bloody
Massacres to all good Christians, and an utter ruin to the Church, and Kingly
Power and Government, as now Established by Law, and a final Desolation to the
whole Kingdom.

And according to his most Holy Precept, above all, let us render to God the
things that are Gods; that his Glory may be declared by us in the Adoration of
his most Holy Attributes, and in our Obedience to his most Sacred Commands;
which that they may be most Religiously observed, let such Effectual Penal Laws
be Enacted, or brought into Execution, which concern the strict observance of
the Lords Day, and such due severe Punishments may be Inflicted upon
irreligious and profane Debauchees, for Blasphemy, Atheism, Swearing, Perjury,
Drunkenness, and other reigning Sins of our Nation; that God out of his
infinite Mercy would pardon our Enormous Offenses and Transgressions: And
therein bless his Majesty, and his Great Council of Parliament, and all his
People committed to his Care and Protection: That Gods most Sacred Name may be
ever Glorified, and we made partakers of Peace and Happiness here, and Eternal
Felicity hereafter. And in reference to it, it is humbly desired by all Sober
and Religious men, that the Lords and Commons would be pleased to make joint
and humble Addresses to the King, to Command Fasts to be Instituted and
Observed every Month; that Prayers and Supplications be made for the Church,
the King, and his Great Council of Parliament, and for all in Authority, and
all the People of his Realms; for the atonement of our Sins, and the full
Discovery of the Plots, and preservation of the Persons of the Roman
Dissenters, in their Conversion to the True Christian Faith.

And to this end let us humble our selves in Weeping, Fasting and Prayer, and
faithfully embrace that excellent Precept of our Savior, in denying our
selves, in the Mortification of our sensual Appetites, that our outward man, by
several steps and periods of crucifying our sinful Lusts, be resigned to the
entire Dominion of our Souls. And that we may take up his Cross in the patient
submission of our Wills to his most holy Will; and in all our Troubles and
Afflictions ever kiss the Rod, and his gentle hand of Correction; and by
following him in his Holy Precepts and Example, may write after his Divine Copy
by our Imitation of him in the Holy Flames of Devotion in Prayer, in a well
tempered Zeal with Meekness and Knowledge, in a patience elevated with Charity
to our Enemies: ever resigning our selves by a most strong and lively Faith, in
all our Trials and Sufferings, into his most gracious hands; humbly prostrating
our selves with a filial Fear and Reverence at the Feet of our great and
Glorious Creator, Preserver and Redeemer; most fervently imploring his Blessing
in all the Offices of his Mediatorship, that he as a King, would Govern,
Protect, and reward us; and as a Prophet, would teach and instruct us in the
Ways of Truth, Peace and Salvation: And as a Priest, having once sacrificed
himself upon the Altar of the Cross, and now sitting at the right hand of God
in Heaven, would intercede for us in the Pardon of all our Sins here, and at
last graciously present our Souls and Bodies without Spot and Wrinckle to his
heavenly Father, at that great day of his coming to Judgment.

FINIS.

