A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR OF THE VINDICATION Of the Proceedings of the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners, Concerning The Legality of that Court.

By Philonomus Anglicus.

Printed Eleutheropolis.

A Letter etc.
SIR,
HAving read your pretended Vindication of the Proceedings of the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners against the Bishop of London and the Fellows of
Magdalen College, I could not forbear acquainting you with the Reasons why I
remain as yet unsatisfied as to the Legality thereof, notwithstanding all that
you allege in their Justification.

I shall pass by your Introduction, and the invidious Reflections therein
contained, upon the Church of England, with respect to their severe way of
exercising the Regal Power against Protestant Dissenters; and come to your
first Section, which you entitle The Legality of the Court held by His
Majesty's Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

Upon which the Question must be, Whether or no by the Laws of the Nation, as
they now stand, the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction may be delegated to
Commissioners?

It is enacted by primo Eliz. cap 1. That such Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Superiorities and Preheminencies Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, as by any
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Power or Authority, has heretofore been or may be
lawfully exercised or used, for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and
Persons, and for Reformation, Order or Correction of the same, and of all
manner of Heresies, Errors, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Eontempts and
Enormities, shall for ever by Authority of this present Parliament, be united
and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

And then follows the Branch Concerning the Queen's Assigning Commissioners to
exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

This you say (and quote the Lord Coke's Authority for it) that it is an Act of
Restitution, Page 6.
and that the Express Letter and meaning of 1st. Eliz. is to Restore to the
Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction Ecelesiastical: Which that it is true in
general, to wit, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Crown of England,
had been usurped upon by the Sea of Rome, and was by this Act intended to be
restored, I suppose no man will deny: But whether Our Kings by virtue of their
Ancient Inherent and Primitive Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, might delegate to
Commissioners the Exercise thereof: Or whether Ecclesiastical Commissioners
derived their Authority from his Majesty by virtue of that Act only, and not
upon the score of any Prerogative in the Crown, preceding to that Act, whereby
Our Kings might appoint Commissioners in such Cases, ad libitum, is (as I take)
the single Question, upon which the validity or invalidity of the present
Commission will turn.

The Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was an Ancient Right of the Crown. But
whether the Kings of this Realm by virtue of their supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction could anciently grant a Commission of this Nature, may admit of a
doubt.

It will be worth while to enquire, what this Supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction anciently was, in order to the finding out whether such a
Commission as is now issued, has any Warrant from the Common Law or not.

For the clearing of this, we must look many Ages backward, and as well as may
be discovered at so great a distance, examine, What Power our Ancient Kings had
in Ecclesiastical Affairs, before such time as the Papal Usurpations wrested it
from them.

It is not an expression that might drop from my Lord Coke's Pen, that will
determine so weighty a point as this; especially being a Question that depends
upon some Knowledge of Antiquity, which my Lord Coke was very little acquainted
with. And what you call the greatest clearness in that Chapter of his, Cap. 74.
appears to others very blind, and the Light that is in it, makes wretchedly
against you.

He tells us that No Commissioner by force of that Ancient Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, could impose Fine and Imprisonment, but never tells us that our
Kings, by Virtue of their Ancient Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, could appoint
any Commissioners.

Nor does he quote any Authorities in the Margent of that whole Discourse, to
evince wherein the Ancient Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction consisted; which yet he
never fails to do, when he can, right or wrong.

And it may justly disparage that whole Discourse, that he tells us the
Statutes of 26 H. 8. cap. 1. and of 35 H. 8. c. 3. are in force, for as much as
the Statute of 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. cap. 8. (whereby they were repealed) was it
self repealed Primo Eliz. and consequently those Acts Implicitly revived.

Then which nothing can be more false; for the Statute of primo Eliz. though it
repeal 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 8. does yet enact that all Laws and Statutes,
etc. made void by the said Act of Repeal (1 and 2 P. and M.) and not in this
present Act specially mentioned and revived, shall stand repealed and void, any
thing in the said Statute (of primo Eliz) to the contrary notwithstanding. Now
the Laws of 26 H. 8. cap. 1. and 35 H. 8. cap. 3. were repealed by the 1 and 2
Ph. and Ma. and are not specially mentioned to be revived primo Eliz. and
consequently do at this day stand Repealed.

He tells us the Branch concerning the High Commission was Enacted out of
necessity: Pa p. 326.

For that all the Bishops and most of the Clergy of England being then Popish,
it was necessary to raise a Commission to deprive them, that would not deprive
themseves. So that, as necessity caused this Commission, it ought not to be
exercised but upon necessity, for it was never intended to be a continual
standing Commission. For that would prejudice all the Bishops of England in
their Ecclesiastial Jurisdiction, etc.

What need then of an Ecclesiastical Commission at this time, now that all the
Bishops and most of the Clergy of England, are Protestants?

The deprivation of the Popish Clergy, he says, was the main Object of the Act.

That indeed he demonstrates clearly, and also that those Commissioners never
had any Authority to Fine and Imprison; but the Ancient Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction he is very dark in, because he understood it not.

He labors in vain to prove the Queen Head of the Church by Statute Law. For
(as I have said) no Law in force declared her so.

But that she was so by the Common Law, and that all our Kings virtute officii
are and ought to be acknowledged so, I readily grant. They are the head of the
State, as well as of the Church, but are bound by the Laws of the Realm in the
exercise of their Jurisdiction.

Let us consider a little what this Legal Ecclesiastical Supremacy anciently
was, is, and ought to be.

The beginning of Popish Usurpations is as high as King William the Conqueror's
days. Then it was the Pope apprehended the first opportunity to usurp upon the
Liberties of the Crown of England. For the Conqueror came in with the Pope's
Banner, and under it won the Battle, which got him the Garland; and therefore
the Pope presumed he might lawfully pluck some Flowers from it, being partly
gained by his Countenance and Blessing. Hereupon he sent two Legates into
England, etc. but no Decree was passed, or put in Execution in his time without
his Royal Assent. In his Successor William Rufus his time, they attempted to
draw Appeals to the Court of Rome, but prevailed not. In the succeeding Reigns
of King H. I. King Steven, King Henry II. and King John, Investitures of
Bishoprics, Appeals to Rome, and exemption of Clerks were contended for, and
with much difficulty obtained: and in King Stephen's time, when the Clergy were
Lords Paramount, the Canon Law got footing amongst us, and has been in part
received and submitted to ever since. It was introduced by the power of the
Clergy without assent of the Legislative Power of the Nation; and from that
time till the Reformation, Kings and Parliaments were axcluded from the
enacting of Canons and Constitutions for the Government of the Church.

The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Crown was during that time under an
Eclipse, which King Henry the eighth Restored to its Luster, but because
whatever he did, was undone again by Queen Mary, we may date the Restitution of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from primo Eliz Which Restitution being in general
terms, and relating to former usage, we cannot know by that Act what the
Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown was in Ecclesiastical Matters. The true
notion of which, as it would dispel some Mists that Ignorance and Flattery have
occasioned, so it must be fetched from those times, in which it was genuine,
unadulterated by foreign usurpations, or modern impertinent and vain
ascriptions.

Appeals to Rome, were gained in King Stephen's Time; and not till then.
Therefore before his time, Appeals in Ecclesiastical Causes were to the King.
But how? To the King in Person? I meet with no such thing in my little Reading.
Nor any footsteps of Commissions of Delegates, till King Henry the 8th's time.
But Appeals were to the King in Parliament: or, in the Language of those times,
to the Commune Concilium Regni. Of which there are many instances.

Investitures and Elections of Bishops were gained from the Crown in King Henry
the 1st. and King John's Time. But before their days it was not a personal
Prerogative in the King to elect and invest them. For Bishoprics were then
conferred by the Curia Regis pro sua complacentia.

In like manner the Power of making Canons for the Government of the Church and
of receiving and incorporating into our Government Canons made beyond Sea by
General Councils, or Councils so reputed, was in the Crown, as was the Power of
making Temporal Laws for the Government of the State. But how to be exercised?
In an Arbitrary despotick manner? No, but with the concurrence of the Great
Council of the Realm: And by that Authority were all the Laws made in those
days for the Government both of Church and State.

Those Ecclesiastical Laws thus made, were administered by the Bishops and
others having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and before the entrance of the
Normans in the Hundred and County-Courts, and at the Turns, where the Bishop
and the Earl sat together: And in the Conquerour's days, since in the Bishops
Courts, who by a Law in his Reign, were empowered to hold their Courts apart
from the Laity.

But no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was ever Delegated to Commissioners.
Records of those times are lost in a great and deplorable measure: But many
Histories, and all written by Churchmen, are extant, which could not have
failed giving some hint thereof, if any such thing had ever been.

Now if no such Commission was ever granted till the Reformation, then was that
Branch of primo Eliz. which sets up the High Commission, introductive of a New
Law. It gave the Queen Power, which she had not before, which power
consequently ceased, when the foundation upon which it rested, was taken away.

For Commissions are not such Arbitrary things as some mistaken men fondly
imagine. Though Commissioners are but Substitutes and Deputies, Persons that
Act in his Name that impowers them, and execute his Authority, not their own:
And how plausibly so ever it be said, that what Power a man has in himself he
may delegate to another: Yet this difference must be admitted betwixt Persons
commissionated by the King in matters of Government, and Persons Authorized by
Private men, to act for them and in their stead; viz. that private men may by
Law do those things in Person, which they empower others to do for them. But
the King commissionates Persons to do, what himself cannot by Law do in Person:
And consequently they do not receive their Authority from him only, but from
the Law of the Realm, which Authorizes him to commissionate them, and where the
Law does not empower the King to issue a Commission, he can issue none, to
exercise Jurisdiction.

The Law (by which the King Reigns) has already distributed his Justice to his
hands, and committed the Administration of it to the several Temporal and
Spiritual Courts, the Jurisdiction of which he can neither enlarge nor abridge.
Circumstances of Affairs sometimes require the issuing out of Commissions of a
new, and perhaps an extraordinary nature; and the Representative Body of the
Kingdom, which by the Law is to be assembled once a year in Parliament, do from
time to time empower the Crown, to issue Commissions according as the case
requires. All which Acts of Parliament would be needless, if his Majesty might
issue Commissions at Pleasure.

The King is empowered by the Law to grant a Commission, when either an Act of
Parliament warrants it, or custom immemorial, which presupposes a Law. When
both fail, the Commission is illegal.

Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, of Assize, Nisi prius, Jail-delivery, and
the Peace, are all by virtue of Acts of Parliaments, as was the
High Commission, whilst it was in being: But the foundation thereof being taken
away, this Modern one is built upon Sand, and when the wind blows, it will
fall. Civil causes (where Acts of Parliament do not warrant it) cannot be
determined by Commission, and yet the King is the head of the State as much as
of the Church, and the fountain of Temporal as well as of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and all Judges derive their Authority from him. But there is no
Law for it: and therefore it cannot be.

So that I take it very clearly, that our Kings Ancient Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was not a Personal Supremacy, separate and distinct from the
States of the Realm; that it was lodged in the Crown of England, in the King
encompassed with Peerage and Cominalty, and to be administered in the Bishops
Courts, and no otherwise, but in cases of Appeals, which were to the Parliament.

But admitting that primo Eliz. with respect to the High Commission were but
declarative; yet it seems to me beyond all manner of Scruple, that the Statute
of 16 Car. 1. has taken away the Commission it self, Root and Branch, and not
only the Power to Fine and Imprison, and minister the Oath ex officio. For if
they had looked no farther, why the Statute of primo Eliz. repealed? In the
4th. Baragr. it is enacted, that no Archbishop etc, nor any person whatsoever
exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Authority or Jurisdiction by any Grant,
License or Commission of the King's Majesty etc. shall inflict any Pain,
Penalty, Fine, Amercement, Imprisonment, or other Corporal punishment, etc.
This had been sufficient to disable them to Fine and Imprison. But they repeal
the Branch of primo Eliz. and ordain, That no new Court shall be erected, which
shall or may have the like Power, Jurisdiction or Authority, as the
High Commission Court then had or pretended to have. And the Stat. of 13. Car.
2. cap. 12. which Repeals the 16 Car. 1. Excepts out of the Repeal, What
concerns the High Commission Court, or the New erection of such like Court by
Commission: enacts that the Branch of the Statute primo Eliz. shall stand
repealed.

Besides immediately upon the passing of 16. Car. 1. the High Commission Court,
that then was, ceased to Act. They did not only cease to Fine and Imprison, but
they ceased to Act as a Court. Nor in the Annus mirabilis of 1660 at the
Restitution of all things, were the High-Commissioners restored, but the
ordinary Jurisdiction of Archbishops and Bishops etc. being asserted, which
some ambiguous words in the 16 of Car. 1. had rendered doubtful: They yet keep
down the High Commission Court bound by two Chains; viz. that of the Repeal of
primo Eliz. and the enacting that no such like Court shall be erected by
Commission. All which caution had been impertinent, if Fining and Imprisoning
and ministering the Oath ex officio, were the only things provided against by 16
Car. 1. and the only things, which 13 Car. 2. cap. 12. designed to prevent the
returning of.

You seem to lay a stress upon those words of 13 Car. 2. c. 12. Or any other
person or Persons, exercising Spiritual Jurisdiction by any Grant, License or
Commission from the King. By which you say that all Ecclesiastical Authority is
recognized to belong to them, the Stat. of 16 Car 1. notwithstanding. But those
words are satisfied by Commissioners of Delegates, and Commissioners to visit
in places exempt, who exercise Ecclesiastical Authority by Commission from the
King. So that we need not take in the High Commissioners, especially the Act
providing in express terms, that there shall be none such.

Nor does that saving of the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs mend the
matter. For it is against the nature of a Saving, to extend it to such things
as are particularized before. It would be nonsense to enact that the King shall
not grant any such Commissions, saving that the King may such Commission, if he
please. Rather the Makers of that Law did not look upon the granting of such a
Commission, as being any part of the King's Ecclesiastical Supremacy, as indeed
it was not, but a new Authority given to the Crown by primo Eliz. Which might
be taken away again without any blemish to the Ancient Legal Supremacy.

You do not pretend to ground this present Commission upon the primo Eliz.
which confessedly stands repealed: but upon the King's Supremacy at Common Law.
What power then have the Commissioners to cite any man out of his Diocese? For
it is against the 23 H. 8. cap. 9. for any judge spiritual so to do.

These things I offer concerning the Jurisdiction it self, in which if you
think it worth your while to give me satisfaction, you will extremely oblige

Your Friend and Servant, Philonomos Anglicus.

FINIS.

