A LETTER TO THE Three Absolvers.

Mr. COOK, Mr. COLLIER and Mr. SNETT. BEING REFLECTIONS ON THE PAPERS Delivered
by Sir John Friend, and Sir William Parkyns, TO THE SHERIFFS of London and
Middlesex:

At Tyburn, the Place of Execution, April 3. 1696. which said PAPERS are
Printed at length, and answered Paragraph by Paragraph.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1696.

A LETTER TO THE Three Absolvers, etc.
Gentlemen,
YOU may remember there was a time when the Paper Delivered by the famous Lord
Russel to the Sheriffs at the place of Execution, were by a noted Author in
those times asserted to be none of his Lordships, and Charged upon one who at
present is none of the Least Ornaments to the Church of England. But all honest
men were so well satisfied as to the injustice of the Reflection, that it
obtained no Credit.

But, Gentlemen, It Is generally thought that you, or some others of your
Fraternity, are not so well able to excuse your selves of being the Authors of
this Paper, which Sir John Friend has indeed made his own by signing, delivery,
and it may be by Transcript; not that it was impossible for a Man of Sir John's
Capacity to write as good or a better Paper, but the Public make bold to say
that it savours nothing of his Temper nor Education, and really, Gentlemen,
except you pretend to a Power of working Miracles as well as of Absolution by
the laying on of your Hands, you will hardly be able to convince the World that
Sir John, who could not speak good common English at his Trial, but said I
Kallenge instead of I Challenge: and that the Popish Priests could Dissolve,
instead of Absolve Catholics from their Oaths, of which I and some hundreds
more were Ear Witnesses, should without something of Inspiration, be able all
of a sudden to oblige the Public with such a Lecture of Passive Obedience
Politics and Non-resistance Divinity, as is to be found in this Paper, tho
really, but weak and silly in it self; and therefore, Gentlemen, these
following Reflections are addressed to you, as the Real Parents, or at least
the Godfathers of Sir John's pretended Orphan, which bespeaks our attendance
thus.

PAPER.
Knowing that I must immediately give an Account to God of all my Actions, and
that I ought to be especially careful of what I say in these last hours, I do
solemnly profess, that what I here deliver is from my very Soul, with all the
heartiness and sincerity of a dying Christian.

ANSWER.
Now, Gentlemen, it is not doubted but Sir John might believe this to be a very
good thing, and so recommend it to the World, from his very Soul, but there is
not one word that he delivers it as his own composure, nor does he publish it
any otherwise than as men commonly do their Last Will, tho drawn up by a
Scrivener, yet perhaps it might be his own Opinion as far as he was capable of
understanding it, and for the rest, he would trust you who were his Spiritual
Guides; but, Gentlemen, if you will take a little pains to compare what Sir
John and his Witnesses said at his Trial, and what he owned himself to the
Committee of Parliament, with what you make him say in this Paper; you will
find that there is but little reason to boast of his Sincerity either as a
living or a dying Christian.

Sir John at his Trial, when certainly he could not but have Death in View, did
solemnly declare in the face of the Court, that he was as Innocent of the
things Charged upon him, as the Child unborn, and some of them he disowned, as
in the presence of God, particularly his giving Money to Capt. Blair on any
other Account but Charity, or that he showed the Captain any Letter, which he
said he had Writ to King James, and yet the Captain fastened both those
Particulars upon him by such undeniable Circumstances as satisfied the Court,
and confounded Sir John. In the next place, Sir John owned to the Committee of
Parliament, that he was at those Meetings, where it was agreed to send Charnock
over to France to invite King James, to make a Descent with Ten Thousand Men,
and that he engaged to raise 200 of the 4000 Horse, which were to Join King
James at his Landing, tho at his Trial he solemnly declared, that there was no
such thing discoursed at any of those Meetings, and that Sir John Fenwick
invited him only to take part of a Dish of Meat with him -- Sir John at his
Trial brought a long train of Witnesses to prove his having said frequently,
that he would live peaceably under the present Government, and never be
concerned in any Plot against it, and that if they caught him in the Corn,
they should put him in the Pound, and in the mean time when he made these
frequent Protestations, that he would live Peaceably under the Government, he
accepted of a Commission from King James to be Colonel of Horse, chose his
Inferior Officers, and paid Money to encourage men to List themselves under
him; and in this Paper you make him say, that to assist King James in the
Recovery of his Right, is Justifiable and our Duty: So that it is plain and
evident, that the whole Tenor of Sir John's Conversation ever since the
Revolution, has been far from sincerity, seeing he talked and protested so
solemnly against what he owns now to have been both his Principle and his
Practice. Then as to his sincerity when a dying, it appears every whit in as
bad Colors. You cannot but perceive, Gentlemen, that Sir John was Guilty of
Horrid Dissimulation, in his Repeated and solemn denials of his being concerned
in that, which you and he do both look upon as the Cause of God and Religion,
yet there is not one Syllable of his Repentance for such a shameful denying of
that Cause, nor does he make the least Apology for it; I need not tell you,
Gentlemen, how unlike this is to the Practice of the Ancient Martyrs, who would
own their Religion in the face of their Persecutors, and say, Ego etiam sum
Christianus, and if any of them had through weakness made a slip, what hard
terms they were forced to submit to, before they could be readmitted into the
Bosom of the Church, and if afterward they were honored to Die for the Truth,
they would be sure to bewail their having formerly disowned it; then pray,
Gentlemen, How could you suffer this poor man to Die with such Protestations of
his Sincerity, without obliging him to leave a Testimony against his having so
shamefully denied that, which he now calls the Cause of God, when it is
Notorious that he did deny it, by appealing to God himself in the Face of the
Court, saying, God knows my Heart I am as Innocent as the Child unborn; and
producing Witnesses to prove, that he had always protested he would never be
concerned in that which now you make him own to be his Duty -- Certainly you
have forgot that threatening of our Savior, that he will deny them before his
Father and his Angels, who deny him before Men, otherwise you durst never have
offered to Absolve Sir John Friend all his Sins, without a Public Repentance,
for his Public Denial of that which to you and him is the Cause of God and
Religion. You make Sir John to say in the next place.

PAPER.
The cause I am brought hither to suffer for, I do firmly believe to be the
Cause of God, and true Religion, and to the best and utmost of my Knowledge and
Information, agreeable to the Laws of the Land, which I have evermore heard, do
require a firm Duty and Allegiance to our Sovereign, and that as no Foreign,
so neither any Domestic Power can alienate our Allegiance.

ANSWER.
Now, Gentlemen, It is manifest that the Cause for which Sir John suffered, was
his accepting of a Colonels Commission from the late King; his agreeing to
invite him over with a French Popish Army, his Promising to Join him with two
Hundred Horse for his own Part, choosing inferior Officers for his own
Regiment, and paying out Money for their subsistence, and therefore if Sir John
did firmly believe; that this Cause, and the Cause of God and Religion, were
one and the same; it was plainly that which Divines call, Casus Confessionis,
wherein all good Christians cannot, without Horror, do any otherwise than
Answer in the Affirmative, so that instead of his shameful denial of the thing,
and solemn Protestations of his Innocence, as to the matters charged upon him;
he ought to have owned it in the Face of the Court, and to have told them
boldly, with the Heroic Courage of the Primitive Christians, that he did
firmly believe it to be the Cause of God, and Religion, whereof he stood
Indicted, and that he rejoiced to be counted worthy to suffer for the same.

But, Gentlemen, we shall come yet closer to the Point, and make it Evident,
that both you, and your pretended Martyr have basely betrayed that which you
call the Cause of God and Religion. Sir John at his Trial did prove it by many
Witnesses, that he frequented the Public Worship, and attended the Prayers in
his own Family, where King William was prayed for, which was certainly a piece
of the greatest Hypocrisy that any Man could be guilty of, for if Sir John did
firmly believe that King James's Cause, was the cause of God, as his paper
pretends he did, it was certainly a mocking of the Almighty to his very face,
to Countenance Prayers himself, for that which was against his own Cause. And
your pretending to absolve that wretched Criminal without a public Repentance,
for having so publicly disowned, and seemingly prayed against that which you
and he did firmly believe to be the cause of God, proclaims you Traitors to
Heaven as well as to our Country; but Gentlemen, to make it as easy for you as
the case will beat, King William has no reason to be angry with you, for not
obliging Sir William Perkins to express his sorrow for being concerned in the
horrid design of Assassinating his Royal person, before you pronounced your
absolution over him, seeing you did also absolve Sir John Friend, without any
profession of Public Repentance for having Renounced the cause of God.

Gentlemen, I shall only add on this head, that you, and the rest of the
absolving fraternity, seem really to have acquired as much Dominion over the
Consciences of your Disciples, as is falsely ascribed to the Pope by those who
worship the Beast, viz. That he can make Vice Virtue, and Virtue Vice,
otherwise those poor deluded Creatures could never be so stupid, as to think
they suffered for the cause of God, when they are actually punished for
endeavoring to bring in a French Power, to establish a Prince on the The One;
who during the whole Tenor of his Life, has shown himself an Irreconcilable
Enemy to the Protestant Religion, appeared at the head of an horrid Plot
against it, when a subject, and endeavoring its subversion when a Sovereign,
contrary to his Coronation Oath.

As to Sir John's Knowledge and Information of the Laws of the Land; It was
very well known, and appeared at his Trial to be so very little, that if his
Father Confessors had consulted either his Credit, or their own, they would
certainly have struck out this part of his Paper, but that our Laws require a
firm Allegiance to our Sovereign, and assert that no Foreign or Domestic
power can alienate our Allegiance: I believe Sir John might have ventured to
swear it, tho he had never seen a Statute-Book. For the Question is not,
whether we own unalienable Allegiance to our Sovereign, but whether or not, one
who has been our Sovereign can forfeit his Title to our Allegiance? which I am
sure, considering Sir John's Education and Qualification, was a question too
knotty for him to resolve.

And therefore Gentlemen Absolvers, the following propositions are recommended
to your Consideration, viz. That all Lawful Sovereigns, have either their
Commission from God or the People, or to speak better sense, God and the
Peoples Commission to their Sovereign, is, or ought to be one and the same,
Gods Commission to the Sovereign; both in the Old and New Testament, is to
encourage the Good, and to punish and be a Terror to the Evil doers, as appears
from Deuteronomy. 17. 15. etc. and Romans 13. 1. etc. And certainly the Commission of
all people, who are not fitter for Bedlam and Bridewell, than humane Society,
is, that the King should make use of his Authority, for the benefit and
preservation of the Community, over whom he is constituted Sovereign, so that
if he either invert his Commission, or Act contrary thereunto, by encouraging
the Bad, and afflicting the Good, and declares that he will continue to do so,
it is plain, that in so doing he neither Acts by the Authority of God, nor the
Authority of the People, and that when they resist him as Acting thus, they do
not resist Authority, but only the Extravagancies of an Usurper; and that if
God shall think fit to Claim the forfeiture of his Commission, either by his
own immediate hand, as by Frenzy, or any other Moral incapacity, or m^diately
by the Representatives of the joined people, he becomes thereby, ipso facto,
divested of all Right to our Allegiance. Which I think is plain from this
familiar instance: If an Husband violate the Marriage-Contract, and upon his
Resolution of continuing to do so, his Wife sue out a Divorce, let him pretend
what he will, he has no further Right to the Duty of a Wife, from the injured
Matron, nor can she be said to be guilty of Disobedience to her Husband in
refusing it, but does justly forsake him as a Divorced Adulterer.

Or to be yet more plain, you may take it thus, That whatever Prince refuses to
Govern according to God's Commission, has no positive Divine Right to Govern at
all; and by Consequence, the people are under no Divine Command to obey him;
And that whatever Prince refuses to Govern according to the Constitutions of
the Government which he enters upon, and such as are then agreed on, or
generally submitted unto by the People over whom he is to Rule, has no Civil
or Humane Right to Govern the People at all.

Or supposing, That on his coming to the Throne, he obliges himself by his
Coronation Oath to Govern according to the Laws of God and the Land; and
afterward breaks his Promise to God and the People, and will Govern them
Arbitrarily, according to his own Humor, the people can be under no Obligation
to obey him, but if they please.

But lest this should be mis-understood, to open a Door to Tumults and
Insurrections against all Governments, seeing it is impossible for any to be so
equally Administered, but that some will be dissatisfied. It Is replied, That as
every froward Humor, Fits of Passion, or Gross Irregularity in either of the
Parties, is not sufficient to dissolve the Marriage-Contract, so neither is
every Maladministration, nor gross Mistake, or Abuse in Government,
sufficient to dissolve the Original Contract betwixt King and People; but as in
the one Case there must be evident and full proof, a manifest Alienation of
Affections, and a Legal Divorce, before the Relation can be lawfully dissolved;
so in the other, the breach must be upon the Fundamental Constitution, which is
like the defiling of the Marriage Bed; the Proof uncontroverted, and the
Forfeiture openly claimed and acquiesc'd by the Generality of the People, or
their Representatives, before the Relation betwixt them and their Sovereign can
be warrantably dissolved -- And if this was not the Case betwixt the Late King
James and his People, when he took upon him to dispense with the Laws of
England, and to casse and annul those of Scotland, let the World bear Witness.

So that in short, the Power which he assumed, was none of the Power in being,
and by consequence none of the Powers ordained by God; for most Commentators
agree, that by the Powers that be, to which we are commanded to subject our
selves, Romans 13. 1. are meant such sorts of Government, as are agreed, or
generally submitted unto by Societies or Nations; and therefore called the
Ordinances of men, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Now that the Theocracy, or Kings of God's
immediate Appointment and Nomination, are ceased; and therefore seeing K. James
assumed to himself a Power which had not a Being, viz. That of Annulling and
Dispensing with Laws, when by our Constitution the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
have a Power equal to, and in order before that of our Kings, in Making or
Rescinding Laws; the Resistance made to him, whilst pursuing such a Course, was
no Resistance to the Ordinance of God, and by consequence did not Merit
Damnation, as you Gentlemen and your Fraternity do Maliciously suggest. The
next thing which you make your Martyr say, is*

PAPER.
For it is altogether new and unintelligible to me, That the Kings Subjects can
Depose and Dethrone him on any account, or Constitute any that have not an
immediate Right in his place. We ought, I think, not to do this, and surely
when it is done, to assist him in the Recovery of his Right, is Justifiable and
our Duty; and however things do seem at present, I do believe, I am sure I
heartily pray, that he shall be one day Restored to his Rightful Throne and
Dominions.

ANSWER.
In truth Gentlemen, you seem to have imposed as much upon your Penitent in his
Politics, as you have done in his Divinity; and I do not at all wonder, that
this matter was Unintelligible to the Scholar, when his Masters seem not so
much as to understand the State of the Question themselves, but first Beg the
Question, and then take it for Granted. For the Question is not, Whether the
Kings Subjects, but whether the Kings Equals, or if you will not be angry
Gentlemen, his Superiors, can do it?

Now Gentlemen, I suppose you will Grant, That according to our Constitution,
the Parliament must first draw up, and then give their Consent to a Law before
the King can make it One; and if the Original of this Power of the Kings be
duly enquired into, it will be found to be likewise the People's Creature, and
settled upon him by their Consent; but however that is, this is certain, That
the Parliament are the Kings Equals as to the Legislative Part; And this,
Gentlemen, must not sound harsh in your Ears, when the Lords, who are but one
of the Constituent Parts of the Parliament, are in our common Dialect, called
The Peers of the Kingdom, which is as much as to say in plain English, The
Kings Fellows, and in the Style of the Scriptures, and the Original Charter of
Kings, Deuteronomy. 17. they are plainly said to be Brethren to their Subjects, and
forbid to have their Hearts lifted up above that of their Brethren, though at the
same time we shall not Grudge them the Title and Privileges of Elder Brethren.
Then, Gentlemen, as to the Executive part, wherein their Superiority over their
People does more appear, it is evident, that herein they are also regulated by
the Laws of their People, which is no more then a Trust to put the Commands of
the Body in Execution upon the particular Members; and certainly he by whose
Commands and Directions I am to Govern all my Actions is my Superior; so that
this Maxim will remain Uncontrovertibly True to the end of the World, That the
King is Superior to any of his particular Subjects, but Inferior to the
whole; For common Sense will instruct you, that if the whole Nation refuse to
Obey, there is no Man whoever that can Govern them, nor is there any particular
Subject who is not in a possibility of withdrawing himself from under the
Dominion of any Prince, by going into another Country; But no Prince can set
himself over a People against their Wills; for even in Cases of Conquest,
Submission is taken for an Assent, otherwise the People would resist, either
till they were utterly destroyed, or till they had expelled the Conqueror; And
therefore when the Alternative is Submission or Destruction, its allowed, that
Salus Populi and Suprema Lex, they submit not for the good of the Conqueror,
but for their own good; and those very Men who assist the Conqueror, or their
Offspring at least, when once they come to be Imbodied with the Conquered
People, do always join with them for Asserting their Ancient Liberties at one
time or other, as is plain from the practice of this very Nation; which being
subjected to the Norman Yoke, and most of the Estates divided amongst the
Conquerors Followers, yet the Norman Offspring joined with the Nation
afterward in Asserting their Liberties against the Tyranny of the Conqueror's
Successors. For Liberty is so much the instinct of pure Nature, that they are
justly to be accounted Creatures of a Courser than Human Alloy, who are fond of
their Chains, or do unconcernedly submit to them. Nay, if those very Persons
who are the Advocates and Tools of an Arbitrary Government, will but look
within themselves, they will find that the cause of their being so, is the
prospect of their own enjoyment of a greater Liberty some one way or other than
they think they can enjoy without it. I shall finish this Point with one
Observation more; which is, That all Civilized Nations allow the Subjects a
Liberty of Defending their Titles to their Estates by Law, against the
Pretensions of the Prince and his Ministers, which is Examplified every day in
our Courts, and scrupled at by none of the Disciples of Passive Obedience.
Then, Gentlemen, let me ask you this Question, Whether you think it reasonable
that every particular Man shall have the privilege of defending his Estate
against the Pretensions of his Prince, and yet that the whole Nation shall not
have the privilege of defending their Possession of all that is near and dear
to them as Men and Christians, against the Prince's Usurpation? If you object,
that they may defend them by Law, but not by Arms; It shall be granted, that
War is the Vltimum R^fugium; but the same Argument which warrants one Prince to
make War upon another for Injuries Received, and not Redressed, viz. because
the Criminal Prince cannot be otherwise called to an account, will Warrant the
Parliament, or the Body of the People, making War against their Kings, when
they cannot otherwise have their Liberties and Properties secured. I have
insisted longer upon this subject than perhaps is suitable for my present
design, but I was willing to make it appear, that those who are of a contrary
Opinion to your Party in this Point, are not acted by a blind Impulse or
Brutish Fury, but by reasonable Principles: And if my Arguments be Weak, pray
excuse my Zeal to Obviate your Pernicious Principles, which have brought those
Two poor Gentlemen, and many more, to their Unhappy Exit; and have oftener than
once endangered the Civil and Religious Liberties of these Nations.

As for your Disciples saying, That he thinks we ought not to Depose our
Prince, and that when it is done, surely it is our Duty to assist him in the
Recovery of his Right. I shall only observe, That his Premises will not bear
his Conclusion; for he ought to have been as sure, that the People could in no
case Depose their Prince, as he pretends to have been, That it was his Duty to
assist him in the Recovery of his Throne when Deposed; but according to you, he
only thought the one, but he was sure of the other. As for his hopes of the
late King's Restoration, we are told by the Divine Oracles, That the hopes of
the Hypocrite shall perish; and that Sir John did both Live and Die one, his
own Trial, and his Father-Confessors Forged Paper make it but too too
presumable. As to his Prayers, we have little reason to dread their Success; He
Regarded Iniquity in his Heart, as you and he have made it plainly appear, by
his going off the World without Repentance for the horrid Crime of Denying the
Cause of God and Religion; and the Almighty has told us, That if we regard
Iniquity in our Hearts, God will not hear our Prayers. Sir John goes on thus*

PAPER.
As for any sudden Descent of his Majesty upon these his Dominions, in order to
the Recovery of 'em, I declare I had no certain Knowledge of it, nor can I tell
what Grounds there was to believe it, so little Reason had I to be in a present
Preparation for it.

ANSWER.
That he had no certain Knowledge of it, is without doubt true, for the late
King never yet made the Descent, but we have just now heard that Sir John
believed it; and I am afraid that was not the only thing wherein Sir John's
Faith had no good Foundation; but however, it was proved at his Trial, that he
had received a Commission to Raise a Regiment of Horse to further it; and that
his Preparations for it depended on the arrival of the Thoulon Fleet in the
Ocean, which must be allowed does still belong to the time to come; and yet Sir
John had made some present Preparation when he named his Inferior Officers,
and paid out Money for Subsisting his Men; and for him to have acted thus, and
yet to declare, That he knew no of Grounds to believe the design of the late
King's Descent, was to proclaim to the World, that he acted like a Fool, and to
give some Uncharitable People ground to say, that he died one; and thus
Gentlemen you see how little he is obliged to your Vindication of him in his
Orphan Paper.

PAPER.
I suppose it is not expected I should here endeavor to clear my self of the
Assassination, which was not the thing alleged against me; however it was
mentioned, through what means I know not; as it was insinuated to my
Disadvantage, I forgive such that were therein Instrumental, and I do also from
the bottom of my Soul freely forgive and beg of God to do so too, such as were
any ways accessory toward the taking away my Life, which I really look upon to
be their misfortune more than mine.

ANSWER.
Gentlemen, the only thing Remarkable in this Paragraph, is the malicious
Reflection, as if the Assassination had been mentioned on purpose, to influence
the Jury against Sir John, but if you had either consulted his Credit or your
own, you would have forborne this, for it was positively sworn against Sir John
at his Trial, that he was acquainted with that horrid design, but on the other
hand it was owned by the Evidence, that he did not approve of it; but said,
that it would ruin King James's Interest. So that it seems Sir John had not
the Conscience to discover it, tho he was ambitious even at the passing of the
sentence upon him; of having the Honor of being thought to decline it. But, in
short, Gentlemen, Your Martyrs Reputation, as to this point, is not so fair as
you would have the World to believe, for tho he refused to be concerned in the
thing himself, yet its plain that he did not abhor it in others; seeing he did
both conceal the design of those concerned in the last Assassination, and paid
an hundred Pound toward the Escape of Coll. Parker, who was accused of a
former, which certainly Gentlemen, you, who are Divines by profession, must
needs know to be very near akin to the Crime it self; for we are told by Holy
Writ, that there are those who may be called Partakers with the Thief and
Adulterer, that are not guilty of the very Acts, and therefore if Sir John had
been so very Charitably disposed, to forgive those who had injured him, as you
make him seem to be, he would never have upbraided the Court with this, seeing
he was so far guilty as we have mentioned above, and that they did actually
declare that it was not proved against him, nor does he now deny but he heard
of the thing, and to be plain with you, Gentlemen, there's-no body so much
concerned to say Amen to Sir John's Prayer, that God would forgive those who had
been Instrumental, or Accessory to the taking away of his Life as your selves,
and those of your kidney, who inspired him with such Principles as brought him
to this hard fate.

PAPER.
I profess my self, and I thank God I am so a Member of the Church of England,
tho God knows a most unworthy and profitable part of it, of that Church which
suffers so much at present, for a strict adherence to Loyalty, the Laws and
Christian Principles.

For this I suffer, and for this I die.

ANSWER.
Gentlemen, I do verily believe that there is no Christian Church, of what
Denomination soever, that would be fond of such a Member, as you have made Sir
John appear to be, and in the mean time you have done that, which you call your
Church, the greatest Injury in the World, for some people were apt to be
Charitable to the Nonjurant party, as thinking that they might have really
scrupled the taking the Oaths, from a principle of Conscience, but if it be
true as you make Sir John say, that it is your Church he suffered and died for,
then its plain that your Church is engaged in a Rebellious design to Dethrone
his Majesty, and to invade his Dominions with a French Popish Army, so that by
Consequence all true Protestants must look upon you, as a Synagogue of Satan,
and no Christian Church, because you are actually in a Confederacy with the
Turk and French King, the Sworn Enemies of the Christian and Protestant
Religion; and endeavor to assist the latter at least, as much as in you lies,
to overthrow the Protestant Interest in Europe, for so much and no less is the
Language of your practice, whatever you may pretend otherwise in your ordinary
Cant. As to that Arrogant part of your Martyrs Paper, that your Church suffers
so much at present, for a strict adherence to Loyalty, the Laws and Christian
Principles, It is truly Extraordinary, that such an handful of Men, as your
party is, should take upon them to determine Loyalty, Laws, and Christian
Principles, contrary to the sense of the Legislative power of the Nation, the
National Church, and indeed the greatest part of Christians in the World,
methinks that the very consideration of this, should have obliged you to
suspend your Judgment at least, till you had fairly examined, what the far
greater part of your Protestant Brethren have to say in defense of their
Loyalty and Christianity; certainly if their practice be compair'd with the
practice of your selves, and your adherents, you will find that they have as
fair a Title to Piety, Loyalty, and every thing else that is good, as you can
possibly have, and would be as loath to offend God, and their own Consciences
as you would be, and therefore you cannot be the only party, with whom Loyalty
and Christianity is to be found. Do but cast an Eye on the practice of your
followers, and you will find that they are generally the worst, and most
Immoral people of both Sexes; and then if you consider your fellows and
associates, you will find them to be Turks, and either English or French
Catholics, who are the very worst of Papists, and that their design is the
subversion of our Laws and Religion. And seeing you pretend to be Men of
Conscience, examine the matter seriously betwixt God and your own Souls,
whether or not the Voice of his word and providence, does not call on you to
come out of Babylon; and not to join Issue and Interest with her, If you have
any sense of the Religion which you profess, or any Remembrance of things past,
do but reflect upon the Danger which all the Protestants in Europe, and
particularly those of Britain and Ireland, did apprehend their Religion to be
in, when Lewis XIV. was swallowing up his Neighboring Princes and States
without Control, and when James the Second sat upon the English Throne,
supported by a Numerous Army under the Conduct of Popish Officers. Look back
upon the Language of the Church of England then, when her Bishops were
Imprisoned, her Universities in danger of being filled with Papists, and the
Laws which Defended her overturned by an Illegal Dispensing Power, and Answer
from your Consciences, whether you think a Design to Reinthrone K. James, who
will certainly pursue the same Measures, can be the Cause of God and Religion.
Or in short, take it into your serious Consideration, whether a Question of
State and mere Politics, such as this is, Whether the Parliament or People of
England can set another Prince upon the Throne, instead of one who did actually
leave it, because he could not be suffered peaceably to overturn our Laws and
Religion? can properly be called the Cause of God and Religion; and whether you
or the Convention and Parliament are the best Judges of our Civil Constitution;
or, because you are high Pretenders to Religion: Answer, Bona Fide, How you can
Reconcile your Principles and Practice with the Injunction of the Apostle, who
Commands, Subjection to the Powers that be, Romans 13. 1. and Submission to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords Sake, whether it be unto the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 13? Call your
Consciences to an account before God, and Examine, Whether the Sufferings of
that which you call your Church, be not as busy Bodies in other Men's matters,
and whether it be yours, or the Parliaments Business to determine, whether the
late K. James did Abdicate or not, and whether His present Majesty has a good
Title to the Crown by our Laws or not, and don't entitle your particular
Notions about Civil Government, which is none of your Province, the Cause of
God and Religion, to ensnare silly weak People, and bring them to the Gallows,
and to Embroil Nations in Foreign and Intestine Wars, as you would not be
answerable for all the Blood that has been or may be shed on that account.

Magistracy is God's Appointment, but the Species as well as Persons entrusted
are Ordinances of Men, else it were unlawful for any Christian to be subject to
a Republic, or a King chosen by the People, as in Poland, etc. and the
Apostles Rule to submit our selves unto the King as Supreme, or unto Governors,
should be false, which no Man in his right Wits will assert; And considering
the Instability of the Roman Government at the time when this Injunction was
given, viz. when Emperors were set up and cast down, as the Army and the
Senate, or sometimes as the one, and sometimes as the other thought fit, we
shall find that its none of our part as private Christians, to meddle with the
Decision of those Affairs, but to submit unto that which the Nation thinks fit
to Acquiesce in, especially in a Case so clear as ours, when the Prince
exceeded the Boundaries of his Commission both from God and Man, endeavored
the Subversion of our Laws and Religion, the Destruction of the Good, and the
Encouragement of the Bad, things Diametrically opposite to the End of
Magistracy: And this I think enough to make it evident, that the Church for
which you make Sir John Friend to have been a Martyr, and a Sufferer, is none
of that Church which was built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, and that by consequence it is no Sin to be a Separatist from it.

PAPER.
Though I have a perfect Charity for People of all Pr^fessions, and do heartily
wish Well, and would endeavor so to do to all my Fellow Subjects of what
Persuasions so ever; and indeed I have met with a great deal of Vprightness and
Sincerity among some People of very different Opinions in Religious Matters.

And I hope and desire, it may not be taken as an Uncharitable Censure, or
undue Reflection, That I objected to the Legality of Popish Evidence, being
advised so to do for my better Security, upon the Foundation of a Statute Law.

ANSWER.
Charity is better manifested by Actions than Words, and truly, Gentlemen, you
will have much ado to persuade the World that there can be any thing of Charity
in your Design, and Sir John's, to involve your Protestant Brethren in Three
Nations in Blood and Ruin, and to endanger the Protestant Interest all over
Europe, by countenancing a French Invasion; And if it were not Ignoble to rake
into the Actions of the Dead, there are many of your Martyr's Actions which
might be instanced that favored nothing of perfect Charity.

But the design of this part of the Paper is obvious, viz. That you and your
Martyr may do all that you can to conciliate the good opinion of the Papists,
whom you and he are so very careful not to offend, that he must die with an
Apology to them in his Mouth; but it seems it was not worth either of your
whiles to make the least Apology for the offense which he had given to God, and
the Professors of the same Religion with himself, by concealing the design of
the horrid Assassination, which his own Conscience told him was so great a
Crime, that he was very careful of having himself not so much as thought to be
concerned in it: but this I suppose he thought could be washed off by your
Cheating Absolution; and truly it had been more for the credit of your Cause,
to let this Apology alone too, and put it upon the same score, for it only
aggravates his own Guilt, and that of your party; for, if he had been a Man of
any manner of Conscience, he could not have reflected so in open Court upon the
Religion of a Prince, whose Restitution he esteemed the Cause of God and
Religion: and if he did really believe what he said in his Defense, That
Papists think they Merit Heaven by destroying Protestants; his Conscience must
needs have told him, if he was really a Protestant, that it could not then be
his duty to endeavor the Restitution of such a Prince, who thought such a Work
Meritorious, and had indeed acted as if he did firmly believe so, both before
and after his Coming to the Throne, which is certainly inconsistent with the
very end of Government, as well as with the Coronation Oath, by which he was
Sworn to Govern us. But notwithstanding all the precaution you have taken, to
have it thought, that those Principles are only an Uncharitable Imputation upon
the Papists, that Character will cleave to them, as being founded upon better
ground than your Martyrs Assertion, which, considered in its self, is indeed
none at all: so that his Vindication of 'em, is of as little weight, as 'twas
possible for the Vindication of any Man to be.

PAPER.
Having owned my self a Member of the Church of England, I must take this
Opportunity, and I do it for God's Glory, to apply my self to you that are
Royalists of that Church, and of the same Faith and Principles with my self:
And I beg of you for God's sake, and the love of your Souls, to be very
constant and serious in all Religious Offices, and holy Duties of Divine
Worship and Service, which I have too much neglected, as I own to my great
Sorrow: Let no Excuse, no Dangers, prevent or hinder you in these most
necessary and serious Matters; and be, I beseech you, very careful and
circumspect in all your Actions, Behavior, and Conversation, as I earnestly
exhorted all that came to me.

ANSWER.
This is a piece of extraordinary application, and concerns the Honor of the
Church of England so much, that surely the Governing part of it are obliged to
think of a Grateful Reward to the Absolvers, for telling the World, that those
of the Church of England are Divided in their Faith and Principles; for it
seems, some of them are of Sir John Friends Faith and Principles, and others
are not; Sir John's Faith we have heard is, that to Restore K. James by a
Popish French Army, is the Cause of God and Religion; and, in truth, if there
be any part of the Church of England of his Mind, they must be the Children of
the Bondwoman, and are fitter to be sent to the Wilderness, then entertained
in the Bosom of the Church.

Your Martyr, in stead of Royalists, should have plainly said Jacobites, seeing
others are for Kingly Government as well as your Party. But this is not the
only thing wherein his partiality appears; for, as he will allow none but
Jacobites the Name of Royallists, so he Addresses his Exhortation to none but
them, which is no great Argument of his Perfect Charity; but the Matter I
suppose would not bear it, for we must understand this Exhortation to be a
Persuasive to Jacobite Conventicles, there being now no danger to hinder any
Man's performance of Divine Duty and Worship, except Sir John understood those
Unlawful Meetings, and no others to be such. For the other part of his
Exhortation, I shall only say, That your Martyr ought to have given better
Satisfaction of his own Repentance, before he could reasonably suppose that his
Exhortation could have any weight upon others.

PAPER.
I have, I thank God, a great deal of Satisfaction in my present Sufferings,
and have found it so ever since I have been under them, And blessed be God it
does continually increase upon me. And I do now lay down my Life with all
Cheerfulness and Resignation, in sure and certain Hope of a Resurrection to
Eternal Life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whose Merits alone I hope
for the Pardon of my Sins, and the Salvation of my Soul.

ANSWER.
Gentlemen, I cannot but express my apprehensions of your Gross Hypocrisy in
this last Article. And I am confident that it will appear very evident by the
following Reflections. Don't you know that your Martyr did not only disown, but
in a manner Forswear the Cause of his Sufferings before the Court, at his
Trial? How is it possible then that he should have so shamefully denied it for
fear of Suffering, if he had really found so much Satisfaction in his
Sufferings as here you make him express? Or is it supposable, if it had been
so, that the very remembrance of his having so unworthily Disowned the Cause of
his Sufferings, wherein he had found so much Satisfaction, should not have
melted him into Tears and Contrition, and made him Glorify God, and Redeem the
Honor of the Cause, by testifying a Public Sorrow for his Weakness in Denying
it? Sure I am, Gentlemen, this was St. Peter's Practice, who made his
Repentance as Public, as his Denial of his Master; and seeing St. John says,
That his Cause was that of God and Religion, his denial of it was as gross as
that of St. Peter's; but you don't make it appear that Sir John's Repentance
was any thing like that Blessed Apostles. God knows whether these be the Words
of your Martyr or not, but supposing they are, we can look upon them as no
other than the effect of those Delusions with which you had possessed his Soul,
and that they were put into his Mouth on purpose to strengthen your declining
Cause: In the belief of which I am the more confirmed, by the assurance I have
that one of your number told him with an unwarrantable Confidence, when he
mounted from the Sledge to the Cart, That the next step was to Heaven; which,
Gentlemen, if you do really believe to be so, its a loss to the Nations, as
well as to your selves, that there are so many of your Party who have not yet
taken the first Step.

PAPER.
And so, O Lord, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me,
O Lord, thou God of Truth.

And I do heartily and humbly beseech Thee Almighty God, and my most Gracious
Father, to forgive and bless this Sinful Nation; Deliver it from the Guilt of
Rebellion, Blood, and Perjury, that is now on all sides more than ever, and
from all those other heinous Sins which cry aloud. Preserve and Bless this
Church. Comfort our Distressed King; Restore him to his Right, and his Misled
Subjects to their Allegiance: Bless also his Royal Consort, our Gracious Queen
Mary; his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, That he may grow in Stature, and
in Favor with God and Man; Support and Strengthen all those that suffer in any
kind for a good Cause; give them Patience under all their Afflictions, and a
happy Deliverance out of them. Forgive all mine Enemies.

Pardon my former neglect, and remissness in Religious Worship, and holy
Duties, and all the Sins I have been guilty of to this very moment. Consider my
Contrition, Accept my Tears; And now Thou art pleased to take me hence, take me
into thy Favor, and grant that my Soul may be without spot presented unto
Thee, through the Merits of thy most dearly Beloved Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

ANSWER.
Gentlemen, We have heard of those who Fast for Strife and Debate, and I think
it may be said without breath of Charity, that this Paper was Penned and put
into the Hands of the poor Criminal for no other end. You had taught him Lies
in the Name of God, and now you put Lies in his Mouth for a Prayer to the
Almighty. Is it possible that you can hold up your Faces to God and call that a
Rebellion which all the Protestants of Europe, besides your own inconsiderable
Crew, do look upon as a Lawful War, pour out their Prayers daily to the God of
Heaven for its Success, and Blessed be his Name not without gracious Returns?
Have you so little observed the Course of Providence, as to accuse that Prince
as an Usurper, on whose Family Heaven seems to have Entailed it, to be the
Champions of the Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of Europe? Do you think
your selves better Casuists then all other Reformed Divines, who do universally
approve his procedure, as agreeable to the Laws of God; And is your Judgment in
State Matters so great, that you will venture to tell Heaven that this is a
Rebellion, which most of the Sovereigns in Europe, and their Counsels, do
approve, as agreeable to the Laws of Nations? In short, Gentlemen, your peevish
Ecclesiastics have assumed a Power to themselves as great as ever was claimed
by the Pope and his Conclave; For you can Absolve Men from their Sins without
Repentance, and Bind that upon the Consciences of your Disciples as Law and
Gospel, which is directly contrary to the Tenor of both. But to return to your
Prayer; Is it not enough that you Arraign your Country as Rebels at the Bar of
Heaven, but you must also pray for the Establishment of a Succession of Popish
Princes, which must needs be attended with the Ruin of our Religion? And will
no other terms serve you, to pray for our Counterfeit Prince of Wales without
Profaning what was said of the Blessed Child Jesus? Is that the Reverence which
you pay to his Name? But its true, Gentlemen, you make your Criminal act like
himself: He owned at his Trial that he used to mock Heaven in his life time by
praying for K. William, when he thought K. James's Cause to be the Cause of
God; and now you make him also to mock Heaven at his Death, by praying that God
would Establish a Race of Prince's amongst us, whom the Poor Man confessed,
must by their Principles think they merit Heaven by destroying Protestants, God
preserve these Nations from such a Generation of Scribes, Pharisees, and
Hypocrites, as are the Tribe of Absolvers. One thing I had almost forgotten to
observe, viz. That Sir John, by his own Confession to the Committee of both
Houses of Parliament, made void his Exception as to the Truth of the Evidence
given in against him by the Roman Catholic Witnesses, and has made it appear,
that whatever Latitude they may allow themselves in their Evidence against
Protestants as such, that yet they may be very good Witnesses against those who
take Indirect Methods to support a Popish Cause, whether they be Papists or
Protestants; and as it was well replied by the Kings Council to Sir John, their
being Evidence in such a Case will be one of the last things that the Priests
will Absolve them for.

Sir WILLIAM PARKYNS's Paper.
IT has not been my custom to use many words, and I shall not be long upon
this Occasion, having Business of much greater Consequence to employ my
thoughts upon. I thank God I am now in a full disposition to Charity, and
therefore shall make no Complaints, either of the Hardships of my Trial, or any
other Rigours put upon me. However one circumstance I think my self obliged to
mention; it was Sworn against me by Mr. Porter, That I had owned to him, that I
had Seen and Read a Commission from the King, to Levy War upon the Person of
the Prince of Orange: Now I must declare, That the Tenor of the King's
Commission, which I saw, was general, and directed to all his Loving Subjects,
to Raise and Levy War against the Prince of Orange and his Adherents, and to
Seize all Forts, Castles, etc. which, I suppose, may be a customary Form of
giving Authority to make War; but I must confess, I am not much acquainted with
Matters of that nature: But as for any Commission particularly levelled against
the Person of the Prince of Orange, I neither saw nor heard of any such.

ANSWER.
There Is no Reason to doubt that this Paper was Sir Williams own Composure, his
Education, and the defense he made at his Trial, do neither of them give it the
lie, nor is there any thing in it which Savours of the Canting Bigotry of the
other; So that I shall only consider what is material for our purpose in it. He
pretends to a full disposition to Charity, and yet complains of Hardships and
Rigours, put upon him at his Trial, which is not very consistent with Charity;
I was present at his Trial, and cannot imagine what ground he had for this
Complaint, if it was not that the Court declined to put off the Trial any
Longer, and that he was not allowed the benefit of the New Act for Regulating
Trials in cases of high Treason. As to the former, if the Government did not
think fit to allow it, Sir William had no just Reason of Complaint, he had
sufficient time allowed him to prepare himself, and was treated with that
Moderation and Calmness, which former Reigns were strangers to. The Crime he
was indicted for, was one of the blackest that is to be met with in any Record,
and God knows that he and the rest of the Assassins, did not intend to allow
our Gracious Sovereign any time to prepare for Death. I Remember, indeed, that
Sir William alleged he wanted some Material Witnesses, but his Confession of
the Crimes with which he was charged, make it evident that his design in that
was to elude Justice. And as to his being denied the benefit of the New Act,
the Bench gave him a very good Reason for it, viz. That it had not then taken
place, and that they were to govern themselves by Law, and not to make Law, and
if the equity of the thing be considered, there seems no great Reason that they
who are guilty of this horrid design, before the making of the said Act, should
have the benefit of it, tho the mildness of the present Government has ordered
it otherwise; and therefore Sir Williams Complaint of Rigor and Hardship, was
but ill founded, and may justly be imputed to some bitterness of Spirit.

As to his declaring, that the Tenor of the Kings Commission, which he saw,
was General, and directed to all his loving Subjects, to levy War, etc. against
the Prince of Orange and his Adherents, and that he neither Saw nor heard of
any Commission, particularly Levelled against the person of the Prince of
Orange. It does not at all affect Capt. Porters Evidence, nor deny that he
informed the Captain so, which proves that Sir William was a very ill Man, to
have put such a Gloss on the late Kings Commission, both to the Capt. and
Charnock, in order to persuade them to the Assassination, if he did not believe
that to be the Real meaning of it, however it may have been worded; And it
argues the Absolvers to be Traitors both to God and their King, pronouncing the
absolution over Sir William, before he had publicly begged pardon of that
Prince whom he had injured, and testified his Repentance for drawing Charnock,
and others to the Gibbet, by that false Interpretation; It has been observed
by another hand, that this Commission which Sir William gives an account of,
Looks liker a Proclamation than a Commission, but if it was only such a General
Commission as he talks of, what need was there of so much Secrecy, why was it
not seen by Capt. Porter, and others, who desired to see it, and why was it all
writ with King James's own hand?

It is plain from the depositions of the Witnesses, at the Trial of Charnock,
etc. that a Commission to attack the Prince of Orange in person, and to carry
him over to France, at least was sent for, which to all Men of Common sense
must appear to be impracticable, to have been done with such a small Number of
Men. Besides, when the Commission, whatever it was, arrived, we find that all
of them prepared to Assassinate the King, and the design was chiefly managed by
Sir Geo. Barclay, who brought over the Commission, and must necessarily be
supposed to have understood the meaning of it best. We find likewise, that he
brought over a Sub-brigadeer, and 16 of King James's Guards with him, and that
they were subsisted privately in Town, and ordered to be in a readiness for the
horrid design, so that let the Commission be couched in what Terms they please,
the meaning of it is plain enough, and all their Art cannot vindicate the late
King from being the unhappy Tool, to promote that execrable Murder: We all know
what bloody designs against Protestants in General, and some of his own nearest
Relations in particular, he has been formerly accused of. Nor are we to suppose
that one who makes his way to the Throne, by the Death of a Brother, would have
any more tenderness for a Nephew, or that he who gives way to the imposing of a
Supposititious Son, to exclude his own Daughters from their Right to the Crown,
will entertain any Scruple at the Murder of a Son-in-Law, whom God and the
Nation have set up in his stead; and if I should venture to say, that Sir
William has not been Ingenuous in his Confession, there is no reason to call it
a breach of Charity, considering that he has not left the least Evidence of
his Repentance, for the Assassination behind him, tho he owned to the Committee
of Parliament, that it was a Crime.

PAPER.
It Is true I was privy to the Design upon the Prince, but was not to act in it;
and am fully satisfied that very few, or none, knew of it, but those who
undertook to do it.

I freely acknowledge, and think it for my Honor to say, that I was entirely
in the Interest of the King, being always firmly persuaded of the Justice of
his Cause, and looked upon it as my Duty, both as a Subject, and an Englishmen,
to Assist him in the Recovery of his Throne, which I believed him to be
Depri^ed of, contrary to all Right and Justice; taking the Laws and
Constitution of my Country for my Guide.

As for my Religion, I dye in the Communion of the Church of England, in which
I was Educated.

And as I freely Forgive all the World, so whoever I may any ways have Injured
I heartily ask them Pardon.

ANSWER.
Here Is another Remarkable piece of disingenuity, as if it were not all one for
him to Act in it himself, as to prompt others to do it, and to furnish Men,
Horses, and Arms, for the Execution, which was fully proved against him at his
Trial, tho he takes no notice of it here, and does not at all deny it. And we
have very great reason to think, that the Late King was one of the few that
knew it, besides these that undertook it, and do verily believe that they
designed to let as few more know of it beforehand as possible, and that in all
probability, was the reason why the Commission was kept up, even from most of
these who were to have been Actors in it. In the next Paragraph, he seems to
justify himself by the supposed Justice of the late Kings Cause, and values
himself upon the Honor of having been always in his Interest; and yet to
preserve his place, he took the Oaths to his present Majesty, so that it seems
the late King allows that practice in his Adherents, and reckons them nothing
the less entire to his Interest, because they may thereby be the more Capable
of doing him service, and by this unhappy Gentleman's confession, it would seem
to be the Principles of the party, to assist the late King in the Recovery of
his Throne, by all sorts of means, how unlawful soever. Nay, even by abjuring
him one day, and Murdering his present Majesty the the other: As for his pretense
to justify himself by the Laws and Constitution of his Country, enough has been
said on that head already, in Answer to Sir John Friend's Paper. And whereas
Sir John and he both pretends to die in the Communion of the Church of England,
it would seem necessary, if the Governing part of the Church find it meet, that
an Authentic Explanation of the Churches Doctrine, as to passive Obedience and
Nonresistance, should be published to the World, that poor people may not be
misled to their own ruin, and the Nations involved in blood by those who
pretend to justify their adherence to the late King by the Doctrine of the
Church of England.

FINIS.

