Imprimatur,

Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

Jan. 12. 1690/1.

A Friendly Discourse BETWEEN An ENGLISH Dissenter AND A French Protestant,
Concerning the Liturgy and Ceremonies OF THE Church of ENGLAND.

By Daniel la Fite, M. A. Rector of East-Dean, in the County of Sussex.

The First PART.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Northcott, at the Mariner and Anchor, adjoining to
St. Peter's. Alley, in Cornhill. 1691.

To my very good and worthy Friend and Patron, ROBERT ORME, Esquire
Worthy Sir,
I Am not so conceited to persuade my self, that these Papers are worthy to be
presented to you, in which a less piercing Judgment than yours is, will easily
discover many defects: but the Subject of them is so worthy and edifying, and
the Charch, for whose Defense they are designed, does so well deserve your
respect and affection, that I promise my self, that on this view they will not
fail of being most acceptable and welcome to you. The only reason that has
persuaded me to expose them to public censure, notwithstanding those many
excellent Treatises that have been published on the same matter, is to
undeceive those amongst the English Dissenters, who pretend and confidently
assert, that our French Protestants were of the same Judgment with them in
matters of Religion: And the Esteem I have of your Worth, and the Concern you
have for the Cause I defend, together with the Experience I have had of your
singular Bounty and Kindness, engage me to present them to you; not with an
intent to acquit my self of my Obligations, which is beyond the reach of my
power; but only to intimate, how sensible I am of those highly-valued
Testifications of your Love and Good Will; wherewith you have been pleased to
honor me. A most dreadful Tempest, such as the Church of God, it may be,
never felt before; having tossed me out of my own Country, with the miserable
Remains of the Shipwreck of our French Churches, and in this common Calamity
finding my self as a person cast out upon a strange Shore, without any support,
help or hope; yet I can say, that even in this state I never wanted any thing;
for which great and unlookt-for Blessing, I am bound, next to the Goodness of
God, to acknowledge your unparalled Kindness and Generosity, who soon after
my Arrival in England were pleased to bestow a Living upon me; by which means I
was prevented from being a Charge to the Nation, as many of my Countrymen
were, and put into a condition of boasting with St. Paul, that I have not been
chargeable to any man. In a thankful acknowledgment of which favor, I humbly
present these my weak Essays to you, wishing they may be so well approved of,
as to persuade you, that I am most truly and sincerely,

SIR, Your Faithful and Obedient Friend and Servant, Daniel la Fite

A Friendly Discourse BETWEEN AN ENGLISH Dissenter AND A FRENCH Protestant.
Engl. Dissenter. I Understand, Sir, you are a French Protestant; I am heartily
glad to see you.


Fr. Protestant. You are truly informed, Sir, I am a French Protestant.


E. D. Pray Sir, in what Condition are the poor Protestants in France?


F. P. When I left France, their Condition was very deplorable; and for any
thing I hear, it continues so still.


E. D. I am grieved at my heart for them; for I am so much one with them as to
their Religion, for which they are so cruelly Persecuted, that I cannot but
extremely Pity them.


F. P. Then I suppose, Sir, you are a Protestant.


E. D. Yes, Sir, and of the same Judgment as you are in matters of Religion.


F. P. I am glad to understand so much; Like, we say, loves like.


E. D. Pray Sir, how long have you been in England?


F. P. Almost these five Years.


E. D. I do not doubt then, but that you are a good Proficient, by this time,
in our English Tongue.


F. P. Truly, Sir, I have nothing to boast of in this regard; for whether it be
the hardness of the English Tongue, or the thickness of my Scull, I know not;
but so it is, that I can only make a shift to speak some broken English.


E. D. Don't say so, Sir; methinks you speak very intelligibly, and proper
enough for a Foreigner. I can understand you very well; and if you please to
enter with me, for this is my House, I shall be glad to have some further
discourse with you.


F. P. Sir, I accept of your kindness; and if you please to show me the way, I
shall follow you.


E. D. Sir, you are very heartily welcome; I am glad to see you here; be
pleased to take a Seat. Pray Sir, how do you like our Country?


F. P. Extraordinary well, Sir; and were it not for the unhappy Divisions that
are amongst you, especially in matters of Religion, I should have reason to
believe this, with the adjoining Islands, to be the Insul^ Fortunatae, or happy
Islands of the Ancients.


E. D. I perceive, Sir, you are sensible then of the Divisions that are amongst
us.


F. P. Ay, Sir, I am but too well informed of them; and indeed very sadly
concerned, to see that Protestants cannot agree amongst themselves, which
certainly casts a great blemish upon the Reformation.


E. D. So it does indeed, Sir; and you may thank the Church of England for it.


F. P. Why the Church of England, Sir?


E. D. Because it is She has refused all terms of Accommodation, that we
Protestant Dissenters, as they call us, have offered to her.


F. P. I never heard that she had refused any. But pray, Sir, be pleased to let
me know, what those terms are that you have offered her, and she has refused?


E. D. We have propounded to her the laying aside of the Commonprayer, and
parting with her Ceremonies; and for other things, we might probably comply
with them.


F. P. But, Sir, are you sure that what you demand is reasonable, and may
justly be granted?


E. D. Without doubt she may, and she ought, and she can do no less for us,
than to wave her Popish Common Prayer Book, and cast off her superstitious
Ceremonies.


F. P. Pray, Sir, let me beg of you, to acquaint me, what you have to object
against the Common Prayer; and afterward, if the time gives leave, I shall be
glad to hear what you have to allege against our Church-Ceremonies.


E. D. That I will, Sir; and shall do it the more freely, because I should be
glad to undeceive you, for I perceive by your discourse you ^


F. P. To deal sincerely with you, Sir, I am a Member of the Church of England,
but withal a true friend to Dissenters; and I hope you will be so too, if in
Answering your Objections, I can convince you, that the Common Prayer of the
Church is very good and edifying, and her Ceremonies lawful and decent.


E. D. I shall consider what you have to say.


F. P. But, Sir, it lies at your door to begin, by propounding your Objections
against the Commonpraver.


E. D. I have many things to object against that Idol: And, in the first place,
I think it ought to be taken away, because it is unlawful to have a set Form
of Prayer imposed upon the Church.


F. P. Either you or I, Sir, are strangely mistaken in this point; for I must
own, that my Judgment always has been, that it is not only lawful to have a
set Form of Prayer in the Church: but what is more, that no Church can well be
without one.


E. D. Pray how so, Sir? For, if I be not greatly mistaken, you speak now
against the General sense of the French Protestants; for I never heard that
they had any set Forms of Prayer.


F. P. I perceive, Sir, you have been ill informed concerning these matters;
for, the truth is, we French Protestants have a Common Prayer Book, which was
composed by Calvin himself, and therein we agree with the concurring practice
of the Universal Church: for I never read or heard of any Church in the World,
but had a set Form of Prayer; so that for you to oppose it, is no less than to
deny the Authority, Testimony and Practice of all the Saints of the Old and New
Testaments, both Prophets and Apostles, and the express Command of our Savior
himself; and, in a word, Sir, you condemn the general sense and practice of
Christianity and the Holy Catholic Church.


E. D. I hear what you say, Sir, and expect you should prove it.


F. P. Nay more than this, you contradict the Example of our great Lord and
Master, the Founder of our Religion, and the Author and Finisher of our Faith.


E. D. This is a high Charge indeed; but pray be pleased to make it out.


F. P. That I will, Sir. First I say, that you contradict the Authority and
Practice of the Prophets in the Old Testament, forasmuch as it is evident that
they made use of set Forms of Prayer, and had a particular Command so to do:
to be convinced of this, be pleased to read the 26th Chapter of Deuteronomy,
from Verse 13. to 16. and the 14th. Chapter of Hosea, beginning at the second
Verse, Take with you words, and turn unto the Lord, and say unto him, etc. and
the 2d of Joel, Verse 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep
between the Porch and the Altar; and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord,
etc.

Secondly, You contradict the Command of our Lord and Savior, and the Practice
of the holy Apostles, which I prove from the 11th Chapter of St. Luke, the 1st
and 2d Verses, where we read that one of our Savior's Disciples asked him in
the Name of all his Companions, to teach them to pray, as John had taught his
Disciples; whereupon our Savior, addressing himself to all his Disciples,
said, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. From whence I infer these two things:
First, That the Apostles had a set Form of Prayer prescribed them by Christ
himself; for it is impossible to order any Form in more plain and express
terms, than our Savior makes use of in recommending this Prayer to his
Disciples. Secondly, I conclude from hence, that the Disciples made use of this
Form; which will not be questioned, if we consider the great desire they showed
to obtain this Form of Prayer from our Savior, and the readiness wherewith
they always obeyed the Commands he laid upon them. So that this cannot but be a
sufficient proof to any thinking Man, that when they prayed, they made use of
this Form or Prescription their blessed Lord and Master had at their request
given them, with this express Command; When you pray, say, Our Father, etc.

3. You oppose the General Practice of Christendom, and of the Holy Catholic
Church; because neither your self, nor any Man else, can give an instance of
any Church in the World, from the Apostles times to these our days, but what
had a set Form of Prayers: for though all have not used the same, yet there is
no Church but has used some Form or other.

4. You condemn the Example and Practice of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ himself; for it is evident that he himself made use of a Form of Prayer,
Matt. 26. v. 44.


E. D. I will not undertake now to return you a particular Answer to what you
have here alleged; but shall only say, that Praying by a Form, has by
experience been found a hindrance and obstacle to true fervent Prayer in the
Spirit; and to deal plainly with you, this seems to be one great reason why the
Ministers of the Church of England are so dull and ignorant in this point, and
so little acquainted with spiritual Prayer.


F. P. I am not a little surpised at this your Answer; for having but just now
proved to you, that the Prophets and Apostles, the Holy Catholic Church, and
Christ himself made use of Forms of Prayer; you, after all this, come and tell
me, that Praying by Forms, is a hindrance to Praying by the Spirit; which is as
much as to say, that neither the Prophets, Apostles, the Catholic Church, nor
Christ himself prayed by the Spirit, because they made use of a set Form, which
is a near step to Blasphemy.


E. D. I did not design to say so much neither; though I must confess that,
Praying by a set Form, seems to me (for I find it so by experience) to be a
great Obstacle to true spiritual Prayer.


F. P. Though it may seem so to you; yet your Charity should lead you rather to
question your own Judgment, than to pass so rash a Censure upon the Saints of
the Old and New Testament, yea, upon Christ himself; besides, you ought to be
very wary of exposing your self to the derision of all men, by supposing your
self wiser than all the Prophets and Apostles, than the whole Christian Church
and Christ himself, since it is most certain that they made use of Forms; and
not only so, but our Savior himself prescribed a Form of Prayer to his
Disciples, commanding them, when they prayed, to use the same; which he would
never have done, had it indeed been so great a hindrance to servent Prayer by
the Spirit, as you pretend.


E. D. If it be not a hindrance to others, I am sure it is so to me.


F. P. I hope I shall understand you better, if you please to explain to me
what you mean by praying by the Spirit.


E. D. I suppose no true Christian can be ignorant of what Praying by the
Spirit is, and therefore I cannot see any necessity there is of explaining a
thing so obvious to the understanding of all.


F. P. Since you seem unwilling to give me your meaning, I am very free to give
you mine; to pray by the Spirit is, as I take it, to pray by the help and
assistance of the Holy Ghost, so as to have our hearts and minds deeply
affected with the sense of our wants, and all our Faculties and Affections
inflamed with the Love of God, and steadfast Faith in his Promises.


E. D. I perceive we do not disagree at all in the meaning of the words.


F. P. I am glad we are so far agreed: for it is evident that, according to
this meaning of the words, a set Form of Prayer is so far from being a
hindrance, that indeed it is a great help to fervent praying by the Spirit; and
on the contrary, Extemporary Prayer must needs be a great impediment to it. To
convince you of this, I desire you would consider, that when we pray by a Form,
we have more time to study the import of our Requests, and to weigh and examine
every Petition with greater attention; we have more leisure to understand and
discern our wants, and to present them before God; we can the better prepare
and dispose our selves for so holy a Duty; and in a word, we can be more intent
and recollected to improve the motions of the Spirit, having nothing else to
do, but to fix our mind wholly on God, whilst we are praising of him, and have
our hearts suitably affected with the things we pray for. Whereas in
Extemporary Prayer, the mind of the Minister, or whoever else it is that
prays, is taken up in hunting for expressions to utter his thoughts; and for
fear of being put to a stand, he is forced to follow, not the motions of the
Spirit, or the dictate of his understanding, but the fluency of an acquired
habit of Praying; and by this means does often begin, where he should end, and
end where he should begin. And those very men that speak so much against the
necessary and edifying Repetitions that we use in our Common Prayer, do very
frequently in their Extemporary-prayer repeat the same things over and over
again, though it may be in different expressions. And as for the People that
hear a Minister pray an Extemporary-prayer, as they do not know beforehand
what he will say, they must first attend to what he says; in the next place
they must consider whether what he prays be according to the Word of God, and
fit for them to join with: but whilst the Hearer is thus employed, he that
prays is got to another thing, and leaves his Hearers behind to overtake him as
they best can; which according to my apprehension makes the way of praying
extempore so difficult and uneasy, that it is morally impossible for both
Minister and People, to pray so devoutly, or at least so understandingly as
they ought to do. If you please well to weigh and consider what I have here
offered, I question not but you will be convinced, that a set Form of Prayer is
so far from being a hindrance, that it is a great furtherance to zealous
praying by the Spirit; whereas the Prayer you are so much taken with, is indeed
a great obstacle to it.


E. D. However Sir, I suppose you will grant me, that it is this tying
themselves up to a Form, that has made the Ministers of the Church of England
so dull and devoid of the Gift of Prayer, that they cannot pray without Book;
and may rather be compared to those Dumb dogs whom the Prophet reproves, than
be looked upon as Ministers of the Gospel.


F. P. Though I am a Stranger here, yet I have very good reason to believe,
that I am better acquainted with the Ministers of the Church of England than
you are, and am better informed of their parts and abilities, than you can be;
for I have made it my business to be acquainted with them, not maliciously to
slander and abuse them, but to the end I might the better understand and value
them, and profit by them. And if you will give me leave to speak my Judgment,
which is not grounded upon hearsay, but upon good knowledge of, and converse
with them, I must render them this true and unbiased testimony, That of all
the Clergy I ever was acquainted with, they are the most Learned and Godly.


E. D. You are a French man Sir, and therefore I suppose that much of this may
pass for Compliment.


F. P. I am indeed a Frenchman by birth, but yet I value my self upon this
account, that in heart and affection I am a hearty true Englishman. And since
you are pleased to look upon my judgment of the English Clergy no better than a
Compliment, I challenge you to tell me, what Nation in the World can boast of
having such great and worthy Divines as we have?


E. D. Pray how comes it to pass then, that they cannot pray?


F. P. Who told you they could not? Sure I am that they both can and do pray;
and that so excellently, that as they surpass those of other Nations for
Learning, so likewise in Devotion, and the Gift of Prayer; and if you had taken
time to peruse their Books of Devotion, you would never have told me, as you
do, That the prescribing of a Form of Prayer has been the occasion why the
Ministers of the Church of England are become so dull and ignorant, even to
that excess, that they cannot pray.


E. D. However, I think, they are much to blame; for that in their Pulpits, if
they pray at all, they dispatch them in so few words, that any one that hears
them will be apt to conclude, they cannot pray; but should you once come to our
Meetings, ay, there you would hear Praying indeed.


F. P. I will not deny, but that commonly our Clergy, in the Pulpit, use only
a short Prayer before Sermon; but don't at all deserve to be blamed, but rather
to be commended, for so doing; if we consider, first, that our Clergy choose to
make use of a short Prayer only before Sermon, because they have found, by
woeful Experience, that long extemporary Prayers have begot, in most People, a
dislike of the Common Prayer, and consequently have been the occasion of those
unchristian Animosities, Schisms and Divisions, that are so rife amongst us.
And, I think, you have no just reason to blame this pre-caution of theirs, till
you have made out, first, that the People do well to undervalue and despise
the Common Prayer, and that the Aversion they have for it is a sufficient
ground for Schism and Division. A second reason why the Ministers of the Church
of England use such short Prayers is, that by this means they may condescend to
the weakness of the People, lest an overlong Prayer should weary those who
have already attended upon, and joined their hearts and voices with, the
public Prayers offered up to God by the Church. And in the third and last
place, we shall find that there is nothing good or useful for us, which the
Minister has not already prayed for, nor any thing evil or hurtful, which he
has not deprecated in the public Prayers appointed by the Church, which
methinks might at least lessen the fault of our Clergy in your sight, and
somewhat allay the bitterness of your Censure against them. And as for your
Meetings, where you tell me there is Praying indeed, I must freely tell you,
that though I never was at any Meeting in my life, yet I have often had an
opportunity of hearing your Ministers pray; but forasmuch as my temper does not
incline me, and my Religion much less, to pass any offensive Reflection upon any
sort of People, therefore I humbly crave leave to be excused from giving you my
opinion of them.


E. D. Though I cannot but approve of your Modesty in this regard, yet I should
be glad to have you speak out; and therefore I desire you to tell me freely
from your heart, what you think of them; and whether they do not pray very well?


F. P. Because you urge me, I shall, in compliance with your desires, tell you,
and that with all the truth and sincerity imaginable, that I am so far from
liking their unpremeditated extemporary Prayers, that I altogether disapprove
them; and above all, am much offended at their way of praying.


E. D. Sure you don't speak from your heart now, as I desired you would, for if
you did, you could not say so; since it is certain that they pray incomparably
better than any of your Churchmen: one of their unpremeditated Prayers being
far beyond all the Prayers that are in your Common Prayer Book.


F. P. Good Sir, I must entreat you for once to lay aside all your Prejudices,
and to make use of your Reason so far as to consider, whether it be not morally
impossible, that men, who never were brought up in an University, and scarcely
ever had the full instruction of a Grammar School, which may be said of the
most of your Ministers, should without any premeditation pray incomparably
better than our Churchmen, who have had the best means and opportunities in the
World to improve their parts and abilities? And whether an extemporary Prayer
whined out (I beg your pardon if that word offend you) by an illiterate man,
should infinitely surpass all the Prayers of the Common Prayer Book, which have
been compiled by some of the wisest and most Judicious Divines that ever
England could boast of.


E. D. How strangely you talk now, as if it were impossible for any man to pray
well that has not been bred at the Universities?


F. P. You mistake me Sir, this was none of my assertion, I only said, it was
morally impossible, that illetrate men should pray incomparably better than
those that have been brought up at the Universities, whose whole business and
employment it is to understand the Scripture, and to be conversant in those
studies that most conduce to true Godliness, which surely are the best means to
teach them to pray also.


E. D. But the Apostles you know were simple illiterate men, and yet they could
pray infinitely better than all the Rabbis, and all the great Doctors of the
Synagogue.


F. P. I grant you that, but withal desire you would consider, that though the
Apostles were illiterate men, yet were they extraordinary men, called and sent
by God in an extraordinary manner, to bring about an extraordinary work, yea, a
Work greater than that of the Creation it self; they were by their Ministry to
change and renew the face of the whole World, to pluck the false Gods from
their Temples, to beat down their Altars, to silence their Oracles, to abolish
their Worship, to root out their Customs, to overcome their Prejudices, and to
oppose and defeat a Religion, of as long standing as the World it self; a
Religion that was in full possession of the Spirits of all men, and which by
consequence could engage for her defense whatsoever was authoritative, great or
powerful amongst all Nations. They were to be the Planters of a new Religion
in the World, to brave and challenge all the power of Princes, to stand the
shock of the Sophisms of Philosophers, and the Politics of Statesmen; to stem
the violent torrent of the Mobile, and to hold out against the Persecutions of
all the wicked. Now that they might be qualified and capacitated for this
strange and wonderful undertaking, God was pleased to indow them with many
miraculous Gifts and Powers, as of Prophesying, speaking all sorts of
Languages, working of Miracles, etc. in order to which the Holy Ghost, who is
the true and alone Spirit of Prayer, came down upon them, in a visible and
miraculous manner. Which things being so, for you to fetch an Argument from the
Example of the Apostles, either in respect of their Person, Mission or
extraordinary and miraculous Gifts, and apply the same to your Ministers, is
everywhit as improper, as if you should go about to prove, that you or I can
stop the Sun in his Course, because Joshua did so.


E. D. I never intended by producing the Example of the Apostles, to prove our
Ministers equal to them, as to their extraordinary gifts and graces; neither do
I suppose, will you dare to compare the Coiners of your Liturgy or
Common Prayer, with those holy Men, the Apostles of our Lord and Savior?


F. P. I never did; I only said, that the Compilers of our Liturgy, were some
of the most Pious and Learned men that ever England did afford.


E. D. They were no better than bigoted Papists.


F. P. How can that be, when it is known that they suffered Perscution, nay,
Martyrdom it self, in the defense of the Protestant Religion, and sealed and
ratified the Commonprayer, they had composed, with their Blood?


E. D. But, pray Sir, who gave them the power to compose the Common Prayer Book?


F. P. They had their Power and Authority from God and the King.


E. D. I shall be glad to hear you prove it.


F. P. That I will Sir, for it is no such difficult matter as you may suppose.
I say therefore, first, that they had their power from God; for they being
Bishops and Governors of the Church, had an unquestionable Power and
Commission, by virtue of their Charge and Office, to redress and reform
whatsoever was amiss in the Divine Service; and forasmuch as in some foregoing
Ages the Prayers of the Church had been corrupted and adulterated, by inserting
doubtful Stories and Legends, with a superfluous multiplicity of Responsals,
Prayers to the Blessed Virgin and other Saints, Prayers for the Dead, vain
Repetitions, Commemorations and Synodals, etc. they very wisely and prudently
cast away all that was Popish and Superslitious, retaining only what was
sound, ancient and edifying, and added some Prayers that were truly Apostolical
and Primitive. And besides, they had a special Order and Command from King
Edward. VI. authorizing them so to


E. D. I find all your Discourse comes to this, that the Compilers of your
Common Prayer Book, only chopped and changed the Romish Liturgy, and out of it,
with some Additions of their own, patched up the Liturgy which is now used by
the Church of England, and which you do so much admire. Now you know the Popish
Liturgy is no other than their Mass Book, which I think might, to much better
purpose, have been quite laid aside, than reformed and patched up again.


F. P. I am not of your opinion, and the Reasons that hinder me are these:
First, Those Holy Men we are speaking of, had no Power or Authority committed
to them to plant or institute a new Religion, but only to reform the Abuses
that were crept into the Church, and the Corruptions of the public Worship of
God, which is the chiefest part of the Christian Religion: now in this case it
is evident, that it was none of their duty or office to take away the whole
public Service or Liturgy, which indeed at that time was very corrupt, though
not to that degree, but that some good was still found amongst it, but only to
change what was amiss, to supply the defects of it, and cast away whatsoever
was corrupt or superfluous. Secondly, It was great wisdom in them to observe
the mean between two extremes, by shunning on the one hand a Spirit of
bitterness and hatred against the Party they reformed from; and on the other
hand avoiding a sinful compliance with the corruptions of those, who were so
unwilling to part with their Idolatry and Superstition. And farther to
illustrate my Argument, I must tell you, that the Reformers of our Church acted
according to this commendable Maxim of Christian Charity and Moderation, viz.
That in love and condescension to the Church of Rome, we ought not to reject
any thing used by them, but what is found contrary to the Word of God: whereas
the Reformers of your Party proceed according to this Rule, That in hatred and
detestation of Popery, we ought not to admit the least thing the Papists make
use of in their Divine Service; and only for this reason, because they use it.
Now I would fain know of you, which of these two you take to be the most
Christian and Charitable method? and whether the Principle our Reformers went
by, be not preferable to that of your Party? The Reason is evident beyond
dispute; because our Reformers, by retaining what was good and of primitive
Purity in the public Service of the Romanists, and rejecting only what was
manifestly corrupt and superstitious, they left a door open for them, and, as
it were, friendly invited them, to leave their Adulterous Church, and to enter
into our Communion.


E. D. But pray tell me what great or good effect this Condescension did ever
yet produce; for I never understood that this their moderate and designing way
of Reforming the Church, has been a means to persuade the Papists to leave
their Idolatry and Superstitions, and to become Converts to their Church.


F. P. If I should grant you that the number of Popish Converts to our Church,
is not very considerable; will it follow from thence, that the means used for
so good and charitable an End, were undue or unlawful? For though God hitherto
has not been pleased to bless these good means, with the greatest success that
might be wished for, yet we know not how soon he may; especially, considering
that we had never more reason to expect, the total downfall of Popery; which,
according to outward appearance, can no way so probably be brought about, as by
the Papists embracing the Protestant Religion. Let us therefore take heed of
deriding (as you seem to do) those lawful, moderate, and Christian-like
methods, the Church of England has made use to facilitate the Papists
Conversion.


E. D. I find then, you take your Common Prayer to be a lawful, moderate, and
Christian-like method or means to facilitate the Conversion of the Papists.


F. P. I do so; and I question not but, in due time, it will prove very
effectual that way to the stopping of the mouths of all gainsayers.


E. D. Ay, you may look for it long enough, I suppose; and if by great change
it should ever prove to be an effectual means, I dare say, for all that, it
will never be a lawful one; for, to speak freely, and without mincing the
matter, I am of opinion, that, though it may be lawful to use some Form of
Prayer, yet it is altogether unlawful to use that Form, which is now in vogue
amongst you.


F. P. Then I find you are not altogether irreconcilable to the Lawfulness of
Praying by Forms; but you are not satisfied with the Forms we use. I shall be
glad to hear the Grounds of your dissatisfaction; as hoping by this means to
have an opportunity offered me, to enlarge my self more in the Praise of our
Common Prayer, than hitherto I have had occasion to do.


E. D. I know the humor of Frenchmen is to be complaisant and complimental;
and so very probably you design, in compliment to the Church of England, to
fall down to the Common Prayer, the great Idol of the English Clergy; as you
have already expressed your great Respects for their dull and profane Priests.


F. P. I beg of you, Sir, let us discourse without Prejudice or Passion; and be
so kind as to tell me calmly and friendly, what Objections you have against our
Common Prayer Book in particular.


E. D. Before I give you the Particular Objections I have against the
Common Prayer Book, I shall premise this General Observation, That your
Common Prayer is so bad, that there is nothing good in it; no, nor any thing
that is so much as tolerable.


F. P. How strangely you and I differ in Opinion? As for my part; I really
think there is nothing in it, but what is very good.


E. D. If you can prove that, as I desire you would, Eris mihi magnus Apollo;
for indeed you will do more than all your Clergymen that ever I discoursed
with, and more than all the Books that treat of this Subject, have been able to
do.


F. P. If the case be so indeed, I should be loath to undertake the task: For
if none of our Clergy, that you have discoursed with, nor any of those
excellent Books, written in the Defense of our Liturgy, have been able to
convince you of the goodness and usefulness thereof, it would be folly for me
to attempt it; for I am very sensible, that my Parts and Abilities, are far
below any one of our Clergy, that you have had to deal with; and to speak the
truth, it is from them and their Writings I have acquired the best part of that
little learning, and insight into these things, that I have.


E. D. I hope you are as modest a Man as your discourse would import; besides,
being a French Protestant, you, as such, can have neither public nor private
Reason, to bear any ill will to our Party; wherefore I look upon you as an
unbiased Person, without Prejudice or Partiality, and consequently fit to be
discoursed with, about the matter in question, between us: And indeed all this
makes me the more desirous to hear the Arguments you can produce for proving
your Assertion, That there is nothing in the Common Prayer Book, but what is
very good.


F. P. I thought all this while that you intended to propound your Objections
against the Common Prayer; and that my only business would have been to Answer
them.


E. D. I suppose we may do both these things at once; for if you please to tell
me what you find so extraordinary good in the Common Prayer, I shall also, on
my part, declare what I dislike in it.


F. P. Be it so. And to the end we may proceed with some order, let us
cursorily read over the Common Prayer Book, which I have here with me.


E. D. This indeed will be a good way to enable us to judge the better
concerning it; and therefore I am very free to run it over with you; only must
desire you, not to take it ill, if now and then I interrupt you with my
Objections against any part of it.


F. P. What you desire, is contained in our agreement for according to it; I am
to tell you, what I approve of in our Liturgy; and you are to tell me, what you
dislike in it, by propounding your Objections against it.


E. D. Very well; and in so doing we shall finely Anatomize these Relics of
Popery. But it is your turn to begin.


F. P. The first thing I meet with in our Common Prayer Book, are some
Sentences of the Holy Scriptures, of which the Minister is to read one or
more, before he proceeds to the Prayers or Devotions, which seems to me to be
very proper and useful; for certainly we can never better begin God's Service,
than with his own Words.

Next follows an Exhortation, wherein is represented to the People, the End of
their present assembling or meeting together; which is, as the Exhortation
expresses it, To confess their Sins, to render Thanks to God, to set forth his
Praise, and to ask those things that be necessary either for Soul or Body: and
toward the end thereof, we are informed and directed how to perform these holy
and bounden Duties, viz. sincerely and reverently, with a pure heart, and
humble voice: which caution is very necessary, if we consider how prone Men
are, without any due preparation of themselves, to rush into the presence of
the great God, who is a consuming fire, and before whom they ought to appear
with the most reverential awe and trembling; as likewise how apt we are to
utter any thing before him, without considering, that he is in Heaven, and we
on Earth; and how negligent we generally are, in disposing and qualifying our
selves, for the acceptable performance of the Sacred Duties of our Religious
Worship.


E. D. So far all is pretty tolerable; but by and by, we shall meet with a
great deal of stuff.


F. P. Not to insist now upon your plain contradicting of your self; for
whereas but just now, you positively asserted, that there was nothing, so much
as tolerable in our Liturgy, you now plainly confess the contrary; I shall
only desire you, when we come to those places, where your great deal of stuff
lies, that you would stop me, for I shall be glad to hear the Objections you
have against any part of it; and in the mean time I proceed to speak of the
Confession, which is the next thing that occurs in our Liturgy. The Minister
and People having been thus stirred up by the foregoing Exhortation to compose
their Thoughts, and prepare their Hearts for a due offering up of their Morning
or Evening Sacrifice; the next thing they do, is, to fall down on their knees,
confessing in a solemn and humble manner their Sins unto Almighty God,
earnestly imploring his Grace and Mercy for the Pardon of them. And this,
according to my apprehension, is very proper and necessary in our approaches to
God; for since it is our Sins that separate between God and us, and hide his
face from us; we can do no better than, in the first place, to beg of our most
merciful Father the Remission of them, that he may utterly efface them, and
put them out of the way of interrupting the free course of his gracious and
benign Communications and Influences. If I regard, says the Psalmist, iniquity
in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer, Psalm. 66. v. 16. Moreover, it is
very reasonable, before we beg any favor from God, to entreat for a removal of
those Evils we groan under, viz. the guilt and punishment of our Sins.


E. D. I suppose you did not observe this method in the Common Prayer the
Protestants use in France.


F. P. Yes, but we did. Our Ministers always begin Divine Service with a
Sentence of the Holy Scriptures; and I shall not scruple to tell you, that it
is expressly the same with which the Roman Office of the Mass begins, (and
yet we have had the good luck, never to be censured as Popishly affected upon
this account;) and in the next place, they proceed to exhort and invite the
People to accompany them to the Throne of the heavenly Grace, repeating after
them a Confession of Sins, in substance much the same with that in the English
Liturgy.


E. D. But your Ministers did not read these Prayers out of a Book, as the
scandalous and lazy Clergy here in England do.


F. P. I find you make it your business to affront our Clergy at every turn,
and suppose the most abusive and scurrilous Language to be good enough for
them; yet question much, whether you would take it well to be paid in the same
coin; however, I cannot but tell you my thoughts, which incline me to believe
you have learned these ill manners from your own Minister.


E. D. What, I hope you will not accuse our Minister of being unmannerly? For I
dare say he is as courteous and civil, as affable and obliging, and, in a word,
as much a Gentleman as any Man I know of.


F. P. He showed himself to be so indeed, when the other day being in his
Pulpit, thought fit to interrupt the series of his discourse to give the lie,
to a person entering into the Meeting, who, it seems, had reported something, as
he conceived, to his disadvantage.


E. D. Ay, this is a fine story, forged at pleasure by some of your Clergymen,
to expose and make our Ministers odious.


F. P. It Is so far from being a story, that I am ready to justify the truth of
it, by many credible Earwitnesses. But to return to the matter in hand; though
first I must tell you in answer to your question, that our French Ministers
always use their Books in repeating of their Common Prayer, reading it word by
word, and yet have been so happy, as to escape the Censure of being either
scandalous or lazy upon that account.


E. D. I only ask you this question by the bye. But let us see what follows.


F. P. After the Confession, which is the last thing we have spoke of, follows
the Absolution, wherein the Minister declares and pronounces to all those that
truly repent and unfeignedly believe the holy Gospel, the Absolution of their
sins; and no doubt, supposing our Confession to have been sincere and hearty,
the Minister has good reason to declare our Sins are absolved, upon these two
Evangelical conditions of Faith and Repentance. But to the end no scruple may
be left in this matter, be pleased to observe, that the Minister does not here
Absolve in his own name, but publishes a Pardon in Nomine Domini, in the Name
and Authority of the Lord God. He does not say I, but He pardons, etc.


E. D. This Form of Absolution, as being only declaratory, may pass well
enough: for, as I understand it now, the Minister only declares that Pardon
may be had, and on what terms. All this may be born with, and therefore you may
go on.


F. P. The Lord's-prayer follows next; and that, if I be not greatly mistaken,
very properly: First, because having hitherto prepared our selves by Confession
and Absolution, we may now more freely take the boldness to call God our
Father, and address our selves to him in that perfect Form of Prayer which his
Beloved Son has taught us. Secondly, the Lord's-prayer being the groundwork
and foundation, on which all our Prayers and Petitions should be built, we can
never do better, than to begin our Prayers with this, which was composed by the
only begotten Son of God, and indicted by Wisdom it self, to be a pattern and
model to all our Devotions.


E. D. But you cannot say that you make use of the Lord's-prayer in the first
place, and before your other Petitions, since you have already used several
before it.


F. P. Whatsoever has been hitherto performed either by Minister or People, is
rather a Preparation for Prayer, than Prayer it self: for if you --


E. D. You need say no more; for indeed it is no great matter whether you use
it first or last: the Question only is, whether it ought to be used at all? I
own it to be a matter of great moment, which therefore ought not to be rashly
determined; though, for my part, I am more inclinable to take it as a directory
for the matter of our Prayer, than for a Form; and the rather, because one of
the Evangelists seems to intimate as much, by ushering in the Lord's-prayer
with these words of our Savior, After this manner, therefore pray ye, Luke 6.
v. 9.


F. P. I fear your Minister is not so cautious as you are in this matter; for
in some of his Sermons he has, if not rashly, at least very positively
asserted, that the Lord's-prayer is not to be used as a Form of Prayer, but
only as a Direction; and consequently takes great care not to make use of it
in his Meeting; though, as I have been informed from very credible hands, he
uses it in his Family-prayers; but how to reconcile P with B in this case; P,
when he is in his Meeting, and B when he is at home, I leave to your
consideration; I only wish there be not some worldly interest at the bottom
that sways him. And as for what you allege, that one of the Evangelists says,
after this manner, etc. I answer, that these words do not forbid or oppose the
using of it as a Form, or the repeating of it in the self-same words; for he
that repeats the same words, says after this manner, though every one that
says after this manner, do not always repeat the same words. So that he who
says the very words themselves, has two Evangelists to warrant and justify
him; whereas he that does not, has but one. I shall only add, that the
Lord's-prayer, is used by the Church of Christ all the World over; and it
cannot but be very comfortable and beneficial to us to bear a part in this
great and Universal Consort.


E. D. But suppose I should grant you, that the Lord's-prayer may be used in
the Morning; yet you cannot but allow me, that it ought not to be used at
Night, because it is ridiculous to beg our daily Bread of God, when we have
eaten our Supper, and are ready to go to bed.


F. P. Though this Objection be too light and frothy, and not at all comporting
with the Sacredness of the things we are treating of; yet shall not this hinder
me from answering it seriously; and the rather, because I am pretty well
assured you have borrowed it from one of your Neighboring Ministers, who not
long since Preaching in this Town, produced it as a most convincing and
unanswerable Argument, to prove, that the Lords-prayer was not to be used as a
Form: but certainly this Gentleman showed hereby, that he was no great
Textuary, since any Woman, except perhaps his own Mother, (who, I am told, has
been the only Tutor he ever had) could have taught him, that by Bread in this
place, as in many other Texts of Scripture, we are not only to understand Meat
and Drink, but also Repose and Sleep, Clothes and Shelter, Health and Wealth,
and, in a word, whatsoever is necessary to support and supply our frail
natures. To this I might add, that the word we render Daily, according to its
most proper and exact signification, does not denote the present time, but that
to come; so that when we pray, Give us this day our daily bread, it is as much as
if we should say, Vouchsafe us all those things that are necessary and
sufficient for the support of the remaining part of our lives: and this we pray
that we may receive this day, that is, as St. Luke interprets it, Day by day.
Lastly, I might also here take notice, that by Bread, we are not only to
understand our Bodily sustenance, but also the food of our Souls.


E. D. These Observations of yours I must confess are new things to me, and
more than ever I heard before. But I desire you to proceed.


F. P. After the Lord's Prayer follow some short and proper Ejaculations, for
the Divine Assistance in the work we are about; and in which the People bear a
part, the Minister praying in the words of holy David, O Lord, open thou our
lips; and the People answering, And our mouth shall show forth thy praise. The
Minister again, O Lord, make speed to save us; and the People, O Lord, make
haste to help us. Neither can you, I suppose, find fault with this Order of the
Church, in assigning this place to these holy Breathings, or ejaculatory
Desires, viz. before the Psalms, Lessons and Collects, and immediately after
the Confession and Absolution; thereby intimating that our Sins have shut our
Mouths and closed our Lips; putting us into an utter incapacity of praising his
most holy Name, and expressing our bounden thankfulness, till he himself be
pleased to open our Mouths and Lips to utter his glory. Again, when we cast an
eye upon the Sacredness of those Duties we are about, and the great opposition
we may expect from the Devil and our evil Hearts, in the performance of them,
we have all the reason in the World to cry mightily to God, to make haste to
save us and deliver us; to the end that by his Divine assistance we may be
enabled worthily to celebrate his praise, and acceptably perform the great Work
we are engaged in.


E. D. These short Sentences you so much commend, forasmuch as they are all
taken out of Scripture, are well enough in themselves: but I can no ways
approve this chopping and mincing of Prayers between the Minister and the
People, for this makes them to be liker Charms than Christian Prayers.


F. P. Well, you are a wonderful Christian, if I may judge of you by your
Charitable and Evangelical expressions: for, if from the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks, I find you have as good an opinion of our Church as your
Minister has.


E. D. Pray, what is that you have to say against our Minister?


F. P. Nothing at all, for indeed I am ashamed for his sake to mention it.


E. D. Speak out man, I know what you would be at; is it not this, that our
Minister has said the same, viz. that your Prayers are liker Charms than
Christian prayers?


F. P. I will not be positive that he used the self-same expressions: but this
I dare affirm, that he used some as bad, if not worse, and which have a great
affinity with these words of yours.


E. D. Pray, Sir, tell me plainly, what it was he said?


F. P. Since you will needs have it, I shall tell you, that he was so kind and
charitable as to imply in one of his Sermons, that our Cathedral was the
Devil's Chapel. These are his words, God has no Church, but the Devil has a
Chapel; I had almost said, a Cathedral. A sublime and worthy Sentence, full of
Christian Love and Charity, and well becoming such a Minister of the Gospel.
And if we join your Aphorism to his, we may challenge the World to show us any
thing like it; for so it will make out this favorable Judgment of our Church,
God has no Church, but the Devil has a Chapel; I had almost said, a Cathedral;
and the Prayers that are used there, are liker Charms, than Christian prayers.


E. D. I don't matter what you say or judge of me, but your having such
frequent flings at our Minister gives me great reason to suspect, you have a
grudge or secret hatred against him.


F. P. I can assure you it is far from that; for I am so free from bearing any
ill will toward him, that I can safely desire all the harm I wish him may fall
upon my self: and I sincerely protest, that the only motive which makes me
reflect upon some of his abusive expressions is, the love I have for that
Church which he is so eagerly bent to expose and vilify; and indeed who could
see his Mother so grossly abused, without being moved at it.


E. D. Seeing you are so nice and squeamish, I shall henceforth avoid any
expressions that may offend or give you an occasion to reflect upon our
Minister or my self.


F. P. I could wish it were in your power to use that moderation, though in
doing it, you would do no more than what I have already several times begged
of you; and had you but complied with my reiterated desires, you would have
spared me the trouble of representing to you the Sarcastical Language your
Minister has very often and very unreasonably made use of against us.


E. D. In kindness to you I shall propound my Objection in other terms. I say
therefore, that I cannot approve, that the People should answer the Minister,
and by turns repeat some part of the public Prayers; for though I know it was
allowed amongst the Jews to sing by turns, answering one another, yet I cannot
find that the same order was ever approved of among Christians.


F. P. After thanks returned for your kindness to me, I must tell you that your
Objection is so far from making for you, that it makes against you. For as I
perceive, you are not well acquainted with the order the Jews observed in their
public Worship, because if so, you would never have produced this Argument to
condemn the practice of our Church. True it is, that it was the custom of the
Jews to sing by turns, and answer one another; but you never observed that this
was a privilege granted to the Priests and Levites only: now this Argument of
yours plainly justifies the order of our Church; for if the Priests and Levites
under the Old Law had the Prerogative of bearing a part in offering up the
public Prayers and Praises, none can deny, but that Christians, both Ministers
and People, have the same, if not a greater, privilege; forasmuch as every true
Christian is a Priest, and that of a higher order than those under the Old Law;
for if we will believe St. Peter, 1 Ep. chap. 2. verse. 9. We are a chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood: and John, Revel. 1.6. declares that, Jesus
Christ has made us Kings and Priests unto God.


E. D. I perceive then you take it to be a great honor or privilege for
Christians to have leave to answer their Ministers, and to have a share with
them in repeating the public Prayers.


F. P. I do so; and have great reason for it too.


E. D. I know well that you Churchmen, both Ministers and People, are very
ambitious of honor; but this is not the thing we must look for, especially in
our Prayers, but rather edification and benefit; now what benefit can you
propound to your self from this answering of your Minister, and pronouncing
some part of the public Prayers?


F. P. The benefit which thereby accrews to us is very considerable; for by
this means we do not only express our full consent to all the Minister's
Prayers, without which we cannot reasonably expect any advantage from them: but
besides, by this method of our Church we captivate the Peoples attention,
restrain their vain and rambling thoughts, and oblige them to be attentive to
what the Minister says, that they may be ready to return the proper
Responsals. Whereas when the People bear no share in the Divine Service, and
have no part to act in it, they are more at leisure to entertain vain and
frivolous fancies, and too too often profane and lascivious thoughts come in
flocks to devour their Sacrifice: and to tell you my mind plainly, I take it,
that the neglect of these Responsals, is the true cause of so much
inadvertency, lazy postures and drowziness, as now commonly discover themselves
in those who frequent the House of God, and appear in his presence, whom the
holy Angels adore with veiled faces; which as it is a dishonor to God and a
discouragement to the Minister, so it is of great prejudice to their own Souls.
Now to put the question to your self, you cannot deny me, but that way of
Praying which most engages our attention, is the best, and therefore ought to
be preferred before any other; and it is evident beyond dispute, that that way
of Praying, where the People bear a part and answer in their course, is the
most proper to make them attentive and heedfull to the Work they are about; and
therefore I leave you to judge, how commendable the Practice of our Church is,
in this regard.


E. D. We shall by and by have a further opportunity of speaking to this
particular; wherefore you may now proceed if you please.


F. P. After the short Prayers and Responsals now mentioned, follows the
Doxology; Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc. which is both a sound
Form of praising and glorifying the eternal and tri-une God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; and a short Creed or Confession of our Faith, concerning the
Trinity in Unity. And if you demand of me, why it is placed here in the close
of the Penitential part of our Prayers? I answer, Because having before
confessed our Sins, and humbly entreated mercy and remission for them; and
being now in full hope that our merciful Father has graciously heard and
granted our requests, we immediately change our Prayers into Praises, and our
Supplications into Thanksgivings, and with transports of Joy and Gratitude we
sound forth our Glory be to the Father, for it is he who pardons our Sins; and
to the Son, because it is for his sake they are pardoned; and to the Holy Ghost,
who alone assures us thereof. And the Minister afterward, as if this were not
enough, (because in the Gloria Patri we more particularly worship the Trinity
in Unity, and not the Unity in Trinity,) calls upon the People again to adore
the Unity, saying, Praise ye the Lord; to which the People answer, The Lord's
Name be praised; which words contain the Christian Hallelujahs or Songs of
praise and triumph, for the absolution and remission of their Sins: or else, if
you will, you may take them for a Preface or Entrance to the Reading of the
Psalms.


E. D. You may take them for what you please; as for my part, I don't concern
my self about them, and therefore you may go on.


F. P. In the Morning Service the Psalms are ushered in with the Venite, O come
let us sing unto the Lord, etc. as being an Exhortatory Psalm, whereby we
continue mutually to invite and encourage each other worthily to adore and
worship the Eternal God. And that this Psalm is very well placed here, appears,
first, Because by it we are informed what we are to do; and, secondly, how we
ought to behave our selves in the performance of the succeeding Offices or
Duties. The former of these, viz. what we are to do, we have in these words;
Sing unto the Lord; Come before his presence; Serve and worship him; and,
lastly, Hear his Voice, or, his most Holy Word. The latter, How we are to
perform these Duties, is thus expressed, We are to sing unto the Lord, heartily
rejoicing in the strength of our salvation; to come before his presence with
thanksgiving, with a grateful sense and humble acknowledgment of all his
Benefits; serve and worship him with all becoming Reverence and Veneration;
falling down on our faces, and kneeling before the Lord our Maker; not hardening
our hearts when we hear his voice, but receiving it with Faith and Obedience.
And thus we proceed to the Psalms appointed for the day, the Church having
ordered them to be read over once every Month.


E. D. Pray tell me the reason why they are appointed to be read oftener than
any other part of Holy Scripture?


F. P. Because they are most accommodated for Prayer and Devotion, and
consequently of a more continual use than any other part of God's Word. The
ignorant will find here profitable instruction and information; the wicked
earnest exhortations and severe warnings; the poor and afflicted will meet with
suitable Prayers and Petitions to beg the good things they want, as well as to
deprecate the evils they groan under; and the rich and prosperous will be
furnished with Thanksgivings and joyful Songs of Praise. Indeed the whole
contexture of them shows them to be fitted and suited to all persons in all
circumstances, whether young or old, Kings or Subjects Nobles or Commons, in
prosperity or adversity, in a wealthy and comfortable, or in a pinching and
afflicted condition; and they are propo^tioned with that exactness to these
several circumstances, as if they ha^ been made on purpose to express an^
represent every one's particular sta^^ and condition.


E. D. I must own there is somewhat of truth in what you have said concerning
the Psalms; but one thing I find that spoils all, which is your silly way of
reading them by turns, the Minister reading one Verse, and the People answering
another; which certainly is a confused, if not a scandalous way of praising God.


F. P. What you are pleased to call confused and scandalous, is in my opinion
very edifying and heavenly; and my opinion is grounded upon Reason; for this
way of reading or singing Psalms by turns, as has been partly already hinted,
is extremely well suited to excite each others Affections, and to increase our
Emulation, making us, as it were, to strive to outvie each other in Zeal and
Devotion, and to contend who shall worship and praise God with most earnestness
and fervency. Now this holy Emulation cannot but be very profitable and
edifying; yea, and Heavenly too, because it comes nearest to the Pattern of
Heavenly and Angelical Adoration; for thus we read that the Seraphims cry to
each other by turns, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, etc. Isai. 6.3.


E. D. Well, but I have another Objection against your way of reading the
Psalms; and that is, that at the end of every one of them you repeat the Gloria
Patri, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc. which certainly is a very
vain repetition.


F. P. I am not of your opinion; for if you observe this Doxology is not
applied twice to the same subject; for though we repeat it constantly at the
closing of every Psalm, yet, because they most commonly differ and vary in
their subjects, for you will hardly find two Psalms together of the same
Argument; some being Psalms of Doctrine and Instruction, some of Confession of
Sins, some of Profession of Faith, some of Supplication and Prayer, some of
Praises and Thanksgiving. And forasmuch as every one of these Arguments contain
sufficient and powerful motives to stir up our Hearts and Affections to bless
and glorify God, therefore the closing of every Psalm with this Doxology,
Glory be to the Father, etc. cannot be judged vain and improper, but rather
very proper and edifying.

After the reading or singing of the Psalms, we proceed to read the Lessons,
the one out of the Old Testament, and the other out of the New; which order
affords this great convenience, amongst several others, that by this means the
Old Testament is read over once, and the New Testament thrice, every Year.


E. D. This is a great mistake of yours, whether wilful or no, I shall not
enquire, for the Book of Chronicles is never read, as well as many particular
Chapters of some other Books.


F. P. I confess the Books of Chronicles are not read, but the reason of it is
plain and evident, because for the most part they are but a repetition of the
Books of Kings, which are read in their course: and if any Chapters of other
Books be omitted, it is either because they contain little else but a repetition
of what is gone before, or because they treat of the Genealogies, Ceremonies
and Laws of the Jews, which chiefly concerned them, as being now antiquated and
of little use under the Gospel.


E. D. Pray why do you read the Apocryphal Books then, which certainly are of
as little use and concern as those Books and Chapters you omit in the course of
your Lessons?


F. P. I don't think so, for though they be not Canonical, they are such as may
be read with Profit and Edification, in that they contain many true and pious
Histories or Relations of the Lives and Actions of several great and excellent
Persons, whose worthy and glorious Examples are very proper to affect our
Hearts, and raise up in us an ardent Desire and holy Emulation to imitate their
transcendent Virtues, to express their untainted Innocence, and copy their
unshaken Constancy, Courage and Magnanimity. Moreover we find there most
exquisite Precepts of Morality, directing and informing of us in the Practice
of all virtuous Actions, teaching us how to order our Lives, Manners and
Conversation, and recommending to us the loveliness and excellence of Virtue,
as well as representing the deformity and misery of Vice and Wickedness.


E. D. But, if I be not mistaken, you do not read the first and second Lesson
immediately one after another.


F. P. True, for after the first Morning Lesson we say or sing the Te Deum, We
praise thee, O God, etc. or the Benedicite; O all ye works of the Lord, Bless
ye the Lord, etc. both of which are the most excellent and heavenly Hymns that
ever were framed by Men; each of them being a most complete Form of
Thanksgiving, Praise and Adoration. After the second Morning Lesson we repeat
the Song of Zacharias, or else the 100 Psalm, both of which are not only
Divine and unquestionable, but also extremely proper to inflame our Hearts with
Love and Gratitude to God, for all his unutterable Goodness bestowed upon us.
In the Evening Service, after the first Lesson, the Church appoints the Song of
the Blessed Virgin, or the 98 Psalm; and after the second Lesson the 67 Psalm,
or the Song of old Simeon; all which for the Reasons just now mentioned, cannot
but be acceptable to God, and edifying to those that attend his Worship.


E. D. But what probable reason can you give for inserting and intermixing
these Songs of Praise with your Lessons?


F. P. The Church has appointed the Repetition of these Sacred and Seraphick
Hymns, to be used as a solemn Form of Thanksgiving, for those unspeakable
Mercies, and heavenly Blessings and good things, revealed and promised to us in
his Word, newly read to us; and it is but sitting and seemly, that after we
have heard God graciously speaking to us, we should in gratitude echo forth
our Praises and Thanks to him; and this we do in the Hymns now mentioned.


E. D. Some of these Hymns, I think, might be allowed; but there be two thrust
in amongst them, which seem to me very improper; and that is the Song of the
Virgin Mary, for bearing Christ in her Womb; and that of Old Simeon, for seeing
Jesus Christ in the Flesh, and holding him in his Arms: Now since these are
extraordinary Cases, which reach none of us; therefore I conclude the use of
them somewhat strange and extravagant.


F. P. To begin with your first Objection: I readily own that we have not the
same occasion to use this Hymn, as the Blessed Virgin had; for God the Word his
taking Flesh in her Womb, was a privilege peculiar to her alone: Yet pray
consider, that when we in all humility, with Obedience and Faith, receive the
Word of God read to us; or as St. Luke phraseth it, Chap. 11.28. When we hear
the Word of God, and keep it, we do conceive Christ by Faith; for according to
St. Paul's doctrine, Gal. 4.19. it is by hearing and keeping the Word of God
that Christ is formed in us; not Carnally, but Spiritually: Wherefore we are as
much obliged, after a due hearing of God's Word, to break forth into a holy
Magnificat, My Soul does magnify the Lord, because Christ is formed in us
spiritually, as the Blessed Virgin was, because Christ was formed in her
according to the Flesh.

And as to your second Objection, I might tell you, that this Hymn of Old
Simeon is frequently used in our French Protestant Churches, as being commonly
sung every Lord'sday: but if this Authority do not satisfy you, I shall give
you a reason why the Church of England, after the reading of the second Lesson
at Evening-prayer, orders the rehearsing the Song of this Blessed Man; for
though indeed in the reading of the New Testament we do not behold Christ with
our bodily Eyes, as Simeon did, yet may we with the spiritual Eyes of our Faith
see that Salvation he then saw; and that more clearly, because it is now more
fully manifested: and therefore upon this account we have the same reason to
say with him; Lord, now let thou thy servant to depart in peace, for mine
Eyes have seen thy Salvation, etc.


E. D. I perceive you have a peculiar way of applying the Scriptures to your
selves: But let us examine what is next.


F. P. The next thing that follows is, the Confession of our Faith, commonly
called the Apostle's Creed.


E. D. But, I suppose, you do not believe the Apostles made it?


F. P. Though strong and convincing Arguments might be alleged to prove them
the Inditers or Composers of it; yet I am resolved, at present, not to differ
with you about it; and the rather, because I am sure you will agree with me;
that as long as it comprehends nothing but what the Apostles have taught us to
believe, and believed themselves, it may very well, of just right, be called
the Apostle's Creed.


E. D. But what particular reason has your Church to place it after the
Lessons?


F. P. Because having heard some Chapters out of the Word of God read to us; it
is but fit that we now make a public profession of our Belief of the main and
fundamental Truths therein contained; which cannot be better done, than by
repeating the Articles of the Apostle's Creed; which is not only a Compendium
of the Gospel, but of all Holy Writ.


E. D. But why is it you repeat it so often, twice a day at least, Morning and
Evening?


F. P. Truly it can never be repeated too often; and I am sure our French
Protestants thought so, whose Example, if it should not convince you, I hope
the following Reasons may; because it serves to express our Loyalty to God, and
our Unity among our selves, and with the Catholic Church; it is a Touchstone
to discover, whether we continue in the number of Christ's Disciples, and in
Unity and Concord with one another; it is our Watchword, our Badge, Mark and
Character, whereby we may distinguish Friends from Foes, true Believers from
Infidels and Heretics; and therefore, as was said before, it cannot be too
often repeated. But before we proceed further, we may here take notice, that
upon certain Festival-days the Athanasian Creed is read, instead of that of the
Apostle's.


E. D. Is there any thing more in the Athanasian Creed, than in that of the
Apostle's?


F. P. Only this, that in the Athanasian Creed, the Mysteries of the most
Blessed Trinity, and of the Incarnation of the Son of God, are more at large
asserted, explained and unfolded, and that in the most sound, plain and
perspicuous terms, those sublime and incomprehensible Mysteries are capable of.
After which, we proceed to this devout, hearty and mutual Salutation of the
Minister and the People; the Minister saying, The Lord be with you; and the
People answering, And with thy Spirit.


E. D. For my part, I cannot approve of the Minister and People thus saluting
one another, because it looks too much like Compliment; which though perhaps it
may agree very well with your French humor, yet is not at all agreeable to
mine.


F. P. If you will quarrel at this, you must quarrel with the Word of God, and
with the language of the Holy Ghost in Scripture; for most certain it is, that
this Salutation is taken thence, viz. what the Minister says out of the Book
of Ruth 2.4. and used by St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. and what the People answer
out of the Epistle to the Galat. 6.18. Which words, whether considered in
themselves, or with respect to the end they are designed for, are of exceeding
great and good use; for now we are entering upon a new part of Divine Service,
viz. that of Prayer; but seeing that without God's aid and assistance it is
impossible, either for Minister or People to acquit themselves rightly of this
duty, which is of so great concern to the whole Congregation, Minister as well
as People; wherefore they begin by praying each for other, humbly supplicating
God to assist them in their present undertaking: the Minister beginning with
this short Prayer for the People, The Lord be with you; lifting up your Hearts,
and raising your Devotions, that my Prayers may not be in vain for you; and the
People, in acknowledgment of the Minister's hearty good will, and as being
themselves extremely concerned in the work he is about, answer his Prayer, with
this good wish, And with thy Spirit; to the end your Prayers may be so fervent,
that you and we may reap the fruit and benefit of those Petitions you are now
going to offer up to God for the whole Congregation. And having thus, both
Minister and People, implored the Divine Presence and Assistance in the great
Work we are entering upon; we do next in a most humble and solemn manner address
our selves to each Person of the most Blessed Trinity to have Mercy upon us,
viz. that our Sins and Transgressions may not hinder our Prayers and Petitions
from being graciously received and accepted at the Throne of Grace; saying,
Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.
After which, we address our selves to God, in that excellent Form of Prayer our
Savior has taught us.


E. D. But methinks, forasmuch as you have used this Prayer already, that the
reiterating of it, must needs be accounted a vain repetition, condemned by our
Savior in Matthew. 6.6.


F. P. True it is, that our Church has appointed the Lord's-prayer to be used
more than once in our Liturgy, but that the reiterating of it, cannot come
under the lash of those vain repetitions, forbid by our Savior, will appear,
if you consider, that we repeat it only in each distinct Service of the
Church: before we made use of it as a Confirmation, and further assurance of
the Absolution of our Sins, and now we repeat it as the ground and foundation
of our following Petitions. Besides, the frequent repetition of it, ought not
to be called vain, since (as has been before observed) Christ himself prayed
thrice, using the same words; and certainly the best of Prayers cannot be used
too often.


E. D. But I dare say, if so be the Protestants in France made use of the
Lord's-prayer at all; yet they did not repeat it so often as you do.


F. P. I have taken notice before, that you are very ready to entertain false
Notions concerning our French Protestants, and the same befalls you in this
particular; for certain it is, that we always had so great a veneration for the
Lord's-prayer, that we believed all our Prayers, whether public or private,
were deficient and imperfect without it; and therefore we did always, both in
the Church, and at home, conclude all our Prayers with the Lord's-prayer,
adding most commonly the Apostle's Creed, and concluding all with the Solemn
Blessing.


E. D. But when your Minister used it in the Church, I suppos^ they did not
repeat it often, as yo^ do; but were content with saying of it once only.


F. P. You are still mistaken; for our Ministers do repeat it most commonly
thrice, and sometimes more before they come down from the Pulpit; and according
to the Discipline or Canons of our Church, they are bound so to do.


E. D. This, I confess, seems strang^ to me. But let us proceed to what follows
next, and that cursorily too for I begin to be ti^ed with speaking so long to
no purpose; for I fin^ you will have always somethin^ ready at hand to dash my
Objections.


F. P. That I may not tire you altogether, I shall dispatch what remains in as
few words as possible. The next part of the Liturgy that offers it self, are
some interlocutory Petitions, taken out of Holy Scripture: both Minister and
People in these short and devout Ejaculations, striving by turns, who shall
most move God favorably to incline and hearken to their Petitions; and after
these, the whole Congregation do in a humble posture, with united hearts and
voices, supplicate our heavenly Father for his grace and favor, for his help
and aid, for his safeguard and protection, for the acceptance of their
Prayers, and his Divine Blessing, not only for themselves, but also for the
King and Queen and Royal Family, for the Church, both Clergy and People, and
lastly, for all Mankind: and this, in few words, is the design and contents of
the following Collects* But I must not forget to observe to you, that upon
Wednesdays, Friday and Sundays, we read the Litany.


E. D. Pray what is the use o^ this Litany? or what is it good for?


F. P. I must not, it seems, for fe^ of trespassing upon your patience enlarge
my self too much, in representing to you the Excellency o^ this Prayer, and
therefore shall te^ you, as briefly as I can, the substance and import of it:
there is ^ Vice nor Lust, which therein, w^ do not pray to be delivered from
nor any Grace or Virtue, but w^ desire God to bestow it upon u^ and, in a word,
whatsoever is fit ^ be prayed for or deprecated in p^lick, is contained in this
Prayer. ^ter which follow some Prayers ^ Thanksgivings, to be used upon
particular occasions, being extremely well suited to those pious Ends they are
intended for; as for Rain, Fairweather, etc.


E. D. But I am sure there is more than this contained in your Common Prayer,
and therefore pray do not shut up your Book so soon.


F. P. There is something more behind, I confess; but because I am loath to
abuse your patience, I hope you will think this general account to be
sufficient. What remains unmentioned, are the Collects, Epistles and Gospels;
which you cannot but like, as to the matter, because they are the Word of God:
And as for their Order, it is admirable, as being so well suited to the
particular Days they are appointed for, that by means of them, the Mysteries
commemorated upon those days are unfolded, the History represented, or the
Example applied to the great benefit and edification of those that truly fear
God and desire to improve themselves it saving knowledge, and are willing to
imitate the holy Examples o^ those faithful Servants of God, wh^ are departed
this life in his Faith and Fear.


E. D. Is this all then?


F. P. No: for besides all this, ou^ Liturgy contains a Form for the
Administration of the Lord's Supper another for the Public Baptism o^ Infants;
another for such of ripe^ years; as likewise a short Catechism ^ the Order of
Confirmation; a For^ for the Solemnizing of Matrimony the Order for the
Visitation of the Sick, with the Form of Administrin^ to them the Holy
Communion; the Order for the Burial of the Dead, and the Thanksgiving of Women
after Childbirth; and, lastly, a Commination of God's Anger and Judgment
against Sinners.


E. D. Ay, here is a multiplicity of Forms indeed; but I am confident, if you
would speak sincerely and from your heart; you will grant me, that all these
Forms are very useless and unnecessary.


F. P. If I should grant you this, I must not only speak against my Judgment
and Conscience, but also condemn our French Reformed Churches; since it is most
certain, that they also have Forms appointed for most of the foresaid
occasions: For instance; we have set Forms for Celebrating of the Holy
Communion, for the Baptizing of Children, for the Solemnizing of Matrimony,
etc. And lastly, I should condemn and oppose the general sense of our French
Protestants, who have always had, and still have a great respect and veneration
not only for those Forms last mentioned, but for the whole Body of the English
Liturgy.


E. D. You are pleased to say so.


F. P. And you will be forced to say so too, if you please only to take the
trouble to read Dr. Durel's Treatise in Defense of the English Liturgy; for
there you will meet with unquestionable Records of the Opinion and Judgment of
all the ablest and most learned Divines amongst the French Protestants, who
have in all times, and upon all occasions, as far declared themselves for the
English Common Prayer, and spoke as highly and favorably of it, as any of the
Divines of the Church of England ever did.


E. D. I have not Dr. Durel's Book, and therefore cannot satisfy my self by
perusing of it; but if you will be pleased to inform me what he says
concerning the Judgment of your French Divines, with respect to our English
Liturgy, I shall be glad to hear it.


F. P. Dr. Durel, amongst other Testimonies, produces a Letter of the Reverend
Monsieur de l' Angle, at that time one of the Ministers of the Reformed Church
of Roan, a Person of great Worth and Fame; wherein, upon occasion of the happy
Restoration of King Charles II. he says, That his heart leaped for joy, when
he was told that the English Liturgy and ancient Discipline was like to be
restored. He alleges another Testimony of Monsieur Gache's, then Minister of
Charenton, one of the most eloquent and zealous Preachers the French Reformed
Churches ever had, who in one of his Letters declares, That he had read the
English Liturgy, and had been wonderfully edified by it. He produces also a
Letter of Monsieur du Bosc, the Minister of Cane, an extraordinary Person for
Learning, Eloquence and true Piety; where he declares, That he as much approves
of a Minister performing Divine Service, after the way of the Church of
England, as he that officiates according to the manner of the French Reformed
Churches. Besides these, he sets down the Testimony of Monsieur Bochart the
Minister of Alancon, a Man of great Repute and Learning, who declares he found
the Liturgy to be very good, and well ordered; as also that of Monsieur Goyon,
Minister of Bordeaux, one of the most grave and learned Divines of all the
Province of Aquitain, and greatly versed in Antiquity, in these words: There is
not one Minister (says he) in all the Province of Aquitain, that thinks his
Conscience offended by using of the English Liturgy; and declares that those
people dream and dote, who are of that Opinion; and those Gentlemen amongst you
do extremely wrong us, when they quote us for to foment their Schism, which
cannot but be very scandalous.

But that I may not be further tedious, I shall refer you to the foresaid Book
of Dr. Durel, where you will find enough to convince you, that all our worthy
Divines, such as Peter du Moulin, Monsieur Drelincourt, Monsieur Daille,
Monsieur Amyraut, etc. have expressed no less Esteem for the English Liturgy,
than any Son of the Church of England ever did. To all which Testimonies, I
will add that of Spanhemius a French Divine, and sometimes Preacher and
Divinity-Reader at Geneva, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Lord Primate of
Ireland, prefixed to the Third Part of his Dubia Evangelica; where commending
the Public Worship of God in the Church of England, he declares, that the like
is scarcely to be found elsewhere.


E. D. According to what you tell me, I cannot believe your French Divines to
be Calvinists; for I am confident Calvin was not of their opinion with regard
to the English Liturgy.


F. P. To the end you may be able to judge what Calvin's opinion was about this
matter, I shall refer you to a passage of his, in an Epistle Dedicatory to the
Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector during the minority of King Edward VI. which
will convince you, I suppose, that he was of the same judgment with the rest of
our French Divines; his words are these, Quoad formam Precum and Rituum
Ecclesiasticorum, valde probo, ut certa illa exstet, a qua Pastoribus discedere
in functione sua non liceat, tam ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati and
imperitiae, quam ut certius ita constet omnium inter se Ecclesiarum consensus;
postremo etiam ut obviam eatur desultoriae quorundam levitati, qui novationes
quasdam affectant. Which may be englished thus, As touching the form of Prayer
and Ceremonies of the Church, I do extremely approve, that it be set and fixed,
so as it may not be lawful for the Ministers to recede from it, in their
function; as well to help and assist the simplicity and unskilfulness of some,
as to give a fuller evidence of the consent and uniformity of all the several
Congregations; and finally, that by this means, the changeable humor of those
that affect novelties may be checked and obviated.


E. D. I always thought Calvin had been of the same judgment that we are,
though you would seem to persuade me to the contrary. But to make an end of our
Discourse at this time, I shall only ask you one question more, and then I
have done, which is this, What your French Divines judge concerning us, who for
Conscience sake refuse to make use of the Liturgy in our Assemblies, or to
frequent the Congregations of those that do?


F. P. What you desire you may find in the forementioned Discourse of Dr.
Durel, where he sets down this Letter of the Reverend Monsieur Goyon, Minister
at Bordeaux, which is thus translated:

SIR,
I Have received your Letter with an extreme satisfaction, as having been
informed thereby, both of your own condition, and of that of the Church of
England. I must confess that we have been strangely deceived in this Country,
by what has been related to us touching the English Presbyterians. I did
always imagine them to be a People that followed the same order we observe in
our Churches of France; but it seems they are very far from it. The Description
you give of them, shows them to be a strange Sect, not fit to be tolerated;
and, I conceive, that the best remedy of this disorder and confusion would be,
to reduce them all to the Episcopal Government, for I hold it impossible that
the Church of England should ever be quiet or flourish otherwise. The
Convocation comes in a very fit time for this purpose; and I question not but
that Assembly will take order about it, which will be a great satisfaction to
me; for otherwise you will be continually in trouble, and the Adversaries will
take advantage thereby either to blemish and slander our Religion, or to
contrive and foment Plots against the State. I beseech the Lord that he would
be pleased to rule and govern that Holy Assembly, and pour his Blessings upon
their Determinations for the Advancement of his Kingdom.



E. D. Though this Man says too much, yet he says nothing in particular to
the point of our refusing to read the Common Prayer in our Assemblies, and to
frequent the Churches where it is read.


F. P. If you think that Monsieur Goyon does not speak home enough to the
matter in question, be pleased to read what Ludovicus Capellus,
Divinity-Professor at Saumur, says to it, in the Body of Divinity published by
him and his two Colleagues, Moses Amyraldus and Joshua Placaeus; in which Book
this Learned Man, having at large proved the Lawfulness, Use and Necessity of a
set Form of Liturgy, in opposition to the then newly started Directory, which
the Presbyterians endeavored to establish instead of the Commonprayer. It is
also worthy our noting, that he maintained a public Dispute on this Subject in
the Divinity-School, wherein he defended the Common Prayer of the Church of
England, as good, sound and expedient, against the Cavils and Objections of the
Presbyterians, even at that very time when the Opposers of set Forms were in
the greatest power in this Kingdom, and that it was generally believed the
Liturgy of the Church of England would never have been restored.


E. D. But what says he in particular of us, for if you don't tell me, I shall
scarce take the pains of reading over his Book to inform my self?


F. P. I am unwilling to give you his words, because I fear you will find some of
his Expressions too sharp and cutting.


E. D. As long as I suppose he was no English Tory, I shall take all he says
of us in good part.


F. P. Toward the end of his first Thesis, he says, Vnum superest
examinandum, etc. which in English speaks thus: There remains yet one thing to
be inquired into, viz. Whether there ought to be a certain set Form of Liturgy,
consisting of express words; or, Whether it ought rather to be left to the will
of the Pastor, to use what words or form he pleases; and this because of a new
Generation of late Upstarts, which will admit of no certain and prescribed Form
of Liturgy, neither in the public Assemblies of the Church, nor in private
Devotions; but maintain that all ought to be left to the pleasure of Ministers
and the Heads of Families. And in his sixth Thesis he declares, That the
several Authors of the Reformation had every where composed and prescribed
several set Forms of Liturgy, and that the same were still made use of by the
Reformed Churches in their several Nations and Districts with happy success and
edification; till of late there arose in England a froward, scrupulous and over
nice (not to say superstitious) Generation of men, who thought good not only
to blame and find fault with, but wholly to abrogate and cast off the Liturgy
hitherto used in their Church, instead whereof they have introduced their
Directory as they call it. He adds further, That the Reasons and Causes you
pretend to have for abolishing the Common Prayer were levissimae, nulliusque
pene momenti, very slight, and scarce of any moment at all. And in Thesis 28.
he says, Certainly nothing else has stirred up these men so eagerly to reject
all manner of set Forms of Prayer, but partly the desire of innovating and
corrupting, to the end that, under the specious pretext of Liberty to pray and
prophecy, they might introduce all manner of Sects and Errors into the Church;
and partly their false and prejudicate opinion, persuading themselves that we
are now arrived at that time, wherein, as in the days of the Apostles, the
Spirit of Prophecy, of prayer and Supplications, is to be poured forth upon the
present Church, according to that of Joel 2.28. and Zach. 12. v. 10. which is
the common and most pestilent Error of all the Phanaticks, concerning the
sending of the H. Ghost by Christ, etc. And drawing up his whole Dissertation
into certain Conclusions, he says, Thesis 49. The use of these set Forms of
Prayer cannot justly be condemned, forasmuch as the same may be always and
every where profitable and convenient; and because they have been received by
the universal Christian Church for these 1300 years all the World over, except
only among these newfangled Independents, so he calls all those who reject
the use of set Forms. And Thesis 50. he adds further; So that the perverseness,
peevishness and superstition, or rather the malapert and obstinate wilfulness
of these men is both prodigious and senseless, who, out of a mere humor or
desire of lawless licentiousness, or out of design to introduce confusion into
the Church, do superstitiously condemn and compare to an Idol, forbidden by the
fourth Commandment, a thing which in it self is most innocent, the use of it
edifying, and the practice of it most convenient, which has long obtained in
the Universal Church, was never yet condemned by any Church, and which all the
Churches of God make use of with the greatest benefit that may be, which yet
these men, most foolishly, would have all to forbear and abhor. And lastly, in
51 Thesis, he says, And amongst the rest, those are most to be detested, who
either will not allow the Lord's Prayer to be said at all, or will have it said
alone, and not in conjunction with any other Prayer whether public or private,
and who think it a great sin for any godly man to be present either in the
Church at Common Prayer, or in any Family at private Devotions, where any set
Form is used; and hold this for a just cause of Separation from the Church,
lest they should be Partakers of the Sins of those who use set Forms, and
thereby become defiled, being not unlike to those of whom the Prophet Isaiah
speaks, chap. 6. v. 5. which say, Stand by thy self; come not near me; for I am
holier than thou; these are a smoke in my nostrils, says the Lord: that is,
they kindle my wrath against them The Lord grant they may return to a better
mind. Amen.

And so say I too. Amen, Amen.

And thus I take my leave of you in the words of this Learned and most Renowned
Divine.


E. D. But pray why in such haste? We have not yet made an end of our dispute;
for when I told you I had done, I meant with your Liturgy: Wherefore now it
remains that we discourse concerning the Ceremonies of your Church, which I
intended for a Second Part of this our Conference.


F. P. If I be not mistaken, we have discoursed long enough for once; besides,
I must give you time to consider what has been said; and if you chance to
approve it, and desire further to discourse me about the Ceremonies of the
Church; I now assure you, that I shall at any time be ready to serve you to the
utmost of my power.


The End of the First Part.

