A LETTER FROM General Leven, the Lord Fairfax, and the Earl of Manchester; To
the Committee of both Kingdoms: And by them communicated to the Parliament.
Concerning the great VICTORY It has pleased God to give them over the Forces
under the command of Prince Rupert and the Marquess of Newcastle, at
Marstam-Moor, near YORK, July the Second, 1644.

Signed thus: Leven. Lindsey. F. Fairfax. Tho: Hatcher. Manchester.

Expressing also what number of the Enemy are slain, what number taken
prisoners, and what Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition the Enemy lost.

Also an ORDER of the Commons assembled in Parliament, for Thursday the 18. of
this present July, for a day of public Thanksgiving throughout the whole
Kingdom.

Die Mercurii, 10. Julii, 1644. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this
Letter be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cl. P. D. Com.

London: Printed for Edw. Husbands, July 12. 1644.

Right Honorable,
SInce our last to your Lordship, the Condition of our affairs is not a little
changed, for on Monday last, upon notice of Prince Ruperts Marching from
Knaresbrough toward us: we resolved, and acordingly drew out the Armies to
have met him, and for that end did march that same night to Long Marston-Moor,
about 4. miles of the west side of York, but he having notice thereof, did
pass with his Army at Borrough Bridge, and so put the River of Ouse between
him and us: whereby we were disenabled to oppose his passage into York, the
Bridge we built on the west side of the Town being so weak, that we durst not
adventure to transport our Armies upon it: This made us resolve, the next
morning to March to Tadcaster, for stopping of his passage Southward: and the
Armies being so far on their way, as the van was within a mile of it, notice
was sent to us by our Horsemen, who were upon our Rear, that the Prince his
Army, Horse and Foot, were advanced the length of Long Marston Moore, and was
ready to fall upon them; Whereupon we recalled the Army, and drew them up on a
Corne-Hill, upon the South Side of the Moore, in the best way we could, so far
as the straitness of the fields, and other disadvantages of the place could
permit; before both armies were in a readiness it was seven a clock at night,
about which Time they advanced the one to the other: Whereupon followed a very
hot Encounter, for the space of three hours, whereof (by the great blessing and
good providence of God) the issue was the total Routing of the Enemies army,
the loss of all their Ordnance, to the Number of 20. Their ammunition and
Baggage, about 100. Colors, and ten thousand arms, there were killed upon the
place about 3000. of them, whereof many are chief Officers, and 1500 prisoners
taken, amongst whom there are above 100. Officers, in which number, is sir
Charles Lucas, Lieut: General to the Marquess of Newcastles Horse, Porter
Major General, and Major Gen: Tillier, besides diverse Colonells, Lieutenant
Colonells, and Majors; Our loss, God be praised, is not very great, being only
of one Leiutenant Colonel, some few Captains; and about two or three hundred
common Soldiers. The Prince in a great distraction, with a few Horsemen, and
almost no foot, marched the next morning from York Northwards: We are now
lying down again in our old Leaguer before York, which we are in hopes in a
few days to gain; and are resolved to send a great part of our Cavalrie after
prince Rupert: we having nothing to add, but as the glory of all the Success
belongs unto God, and the benefit we hope, shall redound to the whole
Kingdom; we have appointed this next Sabbath for a day of public thanksgiving
thorowout the Armies; So your Lordships would appoint a day for the same to be
kept throughout the kingdom, and Notice sent to us thereof, that we may
altogether join in it, and we shall continue,

Your Lordships affectionate friends and servants, Leven.
Lyndsey.
Tho. Hatcher.
F. Fairfax.
Manchester.
From the Leaguer before York, 5. July 1644.
Die Lune, 8. Iulii, 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament, That
Thursday come sevennight shall be set apart and appointed for a day of Public
Thanksgiving to be rendered unto Almighty God, for his great Blessing and full
Uictory over Prince RVPERTS Army in Yorkshire, to be kept in London and
Westminster, and all other parts of the Kingdom.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

