A LETTER TO THE Earl of SHAFTSBURY this 9th. of July, 1680. From TOM
TELL-TROTH a Downright Englishman.
My Lord,
I Have lived to see your Lordship Great as well as Popular, and a stout
Assertor of the Protestant Religion and Interest. Wherefore to your Lordship
have I thought fit, in this time of danger to our native Country, to lay
before you the great Mischiefs that both the Monarchy and Protestant Religion
do suffer, in respect of the present Designs of Papist and Commonwealths-man:
And when I have discovered to your Lordship their Intrigues, as far as my
strict scrutiny and search into them (besides sufficient Testimonies from
others truly informed) have satisfied me, I hope we shall take such adequate
Measures from them, to satisfy both your Lordship and this Kingdom, that Ruin
and Desolation will come swift on us, Confusion and every evil Work, if some
speedy Remedy be not instantly proposed by the Wisdom of the great Council of
this Nation.

And first, my Lord, Your Lordship will please to give me leave to make a
Parallel, between the past Actions of the designing men before and after 1641.
to the happy Restoration of the King, by it I shall be able to satisfy your
Lordship, that what was then designed and effected upon the Person of the late
King, Church of England, and Government, were the results of such pernicious
Counsels and Designs, as are now hatching by these Sons of Belial, to the
present disturbance, if not ruin of our flourishing Church and Kingdoms.

Now it is obvious to all that have had any knowledge of the late Transactions
before 1640. and after, that the Papist seeing our Church so well guarded with
purity of Doctrine and Faith, with innocent Ceremonies, to defend her from the
Invasion of slovenly and dishonorable worshipping of the great God; as well
also to avoid the Superstition and Foppery of the Worship of the Church of
Rome. Behold what Emissaries were there sent out, and with what Clothing to
deceive; the Puritan must be drawn in to make an outcry against Canons,
Ceremonies, and whatever was enjoined by Law in the Worship of God must be
Antichristian, at least it must be said unlawfully imposed on their tender
Consciences. From sowing these Doctrines, the poor and the ignorant were taught
to believe Bishops to be the very Limbs of Antichrist, and Superstition and
Idolatry brought by them into the Church; and many worthy Patriots, such as
Pryn, Bastwick, and Burton, etc. would smell Popery and Superstition in Gown,
Surplice, Cross in Baptism, worshipping God toward the East, (a primitive
Custom in the Church of God) etc. then publish to the World the great care they
had to bring things to a due Reformation both in Church and State. But behold
the consequence of this Undertaking; they had no sooner gone about to undermine
the Church of England, but then 'twas fit time to call in question too the
Miscarriages of State, and to be sure Archbishop Laud, who was the most eminent
Assertor of the Rights of the Church, and as true a Protestant as ever lived,
must be the first man cried down by the Teachers and the Rabble, for being
Popishly inclined, or rather for being a Papist, and must be butchered too for
that supposition; by his death ended the Tranquillity of the once flourishing
Church of England: Thus far had Papist hand in hand with Fanatic Rage and Zeal
triumphed over us. But after this, 'twas not enough to bring our Church low,
but we must yet go higher -- well! What encouragement has the King given to
Papists of late, by preferring them to Places of great consequence in the
Government, such as were Strafford, etc. -- These Persons, ay those, must be
removed for evil Counselors, or we shall have no Peace in our Israel;
accordingly our zealous Teachers sent their Disciples abroad in all Avenues of
the City, to cry down evil Counselors, for that their design was to bring in
Popery, and destroy Liberty, ay the Liberty of the Subject. And then forsooth
Ship Money, (a huge burden to what we have felt since) was (against Magna
harta) indeed every thing in the Government found fault with, as either
Popishly or Arbitraily inclined, then cry out for Reformation, Reformation. And
when for Peace-sake, our good King had granted many of their unreasonable
Demands, and had delivered to their Fury innocent Blood, to prevent, as he
thought, the shedding much more, yet would not their Rage stop here, but at
last King, Church, and all brought to destruction, by the most horrid Rebellion
and Villainy, as can scarce be paralelled in any Kingdom in the World in all its
circumstances.

And now, my Lord, one would think, that this pretended glorious Reformation,
should have produced some Settlement by this time to the tottering Kingdom: No
truly; we found nothing but Sect springing out of Sect, and they that once
prayed and fought together against the Peace of the Kingdom in one Body, and as
it were, under one denomination, are presently dwindled into many little
Parties and Saintships, and every one crying to his Neighbor, I am holyer than
thou art; so that from Papist sprung Puritan, from Puritan Presbyterian, from
Presbyterian Independent, from thence Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Fifth-Monarchists, Sweet Singers in Israel, Quakers, Muggletonians, and the
Lord knows what, till by and through the Inconstancy of their Persons and
Judgments, and the various Frekes of the several Humors, all was reduced to a
Chaos; so that neither a single Usurper, nor a Parliament without a King, nor
Committee of Safety, nor Keepers of the Liberties, or Councels of Officers, and
Strength of Arms, could produce any Quiet, till God wonderfully restored Him,
whose undoubted Right it was to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms. And thus,
my Lord, I have in short given your Lordship an Account of what has been acted
in those Times: Let me now crave leave further to make the Parallel with the
present Times; and therein if I reflect on some of the busy and designing men,
I hope I shall not break the Laws of Decorum, because things are brought to
that Crisis, that if an honest English Heart will not now speak home to the
purpose, (for ought I can see) he may evermore hold his peace.

Well then, my Lord, Do we not now perceive as clear as the Sun at Noon day,
that the same Men, or Men of the same Principles are again hard at work to
undermine, and destroy both our Church and State too? What divided Interests
and Factions have there been for Seven Years last past, and more, to bring the
King and Governors into disgrace, by frequent Clubs at Coffee-houses and
Taverns, on purpose to break the Bonds of Unity among us. From these Places,
and Sinks of Sedition and Rebellion, have there not been many of a higher form,
who through Discontent, or love of Faction, and change of Government, or for
not being continued or preferred to the Highest and most Honorable Places
therein, have endeavored all they can to breed Differences between the Two
Houses of Parliament, by throwing in some little matter with a Ball of
Contention at the end on it, purposely to hinder the prosecution of what should
tend to the advancement of the Public Weal; And what can be more plain, than
that such Designs were like those of 1641. Since, because the Bishops would not
herd with Common-wealth-mens Interests, (Yet my Lord, I do believe the Bishops
are as prudent Men, and can as well tell the nature of an Oath, together with
the Design as well as the Consequence thereof,) as any Statesman I know of in
the Kingdom, let them pretend to what they will; And besides, I am sure their
Interest is so interwoven in the Monarchy of England, that neither Popery, nor
any other Interest besides that of their own Church as established by Law, can
any ways preserve them, unless they will all as one Man fall down and Worship
the great Image, and be all things to all men, that they may be sure to get
something, as many (my Lord) pretended Famous Statesmen have done in the
several Changes of Government in these Kingdoms; (but that is not to be
supposed of them,) since they would not, or did ever join with any such
Interest as opposed Church or State; and thus how did both City and Country,
Clubs, and Coffee-houses ring, that the Bishops were the only opposers of the
true Interest of the Kingdom, and the great occasion why Justice could not be
done on Capital and Notorious Offenders. This, my Lord, is a true spice of old
1641. and Your Lordship cannot but observe, that it has brought the Bishops
into suspicion with the Vulgar sort, that they are driving on the Popish
Design, and that there is not above Two Protestant Bishops amongst them all, as
they give out.

Well, but this will not do yet; it is not so long since Laud was murdered, and
Strafford: People sufficiently smarted under Covenanting Reformers, and
Army-Saints, and it is not easy to play the same Game over again the same way;
and this the Designing Men see, and so are said to have other Artifices to rend
the Government in pieces, and reduce it to its former Chaos or Designed
Commonwealth; So that if neither disquieting or dividing Parliaments, nor
secret combining Clubs against Great Ministers of State, nor a seeming
weariness of the Monarchy of England, nor disgracing the Governors of the
Church, nor suspicion of Popery, and the introducing thereof, will do the
business to exasperate the People, as in 1641. why truly then comes forth a
PLOT full of Treason and Popery; then forsooth the D. must needs be the
Foundation of this Damnable Plot, and the Discoverers (who no doubt have been
blessed Instruments to save us at this time from the Paw of Antichrist,) must
be revered as Demy-Gods among the Vulgar, but more especially among the
Precious Independent and Anabaptist Faction; But not to reflect on the Kings
Evidence, for no doubt deservedly did those suffer who were condemned by the
Justice of our Laws, and many more deservedly may that have had a hand in that
pernicious and Bloody Design against His Majesty's Sacred Person and
Government. In this Hurly Burly what a Confusion did it bring the Kingdom into?
How did it necessitate the King to Prorogue and Adjourn, yea, and Dissolve
Parliaments from time to time? when he could not but so do for the preservation
of the Peace of the Kingdom, and defeating the Designs both of Popish and
Self-designing Men who sought to disturb it; and so apparent this was, that no
Loyal Heart but trembled at it. Then again forsooth all miscarriages of this
nature must be attributed to the D. and his Party, and given out by the
Designing Men, that no Parliaments should ever sit again, but all would be
Arbitrary, and accordingly Guards must be doubled to defend us from Jesuits,
and Popery, and this Bugbear of Arbitrary Government. Now in the name of
Machiavel where are we going next? Oh! cries the first and deepest among the
Designers, Let us but keep off the King from Parliaments till his Revenue will
not answer the Charge of the Crown, and put him into the condition his Father
of Blessed Memory was, that he will be necessitated to call one, then he shall
be obliged to redress all the Grievances, hang all Plotters, (provided they be
none but such as are Popishly inclined,) punish Church Offenders, and Saint
Persecutors; then shall he be obliged to hearken to every thing we shall
propose about the Succession; Then we shall be able to make our own terms with
him, either we will have M. or we will know why; We will have one Black Box or
other found wherein the Writing is that will prove what we would have
Legitimate, and Successor to the Crown, in opposition to Royal Word, and
whatever Demonstrations shall be to the contrary, provided it effectually
hinders, and deprives the known, true and Lawful Successor that is Popishly
affected; and we will never leave Clubbing nor Meeting, till we have effected
this, maugre all former Designs by Popish Councels, or Protestants whatsoever.

Indeed my Lord, it were to be wished for the quiet and welfare of the Nation,
that these, and such like Designs were laid aside, and every one study to do
his own business, to obey wholesome Laws, then to trust again to new Lawmakers:
For my part, My Lord, I wonder what it is these Men would have, if they think
that ever Popery or Arbitrary Government can govern in this Kingdom, then they
have reason to be thus concerned: But my Lord, though I am a plain old
Englishman, I can see as far it may be as one that sees less; and I protest,
my Lord, that after having read over abundance of such ware as little Andrew
Marvel's Unhoopable Wit and Polity, and the Independent Comment amongst it,
together with the Growth of Popery, etc. as also the Naked Truth, Treatises
about French Interests, and the Succession of the Crown, and all this bustle
they have made amongst us. To say the truth, my Lord, I am Tom tell Troth, and
between your Lordship and I, I do not believe there is any need of such Books,
or any such Jealousies; for in Gods Name, what can preserve us, but being
zealous for our Religion, and obedient to our Superiors? and what can preserve
them, but the Love of their Subjects, and governing according to the Laws they
have made, and are obliged to maintain? and for my part, I don't see any
Invasion of Liberty and Property as they term it; I see indeed a sort of men,
will be always restless and buzzing the vulgar Ear with strange Fears and
Jealousies, which tends to nothing but destruction both of Prince and People.
Truly, my Lord, (your Lordship being a Person of such eminent Parts, and having
known most of the public Humors of this Land and People this 40 years) I
think your Lordship would do well to find out some of these Underminers of the
public Peace of the Kingdom, that meet in Taverns, and other public Houses,
and by your strong Arguments convince them, that this is not the way to bring
about their Designs, whatsoever mixture of Councels they may have; And since
your Lordship lives in that great City wherein these Persons are said to
reside, Your Lordship would send them such unquestionable Rules to walk by, as
may tend to the securing of the peace of the Kingdom, rooting out all
Jealousies and Fears of Popery and Arbitrary Government, As also to endeavor
to fix them to the old ways of Loyalty and Obdedience, which are the only paths
of Peace to dwell in: Then shall we see that 'twill be our Interests (whatever
we imagine Liberty and Property to be,) to promote the Honor of God, and the
Religion of this Kingdom as established by Law, to Honor and obey the King
according to the Laws, to love one another as Men and Christians, and to lay
all our Heads, Hearts and Hands together to support the same. My Lord, I shall
now conclude this long Epistle without any other Complement, than that I am,

Your Lordships Most Humble Servant, Tom Tell-troth.
Wilts. the 9th. of July 1680.

