LETTERS WRITTEN BY A French GENTLEMAN, GIVING A Faithful and Particular
Account of the Transactions at the Court of FRANCE, RELATING To the Public
Interest of EUROPE: WITH Historical and Political Reflections on the Ancient and
Present State of that KINGDOM.

Communicated by Monsieur VASSOR.

LONDON, Printed: And Sold by R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1695

THE CONTENTS OF THE First Letter.
INtroduction. Page 1 An Account of some Considerations that might have detered
the French King from imposing Arbitralily a General Poll-Tax on his Subjects.
Page 2 The Injustice of such an Imposition, further demonstrated. Page 3 That
notwithstanding all these Reasons, the Edict for that Taxation will pass at all
adventures. ibid. That the French are tamer Slaves than either the Romans of
Old, or the Danes at present. Page 4 The Motive that makes the French King
endeavor to enslave England and Holland. Page 5 That the Poll-Tax is the last
Refuge of the French Court. Page 6 A Remark upon the Inscriptions on the Gates
of Paris. ibid. That the Poll-Tax will not raise such vast Sums, as the
Emissaries of that Court give out. Page 7 That the Country is extremely
impoverished, and the King's Revenues very much diminished. Page 7, 8 That the
present Misery of the French Nation is too great to admit of any Alleviation
from the Prospect of better times to come. Page 9 That none dare presume to
Petition the King to Assemble the Estates of the Kingdom. ibid. That according
to the Primitive Constitution of the French Government, the Sovereign Authority
was lodged in the States General of the Nation. Page 10 That the Power of the
Prince was limited among the ancient Gauls, and other Northern Nations. Page 11
That the French have still a just Title to their ancient Privileges. ibid. A
Comparison between the ancient and present condition of the Princes of the
Blood, illustrated by some particular instances. Page 12, 13 An Account of the
ancient Privileges of the Dukes and Peers of France. Page 13 That they had a
right to oppose the unjust Designs of the Prince, by entering into Leagues
against him. Page 14 The History of the League of the Public Good against
Lewis the XI. Philip de Cominees Opinion of that Confederacy. Page 16 That the
same Custom was, and is observed by several other Nations. Page 17 That the
present Dukes and Peers of France do only enjoy a shadow of the Privileges of
their Ancestors. Page 18 Of the ancient Authority of the Parliament of Paris,
and of the gradual encroachments of the Crown upon it. Page 18, 19 An
Exhortation to that Body, to imitate the illustrious Example of their
Predecessors, and the chief President la Vacquierie under Lewis the XI. Page 20
That the Courage of the Nation may be easily revived by their Example. Page 21
A brief view of the State of France, with relation to Impositions under the
Reign of several Princes. Page 23, 24 An Account of the immense Sums that are
exacted by the Ministers of the present King. Page 24 Of the stupidity of the
French, who strive to increase the Power of their Oppressor. ibid. That the
Forces which the King maintained in time of Peace made him more terrible at
Home than Abroad Page 25 That his present numerous Armies are more fatal to his
Subjects, than to his Neighbors. ibid. The Conclusion. Page 26
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Letter.
OF the blind Submission of the Parliament of Paris to the Orders of the Court.
27 The present Misery of the French Nation compared with that of the Romans
under Domitian. 28 An Account of some extravagant Rhodomontadoes in the Preface
to the French King's late Declaration. 28, 29 Of the ridiculous Vanity of that
Expression in it, that the Glorious State of France has excited the Envy of its
Neighbors. 29 Of the true meaning of that Phrase. 30 That it was the Injustice
of that Monarch's Attempts. that excited the indignation, not the Envy of his
Neighbors. 31 Of the Glorious and Happy Condition of the United Provinces,
when they were invaded by the French King. 31, 32 Reflections on the unjustice
of that War, and on a Solaecism in a Letter from the French King to the States
General. 32 A Justification of the Medal that was the pretended Cause of the
War. 33 That the Prosperity of Tyrants ought not to be called a Blessing from
Heaven upon them. 34 Of the shameful Flatteries of the French Clergy, and the
juster sentiments of the Court of Rome. 35 Of the prosperous Success of the
Emperor's Arms in Hungary, and the impious Designs of the Court of France,
during the Siege of Vienna. 35, 36 That in all the Wars since the Pyrenaean
Treaty, the French King has been always the Agressor, and is guilty of all the
Desolations and Bloodshed that has been occasioned by them. 38 Of the
Difference between a Conqueror and a Robber. 39. Of the Queen's pretended Right
to Brabant and Hainault, of the Validity of her Renunciation, and of the
Injustice of the King's Irruption into the Spanish Netherlands, in pursuance of
that Claim. 39, 40. That it is lawful to oppose a Neighboring Prince who
strives to aggrandize himself by unjust Methods. 41 That 'twas barbarous in the
King to kindle a bloody War against the Hollanders, merely upon the account of
a Medal, which they also had taken care to suppress. 42 Of the Intolerable
arrogance of some Parisian Inscriptions. 43 Of the Satyrs of the Dutch
Gazettier that provoked the Court of France. 43 The French King's Expedition
against Holland, compared with that of Theodosius against Antioch. 44 That it
was not a Zeal for Religion that prompted the King to invade Holland. 45 That
Subjects are obliged not to assist their Sovereign in the prosecution of an
unjust War, proved out of Grotius. 47 That they ought even to refuse their
Assistance when the Case appears doubtful, demonstrated out of the same Author.
48 That the Justice of the French King's Attempts must not be measured by their
Success. 50 That after all he had no Reason to boast of the Success of that
famous Campaign* 51 That he owed his Victories to the Skill and Experience of
his Generals, and not to his own Valor. 51 Of the difference between
Summer-Heroes, and the pretended Hero of all Seasons. 52 That the French King
acquired not any real and solid Glory at the Sieges of Mons and Namur. 53 What
Opinion after Ages will have of all his Victories and Conquests. 54
THE FIRST LETTER.
SIR,
YOU are pleased to desire an Account of my Thoughts concerning that General
Poll-Tax, with which we are threatened. And to invite me to make you the
Confident of my Sentiments on this occasion; you have said enough to convince
me, that I was not mistaken in believing that you agree with me, in esteeming
it our Honor to be of the number of those True Frenchmen, who continue still
to be Lovers of their Country. For so long as there shall be Men of Sense and
Courage in France, she will still retain some Footsteps of her Dying liberty,
and we shall still preserve the Memory of our former Privileges. But you must
give me leave to ask, whether you have seriously considered, how dangerously
you expose both me and your self, by engaging in a Correspondence concerning so
nice a Subject as that of the Government. We are scarce allowed the liberty to
think: And what Persecutions may we not fear, if it should be discovered that
we have taken the freedom to speak our thoughts? nevertheless if you have the
Courage to neglect this Consideration, I am resolved not to give you occasion
to accuse me of Cowardice; only let us endeavor to manage our Correspondence
with so much caution, as to hinder our Letters from being intercepted.

You cannot be persuaded to believe, that the King's Ministers will ever advise
him to impose that General Poll Tax which is so much talked of. For this, you
say, would be no less than to deprive us of the only shadow of Liberty, that we
are suffered still to enjoy, What? Shall the Princes of the Blood, the
Nobility? the Officers of the Crown, and all the Gentry be Taxed like Peasants?
Shall the Clergy be Robbed of its noblest Privilege? Shall the Inhabitants of
Paris, and of all the chief Cities in the Kingdom, lose that alone of all their
Rights, which they have been able to preserve hitherto? No: the Consequences of
such an Attempt are too visible, and would be too fatal in the present posture
of our Affairs At least, you add, it is not credible, that the King will
adventure to Publish a Declaration that may open the dullest Eyes, and even
cause a general Insurrection, without calling an extraordinary meeting of the
Princes of the Blood, the Peers of France, and the Officers of the Crown; and
without going himself to the Parliament, to acquaint them with the Reasons that
oblige him to impose a Tax upon his Subjects, that will complete the subversion
of this State, and to hear the Remonstrances which that Wise and Illustrious
Assembly would not fail to offer to him, on such an important occasion. This is
a step, you conclude, so contrary to the Maxims, that the King has always
followed, since he began to Govern by himself; that they would rather endeavor
to find out a Thousand other ways to defray the Charge of the War, than reduce
him to an extremity, that would vex him more than all the disappointments that
he has met with from the obstinacy of the Confederates, to refuse the Daily
Proposals of Peace, both in General and Particular, which he causes to be
offered to them.

I acknowledge, Sir, that your Reflections are just and reasonable; and you
might have added, that the Estates of the Kingdom ought to have been assembled,
and their consent obtained. For if it be true what l. 5. c. 18.
Philip de Cominees asserts, that no King or Potentate in the World has a right
to exact a Penny from his Subjects, without the Advice and Consent of those
that are to be Taxed, unless in his own Demeasns; and that all Impositions that
are levied without these Conditions, are the effects of Tyrannical Violence: If
it be true, that M. Colbert and the rest of that Tribe, who, to testify their
Zeal and Affection to their Master, have persuaded him that he has a right to
all our Estates, have made him odious and terrible to his Neighbors, who would
choose any Misery rather than that of being his Subjects: If it be true that
there was a time when the King's of France dared not to say, I take what I
will, and am Master of all. If all this, I say, be true, may we not hope that
the King, who would appear to have so great a Sense of Religion, will assemble
the Estates of the Kingdom, to consult with them whether it be necessary to
continue the War, and whether it be more conducive to the public Good, to
harass all his own Subjects, than to do Justice to the Confederates.

In the mean time, Sir, I can assure you, that neither your Reflections, nor
mine, will hinder the King's Council from imposing the Poll-Tax; and I Am even
persuaded, that there will not be the least motion made to call a Meeting of
the Princes of the Blood, the Peers of France, and Officers of the Crown; much
less will they desire the King to give himself the trouble to go in Person to
the Parliament; and least of all, will they have the Confidence to lay before
him the necessity of summoning a Convention of the Estates. Not long ago, a
certain Lady, who shows a wonderful concern for the Preservation of the King's
Health, grumbled at all those who represented to the King the miserable effects
of the Famine in Paris, and other Places: She asked them whether they came with
a design against the King's Life. And who then could be so hardhearted as to
desire the King to expose himself to the danger of hearing the Remonstrances of
his Subjects, concerning the deplorable condition to which the Kingdom is
reduced? This would certainly afflict the good Prince more sensibly, and sooner
break his tender Heart, than all those stories of his Poor languishing People
that wander about the Streets of Paris, and are forced to rake the Dung-hills
for Dead-Horses, wherewith to fill their raging Stomachs.

We study to imitate the Example of those Romans, mentioned by Annal. 1. and 3.
Tacitus, Princes, Dukes and Peers, Officers of the Crown, Bishops, Gentlemen,
Magistrates of the Sovereign Courts, and all of us together, are posting to
Slavery, and that with so much eagerness and haste, as if we strove to outrun
one another. We think to please the King; but I durst swear that he and his
Minister do in their Hearts hate and despise us, and that they insult over us,
as Tiberius over his base and flattering Senate, O homines ad servitutem
paratos! There is not one amongst us, that ever saw the Days of Liberty. The
form and mildness of our Ancient Government is lost; yet all our Care is, to
flatter our Prince and to obey him blindly. We laugh at the folly of the Danes,
who have divested themselves of all their Liberties, and lodged an Arbitrary
Power in their King's: We, I say, who are more ridiculously mad than they, who,
though we have not given the King any one Authentic Title to our Privileges, do
yet tamely stretch forth our Necks to receive a heavier Yoke than that of the
Danes, or rather a Yoke that is more cruel and insupportable, than that which
the Grand Signior and Great Mogul, impose upon their Slaves.

At last the fatal time is come, in vain we expect to see better Days: We have
put on a Chain, that will grow Daily more insupportable. We are not so much as
suffered to speak of Liberty, and they would hinder us too from seeing it
enjoyed by others. A great Man who Commanded the Roman Armies in Britain
thought it necessary to resolve on the Conquest of Ireland, Velut e conspectu
libertas tolleretur. Tacit. in Agric.
least the Ancient Britons, by seeing a free Nation so near them, should be
tempted to recover their own lost Liberty. Is it not probable that our Court is
acted by the same Principles? Are not these the Maxims that oblige her to
endeavor with so much obstinacy, to make the English and Dutch our Companions
in Slavery? She cannot bear the Neighborhood of a Nation, that has always
asserted its Privileges with a great deal of Vigor; nor is she less prejudiced
against another, that had the Courage to shake of its Fetters* Who knows
whether the French may not at last fall in love with the Constitution of the
English Government, and settle one like to it at Home; which after all, will be
only our own Ancient form of Government restored. And l. 5. c. 18.
Philip de Cormines assures us, with his usual sincerity, that he knows not a
Country in the World, where the Commonwealth is better managed, and the
Subjects suffer less violence, then in England.

I am of the same opinion with you, that the King wishes with all his Heart, he
could continue the War without imposing a General Poll-Tax; that Method is
certainly too odious to be chosen without necessity, and how hard and pitiless
soever we have found our Masters to be, I believe they would not willingly
increase the Murmurings and Dissatisfaction of the People. But what can we
expect from Men that know not what course to take? We have seen enough, more
than once to persuade us, that our Ministers of State do not now begin to be
gravel'd. The Intelligencers have no more Memoirs to present. On what then
would you have them lay a new Imposition? Would you have them Tax the Air that
we breath? For that is the only Element now remains free to us.

Give me leave, Sir, to put you in mind of an Observation, which you that have
past so often through the Gates of Paris have doubtless made as well as I. You
know that many of them bear this magnificent Inscription, The happiness of the
City under Lewis the Great.
Sub Ludovico Magno Felicitas Urbis. But if you cast your Eye on the adjacent
buildings, you shall find a vast number of Toll-gatherers Houses, on which are
written, in no less conspicuous Characters, the Names of Offices and Courts,
for such a prodigious variety of Imposts. If you can advance further into the
City, you shall scarce find a Street without an Office or Court of Audit, for
some ridiculous and hitherto unheard of Taxaation. Such is the happiness of the
French Nation, under the long Reign of the great Prince, for whom they have
erected so many Statues. We have not seen a Week these Six Years, that has not
produced at least One or Two new Edicts or Declarations; and at length the
Invention of the subtlest Finances is drained, as well as our Purses. It Is not
so easy now, as 'twas formerly, to find out Methods to furnish the King with
Ten, Twenty, or Thirty Millions, and a General Poll Tax is the last refuge.

I know not whether the very noise of so surprising a Project has not already
alarmed some of the Confederates? It Is but natural for those who are not well
acquainted with the deplorable condition of a Country, that was once so Rich
and Flourishing, to imagine, that this new Imposition will make the King Master
of a sufficient Fund to carry on the War for several Years. And I do not at all
doubt, but that the Court flatters it self with the hopes of terrifying its
Enemies, by the intended Declaration. Its Emissaries in Holland and England
will not fail to give out, that France is inexhaustible, and that we are as
able and willing to part with our Money, as the English and Dutch are to part
with theirs. I am confirmed in this Opinion, by what I heard yesterday from one
of my Friends, who informed me, that the subject of those Verses that are to be
made in praise of the King, to obtain the Prize that is proposed to be given by
the French Acad my on St. Lewis's Day, is appointed to be this Proposition,
That the King is no less terrible to his Enemies by the love of his Subjects,
than by the force of his Arms. For I Am satisfied, that this cannot be done
without a design.

But who will be imposed upon by so obvious a trick, or regard so base and
ridiculous a piece of flattery? Are the Confederates ignorant of the general
Dissatisfaction of the Nobility, Gentry, and Third Estate, which is so apparent
in Paris, and all the Towns in the Kingdom? Have they not heard in England and
Holland, that the King's Revenues are considerably diminished? And tho the
Truth of this were not so publicly known, it would not require a very great
stock of Sagacity to Divine, that they, who have not Money to buy Bread, cannot
be supposed to consume much Wine, either at Home or at the Tavern; and that
consequently the Entries at Paris, and in the other Cities of France, do not
now amount to such great Sums as they did heretofore. The Peasants are
generally so miserable, that they are not able to fetch Salt from the Garner,
from whence it is likewise plain, that the King's Coffers are not so well filled
by the Gabels as formerly they were. The Fields lie until'd, and are almost
turned to Deserts: An infinite number of People are Dead of Hunger, Misery, and
other Epidemical Distempers. Those Towns which we have seen in a flourishing
condition and well Peopled, are ruined and abandoned by their Inhabitants, and
most of the Laborers and Tradesmen are reduced to Beggary; wonder not then,
that the King is forced to Tax the Princes, Gentry, Clergy, and Inhabitants of
free Cities, since there are so few others left to be Taxed.

Uut you will perhaps tell me, that we do not now begin to be Taxed; for,
you will say, we contributed to pay all those Taxations, which were exacted from
our Farmers and Laborers; since we might have let out our Lands to better
Advantage, if our Tenants had not been Taxed: And consequently the Privileges
of the Nobility, Clergy, and Inhabitants of Paris, and other Cities, are no
more than imaginary Titles. What then, Sir? Did not the King become the most
glorious and powerful Monarch in the World, by imposing only the That which was
paid by the Farmers.
Real Taxation upon us? And shall we grudge to Pay a Personal Tax for the
Preservation of all that Glory and Power, which he has so justly acquired at
the Charge of his good Subjects. Alas! Sir, shall we suffer all these fine
Inscriptions to be defaced, with which the Place de Viatoire, and the Gates of
St. Denis and St. Martin are adorned.

But this is not a time for Mirth; If our King's assume a Power to impose a
General Poll-Tax as often as the fancy takes them, you may assure your self,
that it will take them oftener then we desire. This is the most certain mark of
our Servitude; the French Nation has lost both its Honor and its Liberty;
neither can I think of any Remedy for so cruel a Disaster. Let us try the
Virtue of those Maxims that we find in our dear Tacitus. Ulterior a mirari,
praesentiae s qui. Tacit. Histor. l. 4.
A Wise Man, says he, may admire the Happiness of former Ages; but he bears
present Misfortunes with Patience. Bonos Imperatores volo expetere;
qualescunque tolerare. Idem.
We ought to wish for good Princes, but must bear with such as we have. Ut
Steriltatem and ^imios Imbres and caetera Naturae mala, ita Luxum vel Avaritiam
Dominantium tolerate; 8. d neque haec con inua, and meliorum interventu
pensantur. Idem.
The Reign of a bad Prince is like a Year of Dearth and Famine; and our
Miseries in this World are not Eternal. For as the next good Year makes amends
for our former losses; so a Tyrant is sometimes succeeded by a good Prince.
Thus we may comfort our selves with hopes of better times under the Dauphin;
these Maxims, I confess are not very proper to satisfy Men in our
circumstances; but they are the best that I am able to suggest to you.

Shall we entreat the King to call a general Meeting of the Estates of the
Realm? But who will undertake to present our Petition to him? Shall the Princes
of the Blood? There is not one among them that durst offer the least
Remonstrance to His Majesty; shall the Dukes and Peers of France, or the
Officers of the Crown? They might expect to be immediately rewarded with a
lodging in the Bastile; and there are too many base compliers with the Times,
who would offer their Service to drag them thither. Shall those of the First
Order in the Church? The Court has found out a way to make sure of them; the
Clergy has contributed already vast Sums, and it is said, that several Millions
more will be demanded of them shortly; Should the Parliament of Paris deliver
our Address, they would instantly be interdicted, and the Heads of that
Assembly would be punished as seditious Traitors? should it be presented by the
Inhabitants of Paris, and the rest of the great Cities, we should see Gibbets
erected in every corner of the Streets, and the Troops of the Household sent to
devour 'em: Our Poor and Ill-paid Officers would barbarously pillage the Houses
of those Persons, who could be accused of no other Crime, than of endeavoring
to preserve that little remainder of Liberty which they seem still to enjoy.

I had the fortune, some Days ago, to be in a Company, where they talked
variously concerning the late Revolution in England. A Man of Sense, who is
perfectly well acquainted with the Ancient and Modern History of France,
demonstrated plainly, that our Government was formerly like to that of England,
and that the Sovereign Authority was properly lodged in the Meeting of the
Estates. There Laws were made; there the most important Cases were decided, and
such Subsidies as were judged necessary for the Defense of the Kingdom were
granted; the King had no more Power than what was sufficient to enable him to
cause the Decrees of those Assemblies te be put in Execution, and to attend
diligently to the Security and Preservation of the State. These are obvious
Remarks, which every one that reads our Ancient Histories, tho but with a very
moderate degree of Application, cannot fail to observe.

Such were, in effect, the inviolable Maxims of the Gauls, and of the Northern
Nations, from whom both we and the English are descended. Servirent Syria,
Asiaque, and suetus Regibus Oriens, multos adhuc in Gallia vivere ante tributa
genitos. Tacit. Hist. l. 4.
Let the People of the East, who are accustomed to the Despotic Government of
their Kings, submit to the Roman Yoke, said a great Man among our Gauls, we
will not follow their Example, We can still remember a time when we paid no
Tribute. Libertatem Natura mutis Animalibus datam; virtutem proprium hominum
bonum. Idem. ibid.
Nature made the Beasts free, as well as Men, with this only difference, That
Men are endued with Virtue and Courage to preserve their Liberty. The
Hollanders have not yet forgot the Heroical sentiments of their Countryman;
but we, alas! lose the Memory of 'em Daily. Nec Regibus infinita aut libera
potestas. Tacit. de moribus Germanorum.
The Northern Nations never suffered their King's to assume an Arbitrary and
unlimited Power; Auctoritate suadendi magis quam juben^i potestate. Idem. ibid.
their Princes govern rather by Persuasion, than Force: Regnantur paulo
addictius, quam ceterae Germanorum gentes, nondum tamen supra libertatem. Idem.
ibid.
And even such of those Nations as were under the severest Government, did
still enjoy a great deal of Liberty.

To all these Observations, my Friend added one more, that since we have not
like the Danes, renounced our Liberty, we may lawfully endeavor to shake off
the Yoke that is imposed upon us. For there is no just Prescription against the
fundamental Laws of a State. But how reasonable soever these Remarks be, they
appear so new and so surprising to certain Persons, that they imagine it to be
no less ridiculous to talk of assembling the Estates at this time of the Day,
than it would be to persuade them to resume the Ruff and Bonets that were used
in the time of Francis the First. These are obsolete Stories, say they, and we
do not so much as remember, that ever there were Estates in France. It Is true,
replied one of our Friends angrily, we forgot that we are Frenchmen, and we
shall forget too ever long, that we are reasonable Men.

The Romans, said one of their own Emperors, Nec totam servitutem pati possunt,
nec totam libertatem Tacit. Hist. lib. 1.
are no longer capable of enjoying a full and entire Liberty, tho they were
again put in possession of it, nor will they bear too heavy a Yoke; is it
possible, that we should be already, more accustomed to Slavery, than a People
that had served such Masters as Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero? I Am persuaded the
King will never give such advice to the Dauphin, as Galba did to him whom he
thought to make his Successor. No care will be taken to sweeten our Bondage, we
are such tame Slaves, that Policy would be lost upon us.

The Princes of the Blood are by their Birth chief Counselors of State; their
Advice ought to be taken on all occasions that relate to the Interest of the
Kingdom, such as the making of War and Peace, entering into Leagues, raising of
Subsidies, and the like. It were easy to prove this by our Histories, and by
the Edicts of our King's. But now the Face of Affairs is altered; and nothing
of moment is imparted to these. They are too happy when His Majesty suffers
them to pass some idle and tedious Hours at Versailles, or to go to the Camp to
be killed like private Soldiers. Not only matters of State are not communicated
to them, but they are not suffered to be Masters even at home, nor so much as
consulted concerning the Marriage of their own Children. It Is well known after
what manner the Duke of Chartres married Mademoiselle de Blois. The Prince, to
preserve an Office and a Government in his Family, and to secure the Fortunes
of his Children, was forced to marry them to Bastards, whose Mother's Name
would not be permitted to be mentioned in any public Deed.

The Prince of Conty is Master of all those excellent Endowments both natural
and acquired, with which a Person of his Quality ought to be adorned: But what
Treatment does so rare a Merit procure him at the Court? He is left without
Command, Office, or Government; while the chief Employments are given to to
those that are infinitely beneath him. I know some Gentlemen who are oftentimes
wont to complain, that the Princes of the Blood are not more tenderly touched
with a sense of their own Disgrace, and our Miseries. But neither is their
Power considerable, nor do we merit their Assistance. The late Prince, inspired
with a just Indignation against the French Nobility, used to say, I put the
Sword in their Hands, I cried out against Tyranny, and they answered me with
Musket Shot. The Consideration of his Misfortunes has taught our Princes
Caution: And if any one among 'em should have the Generosity to declare himself
the Protector of the Common Interest, who could assure us that our Countrymen
would not still be Fools enough to fight against him?

The Dukes and Peers, and Officers of the Crown, are likewise, by virtue of
their Dignity, chief Counselors of State, and have a Right to go to the
Parliament when they please. Ah! vain Shadow of the Glorious Privileges of the
ancient Peers of France. No matter of Importance was transacted without their
Consent. They remained unconcerned Spectators of the Wars that were begun
without their Approbation, leaving the King to pursue his own private Quarrels,
and served him only in those Wars which they judged necessary for the common
good of the Realm. Such is the obedience which the present Princes of Germany
pay to the Emperor; and you know better than I, that the Government of France
did very much resemble that of Germany, before our King's had remitted to the
Crown those great Fiefs, that were dismembered from it, during the Reign of Hugh
Capet.

When the King acted contrary to the Privileges of the Nobility, or to the
good of the People, they did not fail to oppose him; they appealed to the
StatesGeneral, and entered into Leagues among themselves, and with the
principal Cities, to prevent the Execution of the unjust attempts of their
Prince. Philip Sirnam'd the Long, had formed a design to seize on the fifth
part of the Estates of his Subjects, under the pretext of reforming or
New-coining the Money. But the Princes and the Prelates, says Abridgement of
Mezeray.
one of our Historians, would not suffer the King's Commissaries to Execute his
Orders; they appealed to the States General, and entered into Confederacies
with the Cities, which had so good an effect, that the Imposition could not be
Levied. Do you think that these generous Patriots would have suffered a King to
seize on the fifth part of all the Coined Money in the Kingdom twice in less
than Four Years, by commanding it Arbitrarily to be new Stamped? And when did
we renounce our Right of having recourse to those means which our Ancestors
might lawfully make use of, for the preservation of their Estates and Liberties?

No sooner had Lewis XI. mounted the Throne, but he began to Abridgement of
Mezeray.
Govern without a Council, and for the most part also without Justice and
Reason. He fancyed himself an abler Politician than his Predecessors, and left
no means unessay'd to make himself terrible. He chose rather to follow the
Dictates of his own unruly Humor, than to observe the Wise Laws of the Nation.
He thought he could not make a nobler use of his Authority, than by oppressing
his Subjects, and that the best way to display his Grandeur, was by ruining the
greatest Families in the Kingdom, and advancing the meanest of the People. This
is what some call, says Mezeray, to pass the Mon-age of Royalty, and to rule
without a Tutor, but they ought rather to say, without Sense or Reason. Thus
the King, by endeavoring to assume an Arbitrary or Despotick Power, irritated
the Minds of the Princes of the Blood, the Nobility, and all true Lovers of
their Country, who resolved generously to shake off the Yoke that they were not
accustomed to bear. Charles Duke of Orleans, and first Prince of the Blood,
undertook to represent their grievances to His Majesty, in the presence of a
numerous Assembly of Persons of Quality who were met at the Court. Accordingly
he spoke to the King with all the freedom that his Age, Reputation, and Quality
Authorized him to use: But these Remonstrances offended His Majesty, and were
received with Indignation and Scorn, adds the same Abridgement of Mezeray.
Historian. The good Duke Died with Grief, two Days after: But not long after
the King's Brother, the Count of Charolois Son of the Duke of Burgundy, the
Dukes of Bretaign, Calabria, Bourbon, and Alenzon, with several other Princes
of the Blood, the Duke of Vemours, the Counts of Armaguac, Dunois, S. Pol, the
Marshall de Lohear, the Lords of Albret, Bueil, and Chaumont-Amboise, and
almost all the Nobility, and old Officers of the Army entered into an
Association to oppose the pernicious Designs of the King: And this Confederacy
was called the League of the Publick-Good.

Lewis was then reduced to so great an extremity, that if the City of Paris had
joined with the League, they might have easily driven him out of the Kingdom.
Our flatterers are wont to call this Confederacy an unlawful Rebellion. But
Philip de Cominees did not think fit to give it so odious a name; he was better
acquainted with the Rights both of the Subjects and Sovereigns of Europe. Far
from that, he only blames the United Princes for neglecting to secure the
Interests of the People, when they made their own Peace with the King. l. 1. c.
2, 3. etc.
The Public Good, says he, yielded to private Interest. Abridgement of Mezeray.
A modern Historian adds, that it was agreed to nominate Thirty and Six
Persons, whom they called Notables, consisting of an equal number of the
Nobility, Clergy, and Lawyers, who should be empowered to consult together, and
to fall upon proper Methods to ease the People of their Grievances, and to
redress the disorders of the State. This instance gives us a clear view of the
ancient Customs and Liberties of France, before it was enslaved by the
pernicious Maxims of Mazarin, le Tellier, Colbert, Lowvois, and the rest of
that base and mercenary Gang, who have sacrificed the Honor and Privileges of
their Country, to their private Interest and Ambition. But we have, at least,
the Comfort to see that their Children and Heirs begin to detest such damnable
Politics, since the Families of these subtle Ministers are ruined, in
pursuance of those very Counsels which were first given by themselves.

I have alaeady said that Philip de Cominees was too well acquainted with the
Privileges both of the People and Princes of Europe, to condemn the Members of
the Confederacy that was set on foot against Lewis the XIth, as Rebels against
their lawful Sovereign. For it must not be imagined, that the Custom of
entering into Association against Tyrannical Princes, was peculiar to France.
It was universally claimed as their undoubted Right by all those States that
were founded by the Northern Nations, on the Ruins of the Roman Empire. The
Princes, Bishops, and free Cities of Germany, have always retained, and do to
this very Day continue to retain their undoubted Privilege, to make Leagues
against the Emperor, in defense of their Rights and Liberties. The same Custom
was also observed by the ancient English, and even owned by their King's: For
when they agreed on certain Articles with the Peers of the Kingdom, it was
concluded on both sides, that the Nobility had a right to maintain their
Prerogatives by force of Arms, in case the King should attempt to violate them.
And it is no less certain, that the Grandees, Bishops, and principal Cities of
Spain, have assumed the same Privilege, when they judged it necessary for the
good of their Country. It were easy to prove this by many and clear instances;
but I shall content my self with putting you in mind of the League which they
made under the Reign of Charles the V, called la Junta Samta, to deliver
themselves from the Tyranny of the Flemings, to whom that Prince had entrusted
the Government of his Spanish Dominions.

The Grandees of that Kingdom do still maintain their Prerogatives, without
suffering them to be violated; and shall we be the only Slaves in Europe? Shall
our Nobility so famed of old for their Bravery, and that Warlike and undaunted
Spirit which distinguished them with so much advantage in the World, or rather
shall their degenerated Posterity, instead of attempting to regain their
ancient Liberty, tamely suffer themselves to be killed, and Daily offered up as
ignoble Victims to support that Arbitrary Power that oppresses them? It Is true,
a Duke and Peer of France may enter into the Louvre in his Coach, and sit for
fashion's sake on the Flower-de-luces in the Grand-chamber, and has also the
pleasure to see a stool presented to his Lady, when she comes to attend the
Queen: And are not these mighty Privileges, or rather the Poor remainders of
all that Honor and Authority that adorned the prime Dignities of so great a
Kingdom.

But perhaps the Parliament of Paris are better Judges of the true Interest of
the Nation. I do not at all doubt, but that there are some intelligent and well
affected Magistrates in that numerous body, who understand perfectly the Rights
both of the People and of the Prince, who bewail our Miseries, and desire
nothing more ardently, than to be able to contribute somewhat more than bare
wishes to regain our ancient Liberties; but they dare not discover their true
sentiments I am confident, you will not think your time ill-employ'd in Reading
an Account of that Assembly, for which I am obliged to one of my Friends, who
is a President. Our Parliament, said he, is now no more than a Company of
wrangling Practitioners in Law, who study nothing but Customs, Edicts, and
Proceedings of Courts. It was at first instituted to represent the States
General of the Kingdom: It was a Body composed of the six chief Peers of
France, the six Ecclesiastical Peers, the Chancellor, Principal Officers of the
Crown, and some other Persons of Note who had a Right to sit in the
States General, when the Necessity of Affairs required their Meeting. They
maintained the Interests of the People against the Usurpations of the Prince,
and shared the Sovereign Authority with him, when the States were not
assembled. For it is beyond Controversy certain, that the Parliament used to
judge even the Peers and greatest Persons in the Kingdom, that they tendered
the Oath of Fidelity to the Officers of the Crown, and that the King's Edicts
were never reputed to have the Force of Laws, nor could be put in execution
till they had been first received and registered in that Assembly: And are not
these the most certain and uncontested Marks of Sovereignty?

You know, continued the President, by what dexterous Methods, and under what
specious pretexts, our King's have made such great Alterations in a Company
that eyed them too near, and often troubled them. It Is true indeed, that it is
long since the Parliament began to be wholly taken up in hearing and
determining Civil and Criminal Causes; but they still enjoyed that Privilege
undisputed, which authorized them to examine the Edicts that the King intended
to Publish; they Registered such of them as they thought useful and necessary,
and if at any time they met with some difficulties, they offered their Reasons
to the King, who never used to neglect them, but when he had a mind to proceed
to violent Methods. I confess the Court has sometimes compelled 'em to Register
its Edicts, but then they never failed to enter a Protestation that such
instances should not be made use of to justify future Violences, but where are
all our Privileges now? The King, indeed, sends his Edicts to us, but we are
obliged to register them as soon as they are sent, and even such of them that
appear to our Consciences to be highly unjust and pernicious, without daring to
offer the least Remonstrance to his Majesty. We have no more Power than simple
Country Judges, and the Edict for the Poll-Tax will pass at all Adventures.

All that you have said is certainly true, replied I to the Magistrate, but
will you not show the least sign of Life in a Case of such vast Importance? And
must we never expect that you will be moved to make at least one glorious
Effort to deliver your Country from Tyranny and Oppression? Most willingly,
cried my generous Friend, with Tears in his Eyes: But are you acquainted with
the King's Humor? The Times are changed, answered I, and we are undone.
Remember the Illustrious example of the first President la Vacquerie. Lewis XI.
sent an unjust Edict to the Parliament, which they generously refused to
enroll; he renewed his Orders, but without shaking their Constancy. At last the
incenst Prince, fell into a Fury, and threatened to put to Death not only the
President, but all the Counselors, if they persisted in their Obstinacy. La
Vacquerie acquainted his Brethern with the King's Menaces; and these good
Magistrates having put on their Habits of Ceremony, went all in a body to the
Louvre. The King surprised to see his Parliament come to pay him a visit with
so much solemnity, asked suddenly, what brought them thither --.

I know all the story, said my Friend, interrupting me hastily, and can tell
you the chief President's Answer; we come, Sir, said he to the King, to offer
our Heads to Your Majesty; since our Conscience will not permit us to Register
the Edict which you sent to us: Very well, replied I, but how did that cruel
and haughty Prince receive so unexpected a Compliment? He dissembled his Anger,
and endeavored to pacify their Minds by assuring them, that he would never
desire them to enroll any Edict contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, or the
Interest of his Subjects. Why then will not you adventure to make a like
Attempt? I Am persuaded that the King would be strangely daunted, if the chief
President, at the Head of the Parliament, should entertain him with a lively
and passionate Representation of the deplorable condition of the Kingdom. But I
had forgotten that you have long ago exhausted all your eloquence in writing
Panegyricks on our invincible Monarch. It Is pity that you have not reserved
some part of it for Discourses of another nature, which would certainly be more
seasonable at this time of the Day. Be not cruel to your Friends, answered the
President; We do all that we are able to do, but we are not under the Reign of
a Lewis XI In those Days the Nobility and People of France had not lost all
their Courage, and the Court dreaded the effects of it. I acknowledge that,
replied I, but are you sure that the King would not treat you with as much
complaisance, if you spoke to him with the same vigor, and showed your selves
capable of enlivening the benumbed Spirits of our Countrymen. Believe me, Mr.
President, the King despises you for your Cowardice; and you might make the
Court tremble in its turn, if you had the Courage to imitate your Predecessors.
After these words, we laid aside Politics, and began to talk of other Matters.

Yes, Sir, I am still of the same opinion: I know that the Inhabitants of
Paris, and our other Cities, are extremely dispirited; but I dare be bold to
answer for them, that they would quickly resume their former Vigor, if the
Princes of the Blood, the Nobility or Parliament of Paris would give them the
least encouragement. They begin to murmur strangely, and I know not whether all
their Patience be not already exhausted. It Is true, the flatterers of the Court
have bellowed in their Ears so long, that The King is Master of all the Estates
of his Subjects, that the poor People seem in good earnest to give credit to
the most detestable Lie that ever was invented. But how easily will they be
undeceived, when it shall be made appear to them, what our subtle Ministers
have so industriously hid from them, that Taxes and Subsidies were formerly
Levied in France, as they are in England, and that we never resigned our
ancient Privileges.

You remember, Sir, when I had the pleasure to enjoy your Conversation in that
solitary but delightful place, whither you have chosen to retire, that we spent
part of our time in reading the History of France, and that we could not find
that any Impositions were laid upon the People before the Reign of Philip the
Fair. Our King's in those Days had no standing Forces, but the Nobility served
them at their own charge in those Wars, that were made with the consent of the
States General. If ever any of our Princes raised a Subsidy by way of Taxation,
it was only when the pressing necessity of his Affairs constrained him to take
that Method, and the Tax was Levied but once. And even on such urgent
occasions, those Monarchs that had any sense of Humanity or Religion, were very
loath to proceed to so rough an expedient. The good St. Lewis, by his
Testament, enjoined his Children not to Tax their Subjects; but, Alas! they who
boast of their descent from so Just, so Chaste, and so Religious a Prince, have
no more regard to the good Advice that he left them, than they have to the
Virtuous example of his Life.

His Nephew attempted to raise the Hundred and fiftieth Denier of the Revenues
of his Subjects. But what was the event? Paris, Rouen, and Orleans, revolted,
the Commissioners appointed to gather the Taxation were killed, and the King
was forced to dissemble his Indignation. Nor was Philip the Fair more
successful in his second attempt, to lay an Imposition of Six Deniers in the
Livre on the sale of Commodities; his Orders were universally contemned, and he
was forced to call a Meeting of the States General at Paris, to harangue them
himself, and represent to them the necessity of his Affairs, after which he
obtained his desire.

The succeeding Princes observed the same Method. Sometimes on urgent
occasions, Aids, and extraordinary Subsidies were Granted, but were never made
perpetual, but by the Authority of the States. The King could not augment those
perpetual Subsidies that were granted to him, and far less could he impose new
ones. The Court Parasites made it their business to persuade Lewis XI, that it
was a branch of his Prerogative to lay what Impositions he pleased on his
Subjects. I have already told you what Philip de Comines thinks of this Maxim.
We have at least as much Reason to complain of Tyranny and Violence now, as the
Subjects of that Prince had in those Days; but our Tongues are tied. Charles
VII was engaged in a long and chargeable War against England; yet he never
Levied above Eighteen hundred thousand Livres per Annum. It Is true, Lewis XI.
augmented the Impositions, to Three Millions and Seven hundred thousand Livres
Tearly, but he had the Character of a very bad Prince, and to say all in one
word, a Tyrant. His Son Charles VIII fearing to meet with the same Fate, and
desirous to live according to the Commandments of God, says Philip de Comines,
resolved to content himself with the Crown Lands, together with the Sum of
Twelve hundred thousand Livres, which the Estates assembled at Tours, had
granted him.

France was happy under the Reign of Lewis XII, who was called the Father of
the People, whence we may reasonably infer, that the Face of Affairs is
wonderfully changed since that time. Under the late King Lewis XIII, the
Impositions amounted to near Fourscore Millions, of which not above Five and
Thirty were brought into the Treasury, the rest being exhausted by the great
charges of the Scate. M. Colbert has found means to raise the King's Revenues
to One hundred and Twenty Millions and upwards. This could not be done without
ruining an infinite number of Families by imposing a prodigious number of new
Taxations, besides the enormous augmentation of those that were already
established. Now if One hundred and Twenty Millions be brought Yearly into the
King's Coffers, the total Sum of the Impositions must amount at least to One
hundred and Fifty, the charges of the State being infinitely augmented since
the beginning of the present War: And we shall quickly see them rise to Two
hundred, for after all, Lewis the Great cannot subsist under a Hundred Millions
per Annum.

Yet we have patience enough to suffer all these Miseries: but what do I talk
of Patience and Suffering? No; we admire them, we delight in them, and fancy
them to be the greatest glories of our Nation. The King, we cry, is the
greatest Monarch in Europe: All other Princes are mere Beggars, and miserable
Wretches. He has Ten thousand Men in the Troops of his Household; in time of
Peace he maintains a Hundred thousand Men in Garrisons, to preserve all those
fine Towns that he has Conquered and Fortified: At present, Three hundred
thousand Men Fight under his Banners against all the Nations of Europe, that
are united against him. Incorrigible Sots that we are! that numerous, and
magnificent Train of the King's Household; those Hundred thousand Men whom he
maintains in time of Peace; that prodigious Army of Three hundred thousand Men,
who obey his Orders during the War, and that vast number of strong and well
Manned Garrisons; what do all these things signify to us? To devour us, to
enthral us, and to make us odious to all Europe. Have we not Reason to think
our Money well bestowed.

The Forces that the King kept on Foot in time of Peace, made him more terrible
at home than abroad. These Domestic Enemies made us suffer our selves to be
oppressed Daily with new Edicts, without resistance, and forced us to be silent
spectators when the Nobility were robbed of their Privileges, and the Cities
deprived of their ancient Rights. The Noblemen have ruined themselves by their
Luxury, and by that chargeable way of living, into which they have been so
subtlely engaged. Our Cities have not Canon to defend themselves; their great
Guns were taken from them under pretext of sending them to the Frontiers. They
are open and defenseless, and even are not suffered to repair their decayed
Walls. It Is enough for them to erect Statues for the King, or to cause
Inscriptions to be engraved in Honor of that Immortal Man.

The Fortifications and numerous Garrisons of Cazal, Stratbourg, and other
frontier places, have drained the Kingdom of prodigious Sums of Money; and what
advantage does it receive from them, but that they have made them jealous of
us, and incenst our Neighbors against us. That Army of Three hundred thousand
Men exhausts all the Men and Money in the Kingdom. All the People turn
Soldiers; and perhaps the consequences of a Peace would be more fatal to us,
than the War. What must be done with all that Army after the publication of a
Peace, which is so much longed for, and which we might quickly enjoy, if the
King would do Justice to his Neighbors, and to his Subjects. The Allies seem
resolved to force him to do Justice to them: And we might be in a condition to
demand Justice from him in such a manner, that he durst not refuse it, if the
force of his Arms which is so loudly celebrated by our Orators and Poets, were
not more fatal to us than to our Neighbors.

Let us conclude from all that has been said, for it is time to put an end to a
Letter that is already too long, let us conclude, I say, that the Poll-Tax will
be imposed, because we have made ourselves Slaves, and are eyes fond of our
Chains, Adieu: I wish you as happy a new Year, as you can possibly enjoy in
such difricult time, and so desolate a Country.

Paris, Jan. 2 1695.
THE SECOND LETTER.
AT last, Sir, the Court has convinced us, that she can be as good as her Word;
and that we may believe her when she threatens, whatever Reason we may have to
suspect the sincerity of her Promises. On the 18th instant, the King by his
Edict commanded a General Poll-Tax to be Levied throughout the Kingdom, as you
may see by the Copy of the Declaration which I have sent you; and Three Days
after it was Registered in the Parliament. This effect of their complaisance
does not at all surprise me; they have been for several Years a standing
example of blind submission to the Orders of the Court; and at last they have
carried their obedience so far, that we may with a great deal of justice apply
to our selves, that which our good Friend Tacitus said of his own Age. Sicut
vetus aetas vidit quid ultimum in liberate esset, it a nos quid in Servitute
Tacit. in Agric.
Our Ancestors beheld the last moments of expiring Liberty under the Ministry
of Cardinal Richlieu; and we are forced to suffer the last and utmost rigours
of Slavery.

The Age of Domitian was an exact model of ours; Adempto per inquisitiones
loquendi audiendique commercio.
we dare neither complain our selves, nor hear the complaints of others:
Memoriam quoque ipsam cum voce perdidissemus, si tam in nostra potestate esset
oblivisci, quum tacere.
And we should have already lost even the Memory of our former happiness, as
well as our Voice; if we could as easily forget as be silent. But we shall not,
by my consent, be altogether such tame Slaves as these Romans: Let us at least
have the courage to remember that under the former Reigns we obliged even our
haughtiest and most ambitious Monarchs to suffer Res olim dissociabiles
principatum and libertatem.
Liberty to subsist with Sovereignty; for we need only cast our Eyes upon
England to be convinced, that these two things are not incompatible; and let us
not be afraid to tell our Friends, what we think of our Miseries. I have sent
you some Reflections on the King's Declaration; I hope you will, in requital,
let me know your thoughts of it, after you have perused them.

It does not at all resemble those Edicts which Tiberius sent to the Senate of
Rome. They were Verba perpauca, and sensu permodesto, Tacit. Annal.
short and modest, this long and extravagant. I could easily forgive its first
fault, considering the vast number of Regulations that were to be crammed into
it; but I can by no means bear the Second; as much as I have been accustomed to
the lofty style of those Edicts that have been published since the beginning of
the War, and of the Circulatory Letters that are sent from time to time to the
Bishops, to Order Te Deum to be Sung for the taking of some Town, or gaining of
a Victory. These great words, The glory of the State; the Prosperity with which
Heaven has blessed our Reign; the Powers of Europe United together, to carry on
an unjust War against us; the Obstinacy of our Enemies, who seem insensible of
their Losses, and of the Misery of their Subjects; the unexhaustible Power of
France, when managed by a skilful Hand; the sure Funds that we possess in the
Hearts of our Subjects, and in their Zeal for the Service of their Sovereign,
and for the glory of the French Nation. These seemingly Fine, and studied
expressions are very unsuitable to the present posture of the King's Affairs.
They are mere huffing Rhodomontadoes, which may cast a Mist before the Eyes of
the dull and unthinking crowd; but they will appear ridiculous to the judicious
and considering part of Mankind.

You will be of the same opinion, if you will give your self the trouble to
examine with me, what all these magnificent expressions can be reasonably
supposed to signify. What is that Glory of the State which has excited the
envy of the Potentates of Europe? Might it not be inferred from hence, that we
have enjoyed so much happiness, since the King began to Reign, and have lived
in so great an abundance of all things, and in so ptofound a Peace, that our
Neighbors, jealous of the happiness and riches of France, had united
themselves together against her, and were come with a design to lay wast our
Provinces, set Fire to our Houses and Castles, and raise our Cities, merely
because they could not endure the vexations and mortifying sight of a People
that enjoyed more freedom and Plenty, and lived more contentedly than all the
other Nations of Europe? If this was the case, the King might indeed complain,
and justly too, that the glory of his State, that is, the happiness of all his
Subjects, had raised the envy of the Potentates of Europe, and that they had
united themselves together, to carry on an unjust War against him.

But besides that our Neighbors are not capable of such base and inhuman
designs, the King has been very careful not to give them the least occasion to
envy the happinsss of those who live under his Dominion. England, Germany, and
Holland, have seen the Trade of France ruined, the People over-loaded with
Impositions, the Provinces drained of Men and Money, and the King's Subjects
force'd to leave their Native Country, to seek their Bread in the remotest
corners of the Universe. But far from envying the happiness and glory of the
French Nation, our generous Neighbors have damented our misfortunes, and to
the utmost of their Power assisted those that came to implore their Help and
Protection.

It Is a great while since we forgot the proper signification of certain words;
the glory of the State, that is, according to our modern Phraseology, the Pride
and Haughtiness of the King; to love the Public good, that is, to furnish His
Majesty with means to satisfy his Luxury and Ambition. But can you imagine,
that the English, Germans, and Dutch, would take such a terrible Alarm at these
improvements and alterations of our Language. They might indeed laugh at the
folly of the French, who fancy that the Power of a King that oppresses them, is
the glory of their State and Nation: But I durst swear that they were never
jealous of our pretended happiness, so long as the King continued to place all
his Glory, and that of the Nation in making Versailles the most magnificent
Palace in the World, in burying several Millions in that proud Structure, in
squandering away his Treasures on Cascades and Waterworks, in throwing away
the lives of a prodigious number of his best Soldiers, to alter the course of
the River Eure, and in reducing the Noblemen that were in his Service to
Beggary, by a forced extravagancy in Cloths, Horses, and Equipage. So long, I
say, as the King's Ambition aspired not to higher objects than these, it is very
probable that his Neighboring Potentates might condemn his Pride, bewail the
blindness of the Lords and Gentlemen of France, who consumed their Fortunes to
so little purpose, and pity those Wretches that were starved to maintain so
extravagant a Luxury: but I am confident, that they had not the least
intentions to combine together against France.

Thus far I dare undertake for those Princes, but no farther: For without doubt
they were otherwise affected than I have represented them hitherto, when they
beheld the taking of Strasburg with several other Places of importance, and the
pretended Acquisition of Casal, to the prejudice of the lawful Heirs of the
House of Muntua; when they saw Fort Lewis and the Citadel of Hunningen built to
curb the Swiss Cantons, and several Princes of Germany; a project laid to
enslave England, and render it dependant on the Court of France, Sovereigns
treated with the utmost contempt; the Empire, Spain, and the United Provinces,
chained at the feet of a Statue which was erected at Paris, by an extravagant
flatterer; and above a Hundred and fifty thousand Men ready upon the first
occasion, either to attack Germany, or seize on the rest of the Netherlands.
This, Sir, is that pretended glory of the State, that has excited, not the
Envy, but the indignation and just Revenge of the Potentates of Europe.

The States General of the United Provinces, had for several Years, been justly
esteemed the most Potent Republic in Europe. They enjoyed all the blessings of
a profound Peace; Arts flourished among them; their Trade furnished them with
great abundance of Money, and of all the conveniences of Life; and the People
were so highly satisfied with the easiness of the Government, that the saying
of Rem difficillimam assecuti sunt, ut illis ne voto quidem op^s sit. Tacit. de
moribus Germanorum.
Tacitus concerning the ancient Germans might have been applied to them. Even
their best Friends could not have made a wish to their advantage; and they had
nothing to desire of God, but that he would suffer them long to enjoy so blessed
and peaceful a Life. The glory of their State was Real and Solid glory. Denmark
owed its Liberty to them; and they had stopped the Kings Progress in the Spanish
Netherlands by Negotiating that Triple-League which mortified France so
effectually. All Europe owned that they had Reason to secure their own Liberty
by keeping so troublesome and Ambitious a Neighbor at a distance from their
Frontiers; and praised their generousity for protecting a Minor Prince against
the unjust Attacks of so Potent an Enemy.

There needed no more to incense the King against them, nor could his Wrath be
appeased without declaring a War under pretext of the ill satisfaction which
the States had given to the Court of France. These are the very words which the
King makes use of in a Letter which he wrote to them a little before. All the
World was surpised at the strangeness of a Phrase which they had never heard
before: These two Words were perfect strangers to one another, and People could
not forbear laughing at the odd figure which they made at their first meeting.
But whence proceeded this ill satisfaction? We are told that it was caused by I
know not what Medal, which bore the following Inscription, Assertis Legibus and
Sacris: defensis exteris Regibus; vindicata per orbem Christianum Marium
liberate. Egregia Pace virtute armorum parta. You know what a pother the Court
made about this Inscription: How insolent they are, ory'd our flatterers? Could
the Romans have spoken otherwise after the Destruction of Numantium and
Carthage.

But after all, I profess I cannot see the least Reason that could provoke them
to make such a hideous noise: For there is nothing expressed by these words,
but what is undeniably true. Had not the States General of the United Provinces
obliged Spain to conclude a Peace with them? Had they not asserted their Laws
and Religion by force of Arms; And had they not preserved Liberty of Trade and
of Navigation? The Inscription of this Medal is infinitely more modest and
exactly true, than any of those that are to be seen at Verseilles, the
Townhouse, the Place des Victoires, the Gates of Paris, and those Citadels
that have been built in Flanders, and elsewhere. But suppose that there had
been really some fault in the Inscription, could that be a sufficient Reason
for the King to set all Europe on Fire, to destroy above Two hundred thousand
Men, to lay waste more than Fifty Leagues of Land, and to ruin his own
Subjects? Confess with me, Sir, that the King had more Reason to complain of
the indiscretion of his Secretaries, for giving him ill satisfaction, when they
made him say, That the glory of France has Excited the envy of the Allies;
since it may be very easily proved, that the King himself was jealous of the
true and solid glory of a Neighboring Republic, and that his Vexation and
Spite excited him to kindle a bloody War, which his brace of Historians, by
their own confession, are not able to justify.

Quis tuler it Gracchos de seditone querentes? However, in the opinion of our
flatterers, it cannot be denied, that Heaven has blessed the King's Reign with
such an uninterrupted course of Prosperity, that his Neighbors have been moved
with Jealousy. These words, Prosperity and the blessings of Heaven are very
equivocal, and their true meaning is not unfrequently mistaken. A happy crime
usurps the name of Prosperity; and the Fortunate unjustly fancy themselves to
be the favorites of Heaven. It Is the Language of Constantinople, that the
Prosperity with which Heaven had blessed the Ottoman Empire, excited the Envy of
the Christian Potentates that joined together to carry on an unjust War against
the Grand Signior. What is the meaning of all this, but that God in his just
Anger against his People, has suffered those Infidels to take advantage of our
Divisions and of the weakness of Christian Princes, and to lay waste the best
Provinces in Europe? Those who are called Conquerors, are usually but the Rods
of God, whom he makes use of to scourge both their Subjects and their
Neighbors. He blesses their Reign, as he blessed of old the Reigns of
Sennacherib, Nebucbadnezzar, Mahomet II, and Solomon. But the Day of the Lord
will come, when he shall visit the Pride of the stout Hearts of the Kings of
Assure and Babylon: He will also raise up a new Warrior, and send forth his
Anointed and his Shepherd, who shall deliver and gather together his dispersed
People, and break to pieces the Rod which God took up in the Day of his
Indignation, to punish our Sins, and scourge us for our backslidings.

Be not afraid, Sir, I beseech you, that I intend to turn Prophet. Only give me
leave to say, that we may then, and not till then, conclude, that God has truly
blessed the King's Reign, when we shall see that God has taken him by the Hand to
destroy the Nations of the Infidels, and to disarm the Enemies of the name of
Christ; when we shall perceive that the Almighty marches at the head of our
Armies to make the King the restorer of Jerusalem, and repairer of the Ruins of
the Temple of God. The Preachers of the Gospel, to the shame of our Age be it
spoken; are the King's greatest flatterers, and but too often have the baseness
to tell the King to his Face, that he is, what he ought, and we wish him to be.
But we have the pleasure to see them publicly contradicted by the Popes
themselves. It Is well known, that at Rome they are so far from believing the
King to be a Prince whom God has wonderfully raised up for the Honor and
Deliverance of his Church, that they speak there of the Wars which he has
kindled as they do at Vienna and Madrid, and Thank God for his Conquests and
Victories no otherwise than they do at London and at the Hague. Do the King's
Ministers imagine that we are ignorant of the true sentiments of the Pope and
Court of Rome? and have they not made the King a public Jest to all the World,
by making him say with so much confidence, that God has blessed his Reign, and
Crowned him with his greatest favors.

But we ought to do Justice to all Mankind; let us therefore acknowledge to the
Honor of the Emperor, that God does visibly protect that Prince, and that he
has lately wrought signal Miracles for him. The Turks had besieged his Capital
City, and he saw himself within an ace of losing the greatest part of his
Hereditary Provinces. We all trembled for him; but God struck the Vizier with a
Spirit of Infatuation. The King of Poland, and the Duke of Lorrain had time to
come to the relief of Vienna with a Potent Army; the Turk lost his best Troops,
and the Emperor in less than Five Years, regained almost all that which had
cost the Turks above an Age to Conquer in the Kingdom of Hungary. What was the
countenance of our Court during the siege of Vienna; you were ashamed of it as
well as I, and you spoke of it with Indignation. They appeared very well
pleased with the Emperors misfortunes; they expected impatiently the return of
the Courrier, who they hoped would bring the good News of the Surrender of that
City, and were even making Preparations for the Reception of the Deputies of
the Germans, who, they concluded, would come to implore the King's Assistance.
The King had an Army ready to march into Germany, and thought to make himself
Master of that Country under pretext of assisting it. But the raising of the
Siege of Vienna at once broke the measures of the Court and of the Divan, and
overthrew all their Projects. And those well-appointed Troops that were
designed for Germany, were employed on the Projects of Maintenon, where the
greatest part of them lost their lives.

God continued still more and more to bless the Justice of the Emperor's Arms.
He made great Progresses in the Turkish part of Hungary: He retook Belgrade,
and advanced even as far as Nicopoli. Is it not clear beyond exception, that
this remarkable course of Prosperity excited the Envy of the King, which
engaged him in an unjust War against a Prince that was busied in repulsing the
common Enemy of the Christian Religion. At the same time that the Court was
giving Orders to demolish the Churches of our Protestants, she was laboring to
find out some colorable pretext to hinder the Emperor from turning the
Mosquees of Hungary, into Christian Churches. And what an impious piece of
Villainy was this? At last the business of Cologne furnished her with the
pretext that she desired, but it was certainly a very bad one: For what right
had the King to interpose in the Election of an Archbishop of Cologne? and
because he had an itching desire to seize on the Palatinate, he took the
advantage of a pretended right of the Duchess of Orleans, to the Estates of
the late Elector Palatine her Brother.

Immediately an Army was sent to invade Germany: The Dauphin took Philipsbourg;
and the Cities of Mentz, Worms, Spire, Manheim, and Heidelberg, with several
other places surrendered without Resistance. God usually blesses such Atttempts;
for he does not always work Miracles to defend us against an Enemy that breaks
Truces and Treaties of Peace confirmed with the most solemn Oaths, to assault
us unprepared. When I say that God blesses such Attempts, you cannot mistake my
Meaning; it is plain, that I speak in the Style of the Court, where it is also
said in the same sense, that God blessed His Majesty's Arms, when he broke the
Peace of the Pyrenees to invade the Dominions of a Minor Prince, who relied on
the Faith of a Treaty made with Spain, or when he rushed like an impetuous
Deluge upon the United Provinces, who never designed to give him the least ill
satisfaction. These are the glorious Exploits of Lewis the Great, this is that
course of Prosperity with which God has blessed His Reign; this is that which has
excited the Envy of the Potentates of Europe, and engaged them in an unjust War
against him. Let us examine these last words, I beseech you; a little Attention
will serve to discover the ridiculousness of them.

It Is not my Business to draw up a Manifesto for the Allies; and they are able
enough to demonstrate the Justice of their Arms without my Assistance. But
since we have begun to examine the Preface of the King's Declaration, let us
proceed to enquire, Whether the Author of it could say, with the least shadow
of Reason, That the Princes of Europe are combined together to carry on an
unjust War against France? In the first place, it is certain, that no Prince in
Europe has invaded France since the Pyrenean Treaty; But how many Irruptions
has our King made into the Spanish and United Netherlands, Germany and the
Dominions of the Duke of Savoy: And the rest of the Confederates have only put
themselves in a posture of Defense, or assisted their injured Allies. So that
these seems to be a prejudication in favor of the Confederates. The King
always begun the War, but the question is, whether he had ever examined the
Justice of his Cause before God, or made it appear to Judicious and
dsinteressed Persons? If he has done neither, he stands Condemned before God
and Men, for robbing his Neighbors, answerable before both for all the
Desolations with which he has filled the Spanish Netherlands, the United
Provinces, Germany, Savoy, and Catalonia, and guilty of the Blood of above a
Million of Men? and is also convicted before the same Tribunal, for placing his
delight in ruining his own Kingdom, and reducing his Subjects to the last
extremities of Misery. Does not this course of Prosperity, with which Heaven
has blessed the Reign of Lewis the Great, make you tremble when you reflect upon
it, and fill you with Amazement and Horror.

Infer bella finitimis, ac populos sibi non molestos sola regnandi cupiditate
conterere and f^bdere, quid aliud quam grande Latrocinium nominandum est.
August. de civit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4. and 6.
He that makes War upon his Neighbors, says S. Austin, merely to satisfy a
Lust of Dominion, and subdues Nations that never provoked him is usually
extolled by his flatterers as a great Conqueror, but to speak sincerely, he is
only an Illustrious Robber. Rem ta Jus itia quid sunt Regna nisi ma na
Latrocinia? and ipsa Latrocinia quid sunt nisi parva Regna?
The Captain of a band of Robbers, and the Commander of a Crew of Pirates are
little Conquerors; and a Conqueror who follows blinldy the impetuous desires of
a lawless Ambition, is but a great Thief. Thou Wretch, said the greatest
Conqueror in the World to a Pyrate that was brought before him, what Reason
moved thee to interrupt the liberty of Trade on the Sea? The same, my Lord,
answered the bold Corsair, that moves you to disturb the quiet of the whole
Earth. I am a Pyrate, because I am Master only of a small Vessel; and you are a
Conqueror because you Command a great Fleet.

It is then an uncontroverted Truth, and received for such by all Nations, that
a Prince who Attacks his Neighbors only with a design to aggrandize himself
and to purchase Glory, is in the sight of God and Men a Robber and a Pyrate. It
is not only lawful, but a Duty to make Leagues against him, as it is to join
together, to pursue a Thief, or chase a Pyrate. Now, tell me, Sir, whether you
could have the confidence to maintain, in a company of Honest and Intelligent
Persons, that the King had lawful Reasons to invade the Spanish Netherlands
after the Death of the late King of Spain, to enter the United Provinces with a
formidable Army, to send his Son to Germany to take Philipsburgh, and to seize
on the Palatinate, and the greatest part of the Electorates of Triers, Mentz,
and Cologne! What could you allege to justify the first Attempt, of which the
two last, are fatal Consequences? Would you have recourse to the pretended
Rights of the late Queen to Hainanlt, and Brabant? She had renounced them in
the most solemn Treaty that has been seen within our Memory; and the King her
Husband had sworn upon the Holy Gospels to observe all the Articles. If that
Renunciation be not good, there can be no Faith or Religion in the World, and
it is a folly for Princes to treat together. Let them henceforth lay down their
Arms when both Parties are weary of Fighting, and reserve a right to renew the
War as soon as they shall be in a condition to prosecute it: For such Maxims
would be found to be infinitely less pernicious than the impious Politics of
those who make a mock of Religion, and swear by all that is most venerable in
it, to observe the conditions of a Treaty which they are resolved to break upon
the first favorable occasion. But you will perhaps say, that the King of Spain
constrained his Daughter to act against her true Inrerest, and treated her with
the highest Injustice. Constraint and Jnjustice, Sir! Can any Man of sense make
so ridiculous a Supposition? The Queen might have declared, that she would not
renounce her Right to Hainault, Brabant, and the rest of her Father's
Dominions; and he would have taken care to Marry her to such a Husband, and in
such a manner, as might have been most conducive to the Interest of the Spanish
Monarchy, and to the Peace and Tranquillity of Europe. But the Infanta chose
rather to be Queen of a great Nation, than to be Countess of Hainault, and
Duchess of Brabant, or to preserve a claim to a succession which she was not
sure to enjoy, as indeed she never did: And with what Reason then could she
complain, of Injustice or Constraint?

Thus it is plain, that the King had not any lawful Reason to break the Pyrenean
Treaty: And it must be acknowledged, that the States General of the United
Provinces acted a very Wise and Honorable part, when they negotiated the
Tripple-League to stop the Progress of his Majesty's Arms in the Spanish
Netherlands. It was their Duty to defend a King who was their Neighbor and
Ally, against the unjust Attacks of a Potent Enemy that threatened to dispossess
him according to the Maxim of an Qui non repellit Injuriam a socio, si potest,
tam est in vitjo, quam ille qui facit. lib. 1. Offic. cap. 36.
ancient Father of the Church. Besides, Prudence obliged them to keep at a
distance from their Frontiers, an ambitious Prince, who assumed a right to
interpret Treaties to his own advantage, and who, they might reasonably
suppose, would not fail sooner or later, to make the same use of the House of
Burgundy to claim the United Provinces, as he then did of the Queen's Right to
Hainault and Brabant. And did he not afterward in effect revive the
pretensions of the House of Austria to Strasburgh, and the rest of those places
that depend upon Alsatia. I confess that it is not just to make War upon a
Neighbor, who-is grown too powerful, under pretext that it is our Interest to
weaken him, lest he should be one Day in a condition to hurt us. But it has
been always esteemed lawful to oppose a Neighbor that aggrandizes himself
unjustly, or who having at the best but a controverted Right to certain
Provinces that are in the possession of another Prince, chooses rather to have
recourse to an open War, than to refer the difference to the Judgment of their
common Allies, or other disinteressed States Justum bellum quibus necessarium,
and pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes. Live. lib. 10.
A Prince that is truly just and merciful, never makes War, but when the
necessity of his Circumstances, renders it unavoidable or when there are are no
other means lest to preserve or put himself in possession of that which
properly belongs to him. Clementia alieno Sanguini tanquam suo parcit, and scit
homini non esse homine prodige utendum. Seneca. Epist. 87.
He is as tender of the Blood of others as of his own, and he is sensible that
a Man ought not lightly to hazard the Lives of his Fellow Creatures. But these
Maxims of equitable Heathens, are utterly unknown at the Court of the most
Christian King.

Nor are they better acquainted there, with the Commandment that Christ left
us, to forgive Injuries. Would any Prince that had the least sense of
Christianity, have presumed, in the face of all Europe, to declare War against
the Hollanders, under the pretext of I know not what ill satisfaction that they
had given him? For what had they done to provoke his Anger? If it proceeded
from the care which they took to negotiate the Tripple-League, it was certainly
very unjust; since the States acted in that Affair, like Wise and Christian
Politicians. Or was it the above mentioned Medal that occasioned all this ill
satisfaction? Was there any thing in it that was not exactly true, or that
could give him the least cause of Offense? But suppose that it had been
injurious to him: Magni animi est injurias in summa potentia pati, nec quicquam
est gloriosius Principe impune laeso Senec. de clem l. 1. cap. 20.
True magnanimity, says a Pagan Philosopher, consists in suffering Injuries
even when we are in the height of Prosperity: And a Prince is never more truly
great and glorious, than when he leaves these unpunished, who have most highly
offended him. Besides, the King was further obliged to forgive that pretended
Injury, because the States were not only sorry that their Medal had displeased
him, but took all possible care to suppress it, in so much, that it is no where
extant, but in the Cabinets of some curious Persons.

The Court of France is not so observant of the Rules of Decency: For though
the Proud and Insolent Inscriptions on the Gates of St. Denis and St. Martin
had given offense to the greatest Sovereigns in Europe; they were so far from
offering them satisfaction, that they suffered a Courtier, who would have
certainly past for the greatest Fool in the World, if he had not been too well
acquainted with the weak side of his Prince, to out do the grossest flatteries
of the Provost of the Merchants and Echevins of Paris. He was even recompensed
for erecting a Statue, at the Feet of which, the King's pretended Enemies were
represented in so unworthy a manner, that it is impossible to look upon it
without Horror: And the most celebrated Wits of the French Academy, were
excited in emulation of one another, to make Inscriptions for that ridiculous
Statue, which never any reasonable Person could Read without Indignation.

Or was it the Dutch Gazettiers Wit that gave the King this ill satisfaction?
We are assured by certain Authors, whose Books were Printed at Paris, with His
Majesty's Privilege; that this did not a little contribute to the Declaration
of War; It Is strange, that such able Ministers as M. le Tellier, and M.
Colbert, should not have represented to the King, Tulere ista and reliquere;
haud facile dixerim moderatione magis an Sapientia Tacitus Annal. 4.
that the Wisdom as well as the Moderation of Julius and Augustus Caesar, never
appeared with more Luster than by neglecting those that writ against them. You
know, Sir, that Works of that nature are Spreta exolescunt, si irascare, agnita
videntur.
wont to fall of themselves, when they are neglected; but when he whom they
Attack, grows Angry at their Insolence, he gives the World occasion to believe,
that there is too much Truth in the reproaches that are fastened upon him.
Tacitus has a judicious Remark to this purpose, which ought to moderate the
Heat of those who meditate Revenge against an Author of a biting Jest, or an
ingenious Satyr. Punitis ingeniis, gliscit authoritas.
The most probable way to advance the credit of such a Book, is to cause it to
be burnt, or to chastise its Author. Qui saevitia usi sunt, nisi dedecus sibi,
at que illis gloriam peperere.
And those Princes who use such rigorous Methods, do a far greater Injury to
their own Reputation, than to the Author of the piece that offends them. The
Book runs through all Hands, and People are curious to know the Reason that
procured the Author so severe a Treatment. Judge then how great the curiosity
of our Posterity will be, and how eagerly they will examine those bitter
Reflections of the Dutch Gazettier, which incensed the greatest Monarch in the
World to such a degree, that because he could not punish the Author, he marched
himself at the Head of a Hundred Thousand Men to destroy the Country where
these Satyrs were Printed.

The Inhabitants of Antioch having broken to pieces the Statue of the Emperor
Theodosius, he resolved to raze that ungrateful and seditious City. Immediately
the Bishop Flavian went to appease the incensed Mind of that Prince, whose
indignation was far more just than that of Lewis the Great against the States
General of the United Provinces. Chrysostom. homil. 4. ad popul Antloch.
The glory of Monarchs, my Lord, said the Prelate to Theodosius, consists not
so much in beating their Enemies, as in subduing their Passions. Victory is not
wholly your own; for your Officers and Soldiers claim a part of it; but in an
Action of Wisdom and Goodness you have no Companions, and that is a Trophy to
which none but your self has a Right to pretend. It Is not enough that you have
Conquered the Barbarians, if you do not also Conquer your own Anger. Show those
Infidels, that no Power on Earth is able to stand in opposition to Jesus
Christ. Glorify your Sovereign Master by pardoning the Faults of your
Brethren, that, at the great and terrible Day of the Lord, he may look upon
your Errors with the Eye of a Father, rather then of a Judge, and that you may
receive the same Forgiveness from him, that you have granted to others. Why do
not those whose Dignity and Function oblige them to inform the King of His
Duty, speak to him with equal Freedom. Theodosius had more Reason to be ill
satisfied with the insolency of his own Subjects, than His Majesty had to be
Angry with the States. The overthrowing of a Statue was a far more provoking
Injury, than the reverse of a Medal coined by strangers, or the Jests of a
disowned Gazettier. Theodosius designed to destroy a Seditious City; Lewis
endeavored to ruin entire Provinces. Ought not the managers of his Conscience
to have represented to him, that so cruel a Revenge would not fail to fill the
Hearts of Christians with Horror, and give occasion of scandal to the Infidels.
Nevertheless, instead of Offering him such good Advice, the Bishops and
Preachers employed all their Eloquence, either in magnifying his Victories, or
in demonstrating even to himself, that he was the greatest and most glorious
Monarch in the Universe.

Do not tell me, that the King undertook the War against a Protestant State, a
People who make it their boast to be the Protectors of Heresy in Europe, and
spread it through the other parts of the World. For besides, that a Christian
ought to forgive Heretics and even Infidels, as well as Catholics, I dare
assure you, that a Zeal for Religion was not the motive of that War. No sooner
had Germany declared War against us, but we detested those very Cities, whose
Churches Cardinal de Bouillon had blessed and reconciled with so much Pomp and
Ceremony. I know not whether it was a sentiment of Devotion that made the
Marshall de Belfonds delay the Execution of the Orders that were sent to him,
to leave those places, where the Catholic Religion was re-established; but I
am assured that the Court was very much dissatisfied with him for it.

Thus, Sir, we see, that the Pretext for the Dutch War was even less specious
than that which was formerly made use of for the War with Spain. One of my
Friends was so thoroughly convinced of the unjustness of this War, that he left
the Service. Do not fancy that he was a Huguenot, you know him, he is a good
Catholic: And you may remember that at the same time, the Marshall de
Scomberg, and other Protestant Gentlemen were in the Army. I had the curiosity
to ask my Friend what made him leave a good Post at a time when Employments
were so much courted by others. He told me that his Conscience would not permit
him to serve the King in a manifestly unjust War. Why do you trouble your self
with those things, replied I; it is the King's business, and that of his
Ministers to examine that Controversy, and Obedience is the Subject's only
part. You tell me nothing, said he, but what I believed before, I had Read
Grotius de jure belli and pacis, who has convinced me that I ought not to serve
my Prince in a War, which I know to be unjust. Read that Book, added he, and
you will be of the same opinion.

At that time I was taken up with other Matters, and contented my self with
doing what I saw others do before me. But after the Peace of Nimeghen, I began
to reflect upon what my Friend said to me, and resolved to consult the Book
that he recommended to me. No sooner had I cast my Eyes upon it, but I observed
with pleasure, that it was dedicated to the late King Lewis XIII. The
moderation of that Learned Man, is acknowledged by all the World, and it is also
well known that he was a great Friend to the Sovereign Authority of Kings: And
yet, in the first place he maintains, that * Si aut ad deliberationem
adhibentur, aut libera ipsis optiodatur militandi aut quiescendi, easdem
regulas sequi debent, quas illi, qui suopte arbitrio pro se and pro aliis bella
suscipiunt. Grotius de jure belli and pacis, lib. 2 cap. 26.
when a Prince asks the Advice of his Subjects concerning a War, which he
desigus to undertake, or gives them Liberty to choose, whether they will serve
in his Armies, or stay at home in Peace; it is their Duty to follow the same
Maxims which their Sovereign ought to observe before he begin the War: That is,
that they ought not to advise him to undertake the War without just and and
indispensible Reasons; and if he persist in his resolution, they cannot without
a crime offer him their assistance, to shed innocent Blood. What can there be
alleged against so clear a Decision? And indeed it makes me tremble, as often as
I think of it, not for the King's Ministers, since these Gentlemen are not wont
to consult either the light of Reason, or Rules of the Gospel, but for an
infinite number of People, who put themselves into His Majesty's Service,
without considering what they do, and oftentimes even against the Dictates of
their Conscience, which tells them that the War is unjust.

But perhaps the Nobility, who never march, but when the Arrier-ban is
summoned, are more excuseable. Let us hear what the same Author adds. Si
edicitur ipsis ut militent, quod fieri solet, siquidem constet ipsis injustam
esse belli causam, abstinere omnino debent. Deo potius obediendum quam
hominibus etc. Idem.
If the Prince, says he, by a positive command, ordain his Subjects to follow
him to the War, they are obliged to disobey his Orders, when they are
convinced, that the War is unjust. For it is an uncontroverted Maxim among Jews
and Heathens, as well as among Christians, that it is better to obey God than
Men. This determination of Grotius furnished me with this reflection, that the
ancient Custom of France and other European Nations, of which I took Notice in
the Letter that I had the Honor to write to you about the beginning of this
Month, was grounded upon very good Reasons. The Lords and Gentlemen were not
obliged to serve the King till after the War was decreed in the meeting of the
States General of the Kingdom: The Reason is plain; it was fit that an Affair
of such vast importance on which the Lives of so many Men did depend, and which
might ruin whole Nations, should be gravely debated, and diligently examined
both by the Prince himself who was to undertake it, and those who were to serve
him.

But what shall the Subjects do, when the Justice of the War in which they are
like to be engaged, appears only doubtful to them? It may seem perhaps a
needless piece of curiosity, to start Cases that we never had occasion to
experience, it is certain, that Lewis the Great never undertook a War that was
not manifestly unjust. Yet there may have been some Persons who imagined that
the late Queen's claim was at least disputable. France published whole Volumes
to demonstrate the Justice of her Pretensions, and Spain answered them. This
might probably disquiet the minds of some French men, that were not able to
decide the Controversy: Now the Question is, whether such Persons were obliged
in Conscience to Fight under the King's Standards. Grotius acknowledges that
there are some Lawyers that hold the Affirmative, but positively declares
himself for the Negative, which he confirms with a Reason that to me seems to
be convincing. Qui dubitat contemplative, debet judicio activo eligere partem
tutiorem, est autem pars tutior abstinere bello. Laudantur Esseni quod inter
alia jurarent non necituros se cuiquam ne si juberentur quidem; Imitatores
eorum Pythagorei, qui Jamblico test, bello abstinebant, causa addita quia
bellum caedes imperat.
In all dubious Cases, says he, A Wise Man always chooses the safest side: Now
it is certainly the safest way to abstain from an Action that may engage us to
injure our Neighbor, and shed Human Blood. This Book has been done into
French, and the Translation dedicated to the King and would to God that not
only His Majesty, but his Ministers of State, the Nobility and Clergy would
bestow some few Hours on Reading that piece with Attention. There would not be
so much Blood shed, so many Nations laid Waste, and such a vast number of
Persons reduced to Beggary. The Preachers of the Gospel would cease to extol
those Generals, whose Virtue for the most part, consists in nothing else, but
in stifling the gnawing Remonstrances of an awaked Conscience, to serve the
abominable Ambition of their Master. But how shall private Persons be informed
whether the King had lawful Reasons to undertake the War, unless by his
Manifestos and Declarations? Thus my Friend perceiving that the King had taken
up Arms against the Dutch, merely to be revenged upon them, for the ill
satisfaction that they had given him, he chose rather to quit an advantageous
Post, than to expose himself to the reproaches of his Conscience, by continuing
to serve in a War which he believed to be unjust. If they who serve in our
Armies had imitated the Example of my generous Friend, if they had examined the
King's Manifestoes, they would not have been so acquainted with their own and
their Countries Interest. Good God! Will the French Nation never learn Wisdom?
Will they never be weary of being led to the Army like a pack of Hounds to a
Hunting-match? Will they always continue to sacrifice their Fortunes, their
Liberty and their Life, merely to give their King the pleasure of assuming the
Title of Lewis the Great? But it is time to proceed to the consequences of the
Dutch War; and to take a view of the glaring part of the King's Life.

The taking of above Forty Towns in the compass of one Campaign, the Surrender
of Maestricht after a Siege of Thirteen Days, the Conquest of Cambray, S. Omer,
Ypres, and Valenciennes, the Battles of Cassel and Senef, and the
disadvantageous Peace which the Allies were forced to make, may serve indeed
for materials to stuff a flattering Panegyric or Inscription, but all together
will not amount to one single Argument, to prove that God has blessed the Reign
of the King, and the Justice of his Arms. To measure the Justice of an Attempt
by the Happiness of its Success, is the way to be eternally deceived, and to
justify the blackest Crimes. Temporal Prosperity is not usually a mark of the
particular favor of Heaven. The God whom we adore, is infinitely Wise; He
suffers the Righteous to be afflicted, and the Wicked to prosper in their Day.
Let us adore then the unsearchable Mysteries of his Providence; and let us
judge of True Merit by the Light of Reason, and by the Rules of the Gospel.

It must be acknowledged that the King was very well served by his Ministers,
and by the Generals of his Forces, during that War. But it was not a very
surprising Accident, that a Republic that was at once assaulted by Land and by
Sea, could not resist a King that came Thundering against her with an Army of a
Hundred thousand Men, commanded by the two greatest Captains that Europe had
seen in many Yeats before. He took Forty Towns in one Campaign, it cannot be
denied; but was he not forced to abandon them with shame, as soon as the
Imperial Army had seized on some places of the Rhine? Maestricht was Surrendered
after a Siege of Thirteen Days; a great Miracle indeed! For how could the
States relieve it? The Inscriptions on the Gates of St. Denis and St. Martin do
more Honor to the States, than to the King. He broke in upon them, it is true,
like a furious and overbearing Deluge; and they were not able to put a stop to
his Progress; yet I do not believe, that all this Action gained him one
Admirer. But that Holland, should force the most Potent Monarch in Europe, to
abandon his unjust Conquests, and to sue for a Peace by offering to restore to
them the only place that he still retained of all that he had taken from them,
is an event so little common and so full of Glory, that it will be the greatest
Embellishment of the History of this Age, and the admiration of all that shall
succeed it. Lewis the Great took Forty Cities, and made himself Master of
Maestricht, after a Siege of Thirteen Days; but what was the fruit of all his
Victories, and what did he retain of so many Conquests but an exhausted
Kingdom, Peopled with Beggars. Is not this the only instance of a Prince that
was Honored with Triumphal Arches for ruining his own Subjects.

The taking of Valenciennes, Ypres, and Cambray, were Actions that had a juster
Title to the proud name of Conquests. The Empire, Spain, and the States General
of the United Provinces had formed a Confederacy against the King, and had
often alarmed him with Potent Armies. Let us do justice to the Merit and
Experience of the late Prince, and of the Marshall de Turenne, who were only
able to preserve us in such an Extremity. They alone merited the Honor of
Statues and Triumphal Arches, and to have their Names inscribed on our Medals.
The pretended Glory of Lewis the Great is only a reflected Splendour, which he
ows to the Valor and Experience of his ill rewarded Generals, and to the Skill
and Dexterity of his Two Ministers, one of which made it his business to find
out ways to squeeze Money out of miserable Wretches, while the other provided
well-stor'd Magazines, that the King's Army might be in a condition to enter
upon Action, before that of the Enemies could be drawn out of their
Winter Quarters.

It was certainly a very prudent Advice, that of M. de Turenne, to keep all
things in a readiness for the early opening of the Campagn. And 'twas by a
careful observance of this Maxim, that France broke the measures of the
Confederates, and obtained an advantageous Peace. But I maintain that a Prince
who aggrandizes himself merely by such Politics, does not deserve the name of
a Conqueror. The Alexanders, Scipios, Pompeys, and Caesar's, of those celebrated
Glories of Antiquity, took other Methods to acquire Honor, than those that are
now in fashion among our Heroes of all Seasons. This is one of those splendid
Titles that the Sappho of our Age bestows on the King: And you know this
thought was esteemed very ingenious and fine. Did ever any of those Summer
Heroes which are placed so far beneath the Heroes of all Seasons, content
themselves with seizing on a Town that could not be relieved; did ever any of
them forsake their Arms, immediately after such an inglorious Expedition, or
Post back to their Mistresses as soon as the Enemies began to appear, and leave
the care of engaging with them to others?

Let the Gentlemen of the French-Academy, rack their mercenary Fancies to
embellish their fulsom Panegyricks with new Hyberboles; it will be for ever
acknowledged by those who are willing to do Justice to true Merit, that the
Duke of Orleans acquired more solid Glory of the Siege of St. Omer and the
Battle of Cassel, than the King by the taking of Cambray, Ypres, and
Valenciennes, and (if you please to add) Mons, and Namur. By coming out of his
Lines, meeting the Enemy, gaining a Battle, and afterward taking the Besieged
Town, he merited far greater Honor, than the King by all that he performed
before Mons and Namur. Instead of advancing to meet the Confederate Forces that
appeared toward the end of the Siege of Mons which they could not possibly
relieve, the King with all his jolly Troop, made haste back to his dear
Verfailles, and arrived there with Men and Horses that were as fresh and
unfatigu'd as those that had not begun to march. The taking of this important
Place was a Blessing from Heaven on the Providence of M. Louvois, and skill of
M. de Vauban, rather than on the Valor of the King, or the Justice of his
Arms. The next Year he took Namur, in sight of the Confederate Army, but he was
covered by an Army greater than theirs, during the Siege of the Castle; which
was an advantage that the Duke of Orleans had not at the Siege of St. Omer. He
was forced to come out of his Lines and Fight the Enemy. An instance that
cannot be pararel'd in all the glorious Life of Lewis the Great.

Where shall we find a Homer to celebrate our new Achilles? But we may trust
that care to himself; he will not suffer future Ages to lose so great an
Example: he has hired his Chroniclers already, and carries them always about
with him, that they may be Eyewitnesses of all his Glorious Exploits. But all
in vain, our Posterity will easily discover the Truth, and pull of the
disguising Vizard of Flattery: And perhaps some Historian may luck in a Garret
that will inform them after what manner Lewis the Great took so many Towns, and
gained all his Victories. And even I am very much afraid, that they will Read
the Histories of the King as we Read the Books of those infamous flatterers who
praised Tiberius and Nero, and that they will have the same regard to all our
Medals and Triumphal Arches that we have, to those which remain of certain
Ptinces, whose Vanity we mock and despise.

I have not time to send you my Reflections on the present Was, but you may
expect them by the next occasion, Adieu.

Paris, Jan. 23 1695.
FINIS.

