A BRIEF CHARACTER OF Englands Distraction: BEING The Copy of a Letter, sent
into the Country by a Gentleman of the Middle Temple.

By Th. Le. Wh. Gent.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

A BRIEF CHARACTER OF ENGLANDS Destractions.
SIR,
HAppily amidst these our late Distractions here at London, you may expect some
other News, either from hence or from abroad, which in all the, intercourses
between us, you know I have evermore avoided, and left that to Diurnals, and
such as delight to tell of Novelties; Only to that, which is I presume long
since known to you and all the three Nations; I send you this as it is, the
grounds of the present, and late differences, between the Army Officers, and
remnant of the old Legal Parliament; for so I style it, in respect, that it was
summoned by the late King. As to all the other Assembl^es, or rathe^
Conventickles, they both came together, and sat to little other purpose, than
to assume to themselves the name of a Parliament, without the Essence, Summons,
and due form of our Ancient great Councels; The relicts of the long Parliament
being first put down by the Army, and of late sat up, and again ^^shler^d by
the power of the Sword: and likewise the Protector divested of his power, as a
Partener, with the Parliament in the late est^blished Government, upon this
Reason and Ground, that the Grandees would nor admit of any single Person; as
also, for that the Parliament as it is alleged, acted irregularly, and not
according to the humor of the Soldier. This is generally conceived to be the
ground of the present Destractions; in the mean time, judge you, where we are
(the Legislative power being laid a side) and the Nation left without any
Government, but that of the Sword.

It Is true, it is in common discourse, that there is a Government informing,
but what that is, or will be, God knows; you know Kings, single Persons, Peers,
and Parliaments, are not now in rerum natura, neither any Settlement in any of
the Courts of Judicature, that may rightly, and legally, determine meum et tuum.

Some there are, that say the Grandees will pitch on that frame, which has
been so happily established by the Hollanders; and indeed their case, and ours,
(...) of so near a Kin, in discarding Kings and single Persons, that I confess
it may invite our great Masters to follow their pattern.

Others there are, that propose a Government answerable to that of the Romans,
on their putting down Tarquinius Superbus their last King, when as the Senate
assumed the sole power of, Government to themselves, as the best and most
d^^^able, though this soft look not back to those interruptions which often
befell them by the Tribunes of the people, their Censors, Dictators, and at
last, that of their Armies, in the election of their Emperors without either
the consent, or approbation of the Senate, to speak in terms of truth, our
case and theirs, are much alike.

Others there are, that propose the Venetian Government, were their Duke as a
single Person, rules no otherwise, than as their Grand Council shall admit and
approve.

But the Major part of the people, are for Charles Stuarts Interest, hoping that
these our Destractions, conduce to the bringing him in, though the wiser sort,
would have him tied up to such conditions that happily will neither become the
propounders, or his acceptance, This sort not foreseeing the future, and that
in case he comes in, otherwise it must necessarily be by the Swords of
Strangers, and a party here at home, then it is most perspicuous, that he w^ll
come in with a revengeful heart, and then no man can expect from him other
measure, than a reseisure of all the Crown Lands, the Royal Houses, with their
rich Ornaments, the Regali^, and what not? that may right him, as well for the
Crown Lands, a^ his Fathers Blood. Woe than to such purchasors, as have
^nriched themselves, by buying the Crown Lands at under rates; neither must
such, as have not been guilty of getting those good bargains, believe to escape
scot-free, for all men's Estates, will be then liable to his conquering Sword,
neither will this be the worst of such a turn of fortune for our Religion,
Laws, and immunities, of every free born Subject, must vayl the Bonnet to that
prevailing power.

All this is too plain and manifest, which necessarily will befall the
Universal Nation, wherein not only the Nocent but the Innocent will be in a
like condition.

Now Sir, there is another sort, that say, we are too much English, in relation
to the old Proverb (which you know) is, that an English man knows not when he
is well, and that there was a Government set up by old Oliver, between him and
a Parliament, as also that during his time they lived in peace and quietness,
as also that the Laws and Justice had a free and open current, and many tedious
suits ended by his means by way of reference, and that he kept a Court,
answerable to the State and honor of the English Nation, entertained all
Ambassadors of foreign Princes and Stares, with his Guards of Horse and Foot,
with his Controller, Stewards, Master of Requests, and Master of the
Ceremonies, and that he was courted and admired by most of the Princes and
States of Europe; whereas now there is no Person, no place, whereunto any
Addresses are to be made from abroad, to the dishonor and scorn of the Nation;
They farther say, and allege our blessed Saviors. Oracles, ut ^em^ntem feceris
ita ut metes, for that the same person was after his death vilified, and his
Son shamefully disgraced, and set at naught, by those which the Soldiers so
lately has put down in retribucion of the ingratitude showed to him, whom the
whole Nation knows was the prime instrument of reducing the three Nations to
peace, and quietness, and that in a trise to the wonder of the world.

The premises rightly considered, where are we now? otherwise than as Slaves of
a new edition; But se^ting aside this our sad condition as it relates to our
temporal estates, let us alittle look back to that of our spiritual condition,
and the obliquies of the Church, where instead of Reformation, (of which God
knows there was need enough, at the sitting down of the long Parliament) too
many learned and Orthodox Ministers have been put out of their Livings, and
mechanic, ignorant, and illiterate Sectaries preferred, and many Congregations
and Parishes both in Engl^nd and Wales, left without any pious or able
Minister, either to read, pray, or preach, as it becomes one, that has Cura
anim^rum; Sectaries, and Sci^^^^cks bearing the sway, and trampling on the
Orthodox and true P^otestant Religion, without any Reformation. Again, if we
look back to our National Laws, (as the case stands) who now shall eith^r make
new ones, or abolish old and useless ones, since Parliame^nts are set at naught
and laid afide; Nay, where is now that Authority that may Legally Summon them,
of enable the M^mbers to sit longer than the Soldier will suffer them.

Hence you may behold the sad Condition wherein the Nation stands, without any
due reformation in the Church, without Laws, Government, Setlem^nt, or
Security, in any thing we have formerly enjoyed; It Is consest the Nation cannot
be secured (as the case stands) without our Armies both by Sea and Land, either
from Invasions from abroad, or Insurrections at h^me; but if our Armies shall
or will be the first that will invade us, and assume to themselves, the Sole
and absolute power of Government, doubtless then we are in a remediless
Condition, when our Servants shall become our Masters.

On the other side, in case our Parliaments, shall act alone and do what they
please, without any control, then we are in the same Condition, as if the
Army ruled alone without any other Partnership (...)e Government.

Me thinks our G^an^ M^ste^s of either side, should both of them have bethought
themselves of s^m^ one M^dium or other, rather than either of them, should
assume to themselves the sole, and supreme power of Government; for that,
wheresoever Sovereignty, or any other power of Government, shall act alone, and
without any Partnership; it instantly turns into Tyrann^: On this
consideration, let them both lay this to heart, that when either Parliaments;
or our wrongs shall assume to ^ct alone the natures of necessity, will become
Slaves, or no better ^han so many Asses, assigned to bear the burden, of that
single and unruly power: for it is without di^pute, that the most lasting, and
best Government, is, and must be of a mixed nature or constitution; Its
Bellarmins opinion, de Roman^ Pont^fic^, who after he had so much mignified,
absolute Monarchy; yet at last concludes Attamen, Monarchiam, mixtam, et
temporatam, inter Arist^craciam, et Democraciam, semper meliorem esse puto; You
may remember that the Lacedemonian Kings had their Ephori, that contrould them
whenever they took upon them, Transire and to go beyond the bounds of Lawful
Sovereignty. It was the grand Court of A^ragon, (suppressed by Ferdinand^,) that
kept their Kings for many hundred years from Tyranny, and the Natives from
Slavery.

To come nearer to the point, I do not conceive that either the late
Protectors, Oliver and Richard as single persons, were absolute, for they had a
Parliament, and in the intermissions of Parliaments, an able Council of State,
that carried on the affairs of the Commonwealth as joint Copartners with them:
If it be abjected that Oliver was the first, that dissolved the long
Parliament, the answer to this, is soon made, for that they began to call into
question the new Government, under which the universal Natives, lived in peace,
and security, without any disturbance, which to preserve, the Protector,
perceiving the Ends, and Aims, dissolved them. You may remember how the late
King made it his common practice to call Parliaments and Dissolve them, without
their due Effects, at will and pleasure: Is it therefore of necessity; that
some few of the Army Officers should do the like as they have often done, and
destroy the most Essential part of the old English Government, the old
security of all the free born Subjects, of this Nation, and that Court which in
all Ages has stopped the current of the Incroachment of the Royal Prerogative,
and prevented that Inundation which would have swallowed up all the Subjects,
Freedoms and Liberties; But the report goes that they will resolve to call a
Parliament speedily, if that be their resolution, In Gods name then let it be a
Free and Legal one, an the Election of the Members left to the Freeholders and
not too much tied up to the rack of their wills and pleasures, otherwise, where
will they be found that will sit, when they shall be chosen? since it is already
in common discourse, and the question put, why should any either accept the^
Election, or sit, when as the Soldier at his will and pleasure shall send them
home as wise as they came to the House?

SIR, To conclude, without doubt there is somewhat if not much amiss, in the
mannagery of this work of darkness, (for so I call it) not pleasing to
Almighty God; It Is most true, that all along our many sad and often changes, we
have had frequent Fastings, Prayers, and Preachings, but whither they have been
rightly addressed, rests the doubt, the Apostle St. J^mes tells us we pray and ask
but receive not, because we petition amiss, I fear me this is our case, and
therefore let us all more fervently pray unto Almighty God, and heartily
beseach him, that our Prayers and addresses may be more pleasing to him, who
alone must help and free us from these our Devisions, otherwise we are all
lost; It is Unity and Concord, that must set us all aright, and in our right
Wits. If a Kingdom, City, or House divided cannot stand, needs must our
devisions ruin us, Concordia res parvae crescunt, discordia dilabuntur.
Therefore let our great Masters lay aside their Ambition and Self Ends, then by
Gods good grace, the cure of these our sad distractions will be soon perfected;
Therefore it behooves us all to pray unto God, that Unity and Concord may be
preserved amongst us, for without it, the Nation cannot be in safety, since as
now the case stands, we are all in the highway of Confusion, and never more
subject and open to foreign Invasions, then at present; we wish that they
which now sit at the Healm, will bethink themselves, and take it into their
serious and timely consideration, that the new Amity and Friendship contracted
between the two greatest and neighboring Princes of Christendom, presageth no
good Omen to England; and that they will call to mimd the late passages and
causes at Paris; as also to bethink themselves, that all things are not so safe
at home as it should be, and might be remota causa tollitur effectus, then the
cure will (by Gods good grace) be soon perfected; but as now affairs are
carried off, we can expect no other rate to befall us, than dissolation; The
Armies divided amongst themselves; the Ci^ and the Armies divided, and in
Combustion; no due settlement either in the Church or State, and the Courts of
Indicature, but all in confusion; Sectaries and Sc^maticks, suffered to discard
the Peace of the Church and State by the Pl(...) of Jesuits; without any care
of redress. Th^^ Sir, y^u may see in what a ^^d condition we all stand, G^d
in his great mercy look upon us, and give us all the grace of a true and hearty
repentance, and avert those heavy Judgments, which now threaten this sinful
Nation with utter Ruin and Defolation.

Your very Loving And Constant Friend Tho. Le. Wh.
From the Middle Temple this 15. of December, 1659.
FINIS.

