HISTORY OF LEWIS XIII


THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS XIII. King of France and Navarre. CONTAINING
The most Remarkable Occurrences in FRANCE and EUROPE during the Minority of
that Prince.

By Mr. MICHEL Le ASSOR.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs and Bible against
Grocers-Hall in the Poultrey. 1700.

Advertisement.
THE Remaining Parts of this History will be Printed in the same Size with this
Volume.

TO MY Lord Viscount WOODSTOCK.
My LORD,
AS soon as I began to write the Book, I now present you with, My Lord the Earl
of Portland, your Illustrious Father, did me the Honor to employ me in your
Service, to read History to you. I was surprised with Pleasure, to observe that
the Providence of God having designed me for this Employment, had turned my
thoughts upon a Subject; the knowledge of which is so absolutely necessary for
you, that so you may reap the full advantage of those wise Instructions, which
your Father who loves you tenderly, will one day give you, concerning those
extraordinary Revolutions, which Europe has with Amazement beheld for thirty
years together.

He knows the secret Motives and hidden Springs, which produced them all; and
he has always been the Depositary of the Secrets of that Great Prince, who had
the greatest hand in them; he has served him in his brave and hazardous
Enterprises, with equal Zeal and Courage.

It Is from a Father so exquisitely skilled in all the Arts of Politics and
War, that you will learn, my Lord, the Intrigues of all the Negotiations, which
have been transacted in his time, the present Interests of Princes, the Account
of Battles, Sieges, Marches of Armies, in which he has always held a
considerable Post. In giving you the Narrative of his own Actions, he will
instruct you, how a Person of your Rank and Quality, may equally love your
Country, and a Prince, who does you the Honor to trust you with his Secrets;
what Rules you are to observe, that so you may do good service for the one,
without intrenching upon that inviolable fidelity, which you owe to the other.
In short, he will teach you, what a Peer of England is obliged to do, that he
may be serviceable to the King in Parliament, and at the same time deserve the
Esteem and Approbation of a People extremely jealous of its Rights and
Privileges.

Others besides, my Lord, the Earl of Portland may possibly be able to give you
good Counsel in these Affairs. But there is one thing yet behind, which your
incomparable Father alone can teach you; And that is, My Lord, Moderation in an
elevated Fortune. He has himself lately given you a rare example of it. The
Greatness of his Soul in this respect, is a thing so extraordinary, that you
will scarcely find an equal Instance, in all those Ancient and Modern
Histories, which you design to read. Keep your Eyes always fixed on this
Domestic Example. It cannot but powerfully impress this weighty Maxim in your
mind, That to set bounds to your Ambition, though just and reasonable, is truer
and more substantial Glory, than it is to rise to the highest Dignities.

I have told you my Lord, that the History of the Reign of Lewis the XIII. will
be of great use to you, to let you into the understanding of those Revolutions,
which have happened for some time past in Europe. You will there see how the
Affairs of the Empire put on a new face after the Peace of Munster; And there
find the causes and first beginnings of the Decay of the Spanish Monarchy,
which before that time, was dreadful to its Neighbors. You will there read the
first steps of France, to that height which it arrived at, under the Conduct of
the violent and refined Politics of a Cardinal, who renders his Master
powerful at home, by humbling the Princes and great Men there, and formidable
abroad, by entering him into a seasonable League with the Crown of Swedeland and
the United Provinces. The good Correspondence which the great Frederick, Henry
Prince of Orange, and this able Minister held together, did not a little assist
the Cardinal, in compassing his vast Designs.

The Swedes were hitherto hardly known, but for their Wars against Denmark,
Poland, Muscovy, and some extraordinary Revolutions, which Religion, or the
differing interests of King and Subjects had produced in Swedeland. We shall
see in the course of this History, a new Warrier arising out of the North with
a small number of Troops, for the Rescue of Germany, almost entirely enslaved
by the Ambition and Arms of Ferdinand the Second. Gustavus Adolphus King of
Swedeland makes the Emperor Tremble, for fear of losing his Hereditary
Countries. The Rapid course of his Victorius Arms carried to the Rhine, makes
jealous even those Princes which called him to their Assistance, and those
Sovereigns which had desired his Alliance. That which you ought particularly to
be affected with, My Lord, is the reading of the resolute Efforts of your Dear
and Illustrious Country, to defend it is Liberty after the twelve years Truce
was expired. The Spaniard's pleased themselves with the hopes of making great
Advantages of the Divisions which arose in Holland, and some other Provinces,
after the Conclusion of that Truce. But the Valor and Wise Conduct of Maurice
and Frederick Henry Princes of Orange defeated those hopes, which seemed to be
but too well grounded. You will be very much pleased to find here Sieges Formed
by those Two Great Masters in the Art of Taking Towns, and Victories Won by
those Two Famous Generals, to whom they came from all Parts of the World to
learn the Art of War; and, in short, That Courage, not Inferior to that of the
Ancient Romans, with which the United Provinces did weary out the King of
Spain, until he renounced all his Pretensions to 'em, and was forced to
acknowledge them, in a Solemn Treaty, for a Free Republic.

I believe you have not forgot that which my Lord, your Father, told you in one
of his Pleasant and Profitable Discourses which he had with you the last
Summer, in the Walks of his beloved Solitude near the Hague. He recited to you
one Day the Prediction of Prince Frederick Henry, a little before his Death:
That his Posterity would be under a Necessity one Day to declare against
France, as he had been to oppose the Ambitious Designs of the House of Austria.
It has fell out as this Judicious and Knowing Politician had foretold. The
House of Orange has had the Honor to have given the first Blow, which shook
the Power of Spain, and by a surprising Turn of Affairs, the only Remaining
Branch of that Noble Stock, which has been so fruitful in Heroes, can glory
this Day, that by his Prudence and Valor he has defended that same Monarchy,
threatened with approaching Ruin. Could that fierce and bloody Philip II. have
ever thought that the Posterity of that Man, whom he had basely murdered, after
an unworthy and ridiculous Proscription, should be one Day the best Support of
his tottering Crown?

The History of the Reign of Lewis XIII. will discover to you, my Lord, the
Reasons which Philip Frederick Henry had to foresee the Glory which was
reserved for a Great King, the Heir of his Blood and of his Virtues, who gives
you already signal Marks of his Distinguishing Favor.

'Twould be but a small Matter to learn from History, The Interests of
Sovereigns, the Accounts of Battles and Sieges, the Intrigues of Treaties and
Negotiations, the Good or Bad Quality of the different Actors. Its greatest and
principal End is to confirm in you the Good Sentiments of Religion, Virtue and
Probity, which, my Lord, your Father has took care to inspire you with. They
charmed me the first Day I had the Honor to be in your Company; and I bless
God, with all my Heart, that they appear so pure, and so deeply engraven in
your Soul, that we have all the Reason in the World to hope, that the
Contagious and insinuating Air of the Court, and of the World, will never be
able to corrupt or wear them out; and that you will never wander from the Paths
of Piety, Prudence, and Valor, which my Lord, the Earl of Portland, has
traced out to you. Heavens grant, which have designed you to enjoy the great
Advantages which a Father can leave to his Son, that you may make an Use of
them worthy of the Purity of the Holy Religion which we profess. These are the
ardent Desires of him, who shall be, all his Life, with a prosound Respect, and
inviolable Fidelity,

My Lord, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Sevant, MICHAEL Le VASSOR.

THE PREFACE.
Polybius in the beginning.
SInce all who have written History before me, says an Able and Judicious
Writer, have taken pains to show the usefulness of things past. It would be to
no purpose to excite the Curiosity of the Reader by a like Preface. All Men are
sensible that the reading of History, is the most proper means to form the Mind
and Inclinations of those who apply themselves to it, with Reflection and
Judgment. They who are born to the first employs of the State, learn here how
to govern those whom Providence has placed under them; and private Persons
often find Instructions for the Conduct of their Lives. To read the Ancients
and Moderns, and only fill the Head with a confused heap of different Facts, is
the vainest thing in the World, and conduces most to Debauch the Mind. But to
run through History with a design to learn Human Nature, to reflect on the
Disorderly and Unjust Passions of Men; to distinguish Solid and Real Virtue,
from that which consists in the mistaken Opinion of the Multitude; This
certainly is the most proper Study to form a Man for the World and Business.

Notwithstanding the reading History has these mighty Advantages, there are few
that profit by it. The fate of those who spend their time in it, is often the
same with that of Persons who Travel, live in a Court, or Converse in the
World. A Man who has the Skill to make a good use of his Parts and Reason,
Accomplishes himself very much in Foreign Countries, by Conversation with
Courtiers, and Men of Business. But it ordinarily happens, that Travelers only
seek to Divert themselves in the places where they come. A young Fellow returns
out of Italy, France, Germany or England, as ignorant as he went there. And
very often, in stead of correcting his Domestic Vices, he increases them, by
the Addition of Foreign ones. Most Men who come to Court, or into the World,
only think how to wast away their Lives, and spend their Time agreeably. Very
far from considering how private Interest and Passion, play their parts on the
public Stage, and reasoning with themselves o^ the different steps Men take,
and profitably observing their good and ill Qualities they only strive to
please them, and wi^ their savor, by some Motives of Interest or Pleasure. The
greatest part of those wh^ read History, fall into the same Mistake They only
aim to consume their Time and pass away the Tedious Hours. It is enough for
them, if a Book be Pleasant and Diverting. They are never in Pain to profit, by
the Examples of Virtue they meet with, or reflect on the Faults of those who
are exposed in it. This Negligence proceeds from the little care taken to
acquaint Youth with the Nature of Mankind, and infusing good Principles of
Morality into them, before they are put on reading History, sent into Foreign
Countries, or left to live at large in the World. If their Tutors and Governors
which had the Charge of their Education, had accustomed them to Meditate on
those Remarks, which the Incomparable Author of the Search after Truth, P.
Malebranche, de Recherche de la Verite.
has made on the Mistakes and Delusions of our Senses, Imagination and
Passions, on the Maxims of Mr. de la Rochefancault, and some other good Books
published in our Times; I do not in the least question, but Minds thus
prepared, would draw a wonderful Fruit from Traveling, Conversation in the
World, and Ancient and Modern History.

Perhaps too, the small number of good Authors in this and former Ages, is
another cause of the little Progress made by those who promiscuously run over
all, without Choice or Distinction. Herodotus, whom the Ancients call the
Father of History, Cicero Live. 1. De Legibu^.
is a polite Writer, and pleasant to read. One may learn good Jonick in him.
Let him if you will have it so, be a good Model of an Elegant and Clean Style,
but what Solid Knowledge can be gained out of an Author, filled with Fables and
Falsities, who only aims to Divert, and not to Instruct? The History of Cyrus
is thought to be a Romance, devised by Xenophon. I do not know whether the Plan
of the Work do not come nearer Truth, than what Herodotus delivers of the
Birth, Conquest and Death of Cyrus. The one at least, is more probable than the
other. However this be, a Man of good Sense, will ever prefer the Reading of
Xenophon, to Herodotus. If the former did not design an exact History of the
Life of Cyrus, he draws at least the Idea, of a good and just Government. This
should make us value the Eight Books of the Cyropedia of Xenophon, more than
the nine of Herodotus his History, though they have the Name of the nine Muses
given them. This may amuse me indeed, but the other will instruct me. I find a
thousand Maxims, a thousand Reflections, proper to improve my Mind, and Reform
my Passions. Discourse of the manner of writing History.
Thucidides was very sensible of Herodotus his Fault. Notwithstanding the great
Reputation of a Man, who first writ History among the Greeks, I had rather,
said he, as Lucian Reports, displease by speaking the Truth, than please by
relating of Fables. If I do not please my Reader so well, I shall profit him
more. I would not prejudice him, by Accommodating my self to his Vicious Palate.

This Admirable Author, whom Salust, Titus Livy, and all the good Masters have
taken for a Model, saw farther, that a perfect Historian ought not only to
Relate Matters with the greatest Sincerity, but must apply himself to the
instruction of the Reader. This he has done in his Harangues in so Artful a
manner, that Cicero was charmed with them. There are, says he, almost as many
Sentences, as Words. Cicero L. II. De Orat^re.
This way of Instructing by Harangues, was very proper in the History of the
Republics of Athens or Rome. The Generals of the Army, and the chief
Magistrates, spoke in the Assemblies of the People, of the greatest Affairs of
State. These sort of Speeches now a days, cannot have place any where but in
the History of England, or that of the Republic of Venice. For want of these
Harangues, Modern Authors ought in imitation of Tacitus, to endeavor to
instruct in the Body of their History. In his time there were yet some Speeches
made in the Senate. But as the Successors of Augustus never proposed the most
weighty Matters there; their Tyranny did not suffer the Senators to declare
their Minds freely. Nothing was said there, but to flatter the Emperor. For
this reason, Tacitus took a different way from Salust, and Titus Livy. Instead
of instructing by his Harangues, he does it by his Reflections on the
Transactions he relates, or in the Pictures he gives us of the Principal Actors
he brings on the Stage.

I have often considered with my self, why Histories have been so rare in all
Ages^^ Polybius mentions several, who had writ the same things as he has done,
and cannot find one to satisfy him. There are several Reasons to be given for
this. Some seek to flatter those, from whom they expect a Reward. Others only
aim to divert the Reader, make Books of a quick and ready Sale, or acquire the
Reputation of Writing with Politeness and Ease. Cicero ad famil. Lib. V. Ep. 12.
There are other Pieces wrote by Command, or at the Request of Persons
concerned in them, such was that which Cicero desired to have of his Consulat;
the Author of which, did not scruple to extol his Hero, a little more than
Truth would allow of Princes and great Men hire, Men of Wit to write the Lives
of their Ancestors. We know some too, who will have their History writ under
their own Eyes. What Sincerity, what Truth, what Instruction, can we expect
from those Authors, who will give us hideous or beautiful Pictures, as their
Interests, Passions or Desire to please their Patrons or Readers lead them?
Besides, there is still another Reason why good Histories have been, and ever
will be extremely rare; because these Works seem to demand a great number of
excellent Qualities in him, who undertakes them.

Cicero maintains, that a good Historian, Lib. II. de Oratore.
ought to be an excellent Orator. And how many things, good God! does he
require to make a finished Orator? Lib. X. Institut. cap. 10.
Quintilian will have the Style of an History, higher than that of the Tribunal
and Bar, and approach to a Poetical one. What Care, what Application must a Man
use, to keep that exact Medium of a Style, more sublime than that of an Orator,
without being carried into the Dithyrambicks of the Poets. Though these two Men
were great Judges, I do not know whether their Judgment be a sure Rule on these
Occasions. Lucian seems to me, to speak more justly of the Historical Style. A
Discourse of the manner of writing History.
This Author will have it clear, intelligible and natural, without being low,
and that the Figures, which give a Relish to the Discourse, should not be too
Sublime, or too far fetched. He allows indeed, the Style should swell a little
on some Occasions, provided the Writer forbear all Euthusiasm and Poletick
Rage. Excessive Strains and Lines, says Lucian, are the two greatest Faults of
an Historian. If a Writer would rise, let it rather be by the things he
represents, than Words. It is much better to relate Extraordinary things in a
plain and common manner, than to weaken the Thought by straining the
Imagination. I would have the Periods neither too long, nor too much studied;
and the Discourse neither too Numerous or neglected. That the Thoughts should
have more Solidity, than Luster. That they should come nearer the Reasons of a
Wise Statesman, than the witty Turns of a Declamer. In short, the Sentences
must not too frequently occur, not be too far asunder. They ought as it were,
to be enchased in the Body of the Work. Lucian requires much less than Cicero
or Quintilian; but how difficult is it to reach that just Mediocrity, with
which he is contented? Thucydides and Tacitus, strove to distinguish themselves
by a Nervous Eloquence, which says a great many things in a few Words. But they
have made themselves dark, and often are unintelligible. Titus Livy on the
contrary, is embarassed by his measured Periods. By seeking to give Number and
Harmony to his Discourse, he loses the weight of what should at first be
presented to the Readers View.

Polybius would have an Historian, to be a great Statesman. None will ever be
capable of Writing an History well, says he, nor escape committing great
Faults, till he has gained a Consummate Prudence by long Use, and a great
Experience in the Business of the World. For this reason, that Author who
himself was an excellent Officer in an Army, and Statesman, wished those who
had a share in the Government, and Important Negotiations, and knew the Reasons
and Motives of Enterprises, would apply themselves in the same manner he had
done, to give the History of their own Times, and never decline an Employment
so profitable and necessary to the Public. Polybius his Wish was good in a
Republic. Men of Estates and Letters, being ordinarily employed in these sort
of Governments, they are able to relate with more Art and Sincerity, the
Affairs they happen to manage, and discover to Posterity, the true Motives of
the Enterprises, and the different Interests of all Parties engaged with them.
For this Reason it is, the History of Thucydides and Polybius, deserve so much
to be commended. Their Probity shines in every line of their Works. The former
lived in the time of the Peloponnesian War, which he has described. He had an
Employ and Character in the Republic of Athens, whose Policy and Government he
perfectly well understood. Polyb. L. III. and V.
The other had been the Spectator of most of the things he relates: He had
assisted in the Execution of some of them. In short, he Commanded in
Enterprises, of which himself had been the Adviser. What Polybius had not seen,
he reports from the Accounts given him by those who had been Eyewitnesses of
them.

In vain it is to wish, the present Ministers of State would write the History
of their Times. These Gentlemen entirely, employed in making their Fortunes,
think they can bestow their time better in advancing themselves and their
Families. They will be sure not to give us an Exact and Faithful account of the
Intrigues, of the Cabinet and Court, and discover to the World the true Motives
of Wars, Alliances, and other Enterprises. Will they publish to the World their
own Roguery and Villainies? Will they speak sincerely of the Infamies and
Criminal Passions of a Prince, to whom they owe their Places and Preferments?
Will they tell the Artifices they used, to flatter or incense them, to ruin a
Rival of more Merit than themselves, or advance their own ill-deserving
Creatures? Statesmen and Ambassadors sometimes write Memoirs. But these are not
to be trusted to. Without fearing to make a rash Judgment, I will say, these
Writers of Quality are like certain Persons, who published the History of their
own Actions in Cicero's time. This Man, the vainest that ever lived, was even
dead with longing to see his Consulat writ by some eminent and able Pen. Ad
familiares. Lib. V. Ep. 12.
Displeased that he could not obtain what he so earnestly coveted, he was
tempted to do as others had done, and to write himself the Wonders of that
Consulat, with which he had stunned the World in his Orations, Books and
Letters. One thing restrained him. For, says he very Ingenuously, there are two
very great Inconveniences, in being the Historian of a Man's own Actions. He
must be too modest in his own Praises, and dissemble his Faults, to save his
Honor. See here the Condition of all Writers of Memoirs. If Decency requires
them not to speak too well of themselves, their Partiality leads them to
conceal, or at least palliate, what they have done amiss.

If an Historian ought to be a Statesman; for the same Reason he ought to be
skilful in the Art of War. Without this, how shall he describe an Incampment, a
Siege, or a Battle? If I may freely speak my Thoughts, these Particulars are
not very necessary in a General History. This Caution belongs more to a
particular Relation, or the Memoirs of a Man who intends to give Instructions
to those of his Profession. Dr. Burnet Bishop of Sal^sbury.
I have heard an eminent Prelate, who has a Noble Genius for writing History,
as well as for the Pulpit and Divinity say, That the late Mr. de Schombergh,
Marshall of France, and after a Duke in England, had advised him to forbear
entering too far into Particulars in Matters of War. None, said that excellent
General, but the most able Men of the Trade can speak well of these things. It
is almost impossible to know exactly all the Circumstances of an Action. The
General gives Orders, and after is ignorant of what passes. The Inferior
Officers must give an Account of what they do themselves. It is reasonable to
believe the Memoirs Caesar has left to Posterity should have the utmost
Exactness: Yet there were some Men in his time, who did not exceedingly rely on
them. Caesar, said they, Suetonius in Julio Caesare cap. 56.
too lightly gave credit to what was reported to him of other Men's Actions, and
is not very faithful in what he relates of his own; either because his Memory
deceived him, or he would not sincerely speak the Truth. Since it is difficult
to learn all the Circumstances of a Battle, where things on both sides are in
great Confusion, an Historian may be excused, if he do not inform us of all
Particulars. He may describe more exactly a March, an Incampment, or a Siege:
But of what use is this at bottom? Few have any Interest here, except those of
the Trade. The Business of History is more to form a Gentleman than to instruct
a Soldier or an Officer. These Reasons have prevailed with me to think I may
undertake to write the History of a Reign, which contains a great number of
Sieges and Battles, though I understand nothing of the Military Art.

I have not more Experience in Affairs of State, or Court Intrigues: This is
true. But on the other Hand, I do not relate the Actions of my own time. I have
chosen, with all the Industry and Judgment I am Master of, what is extant any
where, of all that passed in the Reign of Lewis XIII. There are some who
imagine a good History cannot be written, unless the Author have secret and
curious M^^^^^^ (...) This is the way some late Wri^^^^ (...) ^^ken to raise
and give a (...) Works. Varillas at first (...) by publishing, that (...)
Histories from Extracts of (...) in the King of France's Library, and Memoirs
preserved in the Cabinets of some of the chief Families of the Kingdom. But
when the World took the Pains to enquire into what this boasting Scribler bodly
advances, they soon discovered his Books were only Romances, wrote with
something of Easiness. And when they pressed him to name his Authorities, he
could only produce some exploded Writers, Manuscripts so confused, that no one
could find out the Truth, and Memoirs so secret, that the Persons who owned
them would not be named. For my part I will not dissemble, I have not yet
procured any of those rare and curious Memoirs. After the Example of Titus Livy
and Tacitus, who compiled their Histories out of the Works of those who writ
before them, I have carefully collected the best Things I could find in the
Country where I reside, and have composed out of them a continued History of
the Reign of Lewis XIII. in the most useful and instructive manner I was able.

I have taken that part of the Annals of Tacitus, which yet remains for my
Model; not for the Style, or that mysterious Air which he affects in every
thing he speaks of, but in the Design and Plan of the Work. It is plain, the
principal End Tacitus had in view, was to show by what Means and Degrees
Tyranny was entirely established in Rome after the Death of Augustus: And my
chief Aim is to show the Practices after the Death of Henry IV. to destory the
little remaining Liberty of France, to oppress the Clergy, the Nobility, and
People; in short, to lay the Foundations of an enormous Power, which has struck
a Terror into all Europe in our Days. Perhaps some will reproach me, that if I
want the Strength and the Sententious Style of Tacitus, at least I have
imitated his Malignity. Some charge him with giving an ill Turn to all the
Actions of those he speaks of, and finding no Virtue and Probity any where. But
not to say how small the number of the Good is, when a Man is obliged to bring
on the Stage ambitious Men, who sacrifice all to their Rise, and Fortunes: Base
and flattering Courtiers, who make no Scruple of betraying their Religion and
Country; Can he give these Actors the Part of an honest Man? All that can be
reasonably required of an Historian is, that Men being rarely entirely corrupt
and wicked, he should not conceal what is good and commendable, where he finds
it in the worst.

When an Author is obliged to censure a Man, Polybius, L. XII.
Polybius judiciously remarks, he must not have regard to what may please the
Enemies of him whom he speaks of. The Rules of Truth and Decency must be
inviolably kept. Those who are led by their Passions or Malice, are imprudent
and rash in their Relations and Judgments. Polybius had good Reason to blame a
Greek Historian, who had not Equity enough to own what was good in Agathocles
the Tyrant of Syracuse. If this Man, says he, whose first Employment was to
serve a Po^ter, knew how to make himself King of Sicily, and could embar^ss the
Potent Republic of Carthage, and die in the peaceful Possession of what he had
acquired, it cannot be denied, but Agathocles had rare Qualities; without these
could he have done any of these extraordinary Things? Historians ought then to
do him Justice, in delivering with the same Sincerity, what was Good or Ill in
him. This is the Rule which I propose to my self in respect of Cardinal
Richlieu, and some others. Though I think of that first Minister quite
otherwise than his Flatterers; for indeed I cannot regard, without Horror, a
Prelate, who sacrifices the Liberty of France, and the Repose of all Europe, to
his Ambitions; yet without falling into the violent Invectives of St. Germain,
and the Faction of Mary de Medicis, I will describe with pleasure what is Good
and Valuable in that Great Politician.

There is a Thing in which I would imitate Titus Livy, and Tacitus, and that is
Brevity. The first employs but Ten Books in relating what passed remarkable in
the Roman Commonwealth for several Ages; and the other has brought into one
small Volume the Reigns of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero. But I
believe it is impossible to be so short: The Reason presents it self to every
Man's view. The Roman Religion did not occasion any Disputes; it did not cause
Schisms and different Sects: Their Divinity had no Connection with Political
Matters. It is not so with Christianity: There are great Disputes in this: It
has always been divided into different Communions: Princes interest themselves,
and take a part in the Quarrels of Divines. Since the Popes have settled their
Monarchy in the Western World, the Court of Rome concerns her self in every
thing. So that Matters of Religion, Controversies of Divinity, the Interests
and Pretensions of Popes, Bishops, and the Clergy, the Cabals of Monks, and
diverse other Matters, which only regard the Church, considerably swell an
History. The good Fathers, the Jesuits, have been at the bottom of every thing
since the Rise of the Society. The Relation of their endless Intrigues,
Enterprises and Quarrels, is Work enough to employ an Historian.

Add to this, that in the Days of the Romans Things were in another Posture
than they are at present. There were not so many Treaties with neighboring
Nations, so many Intrigues in the Senate, among the People, and in the Court of
the Emperors. The Romans made War to extend their Territories; they had a small
number of Allies, whom they protected against the Powers that threatened them.
All Intrigues terminate in gaining the People by Donatives, or promising to
procure them a Dividend of Lands, or to obtain for them a greater Share in the
Government. The time of the greatest Intrigues in the Roman Commonwealth
doubtless was that of the two Triumvirates. We have not a very exact History of
this; but it is plain, all was transacted between some few Persons who had the
Address to procure the Command of Armies in the remote Provinces. Others fell
in with the prevailing Party, led by Ambition or Avarice. That which Tacitus
calls the Great Secret of Government, in the time of the Emperors, was to be
Masters of the Legions. He who had Interest or Money enough to procure them to
revolt, was soon proclaimed Emperor. After this he had nothing more to do, but
to beat out the old Possessor, or a Competitor. The Victor became lawful
Sovereign, and the Vanquished was declared an Usurper. In an Absolute and
Tyrannical Government, all things are ruled at the Pleasure of the Prince. The
Favorite and the Mistress have their Share in the Authority. When these are
once established, the Dagger, Poison, False Informations, and Violence, are the
Means they make use of to rid themselves of their Enemies, and preserve their
Power. Thus every thing was managed under the Successors of Augustus.

The History of such a State as I represent the Commonwealth and Empire of
Rome, cannot be very large. But the Affairs of all Christian Princes have so
great a Relation to each other, they make so many Leagues and Alliances
together; some for their own Greatness; others to defend themselves from their
ambitious Neighbors, that it is impossible to write the History of Germany,
France, Spain, or England, without speaking at the same time of what passes in
the rest of Europe. If two Petty Princes have any Difference, one implores the
Protection of the House of Austria, and the other throws himself into the Arms
of France. If the two Crowns commence a War, some of these declare for Spain,
others for France, in hopes of profiting by the Conjuncture. The Powers who
have the smallest Interest are at last obliged to side with one Party; or at
least to arm to keep the Balance even, and prevent the Conqueror from advancing
his Power too much, by the Ruins of the Vanquished. The Intrigues of each
Court; the Interests and Motions of Great Men in a State, where Arbitrary and
absolute Power is not well settled, cannot be so succinctly related. Those
Illustrious Historians, who shall write the present Reign in France, will be
obliged, if I guess aright, to enlarge more in proportion on the Affairs of the
Minority of Lewis XIV. than on what has happened since the Peace of the
Pyrenees. The Designs and Advances of the Prince of Conde, the Cardinal
Mazarin, and some Court Ladies, in the Parlements and Provinces, will fill a
greater Space than the Events since the Death of Philip IV. King of Spain.
Since Lewis XIV. has obtained what Richlieu and Mazarin had proposed, and
opened the way, to every thing is disposed of by one or two Ministers, a
Mistress, or a certain Lady. What Character this Great Woman ought to have,
Time perhaps will inform us. The Princes of the Blood, Great Lords, and
Parlements, all keep the Respect and Silence. All Wars, Alliances, and great
Affairs are resolved on, with the Ministers, Mistress, or the Lady. None can be
preferred, or obtain any Employ or Honor, but through one of these Channels.
There are no knotty, difficult Treaties abroad: Every thing is done by the
Power of Money or Threats. It is the King's Pleasure it should be so: This is
the Answer with which his Majesty's Ministers often pay those of Foreign
Sovereigns as well as their Master's Subjects.

Things were not so under the Reign of his Father. Mary de Medicis impatiently
endured the excessive Power of a Favorite or a Minister. The King's Brother
was not always in a Passive Humoun. If the first Prince of the Blood was weak,
a younger Brother of his House would not submit to creep to a Cardinal. Some of
the greatest and wealthiest Men of the Kingdom showed great Vigor and Courage
on diverse Occasions. The Reformed did not tamely suffer themselves to be
oppressed without making any Opposition. The Court was forced to keep Measures
with them, after they were Masters of their Cautionary Towns. The Monarchy of
Spain was not at that time so formidable abroad. But the Emperor Ferdinand II.
began to grow so Potent in Germany, that it was apprehended he would entirely
subdue it. There was a necessity to make Alliances with the King of Sweden, the
United Provinces, all the Protestant Princes, and those of Transylvania, which
created Trouble enough to the House of Austria. The Affair of Mantua caused
extraordinary Motions beyond the Alps. There was a Necessity to assist the
Duke, to preserve a Succession, which could not rightfully be contested. France
began a Treaty and joined with the Princes and States of Italy, alarmed at the
new Projects of the House of Austria. At length the Revolutions which happened
in Portugal and Catalonia, gave occasion to several Projects and Treaties on
the part of Spain. For these Reasons no one can write the History of Lewis
XIII. without entering into the Particulars of what happened all over Europe.
These are the Reasons why I have thought fit to proceed a little higher in some
places of the first Part in the Affairs of Foreign Countries. Gustavus
Adolphus, for instance, must make so great a Figure in this Work, that it was
almost indispensable to ^epresent how this Hero came to the Crown, to the
prejudice of Sigismund King of Poland, Son to his Father's elder Brother. None
can well understand the Affairs of the Empire under Ferdinand II. unless he
understand what passed about the end of Rodolphus, and under the Reign of
Matthias.

I have not a good Opinion enough of my self to think my Style such as Lucian
^equires for an History. Some of my Friends have told me, that the begininng of
a pretty large Work would endure ^eading. This is enough for me. The chief
Business of a Writer, is to profit the Public, by discovering the Truth or
Probability. For after all, in History we must often be content with the
latter. The Principal Facts are certain; but in ^he Reasons, Motives, and
Circumstances of an Action or Enterprise, there are ever ^ome Grounds of
doubting; and we must ^cquiesce in what is most likely. I am only follicitous
for the most essential Qua^ities of an Historian: Lib. II. de Oratore.
Not to dare to advance what he knows to be false, and to speak freely what he
knows to be true, without being biased by Prejudice. Discourse of the manner
of writing History.
Lucian on this Subject very judiciously says, That we must not imitate the
Painter, who invented the drawing Side-Faces to conceal the Defect of a Prince
who had ^ut one Eye. The Historian ought to paint Persons whole. Let not his
Affection for his Country hinder him from relating the Losses she has
sustained, or the Faults she has committed. An Historian is like an Actor:
Neither of them are accountable for the bad Parts they represent. The former is
obliged to prefer Truth to his Interest and Passions. This is the only Divinity
he should adore. He must ever have the Judgment of Posterity in his sight, if
he would pass more for an Historian than a Flatterer.

It is reported, Alexander desired to revive for a little time after his Death.
He would have been pleased to see what Men would then say of a Prince who had
made such a noise in the World. I do not wonder, said he, to find every one
praise me now. Some are afraid of me; others court my Favor. If Princes judged
as reasonably as this Conqueror, to whom they so much love to hear themselves
compared, they would not be at the trouble to here Writers, or cause Triumphal
Arches and Statues to be erected; nor assemble Men of Letters to form Designs
for Medals to be coined to their Honor; or to compose Magnificent Inscriptions
to be engraven on Marble or Brass, at the Pedestal of their Statues, or over a
Triumphal Arch, or the Gates of a Capital or other conquered Places. Contented
with well governing their People, and making them happy, they would leave to
them the Care of immortalizing their Benefactor after his Death. What Service
will those Histories, wrote by Command, those Monuments of your Vanity, or the
Flattery of Mercenary Wretches then do you? An Historian, who will not be led
by Fear or Hope, Friendship or Hatred; who is of no Country or Party; who will
call Things by their Names, without caring whether he please or give Offense;
such an Author, I say, as Lucian requires, with one Stroke of his Pen, will
show the ridiculous Folly of your Pride, and the Baseness of your Flatterers.

Polybius, who may be called the Master and Model of good Historians, had given
the same Precepts as Cicero and Lucian. A private Man, says he, Polybiu^. L. I.
ought to love his Friends and his Country. He may show his Affection to those
who do them good, and his Aversion to their Enemies. But when a Man has once
put on the Person of an Historian, he must forget all that. Then you are often
obliged to speak Good of your Enemies, and to praise them when their Actions
deserve it. Farther, you ought to blame your nearest Kindred, and expose their
Shame, if they have committed unexcusable Faults. Take Truth from History, and
it is like an Animal which has lost its Eyes: What remains is useless. Let none
then scruple to reprehend his Friends and praise his Enemies. Let him not fear,
on certain Occasion, to condemn those Persons, whose Merit he commonly extols.
Those who are at the Helm do not always succeed, on the contrary they do not
eternally commit Faults. A good Author ought to judge of things without respect
to Persons, speaking of these as the Subject requires. For my part, I so little
fear being Censured for the Fault, Frenchmen are usually reproached with, of
being fond of their own Nation, that I do not know whether I ought not to
justify my self here to my Countrymen, for not speaking through the whole
Series of this Work, very Advantageously of France and its Government. They
would not do me Justice, if they thought I was fallen out with my Native Land,
and this had introduced me to leave it.

I am a Frenchman, and I think it an Honor to be so; but I am not so partial
to my Country, as to think it far Superior to any other. There is good Sense,
Merit and Virtue to be found in all places. If some Nations have more Vivacity
and Politeness than others, these Advantages are not so considerable, that they
should set themselves far above their Neighbors. Those People which some
Persons look on as heavy, have often more good Sense, Solidity, and Plain
dealing, than others that value themselves on their good Taste, Sharpness and
Wit. The one without Dispute, is infallibly more valuable than the other. My
Native Country is very dear to me, and I take pleasure in professing it. But I
love it as an honest Man ought to do. To wish well to a Man's Countrymen, to
pray God they may want nothing which can make them completely happy in this
World, or the next, is in my Opinion, to have a true and sincere Love for a
Man's Country. And I can protest, God be praised, I have such a Disposition of
Mind. St. Paul wished, all his Auditors might become as he was, except in his
Bonds. I pray in the same manner, for all Frenchmen. May Heaven grant they all
become like me, except being almost under a necessity to leave their Native
Country, to follow the Light of their Conscience. If I am bound to France by
that grateful Sense which a Reasonable Man ought to have for a Civil Society,
where God has given him Birth; this does not hinder me from thinking my self
united to other Nations, by the Ties of Religion and Humanity. France may be
Happy and Flourishing, without disturbing its Neighbors, or unjustly Usurping
another Right. Because I am of a Nation, must I desire to see her Mistress of
Europe? Must I applaud the boundless Ambition of the Prince who governs her?
Must I praise my Countrymen for working Fetters and Chains to bind themselves
withal? Natural Justice requires me to contribute all I can, to the Prosperity
and Repose of my Native Land, and that I should defend it when unjustly
attacked. But I am bound by the same Laws of Nature, to prevent my Countrymen
from destroying, and doing Mischief to others. Very far from extolling their
Ignominous Slavery, and Criminal Enterprises, Reason and Religion require me to
Condemn, and Oppose them to the utmost of my Power.

By a strange Inversion of Language and Reason, a Man in France is said to be
well affected to the Government, when he shows I know not what ridiculous Zeal
for the Power of the King. Is the King, then the whole State? These two things
are very different. The State signifies a certain number of Men Associated, and
living under the same Laws. The King is the Person who has the Charge of
Supporting them, and providing for the Welfare of the People. In what does the
Happiness of a Nation consist? That she is only obliged to obey Laws confirmed
by a long Use, or made in such manner, as was agreed on by the People in their
first Confederacy, or in the Assemblies held after; in the Safe and Unmolested
enjoyment of their Estates, and the Fruits of their Industry, without having
these taken away from them by Force; in Taxes and Public Duties being so
equally Levied, that no Man pay more than he conveniently can. To love the
Government or ones Country, is ardently to wish it all the Advantages which a
Man would give his Life to procure, when they are wanting, or to preserve them,
when she has the good fortune to enjoy them. In this Sense it is pleasant and
Honorable, for a Man to die for his Country. To love, as it is called in
France, the Power and Glory of the King, is to labor for the Establishing
Tyranny. Since the Principles and Detestable Policy of Machiavel, have been
brought into Europe, a Prince thinks himself Glorious and Potent, if he has
found a way to become Absolute Master of the Lives and Estates of his People,
and securely make himself Great, at the Expense of his Neighbors. If this be
not true Tyranny, all Men in the World are deceived. What do they understand by
the word Tyranny? The Government of those, who only propose their own Profit.

Why should I Dissemble? The love I have for my Country, gives me an extreme
Aversion for these Politics pernicious to Mankind. I cannot value those who
pursue these Maxims, whatever good Qualities they have, or however eminent
their Rank in the World be. Let some Persons born to Slavery, if they please,
rail at me as a Seditious Author. This is the Language now for those who still
preserve Love for Liberty, in a Country where it is almost Extinguished. I am
not in any pain about it. A Learned Man Condemned the History of the Famous Mr.
de Thou, because it is writ, said he, with a Liberty which does not suit with
the Age. I have not the Presumption to compare my self with that Great Man. He
was infinitely above me by his Birth, and Rank; and yet more by his Sublime
Genius and Universal Knowledge. The Love of Truth, is the only thing in which I
think I may imitate him; I will dare to say, in which I strive to surpass him.
His Character, his Employs, his Relation to the Court, have obliged him to some
Management, which I may lawfully dispense with. If his Liberty did not agree
with his Time, mine will seem less proper for ours. But let the World speak as
it pleases, I will follow the Example of this Great Man, who despised
Mean-spirited Censors. We are not less free than the Men of former times, why
should we not speak the Truth as well as they?

There is nothing remains now, but for me to give a Reason, why in publishing
this History, I have not waited till it was entirely finished. A great Book
frightens the World. The Reign of Lewis XIII. has certain Remarkable Periods,
the Majority of the King, the Removal of the Queen Mother, the Ministry of
Cardinal Richelieu, the taking of Rochell, the Foreign War. The Reader may
Repose himself at each of these Periods, where there is a considerable change
of Affairs. For this Reason, I have divided this Work into different Parts,
perhaps the Reader will not be Displeased, to have them one after the other.
The Judgment which the Public makes of the first, may set me right, and be of
use in the following ones. Those who will favor me with the Communication of
any Memoirs, may adress them if they please to the Bookseller. They will be
thankfully received, and made use of with the Discretion they can reasonably
expect, whether they desire to have the Honor of them, or will not be known. I
shall only desire they will not take it amiss, that every thing be duly
examined, nor expect we should engage our selves to praise or blame, what does
deserve neither.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I. THE Plan of this Work. The State of Europe and France, at the end of
the Reign of Henry IV. Preparations for War. The Prince of Conde's Flight.
Henry IV. prepares to March at the Head of his Army. He is Assassinated the
14th of May, 1610. The Queen labors to be declared Regent during the Minority
of Lewis XIII. her Son. Lewis XIII. sits in his Seat of Justice the first time.
Intrigues and Cabals at Court, in the beginning of the Regency of Mary de
Medicis. The Trial and Execution of Ravillac. The Condemnation of Mariana's
Book and Doctrines. The Funeral of Henry IV. The Good and Ill Qualities of that
Prince. The Regents Council resolve to send Aid to Juliers. Edicts revoked to
ease the People. A Declaration in Favor of the Protestants. The Prince of
Conde's Return. His Arrival at Paris. Two Powerful Factions at Court. The
Prince of Conde Head of the one, the Count of Soissons of the other. The
Marshall de Bouillon attempts to unite the two Parties. The Queen Traverses
this Reunion. The Rise of Conchini, the new Marquess of Ancre. The King of
Spain's Prospect in renewing the Treaty of the double Marriage. Differences
between the Emperor Rodolphus, and the Archduke Matthias, his Brother. A
Treaty of Peace between the two Brothers. Matthias is Elected and Crowned King
of Hungary. The Discontent of the Protestants of Austria appeased. Quarrels
about Religion in Bohemia. The Pacification of the Troubles in Bohemia. The
Diet of Prague in 1610. The Emperor gives the Elector of Saxony, the Countries
of Cleves and Juliers. The Siege and taking of Juliers by Maurice Prince of
Orange. The Meeting at Cologne, to determine the Affairs of Cleves and Juliers.
Reflections on the Coronation Oath. The Oath that James I. King of England
required of his Popish Subjects, occasions a Dispute of the Independance of
Sovereigns in Temporal Matters. Paul V. forbids the English of his Communion,
to take the Oaths. King James prints an Apology for his Oath, without putting
his Name to it. He declares himself Author of the Apology. He Addresses this to
all the Princes and States of Christendom. Coeffeteau writes against the
Apology. Cardinal Bellarmine addresses to the Emperor, and all the Kings of the
Papal Communion, his Answer to the King of Englands Apology. The Sentence of
the Parliament of Paris, against Cardinal Bellarmine's Discourse of the
Authority of the Pope. The King of Spain's Edict against the XI. Volume of
Cardinal Baronius; his Ecclesiastical Annals. Differences of the Marquess of
Ancre with the Count of Soissons, and the Duke of Epernon. Their
Reconciliation; a Party made at Court against the Duke of Sully. BOOK II. A
Quarrel between Bellegarde and Conchini. The Count of Soissons falls out with
the Cardinal of Joyeuse, and the Duke of Epernon. A Difference of the Count of
Soissons, with the Prince of Conde his Brother. The two Princes Reconciled.
Another great difference of the Count of Soissons and the Duke of Guise. The
Duke of Guise is Reconciled to the Count of Soissons. The Duke of Sully's
Disgrace. The first President de Harlay, lays down his Place. A Cabal to hinder
Mr. de Thou from succeeding him. La d' Escouman charges the Marquess de
Vernueil, and the Duke of Epernon, with being concerned in the Murder of Henry
IV. She is Condemned. Reflections on her Sentence. The State of the House of
Austria in Germany. The Ambitious Designs of Leopold of Austria, Bishop of
Strasburgh, and Passaw on the Kingdom of Bohemia. The Troops of Leopold advance
into Bohemia. Matthias King of Hungary, Marches to the Assistance of Bohemia.
He is Crowned King of Bohemia. A Cabal at the Court of France, against the Duke
of Epernon. The Cardinal of Joyeuse and the Duke of Epernon resolve to leave
the Court. The Marquess of Ancre designs to Marry his Son to the Princess of
Soissons. The Count of Soissons accepts the Proposition. The Duke of Epernon's
Generosity. The Cardinal of Joyeuse's Instructions upon his going to Rome. The
Regent justifies her self to Paul the V. upon what she did in Favor of the
Protetestants. Complaints of the Court of France, against the Duke of Savoy.
The Perplexity of the Duke of Savoy, upon the Death of Henry IV. The other
Princes of Italy not less Embarassed, than the Duke of Savoy. The Prudent
Conduct of the Senate of Venice. The ill Designs of the Court of Spain, against
the Duke of Savoy. Diverse Treaties to oblige the King of Spain, and the Duke of
Savoy, to Disarm in Italy. The King of Spain demands the Duke of Savoy to make
him Satisfaction by way of Preliminary. France lays down her Arms in Dauphine.
She has some Jealousy of the Spaniards remaining in Arms in Italy. The Voyage
of Philibert Prince of Savoy into Spain. The Form of the Satisfaction which the
Prince of Savoy gave the King of Spain for his Father. The Reconcilement of the
Duke of Savoy to Spain. Velasco Constable of Castile, and Governor of Milan,
receives Order to lay down his Arms. Diverse Projects of the Duke of Savoy. The
Duke of Savoy resolves to Attack Geneva, and the Country of Vaux. The Council
of France resolves to protect them. At length they force the Duke of Savoy to
lay down his Arms. The Civil Meeting of the Protestants of France. The
Protestants preparation to hold a General Meeting. The Marshall of Bouillon
suffers himself to be won by the Court. The Meeting of the Reformed is
Transferred from Chatelleraut to Saumur. The Reconciliation of the Marshall of
Bouillon, and the Duke of Sully. The Protestants renew their Oath of Union. The
Duke of Sully's Affair proposed in the Meeting at Saumur. The Duke of Sully's
Remonstrance to the Assembly. A Discourse between the Marshall of Bouillon and
the Duke of Rohan, about the Duke of Sully's Affair. The Assembly declares for
the Duke of Sully. The Court undertakes to break up the Meeting at Saumur. A
Division in the Meeting at Saumur. The Wisdom of Du Plessis Mornay, on that
occasion. The Book of Du Plessis Mornay, against the Papacy. The Book of Du
Plessis Mornay is censured by the Faculty of Paris. Reflections on this
Censure. The Troubles of Aix la Chapelle. The Meeting of several Protestant
Princes of Germany, about the Affairs of Cleves and Juliers. The Princes of the
Protestant League, meet at Rottenburgh in Bavaria. The Death of the Elector of
Saxony. The Electoral Diet at Neurembergh. The Elector's Requests to the
Emperor. The Emperor's Answer. The Death of the Queen of Spain. The Death of
the Duke and Duchess of Mayenne. The Duchess of Lorrain, and the Cardinal of
Gonzaga, come to the Court of France. The Count of Soissons discontented. The
Faculty of Paris Censures the three Panegyricks of Ignatius Loyola. Reflections
on the Miracles ascribed to Saint Ignatius, and the Character given him.
Disturbances at Troies in Champagne, about the Settlement of the Jesuits in
that City. The Process of the University of Paris against the Jesuits, upon the
opening their College there. Disputes on the Questions of Grace and
Predestination. The Rise of Arminianism in Holland. Vorstius is chosen to
succeed Arminius. James the I. King of England, opposes the Election of
Vorstius. The King of England's Apology for his Conduct in the Business of
Vorstius. Revolutions in Sweden, after the Death of Gustavus Ericson. John King
of Sweden, Attempts to change the Religion Established by his Father. Sigismund
King of Sweden, is chosen King of Poland. He succeeds to the Kingdom of Sweden.
Differences between King Sigismund, and Charles Duke of Sudermannia. The States
of Sweden give the Regency of the Kingdom in the absence of King Sigismund, to
the Duke of Sudermannia. The Duke of Sudermannia, and the Senate of Sweden are
divided. King Sigismund Attempts in vain to reduce the Duke of Sudermannia by
Force. The States of Sweden depose King Sigismund. Charles Duke of Sudermannia,
is chosen King of Sweden. The King of Sweden sends the Challenge to the King of
Denmark. The Death of Charles King of Sweden. BOOK III. THE State of France
since the Regency of Mary de Medicis. The Treaty of the double Marriage between
France and Spain. The double Marriage is concluded between the two Kings.
Intrigues in the Court of France, when the Treaty of the double Marriage was
known there. The double Marriage at last passes in the Council of France. The
Popes Nuncio complains of the Sentence of Parliament, on the Process of the
University of Paris, against the Jesuits. The Nuncio's Invectives against the
Advocate-General Servin. The Nuncio's Advances to the Parliament, to procure a
Modification of the Sentence. The Nuncio's Intrigues with the Clergy. The
Difficulties of the Jesuits, to keep even in their Conduct to the Court of
Rome, and Parliament of Paris. A Book of Doctor Richer, Syndic of the Faculty of
Paris, makes a great Noise there. The Cardinal du Perron, and the Bishops of
the Province of Sens, assembled together to Condemn Richers Book. Richer has
the Syndicat of the Faculty of Paris taken from him. Public Rejoycings for the
double Marriage. New Disturbances in the Court of France. The Duke of Mayenne
is sent into Spain, to demand the Infanta for the King. Matthias King of
Hungary and Bohemia, is Elected Emperor after the Death of Rodolphus II.
Antonio Memmi is chosen Doge of Venice, after the Death of Leonard Donato, The
Embassy of the Marshall of Bouillon into England. The Discontent of the
Marshall Lesdiguieres. Mary de Medicis depresses ^e Factions of the Duke of
Guise and Epernon. The Count of Soissons undertakes to ruin the Ministers, and
engages outragiously, to Attack the Chancellor de Sillery. The Marquess de
Coeuvres diverts the Count of Soissons from this Enterprise. The Impostures of
the Marquess of Ancres. Some Persons suborned to accuse him of Magic. The
Affair of the Duke of Rohan at St. John of Angeli. The Reconciliation of the
French Protestant Lords. The Protestation of the National Synod of Privas, in
the Name of all the Reformed Churches of France, against the King's New
Declaration. The Entry of the Duke of Pastrane into Paris. The Signing of the
Marriage Articles between the Prince of Spain, and the Eldest Daughter of
France. The Duke of Mayenne's Entry into Madrid. The Signing the Marriage
Articles between Lewis XIII, and the Infanta of Spain. A Conspiracy against the
Duke of Parma. A Discourse of Marrying Christina second Daughter of France, to
Henry Prince of Wales. The Death of Henry Prince of Wales. The Fortunes of
Robert Carr in England. The Death of the Count of Soissons. A New Face of the
Court of France. The Condemnation of a Book of the Jesuit Becanus. The Sentence
of the Parliament of Paris, against a Book of Schioppius. Peace between the
Crowns of Sweden and Denmark. Revolutions in Muscovy. A False Demetrius in
Poland. Demetrius enters Muscovy, and causes himself to be Crowned there.
Demetrius and a great number of Poles are Massacred at Moscow. Susky is made
Czar of Muscovy, and after lays down. Ladislaus Prince of Poland, is proclaimed
Czar of Muscovy. The Polanders are driven out of Muscovy, and Michael
Federovitz is elected Czar. BOOK IV. THE Baron de Luz is killed by the
Chevalier of Guise. The Regents Anger against the Guises. The Duke of Guise
desires to combine with the Prince of Conde. The Queen becomes jealous of the
Prince of Conde. The Violence and Mercenary Temper of the Duke of Guise. The
generous Sense of the Duke of Epernon. The Regent is Reconciled to the Dukes of
Guise and Epernon. The Ancient Ministers are recalled. The Confusion and
Perplexity of the Prince of Conde. The young Baron de Luz is killed again by
the Chevalier of Guise. The Death of Francis Duke of Mantua. New Projects of
the Duke of Savoy, upon this occasion. Artifices of the Duke of Savoy. The
Governor of Milan demands the Duchess Dowager of Mantua, and her Daughter. The
Regent of France opposes the Duke of Savoy's designs. The Pope's Conduct in the
Affair of Mantua. The Republic of Venice supports the Cardinal of Mantua.
Ferdinand, Cardinal de Gonzaga, takes the Character of Duke of Mantua. New
Efforts of the Duke of Savoy, to fetch away from Mantua, the Princess Mary his
Granddaughter. Ambitious Projects of the Duke of Savoy. The Duke of Savoy
carries Montserrat. This Enterprise is the cause of New Metions in Italy.
Manifesto's of the Duke of Savoy, and the Cardinal Duke of Mantua. Artifices
and Bravades of the Duke of Savoy. His Intrigues at the Court of France are
discovered. The Marquess of Ancre being found Intriguing with the Duke of
Savoy, is exceedingly Embarassed. The Ministers are reconciled to the Marquess
of Ancre. The Court resolves to send a powerful Aid to the House of Mantua. The
Queen is diverted from sending Aid so soon to the Cardinal Duke. The King of
Spain declares against the Duke of Savoy. The Emperor requires the Duke of
Savoy to desist from his Enterprise on Montferrat. The Governor of Milan
constrains the Duke of Savoy, to submit to the King of Spain's pleasure. A
difference between the Duke of Nevers, and the Governor of Milan. The Marriage
of the Elector Palatin, to a Daughter of the King of England. A Discourse
concerning the Marriage of Charles Prince of Wales, with Christina of France.
The Emperor Matthias comes to the Diet at Ratisbon. The Catholics and
Protestants reciprocally complain of each other. The ill success of the Diet at
Ratisbon. The Fortune of Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania. A difference
between the Houses of Brandenburgh and Neuburgh, about the Government of Cleves
and Juliers. Prince Wolfgang of Neuburgh, Marries the Sister of the Duke of
Bavaria, and changes his Religion. Difficulties to make the Peace concluded
between the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua lasting. The Governor of Milan presses
the Duke of Savoy to Disarm. The Dukes Evasion. The Governor of Milan demands
the Princess of Mantua on the King of Spains part. The King of Spains Views in
this demand. The Republic of Venice traverses the King of Spain's Designs. The
Perplexity of Mary de Medicis in the Business of Mantua. A Proposition made to
the Council of France, to cause Troops to march into Italy. The Regent sends
the Marquess de Coeuvres into Italy, to treat an Accommodation between the
Dukes of Savoy and Mantua. The vast Ambition of Conchini, made a Marshall of
France, and Galigai his Wife. A Continuation of the Disputes about Grace and
Predestination in the United Provinces. A new Contest in Holland about the
manner of choosing Pastors. The Differences in the United Provinces increase. A
Conference at Delft between the Remonstrants and Contraremonstrants. The
Prejudice of James King of England against the Arminians is abated. Sibrund, a
Frieseland Minister, publishes a Libel on the States of Holland. Grotius is
ordered to reply. An Edict of the States of Holland to compose the Differences
about the Questions of Predestination and Grace. BOOK V. A New Party formed at
Court by the Marechal of Bouillon. Artifices of the Duke of Savoy to raise a
Civil War in France. Different Measures proposed to the Council of Franco, for
dispersing the Prince of Conde's Faction. The Regent's Circular Letter upon the
Retreat of the Prince of Conde, and some Lords of his Faction. The Duke of
Nevers seizes the Citadel of Mezieres in Champagne. The Prince of Conde writes
a Letter to the Regent in form of a Manifesto. The Weakness of the Parliament of
Paris on this Occasion. Reflections on the Answer the Cardinal of Perron made
the Prince of Conde. The Reply of Mary de Medicis to the Prince of Conde. Mary
de Medicis raises Six Thousand Swisses: Bassompierre is made Colonel General of
the Swisses in the Duke of Rohan's Place. The Conduct of the Reformed in France
in the Prince of Conde's Business. The Wisdom of Du Plessis. The Prince of
Conde solicits the Reformed. The wise Reply of du Plessis Mornay to the Regent
and the Prince of Conde. The Duke of Rohan seems to hear the Prince of Conde's
Propositions. The Duke of Vendome's Evasion. He writes into Britany. The Death
of the Constable of Montmorency. The Duke of Savoy shuns meeting the Marquess
de Coeuvres, Ambassador from France into Italy. The Jealousy of the Princes
and States of Italy, occasioned by the Correspondence of the Two Crowns, about
the Affairs of that Country. The Spaniards secretly traverse the Treaty carried
on by the Marquess de Coeuvres. The Cardinal-Duke of Mantua accepts the
Conditions proposed by the Marquess de Coeuvres. The Duke of Savoy seems
likewise to accept them. Troops are raised at Turin. The Treaty of the Duke of
Ventadour and the other Commissioners of the King with the Prince of Conde, and
those of his Party. The Prince retires to Soissons, and goes into Champagne. A
Division in the Regent's Council on the Demands which the Prince of Conde and
the Malcontents make, with respect to their private Interests. Intrigues of
the Marshal of Ancre to divert the Regent from making War on the Prince of
Conde. The Pope's Nuncio's reasoning on the Resolution taken to make Peace with
the Prince of Conde. An Examen of the Political Reflection of a Venetian Author
of the Treaty made with the Prince of Conde. A Treaty concluded at St. Menehoud
between the Regent and the Prince of Conde. The Sentiments of the Parliament of
Paris against a Book of Suarez the Jesuit. Paul V. complains of the Proceedings
of Parliament against Suarez's Book. A Discourse of the Pope to the French
Ambassador upon the Parlements Sentence. The Conduct of the Court of France to
satisfy the Pope. The Jesuits stir to have the Parlement's Sentence burnt. The
King's Declaration in his Council concerning the Parlement's Sentence. The Pope
will not be satisfied with the King's Declaration. The King at last is obliged
to suspend the Execution of the Parlements Sentence. Differences in the Court
of France. The Duke of Vendome refuses to accept the Treaty of Menehoud. The
Ability and Prudence of du Plessis Mornay. Mary de Medicis sends the Marquess
de Coeuvres to the Duke of Vendome to dispose him to an Accommodation. A new
Disturbance of the Prince of Conde. An Interview of the Prince of Conde and the
Duke of Rohan. The Prince of Conde thinks to make himself Master of Poitiers. A
great Tumult at Poitiers. The Gates of the City are shut against the Prince. He
retreats to Chateouroux in Berry. A Remonstrance of du Plessis Mornay to the
Regent. The King and Queen Mother go to Poitiers. The Queen goes to Nants in
Brettany to hold a Meeting of the States. The Prince of Conti's Death. New
Differences between the Princes of Brandenburgh and Newburgh, about the
Administration of the Countries of Cleves and Juliers. The Town of Aix la
Chapelle is put under the Ban of the Empire. The Marquess of Spinola reduces
the Town of Aix la Chapelle, and seizes diverse Places in the Countries of
Cleves and Juliers. Maurice Prince of Orange takes diverse Places in the same
Country. A Conference at Santheim about the Succession of Cleves and Juliers.
The Duke of Savoy is more embroiled with Spain than ever. He seeks to gain the
Venetians into his Interests. The Marquess of Rambouillet is sent Ambassador
Extraordinary into Italy. An open War between Spain and Savoy. Several Things
writ on both sides. The Pope's Nuncio and French Ambassador labor for an
Accommodation between them. The Duke of Savoy accepts the Conditions proposed,
and Spain refuses them. The King of Spain is not satisfied with the Governor
of Milan's Conduct. The Majority of Lewis XIII. His first Act. Sits in his Seat
of Justice. Education of Lewis XIII.
THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS XIII. King of France and Navarre.
BOOK I.
THE Reign, whose History I am about to write, The Plan of the Work.
abounds in Great Events. Here is a Scene of Civil and Foreign Wars, Bloody
Battles, Towns attacked and defended with great Conduct and Courage; The
Protestants oppressed in France, and supported in Hungary, Germany, and the
United Provinces; The Nobility, Clergy, Parlements and People reduced to
Slavery. A King unable to extricate himself from those Difficulties in which
some were still busy to involve him, leaves the Care of Affairs to his
Favorites and Ministers. Alike averse to his Mother, his Wife, his Brother; he
treats the one ill, and obliges the rest to form Leagues at Home and Abroad,
and at last to throw themselves into the Hands of the ancient Enemies of
France. The Princes of the Blood, and the Great Lords disgusted, sometimes at
the ill Administration of a Regent, at other times with the excessive Power of
a Favorite or Minister, rise under the specious Pretense of a Concern for the
Public Good. The Protestants driven to Extremity by the frequent Infractions
of the most inviolable Edict that ever was, at last take Arms to defend the
Liberty of their Consciences, and preserve those Securities which had been so
justly granted them in the preceding Reign.

The Enterprises of the House of Austria on the Princes of Italy, force them to
have recourse to the Protection of France, and make an Alliance with her. These
Sovereigns, jealous of their Repose and Liberty, see, without concern, the Duke
of Savoy give up to the King of France a Place which opens a way into Italy,
whenever he shall think fit to send any Aid thither. A great Conqueror coming
from the Extremities of the North to defend those of his Religion in Germany,
overthrows the ambitious Projects of the Courts of Vienna and Madrid. The
Emperor trembles, and fears to lose his Hereditary Countries; and France, by
the help of a League opportunely made with Sweden, forces from the House of
Austria part of her ancient Patrimony. The Success of the Spanish Arms in
Picardy strikes a Terror into Paris it self. The King of France comes out of
his Capital to repulse the Enemy, and cannot refrain from Tears to see the Fire
advanced so near the Gates of his own Palaces. The Revolutions on the other
side the Pyrences change the Face of Affairs. Catalonia surrenders to Lewis
XIII. and Portugal drives out the Spaniards, and replaces the Duke of B^aganza
on the Throne of his Ancestors. Philip the IV. in a Consternation leaves Madrid
to secure the Country of Arragon, and reduce the Catalonians. But no soon^r
does he begin this Expedition, but he receives the unwelcome News, that France
had seized the Town of Perpigan and the County of Rousillon.

In this Variety of Events there may be ^und many eminent Instances of Virtue
and Vice, Treachery richly rewarded, ^e highest Posts of Honor obtained by ^e
most infamous Crimes, some few be^owed on Merit, great Preferments re^cted with
Contempt, from Motives of ^eligion and Probity. Some great Lords ^eanly ransom
their Lives and Estates by coming Slaves to an Ambitious and Revengeful
Cardinal: Others threatened to be made a Sacrifice to his Passions and Interest,
with a Noble Haughtiness continue faithful to their Friends, and suffer Death
with an Heroic Courage.

This Fragment of the Modern History of France, which I design to illustrate,
is so curious and full of Variety, it would soon tempt a Man who would employ
his Time in writing something Diverting and Instructive. However the boldness
of the Attempt has often awed me, and perhaps it is above my Abilities. If I
praise the principal Actors who appear upon the Stage, I am in danger of being
censured for Flattery; and if I speak too freely, I am sure to be charged with
Detraction. Constant Panegyric disgusts and incenses most Readers. They love
to have the Vices and secret Passions of Men laid open. This Air of Freedom
pleases and diverts them. But if I should indulge this natural Inclination we
have to hea^ others condemned, will not the World too say I am making a Satyr,
and not wri^ting a History?

I shall endeavor then to avoid the^ two Extremes with all possible Care. have
no Inducement to praise or bla^^ Persons who were almost all dead before I came
into the World. What particular Reason can I have to love or hate them The
difference of Opinion in Matters Religion and Government shall not hind the
from doing Justice to Merit, or conmending what is worthy of Praise. I am,
thanks to God, in a Country where every one enjoys a Happiness, which is so
rare in this World, to speak their reasonable Thoughts with freedom. If I am
not in a Capacity to do my Country Service. I have the Liberty to deplore its
Misfortunes.

The State of Europe and of France at the end of the Reign of. Henry IV.
Before I enter upon the Matter, I shall promise some few Things of Henry the
Fourth, and the End of his Life. Its necessary to know the Posture of Affairs
in Europe and France, when this latter lost one of the greatest Monarchs she
ever had. He employed the first Years of his Reign in reducing by force of
Arms, or gaining by Treaties, all who had formed a potent League against him,
under Color of Religion, and in carrying on a War against Philip II. King of
Spain. This Ambitious Monarch had supported the League with a mighty Assistance
of Men and Money, out of a Design to place a Prince of his House on the Throne
of France, or at least to dismember that Monarchy, whose Power was an
invincible Obstacle to the vast Projects he had conceived. But finding himself
worn out with Infirmities of Body, and seeing his Country quite exhausted by
the Immense Sums he expended, and the great number of Soldiers and Ships which
he lost in his Wars against the United Provinces of the Low Countries, England,
and France. Philip, I say, after so many Men, and so much Treasure consumed in
vain, was glad to make Peace with Henry on such Conditions as the State of
France, not less exhausted than Spain, could not give them leave to hope for.

Elizabeth Queen of England, and the States of the United Provinces made loud
Complaints, that the King abandoned his good and faithful Allies in pre^sing ^o
cagerly the Conclusion of the Treaty with Philip. T^^^, say they, is a sure way
to lose the favorable Opportunity of taking those Advantages against Spain,
which its low and declining Condition must have put in our Hands. Henry excused
this Proceeding of his as well as he could, alleging the Incapacity of his
Kingdom to support a Foreign War, after it had been so miserably harassed by a
Domestic one, which had lasted so many Years, and was not yet well
extinguished. The Reason was specious: But the King seemed impatient to give
himself up to his Pleasures, and with ease to enjoy so fair a Succession, which
he had purchased with so much Hazard and Trouble.

It must be owned Henry had good Reason to distrust his Strength for the future
The Duke of Mercoeur, penned up in Britany, would not have made his Peace, if
he had not believed that of Spain entirely resolved on. Besides, the
Protestants of France, who had served a King bred up amongst them, with so much
Courage and Constancy, took Umbrage and Jealousy. His changing his Religion
and the Favors, with which he purchased the friendship of the Great Men, who
had been Leagued against him, began to Alarm them; and his New Engagements to
the Court of Rome, their crael and implacable Enemy, had like to have cooled
them. Henry prudently confirmed his best Subjects by the Edict of Nantes, which
was concerted with great Industry and Deliberation. Happy had they been, if the
Successors of this good Prince, had left them peaceably to enjoy what he so
justly granted them.

No sooner was Peace settled at home and abroad, but Henry strove to win the
Hearts of his Subjects, by publishing he would labor incessantly to make them
live in Ease and Plenty. Several Manufactures were set up, and some certain
Duties taken off: It is probable the great Debts he contracted, and the
engagement of a great part of his Revenue, would not give him leave to take
away diverse others very burthensom, and made him give ear to all Projects, for
bringing Money into his own Coffers. But in all this he had the Address to
prevent, and stifle all Murmurs by making the French Nation since for a long
time accustomed to patience, believe his greatest desire was to make them
happy. The King flattered himself, he should check the turbulent humor of
diverse great Men, and perhaps by degrees, ruin them by engaging them after his
Example, to make excessive expenses in Buildings, Play, and other more Criminal
Pleasures. In this he found his Account in a double manner. It was his natural
Inclination, though he was a Manager good enough; and those who could embroil
the State, would be drained of Money and Credit, and forced to depend on the
bounty of their Prince.

This did not succeed in all points, as he had projected it. If the Constable
of Montmorency, the Dukes of Montpensier, and Epernon, the Mareschals of
Bouillon and Biron did not proceed so far, as to take Arms to express their
Resentment; some because they were not Rewarded according to their mind, others
because some Ministers Confidents of the King, had a greater share in secret
Councils than themselves: Yet these I ords created him great Disquiet. The just
punishment of Biron, the most imprudent and violent of all the Malcontents and
the Submissions of the Marshall de Bouillon, Defeated the Conspiracy which
Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, had laid in his Journey to Paris, and Philip the
III. the New King of Spain, had promised to support. That of the Marquise de
Vernueil, a Mistress of the King, who had foolishly promised to make her his
Wife, before he was married to Mary de Medicis, was likely to have had terrible
Consequences; but was fortunately broke by the Condemnation of d'Entragues,
Father of the Marchioness; and the Imprisonment of the Count d' Auvergue, her
Brother by the Mothers side, and Natural Son to Charles the IX.

The King complained, the Court of Spain promised Aid to all his Factious
Subjects. He showed his Resentment publicly, when he discovered an Intrigue of
the Spanish Ambassador, with a Gentleman of Provence, who undertook to deliver
up the Town of Marseilles to Philip the III. Two Rival Powers have ever matter
to Recriminate, when the one thinks he can convict the other of a secret
Infraction of Treaties. The Ambassador without scruple Reproached the King,
with assisting the United Provinces after the Peace of Vervins, and
endeavoring to raise the Moors in Spain. In some occasions Henry was not more
upright and sincere, than Philip. Princes seldom concern themselves much about
so fair a Virtue: No sooner had the King of France settled his Affairs, and
amassed several Millions, by the Care and Management of the Duke of Sully,
Superintendent of the Finances, but he began to think in earnest, of Humbling
the Pride of the House of Austria. This was the Language of those times; the
World is busi'd at present in Leagues to oppose the Ambitious Designs of France.

Henry waiting only for a Specious Pretense to make War on Spain, renewed his
ancient Alliances abroad, and carried on Negotiations with diverse Princes, to
bring them over to his Interests. By the Treaty of Marriage between the Infanta
Isabella, and Archduke Albert, Philip the II. had given his dear Daughter the
Sovereignty of the Provinces, which Spain had at that time in the low
Countries. Catherine Sister of Isabel, brought Charles Emmanuel Duke of Savoy,
her Husband, but a very moderate Fortune. So unequal a Division, did not
satisfy the Ambition of a Prince, who was always stirring to make himself
Great, though he could never obtain his Aim. Charles thought the Duchy of
Milan ought in Right to be given up to him; Henry seeks to take the Advantage
of Discontent of the Duke: A Proposition is made, to Assist the Duke in the
Conquest of a Country, which lay so convenient for him; and to give the Kings
Eldest Daughter in Marriage to his Son. On these Conditions, Charles
voluntarily makes a League Offensive and Defensive with France.

Some pretend all the Powers of Europe were engaged in it, or at least ought to
have been, to confine the House of Austria to Spain, and its Hereditary
Countries in Germany; but the Project which is ascribed to Henry on this
occasion, is strangely Chimerical. If it be true, that this King ever
entertained a thought of that kind, and proposed no other end in so vast
Enterprise, than the glory of having brought Eu^ope to a Balance; Henry
doub^less was the vainest Man in his Kingdom: Is it not much more probable,
that seeing so favorable an occasion to revenge himself on Spain, he was
resolved to make his advantage of it.

The Declension of that Monarchy, was visible to all the World. Philip the III.
a Prince Inferior to his Father for his Parts; found it in so ill a condition,
that being unable to supply Archduke Albert with Provisions necessary for
carrying on the War against the United Provinces, he was constrained to make a
shameful Truce with the States General; in which he owns them to be free, and
Disclaims any Pretension of his own, or the Archdukes over them. We must not
think Spain wanted good Generals, brave Officers, or Statesmen bred in the
Cabinet of Philip II. but the Duke of Lerma her first Minister, had neither
Genius nor Ability to gain his Master Reputation abroad, or govern a Monarchy
oppressed with its own Greatness.

The House of Austria was still weaker in Germany. The Emperor Rodolphus had
no great Vices, but the Virtues which make up the chief Character of a Prince,
were wanting in him. Shut up in his City of Prague, he employed himself in any
thing, rather than Politics. Had he had good Ministers, he would not have
hindered them from acting well. But he had so little care to choose them, or
observe their steps that himself did not know, whether he was well or ill
served. Rodolphus did not live in good understanding with his Brethren. The
Archduke Matthias, forced him to give up the Kingdom of Hungary to him, and
secure to him the Succession to the Crown of Bohemia. Both unable to keep their
Subjects of different Religion in Peace, were obliged to receive the Conditions
which the stronger Party imposed on them.

England is so seated, it ought equally to fear least Spain or France become
too Potent. James the First succeeded to Queen Elizabeth, a Princess whose
Memory is still dear to the English; for her great Courage, her matchless
Prudence, and her sincere Love to her People. Both Crowns strove which should
make an Alliance with the New King. They believed that being more Potent than
his Predecessors, by the Union of the Crown of Scotland, to that of England; he
would be more able to hold the balance even, or make it incline to which side
he pleased. But James still fearful and wavering, governed by his Wife or his
Favorites, soon showed the World, he was fitter to manage the Pen, than the
Sword; to write on a Question of Civil Law or Divinity, than to Reign
gloriously and make himself formidable to his Neighbors. He made a Treaty of
Alliance with Henry. Both Kings engaged to assist the United Provinces, and to
defend each other in case either of them was attacked by the Spaniards. The
Court of Madrid exasperated to find the King of Great Britain, take to a
contrary Interest; possibly underhand countenanced the discontented Party, and
the Papists in England, formed that Horrible Attempt, which has since been
called the Gunpowder Plot. Since that time. James ever dreaded the Spaniards.
And they were so Skillful to improve this weakness of his, and Avarice of his
Ministers, that far from opposing the Enterprises of the House of Austria, you
will find he will patiently suffer her to dispossess the Elector Palatine, who
married a Daughter of England.

Henry IV. prepares for War.
In this posture were the Affairs of Europe, when Henry Troops, and bring them
to to raise Troops, and bring them to the Frontiers of Champagne. John William,
Duke of Cleves, Bergh and Juliers dying without Children, lest a contended
Succession. His four Sisters or their Children, had each different
Pretenstions; some Imperial Constitutions contrary to each other, embroiled the
Affair more. Some of these determined the Fees of the Contested Countries to be
the right of the Heirs Male; and others supposed Daughters capable of the
Succession. Among all the Princes who were pretenders, the Right of John
Sigismund Elector of Brandenburgh, and that of Philip Lewis Palatin of
Newburgh, were the most plausible. The first had married the Daughter of the
Eldest Sister of the last Duke; and the other was Husband of the second Sister,
who maintained, that the Succession was devolved on her, to the prejudice of
the Children of her Eldest Sister Deceased, before Duke John William. These two
Princes each took possession of a part of those Estates they pretended did
entirely belong to them; But it was to be feared, a third stronger than both of
them, would make himself Master of the best places, while they made War to
drive each other out: Therefore the Landgrave of Hess, their common Friend,
made them consent to a Provisional Treaty. In this they promised to terminate
their Differences Amicably, and by Arbitration; and to join their Forces
against any who should Attempt to usurp the Countries of Cleves and Juliers.
Till this should be decided, it was agreed they should govern Individually, and
in common; and without prejudice to the right of the Emperor, or the other
Princes pretenders. The States of the Country Assembled at Dusseldorp, took
this Affair into their Cognizance at the Entreaty of the King of France, who
already declared for the two Princes.

They were both Protestants, and the United Provinces supported them as far as
they were able. This gave Umbrage to the Archdukes of the low Countries, whose
Estates bordered on one side, on those of Juliers. A certain Prince of their
House in Germany, would have been glad to have made his Advantage in this
Litigious Title. The pretense of Religion is never wanting upon occasion; and
here it would have been very seasonable. The Governor of Juliers then is won
over, and Leopold of Austria, Bishop of Strasbourg and Passaw, passes secretly
into the place. He brought with him a Commission from the Emperor, who
pretended to be the Natural and Sovereign Judge of a Difference arising about
the Fiefs of the Empire; and in the mean time, he gave to his Cousin Leopold,
the Administration of the contested places.

This Sequestration, seemed to tend to an Usurpation. By the Addition of the
Dutchies of Cleves and Juliers, to its other Hereditary Countries; the House of
Austria was in a condition to oppress the German Liberties with more ease. The
Neighborhood of the low Countries, gave the King of Spain an opportunity to
send his best Troops to the Assistance of his Kinsmen. This Enterprise ought to
have alarmed equally all the Princes of Germany; but the Jealousy caused by
difference of Religion, made the Duke of Bavaria, the Electours of Mentz,
Triers, and some others, fear the Protestant Party would be too strong, if the
disputed Countries should fall to a Prince of that Religion. See then the
Catholics assemble at Wirtsbourg; and form there a League of which the Duke of
Bavaria was Chief, and send a Deputation to Rome and Madrid, to demand Aid of
Pope Paul the V. and Philip King of Spain.

On the other hand the Protestants come in great numbers to Hall in Swabia. The
Electour and Princes of Saxony, do not appear there. Those of the branch of
Weymar and Koburg, had their particular Pretensions to the Dutchies of Cleves
and Juliers; and hoped the House of Austria would espouse their right sooner
than that of other Princes, more jealous of her growing Greatness. The Elector
of Saxony contented himself to send to Hall, in conjunction with the King of
Denmark, to exhort all the Pretenders to put their Interests, into the
Emperors hand. The Resolutions taken in that Assembly were kept private. The
Prince of Anhalt, whom those of Brandenburgh and Newburg, had desired to go on
a Negotiation to the Court of France, returned to Hall, accompanied with
Boissise Ambassador from the King. This Minister declared publicly, his
Master would Assist them with all his Strength; and would march himself at the
Head of a powerful Army, to oppose the Designs of the House of Austria. The
United Provinces too, promised to join their Troops with those of Henry. The
Neighborhood of the Contested Countries, made it unsafe for them to suffer
them to fall into the hands of a Kinsman or Friend of Spain.

The mortal Displeasure the King of France had, to see the Archdukes of the
low Countries, and the King of Spain, receive the Prince of Conde with open
Arms, who had secretly withdrawn himself to Brussels, with the Princess his
Wife; and promise him all sort of Assistance against the Injustice done him by
Henry. This Accident I say, happening at the same time with the Affair of Cleves
and Julie^s, urged him more to a War, than the Noble desire to assist his
Allies. Being Resolved to revenge the many Affronts he had received from Philip
the II. and his Son; and to have the Princess of Conde back, what ever it cost
him. Henry again sent Troops toward the Alps. Lesdiguieres, who from a mean
Birth and Fortune, had raised himself by degrees during the Wars in Dauphiny
and Provence; and had obtained the staff of Marshall of France. This Man was
sent to conduct to the Duke of Savoy, the Troops designed against Italy, and to
Attack the Milanese in Conjunction with him. Vast Preparations were made. These
at first were covered with the ordinary pretense of the Public Safety, the
preserving the R^pose of Europe; and the maintaining the Kings Allies in their
rightful Possession; but a Vile and Criminal Passion made them to increase, and
march with the greatest Expedition. Henry it was said had reason to fear, that
his ancient Enemies abusing the easiness and resentment of the first Prince of
the Blood, should excite an Ambition in him, and put it into his Head, to
contest the Validity of the Marriage of the King with Mary de Medicis, after a
Divorce founded on very frivolous Reasons, and the I egitimacy of his Children
by this second Wife; but to speak the Truth, the Absence of his Fair Angel, for
so he called the Princess of Conde, lay nearer his Heart than any thing besides.

M^moires de Bassompierre.
No sooner did Henrietta Charlotte of Montmorency appear in the World, but the
good King became Amorous to the last degree of Folly. The Constable her Father,
would have married her to Bassompierre, a Gentleman of Lorrain; who was well
received at Court, and in great favor with the King; but Henry broke off this
Match when it was very far advanced. Bassompierre seemed too likely to engage
the Affections of his Wife. The Prince of Conde he thought would be a Husband
less troublesome to a Lover, by giving him Diversion in Hunting; he flattered
himself he should find time and means to deceive a Man, who was not so
discerning and jealous, as the other would have been: In a word, Henry who
could not content himself with his own Wife, was willing as he freely said to
Bassompeierre, that his nearest Kinsman should be a Comfort and Support to him
in his old Age, which he was now entering into.

The Fli^ht of the Prince of Conde.
The Prince soon perceived the King was desperately in love with the Lady he had
married. Henry's Passion appeared more clearly every day than other, he could
not keep himself within the Rules of Decency. The new Husband could not contain
himself any more. He complains, is transported, and throws off all Respect. To
make him more complaisant and tractable, his Pensions are taken away.
Notwithstanding his pressing Instances for the Money promised in Marriage, he
meets with nothing but denial. These Hardships served only to exasperate a
young M^n whom the Malcontents, and the private Enemies of the King, urged
incessantly with Motives of Honor, and increased his Jealousy, by
representing the King was not Master of his Passion, and might be transported
by it to some Violence. So that in fine, the Prince of Conde determined to take
his Wife with him, and retire into the Low Countries.

The News of their Flight was a Clap of Thunder to the Amorous Old Man. He
immediately calls his Ministers, who were his chief Confidents, to concert
Measures with them in so nice a Juncture. The Chancellor de Sillery tells him,
with a great deal of Gravity, He ought to make Good and Firm Declarations
against the Prince of Conde and all his Adherents. Could the slow Proceedings
in a Court of Justice be a speedy and effectual Remedy for the Despair of a
Lover, who thought himself the most unfortunate Man in the World when the
Object of his Passion was separated from him? Villeroy, Secretary of S^ate, was
of Opinion, the King should write to his Ambassadors in Foreign Courts, and
order them to press the Princes not to receive Conde, who had withdrawn himself
without the King's leave, and send him forthwith into France. The Counsel of
Villeroy was not heard. This would have required a Negotiation with the Princes
into whose Dominions Conde was fled. A delay of this kind did not agree with
the Uneasiness and Impatience of Henry.

When the Duke of Sully was asked what his Opinion was; I foresaw this
Accident; said he to the King. If your Majesty would have followed the Advice I
gave you some days since, and put Monsieur the Prince in the Bastile, I would
have taken care to have kept him well. That Is true, replied the King, but what
must we do now? Nothing, said Sully, after he had mused for a small time near
the Window. A Fugitive Subject is soon abandoned by all the World, if his
Master do not appear concerned to ruin him. If you show the least eagerness to
have Monsieur the Prince given up, your Enemies will take Pleasure to vex you,
by receiving him well, and aiding him. Doubtless this was the best part he had
to act; but Henry was too Amorous to take it.

The Counsel of the President Jeannin was more pleasing to him. He proposed to
send a Captain of the Guards after him to bring him back if he could seize him;
otherwise, to send immediately to Brussels, where the Prince would not fail to
shelter himself, and demand him of the Archduke and Duchess, and to menace
them with a War if they refused to restore him. Albert and Isabel, added
Jeannin, have no Tie to Monsieur the Prince; and the King of Spain will not
have time to write to them to keep him. What appearance is there that weak and
timorous Persons will for so small a Matter, draw your Majesty's Power on them?

Doubtless the Event would have been as Jeannin had imagined, if the famous
Ambrose Spinola had not been at that time with the Archdukes. Albert and
Isabel, awed by the Menaces of a Warlike King, who had made great Preparations,
would have complied with the Desires of Henry. But Spinola with vehemence
represented to them; they could not in Humanity refuse a Retreat and Protection
to a persecuted Prince, who asked no more than a Shelter for his Honor and
Person against the Insults which he had reason to apprehend: That at least
their Highnesses ought not to give a positive Answer, without first consulting
the Catholic King in an Affair of that Importance. So in concert with the
Court of Madrid, an Answer was given to those sent by Henry: That the Honor
and inviolable Rights of Hospitality would not allow the Archdukes to restore
the Prince without his own Consent into the Hands of the King: But their
Highnesses would take care he should not do any thing during his stay there
against the Respect and Obedience due to his Sovereign.

So modest a Denial served only to inflame the King's Anger, and make him more
obstinate in his Demands of the Prince and Princess of Conde. He sent Orders
every Day to repeat the Instances to the Archdukes. While he was arming
powerfully in his Kingdom, the French, who were at Brussels, took Measures to
carry off the Princess, who gave ground to believe she was not very averse to
it. The People ran to Arms to oppose this Violence. Conde at last resolved to
retire to Milan: and the Infanta took the Princess into her own Palace. The
Archdukes had promised not to give her up without the Consent of the Prince.

The Constable of Montmorency, solicited by the King, demanded his Daughter;
and the nearest Kindred of the Princess wrote to Brussels as well as he. They
alleged, that all the Family would have the Marriage annulled. The King had
recourse to the Pope. He pressed him to interpose his Authority, that the
Princess being set at liberty, might demand a Dissolution of it. She did not
love her Husband, and the Bigotry of the Infanta, who watched her narrowly, was
so contrary to the Humor of a young Person accustomed to the Pleasures of the
Court of France, that she seemed not very averse to the Divorce her Kindred
proposed to her, at least in appearance. But all these Subtilties wore
fruitless. The Archdukes, inflexible in their Word to the Prince, answered
still to all the Instances and Menaces made them, That they would not restore
the Princess without the Consent of her Husband, who had entrusted her with
them. A very generous Resolution indeed! But is there not ground to think their
secret Desire to excite some Commotions in France, to traverse the vast
Projects of Henry, inspired them at least as much as their love to Equity and
Justice?

Henry IV. prepares to march at the Head of his Army.
The great Preparations in France and other places, kept the World in suspense.
None doubted the King had some greater Design than to drive Archduke Leopold
out of the Countries of Cleves and Juliers. In the mean time the House of
Austria appeared Serene: It could not be observed that she made any Provisions
against this approaching War, which openly threatened her; either because she
expected that Stroke, which soon changed the State of Affairs; or that the King
of Spain, a stupid and unactive Prince, suffered himself to be persuaded by a
weak Minister, that the Ardour of Henry would cool, when the French had spent
their first Fire on the Countries of Cleves and Juliers, and some other places
of Italy. The King had Thirty Thousand Foot, and Six Thousand Horse in
Champagne, Sixty Pieces of Artillery, and abundance of Money and Provisions.
Twelve Thousand Foot and Two Thousand Horse waited in Dauphine the Orders of
Lesdiguieres, to go and join the Duke of Savoy's Army. The Venetians promised
to declare themselves, on condition they might have that part of the Milanese
which lay most conveniently for them.

Henry burned with Impatience to march at the Head of so fair an Army.
Sometimes he would try the Arms he designed to bear in the Day of Battle; at
other times he took pleasure to see the brave Prince Maurice of Orange bring
him the best Troops of the United Provinces. Vexed at the Advantages which
Alexander Duke of Parma had gained over him in the Sieges of Paris and Roan, he
hoped to take his Revenge against the Marquess of Spinola, whose Reputation
began to equal that of the other. He was the only General now which the House
of Austria had to oppose to the King.

Measures were taken for the Administration of Government in his Absence: The
Queen was to be Regent, and the Duke of Epernon President of her Council. It is
amazing, that Henry would trust his Wife and Children in the Hands of a Lord
whom he never loved, and whose Fidelity was ever suspected by him. But after
all, he could never have made a better Choice. Of the Three Princes of the
Blood, the first was in the Enemies Hands; Conti passed for a weak Man, and the
Count of Soissons was disgusted. 1610.
Their ancient Enmity, and the strict Tie the Guises had to the Spaniard, made
it unsafe for him to trust any of that House. Epernon had Wit, Courage, Honor,
and was not without some Vanity. So great a Mark of Respect engaged him to
exert himself, to answer the good Opinion the King had shown of his Prudence
and Fidelity.

Henry had yielded to the Importunities of the Queen, Henry is Assassinated the
14th of May 1610.
who ardently desired to be Crowned in all the Forms. He imagined this
Complaisance would make that jealous Princess forget the ill Humor the Kings
Mistresses, and above all the Marquise de Vernueil had so often put her in. The
Ceremony of Consecration was performed at St. Denis, with great Magnificence.
All things were disposed for the solemn Entry of the Queen into the Capital of
the Kingdom. When on the Eve of the Day designed for that Pageantry, Henry
going in his Coach to the Arsenal, to confer with the Duke of Sully,
Superintendant of the Finances, and great Master of the Artillery, received two
or three stabs with a Knife, one of which cut through the Artery of the Lungs.
He fell down dead on the Duke of Epernon, who was on one side of him, and to
whom he was whispering in the Ear, when he received the first blow.

Francis Ravillac a Native of Angouleme, committed this execrable Parricide the
14th day of May, 1610. In the Hurry and Confusion which attend Accidents of
this kind, he might have saved himself by hiding his Knife. But persuaded this
was an Action worthy of Reward, he kept it in his hand till he was seized. One
of the Kings Gentlemen in ordinary, and some Footmen, would have given him a
thousand stabs upon the spot; but the Duke of Epernon remembering the fault
committed in killing in this manner the Monk, who murdered Henry the III*
forbid any on pain of Death to touch him. So he was secured, and carried to the
Hotel of Retz. By a Negligence which appeared suspicious and affected, instead
of throwing this Wretch into a Dungeon, every one had the liberty to speak to
him, during the two days he remained there. If the first Persons of the Kingdom
thought they had more pressing Affairs than to revenge the Death of the King,
what hindered the inferior Magistrates from doing their Duty, in discovering
the Authors of so black an Attempt?

The Queen labors to procure her self to be declared Regen^, during the
Minority of Lewis XIII. her Son.
The Queen wiped off her Tears as soon as the Chancellor and Villeroy had made
her sensible every Moment was precious and she must labor incessantly to make
her Advantage of the absence of two o^ the Princes of the Blood, and the
weakness of the other, to procure her self to b^ declared Regent during the
Minority o^ her Son. The new King Lewis XIII* was about to begin the tenth year
of his Age, being born the 27th of September, 1601. The Dukes of Guise and
Epernon, seemed the most proper Persons to execute the Project. The unbounded
Ambition of both these Men, made them equally believe, by doing this service to
a Foreign Princess unskilled in the Arts of Ruling a Nation, they should make
themselves Masters of the Government. Behold then both of them marching through
Paris, at the Head of diverse Armed Men, to suppress any Tumult might be caused
by the unexpected Death of the King. Guise goes directly to the Townhouse,
Epernon arrives a little after, and both exhort Lejay Provost of the Merchants,
the Echevins and the Citizens met there to continue faithful to the Son of him,
whose Loss they Regretted, and to take all necessary care to prevent Disorder
and Confusion.

The Duke of Sully came from the Arsenal, as soon as he heard of the Death of
his good Master. He went to the Louvre, as other Persons of Quality did, who
all ran to offer their Services, and swear Fidelity to the New King, and the
Queen his Mother. Memoires de Bassompierre.
Surpised to find Bassompierre at the head of a great number of Horse; he
thought fit to exhort him to take an Oath of Fidelity to Lewis: Well Sir,
replied Bassompierre, in a haughty disdainful Tone, We come here to require
that of others, and there is no need of ^our preaching to us on that Chapter. I
cannot tell whether this answer made the Duke suspect these Men went to seize
the Arsenal, and the Bastile, and that his Enemies were resolved to drive him
out as soon as they could. However this was, Sully returns back, shuts himself
up in the Bastile, takes away all the Bread in the Markets, and Bakers Shops,
and writes to the Duke of Rohan his Son-in-Law, Colonel General of the Swisses,
to come to Paris with six Thousand Men of that Nation, which he commanded in
Champagne. In a word, he seems to make Provisions to sustain a Siege, in case
any Attempt should be made to Dispossess him without his consent. An Imprudent
step and subject to the most Sinister Interpretations, especially in a time of
universal Jealousy and Distrust.

Whilst Sully confined himself in the Bastile. Vie du Due de Epernon L. VI.
others were providing for themselves by laboring for the Queen. The Duke of
Epernon had placed the Regiment o^ French Guards on the Pontneuf, and in the
Streets round the Convent of Augustin^ The Parliament was there at that time
because the Courts were fitted up for the Feasts prepared against the Crowning
o^ the Queen. As soon as the Chamber were met by the care of the Presiden^
Seguier, with whom the Duke ha^ conferred, he entered boldly into the Hall,
with his Sword taken out of the Belt. It is yet, says he, in the Scabbar^ with
a Rough Menacing Air. If the Quee^ be not declared Regent before the Court
break up, it must be drawn, and I foresee there will be Blood spilt. Some of
you Gentlemen, says he, demand time to consider. This is an unseasonable
Prudence, What I propose, may be done now without Peril, but to morrow it
cannot without Blood. The Duke added somewhat to soften so violent an Advance,
The Members looked on one another, astonished at the Novelty of the Proposition,
to put the Administration of the Government into the hands of the Queen,
without the participation of the Princes of the Blood, and the Officers of the
Crown. The Magistrates remained for some time in a pensive Silence. The first
President de Harlay broke this at last, and said in few words, the Court was
obliged to the Duke of Epernon, for the Zeal he had shown for the Public good,
and exhorted him always to retain Sentiments worthy of his Rank and Virtue.

This short and general Answer, made Epernon reflect a little. Far enough from
persuading them, the Soldiers were placed ^round the Covent, only to secure
(...) free Debate; the Duke gave occasion to believe, he intended to extort a
Vote at any rate. He went out of the Hall to give the Chambers liberty to
deliver their Opinions without Constraint. I ^ave proposed, said he, as he
withdrew, the ^est way. There is no time to be lost. La ^uesle, Procurator
General, who had his Hopes as well as the rest, concluded in favor of the
Queen, and the Parliament awed, declared her Regent during the under Age of her
Son.

In the breaking up of the Assembly, the wisest Men deplored more than before,
the Misfortune of their Country, in losing a King whose Life was so necessary
for its Welfare. Now, said they, are we once again at the Discretion of an
Italian Woman. What good is to be expected from a Regent, Prodigal, Imperious,
and unexperienced? Our dependence must be now on Galigai and Conchini her
Husband, Confidents of the Queen, and Pensioners of Spain. What Confusions will
not their Covetousness and Ambition cause in the Court and Kingdom. If the
King, added others, had followed the Advice given him, and drove out that
Rabble, who were always cherishing Jealousy and Discontent in the Queen,
perhaps we might not have had occasion now to bemoan the loss of so good a
Prince. It is well known, Conchini and his Wife threatened the Person of the
King, if he attempted to punish their Villainies. Might not People of this stamp
suborn an Assassin?

^^^moi^es de ^^^^gence de M^rie de Medicis.
The next day all was ferene at Paris. Guise so well managed the humor of the
Duke of Sully, that he brought him to the Louvre to pay his Duty to the King
and Queen. Villeroy had disposed them to receive him kindly. He insinuated
incessantly to the new Regent, that the ancient Ministers of her Husband being
most acquainted with Affairs at home, and abroad, it would not be convenient to
make any alteration in the Council. The Secretary of State was afraid the
Disgrace of the Superintendant, might be of dangerous Consequence to the rest.
This was an Example might be made use of against Villeroy himself. Sully made a
set Speech to the Queen, and being persuaded she was averse to the War with
Spain, and would unite her self with those her Husband sought to depress; the
Duke assured her Majesty, he had endeavored to divert the late King from his
Designs. The Duke of Vendome being luckily there, Sully appealed to him for the
truth of what he had said to his Father, in his presence. Base Courtier! who
Sacrificed so early the Reputation of his Benefactour to his wavering Fortune.

The Provinces followed the Example of the Capital, Catholics and Protestants
alike submitted to the Regency of Mary. All was calm in the Armies. At the
Solicitation of his Father-in-Law, the Duke of Rohan had brought the Swisses a
days march toward Paris; but Sully content with the good Reception of the
Queen, sending a speedy Countermand, he returned back. Gonzague Duke of Nevers,
who commanded the Army in Champagne, made all the Officers swear Allegiance,
and the Marshall Lesdiguieres kept that in Dauphine to their Duty. The News
being dispersed on all sides, that the new King was Recognized by the Parliament
the day after his Fathers Death, and the Regency of the Widow was confirmed
there in a Solemn manner; this did not a little conduce to settle the
Tranquillity of the Remote Provinces.

The Constable, the Peers of the Kingdom, and the great Officers of the Crown,
Lewis XIII. sits in his Seat of Justice the first time.
appeared in the Parliament. The King came thither followed by the Queen his
Mother, the Prince of Conti, and the Count of Enghien, Son of Soissons, who was
retired to an Estate in the Country, Disgusted that some mark of Distinction
was refused to his Wise at the Queens Coronation. After every one had taken
their place, Mary began a small Discourse which she had premeditated. Scarce
had she uttered two or three Words, but a shower of Tears hindered her from
proceeding farther. It was doubtful whether they proceeded from Grief or Joy.
Every one made what construction he pleased. Resuming her Discourse after a sew
Sighs, Mercure Francois. 1610.
either Affected or Sincere, I have brought you here my Son, says the Queen, to
entreat you to take that care of him, which you are obliged to do. I conjure
you to do this by the Memory of his Father, by the Love you ought to have for
your selves, and your Zeal for your Country. I will instruct him to follow your
Advice, in all the concerns of State. It is your part to see this be wholesome
and good. When she had done, she came down within the Bar, as if she would
still give them a liberty to agree in their Opinions concerning the Regency.
The Princes, Lords, and Magistrates convinced there was more Ceremony than
Reality in this, begged her to take her place again. Mary skilled in the Art of
Dissimulation, suffered her self to be pressed for a long time, till the
Instances she required, seemed to be a force on her Modesty and Grief.

Young Lewis rehearsed well enough the Discourse prepared for him. It was not
omitted, here to insert the young King would follow the Advice of his
Parliament. This is a Language which ancient Custom has made usual in the
beginning of a Minority, but is never remembered by Princes, when their
Authority is once Established. Ann of Austria, and her Son, said the same
thing. Nevertheless we have seen with our own Eyes in the present Reign, and we
shall see in that whose History I now write, that Lewis XIII, and his
Successor, have too much given ear to vile Flatterers, who have prompted them
to annul the Authority of a Body of Men, on which the Preservation of France
does depend, Reisel Hist. de Louis XII. and dans son livre de la Monarchy de
France, 1. part. chap. VIII. and X.
and which was Established, to curb the Absolute power of the King. Thus Men
talked in the time of Lewis XIII. And this Discourse is Seditious, under the
Reign of Lewis XIV.

The Chancellor assured them, the late King had more than once signified his
Intention, according to diverse preceding Examples; that the Queen his Wife
should have the Administration of Affairs, in case he died before his Son was a
Major. After the Chancellor's Harangue was over, the first President began. He
exhorted the young Prince to strive to deserve the Title of Father of his
People, as the good King Lewis XII. had done, on whose Throne he sat, and to
follow the Instructions which St. Lewis left to Posterity. Servin,
Advocate-General, did the same; and all was concluded by the King's Decree,
sitting in his Seat of Justice, and confirming that made the preceding Day, and
by sending it to other Parliaments, and publishing it throughout the Kingdom.
The Speeches of these Two great Magistrates would have been worthy of their
Gravity and Reputation, if they had given less excessive Praises to a Princess,
who never deserved the most moderate ones.

The New Decree being given out, the King returned with mighty Shouts and
Acclamations of the Multitude, who admire whatever strikes their Senses. All
People wished a long Prosperity to the Son of the Great Henry, crying for
Justice on the Authors of his Father's Death. Happy had it been, if the
Prayers and Wishes of his Subjects could have obtained for him the Qualities of
Mind and Inclinations necessary to tread in the Steps of the good Kings who
preceded him; the number of whom is very small. But he had not Genius enough to
acquire the one, and his Mother would not permit him to have a Governor to
form him for the other.

The Count of Soissons was extremely surprised to find all done in his Absence.
He made haste to Paris, Intrigues and Cabals at Court in the beginning of the
Regency of Mary de Medicis.
accompanied with Three Hundred Gentlemen on Horseback. To lessen his
Discontent, which began to discover it self, he had the Government of Normandy
given him. The Regent next rewarded those who had serv^d her well. The Pensions
of the Princes of the House of Lorrain were very moderate in the preceding
Reign. But Sully, who strove to support the greatest Enemies of his Religion,
raised them to a Hundred thousand Livres. The Duke of Guise obtained Two
Hundred Thousand Crowns to pay his Debts, and the Queen promised to favor him
in the Design he had to marry the Heiress of Joyeuse, Widow of the Duke of
Montpensier, by whom she had only One Daughter. Epernon was so wealthy, and had
such Places, he seemed above the Gratifications of the Court. He was rewarded
according to his own Humor. He had great Honors done him, and all the Marks
of a particular Distinction. The Queen lodged him in the Louvre. I do not, said
she, Vie de Duc d' Epernon, L. IV.
think my self safe there wihtout him. The Secretaries of State communicated
all Dispatches to him. In a word; he seemed on the Point to render himself as
formidable now as he had been under the Reign of the weak Henry III.

The Count of Soissons sought his Friendship with great earnestness. He He
aimed by this to strengthen himself against the Prince of Conde, who was
invited to return and take his Rank at Court; The Princess of Montpensier was
Daughter to a Niece of the Duke of Epernon; and the Count hoped to bring the
Wealth of that rich Family into his House, by marrying his Son to that Heiress.
This Match could not be concluded without the Consent of the Uncle. Soissons
hated Sully mortally. He flattered himself that Epernon exasperated against
that Minister, who had done very ill Offices to the One, and the Other, with
the late King, would join with him to rid themselves of their common Enemy, The
Duke did not refuse the Friendship of a Prince of the Blood, but would not
engage to serve him in all his Projects The Edge of the Count was not taken off
by this: He proposes to his new Friend, to stab the Duke of Sully in the
Louvre. A base and cowardly Action unworthy, I will not say of a Prince, but of
the meanest Man in the World! It struck with Horror, one who valued himself on
his Virtue and Probity. Epernon replied as civilly as he could, his Trust would
not permit him to suffer a Violence of that kind in the King's House. The Count
took this Denial ill. However the secret Desire he had to raise himself above
the Prince of Conde, who filled a Place that Soissons thought belonged of Right
to him, made him dissemble his ill Humor. Could Epernon after this maintain a
Friendship with a Man who had discovered so villainous a Heart? However great a
Prince is by his Birth or Interest, he can deserve nothing but Hatred and
Contempt, when he once becomes guilty of so black a Crime.

Jealousies broke out, and Intrigues grew numerous, State of Affairs in the
beginning of the Regency.
when the Debates began about forming the Regents Council. The Princes of the
Blood justly pretended to have a place there by Right of their Birth. The
Constable of Montmorency, and the Duke of Joyeuse, thought they ought not to be
excluded. Those of the House of Guise, assured of the good Intentions of the
Queen toward them, hoped to raise themselves. They were too weak now to
flatter themselves for the future with obtaining the Superiority they formerly
had over the House of Bourbon; yet they did not despair at least to rival the
Princes of the Blood. But they found at home a great Obstacle to their coming
into the Council: Two Lords of the same House could not be called to it. The
Duke of Guise was the eldest; but the Age and Experience of the Duke of Mayenne
his Uncle, required him to be preferred. Henry being dangerously ill some Years
before, had a mind to form a Council. He named this Lord then, who was heartily
reconciled to him, and since that time had given the King Marks of his
inviolable Fidelity. This was a great Prejudice in his Favor. The Duke of
Nevers too demanded to be admitted, and disputed the Precedence with the
Guises. New Perplexities on all sides!

The Emulation between the Marechal of Bouillon and the Duke of Epernon was
grown to so great a height, that it was not possible the one should be in the
Council to the Prejudice of the other. This latter was considerable for his
Charge of Colonel General of the Foot, and other great Places. The Queen did
not dare to give distaste to a haughty and powerful Man, who had just served
her in a very Handsome manner. Bouillon had a great Heart, a capacious and
discerning Mind, kept a strict Alliance and constant Intelligence with Foreign
Princes. The Sovereignty of Sedan made him considerable at home and abroad. No
one had more Interest than he with the Protestants of France. The late King
stood in fear of him. He gave a Check to his turbulent and ambitious Humor,
but would not push the Matter to an Extremity. So that the Marechal was capable
of doing a great deal of good, if he followed his Reason, or a great deal of
Mischief, if he abandoned himself to his Passion. There were other Lords of
great Bitth, who might pretend to have a place in the Council, but they were
yet of an Age, in which Men of Quality have stronger Inclinations to Pleasure,
than to concern themselves in Matters of State. Of this number were the Duke of
Vendome, the Grand Prior of France, both Natural Sons of Henry Duke of
Longueville, and the Count of St. Paul, a younger Brother of the same House.

The Chancellor de Sillery, the Duke of Sully, Villeroy, and the President
Jeannin, saw all this Emulation with Pleasure. This left the entire Direction
of Affairs to themselves, under the Name of the Queen. Therefore in the first
place they advised her, not to give Distaste to any Person till the first
Prince of the Blood should return, and to admit into her Council all the great
Lords who demanded a Place there. The greater the number of these was, the less
Interest and Power any particular Persons could have. In the mean time, each
took his Opportunity to entertain the Regent. They took care to prepare Matters
to be proposed, to give seemingly some Employment to the Assembly. But these
Gentlemen foresaw it would soon degenerate into Confusion: That some would take
a distaste themselves, and others might be removed under color of sending them
to execute their Places and Governments.

While these Intrigues employed the Courtiers, The Trial and Execution of
Ravillac.
the Parliament was busy in the Process of Ravillac. The first President,
assisted by another, and Two Counselors, examined him several times, All that
can be drawn from the Interrogatories now extant, are, That Ravillac was an
Enthusiast, who imagining on some Reports, that he had heard, that the King was
about to make War on the Pope, and did not concern himself for the Conversion
of the Hugonots, took a Resolution to kill a Prince, whom he looked on as an
unjust Tyrant. What Ravillac had learnt from the Sermons of the execrable
Preachers of the League, who justified James Cl^ment, confirmed him in his
Belief, that any private Man might take away the Life of a Prince who was an
Enemy of the Holy Father. Mercure Francois, 1610.
To make War on the Pope, says Ravillac to his Judges, is to make War on God,
in as much as the Pope is God, and God is the Pope. This moves our Pity indeed.
But do not those Princes, who by a strange sort of Politics, submit their
Dominions to the Pope, deserve our Pity more than Assassins seduced by the
Emissaries of the Court of Rome? After the Attempt of John Chastel, Henry was
always afraid of the Knife of the League. The Desire he had to keep himself
from it, did not a little conduce to make him recall a sort of People, who have
the Secret to make themselves formidable to Sovereigns. He loaded the Jesuits
with his Favors. But had he not better provided for the Security of his Life,
and the Public Good, by giving Ear to the wise Remonstrances of the first
President De Harlay?

Ravillac, otherwise ignorant, knew so well how to maintain the Dogm of the
Society of Jesuits, and the Leaguing Sorbon, one might easily guess a certain
set of Men, had taken care to instruct him. But whether to pleasure a
Religious, who called him his Friend, and recommended to him in express Words
at the Hotel of Retz, not to accuse honest Men: or that he conceived himself
^he horrible Design; the Criminal constantly affirmed to the end of his Life,
that no Person whatever, Frenchman or Forigner, had put him upon killing a
Prince, who had never done him any wrong, and whose Death, though unpunished,
could do him no good. He was condemned to suffer the Punishment which the Laws
of France appoint for such Parricides, and the Sentence was executed on the
27th of May.

The Proceedings of Parliament the same Day Ravillac was executed, are an
evident Proof that that Body saw that the Writings and Sermons of some Doctors
of the Sorbon, The Condemnation of the Book and Doctrine of Mariana the Jesuit,
(engaged in the League, and poisoned by the Books which the Jesuits published
to revive that pernicious Doctrine, which the Faculty of Paris had censured in
the Year 1413. and was confirmed by the Council of Constance.) The Decree, I
say, made the same Day Ravillac suffered, convinced the World, that they
thought those Books and Preachments had plunged the Knife in the Heart of Henry
and his Predecessor. The Parliament therefore ordered the Faculty of Paris to
meet and confirm anew their ancient Censure, authorized by the Council of
Constance, against those who teach. That a Vassal or a Subject may, and ought
in Conscience to kill any Tyrant whatever, and Assault him all sort of ways,
and that this Action is not contrary to that Oath of Fidelity, which Vassals
and Subjects take to their Sovereigns. The Doctors obeyed the order signified
to them. The Parliament on the 10th of June gave another Sentence, condemning
the Book de Rege and Regis institutione of Mariana the Jesuit, to be burnt by
the hands of the Hangman, as containing, says the Decree, diverse execrable
Blasphemies against the late King Henry III. and against the Persons and States
of Kings and Sovereign Princes.

The Jesuits have ever had their Partisans and Adversaries. The first were
ready to excuse them, and the latter rose up against them with great Zeal and
Vehemence. The Abbot Dubois preaching at St. Eustace in Paris, undertook in one
of his Sermons, to refute the Opinions of Mariana. By a figure of Rhetoric
lively enough, he addressed his Speech to the good Fathers, and exhorted them
strongly for the future, to take care in the Books published in the name of
their Body, and with Approbation of their Superious, to let nothing pass
offensive to France; unless the Jesuits would expose themselves to Dangers,
which all their Prudence, strengthened by the Power of their Friends, would not
be able to avoid. This Discourse made a great Impression on the Audience, They
went away enraged against the Society, and the People appeared extremely
incensed against them.

Complaint was made to the Queen of this Sermon, and she remitted the Affair to
the Archb^shop of Paris. Dubois protested before that Prelate, he meant no hurt
to the Society. My Love, said he, to Truth, my Grief for the Death of the King,
and a just Dread of the fatal Effects that the Doctrine of Mariana may produce,
such Sentiments as these, made me speak in that manner. The Archbishop of Paris
had nothing to reply, and contented himself with exhorting the Preacher to live
well, with all the Servants of God, and particularly with the Jesuits. But it
had been more to the purpose, to persuade effectually those good Fathers to
pardon the Abbot, the injury which they thought they had received. I do not
know how it came to pass, but Dubois had the Imprudence to go to Rome the next
year, and then they did not want color, to shut him up in a close Prison.

The Patience of Father Coton Confessor to the late King, could not bear to
hear the General Exclamation against his Brethren. He resolved to justify the
Society, against the Imputation on the account of Mariana's Book. His Wise and
discerning Friends, advised Coton to say nothing, for fear of any
Misunderstanding in an Affair that must be so nicely handled. Every one
wondered that a Man who knew the World so well, and wanted not Prudence, should
not take so good Advice. He published a long Letter addressed to the Queen, to
persuade the World, Mariana was a private Person disowned by their Body, who
had true Notions of the Authority of Princes, and the Obedience due to them.
The thing happened at the Friends of the Jesuits had foretold. A thousand
Pamphlets were instantly published against the Fathers Letter. It is full, say
they, of Ambiguous Expressions and Tricking. They insulted him on his pretended
disclaiming the Doctrine, which was plainly forced to comply with present
necessity. It comes too late, said some, maliciously enough to the good
Fathers, but perhaps it will not be useless to the Children of him, who is now
in his Grave.

Indeed the defense of Coton was weak, and ill put together. What he said of
the Complaints of the Provincial Congregation held at Paris some years before,
and the Answer of their General Aquaviva, gave an Advantage to the Enemies of
the Society. The French Jesuits having desired their Superior to stop the
Liceace, and Suppress the Books of some Authors, who had written some things
to the prejudice of France, the Father gave them this Answer. We approve the
Judgment and Care of your Congregation. And we are very sorry, that this was
not discovered till after the Impression of those Books. We have taken order
they shall be corrected, and we will have a care that nothing of the like
nature shall happen for the future. This is very cold and ambiguous, for an
Opinion which allows Attempts on the Lives of Sovereigns. Here are some of the
Prudential Managements of the Children of this World. But there is no formal
disavowing that execrable Dogm, the Defenders of which deserve an Exemplary
punishment.

We must be very simple to believe, that the Superiors of the Society did not
know what Mariana and others of the same stamp wrote, till after the
Publication of their Works; does not all the World know what are their Statutes
relating to the Publication of their Books. It is to little purpose, that Coton
cites several Authors, of different Sentiments from Mariana. If among so many
able Men, there was none to be found who maintain Homicide to be absolutely
forbid by the Laws of God, it would be a very extraordinary thing. The
permission of the Society to print Mariana's Book, is ground enough to conclude
they approve it, or at least do not condemn it as ill. These Writers pass for
grave Authors, but according to the Principles of Probability, a Dogm which
ows its Birth to, or at least is adopted by the Society in all its Forms; James
Clement could on the Authority of Mariana, Assassinate Henry III. And his
Successor might be killed with a safe Conscience, at least at a time when
Sixtus V. and Gregory XIV. darted all the Thunder of the Vatican against him.

The Jesuits bore the most violent Assaults of the Preachers of Paris, The
Funeral of Henry IV.
at the time of Henry's Funerals. The Ceremony was performed with the usual
pomp. The Heart was sent to the College of Jesuits, which the King had founded
at la Fleche in Anjou. He had ordered it thus before his Death. Coton made his
Funeral Oration there. The Body was first carried to the Cathedral Church of
Paris, and from thence conveyed to the ordinary Burying-place of the Kings of
France. The Bishop of Air pronounced the Elogy of the Deceased King at Notre
Dame, and the Bishop of Angers at St. Denis. Though Henry might deserve in the
Eyes of the World the Title of Great, his Virtues and Actions did not deserve
the Church of Rome should interrupt her Holy Rites, to make his Panegyric in a
Pulpit, which ought to be Sacred to the Preaching of the Truth.

What can a good Christian say in praise of a Prince, dead in several Criminal
Habits, on the point of putting all Europe in a Flame, and causing a great
Effusion of Blood, to satisfy his Ambition, to revenge himself of his Enemies,
who were not in a condition to hurt him, to force away a Princess in the face
of the World, whose Husband took Refuge, to defend himself from the
Solicitations and Pursuits of a King, whom love had deprived of all Senseand
Reason? His pretended Conversion was a fair Field for profane Orators, void of
Religion to exercise their Eloquence. Their Triumph in so Important a Conquest,
served to cover his ill Life, and impenitent Death. But were they ever assured
Henry was sincerely a Catholic. Let us leave that to the judgment of God. If
it be true, this Princes Conscience was settled in matters of Faith, it is
certain his irregular Life, did not do much honor to the Religion which
Politics probably induced him to embrace. The flattering Bishops who praised
him after his Death, had never the Courage to reprove him for his Debauches, as
the Protestant Ministers had done before he left them.

At and after the Funeral, The good and ill Qualities of Henry IV.
wise Men spoke very differently of the Qualities and Actions of the Deceased
King. Some admired his Happiness in coming to the Crown from so remote a
Degree, that it was doubted if the Right of Succession could extend so far.
Others praised his Valor in War, his undaunted Courage in the most dangerous
Occasions, his Experience and Ability in the command of Armies; his Moderation
in his good Fortune, his Constancy in Adversity, his Clemency to his greatest
Enemies, his Affability, his Love to his Subjects, his Prudence not to drive
them to Extremity, but to leave them to return to their Duty when they went
beyond Murmurs; and lastly, the Mildness with which he heard their
Remonstrances.

Other more discerning Persons, said there was more Rashness than Prudence in
the Bravery of Henry. That he exposed himself to Dangers without Necessity,
That if he had met with an Enemy more active and able, than the Duke of
Mayenne, he would have been forced to fly into England a little after the Death
of his Predecessor. That the Heads of the League were better rewarded, than
his most faithful Adherents; that instead of being Liberal, he was Prodigal to
Persons that deserved nothing. That he gave with Profusion to his Mistresses,
and those who served him in his Pleasures. That he had an exorbitant Passion
for Play: That he discovered a covetous Humor, very little agreeable with the
Character of a great Prince: That under the color of easing the People, he
laid on New Taxes. That he introduced into the State, Selling of Offices.

The Ill natured People did not spare to reflect on his Domestic Conduct. They
censured him sharply for his manner of leaving Queen Marguerite, to follow the
Gallantry of her Temper. More insensible than the Emperor Claudius, said they,
he suffered this new Messalina, whom he owned for his lawful Wife, to dishonor
him publicly. Did he intend at his own Expense, to teach those whose Wives he
Debauched, to be easy Husbands. All Men spoke with Indignation of his advances
toward marrying Gabriele d'Etrees, and his Ingratitude to Harlay de Sancy,
whom he turned out of his Places, for delivering his Thoughts freely on so
scandalous a Match. They laughed at his promise to the Marquise de Vernueil,
given under his own hand Writing, to take her for his Wife, in case she brought
him a Boy within the year; His continual jars with the Queen, His easiness in
suffering the Insolence of Vernueil, who always spoke of the Queen with the
last Contempt. So true it is, that Persons of good Sense, will not judge of the
Solidity of the Merit of a Prince, by studied Panegyricks, flattering Titles,
Statues erected to him, or pompous Inscriptions engraved on Marble or Brass.

The Resolves of the Coun^il, to send Aid to Juliers.
Sometime before the Body of Henry was in his Tomb, there was a debate in
private concerning the Armies which the late King had Raised, which were very
chargeable to keep up. The Opinions were very different about them: It is not a
time now, said some Persons, to give it to the House of Austria. Memoires de la
regence de Marie de Medicis.
A Potent and Crafty Enemy, will find ways to embroil the State. His Catholic
Majesty proposed to the late King, the double Marriage of the Infanta with
Mons. the Dauphin, and of the Prince of Spain, with Madame the Eldest Daughter
of France. We ought to Disband the Troops which give Jealousy to the King of
Spain, and resume the Negotiation of the two Marriages, to make a firm
Alliance. This Mary most ardently desired, being Prepossessed by her Italian
Confidents, who were corrupted by the Court of Madrid, the new Regent imagined
the Establishment of her Power, depended upon her good Understanding with the
Pope, and the King of Spain.

This latter indeed had made diverse steps before the Death of Henry, to
conclude this double Alliance, and Paul V. labored to effect it. The Court of
Rome hoped to find her Advantage in it. Being convinced it was not possible to
ruin the Protestants without the Concurrence of the two Crowns, she labored
with all her Might, to form an Alliance between those Rival Powers. Whilst the
one was busy to overthrow the Protestant Interest in Germany, and the Low
Countries, they Projected to engage the other to reduce the Hugonots in France.
For the King of Great Britain, and the two Northern Crowns, they were not in
any great pain about them. The first did not seem difficult to win. Sweden was
employed against the King of Poland, who attempted to recover the Dominions, of
which he thought himself unjustly deprived. The King of Denmark being unable to
do any thing of himself, none doubted he would take that side which James the
I. his Brother-in-Law should embrace.

This was the Project of the Courts of Rome and Madrid; but Henry too well
understood his own Interest, and that of the rest of Europe, to fall into the
snare laid for him. Very far from giving ear to the double Marriage proposed to
him, he promised his Eldest Daughter to the Prince of Plemont, and sent
Bassompierre into Lorrain to treat with the Duke, who had no Male Children for
the Marriage of his Eldest Daughter, with the Dauphin of France. No sooner was
Henry dead, but the Court of Rome resumed the Treaty of Alliance between the
two Crowns by a double Marriage. The Regent had always desired it, and the
private Pensioners of Spain supported it with all their Interest, in the
Council of France.

The Chancellor was one of the number of those who approved it. But he had
reason enough to oppose those who proposed to have all the Troops Disbanded.
Shall we make the World believe, says he, that we all stand in awe of the King
of Spain? Shall we bid Defiance to our best Allies? They will think we intend
to aban^^n them. Who will hereafter seek the Alliance of this Crown? I think it
advisable to keep up the Army in Champagne, and send And to Juliers, to drive
out Archduke Leopold. The Arms in Dauphine gives more jea^^usie to Spain. This
is commanded by a Protestant Marshall of France. I think ^hese two Reasons,
should move us to Disband it. But common Prudence will not suffer us to disarm
our selves entirely, before the return of Monsieur the Prince, before we have
certain Information of the Disposition of the Court of Spain, before the Power
of the King and Queen Regent be well Established.

This Advice was looked on as best. The choice of a General to carry the Aid
designed for the Countries of Cleves and Juliers, caused new Perplexities. The
Marshall de Bouillon pretended to that Employ, and Villeroy gave him hopes of
it. However the Marshall De la Chatre was preferred to him. The Court would
not give an Ab^ Man, and a Protestant, whom they were jealous of, the Command
of an Army designed to join Prince Maurice, his Friend and Brother-in-Law.
Bouillon made a great noise. Must my Religion, said he, exclude me from all
Employs due to my Rank and Services. When Mons. the Prince returns, I Will try to
make a Party to oppose this new Triumvirate of the Count of Soissons, the Duke
of Epernon, and the Cardinal of Joyeuse. These Men would be Masters of all
things.

Edicts revoked for the ease of the People. A Declaration in favor of the
Protestants.
To hinder the Princes and discontented Lords from causing an Insurrection among
the People, or raising the Protestants, they took care to give Satisfaction to
every Man. Fifty four Edicts for taxing the People were Revoked, diverse
Commissions were superseded, and the price o^ Salt abated one fourth part. To
remove al^ Distrust from the Protestants, a Declaration on was set forth to
confirm the Edict of Nants. Though, as the young King is reported to have said,
this Formality was not necessary, in regard that Law was Irrevocable and
Perpetual. Those who had the greatest Interest in the Party, they strove to
gain by Presents. The Regent sent word to Du Plessis Mornay, He might ask what
he liked best, and that her Majesty would readily grant it. Vie de Mr. du
Plessis Mornay (...). a la fin.
No Man shall ever Reproach me, said that Wise and Religious Gentlewoman, with
taking Advantage of the Disasters of my Country, or extorting the least thing
from a Minor King, or his Distressed Mother. If the Queen order me to be paid,
what has been long due to me, I will look on this Order as a new Gratification.

The Prince of Conde's Return.
Affairs were in this Posture, when the Prince of Conde prepared to return into
France. No sooner did the Count of Fuentes hear of the Death of Henry, but he
employed all his Wit and Address, to persuade the Prince not to neglect so fair
an Opportunity to make himself King. Mem. de la Regence de Marie de Medicis.
The Divorce of your Kinsman from Margaret of France, and his Marriage with
Mary de Medicis, says the crafty Spaniard, are contrary to the Laws of God, and
of the Church. Will you tamely lose a Crown which belongs to you. Have but
Courage to assert your Right, you will not want Power or Support. I offer you
all the King my M^ster can do for you. If the Authority of the Holy See
interposed in the Divorce of Henry, we will find a way to engage Paul V. to
declare null, what his Predecessor did. The Thing is not without Example.
Fuentes caused the Project to be proposed to the Pope, who rejected it. Conde
did not any more give ear to it, either because the Design appeared Chimerical
to him, or remembering the proceedings against Charlotte de la Trimoville, his
Mother, he did not dare attempt to contest the Legitimacy of the Children of a
King, who had employed all his power to make him so, when a great many thought
his Condition doubtful. Conde went from Milan to Brussels, to take the Princess
his Wife. Firm in his Resolution, to content himself with the Rank he had in
France, he would not suffer himself to be allured by a deceitful Appearance;
and therefore prepares to resume his former place at Court. The Regent pressed
him every day to it, and his Friends waited with Impatience for him.

The Arrival of the Prince Conde at Paris.
Those of the House of Lorrain, the Marshall of Bouillon, and the Duke of of
Sulli went to Senlis to meet him. And now a new Part began to appear on the
Stage. The Regent took Umbrage at this. The Count of Soissons, the Duke of
Epernon, and the Cardinal of Joleuse, fearing there was a design to drive them
from Court, began to think of defending themselves. Mary alarmed her self,
hearkened to the Advice given her to arm the Parisians. New Officers were
chosen, who took an Oath to the Queen in the Town Hall, and in less than eight
days time, above an hundred Thousand Men were in Arms. However Conde entered
Paris, accompanied with fifteen Hundred Gentlemen. He had received intelligence
from different Hands, that at the Solicitation of the Count of Soissons, the
Regent would secure his Person, and the Marshall of Bouillon. But the kind
Reception he met with from their Majesty's, dispersed all these Jealousies.

Two powerful ^a^tions at Court The Prince of Conde at the head of one, and the
Count Soisson 8 of the other. (...)
He declared at first, he had no design to dispute the Regency, which the Queen
was in possession of. Notwithstanding this, the frequent Cabals he had with the
Heads of his Party sometimes at the Hotel of Mayenne, and sometimes at the
Arsenal, gave an extreme Jealousy. The Duke of Sulii Master of the Artillery
which was there, and the Money the late King had lodged in the Bastile, could
have furnished Conde with means to undertake something considerable. But he had
not the Courage. Either because the Arming the Citizens broke his Measures or
the Guises united with him, were more concerned for their own Interests, than
the greatness of a Prince, naturally an Enemy of their House. These Men
privately had assured the Queen, they only joined themselves to the Prince of
Conde, to skreen themselves from the ill Designs of the Count of Soissons, who
endeavored to depress them, and they should be the first to leave him, if he
ever declared against her Majesty.

Conde might have spared the Guises, and might have made the Queen, the Count
of Soissons, and all the contrary Faction tremble, by following the Counsel of
the Marshall of Bouillon. Memoires de Dac de Rohan.
This was to return to the Reformed Church, which Henry had forced him to
forsake, and declare himself Protector of the Protestants in France. Supported
by the Experience and Credit of Bouillon, secure of the Money in the Bastile,
which Sully could put into his hands, strengthened with a great number of
Swisses, which Rohan their Colonel General would have brought to him, followed
by all the Protestant Nobility, who would have been at his Devotion, Master of
several good and well fortified Cities; with all these great Advantages, the
first Prince of the Blood would have balanced the power of the Regent, and made
himself formidable at home and abroad. But he was only good, to enrich himself
like a Country Gentleman, Covetous and Contentious in reasoning a point of Law,
or Discussing a Question of School Divinity. Some had put it into his Head, to
desire the Reversion of the Dignity of Constable, but he had the Mortification
to see himself denied. Too Happy in obtaining the Hotel of Condi, now called
Conde, which the Queen bought for him.

As soon as the Marshall of Bouillon, perceived that the Prince, The Marshall
de Bouillon undertakes to Reunite both Pazties.
he made his Account of, had neither Genius nor Courage to follow the steps of
his Predecessors, he resolved to reconcile himself with the Court. Bouillon
would have put himself at the Head of the Protestants of France. He had thought
of this in the preceding Reign. But the Dukes of Sulli and Rohan, the Marshall
Les Diguieres, and diverse other considerable Persons of the Party, were no
Friends to him. So he made new Protestations of his Devotion to serve their
Majesty's. He proposes to the Marquess de Coeuvres the Reconciling of the two
Princes. I Will undertake to dispose Conde, says the Marshall to the Marquess,
if you will treat with Soissons, who has a Regard for you. Sillery, Villeroy,
and Jeannin govern, whilst the Princes and great Lords are divided among
themselves. Let us Reunite the contrary Parties, without prejudice to the
Queens Authority. This is the only way to remove these great Ministers, and
reduce the rest to the simple, discharging the Duties of their Places.

The Queen Traverses the Union of the Princes and great Lords.
The Count of Soissons was afraid this was a Trick of the Marshall. He imagined
if those of his Party gave ear to Bouillon's Proposition, he would inform the
Queen, and create a Distrust in her, of the Count and his Friends. The Cardinal
of Joyeuse was of another Opinion, perhaps he sincerely meant the Good and
Repose of the State. The Cardinal then obtained the consent of Soissons, to
treat with the Marshall upon the Subject. The Queen to whom the Count
communicated the Accommodation proposed, seemed to be well satisfied with it;
however underhand she Traversed it. The Ministers made her sensible, that if
the two Princes of the Blood, the Constable of Monimorency, the Dukes of Guise,
and Epernon, the Marshall of Bouillon, and the Cardinal of Joyeuse were once
agreed, her Authority would be much diminished by it. The Regent thought it
better to keep up Jealousies and Misunderstanding between contrary Factions,
and gain the Heads of both by her Favors.

The Rise of Conchini the new Marquess of Ancre.
The Failing of so many Projects, made the Marshall of Bouillon resolve to
retire to Sedan; at the same time preparations were making for the Inauguration
of the King. The Mareschals Religion would not give him leave to assist at the
Ceremony. But before he left the Court for some time, he was resolved to make a
powerful Friend near the Regent. This was Conchini, Husband of Leonora Galigai,
a Confident of Mary de Medicis. He had lately bought the Marquisate of Ancre in
Picardy. As his Favor increased every day, he had obtained the Governments of
Peronne, Montdidier, and Roie, in the same Province. So sudden a Rise, made all
the Ministers uneasy. I cannot tell whether the Count of Soissons, and those
of his Party neglected a New Favorite, whom they did not think able to serve
or hurt them. However this was, Conchini strove to gain the good will of the
Prince of Conde; This Man was the Instrument which the Queen employed, to
divert the Prince and Duke of Guise from harkening to the Accommodation
proposed by the Marshall of Bouillon; the Marshall was too discerning a Man,
not to see the Friendship of the Marquess of Ancre, might be of great Service
to him. He offered to lay down his Place of first Gentleman of the Chamber, if
Conchini would buy it; the Bargain was soon concluded.

The King of Spains Prospect in the double Match.
All Foreign Princes the Republic of Venice, and that of the United Provinces
had sent Ambassadors to the New King. The ancient Alliances were renewed, and
Lewis with all Solemnity received in the Church of the Feuillans, the Garter
which the Ambassador of England brought him from James I. The Duke of Feria
appeared with great Pomp and Splendor in the Name of the King of Spain. Not
being able to embroil France, by means of the Prince of Conde, Philip offered
his Forces to Mary, against all those who should disturb her in her Regency.
The Ambassador again proposed the double Marriage, which his Master had made
an offer of to the late King. Philip knew very well, he could not propose any
thing more agreeable to the Regent. The present posture of Affairs of the House
of Austria, required her speedily to conclude a Treaty, which might give her
time to settle her Affairs in Germany, and raise Jealousy and Distrust among
those Princes, who were Allies of France. And because the Marriage could not so
soon be finished, the King obtained Mary's Word, that France should not meddle
in the Affairs of the House of Austria in Germany, and he engaged himself
reciprocally, not to hear any Propositions which the Disaffected Party in
France should make him. Behold now how the Court of Madrid was Embarassed.

Differences between the Emperor Rodolphus, and the Archduke Matthias his
Brother.
The Emperor Rodolphus extremely broken, seemed not likely to live a long time.
Endeavors were used to secure the Empire in the House of Austria, by the
Election of a King of the Romans. Rodolphus lived in a misunderstanding with
his. Brethren, and the Protestants were very powerful. The King of Spain was
afraid some Men should make use of so favorable an Opportunity to remove the
Empire from a House which possessed it for too long a time, and seeks to make it
Hereditary. The Archduke Matthias taking advantage of the weakness of the
Emperor his Brother had carried on in the Year 1608. a Confederacy between the
States of Hungary and Austria. He marched sometime after toward Moravia, at
the Head of an Army of twenty Thousand Men, with a design to compel Rodolphus,
to yield up the Kingdom of Hungary, the Arch-dutchy of Austria, and Stiria, and
Moravia. Matthias took the Pretext of ill Administration, and Infractions of
the Privileges of those Countries, who after the Example of the ancient
Germans, never gave their Princes an Arbitrary Unlimited Power. A Fundamental
Maxim of Government in all States, formed out of the Ruins of the Roman Empire.

Philip II King of Spain, had attempted to Abolish the Privileges of the
Hereditary Provinces of the Low Countries, and he took them away entirely from
the Kingdom of Arragon, the first Magistrate of which, would have opposed the
unjust Oppressions of Antonio Perez. The Archduke Matthias, next Kinsman to
Philip, better instructed than that cruel Tyrant in the Maxims of lawful
Government, made no scruple to place himself at the Head of the United
Provinces, for the Defense of their Liberty against the Spaniards. At present
too, the same Archduke makes without scruple, War on his Brother, who violates
the Privileges of the States of Hungary and Austria. If Rodolphus gave just
cause for this Opposition, or not, it is not a place here to examine the Fact.
I only Remark, that in the first years of an Unfortunate Age, in which Tyranny
has Established it self almost every where; there have been some Princes of the
House of Austria, have thought their Conscience and Religion allowed them, to
stir up People to defend the Liberty of their Country, and march at the Head
of an Army against their own Brothers.

As soon as the Emperor found the Designs of the Archduke, he convened the
States of Bohemia raised Troops, writ to the Elector and Princes of the Empire
to demand Aid of them. There was in Bohemia at that time, two powerful Parties
of a contrary Religion, the Catholics and the Gospellers. Under the name of
Gospellers, were comprehended the ancient Hussites; those of the Confession of
Ausburg, and the Reformed. The States of Bohemia were composed of Persons of
both one and the other Party. They presented to the Emperor diverse Articles
for the Regulation of Policy and Justice. The Gospellers in particular
required, That the Clergy should not meddle in Civil Affairs, That they should
not determine Disputes concerning Marriage, That they should not acquire
Estates in Land, without the consent of the States of the Kingdom. That all
Persons should be admitted to places of Judicature, without distinction of
Religion. Rodolphus consented to what the States demanded. The Concerns of
Religion were remitted to the next Assembly, which was appointed the end of
September following. And the States in conclusion swore to employ their Lives
and Fortunes in the Emperor's Service.

Matthias was already at the Gates of Prague with his Army. A Treaty of Peace
between the two Brothers.
After some Negotiations, the two Brothers agreed to name Deputies on both
sides, to confer together in a Neighboring Village; The Peace was concluded on
certain Conditions, I will relate the principal ones. That the Emperor should
quit the Kingdom of Hungary; the States of the Country should choose no other
King, than Archduke Matthias; that Rodolphus should give him and his Heirs
Male, the Archdutchy of Austria, without reserving to himself any Right; That
he should succeed to the Kingdom of Bohemia, in case the Emperor died without
Issue Male; That the States of Bohemia should ratify this Article; That the
Archduke should promise to maintain their Privileges if the Kingdom came to
him; That Matthias and his Heirs should have the Administration of Moravia,
with the Title of Marquess; That in the Assemblies of the Countries yielded up
by Rodolphus, the Archduke should take care to have a certain Annual
Contribution paid to the Emperor. When the Treaty had been ratified on both
sides, Matthias goes to take Possession of the Arch-dutchy of Austria. The
Catholics swear Fidelity to him, but the Protestants refuse to do it, and take
Arms. By the Persuasion of Leopold of Austria Bishop of Strasburg, of Mellini
Cardinal and Nuncio of the Pope, and Forgatsi Bishop of Vienna and Cardinal;
the new Sovereign published an Edict, to forbid all his Subjects of Austria the
exercise of the Protestant Religion.

Matthias is Elected and Crowned King of Hungary.
From Vienna, Matthias passes into Hungary. Before they proceeded to Crown the
new King, the Lords of the Country presented diverse Articles to him, which they
required him to swear to observe, viz. That the Protestants should have free
exercise of their Religion in all Cities, not excepting that in which the King
resided; That a Palatin should be erected, who should in Conjunction with the
Senators, have the Administration of Affairs in case the King did not reside in
Hungary; That the Jesuits should not be tolerated, and the Licentious Lives of
the Clergy be reformed. On these Conditions Matthias was proclaimed King, and
Crowned at Presburgh in the year 1608.

The Discontent of the Protestants in Austria abated.
The Protestants in Austria sent a Deputation to those in Hungary, entreating
them to interceed with Matthias in favor of their Brethren, and desiring their
Assistance, by virtue of a League Offensive and Defensive, still in being
between the States of Hungary and Austria, in case Matthias persisted to refuse
them the free exercise of their Religion. He replied to the Instances the
Protestant Lords of Hungary made to him; That he would leave all things in the
same State they were put in by the Regulation of the Emperor Maximilian his
Father. The Consideration, said he, I am obliged to have for the Pope and the
Catholic King, will not allow me to grant the Protestants the exercise of
their Religion in the Towns of Austria. Let them lay down their Arms, and I
will grant it them abroad. In the mean time, those of both Religions shall be
indifferently promoted to places of Judicature. The Hungarian Lords thought
this reasonable, and advised the Protestants to accept the Terms, rather than
make War.

It is hard to come to a Resolution on a sudden. After some Movements the
matter was determined, in the year 1609. At the Entreaty of tha^ States of
Moravia, and by the care of the Archduke Maximilian Brother of the Emperor and
King of Hungary, Matthias consented That the Lords and Protestant Gentlemen of
Austria, should have the free exercise of their Religion in their Castles,
Villages, and their private Houses for their Family only, when they should be
in Town: That they should have Public exercise of it in three Cities,
specified in the Treaty, where the Churches should be equally divided between
the Catholics and Protestants; That all places should be indifferently given
to capable Persons of both Communions. The Protestants upon this submitted, and
took an Oath of Fidelity to the new King.

Differences about Religion in Bohemia.
The Emperor had longer and more difficult Contests with the Gospellers in
Bohemia. The Assembly of the States appointed at the end of September 1608. was
put off till January following. The Roman Catholics did all they could to
exasperate Rodolphus against the Gospellers, and persuaded him, that they
enjoyed the exercise of their Religion only by a simple Toleration. The Oath of
Subjects, is relative to that of a Prince, said the Gospellers with Indignation
to Rodolphus, hearken to the ill Advice given him by certain Persons; If the
Emperor will not keep the Oath he has made to us, we think our selves
discharged from that we have taken to him. Rodolphus remitted the hearing of
their Complaints to the chief Officers of Bohemia, who were all Catholics.
These interessed Judges contemning what the Gospellers alleged in their
Defense, they protested in a full Assembly, against all the proceedings of the
States, and demanded time to give notice to the rest of their Brethren in the
Kingdom of what passed, and to inform his Imperial Majesty.

The Gospellers instantly sent a Deputation to the King of Hungary, and the
Electors and Princes of the Empire, entreating them to intercede with
Rodolphus. The Emperor resolved the States should continue to sit, and regulate
all Matters of Religion. The Term of their Sessions being expired, the Emperor
dismissed them, and forbid the Gospellers to meet in the Court of the New Prague,
or debate of their Affairs there. In vain did they Petition his Majesty to
allow them a place of Meeting, for the taking Measures to represent to him the
Justice of their Pretensions, and read the Answer which the King of Hungary,
and the Electors and Princes of the Empire had sent them. Incensed at the
unjust refusal of Rodolphus, the Gospellers take each other by the hand, and
mutually swear to lose their Lives in defense of their Liberties and Religion,
take Arms in the Court of the new Prague, broke open the Gates, enter and
consult what was fit to be done in their Condition. They were not more than
three Hundred. Budovitz their chief, lays open to the Assembly the Importance
of their Undertaking, the danger they are threatened with, and the ill Designs
of their Enemies. Then making an Ardent Prayer to God, sings the Hymn of the
Holy Ghost in the vulgar Tongue. This animates the Assembly with new Zeal and
Devotion, they continue to sing and shed Tears in abundance. A great number of
Gospellers come presently into them, and all set themselves to sing and weep
together. Notice is given, a great Body of Masqueteers were coming to charge
them. Instead of being daunted, they take Courage, come down into the Area,
seize all the Avenues, and prepare for a Vigorous Defense. There was about
twelve Hundred Horse, and three Hundred Harquebusiers. The People of their
Religion in Prague, came on all sides to the Assistance of their Brethren, so
that there was soon about ten Thousand Men differently Armed. There was a
Rainbow seen in the South, and the Sun appeared encircled with this new
Phenomenon. The vulgar naturally addicted to Superstition, interpret any thing
which seems extraordinary, according as their Imagination is more or less
heated. And now they conceive great hopes, thinking God has given this as a
visible sign of the particular Assistance they had begged of him with great
Ardour. The chief Persons were desired to return into the Hall of the Assembly,
and consider what Methods were to be used. The People promised in the mean
time, to guard the Avenues with all possible care.

Rodolphus informed of what had passed, sent the first Burgrave of Prague, and
the chief Officers of his Court to appease the Tumult. His Imperial Majesty,
says the Burgrave in the Hall, cannot imagine for what reason, you have taken
Arms. He has always loved you, as his good Subjects. The Emperors Conscience
bears him witness, he has faithfully kept his Word in every thing he promised
to the States of the Kingdom, and hopes you will not be less steady in your
Fidelity to him. He is disposed to summon a new Meeting, to determine all
Disputes which may arise on the Head of Religion, contrary to the Intention of
his Majesty. Budovitz replied in the name of the rest, that the Gospellers
humbly thanked the Emperor for his good Will toward them, and entreated him to
believe, they never designed an Insurrection against him. We only complain,
says he, of certain Persons, who under color of preserving the Catholic
Religion, give his Majesty Advice, which tends to the Subversion of the
Government. We hope to make this appear in the next Assembly, which he shall
convene. Farther we most humbly entreat his Majesty, the Publication of this
Meeting, may be made within three Days. This is the only way to prevent those
Accidents, we have reason to be afraid off.

The Suspicion which the Gospellers had of the Catholic Party, was the cause
of more Commotions; Rodolphus appeased these without much Difficulty, by
publishing a Proclamation. In this he owned, those of the Bohemian Confession,
and the Protestants for his good and faithful Subjects, declared that in their
Meetings held without his consent, they had no other end than the good of the
Kingdom, and his Majesty's Service; required all the Deputies to meet in the
Castle of Prague, the 25th of May, 1609. and to bring no Soldiers with them,
promised on his side to send away all those in his Service, that so he might
leave the States an entire Liberty to settle all matters of Religion. The
Gospellers had a solemn Thanksgiving, upon the publishing this Proclamation;
but their Enemies every day finding new Pretenses to hinder the Conclusion of
the matter, the Gospellers began to raise Soldiers, and brought them into
Prague.

All preparations were made for a Civil War, The Pacification of the Trrubles
in Bohemia.
when at the Intercession of the Elector of Saxony, Rodolphus published a
Declaration; That all his Subjects communicating under one or both kinds,
should have free exercise of their Religion, and their Service in Bohemian or
High Dutch, forbidding the Archbishop of Prague to disturb the Ministers of the
other Party in their Worship; That Catholics and others should equally enjoy
the same Privileges; That the Gospellers might build Churches, and found
Colleges. This Edict was declared perpetual and irrevocable, and those who
broke it, were to be punished as Disturbers of the public Peace. By Virtue of
this Grant, the Protestants had the liberty to exercise their Religion in
Prague, and the 15th of July, 1609. their Ministers preached publicly in a
Church of the Hussites, shut up for a long time before.

None doubted the Jesuits inspired into the Archbishop of Prague, and the other
Officers of the Empire the violent Counsels, which caused all the preceding
Troubles. The Catholics and Gospellers, were alike enraged at them. Both
parties reunited to present jointly an Address to the Emperor. In this they
represent, that the Jesuits being very poor when they came into Bohemia, had
gained considerable Wealth, and did not contribute at all to the Charges of the
State; for this Reason, they did humbly beseech his Majesty to take care, the
good Fathers should not be exempted more than other Churchmen; and for the
future, they should not receive any thing by Will or Donation, without the
express consent of his Majesty.

A Diet at Pr^gue in 1610.
The Emperor soon repented of the Treaty with Matthias his Brother, and demanded
the Restitution of Austria and Moravia. The Electors and Princes of that
Empire, summon'd^to meet at Prague in 1610. came thither to endeavor a
Reconciliation between the two Brothers. Besides this, they were to Treat of
the Election of a King of the Romans, and determine the Difference about the
Succession of Cleves and Juliers. The Elector of Cologne, Ferdinand of Austria
Archduke of Gratz, and Henry Julius Duke of Brunswick, went to Vienna to confer
with the King of Hungary. After a long Negotiation, the two Brothers made a new
Treaty. Matthias remained in possession of what had been given him, and the
weak Rodolphus had only some seeming Submissions, and a sort of annual Tribute
of a certain number of Tuns of Wine, and a small sum of Money.

The Emperor gives the Elector of Saxony the Countries of Cleves and Juliers.
The Diet did not take any Resolution about the Election of a King of the
Romans. The Posture of Affairs did not seem very favorable to the House
Austria. As for the Succession of Cleves and Juliers, the Emperor had a mind to
perplex this matter more. The Archduke Leopold, whose small Army every day
received some check from the Troops of the States General, or of the
Confederate Princes, was not strong enough to preserve the contested Countries;
Besides Maurice Prince of Orange, prepared in earnest to come and lay Siege to
Juliers, with the Auxiliary Troops of France and England. The House of Austria
then found it would be impossible for her to resist so many Powers united to
oppose the Usurpation she designed. The only means she could have recourse to,
was to bring the Succession of Cleves and Juliers into the hands of a
Protestant Prince, less contrary to her Interests, than those of Brandenburgh
and Neuburgh. She cast her Eyes on the Elector of Saxony. His House had
pretensions on this Litigious Succession, by virtue of several Grants of the
Emperor. These had lain dormant a long time, though there had several times
been occasion to have presented them. A Daughter Inherited the States of Cleves
and Juliers, since the Emperors had granted the House of Saxony a Right to
succeed in defect of Heirs Male. But when a fair Sovereignty is the Subject of
Dispute, Princes are not very Scrupulous. The least color of Right, is enough
for them to dispose of it, or reserve it for themselves. Rodolphus then gave on
certain considerations to the Elector, and House of Saxony, all the Estates
which belonged to the late John William, Duke of Cleves and Juliers.

The Siege and taking Juliers by Maurice Prince of Orange.
This had been a more handsome Present, if when the Act of Concession was put
into his Hands, he had at the same time an Army given him to assert his Title.
Maurice Prince of Orange, invested the Town of Juliers the 28th of July, with
the Troops of the United Provinces, joined by those sent from the King of
England. The 18th of August, the Marshall de la Chatre, brought twelve
Thousand French Foot, and two Thousand Horse. Rauschemberg Governor of the
Place, defended it with great Prudence and Courage; But Prince Maurice was so
great a Master in the Art of Attacking, and taking Towns, that Rauschemberg
Capitulated the 1st of September. Thus Juliers was put into the Hands of the
Princes of Brandenburg and Newburg. These were then called the Princes
Possessors, to distinguish them from the other Pretenders.

The Meeting at Cologne to adjust the Affairs of Cleves and Juliers.
After the Surrender of Juliers, some Princes of Germany met at Cologne, to find
out some way of Accommodation. The Elector of Triers, and the Count of
Hohenzollern came thither in Quality of Commissioners for the Emperor. Lewis
Landgrave of Hess, made diverse Propositions. The Princes in possession, did not
care to accept them. They tended to a Sequestration into the hands of the
Emperor, and to put the Elector of Saxony in possession of the Litigious
Countries, conjointly with the Princes of Brandenburg and Newburg. The French
Ambassador proposed another way, which was not liked by the Landgrave, nor the
Imperial Commissioners. The German Princes never love that Foreign Sovereigns
should meddle too much with the Affairs of the Empire. There was a great number
of Writings on the side of the Possessors, the Elector of Saxony, and the
Commissioners of the Emperor; but they could not come to any Agreement. The
Assembly broke up, and each one protested for himself; he was not the cause
that hindered the Troubles from being pacified. This was the better for
Brandenburgh and Newburgh. They continued in peaceable Possession of the
Countries of Cleves and Juliers, till the Affair should be determined. The
Protestant confederated Princes did them yet very good Service, by obliging
Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, Head of the Catholic League to Disarm, and the
Elector of Collen to put a stop to all Hostilities of his Subjects against
those of the Country of Juliers.

The Coronation of Lewis XIII.
The Court of France was then at Rheims, for the Coronation of the young King.
The Cardinal of Joycuse representing the Archbishop of the place, performed the
Ceremony with the usual Pomp. The Princes of Conde and Conti, the Count of
Soissons, the Dukes of Nevers, Elbeuf and Epernon, Represented the ancient
Dukes of Burgundy, Normandy, and Aquitain, and the Counts of Thoulouse,
Flanders, and Champagne. It is not needful for me to relate in this place, all
the particulars of this long Ceremony, it may be found in diverse places. There
is one thing not to be forgotten, which well deserves our Attention. Before
that which the Credulous People call the Holy Bottle be made use of, the King
promises when required by the Prelate who Officiates, to the Bishops and
Churches, to preserve their Canonical Privileges, to make good Laws, to do
Justice, to protect his Subjects according to the Obligations of a King to his
People. Two Bishops Peers of France after this, ask all present if they receive
this Prince for their King, and all the Orders of the Kingdom having given
their consent, the Solemn Oath of Inauguration is administered to him. A
convincing proof, there is a Reciprocal and Relative Engagement between a
Sovereign and his Subjects.

Reflections on the Coronation Oath.
In an Elective Kingdom, the Subjects oblige themselves only to the Prince, who
is chosen on Conditions mutually agreed on in the Act of Election. But in an
Hereditary State, they stand engaged to him whom they have Elected, and to his
Descendants; it being still understood, they shall observe all the Conditions
promised by the first of the Royal Family. Thus we see, why each of these in
particular is not received as King, till after the Ratification of the Original
Contract made with him, from whom they derive their Pretensions to the Crown.
This Maxim is founded on Divine Right, and Natural Equity. The good Frenchmen
commonly believed this in the XV. Century; Joan Gerson Oposculo adversus
adulatores Principurm. Considerat. VIII.
It is a gross Mistake, says one of the most Famous and Pious Writers of the
Gallican Church, to pretend that a Sovereign has not contracted any Obligation
to his Subjects. In the same manner as by Divine Right, Natural Equity, and by
the true end of Government, the latter are bound to continue faithful to, and
assist their Prince, so he Reciprocally engaged to be Faithful to them, and
protect them. If it shall happen then that a Sovereign shall do manifest
Injustices, without having regard to the Remonstrances of his Subjects, they
have a Liberty to defend themselves according to the Rule of Natural Right,
which allows every one to repel Violence with all his Might. Claude Despence
Institution d'un Prince Chretien.
Another Divine of Paris, not less Eminent for his Birth, than his rare
Learning, said frankly to Henry II. That his Majesty ought to detest a
Tyrannick Maxim, more fit for a Turk or Tartar Sovereign, than a Christian
Prince; a Maxim I say, since received at Court, That the King is Master of the
Body and the Goods of his Subjects. The Courtiers who instil'd this, Doctrine
into Sovereigns, this Judicious Divine without Ceremony, calls Dogs and
Court-Parasites.

To prevent the ill effects of the bad Politics of the Cardinal Director of
the Education of King Lewis the XIV. they printed the same things during the
Minority of that Prince. Neither the Bookseller nor the Author, did dare to set
their Name to it. This Book was writ by a Churchman, Eminent for his Learning
and Probity. Mr. Jolli Chantre de Notre-Dame de Paris Maxims veritables and
impnrtantes pour l'institution du Roi.
He since enjoyed one of the first Dignities of the Church of Paris; but what
was spoken freely to Henry the II. and what was published covertly about 50
years since, the French would have now lost the Memory of, if it were as easy
to forget, as it is to be silent, to avoid Danger; all Books of this kind, are
now burnt by the hands of the Hangman. Can those unworthy Magistrates who order
this, believe that the flames by consuming of Paper, will erase out of the
Hearts of good Frenchmen, those Sentitiments that right Reason has deeply
inscribed in them?

The Oath which James the 1. King of England requir^d of his P^pish Subjects
caused a Dispute concerning the Independance of Sovereignty in Temporal Matters.
The Parliament of Paris on the 26th day of November, the same year, made a
Decree for the Suppression of the Treatises which Cardinal Bellarmin a Jesuit
had published, concerning the power of the Pope in Temporal Matters; since this
new Book was a Consequence of the Dispute of the Author with James the first,
King of Great Britain, upon the occasion of the Oath which that Prince required
of the Roman Catholics of England: I will in a few words, Relate the beginning
and Progress of the Controversy. After the Horrible Gunpowder Plot, King James
thought for his own Safety it was necessary to require the English Papists, to
take a particular Oath of Allegiance to him. The Form of this was so ordered,
that it might not offend the Conscience of those, who without renouncing their
Religion, would pay that duty to their Sovereign, they rightfully owed him. In
this they acknowledged, the Pope had no right to Depose Kings, or dispose of
their Kingdoms, or any Foreign Prince to Invade them, or Absolve their Subjects
of their Oath of Allegiance, or Command them to take Arms against their
Sovereign; they promised farther to be faithful to the King, and serve him,
notwithstanding all that the Pope should attempt against him or his Successors;
and to discover all Conspiracies which should come to their Knowledge. They
Abjured and Detested as Impious and Heretical, the Doctrine of those who teach,
it is lawful to Depose and Assassinate Princes, Excommunicated by the Pope; and
lastly, they protested they believed, that neither the Pope nor any other
power, could dispense with the keeping of their Oath, and Renounced all
Dispensations, which the Pope might think fit to give. The thing appeared
reasonable to the English Papists, the Nobility, Gentry, Priests, and all
others swore in this Form. George Blackwell nominated Archpriest of England by
the Pope, not content with taking the Oath himself, wrote in Defense of it
against all its Opposers.

Paul V. forbids the English of his Communion, to take the Oath.
The Court of Rome made a quite different Judgment in the matter. Thinking Men
were not surpised at it; a Proposition which she makes, one of the Fundamental
Articles of her Religion was here Rejected, as Impious and Heretical. Whatever
be said on this Subject, those who approve the Oath, reason inconsequently, if
they own the Pope for the Vicar of Jesus Christ. Paul V. scared at these
proceedings of the English Catholics, without his Knowledge and Consent, sent
a Brief immediately, to forbid them to take an Oath Inconsistent, as he said,
with the Catholic Faith, and the Salvation of their Souls. These Expressions
are as moving and strong, as if he designed to dissuade these poor People from
subscribing the most Impious Tenets, against the Divinity of Jesus Christ. This
thundering Brief discomposed them so much, they thought they could not do
better then regard it as Subreptitious or Spurious. His Holiness not being well
informed of the proceedings in England.

King James his Apology for his Oath, without setting his Name to it.
They were not suffered long to remain in this voluntary Mistake, Paul soon
dispatched another Brief, to confirm the first. Cardinal Bellarmin was the
greatest and most eminent Champion of the Pontifical Power, since the Death of
Cardinal Baronius, which happened not long before Bellarmin I say, wrote a well
studied Letter to Blackwell, to reduce him into the right way. A more
passionate Remonstrance could scarce have been made, to one who had renounced
the Gospel, and embraced the Alchoran. This made James loose all Patience, he
wrote himself to defend his Oath against the two Briefs of the Pope, and the
Letter of Bellarmin; and now he did not set his Name to the Work. Had not a
King better forbore Writing at all, and left this care to another? This good
Prince owned himself publicly, that it became a King more to Judge than
Dispute. A little Jesuit made a Cardinal, by blotting of Paper, was not an
Adversary worthy of a great Monarch. Borghese behaved himself like a King, and
James acted the part of a Doctor; one Commanded, and the other Disputed. Except
a Prince then, write as Julius Caesar, or Marcus Aurelius, he is in the wrong
to become an Author. Julian was pleased to take his Pen to defend his
Philosophic Gravity and Religion, and with all his Learning, made himself
Contemptible and Ridiculous.

The King of England declares himself Author of the Apology, to the Princes and
States of Christendom.
Bellarmin did not fail to reply to the King, but under a borrowed Name. A
Learned Prelate of England, undertook to refute the Cardinal; he showed that
before Gregory the VII. no Ecclesiastical Writer had attempted to maintain the
Authority of the Pope, over the Temporalities of Sovereigns. The King of
England caused another Edition of his Apology to be printed, and declared
himself the Author of it. Shall I say, he thought in this to do himself Honor,
by becoming a Champion for the common cause of all Sovereigns, or had a mind to
display a Learning not very common in Persons of his Rank? The Work appeared
with a very pompous Preface at the Head of it. This was a Manifesto, addressed
to all the Kings, Princes, and other Republics of Christendom, to give an
account of his Oath and his Conduct, with regard to his Roman Catholic
Subjects. Rouse your selves, it is high time, said the King to them. The Common
Interest of all Sovereigns is concerned, a Formidable and Obstinate Enemy, is
undermining the Foundations of your Power, unless you act in Concert, to put a
stop to the Progress he makes every Day; your most incontestable Right, will be
soon Usurped. He that attacks me to day, will declare himself against you to
morrow; should a Wise Man stand with his Arms folded, when his Neighbors House
is on Fire. The Advice was wholesome, but his Majesty of Great Britain, had the
Dissatisfaction to hear several Catholic Princes did not dare to read his
Apology, for fear of giving offense to the Pope. A strange Slavery! Can Policy
or Superstition, reduce Princes to so mean a Complaisance; to a Bishop who
would have great Honor done him, in leaving him the first Subject of the
Empire.

Henry IV. of France, was as weak as the rest. Coeffeteau writes against K.
James his Apology.
He forbid any Translation should be published of that Book, which his good
Ally had sent him. His Care and Orders were ineffectual; the Apology appeared
in French, in spite of him. Coeffeteau a Religious Dominican, after Bishop of
Marseille, an Author who successfully began first to give an Elegance and an
Agreeable and Neat turn to the French Language; Coeffeteau, I say, was desirous
to Signalize himself on this occasion, and so enter the List against a King.
This Man was obliged to speak after the manner used in France, and to own the
Independance of Sovereigns, in regard of their Temporal Concerns. But the poor
Dominican Embarassed himself terribly. Indeed, says he to the King of Great
Britain, If the Catholic Church teaches this Furious Zeal, if she arms her
own Children, against Kings, and puts them on making Attempts against their
Lives; she is not only unworthy of their Favors, but deserves to be
Exterminated, and her Memory erased by a General Decree of Mankind; but if on
the contrary, she condemns all these Attempts as Parricides, if she desires
Princes should securely enjoy their Dominions, have their Armies Victorious, an
obedient People, a Faithful Counsel, and all Happiness that can be desired; is
not her Greatness Harmless, notwithstanding the Rage of some private Persons
whom Despair, and not Religion has pushed on to Brutality. She knows she cannot
subsist without the State, that she is born in it, and the State is her Support.

The Catholic Church, this is a word strangely Equivocal in France. If it may
be allowed to fignifie a certain Number of the most enlightened and sincere
Persons in the Roman Communion, the Author I have just now cited may speak
Truth. But if by the Catholic Church we must understand, as is more reasonable
its Supreme Pastor, the great number of those which fill its chief Dignities,
its most Famous Writers: I very much fear, the good Coeffeteau has advanced a
Notorious Falsehood. The Pope and Cardinals gave him the Lie in a very
Remarkable manner, the very same year he answered King James. Barclay had wrote
against Bellarmine, about the Authority of the Pope, and followed the
Principles commonly received amongst the better Men of France. His Book was
Condemned at Rome, as well as the Noble History of Mr. De Thou, the Famous
Argument of Antony Arnaud, against the Jesuits, and the Sentence it self of the
Parliament of Paris, against John Chastel, who had made an Attempt on the Life
of Henry IV. That poor Prince was not yet dead. This strange Censure which he
endured so patiently, did it not serve to Animate the Rage of that Wretch, who
Assassinated him the year following? If the pretended Head of the Church of
Rome, if the Cardinals, and the greatest number of its Paftors did not teach
this Furious Zeal; If they condemned their Attempts as Parricides, would they
have destroyed so many good Books, so Just and so Christian a Sentence? Let us
then conclude with the Opinion of the Eminent Coeffeteau, The Pope and
Cardinals deserve to be exterminated, and their Memory erased by a public
Decree of Mankind.

As the Cardinals pretend they are not Inferior to Crowned Heads; Cardinal
Pellarmine Addresses to the Emperor and Kings of the Popal Communion, his
Answer to the King of England's Apology.
Bellarmine in the same manner, Addresses to the Emperor, and the Kings who own
God for their Father, and the Catholic Church for their Mother, the Answer
which he had some time since made under a borrowed Name, to the King of Great
Britain's Apology. It must not be thought strange, says the Cardinal, that I
undertake to refute a King; It is for the Defense of the Faith, I have taken my
Pen in hand, after the Example of diverse Prelates of Antiquity. Hilary of
Poitiers, and Lucifer of Cagliari, have writ against the Haeretical Emperor
Constantius; Gregory Narianzen, and Cyrill of Alexandria, have Encountered
Julian the Apostate. This did James the first draw on himself from a Priest,
for turning Controvertist without necessity. If he had contented himself with
publishing a Manifesto, to prove the Justice of the Oath he required of his
Popish. Subjects, he would have embarass'd the Court of Rome, and its
Advocates. But he labored to show the Pope was Antichrist, and that Rome is
the Seat of the Son of Perdition. Was not this a way to please the Sovereigns
of the Popes Communion, by furnishing them with a pretense for not receiving
kindly the Kings Apology, and applauding the Cardinals Answer.

A Deeree of the Parliament of Paris, against the Treatise of Bellarmine, of the
Authority of the Pope.
The Dispute stopped there; Bellarmine set himself to reply to Barclay. This Man
had refuted what the Cardinal advanced concerning the Authority of the Pope, in
the first Volume of his Controversies. The Magistrates opposed the printing
them at Paris, and the first Sheets which were worked of, were Suppressed by
order of the Solicitor General. As soon as they had notice of the New Book
which Bellarmine had published, of the Authority of the Pope in Temporal
Matters, Servin Advocate General moved the Parliament, to provide against any
Mischiefs which the Publication of so ill a Book might cause. This Magistrate
urged the Duty of his Place, obliged him not to be less Diligent or Zealous for
the Service of his Master, than Peter de Cugnieres, and John le Cooq his
Predecessors had been; the one in the Reign of Philip of Valois, and the other
in that of Charles the VI. Farther he alleged, the late proceedings of the
King of Spain and his Officers, against that Volume of the Annals of Cardinal
Baronius, wherein the Monarchy of Sicily is attacked. The Chambers meeting upon
the occasion of this Remonstrance, ordered Cardinal Bellarmines Work to be
Suppressed; let us now see what was done this year in Spain against Baronius.

An Edict of the King of Spain, against the XI. Volume of the Ecclesiastical
Annals of Cardinal Baronius.
The Kings of Sicily have for a long time, been the only Popes of this little
Kingdom. By Virtue of a certain Bull which Pope Urban the Second granted, say
they to Roger Count of Sicily, and his Successors, the Sovereign, is Legatus
Natus or Born Legate of the Holy See. His Spiritual Power is so great, that he
Excommunicates and Absolves by himself, or his Magistrates all Laymen and
Ecclesiastics, Bishops and Cardinals themselves, residing in his Kingdom. This
Right, say they farther, though derived from the Holy See, is now Irrevocable,
it is the Sovereigns Property. Thus the King of Spain is alike in Spirituals
and Temporals, and has the same Right there, as the Pope has in Countries under
his Obedience. Joan the foolish Mother of Charles V. and diverse other
Princesses who Reigned alone Sicily, every one of these Ladies were Sanctissimo
Padre. This Title was given them, and their Magistrates. They might in this
Quality preside in Provincial and National Councils, or substitute others in
their Room. The Kings of Spain are so jealous of this rare Prerogative, that in
the Reign of Charles V. a Viceroy of Sicily Collected all the Titles and Acts
which serve for the Justification of it. Three Authentic Copies of this
Collection were drawn at the same time, by order of the Viceroy. In the year
School. one was exposed to Sale in London; it had been brought away the last time
Barcelona was taken by the French, I had it a pretty while in my Hands. The
Right Reverend the Bishop of Norwich, curious in all good Books, did not
purchase it too dear, considering the rarity of the Manuscript. This is a
Collection like that of the Proofs of the Liberties of the Gallican Church. It
contains chiefly diverse Judgments given in the Tribunal, commonly called of the
Monarchy of Sicily.

The Cardinal Baronius in the eleventh Tome of his Annals, vigorously Attacked
this Spiritual Power, which the Catholic Kings ascribe to themselves without
Scruple. A Right never heard of, says the Cardinal, A Right that Frederick the
Second, and his Children, those unjust Tyrants and Rebellious Persecutors of
the Roman Church, never were so Audacious as to usurp. This caused a great
Contest between Baronius and the Cardinal Colonna, who pretended his Brother
had no Reason to set himself so violently against the King of Spain. The Court
of Madrid was so displeased at the Author of the Annals, that she procured him
to be excluded in a Conclave, where he had 37 Voices. At last upon the 3d of
October, 1610. Philip III. published an Edict, where after great Complaints
made against the Invectives of Baronius, and a long Enumeration of the Services
which the Kings of Spain and Sicily his Predecessors had done for the Church of
Rome, he forbids his Subjects on severe Penalties, to Read or Sell the Eleventh
Volume of Baronius Annals, till the place Repugnant with the Monarchy of Sicily
was Expunged.

Servin knew very well the example of the King of Spain, was of great weight
with Mary de Medicis, who every day contracted new Ties to Philip; he hoped
this would hinder the Regent from taking exception at the Proceedings of the
Parliament against Bellarmine's Book. The Advocate General was deceived in his
Conjecture. The Queen was not less devoted to the Court of Rome, than that of
Madrid. The Nuncio in Spain, did not dare to open his Mouth against the Edict
of Philip. The Popes Agent was bolder, and more Successful in France. At his
Solicitation, the Regent ordered the Execution of the Decree of Parliament
against Bellarmine's Book, to be Superseded. The Enemies of the Sovereign Power
of Kings, ever had Liberty of Speaking and Writing.

Differences of the Marquess of Aucre, with the Count of Soissons, and Dpke of
Epernon.
The Marquess of Ancre a Favorite of Mary's, began to be insupportable to the
Princes, and first Lords of the Court. In the Kings Journey to Rheims, the
Servants of the Machioness had some Contest with those of the Cardinal Joyeuse
about Lodgings. Conchini made first Gentleman of the Chamber, had likewise a
Dispute about the Precedence with Bellegarde, Great Esquire at the Public
Entry of the King into Paris, on his return from his Inauguration. The Duke of
Epernon, a Kinsman of Bellegarde declared against Conchini; Mem. de la Regence
de Marie de Medicis.
and the Count of Soissons enraged at him, for assisting the Duke of Guise to
marry the Dowager of Montpensier, would not any more speak to the Marquess of
Ancre. The Enmity of two such powerful Men, made him very uneasy; He labored
to be reconciled to them. Soissons was not very averse to this, but he required
the Marquess and his Wife should serve him in two Things, which he passionately
desired; to marry the Count of Enghien his Son to the Princess Heiress of
Montpensier, and to ruin the Duke of Sully.

Their Reconciliation,
For the first Proposition, the Marquess delivered himself in General Terms, to
those who were concerned in this Accommodation. He spoke more positively on the
Article of the Duke of Sully, in case the Ministers would side with him.
Conchini did not love the Duke. He was afraid the Interest of an Old Minister,
might be an Obstacle to his growing Favor. Nevertheless the Count of Soissons
did not dare to conclude this Reconciliation, till the Duke of Epernon was
satisfied. It was not so easy to bring down his Haughty and Stubborn Spirit,
who pretended to be his own Support, independently on all Favorites. Epernon
required, Conchini should come to him, and make him Satisfaction in the
presence of the Count of Soissons. He, blown up with his Favor, and New
Honor, refused that Submission to the Duke, which he could without meanness
make to a Prince of the Blood Soissons found an Expedient, which might be a
Salvo for the Nicety of the one, and satisfy the Haughty Humor of the other*
The President Jeannin had presented Conchini to the Count; after those
Compliments had passed, which were agreed o^ before, the two New Friends sat
down to play together. The Game being over It is not enough says Soissons to
the Marquess, that we are Reconciled. You must have a right understanding with
all my good Friends. I am going to make a visit to on^ of them, I beg your
Company. I am disposed to do what you please, replied Conchini They were soon
at the Hotel of Epernon; all things were carried there to the content of both
Parties. That which (...) looked on as a Trifle amonst Private Me^passes for a
weighty Matter with great ones.

A Party formed at Court against the Duke (...) Sully.
There was no need to take much pain^ to gain the Ministers over to act in
Concert with the others, to ruin the Duke of Sully. He had a Misunderstanding
wit^ Villeroy, the only Man of their Number who had taken pains to keep him in
Employ. Sharp and Affronting words pa^sed between them in the Council, in the
Queens Presence. Villeroy who though himself to be the more necessary, and to
have the better Interest, leaves the Court. This was a sort of Menace, that he
would not return as long as Sully had a share in the Government. The Regent her
self was inclined to dismiss him. A Protestant could not be very grateful to a
Princess, who blindly followed the Impressions of the Court of Rome. Mary
disliked too the Austere Humor of the Duke, who would not fail to oppose her
excessive Expenses, and Imprudent Liberalities. The fear of causing Murmurs
amongst the Protestants, in discarding a Lord of their Religion without Reason,
possibly would have restrained the Queen, and defeated the Cabals against him.
But they reckoned upon the Interest of the Marshall of Bouillon, with the
Party. He mortally hated the Duke of Sully; and the Prince of Conde tempted by
the Confiscation of the Estate of a Superintendant, which Bouillon made him
cast his Eyes on, Declines interceding for a Man whose Plunder would enrich
him, Mem du Duc de Rohan, Live. 1.
a Powerful Spur to make a Prince Act, says one of the Wisest Men of that Time.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS XIII. King of France and Navarre.
BOOK II.
1611. The Quarrel of Bellegarde and Conchini.
IN the Year 1611. Conchini entered upon the Exercise of his New place of first
Gentleman of the Chamber. Bellegarde who had served the preceding year in the
same Quality, was loath to leave the Apartment in the Louvre appointed for him,
who served in that Quality. The Marquess of Ancre having already Lodgings in
the Louvre, upon the account of his Wife; but the latter had not respect enough
for him, to give him any thing which of Right belonged to himself. The Key of
the Apartments was demanded of Bellegarde. Diverse pretenses were found to defer
this. The Marquess of Ancre tired with these affected Delays, demands it
himself of the Great Esquire, in the Queens Closet. Upon a positive Refusal,
several Affronting Words past on both sides, Conchini did not want Courage. He
goes out of the Louvre, to avoid a Prohibition of Fighting, and with a Design
to demand the Reason of the Affront and Wrong, Bellegarde had done him.

This Quarrel made a great noise at Court, Memoirs de la Regence de Marie de
Medicis.
every one followed that side his Passion or Interest led him to. The Count of
Soissons, and old Friend of the Great Esquires, forgot all his New Ties to the
Marquess of Ancre. He threatened Conchini to drive him from Court, and his
Passion of which he seldom was Master, had Transported him farther, if the
Marquess de Coeuvres his Confident, had not stopped him. Is this the way you
take, said the Marquess to him, to compass your Design of Marrying your Son to
the Princess of Montpensier, and ruin the Duke of Sully your Enemy, to quarrel
with the Queen and her Creatures? Bellegarde is your Friend, but, the Duke of
Guise whom you don't Love; has he not contracted an Alliance with this
Gentleman, by Marrying the Dowager of Montpensier, his near Kinswoman? Do you
think for the future, your Interests will be dearer to Bellegarde, than those
of the House of Guise; if you have no Consideration for Conchini, at least
consider your self. The Count began to reflect a little, when a Gentleman came
to tell Coeuvres, the Marquess of Ancre desired to have some Discourse with him
in the Hotel d'Etrees. Coeuvres go's instantly, exhorts Conchini to consent to
an Accommodation. Monsieur the Prince, and the Duke of Epernon have offered me
their Mediation, says the Marquess of Ancre, but if it comes to that, Monsieur
the Count will be more grateful to me. Coeuvres made his Advantage of this
Offer. The Count of Soissons valued it as a piece of Merit with the Queen, to
accommodate a Quarrel which gave her Majesty some Disturbance.

The Count of Soissons quarrels with the Cardinal of Joyeuse, and the Duke of
Epernon.
Conchini thought himself extremely obliged to the Count, for having so
dexterously managed his Honor; Full of Gratitude the Marquess of Ancre
promised Soissons to labor effectually to procure the Marriage of Mr. of
Enghien with the Rich Hieress of Montpensier, and to ruin the Duke of Sully.
The Queen consented in effect to the two Propositions, which the Ministers and
Marquess of Ancre strenuously pleaded for; But when the Duke of Epernon, and
the Cardinal of Joyeuse came to understand the Queen disposed of their grand
Niece without their consent, they complained to her Majesty, she had not
Communicated to them a Matter which concerned them so nearly. Farther they made
great Complaints, that the Count of Soissons had slighted them in carrying on a
Matter of that kind with the Regent, without their Privity. This Prince full of
Life, but very Indiscreet, took a Pique very unseasonably against two Persons,
whom he sought to engage in his Interests. Endeavors were used for an
Accommodation, but all in vain. Soissons was too passionate, and Epernon too
haughty. The late King had designed the Princess of Montpensier for the Duke of
Orleans his second Son, and had declared this only to the Cardinal Joyeuse, and
the Duke of Epernon; otherwise the Match would have been agreeable to the Niece
and the Uncles. But how could they prefer the last Prince of the Blood, to the
first Son of France. The young Duke of Orleans died the 17th of November this
year. In default of him, the Princess of Montpensier was desired for Gaston
Duke of Anjou, third Son of Henry IV.

A Quarrel between the Count of Soissons with the Psince of Conti ^is Brother.
The Count of Soissons had the beginning of this year two Notorious Quarrels,
one with the Prince of Conti his Brother, and the other with the Duke of Guise.
Three days after the Marriage of this latter with the Dowager of Montpensier,
the Prince of Conti going in the Evening to the Louvre in his Coach, met near
the Croix du Tiroir, the Count of Soissons, who likewise was in his. There
being a stop in the Street, it was necessary one of the two Coaches should put
back, to make way for the other. The Counts Gentleman began to be rough, and
without observing the Liveries, to use Threats, and command the Princes
Coachman to put back immediately. Conti's Men would not yield, bid the Coachman
drive on, and fear nothing. The Count of Soissons then saw it was his Elder
Brother in the Coach, he instantly sent to make excuses for the Indiscretion of
his Gentleman. They protested to the Prince in the Name of the Count, this
happened by Accident, and not by Design. The weak Conti was not contented with
the Deference which Soissons paid him. When a Man has little Merit, he easily
thinks he is despised. To Morrow with your Sword drawn, cries the Prince, as he
passed by his Brothers Coach. To stifle brutally for a small point of Honor,
all Sense of Religion and Nature, was this the way to make himself less
contemptible?

The two Princes are reconciled.
The Regent being informed of what had happened, prays the Prince of Conde to
intercede, and Reconcile his Uncles: She sends the Duke of Guise whose Sister
Conti had Married, to dispose his Brother-in-Law to receive the Excuses that
Soissons made him. Conde and Guise go the same day to the Abbey of St. Germain
des prez, where the Prince of Conti's Residence was. Whether the Duke had a
mind to show the Princes of the Blood, and his New Wife, that the House of
Guise, was not less considerable now, than in the preceding Reigns, or whether
it was mere Accident; he went from the Hotel of Montpensier, where he was at
that time, attended with an Extraordinary number of Gentlemen on Horseback, to
Visit the Prince of Conti, and did not decline passing by the Hotel of Soissons
in this mighty Pomp.

In his Return from the Abbey of St. Germain, Guise met the Prince of Conde
going thither with only four or five Horsemen following him. They Saluted each
other; the Duke told Conde, that the Prince of Conti was well disposed, and had
promised things should not go farther. If your Highness will give me leave,
added the Duke of Guise, I will return back and have the Honor to Accompany
you to Monsieur the Prince of Conti, and put him in mind of his Promise to me.
Conde did not care to accept this Civility of Guise, the Train of one was too
different from that of the other; the Prince would have appeared to have done
the Duke honor in a day of Triumph. The Chevalier of Guise, Brother to the
Duke, left the Company, and followed the Prince of Conde to the Abbey of St.
Germain. Conti repeated to his Nephew the Assurances he had given his
Brother-in-Law, and this Difference was ended.

Another great Difference between the Count of Soissons, and the Duke of Guise,
The Duke of Guise only pretended, said he, to persuade the Prince of Conti not
to break in such a manner with his Brother. In the mean time he made himself
work with the Count of Soissons. Guise, cried they, at the Hotel of Soissons,
had with him a Hundred and Fifty Horse armed, and fit to Fight. It was not
without Design, that he affected to pass by this House. He would huff the
Princes of the Blood; thinks he to awe us, and show us, that if the House of
Guise should take part with the Prince of Conti their Kinsman, ours would be
far inferior. The Count of Soissons Jealous of the great Advantages which the
Heiress of Joieuse brought into an Enemies House, believed all these Reports.
The Prince of Conde perhaps vexed that the Duke of Guise had made a far better
appearance in the Eyes of the People, than himself, fell into the same
Sentiments, and drew in the Constable of Montmorency, who still remembered the
old Jars between the Marshall his Brother, and the Guises. The crowd of Lords
and Gentlemen which came in on all sides to the Hotel of Guise, served very
much to Exasperate the two Princes, and the Constable. Mem. de Bassompierre
mercure. Francois, 1611.
The World was amazed to see the Grandchildren of the Admiral of Coligny, the
Dukes of Sully and Rohan, the Marshall of Bouillon, and the most considerable
of the Protestant Party, forget the bloody day of St. Bartholomew, and go to
offer their Services to the Children of Balafre, against the Son of the brave
Lewis, Prince of Conde.

The Regent and the Ministers feared, this Affair would have troublesome
Consequences. Orders were given to the Inhabitants of the parts of the City,
which were nearest the Louvre to be Armed, the Chains were ready to be put
cross the Streets, in case there should be need, and the Marshall of Brisac
was sent to the Count of Soissons, to hinder him from coming out of his House.
The Marquess of Vitry Captain of the Guards, had order to continue near the
Duke of Guise, and his Brethren. Soissons was not denied Permission to speak to
the Queen, but Guise did not obtain the same Favor. A slight Distinction to
content the Nicety of the Princes of the Blood.

When the Council came to consider of a way to put an end to this New
Difference, the Constable demanded Justice of the Queen against the Duke of
Guise, who had Insulted, said he, the Count of Soissons, by passing by his
House with a hundred and fifty Horse. The Duke of Sully strenuously defended
Guise. Was it an Offense, replied he, to Monsieur the Count, to pass by his
House. Was not this the Dukes way to discharge the Order her Majesty had given
him, to treat with Monsieur the Prince of Conti; Diverse of his Friends and
Servants Accompanied him. There was no Design in this. A great deal of Company
went to Complement the Duke on his Marriage; They followed him to the Abbey of
St. Germain, was this such an extraordinary Matter. Princes and Lords come
every day to the Louvre, attended with such Gentlemen who have a Respect for
them. The Duke is the Counts Humble Servant. He is disposed to give the Princes
of the Blood, what is due to their Birth. Monsieur the Count would have had a
proof of this, if he had met the Duke in his way. What more can be required of
Monsieur, the Duke of Guise. The Marshall of Bouillon, and the Duke of
Epernon, confirmed what the Duke of Sully said.

The Reconcilement of the Duke of Guise. with the Count of Soissons.
The Regent sent to ask whether the Count of Soissons was satisfied with the
Excuses made for the Duke of Guise. Very far from accepting them, he denied
Admittance to four of the Council, upon the score they were Friends of, and
Related to the House of Guise. Nothing but a Treaty would serve; the Duke of
Guise tired with his long Confinement to his House, consented to Visit the
Count of Soissons, and make very humble Excuses to him. But the Duke of Mayenne
Uncle of Guise, laying before him the Consequences of a Step, which gave so
many Advantages to the sworn Enemies of their House; he recalled his word.
Soissons was extremely moved at this, he threatened the Regent to leave Paris,
if he had not that Satisfaction given him which had been promised. However he
was persuaded to content himself with the Duke of Mayenne's, making Excuses to
the Queen for the Duke of Guise's marching through the Streets of Paris, with
so great a number of Horse. Monsieur of Guise, says the Duke of Mayenne, never
designed to cause any Disturbance; he would sooner die, than do any thing
Displeasing to your Majesty. For Mons. the Count of Soissons, our House will
always preserve that Deference and Respect is due to him. When Monsieur the
Count will please to be reconciled to Messieurs of Guise, they will not fail to
Honor him, and be his Humble Servants.

The Queen replied, she would acquaint the Count of Soissons, what the Duke of
Mayenne had said; I will speak to him, said she, to forget what is past, and
content himself with this Satisfaction. The Prince of Conde on the Queens part
went to his Uncle, and told him, her Majesty wished things might stop there.
The Count of Soissons promised to conform himself to her Pleasure. Mayenne by
his Address and Resolution, had brought his Nephew with Honor in a very Nice
case, if it be true that the Duke of Guise had no ill design; yet he made an
Ostentation, which might well give Vmbrage to the Princes of the Blood.

In vain did the Duke of Sully thus meanly make his Court to the Guises. The
Duke of Sul'y's Disgrace.
They would not hinder the accomplishing the Design on foot, to ruin him; their
Party indeed made a Mien, as if they would Combine to oppose the Ruin of one,
who had taken pains to very good purpose to serve them; but the contrary Cabal,
was too Powerful and Zealous. Perhaps too, the House of Guise were not very
Solicitous (...) Bottom, to support a Protestant Lord whom the Courts of Rome
and Madrid were dissatisfied to see in the chiefest Employs. The Marquess of
Ceuvres was the Man whom the Enemies of the Duke made use of to sound the true
Sentiments of Marshall of Bouillon in this matter of Sully. The Interest of
their Religion ought to have united these Protestant Lords. Its Preservation
depended in part, on a good Understanding between them; but Courtiers never
think of this. Sully deserves the worst that can befall him, says the
Marshall, However I ought not to appear among those who declare against him.
It concerns me very much, that those of our Religion should not Reproach me
with removing a Man, who is necessary to them in the post he is in. If Bouillon
would seriously have avoided that Reproach, should he have joined himself to
the Count of Soissons? The World saw plainly, the poor Duke of Sully was the
Sacrifice in his Reconciliation.

The Prince of Conde and the Count of Soissons, jointly demanded of the Regent
to have him removed. Her Majesty readily granted a thing she desired, no less
than they. To keep fair with the Hugonot Party, who must think it strange Mary
should so soon take away the Rewards Sully had deserved by his good Services to
the late King. They gave out, and would make Sully himself believe, it was his
desire to have his Ease. The Regent civilly offered him a Sum of Money for the
Government of the Bastile, which she took away from him at the same time with
the place of Superintendent of the Finances. The Duke was very much surprised
to see himself taken at his Word, upon General Complements made to the Queen.
He had protested upon some Occasions to her Majesty, that she might dispose of
all that he had. Mercure Francois, 1611.
I did not think, said Sully, that such Offers made to ones Prince, were Crime
enough to forfeit ones Places. I have now learnt this new Maxim, but I do not
repent of having done my Duty.

The Duke showed great Constancy in his Adversity, and was Skillful enough to
conceal his inward Disturbance. He writ a Letter to the Queen, which was filled
with fine Thoughts; was not this a Noble Effort of the secret Pride of his
Heart, to seek thus to repair his Losses, by making himself Admired. Perhaps he
thought he should persuade the World, he deserved those Places, which he could
quit with so much equality of Mind and Disinterestedness. This Greatness of
Mind would have appeared less affected, if he had not made a long Enumeration
of the Services he had done for the late King. This was Reproaching his Widow,
he might talk plausibly, how that without increasing, nay, by lessening the
Excises and Duties, he had paid the immense Debts of his Master, had put the
Finances in a good Method, subsisted three great Armies, amassed seventeen
Millions in ready Money; the People could not believe him in his Word. Fifty
four Edicts revoked in the beginning of this Reign, were a proof the
Superintendent had not yet found the secret to enrich the Prince, and at the
same time to ease his Subjects.

The first President de Harlay, resigns hi^ Place. A Cabal to hinder Mr. de
Thou from succeeding him.
The Duke retired to his Castle of Sully on the Loire; no Superintendent was put
in his Room. The Presidents Jeannin, de Chateauneuf, and de Thou, were named
for Directors of the Finances. De Thou declined this Employ; this did not suit
with a Magistrate so Upright, so Zealous for the public good, and so great a
Lover of all good Learning. The Place of first President of the Parliament of
Paris, was more worthy of his Noble Ambition. Christopher de Thou his Father,
had filled it with a mighty Reputation. His Memory would have been
Irreproachable, if the necessity of excusing his Master, had not forced him to
seek out for frivolous pretenses, to give color to that cruel Massacre of St.
Bartholomew, which this Wise Magistrate abhorred in his Heart. Achilles de
Harlay succeeded him in the most unhappy and difficult Time, that ever was. All
Men still speak with Honor of the Integrity, Justice, and Affability of that
great Man. All good Frenchmen cannot forget the Services he did for his
Country, when she was almost oppressed by the Efforts of the League.

Worn out with Age and Labor, he desired to lay down his Office. Memoires de
la Regence de Marie de Medici^.
All Honest Men wished to see James Augustus de Thou, in the Place his Father
had formerly been, but the Regent too much depended on the Pope. The Knowledge
and Moderation of so Learned a Magistrate, did not suit with the Interest of
Rome, besides the Jesuits had too important Business to Solicit in the
Parliament of Paris. They did not care a Man who was not less acquainted than
his Brother-in-Law had been, with the secret designs of the Society, should
preside in the determining the Process they had against the University of
Paris. Conde who had great Obligations to the President de Thou, promised to
assist him in his Pretensions to a Dignity, justly due to his Merit and
Services. But the Weak and Ungrateful Prince, had not the Courage to oppose a
Cabal of Bigots. Villeroy made his Advantage of this Opportunity, he procured
Verdun his Kinsman to be preferred, who ought to have been content with seeing
himself at the Head of the Parliament of Toulouse.

La d'Escouman accuses the Marquess of Vernueil, and the Duke of Epernon, of
being concerned in the Murder of Henry IV.
Some few days before his Resignation, Harlay had presided in the Sentence
against La d'Escouman. This Creature it is said, did not want either Wit or
Address. But her lewd Life ought to have taken away the Credit of her Evidence,
if all concerned in Villainies, were not of necessity Scandalous Persons. It is
not known who put d'Escouman upon presenting her self to Queen Margaret, whom
she was known to, and discovering to her, that the Duke of Epernon and the
Marquise of Vernueil had suborned Ravaillac. Whether Margaret was in a
Combination to ruin these two Persons, or was afraid of ill Consequences, if
she did not give notice of what she heard to the Court; the Princess sent to
let the Regent know, that La d'Escouman had great things to Reveal. Some
Persons were ordered to go to the Hotel of Queen Margaret. They conceal
themselves in an adjoining Closet, while the Princess makes la d'Escouman
repeat with a loud Voice, what she had said. Margaret testified the Woman did
not vary, but repeated Word for Word before to her, what they had now heard.

She is Condemned*
Upon the Report made to the Regent, her Majesty ordered her Letter Patents to
be dispatched for the Parliament of Paris, to take cognizance of this New
Affair. La d'Escouman being examined by the first President de Harlay, accuses
two Persons, one of which had been Valet de Chamber, to the Marquess d'
Entragues. These Men are Seized, Examined, thrown into a Dungeon, confronted
with d'Escouman, who affirms peremptorily, all was true she had charged them
with. Farther she declares, the Marchioness of Vernueil had sent Ravaillac to
her with a Letter for one Mademoiselle du Tillet; and that in her Presence, du
Tillet had spoke to Ravaillac, to Assassinate the late King. But the Evidence
so ill maintained her Charge, was so deficient in describing the Person of the
Murderer, and said so many things directly false, that no Credit was given to
her Depositions. The two Prisoners were acquitted, and la d'Escouman condemned
to close Imprisonment for the rest of her Life.

Reflections on (...) Sentence.
The care taken to confine this Wretched Woman, and the keeping her Examination
so private, gave occasion for diverse Suspicions, and many Reflections. It was
pretty commonly believed, Persons of Eminent Quality had a share in this
Mystery of Iniquity, and it was not judged convenient to disclose it. Some
pretended this was only done to spare the Reputation of certain Persons of the
first Rank, who had made this use of la d'Escouman, to ruin their Enemies. So
ill and revengeful a Woman as la Vernueil, said they, may well enough be guilty
of a great Crime. But is it to be believed, the Queen who mortally hates the
Marchioness, would spare her. Could she ever find a fairer opportunity to
revenge the frequent Disquiets, which the ill Nature and Raillery of a Rival
had given her. The Duke of Epernon 's Interest, added some Judicious Men, could
never stifle this Matter. He has powerful Enemies at Court. The Prince of
Conde, and the Count of Soissons, declare openly against him. The Marshall de
Bouillon, and the Marquess of Ancre strictly tied together, seek to remove and
ruin him. If any one reflect on the Conduct of the Duke of Epernon, his Humor
and Inclinations; he will not appear capable of so black an Attempt. And if he
had Malice enough to conceive it, is he so void of Common Sense, to trust this
in the Hands of a Fool, as Ravaillac was? In short, if he suborned the
Assassin, would he have taken pains to keep him from being killed on the spot,
as James Clement was. The Duke of Epernon said, some who were the most
prejudiced against him, could not be called to an Account, without bringing in
the Queen, whom he served in it. Doubtless said others to them, it would be
much safer and easier to have poisoned the King, than to depend upon a Blow of
that Importance, on such a Fellow as Ravaillac was.

There was a greater Division in the Court of Prague, than that of Paris, and
the Princes of the House of Austria in Germany, lived in a more visible
Misunderstanding, than the Princes of the Blood in France. The Emperor
Rodolphus had three Brothers, Matthias, Albert, and Maximilian. The first had
forced from his Elder Brother the Kingdom of Hungary, and the greatest part of
what the House of Austria calls her Hereditary Countries. Albert lived
contented with the Provinces of the Low Countries, which the Infanta Isabell
brought to him in Marriage; and Maximilian having long ago relinquished his
Pretensions to the Kingdom of Poland, which he disputed with Sigismund King of
Sweden, led a quiet Life with Matthias King of Hungary. These four Brothers had
two Cousin Germans, Children of Charles, Brother to the Emperor Maximilian II.
The small Country of Gratz in Stiria, did not satisfy the Ambition of
Ferdinand, the Eldest of this second Branch of that House, and Leopold the
younger Brother, desired something more than the Bishoprics of Strasburg and
Passau. Rodolphus and his Brothers had no Children; this gave their Cousins
mighty Hopes, but as yet they were a great way off. The King of Hungary this
year, Married Ann Archdutchess of Austria, and might leave Heirs.

Ferdinand Wisely concealed his vast Ambition, he seemed contented with
managing the Pope, and keeping a strict Correspondence with Spain, and seemed
willing to wait patiently for a more favorable Opportunity, to obtain the
Succession of his Cousins. All Men looked on the Emperor as a dead Man. The
Courts of Rome and Madrid were not very well satisfied, that Matthias kept fair
with the Protestants, which he did to prevent being opposed by them, when there
should be a Debate about choosing a Successor to his Brother. Perhaps too his
Inclination led him to follow the steps of Maximilian II. a very Wife and
Moderate Prince. He had had a good Opinion of the Protestant Religion, and it
is thought would have embraced it, if he had not met with Obstacles from
Ferdinand the I. and the Court of Rome. The Emperor his Father pressed by the
Pope, threatened Maximilian to Disinherit him; but if the Son had shown greater
Resolution, the Father would have found it no easy Matter to have made such an
Exclusion valid. I very much doubt, if he would have dared to attempt it.
Ferdinand Archduke of Gratz, was very far from this Moderation of Maximilian.
He was violent against the Protestants, to a prodigious degree. The Jesuits and
Ignorant Monks, who had too great Influence on the Councils of this Prince, and
his Descendants, kept him in this extravagant Bigotry, flattering him with the
Assistance of the Pope, and King of Spain to obtain the Empire, even whilst
those of the Elder Branch were yet alive.

The Archduke Leopold had no less Ambition, but was still more impatient, The
Ambitious Designs of Leopold of Austria Bishop of Strasburg, and Passaw on the
Kingdom of Bohemia.
vexed to see himself reduced to live on his Benefices, and to find his mighty
Designs on the Countries of Cleves and Juliers prove Abortive; he resolved to
take his Advantage of the Weakness of Rodolphus, and to make himself King of
Bohemia, to the prejudice of Matthias, to whom that Crown was promised, after
the Emperors Decease. Leopold had raised a small Army with the consent of
Rodolphus, under color of keeping Juliers against the Confederate Princes. The
Town being taken by the Brave Maurice of Orange, the Archduke kept his Troops
in his Bishopric of Passau, with an intention to employ them in some greater
and more prositable Work.

Romeo their General, as Active and Stirring as Leopold, persuaded him to treat
with his Friends in the Court of Prague, and the Roman Catholics in Bohemia,
who could not endure to see the Gospellers enjoy the free use of their
Religion. Leopold designed in the first place, to make an Alteration in the
Government of Prague, and Expel diverse Lords of the Emperors Council, who were
in the King of Hungary's Interests; the thing did not seem practicable in a
free Country, as that of Bohemia was. There was a Necessity for him to content
himself with gaining over the Catholic Party, and chiefly the Churchmen and
Monks, by giving them hopes that if Leopold should enter Prague by force of
Arms, he would oblige the Emperor to revoke the Edict in favor of the
Gospellers. The Jesuits were the most forward to favor the Designs of Leopold;
they filled their College with Canon, Arms, and Ammunition, to make use of in
case there should be occasion.

Leopold's Troops ^arch into Bohemia.
Leopolds Army was composed of nine Thousand Foot, and four Thousand Horse.
They marched strait toward Austria, under the Command of Romeo, who found the
means to help the Soldiers to Money; in their way they plundered diverse
considerable Castles. King Matthias being unprovided to resist, was very much
alarmed. He writ to his Subjects and Friends to come immediately to his Aid. In
the mean time Romeo passes the Danube, ravages wherever he comes, marches into
Bohemia, under pretense of exacting those Subsidies the Emperor had promised
Leopold, for the Subsistence of his Troops. He took two or three important
Places, and Leopold joined him when he was at the Gates of the Capital. The
States of the Countries amazed at these Motions, prepared for a Defense. The
Gospellers appeared more active and warm, than the rest; they were afraid to
fall under the Government of one of the House of Gratz. But it was not possible
to hinder Leopold from entering into a third part of the Town, which is called
the little Prague. He had a good Intelligence there; the two other Quarters
which they call the Old and New Prague, defended themselves so vigorously, that
Leopold could not make himself Master of them.

Matthias King of Hungary, Marches to the Assistance of Bohemia.
During the Confusions which Accidents of this Nature must needs cause, in a
Town divided into two Factions, Violent against each other, Rodolphus remained
in his Castle, contented with commanding both Parties by a Herald, to lay down
their Arms, he seemed to stand Neuter. His old Piques against his Brother, made
him incline to Leopold, who seized on the Castle, and was declared Lieutenant
General for the Emperor. The King of Hungary had at that time a Dispute with
Gabriel Battori, Prince of Transylvania. He chose rather to give up his
Pretensions, than to have Bohemia taken from him. Behold him then, at the Head
of an Army of eighteen Thousand Men. Leopold and Romeo make a quick Retreat to
the Frontiers of Bohemia, as soon as they are informed Matthias was entered
into the Kingdom; too fortunate in carrying off their Booty, and two Hundred
Thousand Florens, which the Emperor gave them. The King of Hungary being come
to Prague, the States of the Country received him with all possible
Magnificence.

Matthias is Crowned King of Bohemia.
After some of Rodolphus his Counselors were clapped into Prison, and others
forced to fly, it was no hard Matter to make Rodolphus consent to a Demise of
the Kingdom of Bohemia, in favor of his Brother. This poor Prince had very
good Conditions in appearance made for him, at the Solicitation of the Elector
of Saxony, who always was a Friend to the House of Austria. The States of
Bohemia too, proposed theirs to the New King, for the securing the Privileges
of the Kingdom, and Liberty of Conscience. The City of Prague made some
separate Stipulations, and particularly that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
should be restrained, and the Abuses of it corrected. After Matthias had been
Solemnly Crowned at Prague, the 23d of May, by the Cardinal Ditrechstein, an
Agreement was made with Leopold, who still had diverse Important Places in his
Hand. He promised to quit these, upon the payment of a certain Sum of Money. In
Conclusion; the King of Hungary and Bohemia, having agreed to some Articles for
a perfect Reconciliation with the Emperor, he went to Breslau; his Design was
to go and take Possession of Silesia, which had likewise been given up to him.
The Bishop of the City, the Lords and States of the Province, took an Oath of
Fidelity to him, and he likewise swore to preserve to them the free Exercise of
that Religion, each of them professed before. A Cabal in the Court of France,
against the Duke of Epernon.


The Princes of the House of Austria, lived the rest of that year in a good
Understanding, as to outward Appearance; those of the Royal Blood, did the same
in France. Conde and Soissons being now combined together, were not content
with Supplanting Sully, they resolved farther to ruin the Duke of Epernon, the
Marquess of Ancre took part with them. He promised the Count of Soissons to
remove a Man, who was insupportable to all the Favorites. Epernon hated them
in effect, because he loved to engross Favors; he thought no one besides
himself, could deserve it. Conchini provoked by the great Contempt the Duke
treated him with, resolved to humble a Man, who owed his Rise to the Favor of
Henry the III. and was now more haughty and hard to be bended, than the Princes
of the Blood. The more Epernon found his Interest at Court sink, the more he
strove to make the Princes of the Blood Sensible, if they would not love him,
they should have reason to fear him. After the Count of Soissons had threatened
to insult him, he went through the Streets of Paris, attended with Seven or
Eight Hundred Gentlemen; he would sometimes take Pleasure in going to the
Louvre a foot. His Men marched in order of Battle, and when the first were at
the Louvre, the last were at the Hotel of Epernon. The Distance of these is
near two thousand Paces.

In the midst of this outward Splendour, the Discontent to see himself Excluded
from Public Business, tormented him exceedingly. The Cardinal of Joyeuse, who
only Subsisted by the Dukes Support, resolved to go to Rome and Divert himself,
in the Chapels and Congregations there, since there was no more occasion for
him in the Court of France. Epernon desired leave to go to his Estate and
Government; this he obtained with the good liking of the Court. Mem. de la
Regence de Marie de Medicis.
The Regent gave him on this occasion, several Marks of Confidence and Respect.
The Prince of Conde had a mind to go and take Possession of the Government of
Guienne, and nothing could divert him from this Resolution. His stiffness gave
Umbrage to the Court. The Reformed had a civil Assembly at Saumur, and the
Regent did not know whether Conde might not have some secret design to take his
Advantage of this, when he should be in that Neighborhood. The Duke of
Epernon's going to his Governments of Limosin, Angoumois and Xaintonge
bordering on Guienne, gave great Satisfaction. The Queen gave him a thousand
Caresses, and recommended earnestly to him to observe Conde's steps. This
Precaution was not necessary, the good Prince thought no harm, he was too well
satisfied with his feigned Greatness, and acting the part of an Imaginary King
on the Stage at Bourdeaux, and elsewhere, he was charmed to see himself
received with so much Ceremony, took his Place in the Parliament, made his
Progress through the several Towns, and heard with great Gravity, the Harangues
and Complements of the Magistrates and Gascon Gentlemen.

The Marquess of Ancre designs to marry his Son to the Princess of Soissons.
The Count of Soissons was now the only Person who managed the Queen. The
Marquess of Ancre whose Favor increased every day, showed an extreme Devotion
to him. Soissons Transported with bringing so potent a Favorite into the
interests of his House, did him all the good Offices he could. He Assisted him
in obtaining the Government of the Town and Citadel of Amiens, in Spite of the
Opposition and Discontent which the Count of St. Paul showed at it. This Lord
being a younger Brother of the House of Longueville pretended to this Employ.
But Soissons who had an entire Ascendent over him, made him desist. Farther he
engaged St. Paul, to return out of Picardy where he Commanded, during the
Minority of the Duke of Longueville, Memoires de la regence de Marie de Medicis.
to prevent any Difference that might happen between him and the New Governor
of Amiens, if they should meet. Conchini was now risen to such a height,
nothing seemed to be above him. There was a Discourse of Marrying his Son to
one of the Princesses of Soissons. You have a mind to flatter me said the
Favorite, to a Gentleman who made the Offer, but I confess, this Flattery does
not displease me.

He did not long continue in this Modesty, he affected at that time. The Count
of Soissons accepts the Proposition. The Generosity of the Duke of Epernon.
Conchini had the boldness to say to the Marquess of Coeuvres, a Confident of
the Count of Soissons, that the Marriage talked of must be concluded; that a
Prince of the Blood would find great Advantages in it, that the Queen had
already given her consent. Soissons meanly complied with this shameful Match.
He was punished for it, as he deserved. The Ministers laid before the Queen
Consequences of a Marriage, which would sooner or later draw on it, the
Indignation of the King, the Princes of the Blood, and all sensible Men. Vie du
Duc d'Epernon L. VI.
Thus the Count of Soissons by this Treaty, only obtained the Scandal and
Reproaches of consenting to prostitute his Daughter to a young Italian, whose
Father and Mother soon became the Horror of Mankind, not so Wise and Generous
as the Duke of Epernon, inferior in Birth to a Prince of the Blood. Conchini
caused a Marriage to be proposed for his Daughter, with the Marquess de la
Valette, second Son of the Duke. Besides the Great Wealth he would have given
with his Daughter, he promised to obtain the Sword of Constable of France for
Epernon, as soon as the King should be a Major. Far from hearing his Friends
and Servants who advised him to accept this Proposition, the Duke rejected it
with a Noble Scorn. Nay, he was Angry with those who pressed him to make an
Alliance, which if rewarded by the first Dignity of the State, would be still
the more Scandalous.

The Cardinal of Joyeuse took for the pretense of his Journey, the Obligation
he had to go to Rome, to perform the Functions of his Dignity of Protector of
France; a Pompous and Ridiculous Title, which the Pride of the Court of Rome
has invented, and the mean Complaisance of Sovereigns has Authorized. These
like Monks, have each their Cardinal Protector with the Pope. A Subject who is
Agent for his Prince, becomes his Protector at Rome. The Regent Diverted her
self at that time at Fontainbleau. There on the 12th of April, she drew up a
long Instruction for Joyeuse. No one can read these Pieces without complaining
of, or to speak better, contemning Crowned Heads, who suffer such a strange
Slavery to be imposed on them. A King must give the Holy Father an account of
what he does at home, Siri Memory recondite. Tom II. page 502, 503, etc.
for the good of his Dominions; and what Alliances he contracts abroad for
their Security. Has he done any thing which is not well relished at Rome, then
see him humbly making his Excuses, and taking all ways imaginable to extenuate
his Fault. He is very Submissive, he promises to do great and mighty wonders on
some other Occasion for the Holy See.

What a Pother's here about the Instruction of the Cardinal of Joyeuse! The
Regent justifies to Paul V. what she had done in favor of the Protestants.
Mary de Medicis will have him to inform Paul V. exactly of what has been done
since the beginning of the Regency, without omitting the least Particular. To
justify her confirming the Edict of Nantes, he must represent to his Holiness,
this was extorted from her, to prevent the Jealousies of the Protestants, and
disappoint some busy Turbulent Men. The Protestants having Permission granted
them to meet for the Regulating other Civil Matters; she pretended it was
impossible to do otherwise in a Minority. Endeavors are used to pacify the
Disquiet which that Assembly gave the Pope, promising to allow the Hugonots
nothing that could be dispensed with. The Regent had given several Employs, and
bestowed her Favors on some Protestant Lords; for fear the Court of Rome
should be alarmed at this, it was said, this was to gain the Heads of the Party
over. Paul the V. took it ill, that the Parliament of Paris had made a Decree
for the Suppression of Cardinal Bellarmine's Book, against Barclay. Her Majesty
is a little Embarassed upon this Article; she is troubled the Defamatory and
Scandalous Books of the Gardinal, should give occasion to the Magistrates to
concern themselves. But the Queen in Recompense has interposed her Authority,
to hinder the Sorbonne from vigorous Censure, which she intended against the
Propositions of Bellarmine. It was not thought fit to give the Hugonots so
great Advantages; what Baseness, what Trickings are here, but this is not all.

The Renewing the Alliances with the Protestant Princes and States, were
colored with the common good of Christendom, and the Example of the King of
Spain was alleged, who made a League with the United Provinces; all good
Offices were promised with the Electors and Protestant Princes of Germany, in
favor of Matthias King of Hungary, whom the Courts of Rome and Madrid wished
to have Elected King of the Romans. In the last place, the Court would make the
Old Man believe, they were about to form a Potent League against the Turk and
hoped to engage the King of Great Britain, the United Provinces, Prince Maurice
of Orange, and the rest of the House of Nassau in it. These Men, says the
Queen, Lovers of Glory, they will not be uneasy to have this occasion to add
more, to that which they acquired by their Valor. The Picture which she makes
of King James the I. must not be omitted here. I own continues Mary, that he
persecutes the Catholics cruelly. But in short^ he is a Prince who loves
nothing but Peace He does not seek to make himself Great a^ the Expense of his
Neighbors, he declare^ himself an Enemy to all Subjects, who Rebel against
their Princes. If he could b^ sure of the Fidelity and good Intentions of the
English Catholics, he would let them live peaceably. As he is very averse to
the Calvinists, he will soon change in favor of his Catholics, if they give
him no occasion of Suspicion or Distrust.

Complaints of the Court of France, against the Duke of Savoy.
The Principal Article of this Instruction, regards the Duke of Savoy. He seemed
to threaten to Attack the City of Geneva, and the Country of Vaux belonging to
the Canton of Bern. The Queen will have it represented to the Pope, that the
Ambition and Turbulent Humor of the Savoyard, would put all Europe in a Flame,
and hinder the conclusion of the League, which it was pretended was designed
against the common Enemy of Christendom; and that Henry III. and Henry IV.
having taken Geneva, and the Country of Vaux into the Protection of their
Crown, honor and Justice engaged their Successors to defend the one and the
other, in case the Duke of Savoy should attempt to attack them. He beasts, adds
the Queen, that his Holiness approves and favors his Designs, that it is not
probable. The Pope knows better than any other Man in the World, the Humor,
Power and Interest of Charles Emanuel. His Enterprise can never succeed. And
when the King of Spain shall Reflect on the ill Consequences of these Motions
of the Duke, he will be the first Man to Condemn them; Besides it is not well
known, what are the true Designs of Charles Emanuel. When we demand why he
keeps so many Troops afoot, he answers the Spaniards being in Arms in the
Milanese, Prudence requires him to provide for the Security of his Dominions.
The Catholic Swiss Cantons making the same Demands, the Ministers reply, their
Master will Reinstate the Bishops of Geneva and Lausanne in their ancient
Rights. He promises one thing at the same time he is under contrary Obligations
to the King of Spain. We have great reason to believe, he keeps secret
Intelligence with the Protestants of France, and other Countries. At present he
is Intriguing to make an Alliance with the King of England, by a double
Marriage of their Children. For the better understanding this Article, it is
necessary for me to take things a little higher, and relate the several steps
of Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, after the Death of Henry IV.

The great Perplexily of the Duke of Savoy, upon the Death of Henry IV.
This unforeseen Accident mightily embarast him, and he was forced to act an
hundred different Parts, sometimes to pacify the Court of Spain, incensed
against him; at another time to preserve the powerful Support he had from
France; and lastly, to find an Opportunity to gratify his unbounded Ambition.
In the first place, the Duke was Sollicitous to gai^^ from the Regent a
Confirmation of the Promise which Henry had made him, (...) give Madame the
Eldest Daughter (...) France, in Marriage to the Prince of Pi^^mont, whom he
preferred to the Prin^^ of Spain, who had likewise been propose to him. If I
would make my Son a Great King, said Henry, Mem. de la Regence de Marie de
Medicis.
like a Man of good Sense, it is not necessary my Daughters should be Queens.
Care was taken to amuse Charles Emanuel with fine Words, whilst a Treaty was
privately managed with King Philip. As soon as the Duke discovered this, he
made complaints to the Court of France; but the Regent very far from having
regard to his Instances, Demanded of him all the Writings about the Marriage
designed by Henry IV.

The rest of the Princes of Italy, not less Embarassed than the Duke of Savoy.
The other Sovereigns of Italy were not involved in lesser Difficulties than
Charles Emanuel. The Republic of Venice, and some others, had a share in the
Designs of Henry, on the side of the Alps. As soon as they heard of his
unfortunate Death, they were all equally afraid Spain delivered from so
Formidable an Enemy, should now in earnest think of overrunning Italy, under
color of chastising the Duke of Savoy, and the rest who kept Intelligence with
Henry, in order to drive the Spaniards out of the Milanese. Paul V. scared,
sent for the Venetian Ambassador to him. Write instantly to the Seignoury, Siri
Memory recordite. T. II. p. 285, 286.
says the Pope, that I entreat them for the love of God to take care, we may
all agree in so Terrible a Juncture. Measures must be taken for preserving
Italy, and the young King of France. I plainly see he is in great Danger. The
Spaniards are busy to create strange Work for him. I am ready to labor in
Concert with, and declare my self with the Republic,

The Wise Conduct of the S^nate of Ve^ice.
The Duke of Savoy had sent his Secretary to Venice, to press earnestly the
Senate to conclude with all Speed, a League Offensive and Defensive against the
Spaniards. Siri Memory recondite. Tom. II. p. 288, 291,
They make new Levies, says his Minister, and Distribute Money to draw Officers
into their Service. The Duke my Master, sees these Preparations are more
designed against him, than any other. He is resolved to continue steady to his
Union with France, will defend himself to the last gasp of Breath, and sooner
submit to the Turk, than Spaniard. You are to consider whether his Fall, will
not be followed by that of your Republic. The speedy Conclusion of a League
Offensive and Defensive, is the only Means to prevent the Disasters which
threaten us alike. The Venetians who very well knew the Power of Spain, did not
presently take the Alarm. They thought it necessary before they declared, to be
well assured of the good Intentions and Concurrence of France, the Minority of
the King having changed the face of Affairs there. To engage Mary de Medicis to
declare her self, the Seignory wisely caused the League Offensive and Defensive
against Spain, to be proposed to her. The Regent did not in any manner intend
to pursue the Designs of Henry. This therefore without farther Consideration,
she replied to the Senate, that the Underage of her Son, would not suffer her
to engage in a Foreign War; but if the Senate thinks it Expedient, that she
make a Defensive League for the Safety of Italy, we are ready to give our
ancient Allies proofs, we desire nothing more than to preserve and secure that
Repose they enjoy.

Upon this Declaration, the Senate answered very Wisely to the Duke of Savoy;
that it very much concerned all the Sovereigns of Italy, to keep a good
Understanding, and provide for their common Safety. But it is to be feared,
said they, this will only serve to incense the Spaniards more, and increase the
Distrust and Jealousy of a Crown, whom it behooves as much, nay more than its
Neighbors, to seek for Peace. The Wise, Politic, Old Ministers of Henry IV.
saw very well, the Spaniards were not so much to be feared, and there was more
Ostentation than Reality, in the threatening Advances of the Court of Madrid.
The Death of the Count of Fuentes Governor of Milan, which happened at that
time, helped to revive their Courage. They thought Spain would not be able to
find a Subject capable of so well Supporting the Reputation of the Crown, and
covering so artfully the weakness of Philip III. and the Duke of Lerma his
first Minister. Pedro Gusman of Toledo, Count of Fuentes, died aged 85 years,
on the 22d of July 1610. He was a Man of extraordinary Capacity, and great
Experience in all Civil and Military Affairs. He gained mighty Reputation in
the Campagnes of Picardy, about the end of the preceding Age, and especially at
the taking of Cambray. But the care he took to profit by the Lessons of his
Master Philip II. sullied the good Qualities of so finished a Statesman and
Soldier.

The ill Designs of the Court of Spain, against the Duke of Savoy.
As Charles Emanuel was the boldest, and I will add, the most Imprudent of the
Italian Princes, to declare against Spain; so he was the first and chief
Object, which felt the Displeasure of that Revengeful Court. In the first
place, all the Spanish Troops in his Service were remanded back. He saw plainly
they were seeking for an Occasion to pick a Quarrel with him; being assured of
a speedy Aid from the Marshall Lesdiguieres his Friend, Siri Memoire
recordite. Tom. II. p. 282, 304.
who commanded in Dauphine, the Duke was not struck with the Threats made him
from the King of Spain. He spoke not only like a Man, who was resolved to
defend himself Courageously, but like one who would pursue the Designs set on
foot before Henry's Death. All the World was so fully convinced, that the
Superiority of Genius and Strength, which had formerly made Spain formidable,
were entirely wanting in Philip III. that Princes far inferior to him,
haughtily insulted him.

The Imprudence and double dealing of the Duke of Savoy.
The Duke of Savoy might have securely despised all the Threats of the
Spaniards, if he had been more prudent, and less Knavish. Could he not plainly
see, France had no design to break with Spain, but that the Regent would stir
to prevent him from being Oppressed. He ought not then in point of Discretion, to
have provoked a Neighbor, who notwithstanding her Weakness, was stronger than
a Duke of Savoy. At the same time that Charles Emanuel was earnestly pressing
Mary to obtain what the late King had promised him, he was at the same time
keeping secret Intelligence with the Count of Soissons, and the rest of the
discontented Lords, and Heads of the Protestant Party, in hopes of kindling a
Civil War in France. Being persuaded that the King of Spain would be glad to be
reconciled to him, and sought his Friendship; he endeavored to insinuate into
the Court of Madrid, that if she would grant him good Conditions, he would do
her very good Service against France. Both Parties soon saw his Ways. Thus was
he equally odious, and suspected in all the Courts of Europe, suffered the
Disgrace of being humbled in Spain, despised in France and Italy, and hated in
his own Country, which he ruined by his Chimerical Projects.

Diverse Negotiations to oblige the King^ of Spain and Duke of Savoy, to lay
down their Arms in Italy.
Whilst these Intrigues were carrying on, the King of Spain was in Arms in
Italy, and the Duke of Savoy had a considerable number of Soldiers there.
Strange Confusions for France, and the Sovereigns of Italy! The Regent was very
impatient to Disband the Army in Dauphine, Commanded by a Hugonot General, but
Prudence would not suffer her to do it in such a Juncture. Siri Memoire
rec^ndite. Tom II. p. 335, 336.
The Pope apprehended least the Marshall Lesdiguieres should pass the Alps,
under color of coming to the Assistance of the Duke of Savoy. When Mary
pressed Charles Emanuel to lay down his Arms, he asked such conditions, as she
did not care to grant him. The Pope too made his Instances, that Spain and
Savoy should send away those Troops which gave France and Italy so great
uneasiness. But Philip pretended Charles Emanuel ought in the first place to
lay down his Arms, and make him Satisfaction. The Duke on the contrary
alleged, that the weakest ought to stand upon his Guard, when he seemed to be
threatened by a Powerful Neighbor; so that the Difference now seemed only to
consist in Ceremony. Nevertheless the more discerning Men thought, they saw a
Collusion here. The Duke Dissatisfied to find the Regent intended in earnest to
fall in with the Spaniard, he began to talk too, of sending Prince Philibert
his Son to Madrid.

The King of Spain demands the Duke of Savoy should first of all make him
Satisfaction.
Whether it were that the Court of Spain were assured, that the Regent of France
would willingly suffer the Duke of Savoy to be humbled, provided no harm were
done him; or that Philip was absolutely resolved to reduce his Brother-in-Law,
who behaved himself so Haughty at a time, when he sought the King of Spain's
Favor; Charles Emanuel received News from Madrid, That his Catholic Majesty
was exactly informed of his Ties to the late King of France, and that before
the King would consent to an Accommodation, he required a very mortifying
Preliminary of the Duke of Savoy. Siri Memoire recondite. Tom. II. p. 336, 337.
This was, that he should send his Sons, or at least one of them to Madrid, to
remain there as a Pledge of their Fathers Fidelity; and farther, that he should
ask Pardon for his secret Treaties with France, to the prejudice of the Crown
of Spain.

Charles Emanuel presently summoned his Council together. No Expedient could be
found to evade these hard conditions, but to press France earnestly to send a
speedy Aid. For now the Spanish Troops in the Milanese seemed ready to pour
into Piemont. Lesdiguieres gave the Duke fair words, but Mary de Medicis very
far from breaking with Spain, in favor of Charles Emanuel, advised him to send
Prince Philibert to Madrid, to pacify King Philip. Thus did the two Courts
make sport with a Man, who thought himself crafty enough to deceive them both.
There was no way left, but for Charles Emanuel to assure the Spanish Ambassador
at Turin, that he was disposed to make his Brother-in-Law Satisfaction: He only
demanded to have a Suspension of Arms agreed on, and to have Assurance given
him, that the Governor of Milan would not make any Attempt on Piemont, till the
King of Spain should be satisfied. In stead of hearing the Dukes Propositions,
they quarrelled with him, demanded he should Renounce all his Treaties with
France, not excepting that of his Sons Marriage; and Lastly, Philip's Officers
at Milan answered, they had no Orders to grant a Suspension of Arms, or that
Security which the Duke of Savoy proposed.

France lays down her Arms in Dauphine, and is jealous of the Spaniards, who
continue in Arms in Italy.
At the Solicitation of the Pope, Mary de Medicis had broke the Army of the
Marshall Lesdiguieres in Dauphine. The Regents Council had consented to this
more willingly, because they were persuaded the King of Spain would not dare to
begin a War in Italy. Was it probable he could be in a condition to support one
there, who had not the boldness to oppose the taking of Juliers by the
Confederate Princes. Philip had assured the Pope, his Design was only to
mortify the Duke of Savoy, to give him a Check, and Constrain him to make him
Satisfaction. The rest of the Princes were not displeased to see the Pride of
Charles Emanuel humbled. All this while he wasted insensibly, because he would
stand on his Guard, and keep up his Troops till the King of Spain Disbanded
his. Who could yet be sure that Philip would not at last invade Piemont, after
he had fatigued the Duke of Savoy, and craftily engaged the Regent to Disarm on
the side of the Alps.

The Council of France was of Opinion, the Queen should make some Advances, and
declare positively she would not abandon the Duke of Savoy. That the Disbanded
Troops might soon be brought together, and she would send a powerful Aid into
Piemont, if Spain should undertake to attack that Country. Charles Emanuel was
very glad, to understand the Regent had Writ to the Pope to complain, that the
King of Spain continued in Arms, though France had broke her Army in Dauphine;
and to assure his Holiness of the Resolution taken in Council, to preserve the
Country of Savoy. But the Duke of Feria, Ambassador Extraordinary of Philip in
France, had settled so strict a Correspondence between his Master and Mary de
Medicis, that the Pope could without much Difficulty, dispel the Umbrage which
the Regent had taken, and persuaded her to wait quietly the Success of the
Journey, which Prince Philibert was about to make into Spain.

Philibert Prince of Savoy goes into Spain.
The Prince went through Lions and Bourdeaux, attended by the Count of Verue,
and the Bishop of St. John de Maurienne. These were to be his Directors in so
nice a Matter. The Prince Arrives on Posthorses at Madrid, without having
received the least Civility or Mark of Respect from the King his Uncle, in any
of the Spanish Towns he past through. Siri Memory recondite. Tom. II. p. 416,
417,
This was to prepare him to appear as a Suppliant, to make Satisfaction to a
Great King justly incensed against a petty Prince. And now he was to endure all
the strain of Spanish Pride. At the first Interview, Philip gave his Nephew an
obliging Reception enough. Not one Word was said of the Duke of Savoy; no News
of him was asked; the Court affected to enquire of the Welfare of the Princes
and Princesses of Savoy, without making any mention of their Father.

The Second Audience was more Slippery and Difficult. Here was a Submission to
be made, to satisfy the Spanish Humor, which might not be too mean and low
for the Duke of Savoy. Charles Emanuel stood very much on an Extreme Nicety in
point of Honor. His Son framed an Harangue, according to the Instructions he
brought with him. The Count of Verue and the Bishop, assisted the young Prince
in the drawing it. He learnt it by Heart, and spoke it with a good Grace. It
was accompanied with all the Demonstrations of Respect and Submission, which
the Dignity of a Prince could allow of. The King was not Displeased with it,
but the Duke of Lerma, and the Grandees of Spain, thought very heinously of it,
because he had not thrown himself on his Knees before the King, and begged
Pardon for the Duke of Savoy. Lerma made great Complaints, and required that
the Prince should make Satisfaction by Writing. The Spaniards drew up the Form,
and required Philibert to Rehearse it in the Kings Presence.

The Savoyards did all they could to spare their Prince so shameful a step; The
Form of the Satisfaction, which the Prince of Savoy made for his Father to the
King of Spain.
But the Spaniards continued inflexible. Philibert was treated very roughly,
till he consented to what was required of him. It was in vain, the Count of
Verue represented the Prince had exactly followed the Instruction his Father
had given him, and that he had not Orders to make any such Submissions. The
Spaniards were pleased to suppose the Prince had a second Instruction, in case
their King was not satisfied with what was prescribed in the first. However
this be, said they farther, the Duke of Savoy will ever be in a condition to
disavow his Sons Action.

After much canvassing the Matter, no other Remedy could be found, but
Philibert and his Council must agree to the following Form. The Spaniards drew
it almost all up; Great Sir, said the Prince of Savoy, the Duke my Lord and
Father, sends me hither to throw my self at your Majesty's Feet, His Age and
Business not giving him leave to come in Person, to entreat your Majesty on my
Knees, to be content with that Satisfaction I make you. I have not Words lively
enough, to express the extreme Grief the loss of your Majesty's Favor has
given the Duke my Father. I throw my self once again at your Feet, and resolve
never more to rise, but die here, unless your Majesty shall grant me the Favor
I sue for; That is, to Receive the Duke my Father, and all our House, into your
Royal Protection. In this, Great Sir, you will give us a Mark of your Clemency,
in pardoning the greatest Faults, and of the goodness you have always shown to
our House, which is perfectly devoted to you, and Honors you as its Lord and
Father. A Prince of your Blood protests this now at your Majesty's Feet, and I
will Sign it with mine, if it shall be necessary. The Duke my Father relies
wholly on your Majesty's good Will, and we put our selves all into your Hands.
If your Majesty shall receive us into your Favor, this will be a new
Obligation, and indissolubly ties us to become your Majesty's Servants.

The Accommodation of the Duke of Savoy with Spain.
The Bishop of St. John de Maurienne, gave the Duke of Savoy an Account of what
passed at Madrid. When he heard his Son was received with great Haughtiness and
Indifference, That the Duke of Lerma boasted he had a Copy of the Treaties made
with France, and that the Court required Prince Philibert to ask pardon in the
Name of his Father; Charles Emanuel fell into so furious a Rage, that for a
long time, he could not contain himself within the Bounds of Decency. I will
sooner lose my Life, (...) Siri Memory recondite. Tom. II. p. 424, 425.
my Children, my Dominions, than consent to any thing so unworthy of my Rank.
Am I then a Vassal to the Crown of Spain, that I must ask Philip's pardon, for
making a Treaty which does not suit ^ith his Interests? There is now no need
for management, thanks be to God, I am not so weak but I can hazard a Battle
against Spain. Let them Treat my Son ill; Let them break the Laws of
Hospitality. These Hardships shall not oblige me to do so mean an Action. When
the Pope's Nuncio undertook to represent to the Duke, that the State of his
Affairs would not allow him to refuse to make some sort of Submission to his
Catholic Majesty, he was more Transported than before, he said a Thousand
nasty things; he protested he would never consent though the Pope himself should
order him.

The Nuncio was not Diverted by this, he briskly told the Duke, that he must
not expect any Aid from France, whatever happened; if his Country became the
Stage of a War, it must unavoidably be ruined. So that Charles Emanuel
convinced at last by the News he had from France, that the Regent would assist
him with all her good Offices at the Court of Spain; he consented Prince
Philibert should make Satisfaction, according to the Form agreed on with the
Duke of Lerma. The thing was done the 19th of November, 1610. At the Entreaty
of the Pope, and the King of France, replied Philip with his usual Gravity; In
consideration you are come hither, and the Request you have made me, I will not
put in Execution, what I have designed. I will give Marks of my good will to
the Duke your Father, as his good Behavior shall induce me. Prince Philibert
made a profound Reverence, and humbly thanked the King for his Majesty's
Gracious Regard to the Duke of Savoy had always.

Velasco Constable of Castile and Governor of Milan, receives orders to Disarm.
Philip answered to the Pope and the rest, who pressed him to withdraw his Troops
out of the Milanese, that he must wait till Velasco, who was appointed to
Succeed the Count of Fuentes, was Arrived at Milan. He was on the Road when the
Prince of Savoy performed the Conditions proposed to him. The Pope and Mary de
Medicis redoubling their Instances to Philip to Disarm, he was under a
necessity of complying. As soon as Velasco was in Possession of his Government,
he received Orders from Philip, to Disband the Army. The posture of Affairs of
the House of Austria in Germany were so bad, and the Kingdom of Spain was so
much exhausted of Men and Money, that Philip ^ad no other way to revenge
himself of an inferior Prince, who had attempted to take the Milanese from
him. Nay, France and the Pope were for^ed to assist him privately to save his
Honor. Without this, Charles Emanuel would have been a Match for him, and the
King of Spain would not have dared to attack him.

Different Projects of the Duke of Savoy.
The Duke of Savoy was ready to burst with Spite, to see himself made the sport
of all Europe. He resolved to defer laying down his Arms, as long as he could,
and to make his Advantage of the Troops he had on Foot. Sometimes he would
declaim against the King of Spain, and made a Mein, as if he would Disavow all
the steps of Prince Philibert. At others, he was violent against the Regent of
France, and threatened to make work for her in her own Kingdom, in case she
would not perform the Treaties made with the late King. One day he thought of
Surprising Genoa, and for that purpose entered into a Negotiation with the
Marshall Lesdiguieres, because the thing was not fesible, without the
Concurrence of France. Some time after he Resumed his old Project on the City
of Geneva; Filled with new Hopes, he strove to engage the Pope and Constable of
Castile to favor him in the design to destroy a Common-weath equally hateful
to the Courts of Rome and Madrid: Charles Emanuel was on the point of
Surprising Geneva at the end of 1602. Some of his Men were got upon the Walls,
and ready to open the Gates to the Duke, who was come near it, if the
Enterprise had not been happily discovered. In the year 1609, he hoped to
succeed better on the side of the Harbor. The Contrivance was to conceal
diverse Soldiers in Vessels loaded with Wood, and to run these down the River.
The second Attempt was defeated sooner than the first. Du Terrail Head of this
Enterprise, imprudently spoke of it to some Persons, who gave the Magistrates
of the City notice to be upon their Guards.

After this in the Spring time, 1611. the Duke of Savoy thought to try if he
might not succeed better with open Force. The Duke of Savoy resolves to Attack
Geneva, and the Country of the Valleys.
His Troops were ordered to pass out of Piemont into Savoy. This sudden Motion
of a Restless Ambitious Prince, gave great Suspicions at first; he strove to
conceal his Designs on the Country of Geneva, but the Inhabitants of the Town,
and those of the Canton of Bern, soon discovered them. They first Addressed
themselves to the Marshall Lesdiguieres, and desired him to procure Assistance
from the Regent. Lesdiguieres promised his good Offices. Before he wrote to
Court, he laid before the Duke his Friend, that Geneva and the Country of Vaux,
as being under the protection of France, she would not fail to defend them.
Charles Emanuel did not seem to give much heed to these Discourses, and
therefore the Marshall earnestly pressed the Queen and her Council, to oppose
the Designs of the Duke, they saw very well the Consequences. La Nove, Son to
that Brave and Religious Gentleman, who gained so fair a Reputation in the Wars
of France, and the Low Countries, had order to go to Geneva with two Thousand
Foot, and the Canton of Bern, received New Assurances of the King's Protection.

The Council of France resolves to protect Geneva and the County of Vaux.
Bellegarde Gentleman of the Horse was sent into Burgundy, and the Marquess of
Alincourt to Lions, to watch the Duke of Savoy's Motions. Berrault appointed
Ambassador extraordinary at Turin, went to represent to Charles Emanuel, that
his Enterprise would have troublesome Consequences, and declare directly that
the Regents Council were gathering Troops to defend a Town and Country, which
the Predecessor of Lewis the XIII. had taken into the Protection of their
Crown. The Duke who reckoned on the Assistance of the Pope and Governor of
Milan, did not desist for all this. The Count of Soissons sent him privately,
word to be very reserved to Berrault, a Creature of Villeroy, who aimed to
surprise and daunt the Duke. Siri Memory recondite. Tom. II. page 463, 464.
The Pope's Nuncio in France declared, his Master knew nothing of the Designs
of Charles Emanuel; but this Italian Minister maintained them as well as he
could, and strove to prove the Justice of them to the Queen. All this gave
Umbrage. This was the reason she earnestly recommended to the Cardinal of
Joieuse to Discourse with the Pope upon this Subject, and to Represent the
Reasons which France had to oppose the Enterprise which the Duke of Savoy
seemed to design.

The Duke of Savoy is forced to Disarm.
The World could not comprehend the Intrigues of this Prince; perhaps he himself
did not very well know what he would have. Charles Emanuel undertakes to make a
War on the Protestants; and his chief Prospect is to raise the Hugonots of
France, in case he were left alone to act against Geneva. At the same time he
proposes to the King of England, a double Marriage of the Prince of Wales with
the Princess of Savoy, and of the Prince of Piemont, with a Daughter of
England. It was very difficult at first, to make King James hear the Envoy from
Savoy, and yet the Duke pushed the Matter so far, that the Court of Rome was
alarmed at it. Paul V. took Measures to break the Treaty, which the King of
England and the Duke of Savoy had no great mind to conclude. A Capucin had
Orders to go to Turin with an Instruction from Cardinal Borghese, to divert
Charles Emanuel from thinking on an Alliance with England. All that could ever
be guessed of so capricious a Movement, was, that the Duke thought to create a
Jealousy in France, and bring her by this means to finish the Treaty, or the
Marriage of the Eldest Daughter of that Kingdom with the Prince of Piemont. He
hoped too, the Pope would break the Treaty of the Double Marriage between
France and Spain, and Assist the Prince of Piemont, to Marry the Eldest
Daughter of either of those two Crowns, rather than suffer the Duke to bring a
Protestant Princess to Turin.

The poor Duke spoiled all his Affairs, by aiming too much to be crafty. His
Intrigue with England did not succeed better than any of the rest. The Regent
determined too on the double Marriage between France and Spain, thought no more
on the Prince of Piemont, except for Madam Christina, second Daughter to the
late King. For his designs on Geneva, and the Country of Vaux, these he must
quit too. Mary de Medicis had acted her part so well with the Pope and King of
Spain, that they joined with her to compel the Duke of Savoy to lay down his
Arms. La Varenne was sent from the Court of France to Turin, to conclude this
Matter. Charles Emanuel still flattered with some Hopes, the Regent would be
his Friend, had a mind to do this with a good Grace. He thought at least to
make this Advantage, that Mary de Medicis should take in good part, the
Deference which he feigned to have for her Majesty.

A Civil Meeting of the Protestants of France.
The Queen was the more Solicitous, to put a stop to the Commotions in Savoy,
because the Court feared the Protestants met at Saumur, might take Umbrage at
it. When the Reformed of France saw there was a necessity for them to defend
themselves against those who attacked them with open force, they began to form
set Meetings in different Provinces of the Kingdom, to agree on Measures for
their Safety, and the free Exercise of their Religion. One or more Provinces
joined together, first held their Provincial Assembly. Out of these, they
deputed a certain number of Gentlemen, of those they called Elders or
Ministers, to form the General Assembly, who were to take Resolutions for the
common Good of the whole Body. Reason and Natural Equity allow of these sort of
Confederacies. The Primitive Christians united, and had their Meetings for the
Regulation of their Discipline, and preserving the Purity of the Gospel. After
their Example, the Reformed had their Synods to draw up their Confession of
Faith, and form the Government of their Churches. These being born in a
Christian State, where Subjects have Privileges and Liberties, had not only
their Religion to take care of, but were under an Indispensable Obligation to
defend their Right, as far as the Rules of Natural Equity and Christianity
admit against their King, and a Faction of their Countrymen, who strove to
oppress them.

The Sovereign Power ought to hinder as far as may be, all Associations and
Meetings which may cause Disorder and Confusion in a State; but this must be by
a due Execution of the Fundamental Laws, and maintaining those Rights and
Privileges which Subjects cannot without Injustice be deprived of. It is
reasonable to allege, Men ought not to form a State within a State. None would
think of this, if they were left peaceably to enjoy their Birthright. But for
Princes to pretend to prevent Disorders which would never happen, if they were
disposed to do Justice; and to use these plausible Maxims, to oppress with more
ease those whom they have Sworn to protect, is a Tyranny which it is lawful to
oppose. This is ever most dangerous, when it is covered with the fair Colors
of the public Good.

The King of Navarre liked these Principles very well, and thought them solid
and conducing to the Welfare and Repose of Civil Society, whilst he was
struggling to defend himself against the power of the League; but when he once
saw himself Master of a fair Kingdom, he soon abandoned those Sentiments, which
Interest more than Reason had led him to embrace. Princes never consult this
Oracle; they are only entertained with Discourses of Reason, when they are not
in a condition capable of understanding it. In the following part of their
Lives they are flattered, and Transported with Passion for their own Greatness.
Whatever makes them absolute and Independent, ever seems most Just and
Reasonable to them. After the Verification of the Edict of Nants, Henry did not
without great difficulty, grant the Protestants leave to hold a General
Meeting. He was afraid the Lords that resorted to it, or had their Creatures
there, should attempt any thing to his prejudice.

Are not the Synods, said the King, sufficient to determine Matters of
Discipline and Religion? As for Civil Affairs, and the keeping the Edict of
Pacification, the two Deputies General which I allow the Protestants to have in
my Court, can represent to me the Griefs and Complaints of the Provinces. I
will take care to do them Justice. This manner of Reasoning had been good, if
Henry had had the Knowledge and Integrity not to be Surprised by the Popes
Nuncio, and other crafty Men, who were ever near him, to Extort something to
the Disadvantage of the Reformed. The continual Industry of their Enemies to do
them Mischief, made these Meetings almost Indispensably necessary. The King
having come to an Agreement with the Protestants, that they should Nominate six
capable Persons for their Agents, and that out of this Number, he should choose
two which he liked best, it was necessary they should meet for the Nomination
of these Men.

Henry indeed declared, his Intention was, these Assemblies should only concern
themselves in the Choice of fit Persons, to be their Deputies General. But
those who resigned this Employ, being to give an Account of what they had
Transacted, it was not possible for this Assembly to avoid entering upon the
Discussion of some Political Matters. Henry saw this very clearly. The good
King contented with, taking Precaution against the Marshall of Bouillon, and
some other Protestant Lords whom he was jealous of, granted a Permission to the
Reformed, to meet and Adress their Complaints and Desires to him. The Duke of
Sully his Faithful Minister, was a great Assistance to him on these Occasions.
He strove to manage all things so, as to give the King Satisfaction, and the
most moderate Protestants might have no reason to complain, Sully's Station was
enough to Embarass any Man. To serve his Master, and content the Reformed, was
no easy Matter. Turbulent Restless Spirits were continually Exclaiming, and
the Marshall of Bouillon, all whose Motions he observed, conceived an
Implacable Hatred against him.

The time of Villarnoul and Mirandu exercising their Office, The Protestants
prepare to hold another general Meeting.
expiring in the year 1611, these two Deputies General followed the Court in
the Journey to Rheims. Here they presented a Petition, to beseech his Majesty
to permit his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, to hold a General Meeting.
This Request was too reasonable to be Rejected, especially in a time when there
was a necessity to manage every thing. The Kings Letters were dispatched away
the 10th of October, Mercure Francois 1611.
1610. He allowed the Reformed to meet at Chatelleraut the 25th of May, in the
following year. From that time they prepared in earnest, Mem. du Duc de Rohan.
L. 1. Relation de ce qui s'est pass a l'assemblee de Saumur 1611. apt^^ les
Mem. precedente.
to present their Grievances to the Regent, in expectation of Redress. The
Court flattered them with ^air hopes, the Mareschals of Bouillon and
Lesdiguieres, show a zeal for the Interest of their Religion. They engage Du
Plessis Mornay, to draw up Memorials to be sent into the Provinces, that all
might agree what to ask of the Regent in the present Juncture. The Resolves of
the Provincial Assemblies were brisk enough. Bouillon does not conceal these,
publishes them at Court, shows Copies of them to Villeroy, values himself on
this to the Ambassadors of England, and the United Provinces, promises to do
Wonders in the Assembly, then retires to Sedan. This was to let the Regent
know, he would take effectual ways to do his Brethren Justice.

The Marshall of Bouillon suffers himself to be won by the Court.
Whether the Marshall of Bouillon had at that time any ill Intentions, or
whether he suffered himself after to be won by the Promises and Caresses of the
Queen, and her Confidents, God knows. As for Lesdiguieres, he had little sense
of Christianity; his Life was almost a continual Series of so black Crimes,
that the sacred Name may be spared. In short, he was an absolute Libertine. But
what ever the secret Designs of Bouillon were, after his return from Sedan, he
changed his Language. In the time of a Minority, said he, to Aersens,
Ambassador from the States General, is it not the Duty of good Christians to
suffer, rather than form Cabals and Intrigues to amend their Condition? In the
first place, let us give the young King some Marks of our Loyalty and Devotion
to his Service. God will give us the rest, when he pleases. I go in this mind
to our Meeting, and I will endeavor to inspire the same Thoughts into others.
I would here praise his Noble and Generous Sentiments, if other Memoires than
those of the Duke of Rohan did not farther inform me, that a certain Person
carried a promise from the Queen, to the Marshall of Bouillon of the
Government of Poitou, which she designed to take from the Duke of Sully.
Villeroy and the Marquess of Ancre, drew up Instructions for Bouillon, they put
Money in his Hands to be distributed as he should think fit; they gave him
Commission to gain several Mercenary Souls, by New Gratifications from Mary de
Medicis.

The Meeting of the Reformed is removed from Chatelleraut to Saumur. Mercure
Francois 1611.
Chatelleraut being one of the Towns under the Government of the Duke of Sully,
whom they intended to ruin; the Marshall of Bouillon was of Opinion, the
Meeting should not be held there. Saumur seemed to be a place more convenient
for his designs. The Letters for this Translation were Dated at Fontainbleau,
the 2d of May 1611. Before the opening of the Meeting, Bouillon had declared to
Du Plessis Mornay, and some other Persons of Quality, that he would not be
President of it. I think too, added he, this Place ought not to be given to any
great Lord; This must needs create Jealousies. But the Mareschals New
Engagements to the Court, made him change his Mind. Mem. du Due de Rohan. Live.
1. Relation de l'assemblee de Saumur.
No sooner were they at Saumur, but he declared without farther Ceremony, that
he desired to preside. This Distinction, said he, is due to the long and
considerable Services I have done for the Reformed Churches of France.

The Dukes of Sully, Rohan, de la Trimouille, Soubize, Chatillon, la Force, and
diverse other Protestants of Quality came to Saumur. Some of these, and the
greatest part of the Deputies, had a Distrust of the Marshall. For this reason
they agreed to stand by the first Motion which Bouillon himself had made, not
to Elect any Great Lord for their President. Du Plessis Mornay, Governor of the
Town and Castle of Saumur, justly valued for his great Knowledge, Religion and
Probity, carried it by a Plurality of Voices. At first he refused a Place,
which exposed him to the Envy and ill Humor of the Marshall his old Friend.
His Opposition was in vain. The Company earnestly entreated him, to give on
this Occasion, New Proofs of his Zeal for maintaining the Reformation, and his
usual Integrity in the most difficult Matters. Bouillon showed visibly his
Resentment, and threatened to revenge the Affront done to him. This particularly
regarded the Dukes of Rohan and Sully.

The Reconciliation of the Marshall of Bouillon and the Duke of Sully.
Reflecting after some time, that this Transport was capable of overthrowing all
his Projects, he appeared more calm. Some common Friends proposing a
Reconcilement between him and the Duke of Sully, he thought Prudence required
this to be done, at least in Appearance. When the Marshall had Reproached the
Duke, that in the late Kings time, he had drawn the Canon out of the Arsenal,
to destroy the Town and Church of Sedan. Let us forget what is past, says he, I
will become your Friend and Servant. If you a^^ attacked in Sully upon account
of Religion, I will as readily bring down the Canon of Sedan to defend you, as
you drew out that of the Arsenal, to destroy me at Sedan. Let us agree for the
benefit of our Religion. Conscience and our Common Interest require it; We
cannot subsist without an Union. The Party we follow cannot procure us great
Advantages, but it is capable of supporting a moderate Fortune. That which is
commonly called Greatness of Soul, is most commonly Vanity and Ostentation. The
Marshall would appear generous, by feigning to Sacrifice a private Injury to
the public Good. And perhaps he was sincere in what he did. The Sense of
Religion and Probity, sometimes awakes in Noble Minds; but Passion in its turn
rising again, stifles every thing that opposes it. Bouillon sought an Advantage
from the Reformed, he gave Proofs of it in this Meeting. He discovered Vigor
in some weighty Affairs; in others blinded by his Hatred and Ambition he could
not see, that by serving the Court he scattered the Seeds of fatal Division
amongst his Brethren.

The Protestants renew their Oath of Union.
To prevent the ill effects of Differences amongst them, the Protestants thought
fit to renew the Oath of Union they had formerly taken on diverse Occasions.
This Oath was first used amongst them, when they had a Prince of the Blood, and
the late King at their Head. Mercure Francois 1611.
After he had changed his Religion, he did not show his Dislike of his
Protestant Subjects renewing their Union at Mante under his Eyes, and swearing
publicly before the Catholics of his Party, that they would die in defense of
their Confession of Faith. A Just Prince should never complain of an Oath made
under his Obedience. In it they protested, they would ever continue Loyal to
the King; But Henry being now in peaceable Possession of France, he was much
offended at an Act which the King of Navarr had approved off. The Renewing this
at Chatelleraut, put him into an ill Humor. He resented it highly, that
Lesdiguieres had Signed what himself had done under preceding Kings. Sully gave
him good Reasons for this proceeding. The Reformed would not be afraid of any
thing that could happen; Sir, said he to him, if the Crown could make you
Immortal. But the Memory of St. Bartholomew, will strike a Terror into them. We
are not ignorant the Catholics press you, only to give a Toleration for a
Time; See then what Reasons the Protestants have to take care for Futurity.
When the Reformed had so many just Grounds to distrust the Regent and her
Council, could it seem strange they should renew their Union at Saumur, but the
cry was against them They were ever Reproached with this Oath, in the Reign
whose History I am now writing. To make a thing which was Innocent and
Necessary in the Opinion of Henry Criminal; was not this, plainly to declare to
the poor People, their Ruin was absolutely resolved on?

The Affairs of the Duke of Sully propose^ in the Meeling at Saumur.
Boissise and Bullion Counselors of State, and Commissioners sent by the King
to the Assembly at Saumur, having brought with them hopes of the Favor of the
Court, there was a serious design to draw up the Complaints and Requests of the
Reformed Party. Whilst this was managing by Persons appointed for that purpose,
there arose a Debate about the Duke of Sully's Concerns. He feared the
Consequences of the Threats, made him to appoint Commissioners to enquire into
his past Actions, and proceed against him, if he persisted to refuse to lay
down his place of Great Master of the Artillery, and his Government of Poitou.
To bring him to do this with the better Grace, the Court offered him the choice
of two sorts of Recompenses, a Dignity as that of Marshall of France, or a
considerable Sum of Money. The Duke desired to keep his Places and Government,
and convey both to the Marquess of Rony his Son. He could find no way besides
to baffle the Potent Enemies he had at Court, but by engaging all the Hugonot
Party to support him and declare loudly their cause was concerned in his
Preservation. He took Measures to succeed in this Project, and the Marshall
was no less busy in Traversing it; reckoning the Government of Poitou his own,
by Virtue of the Regents Promise, when Sully should be deprived of it.

The Duke of Sully's Remonstrance to the Meeting.
Sully made a Remonstrance to the Meeting. Under Color of desiring their
Advice, he dexterously insinuated, that his Religion was the only cause of
Disgrace, and the Association Oath which he had just now taken, would expose
him still farther to the Displeasure of the Court. This was at least true in
part; Mercure Francois 1611.
the Deputies were convinced it was so, and the most Disinterested amongst
them, declared for Sully. The Consideration all Men had for the Duke of Rohan,
a Lord already very Eminent for his great Courage, his rare Probity, A
Discourse between the Marshall of Bouillon and the Duke of Rohan; concerning
the Duke of Sully's Affair.
his Discernment, and capacity still increased the Friends of Sully, whose
Daughter he had Married. This was an Invincible Obstacle to Bouillon's designs
and embarassed him exceedingly. He thought to surmount, this, by persuading
Rohan to abandon his Father-in-Law, pretending his Cause was desperate.

However Upright and Careful a Man be, who has the Administration of the
Finances and Artillery, says the Marshall to the Duke of Rohan, in a Visit he
made him when he was ill; It is hard for him to avoid committing some fault,
which deserves to be punished, if it be enquired rigorously into. A
Superintendent of the Finances, and a Great Master of the Artillery, are not
only answerable for what they do themselves, but for the Management of their
Commissioners and Inferior Officers. If the Court should appoint Commissioners
to enquire into the Duke of Sully's Administration, do you think they would not
find some plausible Pretense, to take away his Places. The Assembly and the
Reformed, will have no color of Complaint, nay, though wrong be done to the
Duke of Sully. The Matter will be Determined in the usual Forms of Law. For
you, My Lord, you make such a Profession of exact Probity. You are so great a
Lover of good Order, in a Word, you have so Loyal a French Heart, you will not
be able to stir, when the Matter shall be determined Judicially. The Duke of
Rohan took this Complement very ill? What, replied he with some Disturbance,
after the Great Services the Duke of Sully has done to the late King, shall he
become a Prey to those who were always doing Mischief to the State. His Conduct
is unblamable, and we do not fear it should be examined. He is a Peer, and
cannot be judged but by a Court of Peers. If his Enemies endeavor to bring him
before any other Tribunal, his Kinsmen and Friends will never endure such an
Indignity. Be assured, My Lord, that I will do my Duty on this Occasion, and
will not leave my Father-in-Law to be trampled on.

The Steddiness of the Duke of Rohan, discomposed the Marshall of Bouillon.
The Assembly declares for the Duke of Sully.
The Assembly declared for Sully. They pressed him to keep his Places, and
particularly that of Great Master of the Artillery. But if he was inclined to
accept of a Reward, they entreated him rather to accept of a Dignity, than a
Sum of Money. The one suited better with the Duke of Sully's Family, and the
other with the good of the Reformed Churches. In the Conclusion, the Assembly
declared Sully's particular Interest, and that of the whole Protestant Party
were Inseparable on this Occasion; and that they would assist him if any should
Attempt to give him Trouble for his Administration, by any unlawful Methods.
This Resolution was attacked in several Libels. One came out with the Title of
the Overseer of Charenton. This was a Satyr on the Rough and Covetous Humor of
the Duke. The Author Admonishes the Reformed, that this step of theirs in
supporting thus highly a private Person, was subject to the most Sinister
Interpretations, and they would do well to be moderate and reserved.

The Court resolves to break up the Meeting at Saumur, with all speed.
The Court Resented it, that the Reformed should use such high Language in their
Assembly. The Duke of Rohan made a Speech full of Vigor, Courage, and Piety.
He was heard with Pleasure, and every Man discovered more Constancy than
before. That which Rohan then delivered as a Maxim of State, is since become a
Prophecy, V. le Discourse du Duc de Rohan a Saumur apres ses Memoires in 4.
and we see the Accomplishing of it in our Times. Rules of State, says that
Lord, change with the Times. No certain Maxims can be laid down. That which is
profitable to one King, is prejudicial to another: If whenever the King of
France becomes a Prosecutor of our Religion, he loses the Protection of it all
over Christendom: He enriches some Neighbor with that Title: He does not
increase his Interest in the Church of Rome, he entirely ruins his Kingdom. The
Regents Council being devoted to the Court of Rome, was very far from following
Counsels so safe and conducing to the Welfare of France. The Consequences of
the Union, and good Correspondence of the Hugonots, scared the Court. This was
enough to break the Double Marriage, which the Queen Negotiated. It was
resolved therefore to divide the Party, and break up the Assembly, and to do
this in such a manner, that they should have no reason to complain of any but
themselves.

After some time treating with the Commissioners of the King about the Paper,
Boissise and Bullion declared, they had no Orders to give an Answer, and it was
requisite for the Assembly to depute some Persons to the Court, to carry their
Complaints and Requests. This is done. The Deputies are well received by the
Ministers. They are amused with fair words; But how were they surprised, when
in stead of giving them the Paper with a favorable Answer, V. la Relation de
l'assemblee de Saumur apres les Memoires de Rohan in 40.
as they were made to hope, the Chancellor declared, this should not be done
before the Nomination of six Persons, two of which the King would choose for
Deputies General of the Reformed Churches. This was in plain French, to tell
them the Court would not give them any Answer to the Paper they presented, till
after the Dissolution of their Meeting. This could not hold longer than till
the Nomination was made, the King having only allowed of it for this purpose.
It was in vain to insist, and make very humble Remonstrances. The King never
treats with his Subjects, replied the Ministers, He grants what Favors he
thinks fit. Proceed to your Nomination. The Paper is answered as favorably as
you can wish. Bullion protested this at Saumur, with a Curse on his Eternal
Damnation.

A Division in the Assembly at Saumur.
The Question is only about a Formality, said some Mercenary Slaves of the
Court. The King will not deliver to us the favorable Answers which he intends
to give us. This is but decent, to show it is his favor which he voluntarily
grants, and not Articles extorted by a long Treaty. It concerns us to obtain
what we desire, but in what manner this is indifferent. Those who had most
Knowledge and Integrity, were not dazzled with this. They saw that if the
Assembly were once broke up, they must be content with what Terms the Regent
would please, and the Remonstrances of the two Deputy Generals, would be too
weak to oblige the Court to take notice of them. But the Marshall of Bouillon
had gained a very considerable Party. La Varenne, Valet de Chamber of the King
sent by the Court, a Man of great Address and Management, went from Door to
Door to distribute, or promise Gratifications to those who would purchase them.

When the Marshall of Bouillon thought the Party well enough united, he drew
up himself the form of a Letter, which the Regent should write to the Meeting,
and sent it privately to Court. The tenor of this, was to require the Assembly
to proceed incessantly to the Nomination of six Persons, to receive the Answers
given to their Paper, and then to break up. Those who refused to obey this
Order, were declared Rebels; and the lesser Number which were won over by the
Marshall of Bouillon, was Authorized to Name six Persons to the King. The
Regent sent the Letter as Bouillon had contrived: This was Communicated in the
first place to diverse Persons, to sound their Inclinations. Most were of
Opinion they should withdraw, and not hear it read. But Du Plessis Mornay, and
the Wisest part, thought the Party made by the Marshall and the Court, should
pay a blind Obedience, and the rest refuse to do it; that such a Separation
would cause a fatal Division in the Reformed Churches. For this reason, they
strove to persuade the most Warm and Zealous to use Prudence and Management on
this Occasion.

The Wisdom of Du Plessis Mornay, upon this Occasion.
We know well enough the Author of this Pernicious Advice, said the Wise Du
Plessis. Without him our Enemies would not have dared to have attempted a thing
of this Consequence. Let us not flatter our selves. He who has began to snare,
is not of a Humor to leave it unfinished. He will have the Honor to have
Accomplished that which the Persecutions, Civil Wars, and the Bloody St.
Bartholomew could not do. Our Union will be broke, our Churches divided by an
unhappy Schism. Let God judge between him who has given this Advice, and us,
and make him to see his Fault. Gentlemen, the Judgment of Solomon is before
you. Let us show that we are the true Mother. The Bowels of Jesus Christ are
torn in a more cruel Manner, because some among us will not see it. These Men
are not concerned, to teach us what Obedience is due to the King; we know one
another well enough. Whatever happens, let us make our Nomination as the Queen
Commands. Our Churches will pardon us for not following their Instructions,
when they see into what danger the ill Advice of some Men has thrown us. The
Schism is ready to be formed; This is enough for our Justification. This
Discourse full of Religion and Wisdom, calmed their exasperated Minds. They
resolved to hear the Queens Letter read, and obey her Majesty.

The Conclusion of the Meeting at Saumur.
Bullion goes the next day in the Morning to the Meeting, presents the Regents
Letter, and demands the Kings Orders to be executed. They shall be so replied,
Du Plessis Mornay, since we have the Misfortune not to have our Remonstrances
heard; but we hope their Majesty's will have regard to our Submission, and
those Just Requests we have made. Do not take it ill, Sir, said he, turning to
the Commissioners if I frankly tell you those who have sowed Division amongst
us, have not done his Majesty good Service. It was our Union which settled the
late King upon the Throne of his Ancestors; he knew so well the profit of it,
that it was renewed and sworn to in his Presence, and in the midst of his Court
at Mante. Heaven grant a peaceable Minority to the King, and a happy Regence to
the Queen. The more the Reformed are united amongst themselves, the more they
will be in a condition to serve their Prince usefully. Three or four of the
Court Faction, would have stood up at the Instigation of the Commissary, and
have made a noise, but the Prudence of the President, and the Remonstrances of
the rest stopped them.

The fifth of September, the Assembly named the six Persons, out of whom the
Court might choose two for Deputies General of the Reformed Churches of France.
After this, the Answer made to the Paper of Complaints and Requests was read.
What the Court granted was so inconsiderable, that the Persons who declared on
that side were filled with Confusion and Rage, We'll sooner burst, cried one,
than stop here. The time of considering was over; The Assembly was broke by the
same Writ that permitted them to sit. Let us break up, says Du Plessis. Let
every Man leave his Animosities here. It would be an Addition to our
Misfortune, to carry these along with us into our Countries. Every one has
failed, every one has done well. Let us endeavor to obtain by a Respectful
Silence, and a Christian Patience, what we could not gain by our Petitions and
Remonstrances.

This was the end of one of the most Famous Protestant Meetings, after three
Months Sitting. It was composed of the most Eminent Men for their Birth,
Ability, and Experience in Business. They would have been more Successful in
their Labors, for the benefit of their Churches, if they had not furnished the
Court with means to make an Advantage of Divisions, by the Ambition and
Covetousness of some particular Members. This Assembly had given the Regent
some Disquiet, and alarmed diverse Towns, who imagined the Reformed would now be
more potent than ever. When it was found they were broke up without gaining any
advantage, their Enemies insulted them on all sides, and diverse Libels against
them were published. In one of these the Anonymous Author, divides the Meeters
into three Classes, the Malicious, the Zealous, and the Judicious. Under the
Name of Malicious, were designed the Duke of Rohan, and the rest who were of
Opinion, they should show their Resolution to obtain a favorable Answer. These
Men said they, only seek to Embroil the Nation, and kindle a Civil War. As for
the Zealous, they painted these as People whose love to their Religion, made
them Suspicious and Diffident. Their ignorant Zeal, said they, their
Prepossession, that all endeavors are used to distress them, made these comply
with the former. In the last place, the Judicious were the Marshall of
Bouillon, and those of his Party. Their Obedience and Moderation was praised. A
Civil War was in their Opinion, the worst of Evils. They would suffer any
thing, rather than put the Nation into a Flame.

A Book of Du Plessis Mornay against the Papacy.
A New Book of Du Plessis Mornay, enraged the Roman Catholics strangely. The
Title of it was, The Mystery of Iniquity, or, The History of the Papacy. The
Design of the Author was to show against the Cardinals Baronius and Bellarmine,
by what degrees the Monarchy of the Pope was formed, and the several
Oppositions which Honest Men made, to the Establishing a Power so contrary to
the Spirit of the Gospel. There was nothing very extraordinary in this, the
Roman Catholics were accustomed to this Controversy. It had been handled in an
Infinity of Books; the Cut in the Front of this Book, gave greater Offense to
them, than all the rest. Paul the V. was represented in it, with the Flattering
and Impious Inscriptions made for him on the other side of the Mountains. Some
Persons applied to him, what the Holy Ghost says of Jesus Christ himself, gave
him the Title of the most Invincible Monarch of the Christian Commonwealth,
the most Ardent Defender of the Papal Omnipotence; in short, Vice God. This was
a word newly invented to his Honor. Since Men who make a Profession of the
Gospel, have pushed Flattery to such an Extravagance, can we admire that Pagans
should place their Princes in the number of the Gods, whom they adored?

Du Plessis made him ridiculous by a pleasant and lucky Remark. By adding the
value of the Numeral Letters of the Latin words, which signify Paul V. Vice
God, he found the number 666. which makes the Mysterious number of the Beast
spoke of in St. John's Revelation. The Reformed applauded this Discovery, and
their People being now persuaded that Paul V. was truly the Son of Perdition,
whom the Lord Jesus would destroy, by the Breath of his Mouth, and the Glory of
his Coming, they flattered themselves they should soon see the Fall of Babylon.
Du Plessis himself was so well pleased at the Success, Vie du M. du Plessis L.
III.
that his Friends writing to him, that his New Book was a great prejudice to
his Fortune, and that Villeroy, and some other Ministers were cold to him,
whereas before they intended to have given him some considerable Employ. He
comforted himself without much difficulty on this Cross, and showed, he
contemned the Threats, which his Enemies exasperated against him, made him on
all sides.

The more enlightn'd Persons in the Church of Rome, did only laugh at the Fancy
of the Author. This Sportive Wit seemed very seasonable to them, to put to
Confusion a Priest who being come to be Bishop of Rome, was pleased to see
himself flattered in such an Impious manner. But the Monks and Bigots made a
great Noise. The Popes Nuncio was in a terrible Heat, and Paul himself sent
Briefs to complain of the Outrage done him. The Regent was not less alarmed
than the rest. She could not endure to hear it said, the Pope was Antichrist.
Besides the Reasons common to all of her Religion, to oppose a Dogm which make
them pass for Worshippers of the Beast, Mary de Medicis had a particular one.
The Validity of her Marriage with Henry, was grounded on the Authority of the
Pope, who declared his former with Margaret of France, null, and the Regent
imagined all who looked on the Pope as Antichrist, could not look upon her as
the lawful Wife of Henry the IV. This made her desire to see de Mornay's Book
blasted, at least in appearance.

Du Plessis Mornays Book is censured by the faculty of Paris.
It is carried to the Sorbonne, the first of August, 1611. The Dean and Doctors
of the Faculty of Paris, having said a Solemn Mass of the Holy Ghost, met to
appoint Doctors to examine the Work. They make the Report the 19th of the same
Month, and Condemn the Book, as filled with an Infinity of Blasphemies, Mercure
Francois, 1611.
and Execrable Impieties against the Catholic Faith and Religion, and against
the Apostolic See. These big Words only serve to dazzle the Simple. They would
have the World believe, the Catholic Faith and Religion are inseparable from
the Pontifical Authority. Every Doctor, every Magistrate, every Courtier, may
believe what he pleases. But Policy does not allow People to be drawn out of
their Ignorance and Superstition. The Censure of the Faculty was made according
to the Report of the Doctors, who were deputed to censure it. The Book was
detested and condemned as Heretical stuffed with Furious Zeal, exceeding
Seditious, contrary to the Divine, Natural and Canon Law, in short, whatever
those good Gentlemen pleased.

Reflections on their Censure.
Could they have declared themselves with more Vehemence against the Impious
Dogms of Paul of Samosata, Arius or Photinus? To ask these Wise Masters ^f the
Sorbonne, what reason they had ^o thunder thus on an Author, who de^ies the
Monarchy of the Pope, to be of Di^ine Institution, would be an useless loss ^f
Time. The Doctors set up for little ^opes. They thunder, but do not instruct.
^o they think the Papacy founded on Na^ural Right? The greatest part of Man^ind
hitherto have not discovered this. ^trange Blindness indeed! For the Di^ine
Law, they show us one or two Pas^^ages in the Gospel. The Roman Catho^^cks
Disagree about the true sense of these ^laces, the Gravest Christian Writers
did ^ot see the Primacy of the Pope in them, before there were any Protestants
in the ^orld. If by the Canon Law the Mo^ern Decretals are to be understood, we
^ill submit to Condemnation. But if the ^ue Canon Law of France be as we are
^ften told, the ancient Code of Canons, ^ade or received in the first General
^ouncils, the Judicious and Disinterested ^octors of Paris, will find nothing
less ^an the Primacy and Monarchy of the ^ope there.

It was the Name of Antichrist, which ^^d most disturb the Roman Catholics.
The Pope does not care to be the Beast, and those of his Communion will not be
^is Worshippers. But in short, if it be ^ue, and it is not commonly denied in
^rance, that the Dominion usurped by the ^opes, is contrary to the Spirit of
Jesus christ, and the Institution of the Apostles, it cannot be denied that the
Pope is Antechrist in this Sense, and that his Monarchy is Antechristian. If it
be true, as it seems to be, that to rise and oppose what is called God, or what
Men adore, be to put a Man's self above those to whom the Lord of all things has
said; Ye are Gods, and the Sons of the most High, and to assume Honors which
are due to him alone, is it not evident then that the Pope is, or at least
resembles very much the Son of Perdition, and the Man of Sin, foretold by St.
Paul? As for the Prophecies of St. John the Protestants, are not the first who
have applied them to the Pope. There is no need of seeking ways round about, to
find Characters very much resembling those we see in him. The Comparison
between the Pagans and Christians in these latter times, seems so just, that it
is difficult to determine which of the Interpreters are in the Right, who
Explain the Prophecies of the Revelations, of one and the other Rome.

One Ferrier thought to distinguish himself in the beginning of this Age, by
maintaining a public Thesis at Nismes, where he was Professor of Divinity,
that the Pope is Antichrist. The Parliament of Toulouse proceeded against him,
but he declined their Jurisdiction, and removed the Affair to the Chamber of
the Edict at Castres. Some little time after, the Protestants made a New
Article of Faith in their National Synod of Gap in Dauphine, in which they
declared, that they believed and would maintain; That the Bishop of Rome is
properly Antichrist, and the Son Perdition foretold in the Word of God. This
New Article was to be the XXXI of the Confession of Faith of the Reformed
Churches in France. Henry IV. took it ill, than in his Reign they should devise
a thing they had never once thought of, when the Disputes were hottest in the
times of his Predecessors.

Whether it were that he feared for his own part the Consequences, with regard
to his second Marriage, or that he was displeased the Reformed should Reproach
him, with leaving the true Religion to become a Worshipper of the Beast; Henry
commanded absolutely, this New Article should be left out. The more Wise and
Moderate of the Protestants, disavowed what was done at Gap; or at least
thought the Synod wanted Prudence and Moderation. The Question of Antichrist
was again brought upon the Board, at the Synods of Rochell and St. Maixant. But
Henry the IV. constantly opposed the making of an Article of Faith, which did
not seem very necessary to Salvation. Viguier having published a Book with the
Title of the Theater of Antichrist, the Jesuit Gontier, a famous Converter of
these Times* preached against it in a Violent and Seditious manner. The King
forbid the publishing of the Book, and imposed Silence on this Outrageous
Controvertist. Du Plessis Mornay's Book, coming out immediately after these
Disputes, which were not yet entirely stifled, it is not to be wondered that it
made such a mighty Uproar. If it be owned, this Gentleman who was very able and
judicious in all other things, failed in his usual Consideration and Conduct
here; the censure of the Sorbonne is no less extravagant and ridiculous.

Troubles of Aix la Chrpelle.
Mary de Medicis began to take that Method, which has since been so constantly
followed in the Reign of her Son* and is still in our Times. She applied her
self to divide the Protestants of France, and weaken them; but did not refuse
her good Offices, and the young King's Protection to those of Geneva and
Germany. The Marquess de la Vieuville, du Brueil President of Mets, and Villers
Hotman, were sent of her part to Aix la Chappelle toward the end of September,
to endeavor to appease the Troubles raised a little before in that City. The
occasion of these was thus. In the year 1598. the Protestant Inhabitants of Aix
la Chappelle, Mercure Francois 1611.
having drove out the Roman Catholic Magistrates, the City was put under the
Interdict of the Empire. The Elector of Cologne had a Commission to see the
Emperor's Orders put in Execution, and Accomplished it by the Aid of the
Elector of Triers, and the Duke of Cleves. So the Catholic Magistrates were
restored, and the Protestant Ministers in their turn, drove out of the City.
The Protestants showing great uneasiness to be thus deprived of the Exercise of
their Religion, the Catholics to strengthen their Interest, put themselves
under the Protection of Albert, Archduke of the Low Countries. The Revolution
which happened after in the Dutchies of Cleves and Juliers, which Countries fell
into the Hands of two Protestant Princes, gave some Consolation to those of Aix
la Chapelle, who were of the same Religion. They went two Leagues off into a
Village in the Country to pray to God, and hear his Word. This displeased the
Roman Catholics. The Magistrates forbid the Protestants to go into that
Village upon pain of Imprisonment, and paying a great Fine. They added to this
a Clause, that all who should not be able to pay the Fine, should be banished
out of the City.

Some by Virtue of this New Law, suffered Imprisonment, and after were
condemned to perpetual Banishment. Their Friends and Neighbors moved with
Compassion in taking their leaves of them, went in a considerable Number to the
Magistrates, when they were met to present a Petition in favor of those poor
Wretches. They alleged, that the Sentence against them was contrary to the
Privileges of the Inhabitants, and required the Rigor of it to be abated. The
Magistrates very far from considering this, Ordered every one to return
immediately to their Respective Houses. Those who were thus remanded, began to
exclaim against the Hardships of the Magistrates, and the Jesuits whom they
looked on as Authors of these violent Counsels. It is now twelve years that we
have groaned under this Oppression, said some of them; have we not had Patience
long enough? Shall we never think of Revenging three hundred Families of our
fellow Citizens, driven out of their Country in less than eight days time? The
love of Liberty is common to Men and Brutes. But it is the Advantage of Men to
have Courage and Industry to defend it, and recover it when it is lost, Our
Ancestors have ever preferred Death to Slavery. Let us follow the Examples
which they have given us. It is sweeter to die, than endure Banishment. If God
bless our just Efforts, for the Preservation of our Estates and Liberties, We
shall obtain the free Exercise of our Religion into the Bargain.

Fired with this warm Speech, several run presently to Arms, and others join
with them. They sieze the Townhouse, oblige the Burgomaster to let out those
who were unjustly kept in Prison, sieze the Keys of the Gates, and put up the
Chains in all parts of the City. The Protestants being Masters of the Town,
chose Captains, settled a New City Council, and took all ways they could think
of, to prevent Trouble and Confusion. Being persuaded it would be hard to keep
peace in the City, as long as any Jesuits remained in it, the New Council sent
Men to secure the good Fathers, and secure their College. The Consternation
they were in, not giving them leave to Intrigue, they withdrew to their Church,
to implore the Assistance of God, and their Great Patron Ignatius Loyola, whom
the Pope had newly Canonized. When Bigots have rashly brought themselves into
danger by their Cabals and Indiscreet Zeal, they have a vain confidence that
God will work Miracles to bring them out. The Jesuits were carried to the
Townhouse, and put under a strong Guard, without having any harm done them.
The Superior of their professed House at Paris, was then at Aix la Chapelle to
drink the Waters. He was treated with all imaginable Respect, as soon as he
discovered himself. The Townsmen showed they did this in consideration of the
King of France, and the Queen his Mother.

The Wise and Moderate Catholics disapproved the Severity of the Magistrates
to the Protestants; several of them would not quit their Places in the City, or
the Pretensions they had to them, but seeing in the Conclusion they were the
weakest, they had Recourse to Archduke Albert. The Protestants of their side,
begged the Assistance of the Prince of Brandenburgh and Newburgh, Masters of
the Neighboring Countries of Cleves and Juliers. Count Solms Governor there
for the Princes coming to Aix la Chapelle with a good number of Horse, the
Protestants remained absolute in the City. And now they publish a Manifesto,
setting forth the Reasons they had to change the Form of their small
Commonwealth for a time. In this they offered to agree to these Conditions;
that those of the Confession of Ausburg, and the Reformed should have free
Exercise of their Religon; that a certain Number of Protestants should be
admitted to the Magistracy, with a Provision in the last place, that the
Jesuits should be expelled the place.

The Regent of France interposes to calm the Troubles at Aix la Chapelle.
The Archduke Albert, and the Elector of Cologne, had sent Persons on their
part to labor for an Accommodation. But the Threats of the Persons cut by
Archduke Albert, having Exasperated the Minds of the People, their Mediation
was not accepted. The Marquess de la Vieuville and his Colleagues, were heard
more favorably. After a Wise Remonstrance, they made the Protestants agree to
a conditional Treaty, without prejudice to the Emperor's Power, or what he
should order hereafter. The Protestants agreed to wait for his Imperial
Majesty's Decision of their Differences with the Catholics, and that all
things in the mean time, without excepting the College of Jesuits, should be
Reestablished in the same condition they were, with a Provision that the
Protestants should have the free Exercise of their Religion in some convenient
Place, without the Walls of the ancient City of Charlemagne. But the Catholic
Magistrates refused to Sign the Treaty, upon a pretense that the Empepor had
Commissioned Archduke Albert and the Elector of Cologne, to pacify the
Troubles in such manner as they should think fit.

In vain did Vieuville and his Colleagues, make a second Remonstrance to the
Catholic Magistrates, to incline them to Peace. They obstinately refused it,
and the Jesuits retired into the Catholic Low Countries. And now the Envoys of
France caused New Magistrates to be Elected, with the consent of the
Protestants. The Ambassador of the Archdukes of the Low Countries at Paris,
made an Instance to the Regent, to Annul the Regulations made by the Marquess
de la Veuville, and his Colleagues. But the Regent being informed of the truth
of Things, declared to the Envoys of the Princes of Brandenburgh and Neuburgh,
and those of Aix la Chapelle, that her Son would not suffer any thing to be
done to the prejudice of their Masters.

The Meeting of some Protestant Princes of Germany, about the Affairs of Cleves
and Juliers.
They were afraid in Germany, that the Litigious Succession of Cleves and
Juliers, would cause a Division among the Protestant Princes. The Elector of
Brandenburgh and the Duke of Neuburgh had their Pretensions; the Elector of
Saxony too was resolved to maintain the Rights of his Family. The difference of
these three great Protestant Houses, was like to give great Advantages to the
Roman Catholics. Diverse Princes met in May at Introbock near Leipsic in
Saxony; to Advise about Means to prevent this unfortunate Clashing, and bring
the Pretenders to an Agreement. The Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh,
Mercure Francois 1611.
diverse Princes of the two Houses, and of that of Hesse, and some other agreed,
that the Matter should be decided by the Emperor, the Countries of Cleves and
Juliers, should be jointly Possessed and Admin^stred by the Elector and Princes
of Saxony, together with the Princes of Brandenburgh and Neuburgh, on condition
that the Saxons should advance a certain Sum of Money to the two Princes which
were in Possession. The Protestants were glad of this Means, to Reconcile the
two Electoral Houses. But the Prince of Neuburgh having refused to consent to
it, notwithstanding the whole Assembly of Princes in the Protestant League at
Rottemburg in Bavaria, entreated him earnestly to comply; this Treaty of
Introbock had no effect.

The Princes of the Protestant League meet at Rottemburgh in Bavaria.
The several Persecutions which the Reformed suffered in Bavaria, at Bambergh,
Wirtsburgh, Cologne, Worms, and elsewhere, gave occasion to this Meeting of the
Princes of the Protestant League at Rottemburgh. They were glad they still had
the liberty to Regulate some common Matters, and take Measures to preserve and
strengthen their Union. The Emperor sent two Persons of his Part to the
Assembly. Complaints were made to these Men, Mercure Francois 1611.
of the new Execution of diverse things, which his Imperial Majesty had promised
to the Protestants, and of the Persecutions which those of the Religion
suffered in several places. The Emperors Deputies excused this, as well as they
could. His Imperial Majesty, said they, will keep peace among the Subjects of
his Hereditary Countries, without any Distinction of Religion. But having no
Power to Control the Archbishop of Cologne, nor the Bishop of Wirtsburg, and
Bambergh, he cannot be Responsible for what those Prelates do. The Electors
must meet in a little time at Nuremberg, to debate there of the General Affairs
of the Empire. The Emperor desires to act, so as to give every one
Satisfaction. The Protestant Princes being accustomed to these sort of Delays,
replied in high Terms, if the Emperor deferred any longer to keep his Word,
they would make such Provision as the State of Affairs should require.

Matthias King of Hungary, who hoped to procure himself to be chosen King of
the Romans, sent the Baron de Polheim to Rottembergh, to manage the Princes of
the Protestant League. It concerned him not to have them Traverse him in his
Designs. Polheim thanked the Princes for the Affection they showed to his
Master, assured them of the Friendship of Matthias, and communicated to them
the Agreement made between the Emperor and his Brother. After the Complements
which Princes Reciprocally make each other on the like occasions, the
Protestants prayed the King of Hungary to forbear all sorts of Violence, to
preserve a Respect for the Emperor his Brother, and prevent the Foreigners of
his Council, from taking Measures which might disturb the Repose of Germany.
The Republic of Venice, the Swiss Cantons, and the Seignoury of Geneva, had
likewise sent to the Meeting of the Protestant Princes. The Venetians were upon
their Guard against the House of Austria, and especially against the King of
Spain, and Ferdinand Archduke of Gratz. The Swisses and the People of Geneva,
feared the Enterprises of the Duke of Savoy. This made them seek the Goodwill
of all the Protestant Princes of Germany. A like Assistance was promised to the
Seignory of Geneva, and a very civil, obliging Answer was given to the
Republic of Venice, and the Swiss Cantons.

The Affair of Aix la Chapelle was brought under debate; The Princes resolved
to defend the Protestant Citizens if there were occasion for it, but they pressed
them to live peaceably with the Catholics. They undertook to intercede with
the Magistrates of Cologne, to admit the Protestants to go without Scandal or
Fear of being Disturbed, into the Countries of the Neighboring Princes, to
pray to God with those of their Religion. But if the Magistrates refused to
comply with this Request, they were exhorted to suffer patiently, and to avoid
committing any Violence. Besides this, they writ to the Bishop of Bamberg and
Worms, to pray the first not to disturb his Protestant Subjects, and the latter
not to introduce the Jesuits, and to send away those he had admitted. I take
pleasure in relating these particulars. It shows the Wisdom and Moderation of
the Protestant Princes of Germany. They did not take Arms for Religion, till
the last Extremity. These Princes farther sent into France, England, and the
United Provinces to renew the Alliances, and thank the two Kings and the
States General, for the Aid they gave in the War of Cleves and Juliers. In the
Conclusion, several Counties and Towns of the Empire upon their desire, were
admitted into the League, and the Affairs of greatest consequence, were
remitted to the Judgment of the Electoral Diet appointed at Nuremberg.

Christian the Second, Elector of Saxony, The Elector of Saxony's Death.
died of an Apoplexy before. John George his Brother succeeded him. Excess of
Drinking is a common fault among the German Princes. It is surprising the
unfortunate and untimely Death of so many of their Kinsmen, as are daily killed
by the excess of Wine, should not divert them from a Vice so unbecoming Persons
of their Rank, and so contrary to Christianity. Christians ever rewarded the
greatest Drinkers best. His Successor was forced to be at a greater charge to
redeem the Castles and Lordships which he had lavishly given to the Companions
of his Debauches. Mercure Francois 1611.
There is a Report that the Princess his Mother sent a Minister to him, to
exhort him to leave off that Vice. The Elector placed him at his Table; and
knowing he loved Money, promised him a great Golden Cup, if he would drink it
off at a certain number of times. The Minister accepted the Condition, but was
drunk before he finished it. The Elector caused him to be set in a Chair, and
ordered the drunken Preacher to be carried back to the Princess. The next time
Madam, he bid them tell her, Make a better choice of your Men. If you would
have me profit by your Advices, send such Men as are more proof against the
Temptation, than I am. Princes often would want place in History, if it was not
necessary now and then to divert the Reader, and paint the Folly of Vice.

The Electoral Diet at Nutembergh.
John George the New Elector of Saxony, came to Nurembergh with his Colleagues,
about the beginning of October, The first Affair treated of there, was the
Contest between the Dukes of Deux-Ponts and Neuburgh, about the Administration
of the Electorate, during the Minority of the young Count Palatine of the
Rhine. Mercure Francois 16^^, and 1611.
This was to continue till he was arrived at 18 years of Age, according to the
Golden Bull. Frederick VI. Elector Palatine, deceased the preceding year, had
given by his Will the Guardianship of his Children, and the Administration of
the Electorate to John Duke of Deux-Ponts. He was received at Heidelbergh in
this Quality, notwithstanding the Opposition of Philip Lewis Duke of Neuburgh,
who pretended to the Administration, as being the nearest Kinsman, as is
appointed in the Golden Bull of the Emperor Charles IV. The Counselors of the
Palatinate liked the Duke of Deux-Ponts best, because he was of the Established
Religion of their Country, whereas Neuburgh was of the Ausburgh Confession.
They grounded this Preference on the Examples of several Electors Palatine, who
appointed Guardians to their Children, and Administrators of the Electorate, to
the prejudice of their nearest Kinsmen. The Affair was remitted to the Emperor.
Till a full Decision of the Guardianship and Administration were adjudged with
a provision to the Duke of Deux-Ponts. The Electoral Diet of Nurembergh, did
not any more give a Defensive Judgment. It was concluded here, that the Duke of
Deux-Ponts, should keep the Place of Count Palatine, without prejudice to the
Duke of Newburgh's Title.

In the beginning of November, the Electors sent a Deputation to the Emperor,
The Electors Demands of the Emperor.
to represent to him the things which they thought proper to desire from him.
These were, that Justice should be Reestablished; That he should choose more
Faithful Counselors; That he should Summon a General Diet; That the Electors
having no design to choose a King of the Romans, without the consent of his
Imperial Majesty, or to remove the Empire from the House of Austria; Rodolphus
would Name his Successor. The Electors assured him at the same time, they did
not approve of the Attempts of his Brother Matthias. In the close, they
Admonished him that the ill Administration of the Empire proceeded from his
Majesty's not following the example of his Predecessors, who used to consult
with the Electors.

The Answer of the Emperor Rodolphus.
Rodolphus only gave a General Answer. I know, says he, the Empire does want a
King of the Romans. The Electors have spoke to me of choosing one, and I design
to Nominate one, who is fit to fill the Place. I should have done this sooner,
if the Troubles in Bohemia had not entirely taken me up. But before I declare
my self, I shall be glad to see a General Diet, and I will be present there.
The Electors should take care that I may speak freely there, what I think to be
for the good of the Empire. The Electors having received the Emperor's Answer,
broke up the 12th of November, after they had resolved to hold a Diet at
Francfort in the Month of April, the next year for the Election of a King of
the Romans.

Europe was then in Mourning for the Death of Margaret of Austria, The Death of
the Queen of Spain.
Wife to Philip the III. King of Spain. She left behind her four Sons and two
Daughters. Philip, Charles, Ferdinand, Alphonso and Ann, whom we shall soon see
Queen of France and Margaret. There was a Solemn Service for the Queen of Spain
in the Cathedral Church of Paris. The Princes of Conde, Conti, and the Duke of
Guise, performed the Honors, and the Archbishop of Ambrun spoke the Funeral
Oration.

The Death of the Duke and Duchess of Mayenne.
The House of Guise had not long before lamented the Death of the Duke of
Mayenne, the Famous Head of the Holy League in France. He died at Soissons the
beginning of October. The Duke of Aiguillon his Son Succeeded him, and took the
Name of the Duke of Mayenne. The Father had gained a mighty Reputation in War;
but his Remissness made him lose many fair opportunities of increasing it. His
Revolt against King Henry the III. was pardonable for the desire he had to
Revenge the Death of his two Brothers, if it were lawful, I will not say for a
Christian, but for any Man whatever, to kindle a Civil War to Revenge a private
Injury. His Opposition of Henry the IV. was not wholly the effect of his Zeal
for the Old Religion. The Duke of Mayenne was more moderate against this
Prince, after he left the Communion of the Reformed, than before. The ill
Humor which the Miscarrying of the League had put him into, made him take in
Despair, a Resolution to retire into Spain. But the Clemency, or rather the
Policy of Henry, stopped him. The King proposed very Advantageous Conditions to
him. The Duke had in some manner deferved well from him, though he strove to
exclude him from the Crown. Whilst the League was active, Mayenne always
opposed the design of Philip, to procure a Prince of his House to be chosen.
Farther, he kept the Duke of Guise his Nephew steady, who was dazzled with the
deceitful promises of the Spaniards. When they proposed to the Duke of Mayenne
to follow the Example of Hugh Capet, who reserved the Sovereignty for himself,
permitting the Governors of Provinces and considerable Towns, to make
themselves Dukes and Counts Vassals of the Crown. I would sooner die, replied
he generously, than make an Advantage of the Misfortunes of my Country.
Henrietta of Savoy his Wife died of Regret a few days after him, and both had
the same Funeral Solemnity at Soissons.

The Duchess of Lorrain, and the Cardinal de Gonzaga came to the Court of
France.
The Court was at Fontainblean, when they heard of the Death of the Duke and
Duchess of Mayenne. The Cardinal of Gonzaga, and the Duchess of Lorrain his
Sister, were come thither to pay a Visit to Mary de Medicis their Aunt. They
had great Honors done them, and were regaled with all the Diversions which the
place afforded. It is reported, the Duchess of Lorrain came to mention the
Match which the late King had proposed himself, of his Eldest Son with the
Princess of Lorrain. This was the best thing the Regent could do for the young
King's advantage. Siri Mem. recondite, To. II. p. 577, 578.
This Alliance would have brought him the Dutchies of Bar and Lorrain. But the
Imprudent Queen managed by the Pensioners of Spain, had contracted so strict an
Engagement with the Court of Madrid, that nothing could divert her from the
double Marriage which the Pope and Great Duke of Tuscany carried on with all
their Power. The Ambassador of Spain observing strictly all the steps of the
Duchess of Lorrain, talked in big Language. That the King of France could not
have two Wives, that his Match with the Infanta was concluded, and that Philip
would not suffer himself to be mocked, without punishing the Authors. If Mary
de Medicis had contemned the Threats of the Spaniards, what harm would have
ensued? All true Frenchmen, and especially the Protestants, exclaimed against
this double Match. England and the United Provinces, traversed it with great
Application. Aersens Ambassador from the States General, underhand excited the
Hugenot Party to oppose a Treary which must be prejudicial to all the
Protestants in Europe. The Discourses of the Spanish Ambassador, were only vain
Romances. His weak Master who was over-strained to support his House in
Germany, was he in a condition to awe France, who was in a good Union at that
time with its Neighbors. But the Regent neither understood her own, nor her
Sons true Interest.

The Count of Soissons discontented, contracts new Ties with the Prince of
Conde.
Her Ministers jealous that the Count of Soissons their Enemy, would unite
himself with the Marquess of Ancre, took care to push on their Mistress to
remove a Prince, who aimed to drive them from Court. The first occasion of
Discontent which the Regent gave him, was the refusal of a thing she had made
him hope for some Months before: The Duchy of Alenson was engaged to the Duke
of Wirtembergh. Soissons who had received Money from the Duke of Savoy, for the
Goods and Estate which the Countess his Wife had in Piemont, had a mind to
employ it in acquiring that Duchy, by reimbursing with his Money, what the
Crown owed to the Duke of Wirtembergh. In order to this, it was necessary first
to obtain the King's consent. Mem. de la Regence de Marie de Medicis.
Mary de Medicis prepossessed by her Ministers, refused this to the Count of
Soissons, Would you, says she roughly to him, obtain a Duchy which is designed
as Honor appropriated to a Son of France? I see you have no small Designs. The
Regent foresaw the Count moved at this Repulse, would discover his Resentment,
and for this Reason, she hastily recalled the Prince of Conde and the Duke of
Epernon to Court, to oppose him.

The Project of the Queen and the Ministers, did not succeed in every point.
The Marquess of Coeuvres a Confident of Soissons, seeing the poor Count thus
jarring with the Regent and Ministers, and secretly incensed against Conchini,
though he always kept in appearance fair with him, though he could have
recourse to nothing now to support him at Court, but to unite himself entirely
with the Prince of Conde his Nephew, and oppose all those who combined against
him, by the Power of that Interest, which their Birth gives to all Princes of
the Blood in France, especially in the time of Minority. Coeuvres then set
himself to treat with Beaumont, Son of the first Resident de Harlay, a
Confident of the Prince of Conde, who was then expected at Court, to settle a
good understanding between the Uncle and Nephew. They agreed the two Princes
should see one another in the Beaumont House, which was not far from
Fontainebleau.

This Interview gave the Queen a Jealousy, though it was pretended only to be
a Divertisement, and a Huntingmatch. The Count of Soissons thought to remove
the Umbrage Mary de Medicis took at this, by bringing the Marquess of Ancre
over to the Meeting. They go together to Beaumont. After a great deal of
Diversion in the Daytime, the two Princes entertained each other with
Discourse, till it was late in the Night. They bind themselves strictly, and
mutually promise not to receive any Favor or Satisfaction from the Queen, but
by common consent, and engage that if one be obliged to leave the Court for ill
Treatment, the other shall quit it at the same time, and not return but by
agreement. This Union was made perpetual, and lasted till the Death of Count
Soissons.

The faculty of Paris Censures the three Panegyricks of Ignatius Loyola.
The Sorbonne was divided as well as the Court: Duval declared for the Jesuits;
Filesac Theologue of the Church of Paris, and diverse other Eminent Doctors were
strangely averse to the Society. The good Fathers are very desirous to appear
perfectly prudent, but they are deficient in this point, when they set
themselves to Discourse of their Saint Ignatius, and the Advantages of their
Society. Paul the V. their good Friend, having Canonised this Man, (truly
extraordinary in more than one manner) and allowed them to celebrate his Feast,
the Jesuits did what the Monks do on like occasions: What shall I say, they
strove to surpass each other? They gave a thousand fine Spectacles of Devotion
in their Churches. The Men of Wit, who are Spectators of these Ceremonies,
cannot forbear Laughing at the Foppery of them. But those who have a real Sense
of Religion when they Reflect seriously on the Apotheoses, introduced into
Christianity, and the Profane Pageantry in Churches, where the Wor^hip ought
to be Pure and Spiritual. True Christians I say, can they forbear deplo^ing the
strange Corruption of the most Holy, and most August of all Religions? The most
profane part of all these So^emnities, are the Panegyricks spoke of ^he New
Saints. Here he is set above all others, above the Prophets and Apostles, and
often in parallel with Jesus Christ himself. The Jesuits did not fail to take
^uch Preachers, as were most disposed to ^alue Ignatius Loyola. And as the
Spani^rds are more Extravagant in their Super^^ition and Impiety than others,
several ^ermons were made and printed in that Country, with which the Enemies
of the ^ood Fathers in France, diverted the Pub^^ck at the Expense of the
Society.

A Limosin Jesuit thought he had done (...) considerable piece of Service, in
Transla^^ng three Spanish Sermons preached at evil, Valentia, and Barcelona, on
the ^east of the New Blessed Ignatius of ^oyola. The one of the Preachers was
^n Augustine the other two were Domini^ns. The good Limosin imagined that ^he
Frenchmen seeing his Patron praised by Religious Men of a different Order, ^ey
would easily believe the Institutor ^f their Society, was the greatest Saint
(...) Paradise. But whilst he thought to ^ork Miracles, he drew a new Storm ^n
his Brethren, who had work enough before to support themselves at Paris, and
elsewhere. Some Learned Men, and Eminent for their true Piety, as it was said,
brought to Filesac Theologue of Paris, and Curate of St. John in Greve, the
French Translation, and four Propositions extracted out of them, desiring to
know if the Faculty of Paris thought it fit, a Doctor of their Body should give
his Approbation to such Pieces.

Filesac proposed the Question in one of the Meetings, which the Faculty
ordinarily have upon the first Day of the Month This was in the beginning of
October; One of the Propositions was this, Tha^ Ignatius with his Name writ on
Paper, could do more Miracles than Moses, and a^^ many as the Apostles. The
second pretended, that the Life of Ignatius was so Holy, and so elevated in the
Opinion of Heaven, that only the Popes as St. Peter, the Empresses as the
Mother of God, or some S^vereign Monarch as God the Father, and (...) Holy Son,
had the Happiness to see (...) One of the two Dominican Preachers a^serted,
that the Founders of preceding O^ders were sent by God; but God, added he,
(...) these latter Days, has spoken by his Son I^natius, whom he has made Heir
of all thing There is one thing only wanting to consu^mate his Praise, That God
did not make (...) World for him. There was nothing be excepted against in the
third Sermon but that the Preachers had advanced, th^^ the Martyr Ignatius was
particularly ^^voted to the Holy Father, and the Pope Rome, as the lawful
Successor of Jesus Christ, and his Vicar upon Earth.

Andrew Duval a Famous Doctor of the Sorbonne, who was in the Interest of the
Jesuits and the Court of Rome, opposed the Censure of these four Propositions;
They may be piously Interpreted, said he. But the Enemies to the Society
prevailed. What Pious Interpretation could Duval give to words which were
manifestly Impious? The three first Propositions were condemned as False,
Heretical, Execrable, Impious, and full of Blasphemies. This Censure was more
Just and Judicious, than that of Du Plessis Mornay's Book. The Wise Masters of
the Sorbonne, were more Reserved and Circumspect on the fourth Proposition; the
Authority of the Pope was concerned here. This contains, said they, two
Contradictious Positions. The one is true and Orthodox, that the Pope is the
Vicar of Jesus Christ upon Earth. But the other, that the Pope is the Lawful
Successor of Jesus Christ, is manifestly False and Heretical. The Jesuit was
not long without answering. He wrote an Apologetick Letter against the Censure.
Here by a Subtilty which a Limosin would never have thought of, if he had not
been instructed somewhere else besides at Bricue la Gaillarde, he feigned not
to have a Copy of the Condemnation. This was to avoid speaking of the Power of
the Pope. His Friends, he pretended had sent him an Article quite different
from that which the Faculty had Censured. There is nothing more violent than
the conclusion of this good Father's Apology. He Reproaches the Doctors of the
Sorbonne, as those of their Society always Reproach their Adversaries, that
they are Huguenots in their Souls. The Sorbonne Curses the Jesuits, says he,
while the Heretics at Charenton, pray to God for the Sorbonists.

Reflections on the Miracles ascribed to Saint Ign^tius, and the Character
given of him.
An Author who was Contemporary with the Rise of the Society, honestly owns in
the first Edition of his Life of Ignatius, that he wrought no Miracles. He
labored to give good Reasons, that a Man might be a Saint without doing any.
The Establishing a Society which was become so Numerous, so Famous and
Powerful, in so small a time, seemed a great Miracle to the Author. But this
was not enough to Canonize Ignatius; and for this Reason, they were obliged to
seek for others. Till this was done, Rome would never put him in her
Martyrology. And what Mortification must this be to so good Children, that
their Father was not a Saint of the first Order. As soon as once they got it in
their Head, that Ignatius must work Miracles, as well as other Saints, they
found a Million of Glorious Ones. The Author who had been too honest, Retracted
fifteen years after, as handsomely as he could. His Saint then wrought some
every day, if we may believe the second Edition of his Book. As for the
flourishing Estate of the Company, before and after the Death of the Founder,
those who shall read the History of its Settlement and Progress, will find
nothing more than Human in it; if they reflect on the Nature of Mankind, and
what is proper to give Interest and Reputation in a Body Composed and Governed
as the Church of Rome has been for many Ages.

I am Astonished that Men of Sense and Learning, should become Disciples of
such a Person as Ignatius is Represented to be, in the different Histories of
his Life, wrote by Jesuits, with too much Sincerity in some places, and too
much Art and Disguise in others. But my Surprise is over, when I Reflect that
the greatest Men fall into Superstition and Trifling. They might fancy there
was something Divine in the Irregular and Fanatic Fancy of a Spaniard, who
imposed on the World by an Exterior show of Gravity and Mortification. When
they saw this, they were soon ready to serve him in his vast Designs. Ignatius
who was Master of as much Craft and Dissimulation as any Man in the World, knew
how to make his Advantage of the Light which the Admirers of his Sanctity gave
him, and make the World believe he drew that out of his own Stock, which he
learnt from others.

The Jesuits have pusht the Extravagance so far, as to compare their Saint with
the Caesar's and Alexanders. They came nearer the Mark in my mind, who said he
was an absolute Don Quixot in Devotion. The good Fathers must have an ill
Opinion of Mankind, if they believe them capable of esteeming their Founder,
after what they relate themselves of his Paladin and Romantic Actions, of his
Whimsical fancy of becoming a Knight of the Virgin, and an Infinity of other
Circumstances of his Life. Vie de S. Ignace par le P. Bohours.
The reading of it politely writ in French, fully convinced me that Melchior
Canus, a Learned and Judicious Bishop of the Canaries, saw perfectly well the
Genius of the Man, in a Conference he had with him at Rome. Ignatius there
without any necessity told him so many filly Stories of his pretended Sanctity,
of the Persecutions he had suffered in Spain, of the Revelations and Private
Favors he received from God Almighty, that this clearsighted Divine soon
perceived in him, a great Distraction and Pride of Mind.

Canus adds one very singular Passage. Ignatius brought him a pretended Saint,
who was a Member of the Infant Society. Canus soon discovered this Companion of
Ignatius, was an absolute Idiot. He mixed so much Folly and Heresy in his
Discourse, that Ignatius was in some Confusion. This good Man, says he to
Canus, is not an Heretic but his Mind is a little out of order at present. He
has his Intervals at times. The New Moon makes him talk so Heretically. A Man
who can let a Fool pass on him for a great Saint, can he be very wise himself?
Melchior Canus by the Jesuits own Confession, had so ill an Opinion of the
Institution of their Company, that he applied to them this Prophecy of St.
Paul. In the last days there shall be Men lovers of their own selves, Covetous,
Boasters, false Accusers, Blasphemers, Ungrateful, Wicked, Despisers of those
that are good, having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof. The
Character of this Prelate might be Rejected, as proceeding from a particular
prejudice against the Jesuits, if good Fathers had not given occasion to a
certain number of the most Eminent Men of the Roman Communion, to maintain that
Canus had Reason. The only Secret the Society has yet found to elude those
bloody Reproaches, which are often too well proved, is to recriminate, and set
up the cry of a Heretic against those Adversaries who are like to ruin them.

A Disturbance at Troies in Champagne, about the Settlement of the Jesuits in
that City.
The Inhabitants of Troies in Champagne, do not pass for the most refined People
in the World, and yet they have show a great deal of good Sense, in refusing to
receive the Jesuits into their City. When this has been proposed, the Townsmen
have ever answered, That Society can never do any thing but Mischief wherever
it comes, In this Matter they think, as all People formerly did in France,
Venice, Germany, Bohemia, Hungary and Poland. The Jesuits found it hard to gain
Admission in those Countries, and when they were better known, great endeavors
were used to drive them out. The good People of Troies learning Wisdom at the
expense of others, remained Inflexible in their Resolution, to continue without
any Jesuits among them. It is no small praise to that City, that in the Reign
of Lewis XIV. so great a Friend to that Society, they opposed an Intendant, and
a Bishop who engaged to establish the Jesuits where they had more than once
tried in vain to place themselves. The good Fathers have reason to compare
themselves to the Thunder of War, and the Conquerors of Antiquity. They cannot
suffer a little corner of the Earth, never so inconsiderable a Town, should
have the Courage to hold out against them.

In the preceding Reign, they made three several Attempts to enter Troies.
Henry granted them Letters of Jussion, as they are called, to the Inhabitants
to receive them. But the Town had the good Fortune or Industry, to frustrate
the Solicitations of the Jesuits. In the year 1611. they began the Charge
again. In an Assembly held at Troies for the Election of a New Principial of
the College, the Bishop, the President, and some of the old Faction of the
League, demanded to have the Jesuits let in. But the Chapter of the Cathedral,
that of the Collegiate Church of St. Stephen, the greatest Number of the
Clergy, the Presidial, the Officers of the Townhouse; in short, all who
declared for the late King in the time of the League, would have no Jesuits. It
was to no purpose, to say the Queen had ordered they should be admitted. In
case it be so, said they, we will obey. But we will first go and throw our
selves at her Majesty's Feet, and make our Humble Remonstrances to her.

The Bishop then seeing it was impossible to Surmount so great an Opposition,
broke up the Assembly, under color of making farther enquiry in a more
numerous one. This raised a great Commotion among a People jealous of their
Liberties and Privileges. The Jesuits Faction had privately dispatched away to
the Court, a Curate of the City, with a Verbal Process drawn up after their
manner. In this they laid before the Regent, that the Inhabitants desired the
Jesuits for the instructing their Youth. As soon as the opposite Party was
informed of what had passed, they drew up a Verbal Process to the contrary, and
a Counselor of the Presidial was sent away with it immediately to the Court.
The Curate, who was gone some days before, obtained a Letter from the Regent
for the holding an extraordinary Meeting. This they hoped would be more
favorable to the Jesuits. When the News was spread through the Town, that
Father Coton, who interessed himself in this Affair, had surprised the Queen,
it made a greater Noise than before. It was feared the People would rise.
Praslin Governor of Troies, applied himself with all diligence to prevent
Disorder, and all the considerable Bodies in the City met to disavow by an
Authentic Act, what the Friends of the Jesuits had done of their own Head.
Pithou Mayor of the City, the Dean of the Cathedral Church, and two or three
others, were named to go and lay their Complaints before the Regent. They set
forth the Reasons which they had to refuse the good Fathers a College among
them. Some of these were taken from the Situation, the Commerce and Convenience
of the City, which would not let them admit in the Jesuits. Others were
grounded on the Humor and Behavior of the Society, which did not suit with
the Temper of the Inhabitants.

These Honest Patriots said, without disguising the Matter, that the settling so
great a number of Jesuits in the best Cities of the Kingdom, might serve to
make the Society great, but was Injurious to the Public. Since our City, added
they, was reduced by Henry the IV. we have lived in perfect Tranquillity. The
Jesuits will come here to revive the old Quarrels of the League. We shall soon
have two contrary Factions; one influenced by the Society, who will be the Good
Catholics, and the other the true lovers of their Country. The first will ever
be crying, we are Heretics, Latitudinarians, Worldly minded Men, and Lukewarm
loose Catholics. Has not P. Binet had the Insolence to treat us in this
manner, in a Sermon which he preached at Troies? No sooner do the Jesuits get
footing any where, but they pretend strait to govern the World; they sow
Divisions, insinuate themselves into Families to discover their Secrets, what
passes between Man and Wife, cannot escape their Curiosity. The Queen being
better informed of the Affair of Troies, answered to the Petition of the
Inhabitants, whose Deputies were presented by the Duke of Nevers, Governor of
the Province, that she had been given to understand, the Town desired to have
Jesuits. Since it is not so, said her Majesty, I will not constrain the
Inhabitants to receive Men they do not like. She wrote to Praslin to Advise
him, and the President for the future to moderate their too Impetuous Zeal for
the Settlement of the good Fathers.

The Process of the University of Paris against the Jesuits, upon the opening
their College.
The first Project of their Institution, was conceived in the Bosom of the
University of Paris. But she has always regarded the Society, as a Monstrous
Abortion. When the Jesuits began to make themselves known in France, the
Faculty of Divinity of Paris declared Solemnly, after a mature Examination of
the Bulls, which two Popes had granted them, and the Rules which the Founder
prescribed his Disciples, that the New Institution was Dangerous to the Faith,
capable of disturbing the Peace of the Church, and in one Word, more tending to
destroy than edify. When the Jesuits desired to be incorporated in the
University, she rejected them with Indignation and Contempt. When they
attempted to teach publicly, she opposed them with Vigor. The Pasquiers and
Arnauds, undertook her Defense. The Learned Arguments are still extant, in
which they lay before the Parliament of Paris, the Reasons which the University
had to declare against this Hermaphrodite Body, said they, which is neither
Ecclesiastical nor Regular. The Attempt of John Chastel against the Person of
Henry IV. was the cause which moved the Parliament of Paris, (whose most Eminent
Members were bred in that University) to give a terrible Sentence against them,
commanding all Jesuits to remove out of Paris, and all other Cities within
three days, and out of the Kingdom in fifteen, branding them for Corrupters of
Youth, Disturbers of the Public Peace, and Enemies to the King and Government.
After, when Henry IV. at the Solicitation of the Pope, at the Instigation of
Sillery and Villeroy, and Instances of de la Varenne, the Infamous Minister of
his Pleasures, had granted them his Letters Patents for their Reestablishment,
the President de Harlay employed all the power of his Wit and Eloquence, to
persuade the King this Act of his was inconsistent with the Safety of his
Person, the Preservation of his Authority, and the Welfare of his Kingdom. But
neither the Decrees of Sorbonne, nor the excellent Discourses of two
Illustrious Advocates, nor the wise Remonstrances of the gravest Magistrate of
that time, could hinder the King from being worse advised, than the Mayor and
good Commonalty of Troies in Champagne. Henry resolved to forget the League,
was first conceived among the Jesuits; and that Barricre and Chastel who made
an Attempt on his Life, were instructed and pushed on by Varade and Guignard,
Jesuits. His Imprudence cost him dear, poor Prince! Ravillac profited by the
Doctrines and Lessons of the Writers and Doctors of the Society.

The World was not exceedingly Surprised to see them, within three Months after
the bloody Death of Henry IV, when all the Preachers of Paris were exclaiming
against the Jesuits, and an Infinity of Pamphlets had been published to expose
their Temper and Doctrines, have the boldness to desire a Permission from the
New King to open their College of Clermont, Mercure Francois, 1611.
which had been shut up ever since their first coming to Paris, and to make
their Public Lectures there. All Men were now pretty well acquainted with the
humor of that Body. A long experience had taught them, that they are not
confounded with Noise. That Just and Reasonable Confusion, which makes other
Men fearful and modest, increases the Courage and Boldness of these good
Fathers. That which most amazed all Honest Men, was to see the Regent and her
Council give the Jesuits Letters Patents to be confirmed in Parliament, at the
same time that these Magistrates all well affected to the King and Government's
Repose, declared peremptorily in their Decrees, that the Doctrines of Mariana,
and some other Writers of the Society, had plunged the Knife in the Heart of
the two last Kings of France. Father Coton was not less busy in the Hall, than
at Court. He demanded the entering the King's Letters with the same boldness
that he had Solicited the Regent and her Ministers for them. But the Rector
and the Faculties of the University of Paris opposing this, the Decision of the
Affair was remitted till the following year.

During a pretty long delay caused by the Proceedings and Formalities of Law,
the Jesuits got together four-score or a hundred Scholars, whom they taught in
the College of Clermont. At length the matter came to a public Hearing. This
was in the Month of December 1611. La Merteliere Advocate for the University
made a long Discourse, where he repeated with Emphasis, what Pasquier, Arnaud,
and the first President de Harlay had formerly said against the Jesuits. He
added, all they had been accused of having done in England, Holland, at Venice,
Genoa and elsewhere. The Divinity of these good Fathers was not forgot. He
showed the Corruption and Danger of it. In the last place, the University
concluded by the Mouth of her Advocate, that if the Parliament would not have
regard to her wholesome Remonstrances, she should at least have the Consolation
of having done her Duty, and having given more than once by her repeated
Oppositions, to the Enterprises of the Society, a certain Testimony of her
sincere and continual Affection for the Service of the King, and the Good of
her Coutry. Montholon Advocate for the Jesuits, answered in a very short
Discourse. He affected too to speak so low, that the greatest Part of the
Auditory, could not hear his Defense. After this, Hardivillier Rector of the
University, spoke a long Harangue in Latin. This was rather the Declamation of
a College Rhetorician, than a Solid and Eloquent Discourse. The Advocate
General Servin spoke according to Custom after the rest, and concluded in
favor of the University.

The Parliament being tired with the Importunities of the Jesuits, thought of a
good Expedient to free themselves. They proposed to them to subscribe to four
Articles, repugnant to the Doctrines imputed to them. You cannot be
incorporated with the University, nor have Permission to teach publicly, said
the Magistrate to the good Fathers, unless your Sentiments agree with those of
the Sorbonne. This Turn was well devised. They foresaw the Jesuits would never
sign such Propositions, for fear of incurring Displeasure at Rome, and their
Refusal would clear the Parliament at Court, for not passing the King's Letters.
Can we, the Magistrates might have said, allow a Body to teach publicly, which
refuses to subscribe the Doctrine commonly received in France? The first
President de Verdun, then ordered eight Jesuits to be called, who were in
Court, to hear the issue of their Cause. Will you, says he to them, Subscribe
these four Propositions, and undertake your General shall likewise do it? The
first was, That a General Council is above the Pope. The second, That the Pope
has no power over the Temporalties of Sovereigns, and that he cannot deprive
them by Excommunication. The third, That a Priest who by way of Confession,
comes to the Knowledge of a Design or Conspiracy against the Person of a King
or his Government, or any Act of High Treason, is obliged to Reveal the Matter
to the Magistrate. The fourth, That Churchmen are Subjects of the Temporal
Prince, and Civil Magistrate.

The Provincial of the Jesuits did not know how to extricate himself in this
difficulty. In our Statutes, says he with a Modest and Devout Air, taking a
Book and setting himself to read, We have a positive Order to obey the Laws of
the Country where we live; but we cannot promise any thing for our General. We
will write to him upon this Matter, and do all we can to obtain his consent.
The Advocate Montholon seeing what Confusion his Clients were in, had a greater
Presence of Mind, than the good Father Provincial. The Jesuits, says he, will
readily follow the Laws of the University. When these four Propositions shall
be Signed by the Sorbonne, the Jesuits will not make any scruple of subscribing
them. The dextrous Montholon knew there were so many Leaguers and Doctors in
the Pope's Interest amongst the Sorbonists, that they would never agree in
these four Propositions. And if the Faculty would have resolved to have Signed
them, the Court was so afraid of offending the Pope, they would not have
suffered them to do it. So much Respect and Deference had Mary de Medicis for
his Holiness.

The first President himself embarassed by the Advocates Reply, would seem not
to understand it; being well pleased that the Jesuits had not handsomely
explained themselves, on what was proposed to them. He pronounced a Decree,
forbidding any of that Society to teach the Youth at Paris, or read any public
Lecture there. The Members of the University Triumphed, made a thousand Verses,
some good, some bad, in praise of their Judges and their Advocate. The Jesuits
obeyed the Decree. They dismissed their Scholars, continued silent, and did not
write at all, or at least did it under the borrowed Names of their Friends.
Here they comforted themselves on their Disgrace, showed the Imprudence of
those who would renew Disputes out of Season, which might create Differences
between France and the Pope. Every Man discoursed of the Decree of Parliament,
as his Fancy led him. Some took part with the Jesuits, others with the
University. The Pope's Nuncio complained of the Parlements having required such
a Subscription of the Jesuits. The Cardinal Gonzaga was then at Paris. He was
offended the good Fathers had been so ill spoken of. Mercure Francois 1612.
Montholon whose Voice was so low in his short pleading to the Audience,
printed a more ample Argument the following year. This Discourse was divided
into three Parts. In the two first he justified the Conduct and Institution of
the Jesuits. The third answered the Objections made against the Doctrine of the
Society, and the Perverse Consequences which its Adversaries drew from it.

Disputes concerning Grace and Predestination.
The Zeal which the Jesuits showed the latter end of the last, and the beginning
of this Age, for the Doctrine opposite to that of St. Augustine and Thomas
Aquinas in the Matter of Grace and Predestination, drew still a greater number
of Enemies on them, the Advocate of the University Reproaching them with this
in his Plea. Not only the Order of Dominicans, which is more Potent in Italy
and Spain, than in France (where it is trampled on with the rest of the
Mendicants) had declared openly against the Jesuits. But a great Number of the
Doctors of Paris and Louvain, bigoted to the Hypotheses of St. Augustine and
Aquinas condemned too against the Society. They decreed it as Pelagian, At
least, said they, she attempts to revive the Sentiments of Cassian, and the old
Priests, who were called Semipelagians. The Dispute began in Spain, upon
occasion of a Book of Molina a famous Jesuit.

This Author boasted of having found out a new System to reconcile the
Certainty of God's Foreknowledge, and the Operation of Grace, with the Liberty
of Man. The Invention pleased the Society, and she adopted it. This was a
Deviation from the first Laws of the Founder, who ordered she should follow the
Doctrine of Thomas Aquinas. When the Jesuits reproached their Adversaries with
maintaining the Sentiments of Luther and Calvin, condemned in the Council of
Trent, they recriminated instantly: Your Hypothesis, said they to the good
Fathers, is the same with that of the ancient Enemies of St. Austin in Gaul.

The Dispute was so warm in Spain, that the Matter was remitted to Rome.
Clement VIII, resolved to determine this Controversy. It is reported, that he
not only made Preparations for this, by a serious Examen of all the Questions,
for which he settled a famons Congregation of Divines and Cardinals, but farther
had recourse to Prayer, Fasting, and extraordinary Mortifications. The Holy
Father believed that the Holy Ghost had inspired him to condemn the Sentiments
of the Jesuits. The Bull was ready. But to speak after the manner of the People
beyond the Mountains, God did not permit Clement to pass on the Church his
private Illusions for Divine Oracles. The Pope died very lu^kily for the
Jesuits. Paul V. pleased with the Zeal the good Fathers had shown for the
Interests of the Holy See, in the Difference between the Pontif and the
Republic of Venice, suppressed his Predecessors Bull. He imposed silence on
the Dominicans and Jesuits. Few, except these two Orders, had engaged publicly
in this first Dispute. The Universities of Doway and Louvain declared too
against the Jesuits; and their Doctrine of Grace was condemned there. After
this the Book of Jansenius, Bishop of Ipres, caused a long and famons Contest
in the Faculty of Paris, and all the Gallican Church.

At the same time that Paul V. endeavored to stifle in his Church the Disputes
concerning Grace and Predestination, the Protestants of Holland were divided on
the same Questions. Luther, and the first Reformers had at first embraced the
Hypothesis of St. Austin, either because they were prepossessed, or because it
seemed most proper, to combat the Dogms of the Roman Church, and settle those
of the Reformation. However Luther himself, or at least his first Disciples,
soon saw the Inconveniences and ill Consequences of the Augustinian System:
That of the Greek Fathers appeared both more Ancient and Reasonable. Melancthon
took to this; and his moderate Sentiments prevailed with those of the Ausburgh
Confession, Calvin, Zanchy, Beza, and the greatest number of the Reformed,
adhered strongly to the Opinions of St. Austin. Some strained them higher, and
used harder Expressions. The rigid Thomists did the same in the Roman Church.
Toward the beginning of this Age diverse of the Reformed Divines opened their
Eyes after the Example of the Lutherans. Upon examining the Scripture more
attentively, the Sense of St. Chrysostom and the ancient Greeks, appeared
preferrable to that of the Bishop of Hippo, who did not certainly very well
understand the Old or New Testament.

The Rise of Arianism in Holland.
As the Books of Erasmus, Melancthon and Bulllinger, were much esteemed in
Holland, where these Works had much conduced to give a Relish to the
Reformation, so the most knowing of the Magistrates and Laiety were inclined to
the mild and moderate Sentiments of these Divines on Predestination and Grace,
rather than the rigid Hypothesis of the first Reformers. They thought at least
they were very tolerable, and compatible with the Reformation which that
Province had embraced. But the greatest part of the Ministers on the contrary,
who had only studied Religion, Grotius Apolog. eorum qui Hollandiae praefue^unt.
in the Books of Calvin and Beza, stiffly maintained the Opinions of their
Masters. This occasioned a great difference in Religion between the Churchmen
and the Magistrates. The one and the other formed a different Idea of what they
called the Reformation, or, the Reformed Doctrine. The Ministers meant by these
Words, the Opinions in Divinity, explained by their great Authors, and inserted
into the Confessions of Faith, which the first Reformers had drawn up. These
Servants of God meant well: But they did not consider, that by aiming in their
Formularies of Faith and Catechisms to compile a complete and regular Body of
Divinity, they inserted their own Speculations as certain and essential Truths.
The Magistrates and wise Laity of Holland urged, that the Reformation being
only a purer Worship, and more free from vain Superstitions than the Church of
Rome, with a greater Latitude of Opinions in things not plainly revealed in the
Holy Writings, it could not be said the Reformation stood on what some Persons
thought the most crabbed and difficult Questions of School Divinity.

The Ministers, always warm for their Opinions and Prejudiced, often cried, the
Magistrates wanted Zeal for the true Doctrine: And these in their turn
complained, that the other were stubborn and inflexible, and would force all
the World to be of their Mind. When the Churchmen, fired with Zeal, brought
before the Magistrates those who opposed the Hypothesis of Calvin and Beza,
about Predestination and Grace, as Men who subverted the Foundations of the
Reformation, the more wise and discerning asked these new Inquisitors, if it
were impossible to be a true Reformed Christian without embracing the Opinions
of St. Austin and his Disciples. From the first Reformation in Holland, the
contrary Sentiments had always prevailed in the City of Tergow. The States of
Holland too had not solemnly approved the Confession of Faith received in the
Belgic Churches. Is not this a Proof, that those wife Magistrates thought
there were Articles put in this Formulary, which were not absolutely necessary,
which ought to be expressed in a more soft manner, and less offensive to those
of a different Persuasion from the first Reformers? This appears very probable,
since we read in History, that the States of Holland, in other respects very
averse to the Convocation of a General Synod of the Seven United Provinces,
consented in the Year 1597. to the holding such an Assembly, where the
Confession of the Faith should be exactly revised and amended in a Spirit of
Charity and Peace.

For my own part, when I consider the Disputes which have caused such a fatal
Division in Holland, I am in pain to comprehend how Men of Sense can be
persuaded that the Opinions of St. Austin concerning Predestination and Grace,
are essential to a Reformation of Christianity. How many Holy Men were there in
the Times of the greatest Purity of the Church of Rome, whose Thoughts were
differen^ from the Fathers? Cannot we renounce the monstrous and ridiculous
Dogm o^ Transubstantiation, the Religious Worship of Saints and Images, the
Fable o^ Purgatory, Indulgences, the false Traditions of the Church of Rome,
the Tyranny of the Pope, without believing absolute Predestination, and
irresistibl^ Grace? Did all those honest Men who convinced of the Absurdity and
Falsity o^ the Things which I mentioned, embrace^ the Reformation, think of the
Hypothes^ of the Bishop of Hippo? Were they anxious to know if it were true or
false (...) These abstract and difficult Questions only employed some Doctors,
who were projecting to make a complete System of Divinity: Among these who took
this pains there were some who preferred the moderate Sense of the ancient
Greek Fathers Calvin himself was not persuaded, tha^ his Thoughts of Grace and
Predestination were essential to Religion. He took the pains to translate the
Common Places o^ Melancthon into French; whose Thoughts of these Matters were
quite different from his own. In his preface, he gives all imaginable Praises
to Melancthon. Could he in Conscience have done this, if he had been persuaded
the Opinions of his Author undermined the Foundations of the Reformation? Able
Divines of the Reformed Churches have publicly maintained, that ^e Opinons of
Universal Grace, of the ^ower of resisting its Operation, and ^onditional
Predestination, are of the num^er of those Articles which every one may
^elieve, without renouncing the Principles ^f his Religion.

Several learned Hollanders had highly ^efended this Doctrine before Arminius
^ad preached it at Amsterdam; and taught (...) at Leyden, before Gomar rose up
against ^im. These Books are still extant. It is ^ue, certain warm Ministers
made a stir (...) blast those Works, and ruin their Au^ors. But the States of
Holland always ^op'd this impetuous Zeal. The Professors ^^d an entire Liberty
to teach according to ^e Sense of Melancthon. And when Ar^inius was called into
that University, ^one were ignorant of his Opinions: He ^ad declared them in
the Church of Am^erdam; which gave an advantageous ^estimony of them. Gomar
himself, and ^vers more of the same Mind with him, ^tring into a Conference
with Arminius, ^ade no Scruple to say, their Differences ^^d not concern the
Grounds of Reforma^^on. It is true, Gomar did not long live (...) a good
Understanding with Arminius his ^ew Colleague; either because his Reputa^^on
gave him Umbrage, or the Enemies ^f Arminius kindled his Choler by some
^sinuation, and then he vigorously oppo^d a Man whom he looked on as Ortho^x
but a little before.

The two Professors had soon their Disciples and Party. The Division was so
great in the University of Leyden, that the Affair was brought before the Synod
held at Rotterdam. Gomar's Party was the strongest there. The Assembly ordered,
that all the Pastors should subscribe the Confession of Faith and the
Catechism. Arminius and his Party refused to obey. There are some things to be
amended in both of them, said they: They ought to be considered in a National
Synod. We hope to see one meet in a little time. The manner in which Questions
should be treated and determined in this Synod, caused new Difficulties. One
side required certain Conditions; others rejected all. In the meantime the
ordinary Synods pressed Arminius and his Party, to declare publicly what
Exceptions they had against the Confession o^ Faith, and the Catechism, in
order to have the Matter duly determined. Arminius, persuaded his greatest
Enemie^ would be Judges in such an Assembly, declined the Jurisdiction of a
Synod as much as possibly he could. Vtenbogard, a Minister of great Reputation
in the Hague, his Friend, and of the same Opinion with himself, did him
considerable Service, with several of the chief Persons of the Government.
Never did Synod in its first Steps, and perhaps through the whole Course of it
more follow the Council of Trent, than the Synod of Dort; except that there
were more able Divines at Dort than at Trent. This is not in any manner
surprising, almost all Councils are alike. The same Interests give occasion to
them, and the same Passions reign in them.

Arminius presented a Petition to the States of Holland and Westfriezland. In
this he desires, that the Council of the Province might take Cognizance of his
Affair. His Adversaries on the contrary asserted, that a Dispute, which was
purely Theological, ought to be decided in an Assembly of Churchmen. Arminius
carried it. Gomar and he were heard by the Magistrates. These Gentlemen made
their Report to the States, That the Contest of the two Parties was only about
certain subtle Me^aphysical Questions concerning Grace and Predestination; and
that both Parties would do better to leave their Disputes and Animosity, and
support themselves mutually with Charity. Gomar was not of this Mind. How!
Preface before the Acts of the Synod of Dort.
The Dispute is of the last importance, cried he. I would not appear before the
Supreme Tribunal of God with the Sentiments of Arminius. If the States do not
find a speedy Remedy to the Evil which so pernicious a Doctrine is like to
cause, we shall soon see Altar against Altar, Town against Town, Province
against Province: All will be in Disorder and Confusion. The States of Holland
and Westfriezland, always composed of wise and discerning Men, are not so
easily carried away with the Passions of Divines. To give their hot heads times
to cool, they deferred as long as they could the holding of the ordinary Synod.
And when they were obliged to permit it to meet, they ordered no one should
speak there of the Controversies between the Arminians and the Gomarists.

In the mean time Arminius and his Party found themselves always pressed by their
warm zealous Enemies, to communicate to the other Ministers their Remarks on
the Confession of Faith and Catechism. They threatened to proceed against them
by way of Church-Censure, if they persisted to refuse. The States of Holland,
who desired to stifle this Difference if possible* saw well, that if Arminius
published his Reasons, this would only serve to make the Dispute hotter. The
Gomaris^ would have refuted them; the Arminians would have replied; the Synod^
would have Matter to make their Determinations on. For this Reason, the State^
ordered wisely the Arminian Ministe^ should send to them their Remarks in
Writing, and sealed, to be kept till the first extraordinary Synod should meet
to examine the Controversy. All this did no^ content the Gomarists: Nothing
would serve but he must explain himself. And now he desires again to be heard
in a Meeting of the States of Holland; being persuaded these Gentlement would
have more Equity and Moderation than prejudiced and passionate Ministers. Gomar
and he appeared. Arminius delivered his Thoughts on the Principal Articles of
Religion, and particularly on Predestination, Grace, the Liberty of Man's Will,
the certainty of Salvation, and the Perseverance of the Regenerate. He did not
forget at the same time, to show his Adversaries Sentiments were repugnant to
the Justice and Goodness of God That his System deprives Man of that Liberty
which God has given him; that it conduces to throw Sinners into Despair, to
harden 'em in Impenitence, to extinguish the Love and Ardour of Prayer in
Believers, and makes the Preaching of the Gospel, and the Remonstrances of
their Pastors useless in a Word that it Subverts all Morality and Religion.
Arminius said nothing new in all this. Several Persons and Learned Men in Gaul,
made the same Objections against the New Doctrine which S. Austin introduced in
the West.

Gomar spoke next. Convinced that the solid Proofs of Arminius, ought to make a
great Impression in the Minds of the States; he thought to elude the Force of
them by Reproaches, which signified nothing at bottom. Is it not a deplorable
Thing, said he, that a Professor of our University should inspire into his
Disciples, the Opinions of the Jesuits, and weaken the Proofs which our first
Reformers brought, to ruin the Reformation by strengthening the Arguments of the
Papists against us. These Declamations are only proper to move an ignorant
Populace: Can the Jesuits speak no Truth? Calvin, Beza, and the rest, are they
Infallible? Has the Reformation no solid Foundations, but the Speculative
Questions of Grace and Predestination? The States did not give any great
Attention to Gomar's Discourse. His Party persuaded they should have more
Advantage in an Assembly of Ministers, persisted to demand, that this Dispute
should be decided in a Synod. But the States had just reason to fear the Issue.
The Experience of several Ages teaches us, that Councils rather increase, than
end Divisions.

The way of Conference appeared less dangerous to the States. The two
Professors of Leyden, had order to come to the Hague. This happened in 1610.
Arminius took four Ministers with him, and Gomar as many. There in Presence of
the States of Holland, Arminius began to reduce the Controversy to five
Principal Points, which were after the five Famous Articles of the Arminians,
concerning Predestination, the Death of Jesus Christ for all Men, the necessity
of Grace, its Operation on us, and Perseverance. It was not Surprising at the
end of this Conference, to see what ever happens on the like occasions. The
Heat was greater than before. Arminius fell ill, and died in a few days after.
His Friends and Disciples maintained what he had advanced. They boldly preached
their Thoughts, and refuted the Gomarists with great Vigor and Courage.
Afterward they United themselves more strictly, and then they concerted a
Remonstrance, to present in a Body to the States of Holland; they laid down
their Sentiments, and the Gomarists on the five Articles. After this, they most
Humbly begged the Protection of the States, against all Sentences with which
the Synods would blast the Persons and Doctrines of the Arminians. Since this
Remonstrance, they had the Name of Remonstrants given them.

Vorstius is chosen to succeed Arminius.
In the mean time it was necessary to Elect a Successor to Arminius, in the
Divinity Chair at Leyden. Vorstius Professor and Minister at Steinfurt, was
chosen by the Interest of the Remonstrants. This did them a great deal of
Mischief. Vorstius was suspected of Socinianism, and not without some Ground.
He had published a Book, in which he speaks of the Divine Nature in a very
Absurd and Gross manner. From that time the Gomarists charged their Adversaries
with secretly favoring the Impious Doctrines of Socinus. Their Complaints did
not appear ill grounded to a great many Persons. They procured such
Disadvantagious Accounts of Vorstius, that he was not permitted to enter upon
the Functions of his Employment, though he was called to it in a Legal manner,
and brought good Certificates with him. In the year 1611. there was a more
famous Conference at the Hague than before, in the Presence of the States of
Holland. These Gentlemen had a mind to pacify the Troubles, without lying
under a necessity of calling an Extraordinary Synod. But Divines are not so
easily stopped, when their Heads are once hot. There were six Gomarist Ministers
on one side, and six Remonstrants on the other. The Learned Episcopius was one
of these. He has wondrously well defended the Cause of his Party, but has done
it a great Injury too. Though he does not think as Socinus does of the Trinity,
the Incarnation, the Nature and Operations of God; yet he maintains that the
Socinian Doctrine is tolerable, and not contrary to the Fundamental Articles of
Christianity. The Arminians of Holland embraced the same Sentiment, which makes
it to be believed, that Arminianism and Socinianism are near a kin. Yet these
two things are very different. It is common in the Church of England, to find
Learned Divines who think in the same manner as Arminius did on the five
Articles, and yet vigorously Defend the Decisions of the four first General
Councils.

James King of England, opposes the Election of Vorstius.
I will not speak of this Conference at the Hague. This was as Fruitless as the
preceding ones. Vorstius appeared here. He made a Harangue to the States, to
justify himself, against the Errors imputed to him. These Gentlemen were well
satisfied. They demanded next of the Ministers of both Parties, if they had any
thing to say against Vorstius. The Remonstrants declared, they thought him
Orthodox. But the others alleged so much against him, and intervened with so
great Opposition, that he continued still without doing any thing, though the
States were well affected to him. Mercure Francois 1611.
The Opposition of James I. King of Great Britain, made the greatest Noise in
Europe. Vorstius's Books were brought to the King, when he was taking the
Diversion of Hunting in the Country. King James run over these in less than an
Hours time. He saw such Shoals of Heresies with one cast of his Eye, he
immediately sent an Extract to his Ambassador to the States General, with an
express Order to declare to them from him, that if they suffered such a
dangerous Man at Leyden, his Majesty would publish a Manifesto to show the
World his Aversion against the Authors of these Heresies, and those who allow
them to be taught in their Universities.

The Ambassador punctually executed his Master's Orders. The States General
were a little surprised, to see the King concern himself in an Affair that was
purely Domestic. The Zeal which a King shows for the preserving the Purity of
the Faith, is not to be blamed. He does well to extend it beyond his Kingdom.
But however there are Measures to be kept toward his Allies and Neighbors.
His Britannick Majesty's Threat was very high and brisk. The States General
gave their Answer some days after to the Ambassador. If Vorstius, said they,
with great Discretion and Respect, be guilty of the Errors he is accused of, we
will not suffer him to teach in Holland. The High Esteem we have of the King of
Great Britain's Goodness and Wisdom, gives us grounds to hope, that his Majesty
will be satisfied with our Conduct, when he shall be better informed of this
Matter, and the Vprightness of our Intentions. In the mean time, James burnt
the Books of Vorstius at London, Oxford and Cambridge. The Reply of the
States General, did not satisfy him. He wrote a long Letter, exhorting them to
Banish Vorstius out of their Provinces. Arminius was treated in this, as an
Enemy of God; and for Vorstius, his Majesty looked upon him as a downright
Atheist. He concluded his Letter with threatening the States, to separate from
the Communion of their Churches, if they suffered so abominable a Man as
Vorstius amongst them.

He was at Leyden before this Letter of King James came. The English Ambassador
made a long Remonstrance, when he delivered it to the States General. He gave
them the Propositions which his Majesty had extracted out of Vorstius's Books,
and exhorted them to show no less Zeal and Courage, to preserve the Purity of
the Faith against so pernicious an Heretic, than they had done in the Defense
of their Liberty against the Spaniards. The States General did not know what to
think of the Letter, nor the Harangue. They answered the Ambassador, that the
Matter in Question only regarded the particular States of Holland, who were
Sovereigns in their own Province. That Vorstius was only at Leyden as a simple
Inhabitant in the Town, and waited till he should justify himself in the next
Meeting of the States of Holland. For the rest, said they, we humbly thank his
Majesty for his Concern for the good of these Provinces, and the preserving the
Purity of the Gospel in our Churches.

The States of Holland were not to meet till three or four Months after. This
made the English Ambassador look upon this Delay as a Civil Denial. And now
there was a New Remonstrance from the King his Master to the States General.
This bad a Text after the manner of Sermons. The Ambassador began with that
place of the Gospel, which orders Brotherly Correction, and will have those
brought before the Church, who will not hearken to it. He complained of their
want of Respect to the King, in receiving Vorstius not only in their Country,
but in a Famous University. The States General were threatened a second time
with a Manifesto from his Britannick Majesty. These Gentlemen kept their Phlegm:
They answered, the King should have Satisfaction in the next Meeting of the
States of Holland. This was to be in the Month of February, the following year.

In the mean time the King of England saw his Zeal against Vorstius was not so
favorably Interpreted, The King of England's Apology for his Conduct in the
Business of Vorstius.
as he hoped for. Ill-natured Wits Censured him for making Ostentation of his
Learning and Divinity. Others imputed this to his Ambition, and thought it an
Usurpation on the Liberty of the Provinces for him to concern himself in
Matters which Sovereigns are not obliged to give their Neighbors an Account
of. The King of Sweden this year, sent a Challenge to the King of Denmark, to
fight a Duel with him. A thing not seen since Francis the I, and Charles V.
James I. like another sort of Fighting better. To justify himself from the
Sinister Interpretations, put on his Conduct, he took his Pen in Hand, and
printed his Apology. In this the King gave an account to the Public, of what
had passed between the States General and him. His Majesty farther protested,
he had no other design than to oppose the Rise of a Heresy, to give the
States General a new Mark of his Kindness, and to hinder the young Hollanders
and the English themselves, who should go to Study at Leyden, from being
infected with the Pernicious Opinions, Vorstius should spread there. The King's
Apology had the same Fate with all Personal Quarrels. Every one believed as he
pleased.

The Revolution in Sweden after the Death of Gustavus Ericson.
Let us conclude this year with the Death of Charles the IX. King of Sweden, and
speak something of his Elevation to the Throne. He was the youngest Son of
Gustavus Ericson, so Famous in History, for having delivered his Country from
the Oppression of the Danes, for having by his Great Services, Merited the
Crown to be Entailed on his Heirs Male; in short, for settling Luther's
Reformation in his Country, and Abridging the too great Power of the Clergy.
Eric the Eldest Son of Gustavus, Succeeded him, but wanted the Virtues of his
Father. He introduced into Sweden the Dignities of Count and Baron, which
before were unknown there. It was thought this was done to divide the Nobility
among themselves. The too great Union of this Powerful Body, was able to create
Trouble to a Family newly raised to the Throne. The Dignities bestowed on some,
gave a Jealousy to the rest. Those who had most Ambition, made their Court to
the King, to obtain the same Distinction. And the New Nobility were obliged to
support the Authority of the King, and adhere here to his Family to preserve
their Privileges. Eric made himself Odious by his Cruelties, and Despicable by
his Debauches and Extravagancies. His ill Treatment of John Duke of Finland,
and Charles Duke of Sudermannia, obliged them to rise and put themselves at the
Head of the Malecoutents. These two Princes Attacked Eric in Stockholm it self.
He first delivered up his Favorite, whom all the Kingdom Exclaimed against.
They inflicted an Infamous punishment on him.

John and Charles would have something more than all this. They agreed to take
the Sovereign Power from Eric, who abused it unjustly, and that the Duke of
Finland should be declared King, and the Duke of Sudermannia should share with
him in the Government, without having any outward Marks of Royalty. John
thought himself now discharged from the Oath he had taken, when Eric delivered
him out of a close Prison, where he had kept him three or four years. The Duke
had given Assurance by a Writing under his Hand, that he would continue
faithful to the King, and not aspire to the Crown, neither before nor after the
Death of the King his Elder Brother, and that he would acknowledge those
Children for lawful Heirs of the Kingdom, which Eric had by a Mistress of Mean
Birth, whom he afterward Married Solemnly. But John was not very anxious about
the Religious observing his Promises. When he was Master of his Eldest Brother,
not contented with shutting him up in a Castle, he soon poisoned him. John and
Charles continued to attack Stockholm. The Senate of the City delivered it up
to them, and poor Eric reduced to Extremity, was left to the Discretion of his
two Brothers. The States of Sweden declared him fallen from the Crown, and John
Duke of Finland was set up in his place.

John King of Sweden endeavors to alter the Religion Established by his Father.
The New King of Sweden was not truer to the Duke of Sudermannia, than he had
been to his Predecessor. Charles had no share in the Administration of the
Kingdom. Men promise any thing when they are to ascend a Throne; but when they
are once Established in it, they find other Principles of Religion and Honor.
John had Married Catherine Jagellon Daughter to the King of Poland. Whether the
Princess had inspired her Husband with an Aversion to the Protestant Religion,
or the Reading the Books and Conversation of able Men of the Papal Communion,
had raised doubts in him, or he hoped to be King of Poland, after the Death of
Sigismund Augustus, his Brother-in-Law, who had no Children; as soon as John
had made a Peace with Denmark by the Treaty of Stetin in Pomerania, he applied
himself seriously to change the Religion which his Father had settled in Sweden.
It is not a place here to relate all the Artifices he made use of, to prepare
the Minds of his People for the Alterations he designed. I shall only observe,
that the King who wanted not Wit or Judgment, was convinced there were a great
many things to be altered in the Worship and Doctrine of the Church of Rome. He
can neither be reckoned among the good Catholics, nor the true Protestants.
Ever uncertain and wavering, sometimes he relished the Project of
Accommodation, which Cassander had given to the Emperor Maximilian II. at other
times he was inclined to the Greek Church. The Answers of Jeremiah Patriarch of
Constantinople to the Divines of Wirtembergh, pleased him so much, that he once
thought to unite with that Communion.

Possevin a Learned Jesuit, whom Pope Gregory the XIII had sent into Sweden,
thought he had persuaded King John to Reunite himself in earnest to the Church
of Rome. He confessed himself to that Jesuit, the Popes private Nuncio; he
received the Communion in the Form used in that Church. Possevin imposed as a
Penance on him for the Murder of his Brother Eric, whom he had poisoned, to
fast every Wednesday throughout the year. It is said, John observed this
Practice regularly all the rest of his Life. Nevertheless he frequented the
public Service of the Church of Sweden. There was a New Liturgy used which
himself had introduced, and the Pope refused to approve of. The Mixture of
these two Religions, was one of the ways by which this Prince pretended
insensibly to bring the People to forsake the Worship and Belief of the
Protestants of the Ausburgh Confession.

Several Romish Churchmen came into Sweden. The Irresolution of King John and
his Indulgence drew them thither. Several of his own Subjects too favored his
dissembled Designs. By their manner of Discourse, the more unthinking People
took these Preachers for free Protestants. But others observed, in spite of
their Disguises, all they spoke tended to insinuate into the Minds of the
People the Doctrines of Popery. The Archbishop of Vpsal suffered himself to be
won by them. Some Prelates, and diverse ignorant or ambitious Churchmen followed
his Example. There were some Bishops ordained according to the Roman
Pontifical. The Bishop of Linkoping, several of his Brethren, and a great
number of Churchmen, courageously defended the Reformation settled by Gustavus
Ericson. The Clergy of the Duchy of Sudermannia showed a firmness of Mind,
which much confounded King John. Charles, his Brother, declared highly for the
Ausburgh Confession. He opposed this Alteration with all his Might. Neither the
King nor I can make any Innovation in the Religion established by Law; he
replied to those sent to dispose him to comply. All things are well regulated
by the last Will and Testament of the late King our Father. We must fix there.
For my part I am resolved never to depart from it.

The States of Sweden showed great Vigor on several Occasions. They
represented to the King, that mighty Jealousies were risen in Sweden and
Foreign Countries; that his Majesty would overthrow that Constitution which his
Father had wisely established; and that to put an end to all those Rumors, it
concerned him to declare publicly, that the Reformation received in that
Kingdom, was conformable to the Sense of the Primitive Church. Farther, the
States commanded several Popish Books brought into that Country, to be
suppressed; they pressed the King to place able Men of unblemished Reputation
in the Public Schools to instruct the Youth. In the last place they desired,
that Sigismund, the King's eldest Son should be bred in the Protestant
Religion, because that young Prince began to give some Umbrage. Queen Catherine
Jagellon, his Mother, had so strongly tinctured him with the Principles of the
Church of Rome, that the Senators, of the Kingdom having one day threatened him
that he should lose the Right of Succession to the Crown if he did not soon
renounce the Religion he had imbibed, and embrace the Ausburgh Confession. I
prefer, replied he boldly, the Kingdom of Heaven to all the Crowns in the
World. No other Answer could be got from him.

On some Occasions the States of Sweden had more Complaisance for the King. All
seemed disposed to receive the new Liturgy, and the Accommodations he had
invented. Charles of Sudermannia, the Clergy of his Provinces, and some great
Lords, were the only People who defended the Reformation; but the Interest of
the Duke, and the effectual Remonstrances of the rest, brought back several,
whose Hopes and Fears had abated their Warmth and Zeal. The King himself had
lost much of that Ardor the Jesuit Possevin had inspired into him. Whether he
could not accommodate himself to the haughty Humor of Sixtus V. Successor to
Gregory XIII, or his Doubts were not sufficiently cleared, or the great Power
of his Brother kept him in awe; John humbled the Catholics, who thought
themselves now Masters of all things. He drove out the Jesuits, and demolished
their College. Gennila Bielke, whom the King married after the Death of
Catherine Jagellon, cooled the Fervor her Husband had before showed for the
Roman Religion. Kings often think they do that of their own Heads, which a
dextrous and insinuating Woman inspires into them. John King of Sweden, thought
he had solid Reasons to doubt of the Truth of the Protestant Religion. But his
principal Motive, though he scarce knew it himself, was, his great Complaisance
for Catherine Jagellon. The Queen Gennila might have brought him back to his
first Religion, in the same manner as the other had seduced him from it.

Sigismond Prince of Sweden is chosen King of Poland,
After the Death of Stephen Battori King of Poland, Ann Jagellon his Widow, and
Aunt of Sigismond Prince of Sweden managed the Polish Nobility so well, that
the greatest part declared for him. The contrary Faction chose the Archduke
Maximilian, Brother to the Emperor Rodolphus. But Sigismond's Friends carried
it. He was received in Poland, beat the Archduke; and Maximilian being taken
Prisoner, redeemed his Liberty, by renouncing all his Pretensions to the Crown
of Poland. The Swedes made their Conditions before the Prince left that
Kingdom; as the Poles made theirs before they received him. The Principal thing
which the Senate of Sweden stipulated with Sigismond was, the preserving the
Privileges and Religion of their Country. They added this Clause in the
Treaty, that if the King of Poland, becoming King of Sweden after the Death of
his Father, should contravene any of the Articles agreed on, that then the
Swedes should be discharged from the Oath of Allegiance they had taken.

It is very probable that Sigismond before his departure from Sweden, urged the
King his Father to pursue his Design of causing his new Liturgy to be received,
together with the ancient Ceremonies which he had established a little after
his coming to the Crown. When Princes have begun a Work that makes a great
Figure, they are loath to quit it, and soon resume it, when they see the least
Prospect of Success. Sigismond hoped his late Advancement would make it easy
for him to accomplish the Work which his Father had drawn a rough Draught of:
And the King of Sweden, strengthened by the new Alliance of Poland, flattered
himself, that Charles of Sudermannia would not dare to oppose him. He was
deceived in his Conjectures. The Churchmen of the Duchy agreeing perfectly
well with the Prince, refused to receive his Liturgy. This disturbed the King
so much, who was now at greater variance with his Brother than ever, that he
thought of recalling Sigismond in earnest. The new King himself was tempted to
return into his Country. He would willingly have done it, if the Poles had not
briskly opposed it. A Foreign Prince is easily dazzled with the glittering Title
of King of Poland: But he soon takes distaste at the false Luster of a Crown
which only appears fair at a distance. Those who have left their Hereditary
Countries to go into Poland, have repented. This is the way to hazard the loss
of an Effective Sovereignty for a Title which has more Pomp than Reality.
Sigismond knew by Experience the Truth of this Maxim.

The King, his Father, finding so great opposition from the Swedes, who were
more upon their Guard since the Election of Sigismond, had nothing else to have
Recourse to, but to reconcile himself speedily to the Duke of Sudermannia, and
admit him to a Share in the Administration of Affairs. The Apprehensions of
John were something lessened by Charles's losing his Wife. She left no Issue
behind her; and John pretended his Brother promised him never to think of a
second Marriage. If it were so, the Duke in his turn broke his Word. He soon
after married Christina, Daughter of Adolphus, Duke of Holstein. It is
reported, Sigismond courted this Lady before he went into Poland. But a Sister
of King John diverted the Prince her Nephew from the Match. He after married
Constance of Austria, Daughter of Charles, and Sister of Ferdinand Archduke of
Gratz in Stiria. Christina, enraged at this Contempt, conceived so great a
Hatred against Sigismond, that after she was married to Charles of
Sudermmannia, she incessantly urged him to force the Crown of Sweden from
Sigismond. King John was not well satisfied with this second Marriage of
Charles. But his ill Humor did not last long. He died soon after at Stockholm.

The Duke of Sudermannia was active as soon as he heard this News. He set at
liberty the Senators and Clergymen, Sigismond King of Poland succeeds in the
Kingdom of Sweden.
whom the late King had confined for opposing his Designs. Sigismond very much
distrusted his Uncle. To prevent his enterprizing any thing to his Prejudice,
the new King writes, that he was making all Preparations to come speedily into
his Hereditary Countries. In the mean time the Duke of Sudermannia takes the
Administration as next of Kin to the King. Puffendorf. Introduction a Histoire,
Tom. IV. p. 11. Rhap. 1. and 2.
John left another Son by his second Wife; but he was yet a Minor. The
Senators, without prejudice to their Oath taken to Sigismond, promised to obey
Charles in every thing he should order, with their Consent, for the Glory of
God, the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the maintaining the just
Rights and Privileges of the Nation. The Duke promised of his Part, not to
transact any thing of weight without the Advice and Consent of the Senate. A
Council is thereupon assembled at Vpsal, to regulate Matters of Religion. They
abolished the Liturgy and Ceremonies, introduced by the late King, and
reassumed those of the Protestants of the Ausburgh Confession: They elected an
Archbishop, who was well affected, and deprived those of the Clergy who had
devoted themselves to serve the late King in his Innovations. The Swedes and
the Goths only assisted a^ this Assembly: The other Provinces we^^ afraid of
displeasing King Sigismond, i^ they engaged without his Consent. The Decrees of
the Council were confirmed by the Duke of Sudermannia, by the Senate, the
Clergy, the Nobility, the Ministers of State, and the Burgo-Master^ who were
present. Those who were no^ there subscribed after.

Sigismond, and his Uncle Charles, observed each other. The Nephew's Distrust
was increased by Charles his demanding, that before he left Sweden, his Majesty
would give him a Promise under his Hand, that he would confirm the Liberties
and Privileges of the States of the Kingdom, and suffer them to enjoy the same
Freedom of Religion they had done under the Reign of Gustavus Ericson, and in
the beginning of the late King's. The Duke of Sudermannia farther represented
to the King, that the ill Condition of his Country would not admit him to carry
much People away with him. These Instructions and Demands increased Sigismond's
Jealousy. He thought his Uncle plainly discovered he had vast Designs.
Sigismond was resolved not to heed the Duke's Remonstrances. And now Charles
had greater Hopes than ever to embarass the new King, when he saw the Poles
gave Sigismond leave to go into his Hereditary Country, under Condition to keep
his ancient Oath, not to abandon Poland, as Henry III. King of France, had
done; and that his Majesty should return when he ^ad settled his Affairs in
Sweden, and have ^is usual Residence amongst them.

The Swedes were disatisfied the new King had plainly declared the Decrees ^ade
at Vpsal in his Absence, and without ^is Consent, to be null. However they
re^eived him with great Marks of Joy and Affection. Duke Charles withdrew,
^^fter he had made his Compliments to his Majesty. He thought it proper to
leave ^im alone with the Council of his King^om. The Pope's Nuncio, who was
with ^igismond, much disquieted the Swedes. ^t was visible the new King
hearkened to ^he Councils of the Court of Rome. He ^roke the Regulations made
at Vpsal, and commanded another Archbishop to be chosen. He who was raised to
that Dig^ity, was in his Opinion, an Enemy to the late King. Afterward he
demanded a Church in every great Town, for the Roman Catholics. The States of
the Kingdom and the Clergy, vigorously opposed his Enterprise, being assured of
the Protection of the Duke of Sudermannia. The time of the Coronation
approaching, the Senators demanded in the Name of the States of Sweden, that
the King should first promise under his Handwriting, not to hinder the
Exercise of the Protestant Religion. Sigismond replied only in general Terms,
that he would give his Subjects satisfaction after his Coronation. All these
Difficulties retarded the Ceremony.

The Quarrel between King Sigismond and Charles Duke of Sudermannia.
Men cover Liberty and Independence, only for themselves. Very far from
procuring it for others, they strive by all ways possible, to enslave the rest
of the World. The Polish Nobility so Jealous of their Privileges and Liberty,
but accustomed to keep other People in Slavery, incessantly cried to their King
Sigismond, that an Hereditary State is Governed otherwise than an Elective
Kingdom. That in Poland he was subject to the Laws, but in Sweden he was above
them. These Maxims easily insinuate themselves into the Mind of a Prince.
Sigismond displeased to see himself dependant on the Senate of Poland, was
better satisfied with being Absolute in Sweden. He Rejected the Petitions
presented to him. The Duke of Sudermannia stood Neuter in the beginning of the
Dispute. He advised the King to have regard to the just Requests of his
Subjects, but he was not very uneasy to find a Difference arise between them
by his Denials and Delays. The States secure of Charles Assistance, abated
nothing of their Pretensions. The stubbornness of the King strangely incensed
them, and the Sermons of some zealous Preachers of the Protestant Religion,
warmed the most cold and indifferent. They talked of offering ^he Crown to the
Duke, and giving it to Prince John, in case he would not accept ^t. Being
persuaded it was not yet time ^o hear a Proposition of this kind, he con^ented
himself with going to wait upon ^he King at Vpsal, and strongly backing ^he
Pretensions of the States. The Ne^hew and the Uncle so heated each other; ^hey
were upon the point of Fighting. They were parted, and as soon reconciled, ^o
prevent any Confusion and Disorder in ^he Kingdom. These Accidents con^irm'd
the States the more in the Reso^ution they took, to make the King Ex^lain
himself, before they would proceed ^o his Coronation.

The Popes Nuncio, and such of the Po^ish Nation as then attended at
Sigismond's Court, now perceived clearly that in Pru^ence he ought not to stand
it out any ^onger, but must yield to the present Exgency of Affairs: They told
him withal, That he was not bound to keep a Promise ex^orted from him by
Violence. Now Sigismond promises 'em any thing they would have. He reserved only,
that he might have the ^ree Exercise of the Popish Religion for himself within
the private Walls of the Castle, where he should make his Residence. But he
from that very time, took a Resolution of destroying his Uncle. The Plot of
Murdering him at a Play, having miscarried, they undertook to drive at him with
all the Vigor and open Violence that was possible. Immediate Orders were given
to the Polish Army to march toward Stockholm. This made the States of that
Kingdom begin to think of their own Security. They Summoned the Inhabitants of
the Highlands to come down to their Assistance. In the mean time during all
this bustle, the King took no care of the Government, nor of securing the quiet
of the Kingdom. When any Proposal was made to him by the States, he likewise
would make a demand of some other thing at their Hands. The Polanders were
still at him to return home, and to come to no Conclusion with the Swedes. They
flattered themselves, that the wider the Breaches and Divisions grew in
Swedeland, the easier it would be to reduce it. So that Sigismond, in fine
following their Advice, took thipping for Dantzick. He left Orders how he would
have the Kingdom Governed in his Absence; but neither the Duke of Sudermannia,
nor the States, would submit to any of them; as judging the Persons employed
therein, to be averse to the Treaty concluded at Vpsal before the King's
Coronation. The States of Swedeland commits the Government of the Kingdom
during the King's Absence, to the Duke of Sudermannia.


Soon after his Departure, the States of Swedeland prayed Charles of
Sudermannia, to take upon him the Government. The Duke desired to be excused;
yet declared at the same time, that neither his Conscience, nor the Love he
bore his Country, could ever permit him to comply with the Orders left by his
Nephew; yet notwithstanding his seeming Modesty, the Duke wanted only to be
further courted in the Matter. The Senate was to have almost an equal share
with him in the Government, and Governors of Towns did exercise a sort of
Sovereignty in their Jurisdictions. The King had contrived it should be so, as
a necessary precaution to balance his Uncle's Authority, and to lessen his
Power. Such a Scheme of Government was not for the Duke's turn. He expected
that the Senators would abate somewhat of their Rights and Privileges, and that
more Authority would be allowed him over the Governors of each City. Matters
were accordingly brought to that pass, as he would have it. The Duke then, as
if he had only yielded to the repeated Address of the Senate, slides into the
Saddle of State, and marches to Stokholm: Then, he was wont to say, That the
best way of Government at that juncture, was to put into execution what the
King was indespensably bound to perform himself. And are we bound, said he, to
obey such Orders of his, that are found to be contrary to his Corona^ion Oath?
As soon as the Duke entered ^tokholm, he Cashiered the Governor of ^he Castle
for being a Roman Catholic; he ^lso forbid the Exercise of that Religion
within that City, he made great Presents to the Senators, he granted Pensions
to the Bishops, and to the Professors of Colleges, and won his Clergy's and
Citizens Love by his Affable and Courteous ways: His Wife Christina was brought
to bed at that time, and the Child was Christn'd by the Name of Gustavus
Adolphus. This Ceremony was concluded with a splendid Entertainment, which he
gave to the Senators, and to the chief of the Nobility; The Famous Astronomer
Ticho Bradhe, who then Calculated this young Prince's Nativity, pronounced,
that he should one day wear a Crown. This was sufficient to raise his Parents
hopes to a high pitch It is usual for Persons that are entered upon Difficult
and Glorious Designs, to entertain such uncertain Prognostications, (...)
undoubted Oracles. The Duke of Sudermania thought that the calling together of
the States, would be a means to Establish his Authority. The Confusion in which
the King left Matters in Swedeland at his going away, was a Specious pretense
enough for this Convocation. Charl^^ together with the Senate, writ to the King
about it. But he made them no Answer This Silence of his, was by some
Interpreted, as an Assent to this Meeting (...) the States; by others, as an
unjust Dissent But if so, the Prime Officers of State i^ Swedeland, do pretend
that in such a Ca^^ they are empowered by the ancient Law^ and Constitutions of
the Kingdom, to convene a General Assembly of the States. They met accordingly
at Suderkopin. As soon as the News of it came to the King, he charged them not
to proceed any further, declaring that he would never ratify such Resolutions,
that were taken contrary to his Will and Pleasure. But no Regard was had to
such Prohibitions of the King's. The States maintained that their Meeting at
this Juncture of time was both Lawful and Necessary for the Welfare of the
Kingdom. They then came to a Resolution, not to allow of any other Religion in
Swedeland, saving the Protestant Persuasion, according to the Ausburg
Confession of Faith. That the Rites and Worship after the manner of Rome,
should be every where Abolisht. That Priests of that Communion should hasten
out of the Kingdom in a Fortnight's time. The Duke of Sudermania was declared
Regent during the King's Absence: With this Limitation, that all Affairs should
be Administered by him in Concurrence with the Senate. Many other Laws were
ordained for the Preservation of the Liberty and Privileges of the Country; and
they who would not submit to such Regulations, were declared to be evilly
affected toward the Welfare of the Land, and to be Disturbers of the public
Tranquillity.

Charles his Regency seemed now to be well Established; A Misunderstanding
betwixt the Duke of Sudermania and the Senate.
so that Sigismond had no other way left him, but to endeavor to create
Jealousies and Divisions betwixt that Duke and the Senate. This took; and it
was cunningly carried on. Charles was the more readily disposed to fall out
with the Senate, for that he did suspect them with holding a Correspondency with
those of the Province of Fineland, who still held for the King. The Senators on
the other hand complained, that he did all things after his own fancy, and dealt
harshly with such as opposed his Designs in the least. Charles alleged, that
they did wast the Public Revenue; and had fomented Misunderstanding betwixt
the King and him, with a design (as it should seem) to ruin both his Majesty
and himself, that they themselves might thereby become sole Masters. He made a
show of laying down the Administration of Affairs that was committed to him;
but was extremely surprised when he found not one of the Senate opposed that
his seeming Resolution. Therefore considering with himself, that he had gone
too far to retreat (in hopes to slip his Neck out of the Collar) he again laid
hold of the Helm of public Affairs. He Summoned a General Assembly of the
Senates to be held at Arboga. There the Senate with many of the Nobility formed
a distinct Party, in opposition to that of the Dukes; many went home again, and
there were not very many that came to this Parliament held at Arboga. The
Decrees of the Convocation at Vpsal, were here confirmed, and whatever was
enacted by the late General Diet at Suderkoping. Addresses were made to
Charles, to request him not to Abandon the Government at this juncture, with a
promise that none should be allowed to have so great a sway as he, in the
Administration of public Affairs. Yet the Senate refused their Assent to these
New Regulations, and the Chancellor with some others left the Kingdom upon it.

Such a favorable Conjuncture as this, King Sigismonds unsuccessful Attempt,
to reduce the D. of Sudermania by force.
prompted Sigismond to march with a good Army toward Swedeland; if he had made
more speed, he might have dispersed the Duke's Party, which grew weaker every
day; but the King's slackness, gave him time to gather strength, and to seize
on many fortified Places, and to secure the Fleet. When Sigismond Landed, the
Elector of Brandenbourg, and other Princes of Germany, used their Endeavor to
Reconcile the Nephew and Uncle, but their Negotiations proved ineffectual.
Charles protested, that he only sought the Preservation of the Peace of the
Privileges, and of the Religion of the Country. But Sigismond would not trust
him. He resolved to be the ruin of an Uncle, who openly aspired to no less
than the Crown. These two Princes was each of 'em at the Head of his own Army,
and there was great likelihood that the Fate of one Battle, would decide the
Quarrel. Sigismond was so overseen, that his Camp was surprised at Linkoping.
Part of his Army was killed, and some drowned. To save the remainder, he sued
to his Uncle for a Peace. Charles agreed to it, on condition that the five
Swedish Senators that were with the King, might be delivered up to him; he
charged them to be principal Authors of all these Distractions, and that they
should be brought to their Trial for it, at the next Sitting of the States. The
two Princes concluded a Treaty: Charles renewed his Oath of Allegiance to the
King. And Sigismond engaged that for his part, he would govern the Realm
henceforward, according to the Constitution of the Country, and his Coronation
Oath. He further promised to call a Parliament in four Months time, and that
all Matters in Controversy should be there decided, in presence of such
Commissioners as the Emperor, the Confederate Kings, and Electors should
appoint, on Application made to 'em for it. There were other Stipulations made
for the Mutual security of both Princes, and for the Disbanding of their Forces
on each side. Care was taken to add this farther Article, That in case King
Sigismond performed not this Treaty, his Subjects of Swedeland should be
discharged of their Oath of Fidelity to him.

The States of Swedeland depose King Sigismond.
The King and Duke had frequent Meetings, and all things seemed disposed toward
a lasting Peace. Charles seemed sincerely inclined to observe the Treaty on his
part. But Sigismond vexed to the Heart, to see himself forced to submit to his
Uncle's Terms, retired secretly into Poland, instead of going to Stokholm, as
he had promised. He was no sooner arrived at Dantsick, but that he published in
all Courts of Europe, that his Uncle was a Traitor, and a Rebel; and therefore
pretended that he himself was in no ways bound to the Treaty concluded at
Linkoping. Was it possible for him to do any thing that could more contribute
to the promoting of Charles his Designs? who knew accordingly to turn all this
to the best Advantage. He therefore so managed the point, that the States met
at Linkoping, where Sigismond was cited, and summoned to make good his Promises
at the last Treaty of Accommodation, That he would embrace the Protestant
Religion, that he would come to make his Residence in Swedeland, or that at
least, he would send his Son Prince Ladislaus to be brought up under his
Uncle's Tuition, in case that he himself did choose rather to tarry in Poland.
It was at the same time Enacted by the States, that in case the King refused to
accept these Terms, that he and his Issue should forfeit all their Right to the
Crown of Swedeland, which would be bestowed on a Person capable to govern this
Realm, after the Fundamental Laws of the Land. Whilst Sigismond dallyed to
return an Answer, the Duke of Sudermania was desired to take the Government
upon him, and to maintain the Protestant Religion. The States since held at
Stokholm declared, That they were no longer bound to the Oath of Allegiance
they had taken to Sigismond, because he had contravened his Grandfather's last
Will and Testament, had not performed the Office of a good King, refused to
observe the Treaty concluded with him at Linkoping, and slighted all
Remonstrances made to him. Yet after all this, they made an offer of the Crown
to Prince Ladislaus, in case that in a years time, he came to reside in
Swedeland, and would be instructed in the Protestant Religion. But that if
Sigismond and his Son refused to agree to such reasonable Demands as these,
they Solemnly protested, that neither himself nor his Issue, should be ever
capable of pretending to the Crown of Swedeland.

Charles Duke of Sudermnia, chosen King of Swedeland.
Nothing in the World could be more favorable to Charles his Designs, than such
a Conjuncture of Affairs as this was. King Sigismond took a fancy to maintain
the Claim of the pretended Demetrius in Muscovia. He had afterward several
wrangling Contests with the higher Nobility of Poland, so that whilst he was
thus taken up, all he could do in some of the Remotest Provinces of Swedeland,
proved to be very weak and unsuccessful. Then the Duke become Master of the
Heart of the Country, and of the best Garrisons, summoned the States to meet at
Norkoping in March following, in the stear 1607. To make the World believe that
he had no hand in perverting the Loyalty of Sigismond's Subjects, nor of
Usurping of his place on the Throne, he offered to lay down the Regency
committed to him, and even proposed to accomodate Matters with Sigismond, or to
place John the King's Brother on the Throne. The States would have no further
mention of either Sigismond, or of his Son. As for Prince John, whether it was
that he more loved his Ease than Ambition, or whether he rightly guessed at his
Uncle's Real Sentiments in the bottom, who made such Proposals but for a show,
but truly coveted the Government for himself; John (I say) did very generously
refuse it in outward appearance, declaring at the same time, That he was
content with his Duchy of East Gothia, and would always approve himself a
faithful Subject, if any Person that was better able to govern the Realm than
himself, in such Troublesome times as these. Charles therefore after so many
shows of declining the Crown (which were never thought to be sincere) accepted
it at last. It was ever settled on his Heirs Male, and not to devolve to John,
but for want of such Issue Male of the Body of Charles. The States being
moreover sensible that Queen Catherine Jagellon was the chief Promotress of the
Troubles and Difficulties, that King John her Husband, and her Son Sigismond
had brought the Protestant Religion under, decreed that their King might be
only Married to a Protestant. The New King without any more ado writ to
Sigismond, Mercure Francois, 1607, and 1608.
and to the Commonwealth of Poland, to give them notice of his Accession to the
Crown, and to make them an offer of renewing former Alliances betwixt both
Kingdoms. The States of Swedeland writ to the same purpose, to the Senate of
Poland in particular. Charles was presently after Crowned at Vpsal, together
with Christina his Wife, overjoyed to see her self now above Sigismond's
disdain.

The King of Poland did not vouchsafe to make any Answer to his Uncle's Letter,
looking on him to be no better than an Usurper. The Senate writ only to the
States of Swedeland. The Polanders took upon 'em to tax the Swedes, after an
insultting way, with Disloyalty toward Sigismond; they protested they would
own no other as lawful King of Poland, saving him: They inveighed bitterly
against the cunning Tricks made use of (as they pretended) by Charles to strip
his Nephew of the Crown. The States of Swedeland replied to this Letter by a
Manifesto directed to the Senate of Poland; wherein they did justify their own
Conduct all along toward Sigismond, and the choice they had made of a new
King. Some Arguments were made use of in this Apology, which were unanswerable
by the Senate of Poland, they being levelled peculiarly against it. On
Sigismond's sudden and clandestine Retreat after the Treaty of Linkoping, the
Swedes retort it thus on the Polanders: You must needs own, that if your King
had served such a slippery Trick, you would have long ago taken away the Crown
you had bestowed upon him. The Act you formerly made against King Henry III. of
France, is an evident proof of it. He secretly retired, unknown to you, to take
Possession of his Father's and of his Uncle's Succession: He soon after writ to
you, that he would take care, ye should be as well governed as if he were among
you in Person: You took no notice of such a Pretense, but immediately proceeded
to a new Election. Poland (said you) was never wont to be governed by Deputies.
Well, be it so. And what do you make of us, whose Case is no ways inferior to
yours? Swedeland neither cannot be without a King resident in it. The Swedes
made as pertinent Answers to that Charge of their having called an Assembly of
the States without Sigismond's leave. It is a received Custom among us (said
they) That the chief Officers of the Realm have a Right to summon an Assembly
of the States in the King's Absence; and you have practiced the same on certain
Occasions. It is not so long since that you held a Diet without your King
Sigismond's leave: It was for the maintaining of your Liberties: Well then; and
we are resolved to do the like for the preserving of ours.

The King of Swedeland sends a Challenge to the K. of Denmark.
Charles, both before and after his coming to the Crown, was engaged in a War
in Livonia against the Polanders. He sometimes got the best; at other times he
sustained considerable Losses. But the Polanders had Work enough both at home
and in the Parts of Muscovia, that hindered the Advantage they might have taken
by a considerable Victory they had obtained in Livonia. After this, Christian
IV. King of Denmark, declared War against the King of Swedeland. Perhaps
Christian thought he might easily reduce Swedeland, weakened by Civil Divisions,
and the Diversion of its main Strength and Army at that present employed
abroad, both in Livonia and Muscovia; where Charles supported against the
Polanders the Interest of Suski, whom the Muscovites had placed on the Throne.
However, the King of Denmark wrote a long Letter in the Year 1611. to the
States of Swedeland; wherein he complained of several Losses and Damages, which
he pretended himself and Subjects, had sustained by means of the Swedish
Nation. Their Answer did not satisfy Christian; and he doubtless expected a
satisfactory one: Denmark therefore declared War against Swedeland. They that
have a mind to pick a Quarrel with their Neighbors, are generally more ready
to make an Irruption, than those are to make a Defense. Christian enters into
Swedeland, takes the City of Calmar, attacks the Islands of Oeland and of
Borkholm, becomes Master of them. But the King of Denmark, at his coming back,
finds the King of Swedeland encamped before him near Calmar.

Then it was that Charles sent a Challenge by a Herald at Arms to King
Christian: Copies of it were spread abroad in all Parts of Europe. After some
hard and reproachful Expressions that Charles uses against his Enemy, Since you
are at the Head of your Army (said he to him) Let us spare the innocent Blood
of our Subjects; let us decide our Quarrel in a single Combat, after the
laudable Custom of the Grecians of old. I challenge you to it: If you decline
fighting, I Will never look on you to be a Man of Honor, or a gallant Soldier.
But the King of Denmark's Answer was much more abuseful. He declared, That
whatever Charles chargged him with, was but a parcel of impudent Lies, vended
by one who was better at such Railings than at downright fighting at the Head
of his Army. As for the Challenge he had received, he said it argued, that
Charles stood in need of some Hellebore to purge his Brain withal. Might not
such course Language as this justify that way of the Greek Poet of old, who is
taxed with representing his Kings and Princes scolding at one another after a
mean and scurrilous manner? Truly Princes are much like other Men; they forget
themselves too often; they happen to utter Words sometimes unbecoming their
Rank and Character. Here you have a Proof on it.

Death of Charles King of Sweden.
It is likely that Christian, by those last Expressions, intended to upbraid
Charles with an Apoplexy, of which he had a Fit not long before. Charles
required pretty large Supplies of Money for making the necessary Preparations
for a War, with which Swedeland was threatened by the King of Denmark. The
States refused to grant any; which put him into such a violent Passion, that he
fell into a Fit of Apoplexy upon it. This Accident left such ill Symptoms
behind, that they brought a Weakness both of Body and Mind on him ever after.
It was thought the Grief which seized him to see the Progress the King of
Denmark had made over him, did occasion this Relapse, which cost Charles his
Life, for he died the 31st of October following, being sixty one Years old. His
Son Gustavus Adolphus succeeded him. This Prince was yet in his Minority;
though notwithstanding he had already given signal Proofs of his Courage and
Valor.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS XIII. King of France and Navarre.
BOOK III.
1612. The Condition France was in since Mary of Medicis came to be Regent.
THE face of Affairs was quite altered in Europe, since the Death of Henry the
4th. France was in such a Flourishing Condition both at Home and Abroad, that
Spain which a year or two before did stand in extreme awe of her, began now by
degrees to get the uppermost. The false Maxims of a depraved Policy, with which
the Pope and the Duke of Tuscany had slily prepossest an Imprudent Queen,
together with some Spanish Pistoles, seasonably bestowed among her
Cabinet-Councellors (as a great Statesman in those times has it) did bring
about this sudden Revolution. This Queen Mary of Medicis, being persuaded that
an Alliance of a double Match to be made between both Crowns, was altogether
necessary toward the Establishing of her Authority both against the Princes of
the Blood, and all other Opposers, III. Discourse du Duc de Rohan sur l'Etat de
la France Apres ses Memoires in 40.
did therefore foment Divisions both at Court and throughout the Kingdom; She
created Jealousies, and gave Umbrage to the best Allies the Crown had; and
raised the sinking Spirits of her Sons most formidable Enemies. The Confederacy
with England, the United Provinces, the Protestant Princes of Germany, the
Commonwealth of Venice, and the Duke of Savoy, had been the Bulwark and
Strength of France. These Princes who were Apprehensive of the too great Power
of the House of Austria, were entered into a League with the Deceased King. The
good Correspondency that he took care to maintain in this sort of a Confederacy
which he Headed, did keep Spain in awe, and within due bounds. This put Henry
in a capacity of undertaking any thing, whenever he should think it most
expedient. But so soon as these Allies of France perceived that the Queen
Regent was entering into a strict Alliance with the House of Austria, they
presently grew Jealous, and betook themselves to other Measures. The Venetians
did not so openly declare themselves. The Duke of Savoy, extreme angry that no
regard was now had of the Treaties that had been made between King Henry and
him; sought all manner of ways to raise Commotions in France, he had thoughts
of siding with Spain, if he might be secured of any thing to content his
Ambition. France taking no care to preserve the old good Correspondency that
was between the Protestant Princes of Germany, and elsewhere, they fell off,
one from another. The House of Austria that has always a watchful Eye to its
own Interest, was wise enough to make the best of these Divisions. James King
of England might have in this case, supplied the Place of Henry the 4th, and
compelled the Queen Regent to keep to the Model of Government that was left with
her by the late King her Husband. The concern of the Protestant Religion, as
well as the Welfare of England, did require, that James should have at that
time, thought on it better. But alas, the good Prince never loved sincerely
either one, or the other. Such a State of Affairs as this, did well for the
Court of Rome. The Popes have been ever Spaniards by Inclination. The Kings of
Spain are wont to bring the Popes over to their Interest, by affecting a great
Zeal to ruin Heresy. The aim of these, is to raise their Worldly State; and
of the former, to serve those that will best contribute to restore their
Spiritual Monarchy. It appears that the Court of France at this time was
pleased with this old policy of Spain, whereby to gain the Popes favor. But
was it not a little too late to think of this way? The Court of Rome never
keeps a Neutrality with France, but when reduced to it by some emergent
Necessity. The French have Principles that are opposite to the Pope's
Pretensions, and to the greediness of his Courtiers.

The Factions which had formerly put France into such a Confusion, under the
Regency of Catharine of Medicis, were now seen to revive under this Government
of Mary. For the maintaining of her own Authority, Mary took care to bring down
the Princes of the Blood Royal, as that other Queen her Cousin had done before.
She thought fit to make use of the House of Guise, which entered into a new
Knot with that of the Duke d'Epernon. Instead of joining with the real Friends,
and Well-wishers of the Crown, she gave her self over to be led by the Popes,
and King of Spain's Counsels, who could not grow great, but at the cost of
young Lewis. The Princes of the blood understood this great Evil. They were in
the Right, but in renouncing their Forefathers Religion, they had lost all
their Credit. They likewise wanted Strength to oppose the Queen Regent's
Designs. They of the Reformed Religion in France being well inclined, sought to
prevent the Mischief this double Alliance with Spain, would bring on the Head
of the Protetestants. But alas, how could they help themselves? There were now,
no Princes of the Blood to Head them any more. The Grandees of that Communion
divided more than ever, since the Assembly at Saumur, were now ready to undo
one another. I come now to particulars, of the History of the year 1612. We
shall in it begin to see these three different Parties following, their
Intrigues, and the different condition they are in. The Queen Regent and her
Confidents, shall make use of the Kings Authority to cover their wicked
Designs. The Princes of the Blood shall exclaim against the ill Management of
the Government; but either no ear shall be given to what they will say, or their
Mouths shall be stopped by false Promises, or slight Gratifications. The Hugenot
Party fully convinced that ^ll effectual ways are taken to ruin them totally,
shall make loud Complaints, and shall bestir themselves without being able to
mend their Matters in the least thereby. Their mutual Divisions will hinder
them from having sufficient Strength, to cause their just Remonstrances to be
heard.

Negotiations touching a double Marriage betwixt France and Sp^in.
Cosme Grand Duke of Toscany, now entered into a Closer Alliance with the House
of Austria, by a Marriage with Magdalen Arch-Dutchess of Grats, does set on
foot the Negotiation that was begun by his Father Ferdinand, concerning a
double Marriage to be concluded betwixt the two Crowns of France, and of Spain.
The better to succeed, for to obtain the Deceased Kings consent, he proposed a
third Match between Don Carlos, King Philip the 3d's second Son, and the
Princess Christina, second Daughter of France. The King of Spain did offer to
give with the Infant the Sovereignty of the Low Countries, after the
Arch-Dutchess Isabella's Death. But Henry gave no ear to this New Proposal, no
more than to the former, being convinced that it was only a Snare for to get
him to Abandon the Protection of the United Provinces.

As soon as the News of his Death was brought to Madrid, Siri Memory
r^^^ndite. page 3^0, and 3^^ etc.
the Duke of Florence's Ambassador at that Court, did again s^t on foot the
Business of the double Marriage. He knew well enough how agreeable it would be
to his Master, to gratify Mary of Medicis, who had an extreme desire this
Affair might Succeed. The Duke of Lerma, and the other Spanish Ministers of
State, readily agreed to the renewing of this Negotiation; but they finding
that France was not now so much to be feared as heretofore, they made some
other lower Proposals. These Gentlemen would hear no more of that third
Marriage of Don Carlos with the Princess Christina, pretending that their King
was unwilling to Alienate and cut off for ever, the Sovereignty of the Low
Countries, from the Monarchy of Spain; and they did even give out, that Philip
was not out of Hopes of reducing the United Provinces, as soon as the Truce was
expired, or broke. And on pretense, that the Daughters of France do not carry
along with them into another Family, any Right of Succession to the Crown; the
Council of Spain scrupled moreover to give the Eldest Infanta of Spain to the
New King of France; so that they would offer only the Second Daughter. Mary of
Medicis would have been contented with this it self, so that Philip would also
accept of the Second Daughter of France. By this means a way was left to
satisfy the Duke of Savoy, who with great earnestness challenged, that the
promise made to him by the late King, of giving the Eldest Daughter of France
in Marriage to the Prince of Piedmont, might be now made good. But Spain would
also hinder any such strict Alliance and good Correspondency betwixt this Duke
Charles Emanuel, and the Crown of France. So many different Views that Spain
had, rendered the New Negotiation very difficult.

The Council of Spain out of a desire to defend the Dukes designs, Siri Memory
recondite. Tom II pa^ 359, 447, 448.
choose rather to give the Eldest Daughter to the King of France, than that the
Prince of Piedmont should go away with the Eldest Daughter of France. So that
they came to this Agreement about the latter end of 1610. that Lewis and Prince
Philip should each of them Marry the Eldest Daughter of the two Houses of
France and Spain, on condition that the Infant Ann that was designed for the
King of France, should renounce all the Pretensions that she or her Children
might ever have on any of the Estates belonging to the Monarchy of Spain. This
was the only Expedient that was found, to prevent that the King of France's
condition in the case, might not be better than those of Philip. Both Kings
Authorized the Duke of Tuscany to demand in Marriage the two Princesses in
their Names; Mary of Medicis had now obtained, what she had a great while
longed for. But she knew not how to bring about, that this double Marriage
might be liked of in France. Villeroy did Negotiate this Treaty. Being always
suspected to be a Pensionary of Spain, he used all the Intrigues possible, to
compass this Business. The Duke of Sulli, before he was put out of Favor, did
vigorously oppose the Matter. I Will hinder you well enough (said he) one day in
the presence of the Queen Regent, from persuading her Majesty to suffer her
self to be led by all the Figaries of the Popes, and of the King of Spain. The
Friendship of the Protestant Potentates is more useful to this State, than that
of Paul, and of Philip. The Queen heard all this, without saying a word. But
such bold Expressions, and so becoming a true Frenchman, did not a little
contribute to hasten the Dukes Disgrace. It was hoped that this Project of the
double Marriage, would be carried on very easily, when Sully was removed from
the Ministry. The Marshall of Bouillon as less stiff, was looked upon as a fit
Person to get this Undertaking to be liked off by the Protestants, both abroad
and at home.

The double Marriage is concluded between the two Kings.
At the end of the Month of April, 1611. all points were agreed upon. The Treaty
of the double Match was Signed, and both Kings promised one to the other
Reciprocally in Writing, to accomplish it. The Pope and Great Duke of Florence,
were to be the Mediators of it. Siri Memory recondite. Tom. II. page 524, 525,
526, etc.
The Treaty of the particular Match between the King of France, and the
Infanta, was to be drawn up and published at Paris; that of the Prince of
Spain, at Madrid. Another Treaty was likewise made of a League Defensive
between the two Crowns. Lewis and Philip engaged themselves to give mutually
each other certain Succors, in case either of them should be Attacked from
Abroad, or any Insurrection was to be suppressed within either of their States.
The Spaniards had demanded an Offensive League to be made, but the Queen Regent
would not consent to it. This was sufficient to convince her, that Philip
sought after nothing more, than to make France lose the Amity and Confidence
she had in the Protestant Princes and States. Mary content to Stipulate, that
the two Treaties should remain secret for some time, had not the prudence to
break off a Negotiation, wherein the Enemies of young Lewis his Prosperity,
might serve themselves with an Opportunity of laying Snares for him on all
sides. The Approaching Assembly of the Reformed Protestants at Saumur, was the
cause why the Queen demanded this Delay. It was feared, that this News would
too much alarm them, and they should take Measures to oppose a design so
Contrary to the Repose and Common Security of all Protestants.

Intrigues at the French Court, as soon as the Treaty about the double Marriage
came to be known.
The Queen and her Confidents employed all their Wit and Industry, to gain to
their side the Princes of the Blood and the Grandees, to the end the Affair of
the double Match might pass without any Contradiction. The Union of the Prince
of Conde and Count Soissons, was one of the greatest Obstacles to get over.
Intrigues were laid to Disunite them, and when it was perceived, they were too
steadfast one to the other, it was endeavored to gain them separately, by
promises of granting them some new Gratifications. Memoites de l^ Regence de
Marie de tri^dicis.
Both these retired from Court, discontented that a Treaty had been made with
Spain, without their Knowledge, though express Couriers were dispatched to give
Cardinal de Joyeuse, and the Duke of Epernon notice of it. The Count of
Soissons had a design in his Head to remove from Court, the present Ministers
of State, and chiefly the Chancellor Sileri, whom he hated more than the rest.
Soissons accused this prime Magistrate, of shameful and insatiable
Covetousness, in selling Justice publicly to the dishonor of the Government,
and damage of particular Persons, who had any business to Solicit with him.
Though the Count de Soissons was extremely angry with Conchini, since the
rupture of a Marriage between the Son of the one, and the Daughter of the
other, yet he kept still some measures with the Marquess of Ancre. They agreed
very well together for displacing Ministers of State. The new favorite
believed he should find some Obstacles to the increase of his Power, as long as
they held any Office. After some Negotiations, both the Princes returned to the
Court.

The Constable de Montmorency was lured in by a Marriage of his Son, Siri
Memory recondite. Tom. II. page 599, 600, 601, 609 612.
with a Princess of the House of Mantua the Queens Niece. The Marshall
Bouillon said sometimes well in Counsel, that too strict a League with Spain,
would be prejudicial to the State: But at the bottom, he had made his Market.
Lesdiguieres longed excessively to be Duke and Peer in all Forms. The hopes
which were given him of making the Letters, which he obtained to be approved in
Parliament, made him pliable, and complaisant to every thing the Court would
have. The Duke de Guise, to whom Mary had recourse in all her perplexities,
which the Princes of the Blood had given her, assured her of the Service of his
whole Family, and all their Friends. I have only one Favor to ask of you,
Madam, said he to the Queen, which is, that after this Important Service, your
Majesty will not abandon us, as you have already done, to the Resentments of
the Princes of the Blood.

The Duke of Epernon was yet more necessary to the Queen upon this occasion; he
was gone from Court much discontented, but he was gently dealt with during his
Absence; as soon as he came back to Court, they made him all imaginable
Caresses. The Prince of Conti, the Duke de Guise, and the House of Lorrain, the
Duke de Nevers, all the Courtiers, except the Creatures of the Prince of Conde,
and Count Soissons, paid him extraordinary Honors. The Chancellor, Villeroy
and Conchini, showed him as much respect and deference, as he could possibly
wish from them. It Was the surest way to engage this proud and haughty Man, by
letting him gain to himself a point of Honor of being Victorious over the
Princes of the Blood, and opposing them vigorously, when ever they should
undertake to break the Treaty of the double Match. The Ambassador of England
complained aloud of this Alliance; but it was hoped they could appease his
Master, by sending to him the Marshall de Bouillon. Aersens Ambassador from
the United Provinces made a great Noise, he moved Heaven and Earth to hinder
this Affair, the Consequences of which, appeared to be dreadful to his
Republic. Refuge was ordered to go to the Hague, to secure the Amity of Prince
Maurice, and the States General. Lastly, Schomberg was sent to the Protestant
Princes in Germany, in order to dissipate the jealousies which this Alliance
might give them.

The Double Marriage is in fine carried in Council.
The Prince of Conde and the Count de Soissons being come back to Court about
the beginning of the year, 1612. all Persons were brought about to consent to
the double Match, whenever it should be proposed in Council, but the two
Princes were not yet satisfied. Siri Memory recondite. To. II. page 618. 619,
ctc.
The same day they were called to Council, Conde first demanded, that every one
might declare his Opinion according to his degree. Chancellor Sileri spoke much
in praise of the Queen's Administration of Affairs, and laid open the great
benefit which would accrue to the State from this double Match. The Duke de
Guise set forth the Eloquence, which was natural to his Family. There Is no
need, said he, of Deliberation upon so Advantageous a Proposition, we ought
only to thank God that her Majesty has happily brought about the Noble design,
which Heaven had inspired into her. The Constable Montmorency with the Dukes of
Nevers and Epernon, extremely approved of what was said. The Marshall
Bouillon, and Lesdiguieres said only this, that they ought to take care, the
New Treaty with the Spaniards might not be prejudicial to the ancient Alliances
of the Crown, with other Sovereigns.

At last came the Prince of Conde's turn to speak, but he was so startled with
the Duke of Guise's positive way of delivering himself, as that he was quite
dashed out of Countenance; and after an indifferent manner said, that, since
this was an Affair resolved upon, it was needless to ask our Opinion. It was
believed; that the two Princes came with a design to oppose the Treaty. The
words which the Count de Soissons let fall, confirmed Persons in this Opinion.
You see, Sir, said he, turning himself to the Prince of Conde, that we are
dealt with here, as Fools and Servingmen. The Queen vexed at this Reproach,
would have spoke, but the Chancellor cunningly turned her by from it, by
proposing some other matter to discourse upon; and so it was concluded, that
the double Match should be published the 25th day of March following, and the
New Duke of Mayenne was designed for an extraordinary Embassy to Spain, to
demand the Infanta with the usual Ceremonies. The Prince of Conde and Count
Soissons, showed a great weakness upon this occasion; their Consciences would
not suffer them to approve the thing, and either fear or hope, hindered them
from speaking; as they ought to have done. Sir, then said the Constable to his
Son-in-Law the Prince of Conde, you neither know how to Fight with Courage, or
yield with Prudence.

The Popes Nuncio's Complaint of the Edict of Parliament, given in favor of
the University, against the Jesuits.
The Queen Regent found her self otherwise troubled upon the occasion of an
Edict, which the Parliament had made upon the Contest of the University of
Paris with the Jesuits, for the opening of their College of Clermont. The good
Fathers flattered themselves that the chief President de Verdun would be as
favorable to them, as his Predecessor had been to the contrary; but they were
deceived in their Hopes, whether it was that this Magistrate affected to appear
Zealous for the Liberties of the Gallican Church, or that the Remonstrances of
Dr. Richer Syndick of the faculty of Paris, Siri Memory recondite. To. II.
page 624, 625, etc.
or the pleadings of the Advocate General Servin had convinced the chief
President, that if once the Society should set footing in the University of
Paris, it would Establish there its pernicious Doctrine; or Lastly, whether it
was that Verdun did not love so much the Jesuits at the bottom of his Heart, as
other Magistrates had done; before he pronounced the Edict, he put on so gay
and content a Countenance, as the good Fathers believed they had gained their
Cause: But what was their Mortification, when they understood that it was
ordered them forthwith to Sign a Conformity to the Doctrine of the Sorbonne
Schools, and even in what concerned the preservation of the sacred Persons of
Kings, the maintaining their Royal Authority, and the Liberties of the Gallican
Church, according as it was mentioned in the four Articles which had been
proposed to them, and were recited in express words in the Edict! From hence
was the Society brought to great Extremity. They must Subscribe a Doctrine
detested by the Court of Rome, or must be exposed a second time to leave the
Kingdom. The Curates of Paris had now bound themselves to present jointly a
Petition to the Parliament, that they should be hindered from hearing of
Confession: The University put up another Petition, that the Jesuits might be
enjoined to shut up their Colleges, in all the Towns of the Parliament of
Paris's Jurisdiction where they have taught, without allowing their Letters
Patent, which the late King had granted them, to be made good in Parliament. Now
the good Fathers had no other Remedy, but to make use of the Nuncio's
Intercession, and cause the Cardinals and Prelates devoted to the Court of
Rome, to act for them.

Vbaldini the Popes Nuncio, was very forward to bestir himself in favor of
them; he was no less alarmed than the Jesuits. The chief President bragged, that
he would make the four Articles proposed to the Jesuits, be made Solemnly,
received in the faculty of Paris, and whatever the Advocate-General maintained
in his Pleading. The Nuncio in his first Audience he had of the Queen, greatly
complained against the New Edict and Servin: His Discourse ended in earnest
Prayers to her Majesty, for this speedy prevention of the Mischief which this
forward undertaking of the Parliament was making, (said he) against Religion.
Mary de Medicis gave the Nuncio good words: But it was not sufficient to have
Circumvented a Woman not so clear-sighted, Superstitious to the utmost degree,
and absolutely depending upon the Pope; for the Ministers of State, and the
principal Men in Parliament were to be brought over: The Queen was not in a
capacity to do any thing without them, upon this occasion. The Nuncio sent
first his Auditor to the Ministers of State's Houses. There he made a great
noise, Is it then come to this pass, says this Italian, that the Kings
Advocates General believe, they have right to propose in Parlements, Questions
which respect the administration of Sacraments? Does this Assembly pretend to
be the Sovereign Judges of them? If the Edict which it has set forth, did only
oblige the Jesuits to follow the Doctrine received in every Church, or at
least, what the Prelates of the Gallican Church profess to believe, the Matter
might have been born withal; but when a Parliament shall constrain them to
conform to what is not taught, but in so small a Corporation as Sorbonne, the
Pope must needs condemn so unsufferarable a procedure, Then the Auditor
insisted from the Nuncio, that the Kings Privy Council might make void the
Edict of Parliament, or at least Suspend the Execution of it.

The Nuncio's Railing against the Advocate General Servin.
Then the Master on his part bawled, and asked if the Sorbonne pretended to make
a Schism in the Church, by the Adoption of a Doctrine, which was contrary to
any received in all other Universities. If this continue, says he, the Pope
will be obliged to call a National Council in France, in order to have the
Sorbonne Doctrine Condemned there, as Rash, False and Erroneous. In the mean
time his Holiness shall proceed by way of Ecclesiastical Censure against those
Doctors, who shall subscribe the Articles which the Parliament proposes to the
Jesuits. As for Servin, added this Italian Minister, all the World knows how he
is a downright Hugonot, and a Pentioner to the King of England. His Office
ought to be taken from him, or he for the future be prohibited to speak any
thing that concerns Religion, the Pope, the Court of Rome, and the Immunities
of the Church. This Man infects the young Lawyers with his evil Sentiments; he
strives to serve the Hugonot Party, by breaking the good intelligence betwixt
the Court of France, and the Holy Chair, and by sowing Jealousy and Distrust
betwixt the Pope and the most Christian King. The Nuncio maintained further,
that the Clergy of France ought to Excommunicate the Advocate General. If
Humane respect, he added, stop the Bishops from doing this, the Pope himself
shall proceed against a Man, who meddles with making of New Articles of Faith,
and Condemns for Heresy, Doctrines conformable to the Truth, which the
Catholic Church teaches. Paul the 5th, could he have dared to undertake the
Excommunication of the principal Magistrates of France, for having stood up for
the Interests of the King and State? Would to God, this bold Pope had
undertaken it. One might have seen then, how the Gallican Church would have
defended this great Article of its Liberties, viz. That a Magistrate cannot be
Excommunicated for any thing, that regards the exercise of his Office. I
question whether Paul the 5th could have got rid of this Affair, as well as of
his Interdiction fulminated against the Republic of Venice.

The Nuncio complained chiefly of the Article touching the Seal of Confession,
as it refers to ill Attempts upon the Persons of Kings and the State; he spoke
of this, as if 'twas nothing less than Impiety and Sacrilege. This Doctrine,
said he, is against the Security of the Persons of Princes. This is Surprising;
for the Parliament intended to do the King good Service in Establishing, that
the Confessor is obliged to Reveal what he knows of ill Attempts, upon the
Person of the Prince and State. Observe here, how the Popes Minister argued.
Should this be received, he continued. Those who conceive such black Designs,
will never come to Confession; a Priest will be no longer able to dissuade his
Penitent from the execution of his wicked Enterprise. When such sorts of
Practices are made known by way of Confession, its permitted to give the Prince
or Magistrate notice of them in general Terms, without Naming or describing the
Persons; but to use such a way of dissuasion, Discourageth Men from Confession
of the Crime, they intend, and deprives their Confessors of the means to do
this good Service for the Public. What Vbaldini said against the Article,
touching the Popes Superiority over the Council, was more Malicious, and more
capable to affright the Queen Regent. The same Arguments, said he aloud, which
the Sorbonne use to establish this Doctrine, prove likewise, that the States
General of the Kingdom are above the King. The Hugonots, or at least the
troublesome Catholics, will be able to appeal to a future Council from the
Sentence of Divorce, which Clement VIII. has pronounced betwixt the Deceased
King and Queen Margaret. The Birth of the King is not certain, according to
these Principles, and that Man is in the Right, who provides against the
Queen's Regency. This is that which Servin aims at. He Is a declared Enemy to
the Queen and her Council.

This great bustle raised through the Nuncio's means, was the reason why Mary
de Medicis and her Ministers, resolved to appease the Italian: But the Grandees
and Ministers of State, could not well agree amongst themselves about the
Expedients, which ought to be taken. The Grandees were for the Queen's
Suspending the Execution of the Parlement's Edict, for the calling of this
Affair to her Counsel, and that the Advocate General should receive a sound
Reprimand, and be advised never to engage the Queen again to such Difficulties.
The Ministers of State were not of the Grandees mind: They were afraid, least
this high dealing should provoke the Parliament: Prudence required, they should
handle this Matter much more discreetly in a time of the King's Minority, than
at any other time. It Was found at last more convenient, to hinder the Sorbonne
with soft words, from explaining themselves upon the four Articles, and to
engage the Parliament it self to Limit the Edict, and not to receive any more
New Petitions against the Jesuits. The Nuncio's tampering with the Members of
Parliament, to get this Sentence Mitigated.
Conchini was ordered to speak to the Presidents of Parliament from the Queen,
and inform them, that her Majesty wished their Edict were Limited. The
Chancellor Sileri and Villeroy were further employed, for the obtaining the
same from the Magistrates.

This Resolution did not at all please the Nuncio: He sees himself sent back to
the Parliament to Limit an Edict, by a Negotiation with them, which might not be
to the Pope's liking. These Gentlemen are usually more stiff, and have less
complaisance for the Court of Rome, than Ministers of State are. But now see
once again, Vbaldini's Auditor besti^^ (...) himself, he goes to visit the
chief P^^^ident de Verdun. His Master had ordered him to speak to this
Magistrate as skillfuly, and with as much Civility as he could. The Auditor
begins with the great praise of the chief President's Zeal for the good of the
Church, his Devotion toward the Holy Chair, his Affection to the Service of
the Queen, and his Inclination to do good to the Jesuits, After long
Complements after the Italian Fashion, came his Complaints against the Edict of
Parliament, and Servin's pleading. Lastly, followed the Instances to this
Magistrate, not to lessen the good Opinion Men had of him, but to confirm it,
by causing the Edict to be Limited. Verdun excused himself, saying, he was not
Master of what the Parliament had ordained by a plurality of Voices; he told
him, that the Advocate General had not spoke of the Holy Father, but in
respectful Terms, and promised, that no more New Petitions against the Jesuits
should be received, and measures taken to stifle this Affair. As for what
concerned the Limitation of the Edict, Verdun answered, that if the four
Articles had not been there in express words, one could not believe the Nuncio
had any reason to complain. Then proceeding, We shall see, says he, in the
Interim, what can be done for his Satisfaction. The Auditor insisted, that the
Edict would be still reflecting upon the Jesuits, and that might be therein
supposed, their ^^^^ety taught a Doctrine contrary to the Security of the
Person of Princes; How, going on, the Auditor said, can they promise with a
secure Conscience, to conform to the Sorbonne Doctrine, touching the Liberties
of the Gallican Church? These words include all what the Advocate General had
said in his Plea, against the Authority of the Pope, and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

In vain did the Auditor display all his Eloquence. The chief President
remained always inflexible to retrench from the Edict any thing which was there
said concerning the Liberties of the Gallican Church. The Chancellor and
Villeroy having pressed Verdun to this by the Queen's Order; Her Majesty,
replied he Courageously, would do better to Dissolve the Parliament, than oblige
it to alter its Acts, for the pleasure of a Foreign Minister. The Act of
Parliament Limited.
All that could be got from the chief Presisident, was, that the four Articles
should not be expressed in the Edict, and that where there was mention of the
Liberties of the Gallican Church, there should be added these words; At all
times kept and observed within the Realm. 'Twas promised likewise, that the
Jesuits should not be constrained against their will. The Queen confirmed all
this to the Nuncio, declaiming very much against poor Servin. I promise you,
said she, that he shall not any longer thus escape, we shall make him become
more prudent for the future.

Vbaldini was farther Intriguing with the Clergy, for to stir up and incense
the Bishops. The Cardinal Perron and Gonzaga, who was then at Paris, cried
every where against the Advocate General, A Heretic, a Heretic. Marquemont
Archbishop of Lions, was stoutly busy on his part with the Ministers and
Prelates. Servin happening one day to be in the Queen's Closet with Cardinal
Gonzaga and Perron; this latter had the boldness to tell the Advocate General,
that he was an ignorant Fellow: The Cardinal was become extremely proud from
the Applauses, which his easy way of speaking and writing had procured him
from the common People, who are rather dazzled by the false appearance of a
brisk and lively fancy, than convinced by any solid Reasonings, which the
greatest part of Men are not capable to discern. The remains we have of Servin,
and the Cardinal sufficiently prove that the Advocate General knew near as much
as Perron. At least this Magistrate had greater Integrity of of Mind, and
Sincerity. The Subtle Cardinal dared not to take up the Cudgels against
Servin, upon the Pope's Authority or Liberties of the Gallican Church; He could
not have got the better of him, but he fell upon the Article, touching the Seal
of Confession, and as the Cardinal was a great Pratler and Sophister, he
entangled the question after such a manner, for to find Heresies in what the
Advocate General had said, as Servin being put to a Nonplus, denied what the
Cardinal had laid to his Charge.

Cardinal Gonzaga not content to have given a Memoir to the Queen against
Servin, had a mind to affront him in her Presence. He called Servin Heretic,
the King's, Queen's, and States Enemy. The Advocate General replied without
being moved, that his Office obliged him to be careful of what concerned the
Interest of his Master, and the good of the Realm.

I know, Sir, he added, That you have the Honor to be Related to her Majesty.
The Quality of being the Queen's Nephew, makes me have a Respect for you; but I
am not to give an account of my Behavior, to any besides the Queen. Gonzaga
answered, that the best Service Servin could do the King, was never to swerve
from the Catholic Faith, and not to divide France and the Holy Chair, and that
one could not be a good Servant to the King, and an Enemy to the Pope at the
same time. Before you prescribe us Lessons, said Servin, being incen'st at the
Cardinal's boldness, who led a Scandalous Life at Paris, you ought to consider,
Sir, of showing us good Examples. The Queen presently interrupted the Advocate
General, and dismissing of him, ordered him to give the Cardinal Satisfaction.
I don't require any, replied, Gonzaga, this Man is not in a capacity to give me
any Offense. Poor evasion of a Grandee, whom the Truth of a Reproach had
touched to the quick!

The Prelates who were at Paris, Animated by the Archbishop of Lions, set
themselves likewise a crying against the Edict of Parliament, and the Advocate
General. They very much blamed the Bishops of Beauvais and Noyon, who (...)
present at the Judgment as Ecclesiastical Peers, for that they went not out of
the Audience, as soon as they had heard what Servin had said against the
Authority of the Holy Chair, and Immu^^^^es of the Church. Some were of Opinion
to condemn for Heresy, what the Advocate General had said touching Confession:
But this did not content the Nuncio. To stop at this one Article, was tacitly
to approve all the other, which concerned the Council's Superiority over the
Pope, and the Liberties of the Gallican Church. The Bishops too did not well
agree amongst themselves upon the Article of Confession. They believed, that
they had not Authority enough to declare in a private Assembly, upon a question
of this Importance; neither had they the boldness to undertake it. Vbaldini had
better luck at the Sorbonne; He formed there a Cabal numerous enough to hinder
the Paris faculty from declaring upon the Articles: Dr. Duval at the Head of
his Party promised to answer, in case the Parliament press't them to it, that
the Faculty could do nothing without the Bishops, or without an express Order
from the Queen; that the Articles in question had not only a Reference to
Religion, but to State Affairs also. In the mean time the Jesuits were at a
stand, they longed to open their College of Clermont: To obtain this
Permission, The Jesuits puzl'd how they could content the Court of Rome and the
Parliament at the same time.
they were to follow the Advice which the President Seguier their good Friend,
and some others, gave to the Society, which was, to content the Parliament by a
Promise, to conform to the Doctrine generally received in the University of
Paris. But this exposed them too, to the Indignation of the Holy Father, and
Court of Rome. The Cardinal Perron, the Bishop of Paris, and many other
Prelates, Counseled them not to content the Parliament so far. Vbaldini
entreated them from it, being persuaded, that the Honor of the Holy Chair was
concerned in this Affair. After great Consults, the Provincial accompanied by
five other Jesuits, goes without giving notice to the Nuncio or Cardinals, to
make a Declaration in Writing before the Register of Parliament, like to that
which the Provincial had made in Parliament, viva voce. The good Fathers
believed, they should easily Extricate themselves in this Affair with the Court
of Rome, when the thing was done, and should escape with only a chiding from
the Nuncio, and their General, who would not be sorry for it at the bottom of
his Heart.

As soon as the Nuncio had understood what the Jesuits had done, he was in a
furious Passion. Father Coton was ordered to wait on him, to Appease him. The
oily Tongued Jesuit represented to him to little purpose, that his Provincial
did not think to do any Mischief in signing what he had already said, viz. That
the Rules of the Society required, it should conform to the Sentiments of the
Universities, where it had Colleges; that their good Friends counseled them to
prevent the Troubles which the Parliament would not fail to give them, if the
Society should obstinately refuse to obey the Edict; Lastly, that they had
believed the Pope to have Reasons, why he did not give them expressly
Permission, to submit to a Law which the Parliament would impose upon them, but
that they hoped the Pope would not take it ill from them likewise, to have
contented the Parliament, without the knowledge of the Court of Rome. The Nuncio
was not paid with these Reasons. Does it belong to you, said he to Coton, to
guess the Intentions of his Holiness? You should have consulted his Minister,
who knows them better than any one else. And since you ought to conform to the
Sentiments of Universities, why have you not tarried till the Sorbonne
explained clearly what it believes? In stead of consulting your President
Seguier, and the Lawyers, it might have been more expedient to have taken mine,
and the Prelates their Advice, who have good Intentions, and have expected
Orders from your Father General. Coton had nothing to reply; but the business
was over. The Nuncio likewise could not further complain to the Queen, of the
violence the Parliament had done the Jesuits; for one might have answered him,
that the good Fathers went of their own accord, without any new Summons, to
promise to conform to the Sentiments of the University, and Intentions of the
Parliament. As Equivocations, Silence keeping, and Mental Reservation, are
always the Society's great help; the Jesuits of Paris made wonderful use of
them in the Letters they wrote to the Pope and Cardinal Borghese his Nephew.
Can any one forbear laughing, and see Coton speaking down right to his
Holiness, that by the Liberties of the Gallican Church, they understood nothing
but the Concordate made betwixt Leo X. and Francis I.

A Book of Doctor Richer Sindic of the Doctors of Paris, occasions there a
great stir.
Vbaldini bestirred himself yet farther with the Clergy and Sorbonne, to ruin
Richer, Doctor and Syndic of the Faculty at Paris. At the beginning of the
year, two Books were put out, one of which brought great trouble to the Author,
though his Name was not put to it. The first was but a Collection of some Decrees
of the Faculty at Paris, upon the Authority of the Pope. It Was intended to
prove herein, that the ancient Doctrine of Sorbonne is, That Jesus Christ has
instituted an Aristocratical Government in his Church. And because the Court of
Rome accuses all those of Huguenotism, who oppose it is Usurpations, the Author
of this Collection was willing to prevent this Reproach against the Faculty, in
joining to his Collection the Sorbonne Decrees against Luther, and du Plessis
Mornai. The second Book unfolds the Hypothesis of the Aristocratical Government
of the Church. The Title of the Book is, Of Ecclesiastical and Politic Power.

The Author pretended that Spiritual Jurisdiction belongs properly to the
Church, and that the Pope and Bishops are but the Instruments and Ministers
whom she makes use of, to exercise this Jurisdiction; that Jesus Christ is the
Essential Head of the Church, of which the Pope is only Head Ministerial, as
they term it, and that the Authority of the Pope extends only to particular
Churches, where he is to see, that the Decrees and Canons published in General
Councils be observed; that the Church ought not to be governed by one Absolute
Monarch, but by the Canons; that Infallibility is given to the Church in
general, that is to say, to the Body of the chief Pastors, every particular
Bishop and Pope likewise being subject to Error; that the frequent calling of
General Councils is necessary; that the Decrees of the Pope oblige no further,
than they are Conformable to the Canons; Lastly, that the Pope cannot impose
any Obligation upon the Church against her will, and without her consent to it.

As to politic Power the Author maintains, that Jesus Christ has given no
Temporal Jurisdiction to the Church, and that she has not any power to use the
Sword, or Constraint; that Censures and Excommunications are the Spiritual Arms
of the Church, and that they could not heretofore be employed, without the
Counsel of the Assembly, which they called Presbyters; that the King is the
Defender and Protector of the Natural, Divine, and Canonical Law, and that in
this Quality, he has right to make Laws, and use the Sword to maintain, what
God and the Councils have ordained; that Christian Emperors have by Right
called the first General Council: That Appeals as Appeals from Abuse or Error
are lawful, and that Sovereigns ought to receive them in quality of being
Protectors of the Canons; that the Church has an indirect Power over Temporal
Matters, by way of Persuasion and Excommunication, but not by way of Constraint
and Deposition of Sovereigns; that the Decrees of Popes, wherein Sovereigns who
don't Exterminate Heretics, are Excommunicated, have no more Authority, than
the Decrees of Boniface VIII. and other Constitutions of Ambitious and Usurping
Popes; that the Examples of Emperors and Princes Excommunicated and Deposed by
Popes, are facts which cannot prove a Right lawfully acquired. And so this Work
ended in submitting all these Propositions, to the Judgment of the Church.

Richer's Testament at the end of the 2d Vol. of his Works.
Edmund Richer had composed this Book at the Entreaty of the chief President
Verdun. He put it into the Press after the Sentence made betwixt the University
of Paris, and the Jesuits. As soon as this Book appeared, Duval and other
Doctors of the Popes Faction excited by the Nuncio, made a fearful noise; they
got at first too strong and numerous a Cabal, for having the Work to be
censured at Sorbonne. Vbaldini's Auditor and Forgemont, Mercure Francois, 1612.
went from Door to Door to Solicit the Censure: When the Parliament had
cognizance of it, they sent for Richer and Forgemont: The first was
Reprimanded, for that he had published his Book without permission, and any
Precedent Examination according to the Statutes. The other Doctor was much
blamed, because he was in League with a Foreigner, to procure by extraordinary
ways an Assembly of the faculty at Paris, which was to Deliberate upon a Work,
where the Author treated of many Important Questions, touching the Rights and
Liberties of the Gallican Church. The Parliament put forth another Act, to
prohibit the Faculty from proceeding to the Examination of Richer's Book, and
to order, that all the Copies should be carried to the Registry of Parliament.
The most Prudent and most Apprehensive Doctors declared themselves for Richer,
but Duval and some hot Spirited Men, penned bloody Books against him. The
Cardinal Perron, and the Bishops of the Province of Sens, condemn Richer's Book
in an Assembly.
The outcry was so furious, as they threatened him with nothing less than
Transportation to Rome, and sending of him to the Inquisition, to be burned
there afterward. The greatest and most dangerous Enemy of Richer, was Cardinal
Perron, push't on by the Cardinal Gonzaga, and the Nuncio Vbaldini: Perron had
the Malice to say in the Queen's Council, that he had been a long time
heretofore in the party of the League, that he did not set the Council above
the Pope, but because he supposed that the States General are above Kings;
Lastly, that he had it in his Eye, to fling at the birth of the King and his
State, with the Children of Henry IV. and the Validity of the Marriage of the
late King with the Queen Mother. Richer ask't leave to defend himself against
the Calumnies of the Cardinal; but the Nuncio made so great a noise on his
side, as so just a Request could not be granted him. Vbaldini even threatened to
depart presently from Paris, without taking his leave of the King. The Cardinal
de Bonzi declared one day to Richer from the Chancellor Sileri, that he should
be taken into Custody, if he answered any of the Libels which his Adversaries
published against him. How! said Bonzi, The King and Queen his Mother, know how
to deal with the little Republic of Geneva. And why will you say, cannot their
Majesty's as well keep the Pope in awe, who, is otherwise more powerful than
the Seignory of Geneva? Besides that his Spiritual Dominion extends over all
the World, he is Sovereign of many Provinces in Italy. It Was thus, that the
Grandees imagined their Elevation gave them right to pay others with most
extravagant Answers.

The Enemies of Richer seeing there was nothing to do in the Sorbonne, by
reason of the Parliament, they sought some other Means to stain the Reputation
of this good Man. Cardinal du Perron was to hold an Assembly at Paris,
consisting of the Bishops of the Province of Sens, of which he is the
Metropolitan, for to depute at a General Assembly of the Clergy, to be held in
the Month of May, and to Nominate an Agent of the Clergy. An occasion was taken
to present Richer's Book to this sort of Provincial Council. The President
failed not to have it condemned there, as containing many false Propositions
Erroneous, Scandalous, Schismatical and Heretical, without touching however,
said they, the Rights of the King and Crown of France, or the Rights,
Immunities and Liberties of the Gallican Church! Never was there a more
Irregular Censure than this. The Prelates had not power to Assemble, but upon
some certain Temporal Affairs of the Clergy of their Province; The pretended
Cardinal's Council was not therefore called according to the rightful Form. Of
eight Bishops who composed it, five Signed the Condemnation, without having
been present at the Examination of the Book: One might have been surpised, to
find there the Name of Gabriel de l'Aubespine, Bishop of Orleans, well known by
his Books, wherein he endeavors to clear some curious Passages of
Ecclesiastical Antiquity, if one did not otherwise know, that this Prelate was
a Courtier, who led a Disorderly Life. The Bishop of Orleans, they were will not
to say in those days, is writing for the Church, when he has no more Money to
game withal.

The Parliament having taken in hand the Affair of Richer's Book, the Bishops of
the Province of Sens could not pronounce upon it without encroaching upon the
King and Parlement's Authority. They ought to send for the Author, and hear his
Defense. At last the Cardinals condemned, and absolved at the same time. All
the Propositions pretended to be erroneous and heretical in Richer's Book,
respected the Rights of the King, and Liberties of the Gallican Church; and
this was the reason why the Fathers of the Council would not meddle: 'Twas
expected from their Knowledge and Equity, that they would have declared to the
Public, Richer's Heresies, which have no Relation to the Rights of the Crown,
and Privileges of the Gallican Church. Gondi Bishop of Paris, having caused to
be published in all his Parishes the Decree of the Council, where he was
present, Richer appealed as from an Abuse. He presented a Relief of Appeal to
be Sealed, but they refused him the Letters he asked for, without any regard to
the good Reasons he alleged, in offering to justify himself: The Cabal was so
strong, as the Parliament dared not receive the Petition which Richer had
presented, to demand from the Court, that they would be pleased to order his
Letters of Relief should be Sealed. Perron was too subtle to suffer, that the
Decree of his Provincial Council should be examined in Parliament. The Advocate
General would not have failed to prove to the Cardinal, that it was himself who
was downright ignorant, or at least a Malicious Accuser, and Cowardly Flatterer
of the Pope.

Recher is divested of his Sindic or Headship of the Doctors of the faculty of
Paris.
Injustice was push't to the utmost against poor Richer. Some Months after
Harlai de Chanvalon, Abbot of St. Victor at Paris, a Man, who according to the
Nature of his Family, declared for or against the Court of Rome, as the Court
of France would have it; the Abbot Chanvalon, I say, proposed in an Assembly of
the Faculty of Paris, that another Syndic might be chosen in the room of
Richer. The Dr. modestly opposes this last Effort of his Enemies. The Faculty
was divided. Duval was at the Head of 43 cowardly Doctors or Ignoramus's, who
upheld the Abbot's Proposal. 25 Doctors of clearer Judgment, and no less
fearful, declared for Richer. The Division in the Sorbonne was so great, as the
Queen and Parliament made a Prohibition, that the Faculty might not proceed to
the Election of a New Syndic: But Perron the Nuncio, and other Creatures of the
Pope's, stickled so mightily, as notwithstanding all the just Oppositions of
Richer and his Friends, the King sent an express Command to the Faculty, to
choose a new Syndic. They must obey. Richer protested openly, that he would die
in the Communion of the Roman Church; that he was a good Servant to the King
and Queen; that he would ever defend without Stubbornness and Ambition, the
ancient Doctrine of the Schools at Paris; that he believed he ought to oppose
the Pernicious and Detestable Doctrine, which was Artificially insinuated. viz.
That it is lawful to Depose Kings, and kill Tyrants: Lastly, that he submitted
his Book to the Censure of the Church, and the Faculty of Paris, and his
strongest Passion was to see it examined by equitable and disinteress't Judges.
What remains to us of Richer, proves, that he suffered with much Moderation and
Patience, the Injustice done to him. Filesac was chosen to Succeed him in the
Syndicate.

Amongst all these Troubles, the Queen Regent diverted her self more than
Religion or Decency, in the second year of her Mourning would allow of; she
Mourned not the Tragical Death of the Deceased King, but for mere fashion sake.
Nothing, said Mary de Medicis to the President Jeannin, whose Son had been
Murdered, Nothing has so much appeased my Sorrows after the Death of the King,
as the Affairs of the Regency. Her Majesty might have said with more Reality,
if she had said, as to see my self Mistress. The Dukes de Vendosme and de
Cheureuse were with Bassompierre, Memoires de Bassompierre.
to dance a Ball every Sunday; sometimes at the Prince of Conti's House,
sometimes at the Duchess of Guise's, because the Regent dared not to hold
public Assemblies in the Louvre. The double Marriage being solemnly declared
the 25th of March by the Chancellor, in presence of their Majesty's, the Prince
of Conti, the Peers and Officers of the Crown; the Spanish Ambassador gave his
consent to it from the King his Master. From that time he rendered to Madam the
Eldest Daughter of France, all the same Honors which the Spaniards give their
Queens: But the French Courtiers whose Demeanours are much different from those
of the Spaniards, could not forbear Laughter, observing the Ceremonies, and
affected Gravity of the Ambassador. Mary de Medicis had ordered a Magnificent
Tournament in the Royal Square, for joy of the double Marriage. The three
Champions were the Duke de Guise, the Duke de Nevers, and Bassompierre. The
Constable and four Marshals of France, were to be Judges. This Festival which
does not deserve a place in any serious History, cost an infinite Deal of
Money. Mary spent in shows and indiscreet Liberality, the Millions which the
Deceased King had spared with too much providence. New Broils at the Court of
France.
The Prince of Conde and Count Soissons, were not present at the Declaration of
Marriage. They were retired from Court, with a Resolution not to return till
after the King's Majority, and not to Sign the Contract of Marriage. The Queen,
said they, is able to finish all alone, what she has resolved upon, Siri
Memoire recondite. Tom. II. p. 640, 641, 642, etc.
and Negotiated without our Knowledge. God forbid we should do this injury to
the late King's Memory, as to consen^ that the word which he has given the
Duke of Savoy, should not be kept, whose House has been so many times allied
to this of France.

Such good Sentiments would deserve praises if Princes did not ordinarily use
such Pretensions, when they are acted only by mere Interest. Conde and Soissons
did not see that the Regent was forward to grant them the Gratifications, which
they were made to hope for. The Queen being strengthened with the House of
Guise, and the Duke of Epernon, assured of the Constable and the Mareschals of
Bouillon, and Lesdiguieres, who had been brought over Discontented with what
the two Princes had said in Council, when the double Marriage was proposed, the
Queen seemed not to be any more concerned for the Princes of the Blood. The
Constable only endeavored to serve them, by putting Mary de Medicis in fear.
He oft-times represented to her, that the Civil Wars and Miseries of the
precedent Reigns, had no other cause than the evil Counsel given to Catharine
de Medicis, for to despise and lay aside the Princes of the Blood. They, Madam,
said he, who insinuate into you the same Methods, think more of Establishing
their Fortunes and Reputation, than the good of the State: If your Majesty
gives ear to them, I foresee that Trouble and Confusion will speedily follow.
The Advice of the Constable allied to the Princes of the Blood, and Enemy to
the House of Guise, was look'^ upon as Partial; the Regent gav^^^o Attention to
it, but at the last push. The Guises and the Duke of Epernon Triumphed, while
the Prince of Conde and Soissons were absent. The House of Guise had taken care
to order the Tournament. Under pretext of contributing to the Queen's
Diversion, they became more powerful than ever. Some Satirical Wits said, that
she looked upon the Chevalier de Guise with too favorable an Eye: He ordinarily
waited on her at Table, when the Princess de Conti, or the Duchess de Guise
regaled her Majesty. Mary seemed very much content to look near the fine Hand
of the Chevalier, which he himself affected to show. The Marquess d'Ancre, who
all of this House, and the Duke of Epernon hated, could not endure the great
favor showed the Guises and their Ally. The Ministers of State were much
alarmed at it. They thought to pluck down the pride of these two Ambitious
Houses. Conchini was so much the more disquieted, for that the Queen was angry
with him. Mary raised him up to this Greatness, but in consideration of his
Wife; and the Marquess did not live kindly with her. His anger at home
proceeded sometimes so far, as he talked of leaving the Court: They quarrelled
lately at Table with so much heat, as they threw Plates at one another's Head;
The Regent upheld the Marchioness: The Guises and the Ministers of State who
loved not Conchini, took Goligai's part, and bemoaned her, to Exasperate
farther the Queen against her Husband. All this set Conchini forward to side
with the Princes of the Blood, who had a mind to humble the Guises and Eper^on,
and who pretended to drive away from Court, the Ministers of State. Conchini
had a mind, especially to do this good ^urn for the Chancellor. He was busied
^o obtain for Dole his Creature, and his ^^timate Friend, the Office of
Attorney General at the Parliament of Paris, va^^ant by the Death of De la
Guesle; but ^ileri had procured it for Belieure, Allied ^o the Chancellor's
House. To revenge himself of this Affront, Conchini took a ^esolution to get
the Seals taken away from Sileri, and to cause them to be given to Dole.

The Duke of Mayenne is sent to Spain, to make a demand of the Infanta in the
King's Name.
In the mean time the Affair of the double Marriage was to be made an end of,
and Dispatches given to the Duke of Mayenne, which were necessary for to demand
the Infanta Ann, in the King's Name. The Presence and express consent of all
the Princes of the Blood, were of the greatest importance upon this occasion.
The Ministers of State employed diverse Persons to Negotiate the return of the
Prince of Conde and Count Soissons: But the Uncle and Nephew would not hearken
to the Ministers, whom they had undertaken to ruin. Memoires de la Regence de
Marie de medicis.
The Marquess d'Ancre, who had need of the Princes for his own ends, willingly
took upon him the Office of going to invite both of them to come to Court. All
considerations were promis't, which were due to their Birth Soissons suffered
himself to be Lured, by the hopes of being Governor of Quilleboeuf in Normandy.
After this it was no^ hard to persuade Conde. The two Princes at first went to
Paris, accompanied with 500 Horsemen. The Regent seemed to be afraid of this,
but she recovered her Spirits. They came in few days after to Fontainbleau,
where the Cour^ passed away the Spring.

The Count de Soissons Friends counseled him to refuse his consent to the
double Marriage, till he was more assured o^ what he was to hope for, and
hinder the Prince of Conde from giving his; but the Marshall Lesdiguieres
always deceived by the hopes of having made good in Parliament his Brief, to be
made Duke and Peer, though the Court had amused him for more than Six Months;
Lesdiguieres, I say, persuaded the Count of Soissons to do what the Regent
would have him do. The double Match having been then proposed in Council with
the Envoy of the Duke of Mayenne and de Puisieux Secretary of State, and Son to
the Chancellor; the Business came to a conclusion, without any one's opposing
of it: Moreover the Procuration and Instruuctions prepared for the Duke of
Mayenne were read, who immediately set out on his Journey with Puiseux. The
Duke de Pastrana came on his side into France, to demand from the King and
Prince of Spain, Madam Elizabeth, the Eldest Daughter of France.

Matthias King of Hungary and of Bohemia, is chosen Emperor after the Death of
Rodolphus the Second.
The year 1612, was styled the year of Magnificences, by reason of the Festivals
and Shows set up in France, Spain, and Naples, for the Publication of the
double Marriage betwixt the two Crowns; and in Germany, at the Election of
Matthias King of Hungary and Bohemia, who was Proclaimed and Crowned Emperor at
Francfort. Rodolph the Second his Brother, died at Prague in the beginning of
this year, of a Distemper in his Legs. It Was in the 60th year of his Age, and
23d of his Reign. A Prince whom one might judge would Govern well, if he never
had arrived to the Sovereign power. Mercure Francois, 1611.
After his Death, the Duke of Neubourg contended for the Vicegerency of the
Empire, with the Duke de Deux-Ponts, as he had already contested the
Administration of the ^alatinate, and the Tutelage of the young Elector. The
two Dukes sent their Letters Patents into the Provinces of the Vicariat
Palatine, as the Elector of Saxony had sent into his Vicariat for to Exhort all
the People to remain Peaceable, and seek for Redress before the Vicegerent of
the Empire in all Affairs which are needful, till the approaching Election. But
the Duke de Deux-Ponts having been received as Administrator at the Diet at
Neuremberg, the preceding year, it was a great step to promote his interest. He
was present in the same Quality at the Election of the New Emperor, and there
gave his Vote.

The Elector of Mentz according to the right which the Golden Bull gives him,
had convok't a Diet at Francfort, to be on the 24th of May. Ferdinand of
Bavaria New Elector of Cologne, since the Death of Ernest his Kinsman, arrived
in the Month of February, whom he Succeeded in full Right, in Quality of
Coadjutor nominated. The Archbishop of Treves, and John George Duke of Saxony
rendered themselves there. John Sigismond Marquess of Brandenburg, sent thither
his Ambassador to stand in his place. Matthias came the last, as King of
Bohemia, accompanied with the Queen his Spouse, and followed by 3000 Persons.
He had ask't leave of the Electoral College, to have with him a great number of
Men, which the Golden Bull does not allow of to Electors in the like occasion.
They held their first Meeting in the Town Hall at Francfort. They observed
there all the Formalities which were to precede the Election. The 13th of June
the Electors went to St. Bartholomew's Church. After they had taken the usual
Oath, they went into the Imperial Chamber, and Matthias II. King of Hungary and
B^^emia, and Archduke of Austria was Elected and Proclaimed Emperor. This is
not a place to give a Description in of all the Ceremonies, which are practiced
on this occasion. The Concourse of the Princes and Nobility of Germany, makes
the finest Sight: Besides the Princes of Sovereign Houses, who came in crowds
to Francfort: Besides the Barons, which the Emperor and the Electors had in
their Train, there were counted Ninety others who paid their Devoirs to
Matthias.

He was Crowned the 24th of June, with the usual Pomp. The Oath cannot but be
approved of, which they made him take, viz. to be a Defender and Protector of
the Church in General, and in particular, to govern the Empire according to the
Justice of his Predecessors; to preserve carefully all the Rights of it, to
defend the Poor, the Rich, Widows and Orphans; Lastly, to submit himself, and
obey Jesus Christ. But is not this the greatest Indignity in the World, that
they should put into this Oath the Roman High Priest, immediately after the
Savior of the World? The Emperor promises to obey God, and the Pope alike.
Strange blindness of Princes, who will not know the Spirit of the Religion they
swear to maintain! Let the Bishop of Rome be Sovereign of the same Provinces in
Italy; it is a grand abuse in Religion: But the Emperors and Kings engage to
obey him, this is an entire overthrow of the Gospel. They were wont heretofore
to say, that the Church is in the Empire; The primitive Christians, did they
pretend the Empire to be in the Church? She ought to obey God and Sovereigns;
but Emperors and Kings have none but God above them. Thus they thought in the
primitive Ages: All the World would think still the same, if Sovereigns would
be instructed in their true Interests, and those of the Religion they profess.
By giving great Riches and Principalities to the Clergy, they have given them
wherewith they may degrade their Benefactors. Matthias having wished the Empress
his Spouse was Crowned, the Ceremony was performed two days after.

Leonard Donato, Doge of Venice, died almost at the same time. Antony Memmi
chosen Doge of Venice after the Death of Leonard Donato.
Antony Memmi was Elected in his place the 24th of July, and Crowned the next
Morning. The Dogate of Donato, was famous for the Contest of the Republic with
Pope Paul V. who interdicted all the Country of the Seigniory of Venice. The
Doge and Senate seemed at first willing to defend courageously the lawful
Authority of Sovereigns, but when they were come to treat of this with the
Pope, the Venetians Degenerated from the Vigor and Stedfastness of their
Ancestors, upon the like occasions. They yielded cowardly to almost all the
Articles, which the Court of Rome required from them, except the
Reestablishment of the Jesuits, who had been gone after the Fulmination of the
Interdiction. The Society had done much more Mischief in France, than at
Venice. In the mean time being extremely content to see themselves delivered
from the good Fathers, these Wise Senators Resisted a longer time, than France,
the Solicitations of the Court of Rome, for the Reestablishment of their
Society. During this quarrel with the Pope; the Seigniory had forbid the
Subjects of the Republic, under pain of perpetual Banishment, to have any
Commerce with the Jesuits, or send their Children to study in their Colleges.
The same Act was this year renewed, Mercure Francois 1612.
upon the account of a Woman of Bresse, who was gone to Castilione to live
there, under the direction of the good Fathers. They had Established there, I
cannot tell what College of Women, and a great many Maids had put themselves
into it. The Brissan Lady sold the Estate she had in the States of the
Republic, to Augment this New Foundation; but the Senate endeavored to stop
the Money that arose from the Alienation, and caused the Venetian Dames to be
recalled, that might have put themselves under the conduct of the Society into
the College of Castiglione.

The Marshall d'Bouillon's Embassy to England.
The Marshall Bouillon was gone extraordinary Ambassador into England, and this
was to impart to King James the double Marriage, and so dissipate all
Suspicions and Jealousies, which this double Alliance might create in his
Majesty: Bouillon had a particular design in this Voyage. Siri Memoire
recondite. Tom. II. p. 684, 685, 686.
He was minded to Negotiate a Marriage of the young Elector Palatine, Nephew of
the Mareschal's Lady who was of the House of Orange, with the Princess of
England. Mary of Medicis, whom the Court of Rome always made use of for it is
own ends, had recommended to her Ambassador, that he should complain to the
King of great Britain, for that he had entered into a League with the
Protestant Princes of Germany, against the Roman Religion, and to desire his
Britannick Majesty to moderate, the Rigor of the Laws against the English, who
were of the Popish Communion. The Marshall had besides express Order, to cause
King James to Disapprove of the Demeanor of the Reformed of France, in their
last Assembly at Saumur; but especially to bid him beware of the Duke of Rohan,
who was the most Zealous of the Protestant Lords. Bouillon had already done to
Rohan, such ill Offices with the Queen of France, as he himself was enough
disposed, not to be more favorable to the Duke in the English Court.

King James was easily made to believe, that France thought of nothing but the
General good of Christianity, by making this double Alliance with Spain, and
that the Regent would not less preserve the Amity of Princes and the States
Protestants. Bouillon endeavored at last to make his Majesty understand, that
the Pope would not use violent means against the Protestants, and that he
intended only to Convert them by Preachments, and the good Examples of the
Clergy. The Marshall laid hold on this occasion, to insinuate into the King
the Regent's Complaints, for that he had entered into the Protestant League of
Germany, and the entreaty that Mary of Medicis made him in favor of the
English Papists. I don't know whether this good Prince was inclined to believe
what the Ambassador had told him, concerning the good Intentions of the Pope.
Whatever the Matter was, James answered, that the Protestants looked only to the
Reciprocal Defense of the States of the Confederate Princes, and that Religion
was not concerned in it. As to the English, who were of the Roman Communion,
his Majesty protested, he willingly would let them be at Rest, as soon as they
could give certain Assurances of their Fidelity and Obedience. Bouillon sent
this into France, and then Villeroy imparted it to the Nuncio, as a great
Secret. The Regent pressed Vbaldini to make his Master acquainted of it,
Subjoyning, that she would write of it to Breves her Ambassador, to the end his
Holiness might find some Expedient to content the King of Great Britain.

Memoires de la Regence, de Mary de Medicis.
When they came to speak touching the Matters of the Reformed Churches in
France, James was not altogether so Tractable. The Duke de Rohan held a great
Correspondence with Henry, the King's Eldest Son. This was a very hopeful
Prince; he showed a Zeal little common to Persons of his Age, for the good of
the Protestant Religion. Never did the Roman People so much love Germanicus, as
the English loved this Prince of Wales; and the Father perhaps was not much
less jealous of the Applauses they gave his Son, than Tiberius was of old
jealous of the Reputation of him whom Augustus made him adopt. Rohan had gained
over a Gentleman of the Ambassador's Retinue. This secret Friend of the Duke,
was to instruct his Britannique Majesty with the truth of all, which passed in
France: Insomuch as the King was well prepared, whenever he was spoke to
concerning the Assembly at Saumur. If the Queen your Mistress, replied he, to
Bouillon, will break Acts agreed to the Protestants of her Realm, I don't
pretend, that the Alliance I have made and confirmed with France, ought to
hinder me from succouring and protecting them: When my Neighbors are Attack't
in a Quarrel that respects me, Natural Law requires, that I should prevent the
Mischief which may arise from thence. Believe me, Monsieur Marshall, said the
King, you must be Reconciled to the Duke of Rohan, I will let him know, it is my
desire that you live friendly together. Would to God King James and his
Children had always preserved Sentiments so just and necessary for the good of
England, and the Reformation; Lewis the XIII. or his Son, had never dared to
oppress so many innocent Frenchmen. The Marshall Bouillon, who was minded to
be fair with the King, did not insist further upon the Assembly at Saumur. The
ill success of his Negotiation upon this point, brought him to Discredit with
the Queens Ministers of State. They published, that Bouillon had neither
followed the Intentions or Orders of her Majesty. The Marshall complained on
his side, that he was not well dealt withal, he pretended that they had a mind
to Affront him.

Lesdiguieres was not more content with the Ministers, The Marshall de
Lesdiguitres is discontented.
than Bouillon. Whether it was that there was an underhand dealing betwixt the
Queen and the Parliament, or that this Assembly really believed, that the prime
Dignities ought not to be given to Protestants, never could Lesdiguieres bring
it so about, as to have his Brief of Duke and Peer approved of. They
represented to the Queen, Siri Memory recondite. Tom. II. p. 696.
that Brissac and Fervaques, ancienter Mareschals of France than Lesdiguieres,
would have reason to complain, if they had not likewise granted them the same
distinction; that the Duke of Rohannez had a Brief from the Deceased King,
which promised him, that no other should be received in Parliament before him.
At last, that in a time of Minority, it was dangerous to discontent the most
Illustrious and most Ancient Houses of the Realm, for to pleasure an Upstart.
Notwithstanding these Remonstrances, the Queen sent the Orders of her Son for
passing his Brief, Lesdiguieres could not yet obtain it, when the Chambers were
met to deliberate upon this Affair. Memoires de la Regence.
The Suffrages were twice divided; and the Queen who had compass't what she
expected from the Marshall, would not use all her Authority, under pretense
that Prudence did not permit her to provoke the Parliament in the present
juncture of Affairs. Lesdiguieres vexed to see himself played upon, joined
himself to the Princes of the Blood and others, who had a mind to ruin the
Ministers of State.

Mary of Medicis brings down the Duke de Guises, and de Epernons Party.
Conchini Reconciled to his Wife, made use (the most Artificially it was
possible for him) of the Prince of Conde and Count Soissons, in order to
diminish the great Authority which the Dukes of Guise and Epernon had taken.
Caesar Duke de Vendosme, was joined with them to the good liking of the Queen;
but this declared Union drew upon him such troubles, as he did not expect. As
there was need of the presence of the Princes of the Blood, to make an end of
the Marriage with the Duke of Pastrana, whom the King of Spain had sent for
this purpose; the Queen endeavored to content them, by bringing down their
opposite Party. Vendosme desired to go and hold the States of Britanny, whereof
he was Governor. The Princes of the Blood, to punish him for having been in
League with the ancient Enemies of his Father, and the House of Bourbon, told
the Queen in private, that Caesar might be able easily to make a Party in a
Province so far distant, where he had great Reputation and Estate by his Wife,
Heiress of the House of Mercoeur. Conchini and the Ministers, made these
Reasons of State prevail with Mary de Medicis. When the Duke then of Vendosme
came to ask of her leave to go and preside over the Estates of Britanny, her
Majesty flatly refused it him. The Marshall de Brissac Lieutenant General of
the Province, who had been employed to do Caesar this Injury with the Queen,
had this Important Commission bestowed on him. The Duke of Vendosme was so
outragiously angry at the Refusal, as that he challenged the Marshall. This
young Gentleman's outrageous Heat, greatly displeased the Queen: She without
tarrying till Caesar and Brissac were Friends, ordered the former to remove
from Court, and go to his House at Anet. The other went afterward on his
Journey for Britanny, in spite of all the Endeavors and Intrigues of the
Dukes of Guise, Vendosine and Epernon, who were extremely netled at the
Repulses and disa greeable Words, which they received upon this Occasion from
the Queen Regent.

The Count de Soissons undertakes to ruin the public Ministers of State.
This Mortification of the Guise's and Duke of Epernon, rejoyc't the Count of
Soissons; but his Revengeful Humor was not as yet satisfied: He plotted in his
Head to ruin the Ministers, but especially the Chancellor Sileri. Soisson's
Hatred against them was so much the more lively and vigorous, for that he
thought Sileri, Villeroy and Jeannin, hindered the Queen from granting what she
had given him ground to hope for. The Prince of Conde was as much impatient of
the Court delays, as his Uncle; they both feared, lest the Ministers should
Mortify, Memoires de la Regence de Marie de Medicis.
and bring down the Princes of the Blood, as well as the Dukes of Guise and
Epernon, for to keep up their Credit with the two opposite Parties. The
Marquess de Ancre craftily Discours't the Prince of Conde and Count Soissons
upon this opinion. The Queen, said he to them, has good Intentions for the
Princes of the Blood. She would give you both Satisfaction, if the Ministers
did not constantly Represent to her, that it was dangerous you should be too
powerful in two Provinces, so considerable as Normandy and Guienne are. This is
the reason why the Queen defers so long, to give the Governments of
Chateau-Trompette to Monsieur the Prince, Quillebeuf to Monsieur the Count:
From the first day of the Regency, the Ambitious Conchini had taken a design to
alter all things at Court, to remove the Ministers of the deceased King, and
put into their places, Persons who should entirely depend upon him. The present
Conjuncture of time appeared favorable to the Marquess d' Ancre, for putting
in execution the Project he had contrived.

He undertales to put a grand Affront on the Chancellor Sileri.
One day being with the Prince of Conde, the Count of Soissons and the
Mareschals Bouillon and Lesdiguieres, he caused them to agree to work out
jointly the entire ruin of the Ministers. The Count de Soissons promis't them
at his return from a small Journey, he was to make into Normandy, he would deal
with the Chancellor Sileri, after a very Outrageous manner. Lesdiguieres, who
discontent returned into Dauphiny, promised to give the Princes Succors, and to
bring 'em in case of necessity 10000 Foot, and 500 Horse, even to the Gates of
Paris. The Duke of Savoy secretly entered into all these Intrigues; he
entertained a Secret Correspondence with the Count de Soissons. The desire he
had to be Revenged of the Queen Regent, who gave to the Prince of Spain, the
Eldest Daughter of France, promised to the Prince of Piedmont, the hopes to
make Advantages of the broils of France, and to retake what Henry the IV. had
forced him to give, in exchange for the Marquisate of Saluces; all these
Motives spurred on Charles Emanuel, to omit nothing of what ever was capable to
kindle a Civil War in France by means of the Princes of the Blood, or at least
by the Huguenot Party. And for this reason, he constantly Negotiated sometimes
with the Count of Soissons, sometimes with Marshall Lesdiguiers. He renewed
his Intrigues, according as he saw one or other Dissatisfied with the Court.

The Marquess de Coeuvres d^ver^s the Count de Soissons from such a Design.
The Prince of Conde and others, had made Count Soissons promise to say nothing
to the Marquess de Coeuvres, his intimate Friend, of the Complot against the
Chancellor. They foresaw that Coeuvres being used to stop the Count when his
Choler had carried him too far, he would not fail to Represent to Soissons,
that it was unworthy of a Prince of the Blood, to be Outrageous against the
chief Magistrate of the Realm. The thing happened, as they had guess't it. The
Count de Soissons could not keep the Secret: He discovered it to the Marquess
de Coeuvres, who showed him the troublesome Consequences of such like
undertakings. But the Subject Matter, was, how to Disingage the Count from his
Word, which he had given to others. Coeuvres luckily found out a way. The
difference that Soissons had in his Journey to Normandy with the Marshall de
Fervacques, on the occasion of the Garrison of Quillebeuf, which Fervacques had
reinforc't unknown to the Count, this Difference, I say, occasioned the
Marquess de Coeuvres to go several times into Normandy, and to come back again
to Court, to give some satisfaction to the Count de Soissons, who complained
aloud of the Marshall Fervacques.

Conchini impatient that Soissons did not return time enough to work the ruin
of the Chancellor, told himself to the Marquess de Coeuvres at the Marshall
Bouillons House, in the presence of the Prince of Conde, Harlai of Beaumont and
Dole, the Reasons there were to hasten the Count of Soissons to return.
Coeuvres feigned not to know any thing of a Plot amongst them against the
Chancellor. When they had discovered it plainly to him, he so lively
represented the Indignity of the Action, as they were ashamed of it. If you
have wherewithal to prove, said he, that the Chancellor has not done his Duty,
is it not a more honest and surer way to inform the Queen of it, and persuade
her Majesty to take the Seals from him, than to outrage unworthily the Chief
Justiciary? So great a Violence offered, will not fail to pluck more upon your
own Heads. Who hereafter will succeed Sileri, when he sees he cannot exercise
the Office with Security, which of times exposes him who is possessed often, to
discontent Princes and Grandees, in obeying the King's Orders? The Marshall de
Bouillon was the first who yielded to the Remonstrances of Coeuvres. These
Reasons, said he, have so much the more reason in them to be received; for that
the Marquess generously alleges them in favor of one, of whom he has cause
to complain. It Was not then farther thought upon, to put any such bloody
Indignity on the Chancellor, every one then took only Measures to destroy his
Reputation he had in the Queens Breast.

The Marquess d' Ancres knavery, and double dealing.
Conchini and his Wife labored herein with better Success, than all the rest.
This Italian was the falfest Politician in the World. At the same time he made
use of the Count Soissons, to destroy the Chancellor and Ministers of State, he
himself was the Person, who hindered the Regent from contenting the Prince, in
giving of him the Government of Quillebeuf. The Baron Luts Agent for the
Marquess d' Ancre, Solicited in his behalf the Duke of Guise to declare for
the Queen, and uphold the Refusal, which she designed to give the Count of
Soissons. Guise was so adverse to this perfidious dealing of Conchini, as he
gave notice of it to Soissons. The House of Guise, the Cardinal Joyeuse and
Bellegarde, Master of the Horse, dissatisfied at what Mary de Medicis had done
to the Duke of Vendosme, sought to reunite themselves with the Princes of the
Blood, against the Marquess d' Ancre. Only the Duke of Epernon neglected to
enter into this new Treaty; whether it was that his Pride hindered him from
Courting the Princes of the Blood, to confirm his reeling Credit, or that the
Rheumatism which then afflicted him, would not give him opportunity to think of
Court Intrigues. There was in Guise's Party a pack of French Lords, who were
not much better, and perhaps worse than the Marquess d' Ancre. It Was generally
believed, Persons suborned to accuse him of Witchcraft.
that Bellegarde had this year Suborned some Persons to accuse Conchini, that
he had of a long time used some Love-spells, by means of a Looking-Glass. This
Affair much Alarmed the Marquess d' Ancre. He believed himself now so near his
Ruin, as he tried to make the Duke of Mayenne his Friend to return to Court,
who was now at the Foot of the Pirenees to go into Spain. Conchini intended to
serve his Occasions with him and the Count of Soissons, against his Enemies:
But he found out a means to rid himself of the Intrigue, without the Duke of
Mayenne's Assistance. This occasion served him likewise to do the Chancellor
ill Offices with the Queen. He had got some Commissions to Seal, in order to
have his Accuser Examined. Sileri who did not love the Marquess d' Ancre, but
favored his Enemies, made some Scruples of putting the Seals to 'em. Conchini
complained of this to the Queen, who from that time began to show to the
Chancellor some Displeasure.

Affairs of the Duke of Rohan at S lean d' Angeli's.
The Evil Counsels which the Queen Regent hearkened to, caused her troubles on
all sides with the Princes of the Blood, with the Grandees, with the Parliament,
and at the end with the Reformed Protestants. The Division amongst the
principal Persons of this Communion, afforded Mary de Medicis and her
Ministers, the means of undertaking certain things against the Edict, which
never would have been thought on, if two Men capable to maintain their Religion
against the whole World, had lived in good Intelligence amongst themselves, and
acted Unanimously. Memoires du Duc de Ro^ohan Livre f. Vie du Plessia ^^rna
Livre ^L.
I speak of the Marshall Bouillon, and the Duke of Rohan. The first served
himself with the Queen's Ear, to ruin the other in the good Apprehensions she
might have of him. What passed in the Assembly at Saumur, exasperated so much
the Marshall against the Duke, that Bouillon undertook to throw out Rohan from
the Government of St. John d' Angeli, which the Deceased King had bestowed upon
him: The Duke de Rohan being well advised of the evil Offices that were
constantly done him at Court, went to justify himself. After having
represented to the Regent, that he had behaved as a good Man in the Assembly at
Saumur. I confess to you, Madam, said the Duke, that I opposed the Designs of
Monsieur de Bouillon: But this was done but in order to give your Majesty fresh
Tokens of my Fidelity and Zeal, which I have for your Service. I Distrust those
Persons who turn Scales, and pay their Services on both Sides: It Is seldom
known, that such Men are upright in their Intentions. If Monsieur Bouillon had
brought his Designs about in our Assembly at Saumur, he might have understood
how to have used them, and prevailed even against your self. When Monsieur
Bouillon comes to be the Master amongst us, your Authority shall be never the
better Established in this Realm.

The Duke of Rohan upon this occasion, proved the Truth of a Reflection which
he himself made, viz. That a Prince who has a prejudicate Opinion, is hard to
be persuaded. The Regent gave no Attention to these Remonstrances. The time now
of the Election of the Mayor of St. John of Angeli was near. It was a thing of
the greatest Importance that could be to the Duke of Rohan, that he who was in
the place might not be continued. The adverse Party to the Governor, had got
over this Man to their side; and if their Project had succeeded, the Duke had
lost all his Authority in the place: Feigning then that his Brother was
dangerously sick, he took a Journey suddenly from Paris. Rohan took Soubize in
his way, and they both got to St. John d' Angeli. The day of Election being
come, a Letter under the King's Privy Seal was produced, that the Ancient Major
should continue; this not being to be any Rule for the future, and to be
without prejudice to the Privileges of the Inhabitants. The Duke de Rohan
Remonstrated, that her Majesty had been ill informed of the State of the City,
where there was not any thing at all of Division, as the Letter under the
King's Privy Seal had supposed, and that they might proceed to a new Election,
according to the accustomed Form; I hope said he; I shall bring her Majesty to
agree to it: To this effect I send my Secretary to Court.

The Marshall Bouillon flattered himself, that the Duke of Rohan would
infallibly lose himself, whatever Party he would take, in an Affair that was so
ticklish for him to manage: If Rohan suffers the former Major to be continued,
they would strip him of all his Authority, and if he opposed the Court's
Orders, this would find it self in a necessity of punishing a Man who neglected
to observe the Authority of the King: To engage the Queen after such a manner,
as she should not flinch back for the future; the Marshall persuaded her to
send a more express Order for to contitinue the old Major. But the Duke of
Rohan being persuaded, that if he lost the Government, he himself was lost
without any Redemption; believed, that he ought not to obey the Orders which
the Queen had sent, as being Surprised unwarily by his Enemies: A New Major was
chosen; that is to say, three Persons were Nominated, whose Names were sent to
the Court, to the end her Majesty might pitch upon one whom she judged most
proper for the place: Whilst they were expecting an Answer from the Regent, the
Keys of the Town were put into the Hands of the Eldest Alderman, and thus the
Duke of Rohan made himself Master of the Town; from whence he caused some
Subaltern Officers to be put out, who were against him.

This bold Action mightily stirred up the Queen against the Duke of Rohan? Those
whom he had sent to Court, were committed to the Bastile. It Was forbid the
Duchess his Mother, his Wife, his Sister, to stir out of Paris. Some Persons
proposed to the Counsel, that it was fit to go and Besiege the Duke in St. John
d' Angeli, as a Rebel: Orders were dispatched for raising Troops, and sending
the Artillery. The Queen published abroad, that she would go her self in Person
to the Army, which the Marshall Bouillon and Lesdiguieres were to command, to
make the Reformed know, that there was no point of Religion here in Question,
but only a Chastisment of a particular Lord, who had Revolted from his
Obedience: The Duke as soon as he understood this, published a Manifesto, which
he Addres't to the Reformed Churches; he gave them notice that his Zeal for
their Preservation, brought upon him this Persecution; that the loss of St.
John d' Angeli drew along with it other places of Retreat and Security, and
their Enemies would not stop in so fair a way, after they had taken from him
his Government. Mercure Francois, 1612.
The Manifesto ended with a lively Exhortation; The Duke complained, because
his Enemies had made Information of his Conduct, and that having found him
irreprovable, they had informed against some Gentlemen, who were not at all
faulty of any other Crime, than his giving him a Visit: The Court, said he,
fears that our divided Body will reunite, the Reputation Monsieur de Rohan has
acquired by his Quality and Probity, which he has always made profession of,
gives Vnbrage; must they for this cause apply themselves by little and little
to weaken our Party, and to undo us by Peacemeals? Let us know our selves, if
we would Live and Subsist: Let us revive the good Intelligence which was
heretofore amongst us: Let us Devote our selves to the Service of our God and
our King: Let us work for the Good of our Church, and the State: We were the
most judicious and considerable Party, before our Divisions at Saumur. This
great Man, who knew better to Fight than to Write, not standing upon
Manifesto's only, prepared himself for a courageous Defense.

Another Manifesto was published on the Queen's side. She took great care
therein to advertise the World, that her Majesty complained only of the Duke of
Rohan's Undertaking. All the French of either Religion, were exhorted in it to
relieve their Majesty's in the just Design they had to punish a Crime of so
dangerous Consequence to the Common Good of the State. At last the Queen
protested to the Reformed, that Religion not being concerned in this Affair,
the Edicts of Pacification should not be less exactly observed. Du Plessis
Mornai was then in a great Perplexity: The Town of Saumur, of which he was
Governor, was in the Queen's way in case she went to St. John d' Angeli; and
Prudence required, that she would assure her self of that important Passage. Du
Plessis did not know which side to take: If I fortify my self, said this
Judicious Gentleman, if I call for Succors, they will attack me under pretense
of Rebellion. Besides, if I don't think at all of being aware beforehand, I
leave a place of Security, which I am entrusted withal, to the Discretion of
our Enemies: Let Us run rather the Risque of yielding to Force and Injustice,
than augment the hatred they already have against our Reformation, by giving
our Enemies a new Pretension of accusing us of Rebellion. What Crime can they
upbraid me withal? I don't fear their Scrutinies, or their Informations; what
have they to find fault with me? I have no part in Mr. Rohan's Concerns. Set
upon me for Religion! This would be to set the whole Kingdom on Fire. Du
Plessis resolved not to stir: He was contented to let the Ministers of State
know the troublesome Consequence of the ill Counsels, which were given her
Majesty, and to exhort them to let the Reformed enjoy peaceably the Repose,
which the deceased King had granted them with so much Justice and Prudence.

It had been better to have hearkened to the good Counsels Du Plessis gave, if
the Enemies which the Duke of Rohan had amongst those of his own Religion, had
not obstructed it. In the mean time, whether the Regent gave any heed to what
the King of England had answered to the Marshal Bouillon upon the Subject
Matter of the Protestants in France, or that she feared many Provinces
declaring for the Duke of Rohan, a Civil War might break out in France; her
Majesty at last acknowledged, that if the Duke of Rohan had withstood her
Orders with too much Haughtiness, she likewise had too easily given way for the
King's Authority to be undermined. There was sought then some way to
accommodate Matters. Themines, Seneschal of Querci, was sent to St. John d'
Angeli, to bring back the Duke. Du Plessis Mornai had given him wise Counsel,
to yield willingly and fairly, as if the Queen was in the Right; provided he
kept his Government in the same Condition as it was before. The Negotiation was
set on foot on that Condition. The former Major was again put into the Exercise
of his Office, and the Subaltern Officers, whom the Duke of Rohan would not
suffer to be in the Town, entered there again: But in few Days after there was a
new Election, and the Regent gave other Employments to those whom the Duke did
not at all approve of.

The Reformed Protestants after this held a National Synod at Privas, in
Vivarets: They agreed there, That the Division of the greatest Persons of their
Communion was going to make Destruction of the Reformation in France. The Synod
was resolved to make a Reconcilement amongst them efficaciously. They wrote to
Du Plessis Mornai, to join all his Earnestness and Diligence to that of the
Commissaries, which the Company had nominated to agitate in this important
Affair. The Marshals, Bouillon and Lesdiguieres, not content with the Court,
easily consented to the Reunion. This made them more formidable to the Regent
and her Ministers. The Princes of the Blood, with whom they were lately
confederated, should have had more Consideration for Persons who were capable
of bringing the Huguenot Party well united on their side. In the Act of
Reconciliation, prepared by consent with Du Plessis Mornai, the Reformed Lords
mutually promised to forget all that had past; to love one another, to give one
another reciprocal Testimonies of their Amity, as far as Religion and their
bounden Faith to the King would give them leave; to labor jointly for the
Advancement of God's Kingdom, and the Repose of their Brethren; to do nothing
which might prejudice the Union and Conformity of the Doctrine and Discipline
established in the Reformed Churches of France. The Dukes de Rohan and de
Sulli, the Marshals Bouillon and Lesdigueres, Chatillon, Soubize, La Force, and
Du Plessis Mornai, signed the Writing. They agreed further, that the Governors
of places of Security, and Gentlemen distinguished in the Provinces, should be
asked to subscribe the same.

The Protestation which the National Synod of Privas published in the Name of
all the Reformed Churches in France, made a great noise in the World. See here
the Occasion. The Regent, in her Letter to the General Assembly at Saumur. had
enjoined the Deputies to retire into their Provinces, and there make report of
the good Intentions of her Majesty. The Reformed seeing at last that this
Assembly was obliged to break up, before they had time to examine the Answer
made to their Address of Complaints and Demands, thought to remedy this
Misfortune, by convening Provincial Assemblies. The Regent seemed to suffer
these, by ordering the Deputies to make their Report in their Provinces. They
assembled then for this Effect; without that the Court could find any thing to
say against them. The King's Lieutenants had themselves called some; and the
Presidents of the Sovereign Court were present at others. The Regent had her
self given order to the Commissioners sent to examine the Contravention made
against the Edict of Nants, That they should repair to the Provinces, before
any Assembly was held. They were present upon certain Occasions: One cannot say
then, that these were held without the Knowledge and Sufferance of her Majesty.
She thought that she had so fully allowed them as her Commissioners had had
Orders to assist there in Person; and her Officers, with the Magistrates, were
present there likewise.

The Deputies of the Eight Provinces being come afterward to Paris, with
design to finish what the Assembly at Saumur was not able to perform, and to
solicit more favorable Answers to the Remonstrance which they had presented,
the Regent found her self in a Perplexity she had not foreseen. It is to be
confessed, that the way of the Reformed upon this Occasion was not ill
contrived. This was a Means to hinder their secret and professed Enemies from
gaining so great Advantages from the Separation of the Assembly of Saumur.
There was much likelihood that the Duke of Rohan had furnished them with this
Expedient for to cross the Marshal Bouillon, who had deserved much at Court, by
having managed so well Affairs in the Assembly at Saumur, as the Regent could
not from thence expect a more favorable Issue. These Deputations put the
Regent and her Council at a stand; which was as troublesome as if the General
Assembly had continued. And the Marshal Bouillon did not now seem to have done
such great Feats. It concerned him to save his Reputation, by seeking some
Remedy for this new Inconvenience. A better could not be found out, than to
send back the Deputies of the Provinces, as being sent from People who were
assembled against the King's Will, or at least without his Permission. And for
the Court should not scruple this, by reason of the Coffeehouse that the
refusal to hear the Deputies might raise, the Marshal Bouillon took all the
Blame upon himself that might ensue.

They went yet further. The Regent had put forth a new Declaration, which
forbid the Reformed to hold for the future these Provincial Assemblies.
Consistories, Colloquies, Provincial and National Synods were only allowed
them, upon Condition that none should be there besides Ministers and Elders;
and that they should treat of nothing, but what concerned the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Reformed Churches in France. The Assemblies held since the
Separation of that at Saumar, were in very mild Terms declared unlawful: And to
the end that they who had been present there might not be disquieted, the King
pardoned them this pretended Crime, and forbid his Officers from prosecuting
any of them. His Majesty supposed they went thither with downright Intentions;
and that they had no Thoughts of disobeying the deceased King's Orders. The
Reformed were extremely surprised, they should be pardoned a Fault, which they
pretended to have in no wise committed. Their Deputies General presented a
Petition to the Parlements, for opposing the registring of this Declaration.
They protested, that being far from requiring any such Pardon, their Churches
looked upon it as injurious and reflecting; and that none of the Reformed
intended to make use of it. This Opposition stopped the Registring of it: But
the Court having got over some of the Reformed, under pretense, that they had
need of it for their own Security, the Declaration was registered and approved
of in Forms.

This Affair made a great noise in the National Synod of Privas. 'Twas resolved
there, to draw up a public and solemn Protestation, that the Provincial
Assemblies had not been held against the King's Will; and that the Reformed
looked upon the Pardon, which his Majesty had granted them upon this Occasion,
as a Reflection which they had not deserved. They declared at the end of the
Act, that they would never make use of the Pardon, which the King pretended to
grant 'em, and downright disavow'd those amongst the Protestants, who sought
for it. As this caused great Stirs in some Provinces, so the Court designed to
appease them by another Declaration put forth in Form to explain the former.
His Majesty acknowledged therein, to be very well satisfied with the Fidelity
and Obedience of his Protestant Subjects; but at the bottom he did not remedy
the Mischief the other Declaration had done. The Provincial Assemblies remained
forbidden: And this is all that the Court now delivered from the Deputies
Solicitations intended.

The Arrival of the Duke of Pastran^ at Paris was of great use to diminish the
Troubles which all these Affairs had given the Queen: He was received in all
the Towns he passed through, with extraordinary Honors. The Dukes of Nevers
and Luxemburgh went to meet him out of the Gates of Paris, accompanied with
four o^ five hundred Horse. He made a Magnificent Entry: He had a splendid
Equipage and abundance of Men in his Retinue very well clothed. Don Francis
and Do^^ Diego de Sylva his Brothers, and many other Spanish Lords were come
with him. The King gave him his first Audience the 6th of August. The Princes
of the Blood, the Grandees, and the Cardinals Sourdis and Bonzi, were invited
to this Ceremony. These endeavored to be excused, under pretense their
Dignities would not suffer them to be beneath the Princes of the Blood.
Ridiculous and insupportable Pretension! These Gentlemen, to speak properly,
are no better than Priests and Deacons of the particular Church of Rome: Since
they have been suffered insolently to put on Purple, they believe themselves
not to be inferior to crowned Heads. Mary de Medicis, who had had a mind the
Spaniards should see the Court of France in all its Splendor, wished that the
Cardinals were present at the Audience. They were told from her, That there
should be no distinction of Places, and that every one should sit as he came.
The Princes of the Blood strait took their Seats on the Right Hand of the King.
The Cardinals, excluded from this place, ^ut themselves on the side of the
Queen. They did not tarry there long: The Prin^ess Dowager of Conde would not
suffer them above her; and the Regent fear^ng to cross the Princes of the
Blood, ^ho would not fail to maintain the Right ^f the Princess, let the
Cardinals go out ^ith Confusion, with their sottish deserved ^mbition.

There was another difference, which made more noise on the King's side. The
Duke de Nevers had placed himself on the Bench of the Princes of the Blood. The
Count de Soissons, busied in speaking with the Prince of Conti, his Brother,
was not aware that Nevers had seated himself immediately after him. As soon as
the Prince of Conde, who sat above his two Uncles, perceived it, he jogs Conti;
and he did as much to Soissons, who failed not to push at the Duke of Nevers
with all his strength. I don't know, said he then, why you crowd me after this
manner: Because this here is none of your place, replied disdainfully the
Prince of Conde. There were interchang'd on one side and 'tother sharp biting
Words. We will explain our selves better in another place, said at last the
Prince of Conde, giving a Wink upon him to follow him. The Marshal Bouillon run
hastily to stop the Prince, who in passing by the Duke, made him understand,
that this was a Challenge. The Quarrel was presently made up by Order of the
King; and the Regent blamed the Duke of Nevers, because he had seated himself
in a Place, which was not designed but for the Princes of the Blood. The Guises
had no ^^mtest abo^^ their Places. The Duke and his Brothe^ were to go and
conduct the Duke (...) Pastrana to his Audience. After the Ambassador had made
his Compliments, and presented to the King and Queen his Catholic Majesty's
Letters, he was conducted to Madam Elizabeth, designed for the Prince of Spain,
and from thence to the Duke of Anjou's Apartment, to Salute the Prince and his
other two Sisters Daughters of France.

Articles of Marriage signed between the Prince of Spain, and Eldest Daughter
of France.
The 25th day of August, the Festival of St. Lewis, was appointed for Sealing
the Articles of Marriage between Madam Elizabeth, and the Prince of Spain. The
Duke de Pastrana and Don Innigo de Cardenas, King Philip's Ambassador in
ordinary into France signed them, as the Fathers and Sons Proxies; immediately
after the King and the Queen his Mother, Madam Elizabeth, and Queen Margarite.
The Nuncio and Ambassador of Tuscany, as representing the two Mediators, set
their Names after those of the Princes of the Blood. Elizabeth's Dowry was
500000. Crowns in Gold. They were to be paid down the Night before the
Consummation of Marriage. The Princess renounced all the Rights she could
pretend to in the Succession of her Father, Mother, and Brothers, without
excepting the States which are not Fief-Males, into which the Daughters may
Succeed. This Clause had an Eve upon the Rights in the Kingdom of Navarre, and
Principality of Bearn, which Henry the IV. held in right of his Mother. The
Duke of Pastrana tarried yet some days at Paris: He was regaled with all
Divertisements possible upon such an occasion. Having got to Bourde aux in his
return to Spain, he found there the Duke of Mayenne, who came back from Madrid.
He had been gone thither to Sign likewise the Articles of Marriage between
Lewis XIII. King of France, and Ann Infanta of Spain.

The Duke of Mayenne had received greater Honors in Spain, Entry of the Duke
of Mayenne into Madrid.
than the Duke of Pastrana in France, whether it was that they had regard to
his Quality, as Prince of a Sovereign House allied to the House of Austria, or
that the Spaniards had an Ambition to outgoe the French in Magnificence and
Galantry. He found in his way the Duke of Lerma's Mansion House. French
Mercenary 1612.
This Favorite gave Orders, that Mayenne should be splendidly regaled, and to
the end, the Feast might seem more Galant, it appeared, that all was done at
the expense of the Inhabitants of Lerma, who were Ravished with Joy, to have
amongst them a Guess so honorably distinguished. The Duke failed not upon this
occasion, to set out all his Sumptuous Movables and Tapistry, the Borders of
which were all Embroidered with Gold, and richly set out with Rubies and
Emeraulds. The Duke d' Alva de l'Infantado, d' Albuquerque, the Admirante of
Castile, and many other Grandees of Spain, accompanied with 500 Cavaliers,
whose Horses were proudly Harnas't, went to receive the Duke of Mayenne without
Madrid. He made a very fine Entrance: But the long and close Mourning the
Ambassador wore for his Father and the Court of Spain, had put on for the Death
of the Queen, rendered the Ceremony less Glorious. The 17th of July, the Duke
d'Vseda conducted the Ambassador to his Audience of the King. The Prince of
Spain stood at the left hand of his Majesty and the Duke of Lerma at the right.
The Father and Son embraced the Ambassador, when he drew near to kiss their
Hands. This was a Distinction granted to the Quality of the Prince, who was of
the House of Lorrain. After this, he was Conducted to the Audience of the
Infanta. The Duke kissed her Hand; because her Highness had declared, she would
use the Ambassador, as the Queen had used one of her Subjects.

The Articles of Marriage signed between Lewis the 13th, and the Infanta of
Spain.
The Signing of the Articles of Marriage, was fixed to be upon the 22d of
August. All the Court left off their Mourning for that day, besides the King.
The Duke of Lerma went to the Ambassador, to Conduct him to the Palace. Neither
his Majesty, or the Prince or Infanta of Spain, were present at the Ceremony of
Sealing: Two Acts were prepared, one in French, and another in Spanish. The
Duke of Mayenne, Puisieux Secretary of State, and Vaucelas Ambassador in
ordinary at Madrid, first signed the French Act as Proxies for the most
Christian King, and the Queen his Mother. The Duke of Lerma signed afterward
in quality of Proxy for the Catholic King's Father, and Guardian of the
Infanta. It was after another manner composed in the Spanish Act: Lerma put
there his Name first, and the French after him: The Infanta renounced for her
self and Children, all the Rights of Succession to the States of the Crown of
Spain. Two Cases were only excepted: That if the Infanta was a Widow without
any Children, she should return into Spain; or that for reason of State, and
the public Weal of the Spanish Monarchy, she should Marry again with the
consent of the King her Father, or the Prince of Spain her Brother, she should
in this second case re-enter into her Rights of succeeding one and the other.
After the signing of the Articles, the Duke of Mayenne was Conducted into a
Hall, where the King was with the Prince and Infanta at each side of him; The
Ambassador only made a Reverence to the Father. He harangu'd chiefly the
Daughter, in Quality of the Queen of France. When the Duke took his leave some
days after, he entreated her to give him some Orders to the King his Master.
Assure, him, said the Infanta, that I am very much impatient of seeing him.
This Answer did not seem grave enough to the Countess d' Altamira her
Governess. Ah Madam! cried the Spanish Lady; what will the King of France
think, when the Duke shall report to him, you have so great a passion for
Marriage? You have taught me, answered the Infants with a great deal of
liveliness; that one must always speak the Truth. She poor young Princess, had
a heart burning for a Husband, who did not make her so happy as she fancied he
would.

Conspiracy against the Duke of Parma.
We shall see anon, the face of Affairs wholly altered in Italy, by the Death of
Francis Duke of Mantua, which happened at the end of the year 1611. But before
I enter into this particular, which I reserve for the following year, I think I
ought to say somewhat of an Affair, which made a great noise in Italy in the
Month of March this present year. Francis Duke of Mantua, had some days ago
succeeded Vincent his Father, Husband of the Eldest Sister of Mary de Medicis.
At this same time Ranutius Duke of Parma, discovered a Plot laid against him
for above a year since, and against all the House of Farnese. He thought that
he had sufficient Witnesses to believe, that the Deceased Duke Vincent of
Mantua, the Cardinals Sforza and Este, the Prince of Modena, the Duke of
Mirandola, and some other Sovereign Princes, had had a part in so horrid a
design. Here Is what is discovered now of it. Many Gentlemen, and some Ladies of
Quality of the States of the Duke of Parma, and the Neighboring places,
Conspired together to kill him, with all those of his House, and to possess
themselves of the Towns of Parma and Placentia, which they were afterward to
deliver up to some Neighboring Princes, from whom the Conspirators had
received Money. There Is this difference betwixt the true Religion and
Superstition, that the one Abominates the smallest Crimes, whereas the other
can very well accord with the blackest Actions. The Wretches who attempted upon
the Life of Henry the IV were confess't, and took the Sacrament afterward, to
prepare themselves for their barbarous Design. They who Conspired a little time
after against Ranutius Duke of Parma, and against all the House of the
Farnese's, swore by the Image of the Virgin Mary, to keep their Trust and
Fidelity one to the other, and not discover their Enterprise.

Their first Project whereby they might bring their Design about, was to lay
hold of the Opportunity, which the Solemn Baptism of the young Prince of Parma
afforded them, where the Cardinal Farnese was to be present with the rest of
the Family. They had resolved to slay there Ranutius his Children, the
Cardinal, and all the Persons Devoted to the Farneses. The Ceremony of Baptism
having been happily put off, the Conspirators notwithstanding continued their
Meetings, and took their Measures for the Execution of their Conspiracy: They
had already got a great number of Men, and some Neighboring Princes were to
furnish them with Soldiers at the appointed time. But seeing that the Ceremony
of Baptism was put off too long a time, and that the Plot might be discovered,
the Conspirators took a Resolution to set up the Duke of Parma in an Abbey,
whither he had been retired to take the Air, and be devout with the Capuchins,
and Assassinate him in this place. They were to come after this was done, to
Parma in the Nightime, to kill the Dukes Children, and those of his House, to
sack the Palace and City, and possess themselves of the Citadel. Another Party
of the Accomplices were ordered to make themselves Masters, by means of some
Intelligence of the City and Castle of Placentia, which they were to deliver up
to the Duke of Mantua.

In all Conspiracies which require long time for Execution, and a great number
of Accomplices, there is almost always some one found, who upon consideration
reflects seriously on the Enterprise. The fear of Punishment, the hopes of
being well rewarded, the Horror likewise of the Crime, and Remorse of
Conscience, bring them to discover the Contrivance. The Duke of Parma happened
upon some Persons of this Humor, who gave him notice of the Danger he was
threatened withal. After an exact Information of all the particulars of the
Conspiracy, Ranutius caused a Manifesto to be fixed up in all public Places,
which contained the Story of the plotted Enterprise, and the Names of the
principal Accomplices, whom the Duke summoned to come and justify themselves: It
appeared, that the Names of some Persons who were considerable for their Degree
and Quality, were suppress't. Vincent Duke of Mantua some days ago Deceased,
was so well described, as every one presently knew him by the Name of Chief
Conspirator, which was given him. The Captain of his Guards was the second Man
amongst the Plotters. Francis his Successor complained aloud, of the injury
done to the Memory of his Father. For this he demanded Reparation. This Affair
was so much noised in Italy, insomuch that they feared an open breach betwixt
the Duke of Parma and the Duke of Mantua. The former had his Recourse to the
King of Spain for Protection, for whom the Famous Alexander of Parma, had done
Signal Services. And the other, the Queen Regent of France's Nephew, implored
the Succors of that Crown. Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, would intervene for
an Accommodation betwixt the two Princes. But it was strait known, that this
Disquieted Spirit sought to embroil them further, and rather raise a War from
whence he hoped for an Advantage, than any ways to make an end of the
Differences. The Parties agreed to refer themselves to the Arbitration of the
Duke of Vrbin, as to one part of the Contest. The Governor of Milan stifled the
rest of this Affair in the Name of the King of Spain, and so the Princes
dismiss't the Troops which they had raised.

A Proposal of Marriage between Christiana the 2d Daughter of France, and Henry
Prince of Wales.
To stop the continual Complaints of the Duke of Savoy, the Regent sometimes
offered to give Christina her second Daughter, to the Prince of Piedmont; yet
this did not hinder the talk of Marrying her to Henry Prince of Wales, the
Eldest Son of James the I. King of great Britain. Whether it was that Mary de
Medicis had an Ambition to make all her Daughters Queens, or that she would
break off the Negotiation already much advanced betwixt his Britannick Majesty,
and the Duke of Savoy, for Marrying the Prince of Wales with the Princess of
Savoy: James had demanded the Eldest Daughter of France; but seeing that the
Regent was so far engaged with Spain, he gave ear to the Duke of Savoy's
Proposition, which he had made him. As his Majesty had got in the World a great
Name for loving Money very well; so Cosmus Great Duke of Florence, a more
Monyed Prince than Charles Emanuel, thwarted the Design. He offered one of his
Sisters for the Prince of Wales, with a more considerable Fortune. But the Pope
perhaps at the Instigation of the Regent, who pretended to make the Duke of
Savoy amends, by bringing about a Match for the Prince of Piedmont with the
Princess of Florence; the Pope, I say, wrote forceably to the Great Duke, for
to persuade him from any Alliance, which the Holy Chair could not approve of.
Notwithstanding the Pope's Letter, which seemed to be Precarious, Cosmus
thought always to Marry his Sister into England; he press't the Queen to assist
him with her good Offices at Rome, to obtain a Dispensation; but Mary de
Medicis who had other things in her Head, flatly denied him. The Duke of Savoy
wrote to his Ambassadors in France, to tell the King of England's Ambassador,
that his Highness knowing well the Difference there is betwixt a Daughter of
France, and a Princess of Savoy, Charles Emanuel might not think it strange,
that a Daughter of Henry the IV, should be preferred before his; but he thought
he should receive a sensible Affront, if his Britannick Majesty should Reject a
Princess of Savoy, for to Marry his Son into the House of the Medicis.

The Regent showed so much eagerness for the Marriage of Christina with the
Prince of Wales, as Edmonds, Knight and Ambassador from England, believed, that
after the way Villeroy had spoke to him, it might be King James's fault, if
this Affair was not concluded, and that Mary de Medicis would with much
willingness yield to him all the Conditions he could ask of her. When the King
had heard this News, he ordered Robert Carr Viscount of Rochester, his
Favorite, to write to Prince Henry, who was then at Richmond, and pray him to
speak freely, if he like'd of the Match. Henry had notice that Christina was
not yet nine years of Age, and that her Eldest Sister's Portion was but 500000
Crowns in Gold. But France, said Rochester, seems to have so great a desire for
this Marriage, as no one doubts, but she may give more to the Second Daughter,
in case the Augmentation of her Fortune be insisted upon.

The Prince of Wales with great Prudence answered the King his Father upon all
the Articles of the Letter of the Chevalier Edmonds, which he had sent him at
the same time. As for the time, said he 'they'l bring the Princess of France
into England; I believe, the sooner it is, the better; and that your Majesty
ought not to demur hereupon. As long as the Princess shall be in France, the
Queen her Mother will be Mistress either to forward the Marriage, or to stave
it off; and to oblige her Daughter to give her Consent, or hinder her from it.
The younger she is, the more time we shall have, and easiness to instruct her
in our Religion, and Convert her. Since they ask of your Majesty to Explain
your self, as to the Liberty the Princess shall have in the exercise of her
Religion; I desire, you, Sir, to answer your Ambassador positively, that you
will not agree to any other Conditions with France, than what the Duke of Savoy
had demanded, when he offered you his Daughter; That is to say, that the
Princess shall have the liberty to follow her Religion in private, and in the
most Retired Chamber of her Apartment. I confess, that these are too strait and
narrow Conditions; but if France speaks sincerely, I don't question but that
she will be contented with them.

Henry very well knew his covetous Fathers Humor. For this reason, he had a
touch upon the Article of her Fortune, in a somewhat more nice manner. If your
Majesty, continued he, regards the greatness of a Dowry, I think you will
prefer the Princess of Savoy; she brings with her Two hundred thousand Crowns
more than the Lady of France; for at least, I can scarce persuade my self, that
the Regent will give more to the second Daughter, than to the Eldest. But if
your Majesty lays aside Interest, to do what shall be more to the mind of the
General Body of Protestants abroad, it seems to me, you will rather incline to
France than Savoy. Lastly, concluded the Prince; I fear lest your Majesty
should not be content with the indifference I show for all the Propositions of
Marriage which are made me. I most humbly beg your pardon for it. It Is you Sir,
who is to take the most advantageous Resolution that may be, for the good of
the State. I have but little experience in politic Affairs* and cannot speak
like a Man smitten with Love upon this Occasion. I have with the greater
willingness inserted into History this Letter, because it might be perhaps the
last he ever writ. It Was dated the 14th of October 1612. and the Prince died
the 16th of November.

Having drank some small Beer to quench his Thirst, after hard Riding, he fell
dangerously Sick. All the skill of the ablest Physicians, could do no good
against the violence of his Distemper. Heaven was deaf to the prayers of all
England, for the recovery of a young Prince Nineteen years of Age, the Hopes
and Delight of the Nation. Those Persons who at first affected to show the
greatest grief for his Death, were not sorry for it heartily. At least it was so
believed. The Affliction of the common People was more sincere, and of deeper
impression, than that of the Court. They generally said, the Applauses which we
have so heartily given the Prince of Wales, have been Ominous and Fatal to him.
They who will Reign as absolute Masters, don't love to see their Children too
popular. The Affection which young Henry had for Religion, and the Libertie's
of his Country, had caused the course of life to be cut off, which had been so
happily begun. Charles his Brother, and Frederick Elector of Palatine, who was
come to visit the Princess of England, designed in Marriage for him, were
present at the Funeral in close Mourning. The Tears of the People who
accompanied him to the Grave, in reckoning up his Virtues which shined already
in his Person, and in bewailing the irreparable loss which England had
suffered, were the greatest Ornament of this Ceremony.

The Prohibition the King his Father made some few days after, to appear at
Court in Mourning, redoubled the suspicions and indignation of the Englishmen.
Did not he think as a Roman Emperor did once heretofore, that it did not become
the Majesty of a Prince to sully his Face with Tears, that great Afflictions
are for little private Persons; and that Kings may die, but the State is
Immortal. This was the reason why King James thought he ought not to Interrupt
the Divertisements which were usual, at the beginning of a new year. It Was
said, that France was not sorry to hear of the Death of the Prince of Wales,
who seemed rather to have the Inclinations of the ancient Kings of England,
than of the Kings of Scottish Race; and one could but very badly Interpret the
Sentiments which the Prince showed, when he heard of the Death of Henry IV. I
have lost, cried he, my second Father. The common Opinion is, that young Henry
had resolved to steal away from the English Court, and go learn the Trade of
War under the King of France, as soon as he marched at the Head of his Army. At
the same time the Prince of Wales lamented the Tragical Death of Henry the IV.
a Courtier resolved to tell him, that this Occurrence would give his Highness
the means of making the pretension of England's Kings to France, more strong
and prevalent. Get you gone idle Flatterer, replied the Prince in Anger; dare
you talk to me of making War against an Infant? I am ready to defend him
against all those who shall venture to attack him. The Son of that Person for
whom the Prince had so Noble Sentiments, has not had this delicate Generosity,
though he was much more advanced in Age.

I doubt whether it be needful to carry the Suspicions of young Henry's Death,
as far as many in England have carried them. If it was hastened, as the report
of Physicians made People believe, the Viscount of Rochester may have committed
so horrible a Crime. He and his Wife were accused since then, as being guilty
of Poisoning. The Prince had no kindness for his Fathers Favorite; he always
looked sourly upon him, and showed a great Repugnance of Spirit to suffer him
near his Person. Robert Carr, a Gentleman of a mean Birth in Scotland, having
found out a way to be Page to the King; his pleasant Countenance, fine Stature,
insinuating Behavior pleased him extremely. In a little time Car was Knighted;
and the King disgusted with the Count of Montgomery, set all his Affection upon
the Scotch Knight. He raised him up further to the Dignity of Viscount of
Rochester, and afterward to be Duke of Somerset. The Fall of this unworthy
Favorite was as shameful, as his Rise was astonishing. He at last fell in Love
with the Countess of Essex, who sought to engage him; and he afterward married
her. This is not a fit Place to relate this Lady's Adventures. It Is said, that
the Prince of Wales was struck with her great Beauty; but Rochester was
preferred before him. The Despite which the Prince harbored from hence,
increased the Aversion he had for his Rival. The Countess having let fall her
Glove, as she was dancing, he who had taken it up, presented it to the Prince
of Wales, thinking to please him, in giving him an Opportunity of showing the
Lady a Civility, whom he seemed to have a Kindness for: But Henry threw the
Glove back with Disdain; saying, Another has stretched it out. As the Two
Lovers were expert in the Art of Poisoning, so, it is very probable, they had a
mind to be rid of a Prince, and make him away, who would have been a great
Impediment to their Repose, and the Establishment of their Fortune.

The Count de Soissons, dead some Days before the Prince of Wales* left behind
him vacant Places of great Dignity; the Governments of the Dauphiny and of
Normandy, with the Office of Lord High-Steward of the King's Household. The
Regent gave this Office to the new Count, Son of the Deceased, with the
Government of Dauphiny: She was willing to keep that of Normandy to her self,
and have it managed by a Lieutenant General. But the Prince of Conti was to be
satisfied, who asked for one of his Brother's two Governments. This seemed very
reasonable, Conti having heretofore given up the Government of the Dauphinate
to the Count. To give him and the Guises some satisfaction, a Sister of whom
the Prince had married, it was caused to be proposed to Charles of Valois,
Natural Son of King Charles IX. whom we before called Count d' Auvergne, and
henceforth shall be styled Duke of Angoulesme, to lay down the Government of
Auvergne. Henry IV. had put him into Prison for a Conspiracy; and the Regent
kept him there still. The Marquess de Coeuvres was ordered to speak to him for
accommodating the Matter. The Duke d' Angoulesme, who longed for his Liberty,
accepted the Proposition to obtain his Liberty; and so the Prince of Conti was
made Governor of Auvergne.

The Count de Soissons had vast Designs rolling in his Head when he died. 'Twas
said, that he had bound himself in a great Correspondence with Henry Prince of
Wales, Maurice Prince of Orange, the Duke of Savoy and the Huguenot Party. The
Duke of Rohan perceiving him discontented with the Regent and her Ancestors,
sent to offer him his Services. He did not ask for the Government of
Quillebeuf, but only to be in a Condition of giving Entrance to the Succors,
which he had projected should come from England and Holland. His greatest
Passion and Desire was to remove the Ministers, and quell the Party of the
Guises, and of the Duke of Epernon. He would have had the Joy of seeing his
Wishes almost fulfilled, if Death had not taken him hence the first Day of
November. The Marquess and Marchioness d'Ancre, had so much prepossessed the
Queen against the Ministers of State, and especially against Sileri, that she
began to keep them in the dark as to her Cabinet Affairs. Galigai had the
Insolence to say a thousand offensive things to the Chancellor in presence of
the Queen, and to upbraid him with the ill Administration of his Office. Mary
de Medicis suffered her She-Confident to speak all; and poor Sileri dared not
to answer a Word for himself. He was afraid lest the Queen should second the
Reproaches, perhaps too true, which were said against him. The Marchioness
d'Ancre, being sure of her Mistress's Sentiments, spoke confidently, as she was
able to put out of Countenance the boldest Man alive. It Is a Maxim amongst
interested Courtiers, not to be put off and repulsed easily, and not to quit
the Game, but at the last Extremity. The Chancellor went into the Queen's
Closet with other Ministers; but there he was afresh mortified. Her Majesty
turned her Back to him, affecting to speak with a deal-of trust to the
President Jeannin.

A new Party was now set up at Court, which having got the upper most,
dissipated all the rest. The Prince of Conde headed it. The Dukes of Nevers,
Maienne, Longueville, the Marshal Bouillon, and the Marquess d' Ancre came into
it: The Guises, Epernon, Amville, and their Friends, found their Affairs
retarded by these Means. The Duke of Amville was Brother to the Constable
Montmorenci; in whose Absence, being gone to his Government in Languedoc, he
joined himself to the Guises, whom he thought had got further into the Queen's
Favor than others. The Master of the Horse, Bellegarde, of the same Party, was
then at Bourgundy, as Governor of it. He received Orders to come presently to
Court. Bellegarde obeyed the more willingly, for that the Duke of Guise had
hastened him to come to their Relief. As soon as he had reached Sens, they gave
him notice that the Queen had sent for him, only to put him out of his
Government: Understanding this, he went back to it with all speed. The Marquess
d' Ancre had laid an Intrigue for causing Bourgundy to be given to the Duke of
Mayenne.

There were more open Contentions at the Sorbonne than at the Court. The Jesuit
Becanus his Book condemned.
The Jesuits let loose against the lawful Authority of Sovereigns, published
new Books every Day upon this Subject, to court and please the proud Borghese.
Becan, a famous Author of the Society, had printed one this Year, Mercure
Francois 1611.
with this Title, The Controversy of England touching the King and Pope's
Authority. When Doctor Filezac, new Syndic of the Faculty at Paris, had perused
it, he spoke of it to Cardinal Bonzi, to know whether the Queen would think fit
the Sorbonne should censure so pernicious a Book. The Nuncio and the Jesuits
strove alike to shake off the Blow. Vbaldini saw that the Faculty would not
fail to have a fling in its Censure, at the pretended Authority of the Holy
Chair. The good Fathers feared, lest a new Decree of the Faculty of Paris
published throughout all France, might further confirm the common Opinion, That
the Society makes Profession to teach constantly a Doctrine, which is contrary
to the Authority of Kings, and Security of their Persons. But the Propositions
of Becan were so loudly complained of, as it was expedient to appease Men's
Minds by some Condemnation of them. Here Is the Expedient which the Pope's
Counsel and the Jesuits resolved upon. They told the Queen, that it would be of
greater efficacy to have these sorts (...) Books condemned at Rome; and that
(...) Censure coming forth from the Holy Chair, would carry more Authority with
it, than one from the Faculty of Paris Mary de Medicis was easily drawn into
the Snare they had laid for her. She bid the Cardinal Bonzi tell the Syndic of
the Faculty, That her Majesty would not have the Sorbonne to determine any
thing upon Becan's Book, because the Queen had a design to have it condemned by
the Pope, the Court of Rome, and the good Fathers to make for them this
Evasion. If the Sorbonne had left off making a noise, the Examination of the
Book had been stopped. Whatever came on it, the Inquisition condemning a Book in
general Terms, without specifying any thing, People could not exactly know upon
what Point the Condemnation fell; and thus the exorbitant Proposition,
concerning the Pope's Authority, would have been not touched or meddled with.
It was supposed, that the Inquisition never intended to condemn them.

One Paris having presented in the Sorbonne, the first of December, some
Propositions extracted out of Becan's Book; wherein the Assassination of Kings
and Princes was permitted, and many other things contained, which were contrary
to Divine and Humane Laws, the Syndic made a Report of what Cardinal Bonzi had
told him concerning the Queen's Intentions. Dr. Paris's Mouth being stopped with
this Answer, desired, that what he had proposed, might be registered; and that
a Copy of what the Faculty had concluded upon, might be given him. It was
granted him. The first Day of the Year following, the Faculty of Paris deputed
four Doctors to represent to the Chancellor, that they desired to make a
public Testimony of their Stedfastness for the Service of the King, by
censuring Becan's Book; and to make, at least, the Public know, that it was
not their Fault, if so dangerous a Book had not been condemned in Forms, or
formally. They moreover said, that they entreated leave to remonstrate to the
Queen upon this, as an Affair of the greatest Importance. Sileri approved the
Zeal of the Sorbonne. He gloried, that he had all his Learning in the
University of Paris: And so he promised the Doctors to introduce them into her
Majesty's Presence, Dr. Fayet, who was the Spokesman, told the Regent, that the
Faculty of Paris not being accustomed to receive Orders from the King by the
Mouth of any private Person, or by Letters under the Privy Seal, but only by
Letters sealed with the Great Seal, they had obeyed, as soon as it was reported
to them what the Cardinal Bonzi had told the Syndic of there Majesty's
Intentions. Nevertheless, Madam, said he, the Faculty has believed it was
their duty to receive your Order from your own Mouth. If you don't judge it
convenient for us to deliberate upon Jesuit Becan's Book, we most humbly
entreat your Majesty to take care, that our Silence upon this Occasion be not
interpreted as a tacit Approbation of those pernicious Sentiments, which
deprives Kings of their lawful Authority, and justifies their Assassination.
The Regent answered, that she would speak of this Affair to her Council, and
that the chancellor should by the Faculty know her Intentions.

Dr. Fayet being come to the Chancellor some Days after: The Queen, said
Sileri, is informed, that the wicked Book of Becan is become too common. Her
Majesty gives you leave to do what you judge convenient. It Is a great Mischief,
that the Sorbonne is divided, for what concerns good Sentiments. Will you never
unite and agree again? Fayet answered the Chancellor, That the Faculty was
willing to preserve its ancient Doctrine; and that they had always taught the
same Doctrine in the Sorbonne, till some certain Persons had broached there
some Foreign O^inions. The Chancellor commended the Doctors for their Zeal, and
gave the Queen's leave to censure Becan's Book; ^ut the Nuncio Vbaldini
cunningly turned he Blow aside: He being persuaded, that ^^mething would be
attempted in France against the Jesuit's Work, straitways solli^ited a Decree
from the Inquisition. As ^on as he received it, he communicated it (...) the
Queen: She being always submis^ve to the Pope, told the Faculty, that it ^as
sufficient to read the Decree openly in ^e Sorbonne. The Affair thus rested.
One ^ight be surprised to find Robert Bellar^in's Name amongst those Cardinals,
^ho condemned the Author's Book, who ^llow'd Bellarmin's Principles, if it was
not known, that the Cardinal promoted in the Society, had in a readiness his
Equivocations and Mental Restrictions, to condemn with safety of Conscience in
the Work of one of his own Fraternity, the Doctrine which he maintained as the
most Orthodox in the World.

An Edict of Palement against Scioppius's Book.
It was the Jesuits alone, who courted Paul V. by writing against James I. King
of England, concerning the Authority of Sovereigns and the Holy Chair. Gaspar
Scioppius, the most violent Enemy of that Society, would enter the List
likewise, and show some of his fine Latin in this notable Dispute. His Book
having been brought from Frankfort-Fair to Paris, there was a Presentment made
of it to the Parliament. Scioppius discoursed herein of Henry IV. as if he was a
Prince without any Religion. He seemed to approve of the infamous Action of
Ravillac. All Kings and Sovereigns, who let Heretics live in repose in their
States, were, in his Opinion, Heretics themselves. What do I say? nay, even
Turks and Atheists. The Parliament ordered, that this extravagant and impious
Book should be burnt by the Hands of the Common Executioner; and that all the
Copies should be suppressed. That it should be branded in England after the
same manner, Dictionaire Hist. and Critique de M.. Bail.
is no wonder. But I cannot enough admire, the King of Great Britain should
suffer a Farce to be acted before him, wherein Scioppius was represented and
hanged upon the Stage. A Revenge alike unworthy of a Prince and an Author! If
his Majesty had looked upon Scioppius's Work as the Libel of a contemptible
Declamator, should not the King have despised it, or at the best, contented
himself to have left to the Magistrates the Execution of the Laws against
defamatory and pernicious Libels? But to take a Pleasure to be revenged of the
Author after such a manner, so little becoming a Crowned Head, was to show the
Public, that the Book had touched to the Quick the Person whom the Author had
attacked.

The Care which his Britannick Majesty took at that time to reconcile the King
of Denmark with Gustavus Adolphus, Peace betwixt the Crowns of Swedeland and
Denmark.
the new King of Swedeland, was a Work more worthy of a Prince. Christian IV.
endeavored this Year to push on his Conquests in Swedeland. He, accompanied
with George Duke of Lunenbourg, who had brought him Succor, advanced as far as
Jenkoping, laying all the Country desolate, where he went. The young Gustavus
gave now such clear Tokens of his Wisdom and Valor, as that the Queen
Christina his Mother left to him the Administration of the Realm, though he was
but yet in the eighteenth Year of his Age. He stopped the Enemies Progress, and
obliged him to retire into the Province of Schonen. Gustavus followed him
thither; and after the way of using Reprisals, he put all to Fire and Sword.
The Swedish Army had some disadvantage in their Retreat. The King of Denmark
made a new Irruption into West Gothia. Being aboard the Fleet, he tried to get
near to Stockholm. Gustavus broke the Enemy's Design with an extraordinary
Prudence and Courage. At last the Hans Towns, and the United Provinces,
troubled that the War betwixt the two Northern Crowns broke off all Commerce in
the Baltic Sea, engaged the King of England to intermediate for a Peace.
Christian himself treated with four Swedish Senators. After some Conferences
held at the end of this Year, the Treaty was concluded at the beginning of the
next following. Denmark gave up to the Swedes the City of Calmar, and the Isle
of Oeland; but kept E^sbourgh for a time, and till the Crown of Swedeland had
paid a certain Sum of Money, which Denmark pretended was due to him.

Revolvtions in Muscovy.
Gustavus very freely surrendered something on that side, to be in a Condition
of marching toward Muscovia. There was a strong Party who desired of him
Prince Charles Philip his Brother, whom these People intended to set upon the
Throne of their Nation. Although the Affair of Muscovy seem to have no Relation
to those of France, I think I ought to say something of the surprising
Revolutions which were seen there at the beginning of the XVII. Century. This
may give us a more particular Light into the State of Eu^^pe in Levis XIII. his
time. The Czar, John Basilovits, famed for his Cruelties, and the War which the
brave Stephen Battori King of Poland waged against him with so much Glory and
Advantage, French Mercury, 1605.
as the Muscovite was obliged to have recourse to the Pope's Intercession for
obtaining a Peace. Basilovitz, I say, had left but two small Children behind
him of seven Wives which he had, Theodorus and Demetrius. The eldest, stupid
and heartless, succeeded him. Whilst he diverted himself in ringing of
Church-Bells, Boris Frederovits, a Muscovite Lord, who had married his Sister,
governed the State. This wicked Ambitious Man caused young Demetrius to be
slain, who dwelt with his Mother in a Castle remote from Mosco: And the better
to conceal his Crime, he procured him to be assassinated, whom he made use of
to commit this Villainy. The Czar Theodore died in a little time after. 'Twas
though Boris had poisoned him. The Masculine Line of the ancient Czars being
thus at an end, it was not hard for Boris, Brother-in-Law to this last Prince,
to mount up into the Throne. Being as crafty as he was cruel, he had taken care
to gain the Love of the People, and to remove far from him, under specious
Pretenses, the Lords, who were in capacity to oppose his Ambition. He was
crowned at Mosco in all Forms and Ceremonies: His bloody and suspicious Nature
rendered him quickly odious to the Muscovites. A Nation accustomed to Slavery,
does not so patiently suffer the Tyranny of a Prince newly raised up to the
Throne, as that which is established in a long Succession of one and the same
Family.

A Counterfeit Demetrius in Poland.
About the year 1604. Boris received News from Poland, which put him to strange
Difficulties. A Russian Monk had carried thither a young Man, who much
resembled in Stature and Countenance the Prince Demetrius, whom Boris had
caused to be put to Death. The Monk first puts this youth into the Service of
Vietsnovisky a Polish Lord, who had Married the Palatin's Daughter of Sendomir,
from whence he got into the Palatines Wine-House. When the Monk thought he had
prepared Men well enough, he told the Palatine as a Secret, that this young Man
was Demetrius, lawful Heir of the Empire of Russia, who had been privately and
happily conveyed away from the Cruelty of Boris, by putting another Child in
the Prince's room, whom the Tyrant intended to cause to be slain. This
adventure was related with such probable Circumstances, as the Palatine
believed all that was told him. He presently discovered the Secret to Sigismond
King of Poland, who was willing to be fully acquainted with the pretended
Demetrius.

The Youth who neither wanted Wi^^ or Education, Rehearses the Misfortunes of
his Life in the presence of the King, with much Craftiness, and a good Grace;
he showed certain natural Marks on his Face, and upon one of his Hands, which
he pretended to be undeniable Proofs of the truth of his Birth, and then
addressing himself to Sigismond, he thus proceeded. I am, Sir, very happy to
have fallen into the hands of a King, who having been himself unfortunate and
persecuted, during his Infancy by his Uncle, must have the greater Compassion
for my hard Fortune. You was born in the Prison where the Cruel Erric had put
your Majesty's Father and Mother. The Polanders have made choice of you, before
all the Princes in Europe. This distinction, Sir, ought to render you the more
respected by the Swedes your Natural Subjects. Another Ambitious Uncle raises
'em against you, he endeavors to snatch forcibly away your Patrimony. Thanks
be to God, your Majesty is still powerful enough to help me to be Restored to
mine. As soon as you shall put me into a condition to be thankful for so great
a Favor, the Polanders and Muscovites united together, shall quickly reduce
the Swedish Rebel. May Heaven grant, that after this Happy Expedition, we may
jointly set upon the common Enemy of the Christians. If King Sigismond did not
believe what was told him, he hoped however that the Story, whether true or
false, might stand him in some stead against the Muscovites. It Was resolved
upon to Assist the pretended Demetrius, and to send him first into Lithu mia,
that from thence to write to the Pope, he might be nearer Muscovy. He asked of
him to do him all the good turns he could in Poland. The Court of Rome always
attentive to what is capable of extending her usurpt Domination, willingly gave
an ear to the Person, who made her hope to Reduce the Russians to the Obedience
of the Holy Chair.

Demetrius enters into Muscovy, and there Crowned.
A private Rumor presently run aboroad at Mosco, that the Prince Demetrius
having escaped the fury of the Tyrant Boris, showed himself near to the
Frontiers. The Malcontents and they who loved Novelty, confirmed for truth
what others had said. The People easily drawn to believe extraordinary
Contingencies, and who flatter themselves with finding a milder and more
supportable Government, seemed to wait with impatience Demetrius's coming.
Boris informed of what had passed at Poland, and of the practices begun at
Mosco, did not know which side to take, whether he should despise this Story,
as if it was but a ridiculous Story, the noise of which in a little time
vanishes, or if he should downright prepare himself to press and quell a
Party, which seemed to fortify it self every day, both at home and abroad:
Persuaded at last that nothing was to be neglected, he caused it to be spread
abroad on his side, that the pretended Demetrius was a known Mag cian; and
after Orders for the safety of the Frontiers, he sent Ambassadors to the Diet
at Warsaw. They were to complain to the King and Republic of Poland, for that
they had Transgressed the Conditions of Peace made betwixt the two States, by
showing their willingness to uphold the Impostures of the miserable Son of a
Priest, and to demand the delivery of him up to 'em alive or dead. In case the
Ambassador could not obtain of 'em a favorable Answer, Boris had ordered 'em
to Negotiate with some Popish Lords, for to engage them to oppose a design,
which the King might have against him. Sigismond answered the Muscovites in
general Terms, and in the mean time, prepared himself underhand to assist him,
who averred himself to be the rightful Heir of the ancient Czars.

Demetrius entered into Moscovy at the Head of an Army, consisting of Ten
thousand Poles and Cossacks, which the Palatine of Sendomir commanded under
him. Demetrius and he not having known the advantage they had of so good an
occasion to rout the Muscovite Army, were themselves defeated in the beginning
of the year 1605. Demetrius too weak to keep the Field any longer, shut himself
up in a Town, which he had before taken; he hoped to receive new Succors from
Poland, before the Enemy could retake the places which had been taken from him.
The Death of Boris, while these things were doing, arrived and changed the face
of Affairs. Though the Muscovite Army had sworn fealty to his Son, division got
into it in a little time after. All followed the Example of some Lords, who
declared aloud for the pretended Demetrius. The Son and Widow of Boris, were
Apprehended and Stifled. At length the New Czar is received and Crowned at
Mosco the last day of July, French Mercury 1600.
in 1605. The Palatine Sandomir's Daughter, whom Demetrius afterward Married
by a Proxy at Cracovia, was conducted in great Pomp the following year to
Mosco. Her Father, and her nearest Relations were present at the Ceremony of
her Marriage and Coronation.

Demetrius and many Polish Lords are Massacred at Mosco.
The New Princess did not long enjoy her good Fortune. Susky, a Moscovite, to
whom Demetrius had pardoned his Life, against the Advice of many Persons, who
Counseled him to let the Sentence of Death be executed, which had passed
against a Man of a restless and ambitious Spirit, and of whose Fidelity no one
could be assured; Susky, I say, and a great number of Muscovite Nobles, had now
laid a Plot against Demetrius. They rendered him odious to the Clergy and
People, by spreading abroad a Rumor, that he designed to alter Religion, to
bring Muscovy into subjection under the Pope and cause Jesuits and Roman
Priests to come in: And because the People thought Heaven would not have so
much declared in favor of the New Czar, if he had been an Impostor, it was
endeavored to make it be believed, that he had not go^ so great advantage
against Boris and hi^ Son, but by the help of Magic. This Discourse made so
great an Impression, as the People could hardly suffer, that Demetrius should
have two or three Companies of Foreigners to guard his Palace and Person. The
natural Aversion which the Muscovites have for the Poles, made the People yet
more apt to receive what they took care to insinuate into them; to wit, that
the Treasure of the Czars was to be Transported into Poland, and that the State
should be governed for the future by a Polish Princess, and other Confidents of
the same Nation. Susky and the principal Heads of this Conspiracy, having taken
their Measures by the favor of the Malcontents, to make an Insurrection of
the People in Mosco, the 27th of May 1606. came to the Palace at the Head of a
great number of armed Men, broke it open with violence, slew the pretended
Demetrius betrayed by his best Friends, and did a thousand Indignities to his
dead Body. The People afterward put all the Polanders to the Sword; it is
reported, that there died of 'em more than seventeen Hundred. The Palatine of
Sendomir was only saved, his Daughter, his Son, and some Lords, who were every
one of them put into private Houses.

Susky is made Czar of Muscovy, and after lays down his Dignity.
Susky caused himself to be chosen, and Crowned in the room of Demetrius,
whether he was the right, or Counterfeit one; for at last many pretended that
he spoke truth. But the Circumstance of the Monk who conducted him into Poland,
and that of his being put into Service in two different Houses; this I say,
makes the History to be very much suspected. It seems to me, that a Child of
this Importance, should have been first carried to the King of Poland. What had
he there to fear from him? Whatever this Affair was, yet to confirm further the
People in their Opinion, that this was a Cheat, Susky was willing they should
dig up the dead Body of him, whom Boris had caused to be Slain. The Bones were
carried to Mosco, and the Patriarch ordered that he should be Reverenced as a
Martyr. Susky not doubting but that the Poles would wage a War against him,
entered into a Negotiation with Charles of Sudermania, the New King of Sweden,
who sent him Succors under the Conduct of de la Gardie. The Divisions of
Sigismond with the Palatines of his Realm, did not permit him to attack the
Muscovites so soon. In the year 1609. he resolved to take the City of
Smolensko, which the Muscovites had taken from the Poles. The Siege or Blockade
of this place, lasted two years; and more than two Hundred Thousand Inhabitants
died, before it was surrendered. He sought several times to cause the Siege to
be raised. Susky troubled at the ill success of his Arms, retired into a
Monastery, after having laid down the Scepter and Crown.

Muscovy was then divided into three Parties. A New Demetrius was put up,
Ladislaus Prince of Poland, proclaimed Czar of Muscovy.
and a great many declared for him; others to remedy the ill condition Muscovy
was in, would have Ladislaus, King Sigismond's Eldest Son, and a hopeful
Prince, set upon the Throne. At last a third Party would have a great Lord of
the Country; these being united to Ladislau's Party, he was chosen Czar in his
absence, in the year 1610. and the most considerable of the Clergy and
Nobility, took an Oath of Fidelity to him. The false Demetrius strove to make
himself Master of Mosco; but the Poles having twice beaten him, he was obliged
to Retreat beyond the River Volga. This put the Poles into a condition of
undertaking every thing. They made themselves Masters of the Castles of Mosco,
and made it known to King Sigismond, who daily Besieged Smolensko, that his Son
was Proclaimed Czar. The Inhabitants offered to yield themselves to Ladislaus,
Elected Sovereign of Moscovy: But Sigismond was willing to get the place for
Poland. The Inhabitants resolved not to separate themselves from the interest
of Moscovy, held still the Siege out, till the Month of June, 1611. So that
Sigismond had got but a City almost quite Dispeopled, and reduced to Ashes. The
King of Poland, who did not think so much of Establishing his Son in the Throne
of Moscovy, as to make advantage of the Country's Divisions, and bring it into
Subjection, deferred too long to carry Ladislaus into Mosco. He had put off
this Affair to the year 1612. but the continual Contentions he had with the
Palatines, did not suffer him to execute his Project.

The Poles are driven out of Muscovy, and Michael Federovits is chosen Czar.
So long a delay gave time to the Relations of the Deceased Czar Boris, to get
together a strong Party. Michel Federovits put himself at the Head of 'em, and
marched toward Mosco. The Polish General came out of the City, gathered Troops
together, and gave Battle to the Moscovites revolted from Ladislaus. The
Poland^rs were Defeated, and their General Retreated toward Smolensko, with
the broken Remnant of his Army. After this it was easy to drive the Poles out
of the Castle of Mosco. The Moscovites thus delivered from a Foreign Power,
chose a New Czar in the year 1612. This was Michel Federovits, the nearest
Kinsman of the Deceased Czar Boris. A New Party united in favor of Charles
Philip, Brother to Gustavus King of Poland, might have been able to have
thwarted this Election, if Gustavus had not lost the Opportunity, by thinking
rather to extend his own Dominion, than endeavor his Brothers Establishment.
The Muscovites had time to reunite themselves. Their New Czar having nothing
more to fear at Home, undertook to be revenged of the Poles. He said Siege to
Smolensko the following year, and the City being but weakly defended, was in a
little time taken. The Poles were then so divided, as that they were not in a
condition to hinder the Enemy from retaking all that Poland had taken away from
him, and making inroads further into Lithuania.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS XIII. King of France and Navarre.
BOOK IV.
FRance was not much less troubled with Commotions, than Poland. 1613. The
Baron de Luz. Slain by the Chevalier de Guise.
If there was not yet Civil War in France, the Number of Malcontents was so
great, and the Factions encreast after such a manner every day, as all seemed
to be in a readiness for an open Rupture. The Death of the Baron de Luz, Knight
of the King's Order, and his Lieutenant General in Burgundy, who was killed in
the midst of Paris the 5th of January 1613. by the Chevalier de Guise, gave the
Queen new Disquiets.

Luz whilst he lived, had made many Persons; he had been in a League with
different Parties, and we find him in several Intrigues. Under the Reign of the
Deceased King, he was one of the intimate Friends of the Marshall Biron. At
the beginning of this, he was Intrigu'd with the Guises; but believing he
should settle himself better through the Marquess d'Ancre's favor, he left them
to be of Conchini's side. He was suspected to serve this Italian in a design he
had to undo Bellegarde, and take away from him the Government of Burgundy.
This provoked more against him, the House of Guise, Friend and Ally to
Beuegarde. This House sought but an occasion to be revenged and rid of a Man,
who not content to have left him in the Lurch, was moreover Intrigu'd to
mischief him as much as he could. French Mercury 1613.
Some of the Baron's indiscreet words seemed to the Chevalier de Guise, Siri
Memory recondite. Tom. III. page 23, 24.
a sufficient reason to fight him. The Baron had unwarily bragged of his being
at Blois with the Marshall Brissac, in the Chamber where King Henry the III.
had taken a Resolution, to cause the Duke of Guise to be Slain, and to have
hindered Brissac from Advertising the Duke of this evil Design against him.
This was reason enough to animate the Chevalier de Guise to be revenged of an
Enemy of his House, who boasted to have contributed to the Death of his Father,
by hindering Brissac from saving his Life. The Chevalier then met the Baron in
St. Honore's Street, makes him draw his Sword, and at the second Pass he made
at him, kills him.

The Queen's Anger against the Guise^.
The Regent who made use of the Baron de Luz, was extremely provoked at this
boldness. She being persuaded that they thought rather to give her Trouble,
than revenge the Death of the Deceased Duke of Guise, left her Dinner which she
had just set down at; as soon as she heard of the Baron's Death, and throwing
the Napkin upon the Table, she retired with Tears in her Eyes into her Closet.
Her Majesty straitways calls for the Princes and Ministers to deliberate upon
this Affair, Memoires de Bassompierre.
which she extremely took to Heart. It was there resolved, that the Parliament
should take Informations, and proceed immediately to prosecute the Murderer,
and send somebody in her Majesty's Name to Guise's House, for to command the
Nobility, who were met there, to be gone forthwith, and forbid the Duke
appearing at the Louvre, till such time the Queen had sent for him. It Was said,
that Guise was resolved to go to Court, accompanied with a great number of
Gentlemen. Some scrupled to go out of Guise's House, tho the Duke had prayed
the to obey the Regent's Order. The Count de la Rochefoucault, Master of the
King's Wardrobe, Signalized himself amongst all the rest. He alone refused to
go out, and the Queen was angry at his Disobedience, and commanded him to be
gone presently from Court.

The Mind of Mary de Medicis was somewhat quieted, when she heard, that the
Duke of Guise had made the Chevalier his Brother depart from his House, and
that he had ordered him to be gone into the Country. Bassompierre a friend to
the Guise's, for the Princess of Conti's sake their Sister, whom he loved, and
to whom his Person was not indifferent took an Opportunity to tell the Queen,
that the Duke humbly. desires leave of her Majesty, to justify himself. The
Queen granted him this, on condition he would only come when it was almost
Night, and without any Company. Bassompierre went and fetched him immediately.
The Duke spoke in such Respectful and Submissive Terms, as her Majesty seemed
to be appeased: But the Duchess, Mother of the Guises, spoilt all in a Visit
she afterward made to the Queen. The Duchess spoke of the Matter so proud and
lofty, as her Majesty was more provoked against the Guises's, than before.

The Duke was enraged against the Prince of Conde's Party, Siri Memoire
recondite, To. III. page 24.
which had opposed him: He could not Digest, that the Duke of Mayenne his
Cousin was entered into it: Guise, if the Duke of Epernon had not stopped him, in
company of some of his Friends, would have Assaulted Mayenne, who likewise
walked well Guarded, insomuch that there might have been match Blood spilt. The
Queen advertised of this New Accident, ordered the Duke of Mayenne to be
reconciled with the Head of his Family, and to go and visit Guise at his House.
They had a long Discourse together, and parted seemingly good Friends.

The Duke of Guise would join himself to the Prince of Conde's Party.
I don't know whether it was not Mayenne, who persuaded the Duke of Guise,
incens't that the Queen denied him to call back the Count Rochefoucault to
Court, to unite with the Prince of Conde for removal of the Ministers, already
sunk in their Credit. The Marquess d' Ancre had so great a desire of drawing
into this new Confederacy the Dukes of Guise and Epernon, which was so
prevalent at Court, as Guise having address't Conchini, to get the Regent to
give the Count de la Rochefoucault leave to return to Court, this politic
(...) (...) fer me a Reward? I should look on it as an Affront done me. What I
can do for the Queen is already sufficiently paid. I should be unworthy of the
Name I bear, and the Offices I am dignified withal, and ought to be as
despicably looked upon as the most ungrateful of all Men, if I should make my
Master buy my Services. Bassompierre averred, that he never forgot what he
heard the Duke of Epernon up-this Occasion. The Words certainly deserve to be
committed to Memory; and if there was not more of Vanity perhaps, than of
Reality in the Duke of Epernon's Sentiments, it must be confessed to his Glory,
that he had a more Noble Heart than any Prince or Grandee of the Court of
France.

The Regent reconciled with the Dukes of Guise and Epernon.
In the mean time Bassompierre went to wait again on the Queen, after she had
dined, as her Majesty had ordered him. I am so sick at Stomach, said Mary de
Medicis, when she was alone with him, as all that I have eaten seems to be
Poison: If I am not suddenly rid of this Trouble, I fear that I shall be out of
my Wits. She spoke probably more Truth than she thought for. They who best
understoood this Business, testified this of her, that she had a great Spirit;
but not the large Capacity, nor the Constancy and Experience, which another
Queen of the same House showed in some Precedent Reigns; and those excellent
Qualities were needful to Mary de Medicis for to govern a State full of
Factions. Bassompiere, continued she, you must bring me back the Duke of Guise
whatever it costs: Offer him a Hundred Thousand Crowns, which I Will pay him in
ready Money, with the Lieutenancy-General of Provence for the Chevalier his
Brother, and the Reversion of the Abbey of St. Germain for the Princess his
Sister. In a Word, I give you full Power to offer what you please, provided you
make him quit this Cabal, and I can be ascertained of his good Intentions.
'Madam, answered Bassompierre smiling, you have put such a Stock into my Hands,
as 'twill be very hard if I do not make a good Bargain.

Now see here what the Reversion is of the Abbey of St. Germain de Prez at
Pa^is. The Prince of Conti enjoyed this rich Benefice, though he was married.
The same was promised to the Princess his Wife, in case he died before her.
Strange Abuse of Ecclesiastical Revenues! But a Dispensation from the Pope
solves all. Let it not be said, that these Disorders are now reformed. Have we
not seen a younger Brother of the House of Lorrain in France, The Count of
Marsan.
confirmed by a solemn Edict in the Enjoyment of a considerable Pension from a
Bishopric; because the Pope had granted him a Dispensation to keep it,
notwithstanding his Marriage? And certainly, every thing fully considered, if
the Revenues of the Church been't employed for the Relief of the Poor, or any
other good Work, they are as well in the Hands of a Prince or Princess, as in
any idle Monk's hands, Cardinal's, or Abbot's of Quality, who spend them in
rich Equipage, great Feasts, keeping of Horses and Dogs and maintaining Misses.
But I return to Bassompierre's Negotiation.

Before he had taken leave of Mary de Medicis for to go and execute his Orders,
he spoke to the Queen to call back to Court the Duke of Epernon. I would withal
my Heart, she replied, but he is a Man whom I have offended; and he never
pardons. 'Yes, his Enemies, answered Bassompierre smiling; but not his Masters.
The good Princess did not well know the Duke's Temper. He was not so good a
Christian, as to pardon his Enemies; yet he was too ambitious not to pardon the
Regent, provided she would set him up higher in Authority and Reputation. Tell
the Queen answered he to Bassompierre, that I only supplicate to her to be
somewhat more constant for the future; to distinguish better, and continue her
good Servant. At length Bassompierre proposed to the Regent, she would be
pleased to give leave that her Ministers of State might come back to Court
again. He offered to speak for Villeroy and Jeannin; but as for what concerned
the Chancellor, the Regent was to declare her self to the Chevalier Sileri,
Brother to this Magistrate.

It Is needless to relate all the Particulars of Bassompierre's Negotiation: He
had so good Markets to make, as there was not much trouble to bring 'em to an
end. The Duke of Guise, said Bassompierre, at first ranted according to his
Custom, but afterward he consented to all. His Lady Duchess, who was made use
of in this Affair, did not make many Words to make him accept of a good Sum of
Money. The Duke of Epernon asked nothing better, than to have a Share in the
Government. This haughty ambitious Man saw, with Pleasure, that they thought
him the most proper Person to break up a puissant Faction, contrived by the
first Prince of the Blood and Grandees of the Realm. The Two Dukes saw the
Queen the next Morning in private, to both of their Satisfactions.

The old Ministers of State recalled
As for these Ministers of State, they were not less tractable. These Gentlemen
were too much discontented to lose their Credit. The Chancellor and Villeroy
were at odds, but quickly reconciled. Jeannin had a Commission to give the
Queen a Visit in the Name of these Three, in Luxembourgh House, whither she
repaired every Day to see the fine Palace she had begun to build, and the
pleasant Gardens she was planting. The secret Discourse which the Queen had
with the President Jeannin, caused many Thoughts in the Marechal de Ancre, who
was come to Luxemburgh House. His Surprisal was yet greater, when the Officer
of the Queen's Guards would not let him come near to her, because she had given
express Order, to hinder whomsoever he was that came, from interrupting her,
whilst she was talking to the President Jeannin.

Conchini from that time began to fear some new Revolution at Court; he did not
doubt of it farther, when he saw the next Evening the Queen give the Duke of
Epernon a Thousand Marks of distinction. She caused a Chair to be brought for
him, and placed next to her, under pretense that he was newly recovered from a
great Sickness. They discoursed a long time together. She invited him to see a
Play; and ordered a Chair to be brought for him and Zamet, the Duke's great
Friend, who bore him Company, without giving the least Attention to the Duke of
Mayenne, who was there present. Conchini swore bloodily; and considering how
the Scene was altered, said, I laugh at the Affairs of this World. The Queen
takes care of a Seat for Zamer, and never takes notice of the Duke de Mayenne.
After such a Stir as this, depend, if ye will, upon the Friendship of Princes.

Mary of Medicis was then the most satisfied Princess in the World: The very
Day that she was reconciled to the Duke of Guise and Epernon, was, in her
Opinion, the most difficult and weightiest Day of her Life. This is a Play,
said she, with a many Intrigues in it; at the end we have nothing but Peace and
Rejoicing. Whilst she was in so good a Humor, she plentifully bestowed her
Liberalities. The Duke of Guise was secured of an Hundred thousand Crowns: and
that the Count of Rochefoucault should be called back to Court. The Chevalier
de Guise got the Lieutenacy-General of Provence; and the Queen caused all
Processes to cease which were commenced against him. The Princess of Conti
obtained the Reversion of the Abbey of St. Germain. At last Bassompierre was
promised the Office of Chief Gentleman of the King's Bedchamber.

Confusion and Troubles of the Prince of Conde.
The Prince of Conde went next Morning to Court: But what was his Amazement,
when he found the Queen shut up in her Closet with the Ministers of State
without suffering any one to open the Door to him! After a great many
Reflections upon this sudden Accident, the crafty Bassompierre insinuated, That
the Marshal d^ Bouillon might have put a Trick upon his Highness in this
Occasion, and have made his Peace with the Queen and the Ministers of State,
leaving the Prince in the Lurch. This Suspicion seemed likely enough to poor
Conde; who went strait away to the Marquess d' Ancres, for to consider together
upon this Conjuncture, and found him no less cast down than himself was, at the
good Understanding that wa^ between the Queen and her Ministers o^ State, and
the new Favor of the Duke o^ Guise and d' Epernon.

The Death of the young Baron de Luz^ slain in a Duel by the Chevalier de Guise
did not make a less noise in the World; though the Court did not so much bestir
it self about it, The young Baron de Luz killed in a Duel by the Chevalier de
Guise.
as about the Murder of his Father. The Guises were at that time in Favor with
the Regent. Luz, the Son of him whom I but now spoke of, instructed in the
false Maxims of the French Nobility, thought himself to be bound in Honor to
require Satisfaction for his Father's Death. A Month after he sent a Challenge
to the Chevalier de Guise, by a Gentleman named du Riol. Sir, Mercure Francois.
1613.
imported the Challenge, you ought to be the only and trusty Witness of my just
Grief. Pardon then, I pray you, if I require you, by this Note, to see you with
Sword in Hand, for to have an Account from you of my Father's Death. The good
Opinion I have of your Bravery and Courage, makes me hope you will make no use
of your Quality for an Excuse to grant me a Request which Honor exacts from
you. This Gentleman will show you the Place where I shall be with a good Horse.
I have Two Swords, you shall have the choice of them. If you will not come hither,
I Will go wherever you shall command me. The Chevalier de Guise was in Bed when
du Riol gave him the Challenge. He quickly dressed himself; and taking the
Chevalier Grignan to be his Second, they went all Three to the Place where the
young Baron expected them. After the usual Formalities in premeditated Duels,
the Four fought with their Swords on Horseback. Guise was wounded at the first
Pass; but at the third he run Luz quite through, who fell from his Horse in a
little time after. Grignan could not make his Part so good with du Riol, who
had given him Two great Thrusts with his Rapier. The Chevalier de Guise ran
speedily to help him; and du Riol, seeing Luz at Death's Door, made the best of
his Way. 'Twas said, that the Court Bravo's went to congratulate the Chevalier
de Guise upon this Achievement; which, in the Sense of all reasonable Men, he
ought to be rather ashamed of. He had barbarously killed the Father, to rid his
House of a Man who was a Thorn in their side. Though the Rule of false Honor
did not allow him to deny the Son the Satisfaction he required, yet this second
Homicide was not less Criminal than the former before God and Men, who have a
right and sound Apprehension of things. One should be so far from applauding
this wretched Murderer, as he ought to be looked upon with Horror, who after
having unjustly killed the Father, was drawn on into the unfortunate Necessity
of killing the Son, blinded by his just Resentment, and hurried on by the Evil
Custom of the Times. That which is more astonishing is, that Mary de Medicis
sent to visit the Chevalier de Guise after this second Duel, and ask how he did
after his Wound; Memoires de Bassompierre
she who but few Weeks before had commanded the Parliament to prosecute him in
less than eight Days for the first Duel.

Behold how this weak and imprudent Queen executed the Declarations published
by her Son, and under her Directions, at the beginning of the Year, against
Duels. The precedent Kings had tried to abolish this pernicious and abominable
Custom without ever being able to compass their Design. Lewis XIII. was more
vigorous in the matter in the last Years of his Reign. Let us not deny his Son
the just Praise he deserves in this Case. His Severity has almost completed
what his Predecessors undertook, but could never bring about. This is the best,
and perhaps, the only good Action he has done in fifty six Years of his Reign.
If the Justice of Men let the Chevalier de Guise go unpunished, Mercure
Francois 1514.
yet this false Brave cannot escape God's Judgment. The following Year, being at
the Castle de Baux, five Leagues from Arles in Provence, he would needs himself
fire a Cannon, which burst asunder. He received such a Wound from a Splinter of
it, as he died in two Hours after: Time, God wot, short enough for Preparation
to appear before the terrible Revenger of Blood unjustly spilt. His Name was,
Francis Paris de Lorraine.

The Death of the Duke of Mantua. New Designs of the Duke of Savoy upon this
Accident.
Affairs abroad disquieted the Regent as well as the Commotions at home. Francis
Duke of Mantua, her Nephew, died the latter end of the precedent Year. He left
behind him by Margaret his Wife of the House of Savoy, and Daughter of Charles
Emanuel, but one Daughter about four Years of Age. Ferdinand Cardinal de
Gonzagua, Brother to Francis, succeeded without any Contest, to the Duchy of
Mantua. But Montferrat not being a Fief Male, it was to descend to the young
Princess of Mantua. This Marquisate, formerly given by the Emperor Otho to a
Saxon Lord, had fallen since into the Possession of two different Houses. The
Paleologues first got into it by the Marriage of Yoland, an Heiress of the Line
of Saxony, with Andronicus Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople. Theodorus,
their second Son, having had Montferrat for his Share, his Issue Male were in
Possession of this Fee of the Western Empire, till for want of such Heirs, the
House of Gonzagua came to inherit it, by Virtue of a Marriage of Margaret
Poleologus with Frederick Duke of Mantua

The Duke of Savoy disputed the Succession with the Family of the Gonzagua's.
There is said they, an ancient Agreement made between Theodorus Paleologus and
Edmund Comte de Savoy. That when the Line Male of the Paleologues should be at
an end, the Issue Male of Yoland his Daughter, and of Edmund of Savoy, whom she
had married, should inherit Montferrat; preferrably to the Daughters of the
Family of the Paleologues, who might only pretend to a Portion suitable to
their Quality. Charles Emanuel had other Pretensions to a part of Montferrat,
by Virtue of the Will of Blanch Paleologus, married into the House of Savoy.
She made Duke Charles II. Heir of a part of Montferrat, which she laid claim
to, and of what was besides due to her for her Jointure. The Sum was but
Fourscore Thousand Crowns; but the Interest for a long time added to the
Principal, made it amount almost to a Million of Livres. This occasioned a very
long Suit between the Houses of Savoy and Gonzaga. Instead of ending the
Process by a Definitive Sentence, the Emperor Charles V. made the Affair more
perplexed. He, to content both Parties, awarded the Possession of Montferrat to
the House of Mantua, and left, as they were, the Pretensions of Savoy, by
Virtue of a Testamentary Donation of Blanch Paleologus.

The Marriage of the last deceased Duke Francis with Margaret of Savoy was at
last concluded, with design to put an end to all the Differences of both
Houses. In favor of this Alliance Charles Emanuel gave up all his Pretensions
to his Daughter, and the Children begotten of her, if she should have any.
'Twas agreed likewise on both sides, that a Line should be drawn to divide, as
equally as possible could be, the two Princes Estates which ran into one
another. But this Division being made, the Duke of Savoy was minded to renew
his ancient Rights: insomuch as he was not so ready to maintain the Pretensions
of Mary his Grandchild for Montferrat, as his own.

Cartifices of the Duke of Savoy.
As soon as he had heard of the Duke of Mantua's Death, he sent two Persons,
whom he chiefly relied upon, not so much to comfort his Daughter, as to
instruct her in what she was to do in this present Conjuncture. The first
counseled her to say she was with Child, to hinder Cardinal Gonzaga, who came
in haste from Rome to put himself into Possession of the deceased Duke's
Estate, his Brother. Margaret was extremely fixed on the Interest of her House;
and Charles Emanuel had taken care to breed up his Children upon an entire
dependence on their Father; so that the young Widow was easily brought over to
counterfeit her self big with Child. Victor Amedaeus, Prince of Piedmont, went
in Person to Mantua, under pretense of visiting his afflicted Sister; but he
had secret Orders from his Father to take her out of Mantua, with her Daughter,
to Turin, or Milan; or, lastly, to Montferrat; of which Place the Princess Mary
was Heiress. It is not convenient, said Victor Amedaeus to the Court of Mantua,
for a disconsolate Widow to live in a Place, where she constantly finds Objects
to renew her Sorrow; and Decency will no more permit her to be with the
Cardinal her Brother-in-Law, who is not much older than she, and has so great
Interest for the Succession of Mantua. He besides ought to wish it so, for his
own Reputation. Would he make himself responsible for all the Accidents which
might happen to the Mother or the Daughter? My Sister, continued he, ought ^lso
to take along with her the young Prin^ess; she cannot be in better Hands:
Natu^al Right gives to Mothers the Education of their Children: They can take
more care of them, and be more tender of them than any other Person.

The Cardinal Ferdinand understood very well, that the Savoyards thought of
nothing more, than making sure to themselves Montferrat, under the Name of the
Pupil who was in their Hands, or at least, at the disposal of John Mendoza,
Marquess of Inojosa, Governor of the Milanese, their good Friend. Therefore the
Cardinal alleged several Reasons to hinder his Sister-in-Law and his Niece,
from going out of the States of Mantua. Is it Reasonable, answered Ferdinand,
that we should suffer the Princess to go away, who perhaps may quickly bring an
Heir capable to make this Country happy? The Princes of the House of Gonzaga
are ordinarily born, where they are to Govern; and is it not more convenient
for my Niece to be brought up in a Country, where we shall endeavor to make
her some time a Sovereign Mistress, by Marrying her to the Heir of the House of
Mantua? If the sight of my Deceased Brother's Palace troubles too much his
Widow, we have other places whither she may retire for her Pleasure, with all
imaginable Liberty.

Charles Emanuel Negotiated at Milan, with as much Zeal and Artifice. He
persuaded, that they would not consent to entrust with him the Heiress of
Montferrat, caused it to be reported at Inojosa, that she was the King of
Spain's Grandchild, that his Catholic Majesty was interess't to get her out of
her Uncles Hands by the Father side; that they should beforehand beware of the
Cardinal, from whom she carried away with her the Succession of a rich
Marquisate; that Philip III. was to take so much the more care of the Princess
Mary; that it was of great concern to his Majesty, that Montferrat should be in
the possession of a House, which might be the best agreeable to him; Lastly,
that it was to be feared, lest the Gonzagues should marry their Niece into
France, with the Son of the Duke of Nevers, their near Relation.

The Governor of Milan demands the Widow Duchess of Mantua and her Daughter.
These Reasons, it was said, backed with some Presents which Charles Emanuel had
sent to the Marquess Inojosa, engaged this Governor to send the Prince d'Ascoli
to Mantua with a great Retinue, to demand of the Cardinal the Widow Duchess
and her Daughter. Such a Proposal at first surprised him, but recovering
himself a little, he found an Expedient which broke the Measures of the Prince
of Piedmont, and the Envoy of the Governor of Milan. It Is true, answered
Ferdinand, that the Princess Mary has the Honor to be related to the King of
Spain, but she has this likewise, of being the Emperor's and Queen of France's
Niece. I cannot disdispose of her, without the consent of their Majesty's.
Besides, the Duchess my Sister-in-Law, and I, are at difference about the
Tutelage of her Children. It belongs to the Emperor, on whom our Estates
depend, to judge which of our two Rights are best grounded. The Prince of
Piedmont and d'Ascoli, departed after this Answer, whether it was that the
respect they had for so great a Name, stopped their Mouths, or that they had not
taken necessary Measures for speaking more resolutely.

The Regent of France opposes the designs of the Duke of Savoy.
The Marquess Trenel was at Turin, i^ the behalf of Mary de Medicis, when the
News was received there of the Death o^ the Duke of Mantua. Amongst the
Complements of Condolence to Charles Emanuel, upon this troublesome Accident
which happened in his Family; Trenel, as from himself insinuated into the
dissembling Savoyard, who feigned to talk of the Count of Spain, that his most
Christian Majesty had so good Intentions for the House of Mantua, as he would
never fail to take it into his Protection, and Oppose with the force of his
Arms, those who should undertake to offer violence to his near Relations.
Charles Emanuel well understood this Discourse concerned him, more than it
regarded the Spaniards. He then laying aside his ordinary Dissimulation,
answered frankly, that he hoped from the Equity of the King, and his Mother
Queen, their Majesty's would not take it ^l, if he maintained, in case he was
forced ^'t, the Right of his Children to the Estates of the House of Mantua. My
Daughter is big with Child, proceeded he, and don't we know, but that she may
be ^rought to bed of a Son? Be it what it will, ^he Princess Mary is the
undoubted Heiress ^f Montferrat. If the House of Gonzaga ^ill do any Injustice
to the Mother or Daughter, am not I in a necessity to take their In^rests? I
cannot be persuaded, that his most ^hristian Majesty, whom I have always ^erv'd
the best it was possible for me, would ^rotect upon this occasion, Persons who
would ^^ke away Mine and my Childrens Rights. Whatever comes on it, if Men fail
to do Ju^^ice, we shall have Recourse to the Sove^^ign Judge of the World, and
we trust he ^ill be favorable to us. Such is the Lan^uage of Princes, when
they are going ^^on unjustifiable Actions. Geffier Resi^ent from France at the
Court of Savoy, ^^d Orders to speak more positively to ^^e Duke, and declare to
him, that the ^^areschal Lesdiguieres, should have an ^rmy ready to march
forward into Italy, as soon as there should be any Attempt against the House of
Mantua, which the Crown of France took under its Protection. The French being
gone to Mantua, to make his Complements of Condolence, in behalf of the King of
France, and the Queen his Mother, to the Cardinal, upon the Death of the late
Duke, gave the same Assurance by the Queen's Order. This did not a little serve
to secure Ferdinand, whom these Affairs had put into great perplexity.

The Popes Conduct in the Affairs of Mantua.
He was to expect some Succors from the Pope, whose chief Interest is to
maintain peace in Italy; but the fearful and interessed old Man, acted but
weakly in this matter. However urgent Breves, the French Ambassador at the
Court of Rome was with Paul V. for to stir him up to prevent the Troubles which
this Controversy might raise in Italy; Siri Memory recondite. To. III. page
16, 17, etc.
no other answer could be got from him, than that the Queen of France ought to
press the Catholic King, to send a precise Order to the Governor of Milan, not
to bac^ the Pretensions of the Duke of Savoy. The Pope secretly gained over by
the Spaniards, to whom he was wholly devoted and who at first flattered
themselves o^ making an Advantage of the Ambition (...) Charles Emanuel, had
Counseled the Cardinal of Mantua, to send the Mother and Daughter to Milan.
And when it was proposed to him, to take them both to Boulogne, under the Care
and Protection of the Holy Chair, he excused himself of this; for that Charles
Emanuel had no confidence in him. At length Breves having told Paul, that it
was however expected from his love for the common good of Italy, that he should
oppose his Spiritual and Temporal Arms against the Duke of Savoy, in case he
attempted to attack with open Force, the Cardinal of Mantua; the Pope answered
in General Terms, that he would follow the Dictates of his own Conscience, and
do as God should inspire him; an usual Evasion of these Gentlemen, who hearken
to their Interests and Passions, more than to the Voice of the Holy Spirit.
Pope Paul spoke with more Sincerity, when in Reference to this same Affair of
Mantua, he said, that he would not meddle with the concern of Princes, who had
no regard for his Authority; and such indeed are the Sentiments of the great
Personages, who are of the Popes Communion. They all of 'em know, that this is
but Usurpation, Deceit and Pageantry; yet in the Interim, I cannot understand
by what politic Interest, all these Princes who are under the Popes Obedience,
keep still in with him. These imagine, whether it be good or bad, that his
Authority is necessary to them upon certain occasions, and the Court of Rome
crafty to make an Advantage of their so beneficial prejudicate Opinions, think
that they are quit with 'em, if from time to time they wipe off, and connive at
some disdainful Aspersions, whilst they can preserve their Revenues and a
Spiritual Power over the Ignorant and Superstitious People, without which, the
Pontifical Chair could have no long continuance or Duration.

The States of Venice stand by the Cardinal of Mantua.
The Venetians upon this Occurrency were less Fearful, and more Wise than the
Pope; for these able Statesmen foresaw too well, the Consequences of the
Affair of Mantua, and easily discovered where the Artifices of the Duke of
Savoy drove at. The Senate therefore took particular care to encourage Cardinal
Ferdinand, and gave him the best Advice, for not to suffer himself to be
surprised unawares. Nani Hist. Veneta. Lib. I. 1613.
The Republic did moreover Negotiate very effectually both at Vienna, and at
the Court of France, to persuade those Princes to oppose the secret Designs of
the Spaniards, and the undertakings of Charles Emanuel. Matthias the Emperor
did as much instruct his Kinsman the King of Spain, as any other Prince in
Europe, and the Cardinal de Clessel kept him in this Jealousy.

Being both persuaded that the Spaniards designed rather to Ruin, than to
Support the Authority of the Emperor in Italy. Upon this account Matthias did
not make any difficulty to choose the Cardinal of Mantua for the Guardian of the
Children of the late Duke, and to dispense with his Age, he not being old
enough according to the Common Laws, to be their Guardian.

Ferdinand, Cardinal of Gonzague takes upon him the Title of Duke of Mantua.
At length after Three months pretense, the Duchess Margarita declared, she was
not with Child; and Ferdinand de Gonzague took the Quality of Duke of Mantua.
The Prince of Piedmont came to fetch his Sister, and Conduct her to Turin.
Isabella of Savoy, another Daughter of Charles Emanuel, Married to Caesar
d'Este Duke of Medena, came also to Mantua, that so she night have a meeting
with the Prince of Piedmont her Brother, and the Duchess Margarita her Sister.
This was a new ^ontrivance of Charles Emanuel. The Marriage of the Cardinal,
Nani Historia Veneta. Lib. I* 1613. Siri Memorierecondite. Tom. III. p. 52, 53*
54. etc.
Duke of Man^ua was thought a proper expedient to ^ompose all Differences:
'Twas proposed, and Ferdinand did not seem very averse to (...) Margarita
thought by shedding a few Tears 'twould be easy to work upon her ^over, and to
obtain leave of him to ^arry away the Princess Maria; but tho ^he Cardinal
might have some inclinati^ns for Margarita, yet his love was not so ^olent as
to overcome all those Reasons which engaged him not to part with his Niece. The
Prince of Piedmont seeing him resolute in this point, thought fit to try
another method, which was this; that the Duchess Dowager should retire to
Modena with her Daughter, till the proposed Marriage should be Consummated; but
in case it should be broke off, she should go alone to Turin; and that Caesar
de Este should be obliged by promise to send back the Princess Mary to Mantua,
if the Emperor or Cardinal Duke should re-demand her.

New efforts of the D. of Savoy, to fetch the Princess Mary his Grandaughter
from Mantua.
Ferdinand was caught in the Snare: Whether it was that his Ministers were
bribed, or that he had not quickness of apprehension enough to receive it; the
Cardinal imprudently accepted the proposal, which his Enemies made him: When
the Ministers of France had notice of it, they admonisht Ferdinand, that if his
Niece should once go out of his hands, 'twould be impossible for him to get her
again, and that the Duke of Modena would be so confined by the artifices of
Charles Emanuel, and the Marquis d'Inojosa, that he would not be able to
restore her, tho he should be willing to do it. They added farther, if you
should marry any one but Margarita, and it should please God, you have any
Children, what perpetual disputes will there be between them and the Heiress of
one part of the Estates of your Family?

Have you duly weighed all these inconveniences? This Remonstrance opened the
Cardinal Dukes Eyes; but he had given his Word, and he could not tell how to go
back. The Ministers of France, and the Venetians helped him out by persuading
the Duke of Modena, not to charge himself with a Trust which was like to
en^angle him in a great deal of trouble and vexation: So that the Prince of
Piedmont set out for Turin with his Sister Margarita, ^he being very much
grieved to leave her Daughter behind her. They came to Milan in the holy Week.
The Governor ^nvited them to spend those days of Devotion there: But Victor
Amadeus and ^nojosa had something else to mind than Holy Days. The latter sent
immediately ^o Modena to engage Este, to charge himself with the Duchess and
Princess of Mantua, which according to Agreement were to be committed to his
Care: And when they were sure of the Duke of Modena, the Captain of the
Governor's Guards was sent to Mantua, in Inojosa's Name, to desire the Cardinal
Duke to be ^s good as his Word. Ferdinand, who ^id not expect thus to be
importuned a^resh, had no other way to come off, but ^o retract what he had
said. He al^edged for his excuse, that he could not ^eliver up his Niece
without the consent of the Emperor, who had committed her ^o his Guardianship.
The Titular Bishop of Diocesarea was sent to Milan, to make up the business
with the Governor. Ferdinand ordered this Prelate to go likewise as far as
Verceil, whither Charles Emanuel was advanced, under a pretense of coming to
meet his Daughter Margarita, but really with a design to execute a Project,
which he had in his Head.

The ambitious Projects of the D. of Savoy.
The Bishop of Diocesarea had power to Negotiate the Marriage proposed between
the Cardinal Duke and his Sister in Law. The Dissembling Savoiard sometimes
seemed to listen to this Expedient, but he had no desire to bring the matter to
a conclusion. The opportunity which he had of seizing on Monferrat, was too
good to be neglected: Charles Emanuel plainly told the Bishop of Diocesarea,
that he would not give up the pretensions of the House of Savoy to Monferrat in
favor of the Match; he demanded back again not only the Jewels which his
daughter had carried into the Family of Gonzague, but also those which her
Husband had presented her with. The Cardinal Duke refused to restore the
latter, and Charles Emanuel full of great expectations, designed nothing, but
to satisfy his Ambition.

He pleased himself with the thought^ of having time to effect his Enterprise
before the Princes of Italy would be awakened out of that Sleep, which ^long
and profound Peace had brought upon them. The watchful Eye which the Republic
of Venice had upon every thing that was doing in their Neighborhood, gave him
some Disturbance: But he imagined that if they did not approve of his Invasion,
yet they would stand by, and look on, rather than engage in a War. As for the
Emperor, he did not much concern himself about it: The Authority of the Empire
in Italy is but a vain Title without Power. The two Crowns were more to be
feared. But the Duke thought Maria de Medicis, having her hands full by reason
of the Factions of the Princes and great Men at home, could not send any mighty
Assistance to the House of Mantua. And then he hoped to curry favor at the
Court of Madrid, by means of the Governor of Milan, his Friend: Besides, there
were at that time no Troops in those parts; and it would require time to bring
them thither: However, he thought the fear of bringing the French into Italy,
would make the Court of Madrid backward to declare it self either one way or
the other. And this in the very thing, which would have checked Charles Emanuel,
if he had not been blinded by his Ambition.

For indeed his Catholic Majesty fearing nothing more, than that the French
should have any pretense to carry their Arms into Italy; his business was to
take care that the Duke of Savoy should not tacque the House of Mantua, which
France would not fail to take under its Protection.

The Duke of Savoy invades Monferrat.
Charles Emanuel assembles his Troops as secretly as he can, and parts from
Verceil the 22th of April 1613. to enter Monferrat with his Army: He presently
surprises several places; others being not prepared to make any Resistance,
Surrender; so that within a few days, he was Master of all the Province except
Casal. He had also took this important Town, and the rest of the Marquisat, if
Charles of Gonzague Duke of Nevers in France, had not happily been in Italy at
the time of his Invasion; whether it was upon the account of assisting the
Cardinal Duke with his Advice, and with his Sword if there should be occasion,
or whether he pretended to Negotiate at Rome and at Venice, about an imaginary
descent into the Morea, which he had designed; he undertook to Conduct to
Florence his Sister in Law, Daughter of the late Duke of Maienne, married to
the Count of Saintfiore, Son of the Duke of Sforce. When Nevers was arrived on
the Coasts of Genoa, he received Letters, which invited him in the Name of the
Nobility of Monferrat, to come immediately to their assistance, to stop the
progress of the Arms of the Duke of Savoy. Nevers went away presently with some
Soldiers, which he got together, and with the assistance of a good Guide he
luckily entered Casal, which the Cardinal Duke had made as strong as he could.
Vincent de Gonzague the Cardinal's Brother hasted toward that place at the
same time, and in his Passage through Milan, he endeavored to convince Inojosa of
the secret designs of the Enemy of their Family, who flattered himself that the
Conquest of Monferrat* would facilitate that of Milan one day, which was a
thing he had long ago contrived.

This Enterprise occasions great commotions in Italy.
All Italy was allarmed at the report of the March of Charles Emanuel. 'Twas not
doubted but Inojosa was privy to his Designs, though he took particular care
openly to condemn the Dukes Enterprise.

And though the Governor inveighed against him, sent Circular Letters to the
Princes of Italy, and writ to France, declaring that the King his Master
disapproved the Action of the Savoyard, and that his Catholic Majesty would
vigorously oppose all those that troubled the Repose of Italy. All the World
believed that Charles Emanuel and he understood one another, and that he had
received considerable Presents from him. And it is a question whether the
Marquess of Bedmar, Ambassador of Spain at Venice, was more sincere in the
Protestations which he made to the Seigniory, implying that Philip would
willingly concur with them in securing the quiet of Italy, that the Cardinal
Duke should be re-established in his Possession of Monferrat, and that Charles
Emanuel should be punished for his Temerity.

When the Duke of Savoy's designs were publicly known, the Republic of Venice
represented to him, that they were surprised to see him begin a War, which in
all probability, would draw Foreign Forces into Italy, which must first pass
through his Territories. These prudent Senators said to him, There are some
Conquests, which don't deserve to be bought with the loss of that Quiet and
Tranquillity, which a Prince enjoys. Have a regard to your Glory and to your
Interest: You thus hazard the loss of the one, and expose your Country to be
the Theater of a War, the End of which perhaps you may not live to see: France
and Spain will Interest themselves; at least they will make themselves Arbiters
in the Case, and you must submit to their Decision. Instead of listening to
these wise Admonitions, Charles Emanuel ordered the Ambassador of the Republic
to leave him; but it was not long before the Ambitious Duke perceived he was
engaged in an Enterprise, which was not like to prove Honorable to him in the
Issue. The Venetians sent Three thousand Men for the preservation of Casal. The
great Duke of Tuscany promised Two thousand Foot, and Two hundred Horse to the
Cardinal Duke. The House of Mantua levied Three thousand Switzers; so that they
hoped in a short time to be in a Condition to meet the Duke of Savoy, with
Sixteen or Seventeen thousand Men; but things did not perfectly succeed
according to his Expectation. As for the Pope, he only promised his good
Offices in order to a Peace. The Quality of Universal Father is of mighty use,
when he thinks fit rather to Enrich his Family, than to Succor an injured
Prince.

The Manifesto's of the D. of Savoy and the Cardinal D. of Mantua.
In the mean time they published Manifestoe's on both Sides. The Duke of Savoy
asserted, that the Guardianship of the Princess Mary belonged to the Duchess
her Mother; he insisted mightily on the Cardinal Dukes refusing to keep his
word; Mercure Francoise. 1613*
and the excuse that that Prince could not part with a Pupil, which the Emperor
had committed to his Tutelage, was pretty well refuted; as indeed it was not a
very good one. The Emperors Interposition in that affair was desired by him,
that so he might make use of it afterward, as there should be occasion. And he
had sufficiently explained himself as to that Point, when he promised to
deliver back his Niece into the hands of the Duke of Modena. Charles Emanuel
laid forth his Pretensions to Monferrat; with as much boldness, as if they had
been the clearest and justest in the World. This is the way of Ambitious
Princes. They imagine that the World is easily imposed on, and that Men will
believe them upon their Word. As for the Cardinal Duke, he replied in his
Manifesto, that the Duchess his Sister-in-Law not being of Age, the Law did
not allow her to be Guardianess of her Daughter, and that Mothers forfeit the
Guardianship of their Children, when they voluntarily withdraw from the Family
and Dominions of their Husbands. From whence he concluded that Margarita,
having earnestly desired to go to Turin, had thereby renounced her Guardianship
of the Princess of Mantua. He endeavored to make good the Emperor's committing
her to his Care. But the Promise which he made, and broke afterward, was such
a Slurr upon him, that he could not possibly give it a good Color: His best
way had been ingeniously to have confessed his Imprudence; such a false step
costs a Prince Dear: The superannuated and extravagant Pretensions to Monferrat
are very well refuted. He did not fail to put the Duke of Savoy in mind of the
Grant which he had made upon the Marriage of his Daughter with the late Duke
Francis of Mantua. In which Point, he had been guilty of a far more
considerable Breach of his Word than that was, which Charles Emanuel made such
a noise about: How could he have the Face to insist so much upon the
retractation of a surprised Man, who himself was the most Perfidious, and
falsest Prince of his time.

At this time he Acted a Thousand parts to justify his Conduct to the World,
or at least to gain time in managing the two Crowns. Artifices and bravado's of
D. of Savoy.
Sometimes he proposed to set the Arms of the King of Spain over the Gates of
all the Towns which he had taken in Monferrat, and to put them into the hands
of his Majesty, on Condition, there should be a Garrison of Savoyards.
Sometimes he offered to let Philip III. have Casal, on Condition that the House
of Savoy should remain in Possession of all the rest of Monferrat. When he writ
to the Queen Regent of France, he did it in the most submissive manner
imaginable; he was ready to deliver up to her Majesty, all that he had taken
from the House of Mantua.

And when Charles Emanuel perceived that his pretended Submissions did him no
kindness, he put on another Shape; he Hectored and Threatened all the World;
Just as if all Europe had been at his Disposal. If the Spaniards required him
to desist from his Enterprise, he answered them haughtily that he would side
with France. If the Pope urged him to make Peace, he talked of calling to his
assistance an Army of Protestants into Italy. And, if the Republic of Venice
pretended to assist the Cardinal Duke, he threatened them with nothing less than
bringing the Turk against them, and covering the Adriatic Sea with Corsairs
and Pirates. Sometimes, nevertheless he talked of Peace, but his Proposals were
so extravagant, that they could not be accepted, or else so ambiguous, that no
body could tell what he meant.

His Intrigues at the Court of France are discovered,
The Intrigues which this turbulent Spirit had formed in the Court of France,
with some great Men there, gave him more Confidence than any thing else. He
sent Couriers continually to the Marshall de Lesdiguieres, his Friend, who
Commanded in Dauphine by reason of the Nonage of the Count Soissons. Siri
Memoirie recondite Tom. III. page 81.
He made Lesdiguieres believe that he did nothing without his Privity and
Advice; that so he might get him into his Interests, and hinder him from
obeying too punctually the Orders, the Queen Regent had sent him to assist her
Nephews of Mantua; and amuse the Marshall with diverse Proposals of
accommodation: Charles Emanuel held also a great Correspondence with the Duke
of Bellegarde, one of the Malcontents of the Regency. The Government of
Burgundy, in which he was settled, might render him very useful to the Designs
of the Savoiard. In short, he had Agents and secret Spies in the Court of
France, who gave him notice of every thing, and who were nearly Allied to the
Prince of Conde, the Male-contented Noblemen, and even the Marquess and
Marchioness of Ancre, the most intimate Confidents of the Queen. Being exactly
informed of all that past at Court, and in the several Provinces; The Duke of
Savoy flattered himself that Mary de Medicis being embarrast with Factions,
which he managed with extraordinary application, would not be in a condition to
let her thoughts run abroad; and that she would shortly be engaged in a Civil
War.

Memoires de Bassompierre.
And really, what care soever the Queen Regent took to secure her self of the
Duke of Guise, he still wavered, and the Prince of Conde was forward enough to
take notice of it. The Duke of Vendome, Gevernour of Britagne had given his
word to the Duchess of Mercoeur, his Mother-in-Law, that he would be faithful
to the Queen: And nevertheless he grew into a great intimacy with Conde, before
he set out for Bretagne, whither he went to call together the States of that
important Province. The Marshal of Bovillon disgusted that he could not rise so
high as he aspired, was the Man, who underhand endeavored to take off the Duke
of Guise from the Queens Interests, and to strengthen the Prince of Conde's
Party, that so Mary de Medicis might see her need of him, and buy him at a
dearer rate. The Marquess d' Ancre being earnestly bent upon the ruin of those
Ministers, which the Cab^l had a mind to undermine, went so far in that
business, that the Queen Regent was obliged to threaten him with Banishment, if
he did not break up the Cabal, and presently return to Court, from which he
affected to be at a distance, under a pretense of some Discontent. I am a Man
of Honor, answered he to Bassompierre, when this Nobleman spoke to him in the
behalf of his Benefactress, The Queen thinks she may break her Word to People;
for my own part, I Will be Faithful to Mr. the Prince, and those others, with
which her Majesty has united me. The cunning Italian loved Conde no more than
those Ministers, but being resolved to remove all those Princes and Noblemen
that stood in his way, after he had driven from the Court all those which he
thought had too great a share in the management of Affairs. The Ministers did
not let slip so good an occasion of irritating the Queen against the Marquess;
they studiously aggravated the Ingratitude of a Man, whom the Queen had raised.
Galigai his Wife was the first that exclaimed against him: But at the bottom
there was a very good understanding between him and his Wife, they were both in
the same Intrigues.

Their Enemies thought they had found out enough to be the Ruin of both without
remedy. Gueffier the Resident of France in Savoy had discovered that the Duke
had notice of all the secret Passages at Court, Mercure Francoise. 1613.
and that the Letters were directed to a certain Baron de la Roche of Dauphiny,
whom Charles Emanuel often kept company with, and I cannot tell how, Gueffier
had gotten a piece of a Letter written by the hand of the Duke of Savoy's Spy.
He sent it back to France, Memoires de la Regence de Marie de Medicis.
to be examined, to see if they could know the Hand of this Person that sent
secret Advice. They suspected diverse, and the Officers of the Post had Orders
to seize him, who should bring Letters written by the same hand. The Queen
Regent was then at Fontainbleau, where she was entertaining her self with the
Pleasures of the Spring. 'Twas there they seized a Dauphinois, by Name Magnac,
as he was carrying to the Post a Letter addressed to the Baron de la Roche;
they examined him before the Queen's Council. Magnac accuses the Marquess and
Marchioness d' Ancre; but above all, Dole their intimate Confident. The
Ministers began to triumph hereupon. They boasted that Conchini and his Wife,
or at least Dole should never get clear of this unhappy affair. And certainly
there was matter enough to ruin them entirely, The extreme Embarrassment of the
Marquess d' Ancre, which he brought himself into by intrigueing with the D. of
Savoy. Memoires de Bassom.
if their Friends had not stood by them, and if they had had a Mistress more
Advised, and less Indulgent than Maria de Medicis.

Bassompierre had dexterously gotten all the Secret out of Lomenie the Secretary
of State, something of which the Queen had before told him. He thought he was
obliged immediately to advertize Conchini of it whom he looked on as his
Friend. The Marquess d' Ancre denied that he knew Magnac, and affected to speak
without any concern. Bassompierre being satisfied that he had performed a good
Office to a Man that might make his advantage of it if he pleased, left the
Marquess, and took a walk along the Canal of Fountainbleau. But Conchini
reflecting upon the notice that had been given him, he presently sent to
enquire for Bassompiere: They shut themselves up in a Gallery, and Conchini
being uneasy, having walked sometime without saying any thing, Cried out all of
a sudden in his odd Language, half French and half Italian, I am Ruined. Mr.
Bassompierre, The Ministers my Enemies have got the better of me with the
Queen. Then he wept bitterly, and threw out a thousand Execrations.
Bassompierre suffered him to torment himself for some time. After the Marquess
was a little come to himself, he said thus to him. Sr. your business now is to
take a good Resolution. The favor of the Queen may be a great stay to you
against your Enemies. They can never hinder her from hearing you make your
Defense if you are Innocent. But if your. Conscience reproaches you with any
thing, rather retire to your Government of Amiens. Let your Wife and Friends do
what they can; they will find a favorable moment to appease the Queen.

Conchini, who knew himself guilty, at present though it the best way to secure
his Person in Amiens, to which Place Bassompierre was willing to accompany him.
But Dole fearing he should be Ruined, if the Marquess d' Ancre left the Court,
persuaded him to change his Resolution. He had recourse to the Goodness of the
Queen, who too much doted on Leonora, Conchini's Wife. The Queen was not very
backward to forgive them this Trick. The Commissioners who examined Magnac,
gave in an account very favorable of the Marquess and Marchioness. Mazurier
and Mangor, whom they had made their Friends, did them good Service in this
Rencounter. And these mercenary Souls were well Paid for their Pains. Each of
them was advanced to be a First President. Mazurier was named for the
Parliament of Toulouse, and Mangot for that of Bourdeaux. The Names of Conchini
and his Wife, were suppressed in the Proceedings of the Lieutenant du Prevot de
l'Hotel against Magnac; and this wretch, which had not the greatest share in
the Guilt, was broke upon the Wheel alive at Fontainbleau.

This being a certain proof, that the Marquess and Marchioness of Ancre were so
well settled in the good graces of the Queen, The Minissters renew their Friend
ship with the Marquis d' Ancre-
that nothing could make them Forfeit her Favor: The Ministers took a
Resolution to come to an Agreement with Conchini. The President Jeannin, who
had always carried himself well enough toward the Favorite, proposed to the
Queen the Reconciliation of Villeroi and the Chancellor, with the Marquess. She
desired nothing more than to Reunite her People, in order to oppose the
contrary Party, There was a proposal made of a Match between Conchini's
Daughter and the Marquess of Villeroi, Memoirs de Bassompierre.
Grandson to the Secretary of State. And at the same time the Ministers
promised this Favorite, who was all along endeavoring to Raise himself upon
their Ruin, that they would assist him in all his Enterprises, and contribute
their utmost for the making his Fortune as great as he could wish. Bassompierre
who had done such Service, both for the Ministers and Conchini, complained,
that they coming to an Agreement, without his having a hand in it, both united
in their endeavors to turn him out of the Queen's Favor: They made the Queen
so Jealous of Bassompierre's Conduct, that despairing to obtain any thing of
her, he was upon the Point of leaving the Court of France, and going to seek
his Fortune elsewhere. But Bassompierre's good Friends, especially the Duke of
Guise and the Princess of Conti, spoke so effectually to the Queen Regent, that
her Majesty gave him good words to Retain him. The Princess of Conti would not
lose her Lover, and the Duke of Guise was persuaded by a long Experience, that
Bassompierre was serviceable to him.

The Queen Regent was not so taken up with these Intrigues at Court, that she
did not at all reflect upon foreign Affairs. That of Monferrat seemed to her
the most important, They resolve at the Court of France. (...) to send powerful
Succors to the House of Mantua. Memoires de la Regence de Marie de Medicis.
that was likely to come into her hands during the Administration. But her
Majesty would not come to any Resolutoin without the Advice of the Princes, and
all the Principal Men of the Kingdom. Here was an opportunity to recall to
Court the Prince of Conde, and the other Heads of the Party. They had withdrawn
one after another, very much disgusted that the Queen was Reconciled to the
Duke of Guise and d' Espernon, and that she had called back the Ministers. They
presently agreed to send Two thousand Men to Casal, History du Connetable de
Lesdiguieres. Live. VIII. Chapter 4. and (...).
under the Command of the Chevalier de Guise, who should Embark in Provence, to
pass by Savone into Monferrat. And the Court of France being persuaded that the
Governor of Milan privately sided with the Duke of Savoy, or at least that the
Spaniards would make their Advantage of this Quarrel, resolved to send Three
Armies to attacque Charles Emanuel in three different Places. The Mareshal de
Lesdiguieres was to march the greatest through Dauphine into Piedmont. Siri
Memoire recondite Tom. III. p. 92.93. etc.
The Duke of Guise had the least considerable, to attacque the Savoyard on the
Side of Provence. Lastly, the Third was designed to make an Irruption through
Burgundy, under the Command of Bellegarde.

As soon as this was concluded on in the Queens Council, The Duchess of Nevers
went away to Grenoble, to engage the Marquess of Lesdiguieres to march with all
speed. They diswade the Queen Regent from sending so speedy Succor to the
Cardinal Duke. Nani Historia Veneta. Lib. 1.1613.
But the earnest desire, which the Queen Regent at first discovered to Succor
her Nephews, grew cool by degrees. The secret Friends of the Duke of Savoy
cunningly represented to her Majesty, that 'twas dangerous to trust great Men
with Armies under their Command, during a Minority, and to place a Marshall of
France an Huguenot, at the Head of the most considerable. Vbaldini the Popes
Nuncio was on their side, for fear the Arms of France should make too great
advances in Italy, and that Lesdiguieres should bring too many Protestants
along with him; of which the Court of Rome has been always very Jealous. The
cunning Italian, with some others endeavored to persuade the Queen, yet
fearful and irresolute, that it was not necessary to be hasty in carrying the
Arms of France into Piedmont; since the King of Spain himself intended to
oppose the Duke of Savoy, and to take care, that what the House of Mantua had
lost in Monferrat, should be restored. Said they, Madam, if you send powerful
Aids to the Cardinal Duke, that step will create a jealousy of you, in King
Philip. Then he will assist the Duke of Savoy, and so of Course you must break
with Spain. Had not your Majesty better threatten the Duke of Savoy to agree
with Spain; would not that be sufficient to stop a Prince, who has began a War,
which he can never maintain, without the assistance of one Crown or the other.
By these insinuations the Queen was persuaded to suspend the march of the
Armies, till she should see, how affairs went at the Court of Madrid. The
Spaniards having seriously considered the consequences of those Commotions, The
K. of Spain declares against the D. of Savoy.
which the ambition of the Duke of Savoy had raised in Italy and other Places;
his Catholic Majesty resolved in good earnest to oppose the designs of this
restless and turbulent Prince. He sent his Secretary Vargas to Milan, to
declare plainly to Charles Emanuel, that if he would not consent to restore the
Towns he had taken in Monferrat, that Philip. would force him to it. Besides
that the Duke of Lerma hated the Duke of Savoy, this Minister did not care for
War; whether it were, that he thought Peace more proper for the Conservation of
his Authority, or whether he was willing to conform himself to the calm and
pacifique temper of his Prince.

So that Charles Emanuel is in worse confusion than ever He had pretended to
listen to some proposals of accommodation, Siri Memoire recondite To. III. p.
81, 82. etc. Nani Historia Veneta 1613.
which Massimi the Popes Nuncio had made him in the Name of the Pope. Victor
Amedeus, Prince of Piedmont was also gone to Milan to Negociate that Affair:
But his Father always found some occasion when the matter was near being
concluded. And even at that very time, when the Duke appeared inclined to
Peace. He endeavored to carry on his Conquests in Monferrat. Although France and
Spain then threatened him equally, and the Princes of Italy had almost all
declared against him; yet he was not daunted, but steddily resolved to make a
new Effort to lay the Storm, which roared on both Sides of him. He sent out of
hand the Prince of Piedmont to Madrid, to represent his Rights to the Catholic
King, and he engaged his Brother, the Duke of Nemours, to make a Journey into
France, to bring over the Queen Regent, if he could, or at least, to oppose the
Duke of Maienne, who made a powerful Interest in favor of the House of Mantua.
But they had less Respect for him in Spain, than they had in France; when
Victor Amadeus arrived in Catalonia, the King let him know, that he forbid him
to pass any farther, till he should receive news of his Father's submission to
his Majesty's last Orders. The Emperor Commands the D. of Savoy to desist from
his Enterprise- upon Monserrat. Siri Memoire recondite To. III. p. 84.85. etc.


According to the Project of Accommodation proposed by the Pope's Minister, the
Duke of Savoy was to deliver up to his Holiness, the Places, which he had
Possession of in Monferrat. At this, the Court of Vienna took offense. And
indeed, the Marquisat being a Fief of the Empire, It belonged to the Emperor to
decide the Controversy and to be the Sequester, preferably to all others.
Matthias therefore sent Orders to the Prince of Castiglione his Commissary in
Italy, to go to Turin, and tell Charles Emanuel, that he should immediately
raise the Siege, he had laid before Nice de la Paille, a Town of Monferrat, and
consent to the suspension of Arms, which his Imperial Majesty had ordered on
both Sides, upon pain of forfeiting the Emperor's Protection and that he must
with all speed lay down his Arms, to dissipate the Jealousies which his
Enterprise had given him. But as the Emperor pretended to be the sole Judge of
a Controversy concerning a Fief of the Empire, so the King of Spain, he too,
would be the Arbiter without the concurrence either of the Empire or of France.
All these incidents, pleased Charles Emanuel. What with Criticizing on some of
the Articles that were proposed to him, and expecting till the Competition
should be decided, he had time to push on his Conquests in Monferrat.

The Prince of Castiglione tired with the delays of the Duke of Savoy, published
a Proclamation in the Name of the Emperor; where he enjoined Charles Emanuel to
deliver up to his Imperial Majesty's Commissary, all that he had taken in
Monferrat, to send within Ten days a Deputy who should Treat, (the Prince of
Castiglione being present) with him, whom the Duke of Mantua should send, about
means to determine the Controversy, to the satisfaction of those who were
concerned in it: And that the Affair must be finished within a Month, after they
should meet on one Side, and on the other. But, was it prudent, to use a
precise and absolute way of speaking before he had sufficient Forces in Italy
to Command Obedience, if either of the Two Sides should resist? This was to
expose the Authority of the Emperor too rashly. The Dukes of Savoy and Mantua
had no other regard for him, but as his great Name might sometimes do them a
kindness. The Princes of Italy, Feudatories of the Empire, are willing to
withdraw themselves as much as possible, from any Authority which incommodes
them, as weak as it is. The King of Spain himself undermines it slily upon this
occasion. His Catholic Majesty will have no other Arbiter in a Country where
he is most powerful.

The Governor of Milan acts more effectually than the Imperial Commissary. The
Governor of Milan compels the D. of Savoy to submit to the K. of Spain. Nani
Historia Veneta. Lib. 1.1613.
Inojosa, being persuaded that his Master was resolved to bring this Affair to
a Conclusion, without the interposition of France, sends the Prince of Ascoli
at the Head of Five thousand Men, which joined Three thousand more of the
Troops of Mantua, Commanded by Prince Don Vincent, the Cordinal Dukes Brother.
This Army advances toward Nice, near to which, that of Charles Emanuel lay;
the Savoiards did not then doubt, Mercure Francois. 1613.
but that the Governor was firmly resolved punctually to execute the Orders of
his Catholic Majesty. There being no other way left, but that of putting a
good face upon it; the General of the Dukes Army sent word to the Prince of
Ascoli, that the Duke his Master entered into Monferrat, not imagining that King
Philip would have espoused the Cause of the House of Mantua, against a Prince
which had the Honor to be his Majesty's Brother in Law. Since it is so, added
the Envoy, the Troops of the Duke my Master are ready to retire. I will only
say, that it is not the fear of the Arms of Mantua, but the Respect which his
Highness has for the King of Spain, that inclines him to this Resolution. He
will never Employ his Forces in any thing that shall displease his Catholic
Majesty. The Prince of Ascoli, answered that he had Orders to Relieve the Town
of Nice, and to take Care, that the Army of the Duke of Savoy leave Monferrat.
He added, If the General will lead off his Army, no body will pursue it; but if
he is resolved to stay, we will presently be with him.

After so many cunning Tricks and Contrivances, the Duke of Savoy was entaged
to see himself once more the Jest of all Europe, and to have spent a great deal
of Money in Projects that were defeated in a Moment. Before he would quite give
up, he had a mind to try Inojosa whose friendship he had always reckoned upon.
He proposed to him, that he would blindly devote himself to the King of Spain,
in opposition to all the World, on Condition he would leave him in Possession
of what he had taken. Offers, so Honorable, so Advantageous to the King of
Spain in appearance, were despised. The Duke was reduced at last humbly to
desire, that till the entire decision of the Controversy, he might have one
Place left him in token of his pretensions to Monferrat. They would not enter
into any Treaty with this good Prince, but sent him Padilla a General of the
Artillery, one of the most morose Men in Spain, who at first word told his
Highness, in Terms very concise, and with an Air of severity, that he must even
restore all. To complete his mortification, Padilla produced a Letter of the
King of Spain's, Short, but Expressive, which obliged the Duke to comply with
whatsoever the Marquess of Inojosa should prescribe to him.

Nothing so much mortifies an haughty and valiant Prince, as to be treated like
a Subject by one that is more powerful than himself. But what shall say? Poor
Emanuel abondoned of all the Word, was forced to receive the most rigid Terms.
Instead of giving a Positive answer to grave Padilla, he sent of his Ministers
to Milan, with such proposals, as tended to lengthen out the business, and
delay his Resolution. Inojosa rejected them with Indignation, and sent word to
Charles Emanuel, that if he did not presently Restore all that he had Usurpt,
the Prince of Ascoli should lay Siege to one of those Places, which were
Re-demanded, that the Governor of Milan should come himself upon the Spot, and
hang up every one that dared to Resist him. The Duke knowing no means to
prevent it, offered to Surrender and Resign all that he was in Possession of in
Monferrat. I cannot tell, but still he might have some little hopes of gaining
time, by reason of a Quarrel that arose between Inojosa and Castiglione. Each
pretended that the Places were to be delivered up into the hands of his Master:
But Castiglione who had only the Name and Authority of the Emperor to back him,
soon complied with the other who had the Power in his hands: The Imperial
Commissary only received one Town for Form sake, and the Spaniards took
Possession of the rest. Never was there an Agreement sooner Concluded than
this, tho the Duke of Savoy made a great many Difficulties, before he would be
brought to it. This was the last Artifice of a Prince who had a mind to have in
Reserve a pretense to Break, when he should see it Convenient. A Treaty made
with precipitation, is never well fixed. There Is always some room for Evasion
left for one, that has no mind to be honest.

A dispute between the D. of Nevers and the Governor of Milan.
Before the conclusion of this Agreement, the Duke of Nevers, who, as we said,
was come thither for the Relief of Monferrat, had some words with the Governor
of Milan. Nevers had joined Prince Vincentius of Mantua with an Hundred, or Six
score French Gentlemen. Mercure Francoise. 1613.
These observing the steps of the Spaniards, grumbled that the Prince of Ascoli
had not the pleasure of an opportunity to Bang the Savoiard Army. The Marquess
of Inojosa, being angry that his Collusion with Charles Emanuel was discovered,
declared openly, that he would not suffer the French to have any Soldiers in
Italy, nor that any should come into the Country of Milan, that he would give
no civil reception to any that should pass through that Province; and if the Two
thousand Men which the Chevalier de Guise was to bring with him into Italy,
should come thither, he would cut them in pieces. This Spaniard was so offended
at the coming of the French, that he Commanded the Gallys of Naples, of Sicily
and Genoa, unitedly to oppose those Vessels which brought Aids from Provence,
and to hinder the French Troops from Landing in the Coasts of Italy. Inojosa
after all, endeavored to make the Cardinal Duke Jealous, by giving it out,
that Nevers had a greater design to make himself Master of Monferrat, than to
assist the House of Mantua.

The Duke affronted with the arrogance and moroseness of the Governor, told
him that 'twas too much in all reason, for a Man of Inojosa's Quality to march
with so great a Train, but that the Duke Nevers, of the Family of Gonzagua,
might be allowed to have an Hundred or Sixscore Men at his Heels. He added,
excepting four or five Friends that are come to me, all the rest belong to me;
If the Marquess d'Inojosa offers to abuse any of them, I know the Reason. As
for his threatening to cut in pieces the Troops which may come from France, to
assist the House of Mantua, it is not to be rhought that his Catholic Majesty
approves such Language: There Is no body in the World can hinder the most
Christian King from Assisting his Kinsman and Ally, or opposing the unjust
Designs of the Duke of Savoy. He would also raise a suspicion concerning me,
but I am not afraid that the vain talk of the Marquess d'Inojosa, should make
the least impression. My Interest is so much one with that of the House of
Mantua. Monsieur the Governor confirms himself the just suspicions we have of
his Conduct: We know his Aversion to the Cardinal Duke, and we are not ignorant
of the Reasons which he has to favor the Duke of Savoy, agrinst the
Pretentions of his Catholic Majesty. Thus it was that the Duke of Nevers
supported the Honor of France, better than the Regent of the Kingdom. And not
listening to the wise Remonstrances of the Senate of Venice, who pressed her to
bring Troops into Piedmont and other Places; she suffered the Court of Madrid
to have all the Honor of this Affair, being ready to reap advantage from it,
as there should be opportunity.

Whilst the greatest part of Europe was in some Commotion, The Marriage of the
Elector Palatine, with the K. of England's Daughter. Larrey Hist. d' Angliterr
Tom. II. 1612.1613.
on the account of the death of Francis Duke of Mantua, James, King of Great
Britain, who did not much concern himself with the Affairs of Italy, lived
peceably in his own Island; he was Entertaining himself with Diversions, and
giving the People afflicted for the death of the Prince of Wales a Thousand
spectacles. Some said, that the Father had a mind insensibly to efface the
Memory of his Son, which a little before charmed all England. Instead of taking
pains to discover the secret of the hasty death of his Son, the King heaped new
favors upon his unworthy Favorite, who was thought by some to be the Author
of it. Robert Carr, Viscount of Rochester was made Earl of Sommerset, a very
high Title, which was not wont to be bestowed, but upon the Princes of the
Blood of England, or at least to the near Kindred of the King by the Mother's
Side. This Favorite married afterward Frances Howard Countess of Essex,
famous for her Crimes and Exploits. Should I make a rash judgment, if I should
say, that the good King looked upon himself as a Man happily raised from the
dead, after the death of his Son, whose Court having for some time been fuller
than his, made him Jealous. This was clear enough from a word that fell from
him: What will they bury me alive? An expression, which the World reflected on,
when the Prince of Wales came to die a little while after.

The occasion of so many Diversions and Festival Solemnities in England, was
the Marriage of the Princes Elizabeth, the Kings Daughter, with Frederick Count
Palatine of the Rhine. This Alliance pleased the English extremely, and all the
Protestants. Mercure Francois. 1613.
The House of Austria took a great deal of pains to Traverse it. And the Queen,
whom the Court of Madrid had took Care to make their Friend, did her best to
dissuade the King from it: But he concluded it, notwithstanding the Intrigues
of the Spanish Faction. James conferred the Honor of the Order of the Garter
upon the Elector, before the Solemnity of the Wedding. The Illustrious Prince
Maurice of Orange, was Received into the same Noble and Ancient Society at the
same time with his Nephew. The Chapter of the Order was Convened at Windsor
Castle, the 14th of February this Year: The Ceremony was performed with all the
Solemnity imaginable. The Elector Palatine, who was himself in England, to
Negotiate his Marriage, Received the Order in Person, and Maurice being absent,
Received it by Count William of Nassau, his Proxy. Ten days after, Frederick
was publicly Married to the Princess Elizabeth. Before and after their Wedding
day, the King Entertained the People with Plays and magnificent Spectacles.

Holland also was well pleased, and joyful for a great while. Prince Maurice
Received in the Presence of the States General of the United Provinces, the
Garter which the Herald of the Order had brought thither, and there was nothing
omitted, which might contribute to the Glory of the Ceremony. The wise
Barnavelt, Pensionary of the Province of Holland, Returned thanks in the Name
of the States General, to the English Ambassador, who had presented the Garter
in the Name of the King his Master, to Prince Maurice. The New Electoress
having past from England into Holland, in the Month of May following, to go to
Heydelberg, she was Received almost in every City of the Province, and
particularly at Amsterdam, with a Magnificence answerable to their Wealth, and
the Memory which they retained of the great assistances which their
Infant-Republick had received formerly from the Crown of England.

The Protestants were in hopes, that the Marriage of the Elector Palatine, with
the Princess of Great Britain, would be very advantageous to their Religion:
But there was yet one thing which they wished for; And that was, that King James
would abondon his Design of Marrying his Heir to a Princess of the Popish
Communion: A Marriage talked of between Charles Pr. of Wales, and Christiana of
France.
But although his Majesty did not stick publicly to say, that the Pope was
Antichrist, yet he never had a sincere and fervent Zeal for the Establishment
of the Reformation. As soon as Prince Henry was in his Grave, James proposed
the Marriage of Charles his Second Son, now Prince of Wales, with Christina,
Siri Memoire recondite To. III. p. 44.45. etc.
Second Daughter of France. The Regent frankly received the Memoires, which the
Ambassador of England delivered, touching this Affair, to Villeroy Secretary of
State. She hoped that the Protestants of France and elsewhere, allarmed with
the double Marriage concluded with Spain, would be calmed, when they saw that
nevertheless the Crown of France was not set at such a distance from an
Alliance with Protestants, but that it still designed a strict Union with them,
in giving the younger Sister of the King to the Heir of the most powerful
Prince of their Communion. Although the Conduct of Maria de Medicis in this
Negotiation, was full of Artifice and Dissimulation, the Court of Rome was
Jealous, and the Pope used all his Power to dissuade the Regent from listening
to the offers of his Brittannick Majesty. The Pope plainly told Breves the
King's Ambassador, that he took it ill, that there should be any design of
mingling the Blood Royal o^ France, with that of an Heretic Prince^ Breves
took the liberty to represent to the Pope, that the welfare of the Kingdom and
of Religion it self required that the Proposals of the King of England should
not be rejected. The Old Man being devoted to Spain, did not regard him. He
insisted to conjure the Regent not to enter into a Negotiation, so
disadvantageous to the Church, which is really, as much as to say, so little
conducible to the Interests of the Court of Rome.

The Nuncio Vbaldini very much bestirred himself in France, Ibid. p. 50.51. etc.
he tired the Queen with his Remonstrances; he exhausted himself in finding out
the most pressing motives of Piety and Religion; at length he heated the Cabals
of Devotees, which are always numerous and powerful, in an ignorant and
superstitious Court. Said this Italian Prelate to the Queen, Is it possible,
Madam, that your Majesty should be so little sensible of the particular
kindness of God to you! It Is to distrust his Providence, to have recourse to
the Alliance of Heretics, as a thing necessary for the Repose and Conservation
of the Dominions of the King your Son. Your Ministers think it convenient that
you should hear the Proposals of an Heretic Prince: Your Majesty agrees with
them, but that is not sufficient to clear you before God and all those who
detest this sort of Politics. You should rather listen to the Voice of your
Conscience, and the good Advice of the Pope, than the vain speculations of a
Council, that govern themselves by the maxims of the wisdom of the Children of
this World, rather than by those of Religion.

This Prelate advanced at that time, a Principle of his particular Gospel,
which deserves to be related. He declares that these pretended good People,
whom he would make the Queen afraid of, entertain this piece of corrupted
Morality, that the Princes of their Communion, are not obliged to observe
Treaties made with those, whom they are pleased to call Heretics, if the Terms
appear to them to be never so little contrary to their Religion, that is, to
the Court of Rome. This Nuncio said moreover, It is true Madam, that promises
made against the interest of God, don't in any wise oblige, and that we ought
not to keep them. But consider that your Majesty will hereafter find it more
difficult to break your promise with the King of England, than it is now to
reject his Proposals. Your Affairs are thanks be to God, in a better Posture,
than they have been since the death of the King your Husband. The Kingdom is in
a peaceful State, without the assistance of such an Alliance. The time of your
Administration will shortly Expire: What a comfort will it be to you, to
deliver up to the King your Son, France in a better Condition than you found
it, without doing any thing against your Conscience, or the welfare of
Religion. These studied Discourses made no great impressions on the Queen. She
coldly answered the Nuncio, that all her Council except the Marschal de
Bovillon were good Catholics, and that they were the best Judges, what made
for the Interest of the Kingdom, and of Religion. Besides, added her Majesty, I
do nothing upon this occasion, but what certain Princes of Italy have done as
well as I, and that before the Pope's Eyes. The Duchess of Tuscany, with all
her Devotion, did she refuse to allow of any Discourse concerning the Marriage
of her Daughter with the late Prince of Wales?

The Emperor Matthias goes to Ratisbonne to the Diet.
Of all the Protestants, the United Princes in Germany, were those which
flattered themselves with deriving great Advantages from the Alliance of the
Elector Palatine with the Crown of England. They hoped that King James would
Support their League, of which Frederick his Son-in Law, was the Chief. Since
the Dispute that arose concerning the Succession of Cleves and Juliers, the
Animosite which the Catholics and Protestants bore toward one another in
Germany, was inflamed. The Two Parties got all the Strength they could, and
made Attempts upon each other. The weakness of Rodolphus contributed much to
this unhappiness. Matthias his Brother, and Successor, tried to Cure it in the
beginning of his Reign: But he had neither Power, nor Wisdom necessary to
reconcile so different Interests, or to Command equal Respect from Princes that
were sowr'd one against the other, with mutual Discontents. Possibly the
Emperor had no very ill intentions with respect to the Protestants, at least he
seemed to imitate the moderation of Maximilian his Father: But not having so
much Sense and Resolution, he was ensnared with the Contrivances of the Court
of Rome, the Catholic Party. The Progress the Turks made a little while ago in
Hungary, seemed to threaten Matthias with a War near Home. This obliged him to
keep even with both Sides, because he equally needed their assistance against a
formidable Enemy. The Protestants endeavored to make their use of this
opportunity to better their Condition, and to secure the repose of their
Churches. The Catholics and Protestants complain of each other


Matthias had promised at his Coronatiion, to call a Diet, to consult about
means to secure the Peace and Tranquillity of the Empire, and to remedy those
Disorders, of which several parts of it had complained a long time. It was
appointed to meet at Ratisbonne. The Emperor and the Three Ecclesiastical
Electors came thither: But the other Electors, only sent their Deputies. Lewis,
Landgrave of Hesse declared at large the Reasons the Emperor had to convene the
Diet. Mercure Francois. 1613.
Five were with relation to the particular Government of the Empire, and the
Sixth related to the Attempts of the Turks upon Hungary. His Imperial Majesty
thinking it necessary, vigorously to oppose them, desired that they would grant
him certain Contributions for that purpose, but before they would enter upon
the Consideration of what the Emperor proposed, the United Protestant Princes,
who were then called Correspondans, presented several Grieveances, of which
they had before complained, under the preceding Reign, without obtaining any
Redress: 'Twould be to no purpose to give an account of them here. The Emperor
in vain endeavored to Elude the Demands of the Correspondans; and to defer
till another time the Examination of that Affair, they stood to it, that his
Imperial Majesty ought first to Redress their Greivances.

The Catholic Princes being convinced of the Justice of the pretensions of
their Adversaries, were of Opinion, without having any regard to the Complaints
of the United Protestants, that they should immediately proceed to deliberate
upon the Articles proposed by the Emperor. The Consideration of some particular
Persons, less in Number, said they, ought to be preferred before the necessity
of the public Welfare, which was very pressing. Being sure to have the
plurality of Voices on their Side, these Gentlemen had a mind that what ever
they Ordered; should be looked upon as a Resolution of the Diet: There could be
nothing more contrary to the Repose and Tranquillity of the Empire, in the
present posture of Affairs. At this Rate they would presently have Ruined all
the Protestants in Germany. The Catholics did likewise maliciously insinuate
to the Empire, that the Protestants had ill Designs underhand, and that there
was Reason to fear they would at last Contest the Lawful Authority of his
Majesty. Within a little while after, they presented a long account of the
Complaints which the Catholics had to make against the Protestants: They
accused them of diverse Infractions of the Treaty of Pacification that was made
some time past at Passau, and of diverse Attempts contrary to the Constitutions
of the Empire. The Catholics Demanded Justice in their turn of his Imperial
Majesty. These Gentlemen have been a long time used to cry out of Injustice,
and Persecution, against those very Men which they Tormented and Oppressed: Not
to suffer them to Tyranize, is to Persecute them. So that the Pope grants
Jubilees and Indulgences with a liberal Hand, to obtain the Deliverance of
those of his Religion, as if they were unjustly Oppressed; although at the same
time, they live in perfect Tranquillity, This, we see done every day.

The bad Success of the Diet at Ratisbonne.
Not being able to Reconcile Spirits which were more and more sowr'd against one
another, the Emperor endeavored to avoid the Examination of the Complaints
which were made of either Side: He proposed to defer it to another time.
Nevertheless he demanded Assistance for the Security of Hungary, where Bethlem
Gabor, the New Prince of Transylvania, Supported by the Turks, had made himself
dreadful. The Protestants answered, that they did not doubt but the Emperor was
well affected to them, and that they were ready to Contribute both Men and
Money for the Defense of his Majesty's Hereditary Countries: But that they could
not forbear to desire his Imperial Majesty in the first Place to restablish the
Peace and Tranquillity of the Empire, and take Care of redressing the Greivances
which they had presented to him. The Archduke Maximilian, the Emperor's
Brother, a Prince of a sweet and moderate Temper, was then at Ratisbonne:
Matthias desired him to Treat with the Protestants, hoping he was able to bring
them over; but although they professed a great Respect for the Archduke, yet he
could obtain nothing of them. With a design to make the Emperor more
favorable, the Catholics showed themselves Liberal and well Inclined: They
promised to furnish him for Two years, with their Ancient Contributions to
carry on a War against the Turks. the Protestants opposed this Deliberation,
being resolved not to suffer, that the Resolutions taken by the Catholics
should be looked upon as the Decrees of the whole Diet of the Empire: Thus the
Diet of Ratisbonne broke up; instead of remedying the disorders of Germany, it
made them greater and more incurable.

The Fortune of Bethlem Gabor. Pr. of Transylvania.
Since Bethlem Gabor must often appear upon the Stage in this History, I think
it necessary to say something of his Fortune, and Elevation: He was one of the
most dangerous Enemies the House of Austria had in this Age. I will look a
pretty way backwards upon things, that so the Reader may the better understand
the Ancient pretenions of the Emperor upon Transylvania. The brave Stephen
Battori was the first, who was declared Prince of Transylvania, under the
Protection of the Ottomans. After his Elevation to the Crown of Poland, by his
means Christopher his Brother, was Elected to the Principality of Transylvania.
Sigismond his Son and Successor, steered another Course by the persuasion of
the Emissaries of the House of Austria, which he had about him. This Prince,
who did not want Courage, was persuaded that it was more advantageous and more
honorable for him to quit the Alliance of the Sultan, and unite with the
Emperor. But to the shame of Christianity, Sigismond found, that, which has
happened to a great many more, I mean he met with less Justice and Fidelity
among those of his own Religion, than his Uncle and his Father had found among
Infidels. That he might be more firmly united with the Emperor Rodolphus, he
Married a Princess of the House of Austria, but this marriage was the cause of
the misfortunes of his Life. They made him give up his Right to Transylvania
for a certain Duchy which they gave him. At length repenting of the bad
Market which he had made, he retracted the Cession which he had made to the
Emperor, and gave his Principality to Cardinal Battori his Brother, who was
chosen by the States of the Country under the Protection of the Grand Seignior.
The new Prince had a terrible War to maintain against the Emperor, and in it
lost his Life.

Botskay his Kinsman Elected afterward by the Transilvanians, Mercure
Francois. 1606, 1607, 1608, etc.
defended himself with a great deal of Courage and Success, insomuch that he
took a great many Places from the Emperor in upper Hungary. The House of
Austria was forced to make a Peace with him. One Article of the Treaty
Imported, that if Bortskay died withot Male-Issue, Transylvania should Devolve
upon the Emperor: The Sultan Ratified this Treaty in another, which he
afterwads made with Rodolphus. The House of Austria not long before it Demanded
Transylvania, by Virtue of this Agreement. Borskai being poisoned immediately
after, by his Chancellor, The States of the Country did not fail to choose
Sigismond Ragotski for their Prince. There were then so great Divisions in the
House of Austria, and such Commotions in Hungary and Bohemia, that neither
Rodolphus nor Matthias his Brother, were in a Condition to press the Execution
of the Treaty made with Botskay. The New Prince did not long enjoy
Transylvania, but Generously gave it up to Gabriel Batori, Heir of that Family,
whom the Turks publicly Supported.

Mercure Francois. 1613.
He being rendered odious by his Cruelties, Bethlehem Gabar a Transilvanian
Gentleman, of boundless Ambition, took care to gain the Favor and Protection
of the Ottoman Court. This is the Man, which formed a powerful Party against
Batori, and which made War against him. The Assistance of the House of Austria
was of no use to Batori, who was presently Reduced to the lowest Despair, so
that he begged of his own Friends to kill him: His Enemies Soldiers did him
that kindness, which they refused. Three days after his death, Bethlem was
declared Prince of Transylvania, by the General of the Turkish Army, who
invaded Hungary, The States of the Country assembled at Claussembourg,
afterward chose him, upon Condition that he should ask the Authentic
Confirmation of the Sultan. When Bethlem was in Possession of his New
Principality, he wrote a Letter to the Palatine of Hungary, to desire the
Favor of the Emperor: But his Imperial Majesty intended to make the best of
his Pretensions to Transylvania, by Virtue of his Treaty made with Botskai,
which the Sultan Confirmed. Matthias declared this publicly in the Diet of
Ratisbonne, and it was principally for this End, that he desired Assistance of
the States of the Empire. With this Prospect the House of Austria kept up the
Party of Batori, who refused to acknowledge the New Prince. Bethlem Protected
by the Turks, whose Favor he had cunningly gained, not only maintained himself
in Transylvania, but was upon the Point of taking away Hungary from them that
would oppose him.

The Protestant and Catholic Leagues, were Formed in Germany upon the occa^ion
of the Quarrel that arose about the Succession to the States of Cleves and
Ju^iers, The Division between the Houses of Brandenburg and Newbourg concerning
the Government of the, States of Cleves and Juliers. Interests de Princes per
M. de Rohan. Part 1. Disc. 4.
the Princes of Brandenbourg and Newbourg Governed these Dutchies in Common,
Peaceably for many Years, under the Favor of the Protestant League, The strong
Places were guarded by equal Garrisons. The Two Princes Resided in the same
Palace, and did all by Concert. But how difficult is it that a Country should
be long governed after this manner, without Divisions? Princes of a different
Family and different Religion, have not the same Interest and Designs. These
began to fall out about Ecclesiastical Affairs. Mercure Francoise. 1613.
Brandenburg would have ordered something, without the consent of his
Colleague, and Newbourg opposed him. The King of great Britain, and the States
of the United Provinces, Mediated for a Reconciliation, they were afraid their
Division would give opportunity to the House of Austria to Seize upon a
Contested Succession, which would have been so convenient for it; to prevent
the Increase of their misunderstanding, their Friends proposed a Marriage,
between the Two Families.

That of Newburg was free to it. Prince Volfgang goes to the Elector of
Brandenburg, and desires his Daughter in Marriage. But this step made by the
wholesome Advice of those, who designed nothing, but to Establish a good
Correspondence between the Two Houses, was the occasion of an inplacable hatred
between them, and of the Distraction of those fine Dutchies, which they might
have divided between them. I cann^t tell how it came to pass, but in the heat
of Wine. and at a Feast, The Prince of Newburg said something at the Table of
the Elector, which displeased him. Brandenburg was so enraged at it, that he
gave a Box in the Ear to him, who desired his Alliance. This unhappy accident
might have been redrest, if the Elector would have made a suitable
Satisfaction; but he obstinately refused to do it. Volfgang being provokt with
such an Affront, returns to the Country of Cleves, being resolved to be
Revenged on him, what ever it cost him. From that time, Brandenburg and Newburg
did nothing by Concert, in the Government of the States of Cleves and Juliers;
they Cavild at every little thing, and the one pretended to disannul, what the
other had done. Prince Wolfgang of Newbourg marries the D. of Bavaria's
Daughter, and changes his Religion.


The Spaniards wisely made their Advantage, of so fair an occasion to weaken
the Protestant League, and to bring over the House of Newburg, to their
Faction. They proposed to Prince Volfgan a Match with Magdalen, Sister of
Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria, and of Ferdinand, Elector of Cologne. They
promised him the Protection of the House of Austria, a Pension from the King of
Spain, and the Support of the Catholic League, if he would quit his Religion,
and enter into the Communion of the Church of Rome; a very sensible Temptation
to an Ambitious young Prince, and who was big with Revenge for the horrible
Affront, which had been offered him. Newburg falls before the force of it: But
Wolfgang, whether 'twere to keep fair with his Father, who was a zealot for the
Confession of Ausbourg, or whether he had some other Reasons, would not
renounce his Religion before his Marriage. He only consented to Marry the
Princess Magdalen, and the Duke of Newbourg gave his Consent, not seeing the
Snare, which was laid for his Son, who was blinded with Passion. The Marriage
was Celebrated at Munich, the 10th of November, this Year: And that he might
keep within bounds, as to outward appearance; the Prince was not Married by the
Mass, he only received the Nuptial Benediction by the hands of the Bishop of
Aichstat at Evening Service, in the great Church of Munich: But at length
Wolfgang declared himself in the Month of May, the next Year. He made public
profession of the Popish Religion at Dusseldorp. The Duke his Father was
extremely troubled at it. The Proclamation which he published immediately,
after, is an infallible proof of it; It imported, that every Monday throughout
the Year, public Prayers should be made for the Conservation of the Protestant
Religion in the Duchy of Newbourg.

The Artifices and Fetches of the Duke of Savoy, The Peace mude between the D
of Savoy and. Mantua, has much ado to continuefirm and stable.
oblige us frequently to return to him. The Treaty of Peace between Charles
Emanuel and the Cardinal Ferdinand, Duke of Mantua, had been concluded with so
much precipitation, that they spoke there only of Resigning the Places in
Monferrat, without making any mention of the Mutual pretentions of each Party,
of the reparation of the Damages done in Monferrat, which Ferdinand demanded,
nor of an Amnesty for the Subjects of the House of Mantua, who had declared for
that of Savoy, which Charles Emanuel was willing to obtain. These Affairs not
being settled, Disputes must presently revive: Neither were the Princes of
Italy very well satisfied with a Peace, that was so infirm and subject to a
Rupture. They imagined, and that with probability enough, that the Marquess
d'Inojosa had made it, because he could tell how to refuse Obedience to the
positive Orders of the King his Master. They were still afraid there was a
Collusion between him and the Duke of Savoy, and that they, both of them had an
underhand Design, At the very same time that Charles Emanuel Restored the
Towns in Monferrat, he reenforced his Troops, and the Governor of Milan
remained in Arms, diligently observing all these steps, of which the most
penetrating head could not understand the Secret. The Venetians took care to
continue to the Cardinal Duke, the assistance which they had given him since
the beginning of the Quarrel, and to be themselves upon their Guard. The
Quarrel which arose between their Republic, and Ferdinand of Austria,
Archduke of Gratz, who had a great Interest at the Court of Madrid, obliged
them to distrust the King of Spain. 'Twas upon the account of the Vscoques
Pirates and Robbers upon the Coasts of Dalmatia, whom the Archduke openly
protected, although the Venetians and the Turks did equally complain of their
Robberys. We shall say something in the Course of this History concerning this
Quarrel, which occasioned the Vscoques to be known in the World.

The Governor of Milan presses the Duke of Savoy to lay down his Arms.
That which most perplexed the speculative Italians about the Affair of
Monferrat, was, that the Governor of Milan who was thought to be in the
Interest of Charles Emanuel; nevertheless powerfully pressed him to lay down his
Arms as soon as possible: And at the same time, that he was contending with
him, he would constrain Ferdinand to do all that the Savoyard could wish. These
steps Contrary in appearance, are not difficult to be reconciled. Spain
endeavored to make its advantage of the Quarrel. His Catholic Majesty
pretended to be the absolute Arbiter, and to direct the Dukes of Savoy and
Mantua as should be most for his Interest. The Governor of Milan who had no
mind to be at the charge of having an Army on Foot to oppose the Duke of Savoy
in case his Attempts should make it necessary, was continually pressing him to
Disband his Troops: And because it was of Importance to the King his Master to
have at his Disposal the Heiress of Monferrat, he boldly demanded her of the
Cardinal Duke; and thus the Intrigue comes out. Now let us see how these Two
Parties will get clear of the Demands of the Catholic King. Inojosa had sent
to Turin the Commander of the Castle of Milan, possitively to tell the Duke
that he must comply immediately with what was required of him. Charles Emanuel
bore very impatiently this Imperious way, which the Spaniards took with him,
and with the other Princes of Italy, although he had been used to it for many
Years. But not being able openly to resist the will of King Philip, he found
out according t^ his usual way, diverse pretenses to shrin^ back. Never was a
Mind more fruitfu^ of such Inventions, than that of thi^ Prince.

He answered to this Message, that he was ready to dismiss his Troops, when the
Marquess of Inojosa should perform the private Articles, to which the Cardidal
Duke of Mantua had agreed, at the time of the Treaty made with him. Mr. the
Governor has himself given me positive assurances, said Charles Emanuel, that
the Cardinal Duke did consent to deliver up into my hands the Princess Mary my
Granddaughter, and to grant a general Amnesty to ^he Subjects of Monferrat,
which declared for me. Is it not fit that I should continue ^n Arms till this
be performed? All the World was mightily surpised when this Answer of the Duke
of Savoy was known. The Cardinal Ferdinand denied that he had ^ver promised any
such thing. He pretend^d likewise that Inojosa had told him to the ^ontrary.
People could not tell what to ^^ink of this Riddle. Some said that ^^e Governor
of Milan having received ^resents from Charles Emanuel and Ferdi^^nd, had
imposed upon them both, in tel^^ng the Duke of Savoy that which I have ^^lated
before and in promising the clear ^^ntrary to the Cardinal Duke, that the
^^voyard would not re-demand his Gran^^ughter, nor require an Amnesty from ^ose
of Monferrat who had appeared for (...). Inojosa was enraged that the Duke
(...) Savoy would have him pass for a Cheat. (...) that he could say in his own
Defense, ^^s, that Charles Emanuel had played many such tricks before. In his
Negociations with the Ministers of Henry IV. and the most considerable Persons
in the Court of France, he often affirmed that in their private Conferences
they had promised him things which they never thought of.

Whatsoever this Intrigue was, if the Governor of Milan had ever said such
things to the Duke of Savoy, he was not much concerned about them afterward.
Inojosa persisted to press Charles* Emanuel to lay down his Arms. It was his
business now to find out other Evasions, France, said he, has Troops in
Dauphine. The Marshall de Lesdiguieres expects only the Queen Regent's last
Orders to advance toward Piedmont. Does his Catholic Majesty expect that I
should not be upon my guard? This cunning Duke knew very well that Mary de
Medicis being fully satisfied that the Houses of Savoy and Mantua had made a
Peace without France's sending any Troops over the Mountains* had no design
that Lesdiguieres should March. The Queen Regent for her part desired likewise,
that he should lay dow^ his Arms. Charles Emanuel had answered the Ministers of
her most Christian Majesty, that the Spaniards did not wis^ him well, and that
Prudence obliged him to be in a posture of Defense, against those which had not
forgot that he was i^ a League against them with the late King Vargas,
Secretary to his Catholic Majesty, was upon the point to return to Madrid,
after he had executed the Orders which were given him with relation to Italy.
They sent him New ones, to pass first by the way of Turin, and to know the last
resolution of the Duke. This business perplexed Charles Emanuel less than any
of the rest. Nani Hist oria Veneta. Lib. I. 1313.
He pretended to dismiss his Troops in the Envoy's Presence. But he Cashierd
only the Militia of his Country, which he could recall in a Moment. It was
enough that he retained the Foreign Troops which were in his Pay. We see the
reason why he used all these Tricks, unworthy of a Man of his Quality. His
Spies in France gave him an account, that the Prince of Conde and the other
Malcontents would shortly Rise, and that there would be a Civil War. Charles
Emanuel was in hopes to make his advantage of this Conjuncture, to re-establish
his Affairs in Italy, or on the Side of France. The Governor of Milan demands
the Princess of Mantua in the Name of the K. of Spain.
But the poor Duke was always deceived in his Expectations, and unsuccessful in
his Intrigues and Artifices.

The Cardinal Duke would have been pleased to see his Enemy perplexed with ^he
Spaniards, if the Governor of Milan had not been as troublesome to him as ^e
was to Charles Emanuel. Nani Historia Veneta. Lib. I.
The Veneti^ns advised Ferdinand to make this Answer ^o the Demand that Inojosa
made him, to send his Niece to Milan, that as to all his Quarrels with the Duke
of Savoy, and particularly that which related to the Princess of Mantua, Siri
Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 123.126.127. etc.
he was ready to refer himself to the Judgment of the Pope, the Emperor, and
his Catholic Majesty: But in his Arbitration, the Spaniard could not endure
that Philip should have either a Superior or an Equal, Without having any
respect to that which his Imperial Majesty had told him by the Prince of
Castiglione, that he ought to treat the Princes of Italy with more Softness and
Civility; the Governor sent Pimentel General of the Milanois Horse to Demand in
the Name of the King of Spain, that they would forthwith send the young
Princess to Milan to be Educated there Pimentel represented to the Cardinal
Duke that Philip would take care of the Education of his Niece, and that the
repose of Italy depending in a great measure upon the disposal of the young
Princess, his Majesty who was careful of the Conservation of the Peace, ought
to have the Princess in his keeping, for fear they should Marry her to one that
should no^ be agreeable to the Neighboring Princes and perhaps might raise a
War: Pimentel concluded his Remonstrance in giving Ferdinand to understand that
if he would not deliver up his Niece willingly, the^ would take her away by
Force. The Cardinal Duke answered according to hi^ usual manner, that he could
not do any thing without the consent of the Emperor and the Queen of France.
Pimentel not being satisfied with this answer, he told him further, that the
Princess was not well; and because he would not believe it, he gave him a sight
of her, to convince him that she was not in a Condition to be removed; after
this Ferdinand dismissed him as Civilly as he could.

The Designs of the K-of Spain in this demand
It was no hard matter to penetrate the Designs of the Court of Madrid. The
Cardinal Duke and Don Vincent his Brother, had so ruined their health by their
excessive Debauches, that it was thought they would never have any Children,
and that they were not long lived. To preserve Monferrat in the Family of
Gonzague, it was necessary to Marry the Princess to the Son of the Duke of
Nevers, the undoubted Heir of the Duchy of Mantua: And it was this which the
Court of Modrid had a mind to hinder. The King of Spain had a mind to make
himself Master of the Dominions of the House of Mantua, for fear they should
one day fall into the Hands of a Prince of French Extraction, who would favor
the French Interest, by reason of his great Possessions and Alliances in
France. This ^s too true, that Ferdinand at this time ^alling dangerously ill,
the Ministers of Spain had already laid their Design, to declare the Duke of
Nevers had forfeited all his Right to the Succession of Mantua, and that the
Investiture of the Duchy should be given by the Emperor to him, whom the House
of Austria should best like of, as if the Male Line of the Gonzagues had been
utterly extinct.

The Republic of Venice traverses the designs of the King of Spain.
The Cardinal Duke of Mantua who had neither understanding nor experience enough
in Affairs to extricate himself out of all these Intrigues, did supply his
defects by his teachable Temper, and by the Respect which he paid to the good
Counsels which the Senate of Venice carefully sent him. These refined
Politicians saw with extreme Jealuosie that the Spaniards had no less a Design
than to devour all Italy. Nani Historia Veneta. Lib. 1.
Not being content to assist Ferdinand with their Counsels, and with their
Forces, and to encourage him resolutely to maintain the Interests of his
Family; this Republic further gave pressing Orders to their Ambassadors at
Rome, Siri Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 133, 134, 137.
Vienna, and at Paris, to Treat zealously with the Pope, the Emperor and the
Queen of France, in Ferdinand's favor. The Ministers of the most Christian
King, and the Republic of Venice represented to Paul V. that his Title of
universal Father, indispensably obliged him to prevent the ill Consequences of
the Enterprise of the Spaniard, but the Pope was unconcerned, and acted not in
this matter, being resolved peaceably to enjoy all the rest of his days the
advantages of the Popedom; he would have seen all the Princes of Italy Ruined
without any Concern, so that they let him alone and suffered his Nephews to
grow Rich at their ease. Breves, Ambassador of France, affronted at this
natural or affected Negligence, writ to Mary de Medicis, that the Pope was but
a lump of Flesh which grew Fat in Laziness, a Man without Courage and without
Experience, who took no other Care but of making his advantage of the highest
Place in the Church, which Fortune had given him, tho he did not see Merit in
himself to pretend to it: So that there were not hopes that his Holiness would
give the least assistance to the House of Mantua. All that Paul V. could do,
was to whisper in the Ear of the Cardinal Duke that he should obstinately
refuse to part with his Niece, and to Marry Margarite his Sister-in-Law, to
which the King of Spain persuaded him, so much afraid was this timorous Old Man
to offend the Court of Madrid: Might it not be thus also, that the Pope being
well informed of the peaceable Temper of Philip III. and of the Weakness of the
Spanish Monarchy, did rightly Judge that all this Bustle was but an Intrigue of
the Catholic King's Ministers, and that when their Master should see himself
^hreatned with a War with France, ^e would put a stop to the forwardness of his
Ministers, and hear Reasons?

As to the Emperor, there was less to be hoped for from him than from the Pope.
Mary de Medicis perplexed about the Affairs of Mantua-Siri Memo. recondite.
Matthias neither was in a Condition nor in an Humor to send Troops to Italy,
and besides he was afraid too openly to offend the Court of Madrid. His
Imperial Majesty confirmed to the Cardinal Duke the Guardianship of his Neice:
But he writ immediately to King Philip to excuse himself, and tell him that he
could not fairly refuse that favor to Ferdinand. And to satisfy the Spaniards
yet more, Matthias advised Ferdinand to deliver up the Princess Mary into the
hands of his Catholic Majesty. The House of Mantua had no other Refuge but the
Protection of France. The Kindred and Friends which it had there, Solicited for
it with all its might: The Ambassadors of the Republic of Venice and of some
other States did still Treat in its favor: Mary a^ Medicis was well pleased
with the Reasons which they alleged to her, to exhort her to take her Nephews
under the Protection of her Son. Interest of Blood was united together with
Reasons of State. But the Timorous Regent could not come to a Resolution: Being
fond of the double Marriage with Spain, which she had managed with a great deal
of application, and which she looked upon as the strongest support of his
Authority, her Majesty was afraid least the Affairs of Mantua should produce a
Rupture between the two Crowns, and all her Projects should be unravel'd. She
suspected the Importunities of the King of Great-Brittain, Ibid. p. 174.
the Republic of Venice, the States of the United Provinces, the Prince of
Conde and the great Men of the Party used with her, to send Troops into Italy.
Her skill went so far as to discover that all these endeavored only to Engage
France openly to oppose the Designs of the Court of Madrid to declare War
against the King of Spain, and consequently to break the Treaty of the double
Marriage which did not so well suit with their Interests.

In this perplexity Mary de Medicis did her endeavor at the Court of Madrid,
that the Affair of Mantua might be soon amicably Concluded: But the Spaniards
which knew her Temper, did amuse her with fine Words, whilst they heartily
endeavored to effect their Enterprise; not being concerned about the
Negociations against their Master in France and Italy, Nani Historia Veneta.
Lib. 1.1613.
the Ministers of Philip declared plainly that he expected that he should have
the Princess of Mantua committed to his Care, and that the Cardinal Duke should
Marry Margarita of Savoy, his Sister-in-Law, in order to compose the
differences of the two Houses. That Charles Emanuel and Ferdinand should
immediately lay down their Arms, and that the other contested Points should be
referred to the Judgment of the Pope, the Emperor and his Catholic Majesty.
1615.
These Conditions were agreeable to the Demands which Charles Emanuel had made:
And hence it appeared that the Prince of Piedmont who had at last obtained
leave to go to Madrid, had not ill managed the Affairs of his Father. In the
mean time the Duke of Savoy was enraged to find himself always curbed and
overruled. But Ferdinand was more agriev'd than he. They were not content to
take away his Niece, but would also force him to Marry against his Will, his
Sister-in-Law whom he did not Love. The hatred which he bore to Charles Emanuel
very much Estranged him from the Daughter of a declared Enemy of the House of
Gonzague. He liked better the Sister of Cosmo, Great Duke of Tuscany; she would
be a considerable Fortune. The Venetians, his particular Friends advised him
this Match: And Cosmo was inclined to Conclude it as soon as the Quarrel
between the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua should be made up.

It is proposed in the Council of France to send Troops to Italy.
The Spaniards spoiled their Business by speaking too proudly. It was earnestly
represented to the Queen Regent that it was a Shame and a Dishonor to suffer
the King of Spain to Domineer over Princes Allied to that Crown, and that he
should endeavor to hinder the King of France from concerning himself about the
most important Affairs of Italy, Mary de Medicis hard put to it on every Side,
began to give some signs of Life. She declared roundly to the Ambassador of
Spain that the King her Son should not see the House of Mantua Oppressed, Siri
Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 141, 142. etc.
and that he should employ his Arms to assist his Kindred and Allies. They
talked of nothing in France but a Rupture between the Two Crowns: And the Nobles
who breathed nothing but War, although it be the Instrument of their Ruin and by
consequence of their Slavery, were in readiness to get a Horsback. They held a
great many Councils at Court about the Affair of Mantua, every one advised
according to their own particular Interest. Villeroy and the Ministers who were
best pleased with Peace, Represented, that before they were Engaged in a War,
which ^ight be a long and Bloody one, it was fit to try if the Quarrel could
not ^e adjusted by way of Negotiation. The Princes and Great Men who thought
that War would tend most to their Ad^ancement and Reputation, did not utterly
reject the Experiment of a Negotiation: but to make this Negotiation ^ow
Effectual, that they should have an ^rmy ready to March, in case the Duk of
Savoy and King of Spain should refuse reasonable Terms.

When the latter had learnt by his Ambassador in France, that they spoke in
earnest of sending Troops into Italy, his Majesty and the Duke of Lerma his
Favorite, who had no mind to go to War, The Q. Regent sends the Marquis de
Coeuvres into Italy, for to negociate an Agreement between the D. of Savoy and
Mantua.
began to speak with more humility. They declared themselves inclined to
terminate the Affair of Mantua, by way of Negotiation. Philip coldly desires
the Prince of Piedmont to write to Turin, that his Majesty would not fall out
with France, and that he would not give occasion to others to break with Spain,
for the Duke of Savoy's Fancy's who had every day new Chimaera's in his Head.
Siri Memo. recondite. p, 165.172.173.175.
Let your Father, added the King, think of nothing but lying still, unless he
find himself able to Cope alone with the Two Crowns, and all Italy. A certain
Author relates upon this occasion a Circumstance which if True, Hist. du
Connetable de Lesdiguieres. Live. VIII. Chapter 6.
proves Charles Emanuel to be the most fantastical Man in the World, at least
Villeroy told it for certain to the Nuncio Vbaldini. The Cardinal Aldobrandin
an Enemy to the Borgheses being at Turin, persuaded the Duke of Savoy to become
a Cardinal. It would be very easy for you afterward, said Aldobrandin, to be
Elected Pope in the first Conclave, I will undertake for all my Uncles
Creatures. In the mean time we will stick to one another, and make the Pope and
Court of Rome do what we please. The Count de Verue, a Confident of Savoy,
approved of this Project, and thought it one of the finest in the World. Let us
return now to see what became of the Affair of Mantua.

His Catholic Majesty sent Orders again to his Ambassador in France, to
Declare that he would withdraw his Troops from Monferrat, provided the Cardinal
Duke would grant an Amnesty to his Subjects which had Sided with the Duke of
Savoy, and desist from demanding reparation of Damages. The Marriage of
Ferdinand with his Brother's Widow, was proposed at the same time: And as for
the young Princess of Mantua, Philip consented that she should be disposed of
in a Third hand by the Agreement of the Two Crowns. These Offers were tendr'd
in the most Civil Language imaginable: All this seemed to give an opportunity
to the Cardinal Duke to Extricate himself with Honor. The Court of France was
intent upon the Method of Negociaton, and sent one for that purpose into Italy,
in Quality of Ambassador Extraordinary.

The unreasonable Ambition of Conchini, now Marshall of France, and of Galigai
his Wife.
The Marquess de Coeuvres who was fixed upon for this Employ, set out from Paris
at the End of this Year, took the Road of Turin that he might Confer with the
Duke of Savoy, in the first place Coeuvres informs us himself that he had
secret Orders to Treat with the Cardinal Duke about surrendering his Cap to
Galigai the Mareschalless of Anchre's Brother. These People set no Bounds to
their Ambition. Conchini obtained the Staff of Marshall of France in the room
of Fervacques lately dead: And now Galigai not being content that her Husband
was raised to the Second Military Honor in France, Memoires de la Regence de
Maria de Medics. Siri Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 36.160.
proposes to obtain for her Brother the Second Dignity in the Church of Rome:
This Creature so far forgot her self, that she did not observe the Rules of
Decency, with the Princesses of the Blood. A little while before she had spoke
in the Queen's Closet to the Princess of Conde in such a Proud and Imperious
manner, that her Highness was extremely Affronted. All the World was offended
at the Insolence of Conchini's Wife, whofe behavior did not a little provoke
the Princes and Great Men against her Husband, whose new Dignity of Mareschall
of France did yet more expose him, to the jealousy and hatred of the Courtiers.

Continuation of the Disputes about Questions concerning Grace and
Praedestination in the United-Provinces.
There was not less Confusion in the United Provinces. about Questions
concerning Grace and Predestination, than in Italy about the Interests of the
Dukes of Savoy and Mantua. James King of Great Britain interposed in the
Disputes of the Divines of Holland with as much Heat and Zeal, as the Kings of
France and Spain did in the Quarrel occasioned by the Pretensions of Charles
Emanuel upon Monferrat. Winwood the English Ambassador to the States General of
the United Provinces, was very much in the Interest of the Divines which
adhered to Gomarus; They did say, that it was a Point of great Concern to the
Crown of of the King his Master. Nevertheless, Preface dee acts du Synod de
Dordrecht. Brand. Hist. de la Reformation. Live. XX, XXI. Grotius. Apologeticus
eorum qui Hollandiae praefuerunt. Cap. VI. and alibi passim.
the Question was only to know whether Vorstius should be excluded the
Universi^y of Leiden, which had Invited him thither ^r at most, to determine
whether the Five Articles of Arminians were contrary to the Fundamental
Doctrines of the Reformed Churches. The Ambassador pub^ickly Declared, that
Barnevelt Pentiona^y of Holland, was Governed by Vytenbo^ard Minister of the
Church of the Hague, and that the States of Holland, led by Barnavelt, did all
that he Suggested to them. The Gomarists which now began to be called
Contra-Remonstrants, by Reason of the Contra-Remonstrances which they opposed
to the Requests and Writings of the Arminians, their adversaries the Gomarists
I say did continually offer new Memorials to their Winwood, some^imes against
Vorstius, sometimes against the States of Holland, whom they accused as ^oo
favorable to the Remonstrants, and Socinians themselves. The Ambassador
Communicated every thing to the King, or to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
publicly disallowed Vorstius and the Arminians. The Support which the
Contra-Remonstrants Received from his Majesty, did strangely perplex the States
of Holland. They tried all possible ways to stifle these Disputes, which might
have unhappy Consequences. And the Contra-Remonstrants which always reckoned
upon the Protection of King James, would not be at Rest.

After the famous Conference held at the Hague, in 1611. the States of Holland
Ordered the Divines of each Side to draw up their Thoughts in Writing,
concerning the Five Articles in Controversy. And to give their Opinion
concerning the Means which might be most proper to compose the Disturbance
which their Dispute had occasioned in several of the United Provinces. The
Remonstrants declared that their way of Toleration seemed the safest and most
convenient; so that every one should have the Liberty to Teach and Preach his
Opinion concerning the Five Articles in Dispute. The Contra-Remonstrants
proposed a Convocation of the National Synod, which should Examine and
Determine which of the Two Opinions was most agreeable to the Word of God, and
to the Doctrine commonly received in the Reformed Churches. When the States of
Holland were consulting about this matter in their Assembly, they found
themselves divided into Two Parties, the one approved the Advice given by the
Remonstrants, and the other was for a National Synod. The First carried it.

Without declaring for one or the other, the States of Holland published an
Edict, in which it enjoined both the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants,
Charitably to bear with one another, not to disturb the Peace of the Churches,
not to say which had got the better of the other, to speak with a great deal of
Wariness and Consideration concerning the controverted Points in their Sermons,
to take more care to inculcate upon the People the duties of the Christian
Life, and the necessity of preserving Peace in the Church and in the
Commonwealth, then to explain to their Auditory abstracted and difficult
Points in Divinity, and whereas the Contra-Remonstrants complained that their
Adversaries entertained Opinions contrary to the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches, not only concerning Grace and Predestination, but also about original
Sin, the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and other important Articles of
Religion. The States of Holland forbid them to Preach in their public Lectures
and their Sermons any thing contrary to what the Reformed Churches had always
Professed to be concerning Original Sin, the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and
other Articles specified in the Edict of the States.

This is sufficient to refute the Calumny of certain zealous
Contra-Remonstrants, who had the Impudence publicly to accuse the States of
Holland of a design to introduce into their Province, the Impieties of Paulus
Samosatenus, which Servetus and Socinus had revived in the last Age^ They which
composed this Illustious Assembly, always detested the Enemies o^ the Divinity
of Jesus Christ. If severa^ Deputies to the States of Holland did no^ think
themselves obliged to declare against Vorstius, his being called to the
University of Leiden, the Reason was because Vorstius publicly disavow'd the
Opinions o^ Socinus. The States desired him to Prin^^ the Declaration that he
had made, both in Latin and in Dutch, and to send it to the King of England.
They Commanded him also particularly to answer all the Accusations which he had
been charged with in Print, and to stay at Tergow til^ they were better
informed of his rea^ Opinions. Grotius so renowned for his Works, was then
Fiscal Advocate of Holland, he had a great share in what the States did, with
relation to these disputes. This Learned Man did so abhor Socinianism, Epistola
Grotii 13. ad Walaeum 1611.
that he declared that the Followers of Socinus did not deserve the Name of
Christians, and that he saw but little difference between a Socinian and a
Mohammedan. Grotius afterward did not seem to have quite so bad an Opinion of
the Disciples of Socinus, but yet he never espoused their Sentiments. This
might be clearly proved by abundance of Passages in his Letters and in his
Works. Whatsoever ^^ey might say to stain his Reputation he, ^ill always have
the Glory of having ^etter refuted the deceitful subtilties of ^^cinus against
the Satisfaction of Jesus christ, than any who have writ before ^^m.

New Contests in Holland about choosing their Pastors.
The Wiser and more moderate Di^^nes easily submitted to the Edict ^ublish'd in
1611. Those of the Walloon Churches signalized themselves upon this ^ccasion,
they promised in their Synods (...) 1612, and 1613. to Respect as Bre^^ren
those which maintained the Five ^rticles in Dispute. But the far greater ^art
of the Dutch Ministers were not so ^ractable. They had almost all took ^^e Side
or other in this Quarrel; they which were for the Contra-Remonstrants,
^^claim'd against the Edict; they ac^^s'd the States of Holland of a base
Con^escention to Men whose Doctrine tend^^ to re-establish Popery, Grotius
Oratione habita in Senatu Amstelodamensi, and Epist. 18. ad Uytenbogardum. 1613.
or at least to ^^troduce Socinianism into the Reformed ^hurches. In the Year
1612. there a^^se a business which occasioned a new ^ontest, the Remonstrants
complained ^^at their Adversaries were more nume^^us in their Synods and
certain Assem^^ies which are called Classes in the Vni^^d Provinces, and which
the Reformed (...) France call Colloques, they complained ^^at it often
happened that they refused (...) admit to the Ministry, those which ^eclar'd
for the Doctrine of the Five Articles; upon this and some other considerations,
Barnevelt proposed in the Assembly of the States of Holland, the Revival of a
Law made in the Year 1591. concerning the manner of choosing the Pastors of the
Church.

It seems that at the beginning of the Reformation in Holland, Grotius.
Apologeticus eorum qui Hollandia praefuerunt. Cap. VII.
William Prince of Orange, and the States of Holland had a design to make a
Law, that the Election of the Ministers should belong to the Magistrates of the
Places, but the Clergy had Wit enough to baffle this Project. A National Synod
Convened at the Hague in 1586. Ordered that the Pastors should be chosen by the
Consistory, that they would do the Magistrates the Honor of giving them notice
of the Election, and of asking them whether they found any fault with the
Manners or the Doctrine of the Person chosen. The Decree of the Synod
overturned the Right of Patronage Established in Holland a long time before the
Reformation which the States and Gentlemen of that Country endeavored to
retain, as well as many other Reformed Provinces. Far from approving this Order
the States of Holland published an Edict the same Year, by which they declared,
that their Intention was to reserve to themselves and to the Gentlemen the
Right of Patronage, upon Condition that they who are Named by the Patrons
should not be received into the Ministry but after an exact Information of
their good Manners, and of their sound Doctrine. Neither did the States of
Zealand observe this Canon of the National Synod at the Hague. In the Year
1591. They Convene'd a particular Synod of their own Province. 'Twas there
Decreed that the Consistory should desire the Magistrates of the respective
Places to Name certain Persons from amongst themselves, who should proceed
Jointly with the Consistory in the Election of their Ministers.

In Holland, there almost every day arose some dispute when there was a Vacant
Church, to be provided for; the Consistory maintained that this privilege
belonged solely to them: The Magistrates and the Gentlemen endeavored to
maintain their Right of Patronage. But to remedy the disorders which frequent
disputes about this Point occasioned, they endeavored in the Year 1591. in the
Assembly of the States of this Province, to make a New Regulation concerning
the manner of choosing Pastors. According to this Project the Magistrates and
the Consistory were to Name each Four Persons of their own Body, to Elect
Jointly: The Act of Election was to be carried afterward to the Body of the
Magistrates, who should have power to Accept or Reject the chosen Minister: And
in this last Case they were to proceed to a new Election. This Law was
agreeable enough to the Civil Law Established by the new Constitutions of the
Emperor Justinian, touching the Election of Ecclesiastical Ministers. And
because it was convenient to Reserve some Privileges to particular Persons,
who had the Patronage of Churches; it was added in the same Law, that if there
were a Pastor to be chosen to a Church of which a particular Person was the
Patron, then this Person was to depute Four others to Elect in Conjunction with
the Four Named by the Consistory: So that a Gentleman had the same privilege
with respect to the Church of which he was Patron, as the Magistrates had
reserved, with respect to the Churches of Towns and Cities. A Regulation so
well Contrived for the Satisfaction of all the World, met with so much
opposition in the Assembly of the States of Holland in the Year 1591. from
several considerable Cities, that it was not possible to pass it into a Law.

In the Year 1612. the Pensionary Barnevelt proposed a second time to the
States of the Province, as more necessary than ever, by reason of the Quarrels
that arose about the Five Articles. Besides that the Synod and Classes did not
dare to make use of the pretended Heresy (...) Remonstrants to Interdict those
which ha^ been chosen after this manner, by the Consent of the Consistory's,
and Magistrates, and Patrons; this Project had a considerable Advantage in the
present Posture of the Churches of Holland. It allowed the Magistrates to
choose none but wise and moderate Pastors, and such as should be acceptable to
all the World, and well inclined to Peace. When Barnevelt spoke in the Assembly
of the States of the Province, of the Revival of the Law proposed in 1591.
Their Opinions were then decided. Some thought it fit that they should publish
it; others thought that it was more convenient first to have the consent of the
Synod. These latter were apparently afraid that this Law should more provoke
the Ministers of the Contra-Remonstrant Party, who grumbled very much that the
States pretended singly to decide matters belonging to Religion and the
Government of the Church.

Barnevelt, in this Affair, in which he was so heartily engaged so managed
those that were concerned, that he brought them all over to his own Opinion.
The States of Holland at last resolved, that the Laws which had been Projected
concerning Ecclesiastical affairs in the Year 1591, should be from that time
observed; but they found great difficulty in the Execution of them: There arose
immediately great Disputes both by word of Mouth and by Writing, concerning
this Deliberation of the States. The Contra-Remonstrants said, that the States
had gone beyond the Bounds of their Lawful Authority, and that it was not fit
for them to put their hand to the Censor, in Regulating the Doctrines of Faith,
and the Government of the Church. The Remonstrants side with the States. By
this means they had opportunity to curry favor with the Government, and
likewise found their account in the Enacting of this Law. The Armenians
maintained, and not without Reason, that the States of Holland being Sovereigns
in their Province, had power to Establish any thing that was not contrary to
the Law of God, and to regulate the Government of the Church, to make Laws for
the Security of it is Peace, according to the Example of Christian Emperors and
Princes, which have done so before them, without any Contradiction from the
primitive Church. So that for the future we shall find there were disputes in
the United Provinces, not only about the Five Articles of the Remonstrants, but
also about the Right of Patronage, and the Lawful Power of Sovereigns in
matters of Faith and Discipline of the Church. This was the occasion of an
excellent Treatise which Grotius published to the World. This Learned Man does
in that Book defend at large that which he had before advanced in an Apology
for the States o^ Holland, Grotius De Imperio summarum potestatum circa Sacra.
touching the Authority of the Sovereign Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs But,
before we speak of this Apology published by Grotius, It is fit to say
something concerning this Quarrel, which intreas'd every day in the United
Provinces.

The divisions increased in the United Provinces.
Before this time there had been Synod against Synod, that of Vtrecht in 1612.
^eclare that the Five Articles of the Re^onstrants were Tolerable. That of the
^rovince of Guelderland, maintains that ^^l the Doctrine contained in the
Confes^^on of Faith, and in the Catechism of ^^e Belgic Churches, was
agreeable to ^^e Word of God. Preface des Acts du Sinode de Dordrecht.
The Synod Solemn^^^ Engage themselves to maintain and de^^nd it. In Some
Cities they Suspend and ^epose the Remonstrant Ministers as Here^^ks; in others
they drive out the Contra-^^monstrant as Violent and Seditious. ^^e People
being devoted to their Old ^^nisters would not acknowledge those ^^t were put
in their Room: So that there ^^s a Schism in one and the same Church. Brand
Hist. de la Reformation. Live. XX. XXI.
^^e part of the People assembled with (...) Deposed Minister in spite of the
Ma^^rates: Another part stuck to the new ^^e. One Geselius gave a great deal of
^^ble to the magistrates of Rotterdam. ^^ey Depose him, he sets up Conventi^^
they Banish him, and he refuses to ^^ey them. The Magistrates published
Manifesto, giving an account of their ^^duct to the People; Geselius answers
(...) his own Justification. In one Word ^^e were not greater Divisions in the
Church in the time of Arianism. Circular Letters flew about to Exhort to
forsake the Communion of those who embraced the Five disputed Articles. The
Contra-Remonstrants called themselves the unjustly persecuted Church. They had
a private Meeting in a Barn at Rotterdam. The Magistrates ordered it to be shut
up, the Contra Remonstrants opened it again. Could they have had more Zeal and
more Heat about the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion!

During these Confusions Gomar quitted the Chair of Divinity-Professor at
Leyden, and retired to Middleburg in Zealand. Polyander a great Stickler for
the same Opinion was put in his Place. The Remonstrants comforted themselves
under this disappointment with Episcopius, being called to the same University.
He had obtained a great Reputation in the Party, by his strong Defense of the
Five Articles at the Conference in the Hague in 1611. There seem d to be a good
understanding at first between the Two Professors: But it did not last long.
Whether 'twas that Polyander was Jealous of the Reputation of Episcopius a Man
of uncommon Learning, of a clean subtle and penetrating Head; whither he was
urged by an honest Zeal and Love of the Truth, to prevent the Mischiefs which
the Free Opinions of Episcopius's, concerning Important Points (...) Grace and
Predestination might do in the University of Leyden. There arose an open War
between the Two Professors. Polyander had a very strong Party. The liberty with
which his Adversary discoursed concerning the Nature and Attributes of God, the
Trinity, and the Incarnation, did the Remonstrants a very great Injury, since
they were headed by Episcopius and Vytenbogard.

The Conference of Delft, between the Remonstrants and the Contra-Remonstrants.
The latter kept himself more within Bounds, and stuck closer to the Belief of
the Ancient Church. Count William Lewis of Nassau, Governor of Frizeland, being
at that time in the Hague, and contriving means to Calm these Contests about
Religion, which were like to be of ill Consequence to the Church and Common
Wealth, brought Vytenbogard and Festus Hommius a Professor of Leyden, and one
of the moderatest of the Contra-Remonstrants, to a Conference. The Count first
of all asking them, if they could think of an Expedient, and to restore peace
to the Churches of the United Provinces; Hommius answered, that 'twould not be
hard to reunite the differing Parties, if till such time as there should be a
general Synod, the Remonstrants would declare positively that setting aside
their Five Articles, they sincerely received the Confession of the Faith of the
Belgic Churches. As for me, says Uytenbogard, I have no other-private
Sentiments of my own, I am ready to Declare it, when you please; And I don't
doubt, but the Wiser part of the Remonstrants will do the same. This
Declaration occasioned another Conference in the City of Delft, in the
beginning of the Year 1613. between certain Select Persons on each Side.

The States of Holland thought it convenient that there should be but Three
Divines of a Side, when they came to Discourse concerning means of healing
their Divisions: The Remonstrants proposed the way of Toleration, and desired
that their Adversaries should declare whether the Doctrine of the Five Articles
were Tolerable or not. The Contra-Remonstrants were for a Convocation of a
National Synod, which should definitively pronounce concerning the Five
disputed Articles. As for a Toleration added they, you demand it in too general
Terms, Tell us plainly if the Five Articles are the only Points in which you
differ from the Confession of Faith, commonly received among us. Explain your
Thoughts concerning the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, of Original Sin, and
certain other Important Points. We have taken out of the Books of Arminius,
Vorstius, and some other Remonstrants, several Tenets that are contrary to the
Coufession of Faith, in other Essential Points, as well as those of the Five
Articles: Let us see you Reject these Tenets, which are evidently Bad. The
Remonstrants answered, that Councils had often done more harm than good, that a
Convocation of a National Synod did not look like a good Expedient to end the
Quarrel, and that the Province of Holland did not think themselves obliged to
submit themselves to the Judgment of the other Provinces in matters of
Religion. Grotius Apologeticus eorum qui Hollandiae praefuerunt. Cap. IV.
As for the Declaration which you require of us concerning the other Artiticles
of the Confession of Faith, said the Remonstrants, We will deliberate of that
Proposal with our Brethren. It Is likely we may grant your desires, provided you
will Sign that the Doctrine of the Five Articles is not contrary to the
Fundamentals of Christianity. And thus, the Conference of Delft, was attended
with no better Success than the preceding ones, They broke up without coming to
any Resolution. Vytenbogard one of the Deputies for the Remonstrants, and
Festus Hommius for the other Side, went immediately for the Hague, to inform
the States of the Province of what had past at Delft.

In good truth, these Divines and Professors are a strange sort of Men. Instead
of bringing things to a happy Conclusion, they are good for nothing, but to
perplex them more, when they are left to their Prejudices and Passions. What
hindered them from giving Peace to their Churches and Country, which their
Disputes exposed to remediless Peril? only a ponctilio of Honor. The
Remonstrants did not care to humor their Adversaries so far as to explain
themselves upon certain Articles, and (I know not what) Tenets of Arminius and
Vorstius. As for the Contra-Remonstrants they were afraid of giving ground of
Triumph to the others, by letting them obtain a Connivance in favor of the
Five Articles. For what reason should they both refuse to make an advance which
appeared so reasonable? With a little Charity and Condescension they might have
prevented all those Miseries which ensued. For my part I cannot approve of the
obstinacy of the Remonstrants on this occasion. If they spoke sincerely, why
did not they stop the Mouths of their Adversaries, by a clear and distinct
Explication of their Faith? It cannot be denied but that the Writings of
Vorstius and some others of that Party, give just ground of Suspicion, both to
their Adversaries, and to wise and disinterested Persons.

In the mean time Vytenbogard had the skill and Reputation to insinuate a good
Opinion into the States of Holland, of the Conduct of the Remonstrants in the
Conference of Delft. He excused their backwardness, by representing to them
that the Contra-Remonstrants had a mind to have the same Power as the
Inquisitors of Spain. It is Lawful said he, to prosecute Men when one has
sufficient Proof to Convict them: But to oblige those whom they think fit to
suspect, to accuse themselves, is a Tyrranical Maxim of the Tribunal of the
Inquisition. If we Teach any Heretic Doctrines, our Adversaries have the
Liberty to Convict us: But if they have no Proofs against us, why should they
spread abroad suspicions of Persons, whose Doctrines are Irreproveable. This
come-off was specious, but had nothing in it at the Bottom. We ought not to
think much to give a reason of our Faith, when Charity and the Edification of
our Neighbor, and the Conservation of Peace demand it. Certainly there was
something in the Conduct of the Remonstrants which wanted Fairness and
Sincerity.

Vytenbogard and those of his Party, James K. of England is loss prejudised
against the Arminians, Preface des Acts du Synod de Dordrecht. Uytenbogard
Hist. Ecclesiastique Part. IV. 16113. Brand Hist. de la Reformation.
did not take so much Pains to obtain the Favor of the States of Holland, but
that they did endeavor also to Efface the ill Impressions which his British
Majesty had received of their Doctrines and their Persons. It was of high
Concernment to the Remonstrants to withdraw from their Adversaries that Support
which they flattered themselves of receiving from King James the I. Winwood his
Ambassador at the Hague, had prejudiced him against the Remonstrants, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the declared Enemy of the Opinions of Vorstius, gave
the King a bad Character of them: In short, this Prelate imagined that all the
Remonstrants Ministers, and the Magistrates their Protectors had an Inclination
to Socinianism, with which he thought Vorstius was infected. Grotius
Apologeticus eorum qui Hollandiae praefuerunt. Cap. VI. and in Epistolis. 1613.
Vytenbogard and the Rest thought good to oppose to the Archbishop, several
Doctors and Prelates of the greatest Note and Meritin England, and especially
the learned Casaubon, whom his Majesty had a particular Value for. His Majesty
owing his Entertainment of the Sentiments of Calvin, concerning Predestination,
more to the prejudices of his Education, than Reason or Study, Casaubon and
others easily persuaded him to listen to what they had to Offer in favor of
the Remonstrants in Holland. These took the advantage of this favorable
Conjuncture. They sent to Caron the Dutch Ambassador at London, a Memorial, in
which the Questions in Debate were fairly and clearly Stated. This Memorial was
read to the King, and gave him Satisfaction. His Majesty writ a Letter to the
States of Holland, and to ^ell them it was his Opinion that they should
Tolerate the Remonstrants, and that the Magistrates should use their Authority
to suppress their Disputes, and to forbid them to Preach such difficult and
abstruse Doctrines. The King's Letter extremely vexed the Contra-Remonstrants:
but it did quite dicourage them. They sent privately into England a Memorial,
to persuade the King that they had imposed upon him. The Conduct of the States
of Holland, and those who had the greatest share of the Government, was there
railed at in so outrageous a manner, that his Majesty sent a Copy of it in a
Letter which he wrote to the States of Holland.

Grotius was sent into England about this time, to adjust some Affairs for the
East India Company: I am ap^ to think there was something else in the Bottom of
this Commission. The States of Holland were very glad that so able a Man
undertook to undeceive the King of Great Britain, and that he Conferred upon
the Five Articles with the Bishops and chief Divines of England. Grotius found
that the Bishop of Ely, the Dean of St. Paul's of London, Casaubon and several
others were very nigh of the same Opinion with the Arminians, in the Points of
Grace and Predestination. They all gave him a favorable hearing, except the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who was always deeply prejujudic'd against the
Remonstrants, and consequently against Grotius, who Strenuously defended them.
He had many Audiences of the King, who frankly told him, that the Opinions of
Calvin and Beza seemed to him too Rigid, and that according to their
Nypothesis, God would be the Author of Sin. But his Majesty persisted always to
Condemn the ill Opinions which he had observed in Vorstius's his Writings. To
gain his Favor, it was necessary to Reject whatsoever savored of the Impious
paradoxes of Socinus, concerning the Divivinity and Person of Jesus Christ. If
you have a mind that I should entertain a better Opinion of Uytenbogard, and
the Remonstrants said the King to Grotius, you must persuade me that these Men
don't favor Socinianism. Grotius informed Vytenbogard his Friend of his
Majesty's Opinion concerning him and the rest of his Party. Hereupon
Vytenbogard by the advice of Grotius, writ a Letter to Casaubon, that he might
show it the King. He plainly saw that Vytenbogard had too great an Esteem for
Vorstius.

Sibrand Minister of Frizeland, publishes a Libel reflecting on the States of
Holland. Grotius is orderd to answer it.
The Contra-Remonstrants did all they could to hinder the success of the
Negociations of Grotius in England. A Professor of the University of Franneker
in Frizeland, by Name Sybrand, wrote against Vorstius, whom he accused of
maintaining an Hundred Heresies. The Book was Dedicated to the Archbishop of
Canterbury. Under pretense of praising the King of Great Britain for the Zeal
which his Majesty had discovered against Vorstius. Sibrand in his Epistle
Dedicatory accuses the Curators of the University of Leyden, and the States of
the Province, of a design to introduce Socinianism into Holland. He endeavored
to render the Conduct of the States suspected, because they would not Consent
to the calling a National Synod; he pretended that the Civil Power went beyond
the bounds of their Authority, in taking Cognizance of Religious Controversies,
which ought not to be Treated of, but in an Ecclesiastical Assembly; He
declaimed against the Revival of the Law made in 1591. in short, he maintained
that the Magistrates had nothing to do with the calling of Pastors and the
Government of the Church. The States of Holland were highly affronted at the
Sauciness and Insolence of this Frizeland Minister. He might have Refuted the
Errors of Vorstius; and they would have had nothing to say against him: Ordinum
Hollandiae ac West fri siae pietas.
Was it pardonable for a private Person to publish such vile Calumnies against
the Governors of a Province Allied to his own, and to speak Reproachfully of
Laws which they had Right to publish. Grotius was ordered to make an Apology
for the States of Holland. He acquitted himself wonderfully well of so
Honorable a Charge. His Book is Wrote very Elegantly, full of lively Strokes
against his Adversary, and is altogether a learned Composure, worthy of its
incomparable Author. He there fully Justifies the Conduct of the States of
Holland in the Affair of Arminianism: Grotius there Treats by the by, of the
Authority and necessity of Councils, and Solidly and Frirmly Establishes the
Power of Sovereigns in matters of Religion, and the Government of the Church.
Sibrand endeavored to answer Grotius: But he was not a Match for him. It Cost
Grotius only Three or Four Sheets to show that the Professor of Franeker was an
unfair Man, and that he understood not the things that he pretended to talk of.

B^na fides Sibrandi Lubberti. Edit des Etats de Hollande pour assoupir le
di^^^r^nd sus les Questions de la Predestination and de la Grace. Mercure
Francois. 1614. Uytenb^gard History Reformation Dordrecht. Ecclesiae. Part.
IV. 1614. Brand History de la Livre XXI. Preface des Acts du Sinode de
Grtotii Epistolae. 1614.
The States of Holland were very well pleased with the Advice of the King of
England, that they should Employ their Authority to suppress these Disputes,
and Command the Divines of both Sides, Charitably to bear with one another, not
to disturb any longer the Peace of the Church with abstruse Questions of no
Importance to Salvation. Grotius now Pensionary of the City Rotterdam, had
Orders to prepare an Edict, which they should propose to the Assembly of the
States of Holland, Here occurred great Difficulties. One Side said that it was
fit that the Five Articles should be Considered in the Synod, before they that
maintained them should be Tolerated by Law. To give leave to any, said they, in
the same Church, in the same Pulpit, to Preach such contrary Doctrines, is to
expose the Province to great Destractions. The Disputes, Replied the others,
are about Speculative Doctrines, which are of no Importance to Salvation. What
Inconvenience is there in giving every one the Liberty of Speaking their own
Thoughts with Modesty? The Emperors and Christian Princes have often without
the Assistance of the Clergy made Laws to Regulate the Doctrine and Practice of
the Church. These Reasons did not then Convince the Deputies and Magistrates of
several Cities of Holland. They a long time denied their Consent to the
publication of the Edict. These of Amsterdam were more obstinate than the rest.
They Demanded that their Dissent should be Entered in the Register of the State.

And hence it came about, that the Edict Projected in the Year 1613. was not
published till the beginning of the Year 1614. The States of Holland Exhorted
the Ministers when they Preach^ from those Texts where Predestination
destination is mentioned, to follow the Precept of St. Paul, and to Preach that
the Beginning, Progress and End of Salvation was owing alone to the Grace of
Jesus Christ, and not to Works of those that are Called. They were forbid to
Preach that God made Men to damn them; and that he puts them under a necessity
of Sinning, and that he invites those to Salvation, whom he has resolved never
to Save. Lastly, the States Ordered that they should not be molested, who in
explaining the Doctrine of Predestination, suppose that Men are saved by the
alone Grace of Jesus Christ, in persevering in the Faith unto the End, and that
all those that believe not in Jesus Christ are damned: As for all other
Doctrines, the States forbid them to Preach any that was not agreeable to the
Doctrines commonly received in the Chuches of Holland.

So far was this Edict which was drawn up with such Care to satisfy all the
World, from Calming the Tempest which had some time continued, that it
increased its Fury, some Contra-Remonstrants Ministers wrote Books to persuade
the People not to submit to the Edict. They openly accused the States of
favoring Popery, and of introducing a bad Doctrine into the United Provinces.
Vytenbogard wrote in Defense of the Edict of the States. There came out every
day some Book or other for, and against the Edict. One for Sibrand and another
for Grotius. This Division entered the Churches. The Contra-Remonstrants being
resolved to hold no more Communion with their Adversaries, met by themselves in
private Houses.

It was matter of great Dispute between them, whether the Edict was approved of
in England, or no. Grotius received a Letter from Casaubon, a Man equally
sincere and accomplished with all polite Learning. Casaubon assured his Friend,
that the King, the Archbishop of Canterbury and several other Prelates of
greatest Note had approved of the Edict. The Strain in which it is Writ, says
Casaubon, seems to the King and to the Rest equally distant from the Two
opposite Extremes, Manicheism and Pelagianism. The necessity of Grace is there
Established. The Contra-Remonstrants produced of their Side Letters from
England, which Imported, that neither his Brittannick Majesty, nor the Prelates
of the Church of England approved the Edict, and the Conduct of the States of
Holland. But upon the whole, the Testimonies of Casaubon who in Person spoke to
the King, and the Bishops seems prefer^able to any angry Man's Letters, which
the Contra-Remonstrants pretended to.

THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS XIII. King of France and Navarre.
BOOK V.
THE Joy which Mary de Medicis had conceived to see her self, delivered from a
Rupture with Spain, occasioned by the Affair of Mantua, was of short
Continuance. The Retreat of the Prince de Conde and several other Discontented
Lords, who by Consent had left the Court in the beginning of the Year 1614.
very much allarmed her Majesty. The Marshall de Bovillon had very cunningly
Formed this new Party to serve his own Interests. This subtle and ambitious
Man, taking it ill that he was not entrusted enough in the management of
Affairs, Memory du Duc de Rohan. Siri Memoire recondite To. III. p. 222.
and that the Regent did not Reward him suitably to the great Services he
imagined he had done her Majesty, tried to make himself necessary to the Queen
and her Ministers, by involving them in Troubles, out of which he alone was
able to deliver them. Hereupon he persuades with all his might the Prince de
Conde whom the Queen had disgusted by the denial she had given him of the
Chateau-trompette, and by recalling the Old Ministers, who he thought were
utterly turned of, as also by the hasty Rise of Conchini who had been drawn of
from his Party, publicly to make known his Discontent. The Dukes de Nevers, de
Maienne, de Vendome, de Longueville, de Piney-Luxembourg, and several others
being brought over by the Marshall de Bovillon, enter into New Engagements
with the first Prince of the Blood. They agree to retire all from Court almost
at the same time, and to meet in Champagne in order to Demand conjunctly
Redress of the Disorders of the Government. An Illusion with which the Princes
and great Lords have too often blinded the Eyes of the People, when they have a
mind to make use of them, to effect their own private Designs. The People would
have been Fooled by them to this very day in France, If having been less
Covetous of the Preferments of the Court, they had had at least the Wit to have
kept them from utter Slavery, and had not utterly incapacitated them to join
with them upon occasion. But the Princes and great Lords by Sacrificing the
Interests of the People to their own avarice and ambition, are now themselves
undone without Remedy. After having oppressed those who might have stood by them,
It was an easy matter to reduce them to a most shameful Slavery.

The Party which was then formed under the specious Pretense of the public
Welfare, might have done good Service to the whole Kingdom, if those who Listed
themselves in it, had done it with an honester Design, and had taken better
Measures. Nevers Commanded in Champagne, Maienne in the Isle of France, Vendome
in Bretagne, Longueville in Picardie, the Government of which the Comte de St.
Pol his Uncle had Surrendered to him. But the Marshall de Bovillon upon whom
they most depended by reason of his wisdom and his Sovereignty of Sedan, had no
mind to Unite a Party which he was not able to dissipate, when he should find
it for his advantage so to do. The Prince of Conde Retired to Chateauroux, an
Estate which he had in Berri. The Duke de Nevers went to Champagne, Maienne to
Soissons, the Dukes de Longueville and de Vendome were shortly to follow: But
the latter having delayed too long, was seized at the Louvre, and kept close
Prisoner in a Chamber by the Regent's Order. Mercur^ Francois. 1613. Memoires
du duc de Rohan.
The Marshall de Bovillon was one of the last to leave the Place. To render
himself less suspected, he got himself Commissioned to Visit the Ministers
first, and to declare to them the Intentions of the Prince and the Rest. The
Marshall was always Master of the Affair, and could manage Conde as (...)
pleased; he made no offer to stir from Court, till he had first promised the
Queen to bring back Conde and all the Lords of his Party.

Artifices of the Duke of Savoy to raise a Civil War in France.
'Twas so much for the Duke of Savoy's Interest to find business for Mary de
Medicis in France, that he must by all means Correspond with the Prince de
Conde. Besides that a Civil War would incapacitate the Regent to succor the
House of Mantua, Charles Emanuel had yet further hopes that the Prince and
Lords combined with him, breaking the double Marriage, which was concluded with
Spain as they pretended to him, he would revenge himself on the Regent, in
forcing her to give her Eldest Daughter to the P. of Piedmont, and perform the
Promise which the late K. had made him. The D. of Savoy at the same time that
he held a private Correspondence with tha Party, endeavored to amuse the
Regent; he exhorted her vigorously to exert her Authority against all that
should oppose it. The Agents of Charles Emanuel had Orders to Protest to her
Majesty that he did readily forget all the occasions of Complaint, and the
Affront she had given him in the Sight of all Europe, by the Treaty of the
double Marriage with Spain; that he was extremely concerned to see the new
Troubles which Men of a Factious and unquiet Disposition gave her; and that he
never ha^^ a Thought as some Persons would accuse him, to support the Party of
the Prince of Conde, and to give him any Assistance. Although his Highness said
the Agents of Savoy to the Regent, Doubts not but your Majesty's Prudence will
soon dissipate this new Faction, as you have the former, the sincere Respect
which the Duke our Master has for the Crown of France, makes him take the
Liberty to offer his Mediation to your Majesty, If you believe 'twill be of any
Service to you. He would likewise offer his own Person and his Troops, if he
was not persuaded that your Majesty has no need of such weak Assistance, and if
he was not under a necessity of putting strong Garrisons into his own Towns,
till the Difference between him and the House of Mantua should be adjusted.

The Regent had need of more sincere and honest People than the Duke of Savoy.
The King of Spain and the Duke of Lorrain offered her their Assistance as well
as Charles Emanuel: Different advice in the Council of France, how to dissipate
the Party of the Prince of Conde. Memoires de la Regence de Mary de Medicis.
But her Majesty had no Inclination to bring Foreign Troops into her Country.
That might have been the way* (...) have made more Rise than did. The Duke
d'Epernon was immediately called back, whom the Queen had again disobliged,
since her last Reconciliation with him. There was more of Ostentation than
Reality in the generous and disinterested Temper, which this Nobleman
affected, when he was recalled. Epernon had a little before solicited the Queen
to receive the Office of first Gentleman of the Chamber, Vie du Due d'Epernon.
Live. VI.
which he had enjoyed under Henry IV. and to bestow it on Candale his Eldest
Son. Being disobliged that he could not obtain a thing which he thought due to
his Services, he desired leave to go to Mets, of which Place he was Governor.
But when she began to hear the threatening Storm to Roar, she pacified the Duke
d'Epernon by granting what she had before refused. The Duke de Guise received
also new marks of distinguishing Favor. He pleased himself with the hopes of
being General of the King's Forces, in case they should March against the
Prince of Conde.

'Twas the Advice of the Cardinal de Joieuse, of the Duke d'Epernon, and de
Villeroi. They said that the Malcontents not having Troops nor Money, nor any
Place of Retreat, that therefore they should pursue them out of hand with the
Troops of his Majesty's Household; and that if his Majesty should advance as far
as Rheims with that little Body of Men, the Prince and the Lords of his Party,
being surprised unawares, would be necessitated humbly to implore the King's
Mercy, or to flee out of the Kingdom in Disorder and Confusion. The New
Marshall d'Ancre and Chancellor de Sillery were of another Opinion, they said
it were better first to Treat with them. He could not endure that the Duke de
Guise whom he both hated and feared, should have the Command of the Army. The
other being fallen out more than ever with Villeroi, was blindly led by
Conchini. Ever since the death of Madam de Puisieux the Chancellor's Eldest
Son's Wife, and Grandaughter of Villeroy, these two could never agree. Dole a
Creature of the Marshall d'Ancre, was disgusted upon the Conclusion of the
Marriage of the Marquess de Villeroy, Grandson of the Secretary of State,
because they had not given Dole the Office of Controller of the Finances, which
the Marquess d'Alincourt Son of Villeroy had given him hopes of, in case the
Marquess de Villeroy should Marry the Daughter of Conchini. The Chancellor de
Sillery took the advantage of this Discontent of Dole, to gain the Favor of
the Marshall d'Ancre and to Ruin his Rival, with whom Conchini had fallen out.

This Second Expedient pleased the Regent best, who relied upon the assurances
that the Marshall de Bovillon had given her. Mercure Francois. 1613.
She sent the Duke de Ventadour and Boissise Counselor of State, to Invite the
Prince of Conde, who was thought to be at Chateauroux, to Return to his Post at
Court. Villeroy could not forbear saying, that she exposed her self to the same
Inconvenience which befell Henry III. when the League first took Arms against
him. The Duke d'Epernon had advised him to March immediately against the Duke
de Guise, who could not then make any Resistance: But Henry not listening to
such wholesome Advice, rashly threw himself into those Misfortunes which cost
him his Life. God grant, said Villeroy, that the same thing does not befall us,
since we neglect to crush this Conspiracy in its Birth, which is likely to
produce great Revolutions in the State. They thought that this Old Statesman
spoke thus only to get the Command of the Army for the Duke of Guise, and that
he would not be sorry to see a Civil War, which might in the Issue prove fatal
to the Marshall d'Ancre, and the Chancellor de Sillery. The Prince de Conde
and the Duke de Guise hated them both. Conde would have had them removed from
Court, if he could have had any advantage against them; and the Duke de Guise
would have done his endeavor to have removed them, as soon as he should have
been at the head of the King's Army. The Duke d'Epernon angry that his advice
to oppose the Malcontents with an open force, was not followed, resolved not
to assist at any Treaties which they should afterward hold with the Prince and
the united Lords, where the King was to buy of his Subjects a short lived Peace
at a shameful Rate.

The Circular Letter of the Regent upon Retreat of the Prince de Conde, and the
Lords of his Party.
When the Duke de Vantadour and Boissise were gone to the Prince de Conde in
Berri, the Regent wrote a Circular Letters dated the 13th February, to all the
Parlements of the Kingdom, to the Governors of Provinces and other Places, to
the Provost of the Merchants, to the Mayors and Sheriffs of the Cities, to
exhort them to remain faithful to the King, and not suffer themselves to be
surpised by the Prince de Conde and his Party. If you will believe Mary de
Medicis, Mercure Francoise. 1614.
These Gentlemen had no just ground of Complaint, neither with relation to
their own private Interest, nor to the Administration of the public Affairs.
Her Majesty had Treated this Prince and those Lords with all the Respect
imaginable, she had heaped as many Favors on them as they could reasonably
desire, and had taken no Step of any consequence without their Advice. The
Kingdom was in as flourishing and quiet a Condition, the Dignity of the Crown
of France as well Supported, the People as easy and happy as ever. To write
the History of a Reign from Manifesto's, from prefaces of Edicts and
Declarations, from Letters and other Papers published under the King's Name, is
to have but very bad Authority for what one writes. In the mean time to amuse
the People with the hopes of a better Government, the Regent declared in a
Letter that her Majesty resolved to call as they speak in France an Assembly
des Notables of all Orders in the Kingdom, in which they should consult
together for the public Welfare.

The Duke de Nevers seizes on the Citadel de Mezieres in Champagne.
Ventadour and Boissise had Intelligence upon the Road, that the Prince de
Conde was gone from Chateauroux, and designed ^o pass the Loir, accompanied by
30 or ^o Horse. They sent one of their Com^any to inform him of their
Commissi^^, and to know where they might meet ^^m. Mercure Francoise. 1614.
Conde refused to receive the King's ^eputies, and went immediately into
^hampagne, where the Duke de Nevers ^^ceived him. The Prince was immedi^ely
Conducted to Chalons, from thence ^^vers and he went to Mezieres. Descu^es
Commanded there in the absence of ^^e Marquess de la Vieuville. There ^^ing a
good understanding between him and the Duke de Nevers. Descuroles made as if he
would shut the Gates of the Citadel, and defend it according to the Order
which he had received from Vieuville. But the Prince and the Duke de Nevers
threatening to attack it, if he did not show express Orders from her Majesty to
Resist them, Descuroles received the Prince and Duke into the Place. Nevers
wrote afterward to the Queen, to complain of the Marquess of Vieuville, to
desire that Justice might be done him for the resistance that had been made
him, who was the Governor of the Province. Was not this to Affront the Queen,
under pretense of paying, I know not what respect to the Majesty of a Sovereign?

The Prince de Conde wrote to the Regent a Letter in Form of a Manifesto.
Mercure Francois. 1614.
The Prince de Conde, the Dukes de Nevers, de Maienne, de Longueville, and some
others of the chief of the Party, being met at Mezieres, Conde wrote a long
Letter to the Queen in form of a Manifesto. He expresses there an
extraordinary Zeal for the public Good, and offers to Restore the Pensions and
Gratifications which he had Received from the King, to her Majesty's hand, when
all the States shall be assembled, and Act with entire Liberty: In a Word, he
speaks much like the Ancient Greeks and Romans; of whose Impartial Justice we
read of in History. If he had a mind to impose upon the World, he should have
taken care that his Actions did not contradict his Words. In truth, the
Complaints which the Prince de Conde and those of his Party made concerning the
wasting of the Treasury, the giving the highest Employments to People unworthy
of them, the too great Authority of the Ministers, the little Respect that was
paid to the Princes and Peers of the Realm, the Officers of the Crown, the
Obstacles which the Parliament found in exercising of their Power, the Ruin of
the Nobles, the excessive Price of the Places of Judicature, the Oppression of
the People, neglecting to Assemble the States of the Kingdom, the Haste with
which they had concluded the Marriage of the King before his Majority; all
these Complaints I say, were well founded. In the mean time, what ever
Protestations the Prince of Conde made, that he had no other design, but to
procure an effectual Remedy for these heavy Grievances, yet the World could
never firmly believe the integrity of his Intentions, nor the sincerity of his
Words. He added to these, Three or Four Demands which were not less Reasonable;
the Assembling of the States of the Kingdom within Three months at farthest,
the Suspending the Marriage of the King and his Sister, till after the sitting
of the States, and the placing near her Majesty, Persons of known Honesty and
Integrity.

Conde at the same time wrote to the Prince of Conti his Uncle, to the Dukes,
Peers, and Officers of the Crown, to the Parlements, to Cardinals, and he sent
them a Copy of the Letter he had sent to the Queen. In that to the Parliament of
Paris, he Styled them, the Chief Guardian of the Kingdom. He was willing to
give them an account of his Actions, he desired their Advice and Concurrence in
this Laudable undertaking of his, to Reform the Government. Thus it is that
Kings and Princes, and great Lords have used to play with a Senate, The
weakness of the Parliament of Paris on this occasion.
the Chief Members whereof being Ambitious and Slaves to the Court, take no
care to maintain its Reputation and Authority. When there are hopes that the
Parliament of Paris will be of any use to impose upon the People, they bestow
upon it magnificent Titles, and Treat it with the greatest Honor and Respect
imaginable; but when these Considerations cease, they despise and ridicule it.
The Parliament upon this occasion gave a Proof of its Weakness. They would not
open the Letter which the Prince de Conde sent them. Two of their Members were
deputed to carry it to the Queen, who sent them to the Chancellor. I should not
have found fault with these grave Magistrates for not relying much upon a young
Prince, whose little Genius and low Conduct gave them no great hopes; but what
shall we say of People that pretend to be the Guardians of Kings? Here we see
they dare not open a Letter written by a first Prince of the Blood, to complain
of the ill Administration of Affairs during a Minority. Our Fathers were then
Born to Slavery, and we have gone on in the Paths they chalkt out to us.

Reflections upon Cardinal Perron's answer to the Prince of Conde.
None of the Parlements had the Courage to Answer the Prince, several Officers
of the Crown sent their Letters to Court unopened, some few Printed Answers. I
find that of Cardinal Perron seems to me to deserve some Reflection. This
flattering and mercenary Pen did not dare to deny that there was a great many
disorders to be regulated in the Government under the Minority of Lewis XIII.
Mercure Francois. 1614.
They have been pleased to multiply them since his Minority, and during the
long Reign of his Son. How great a Reformation is necessary now, and who at
this time dares to Demand it? One of the Ancients, said the Cardinal, has
wisely said, that there is no Prince so bad, but that he is better than a Civil
War. And thus we may say of the Government of Kingdoms, that there is no
Administration, let it be what it will, but it is better than Civil Discord.
Whether the Author who laid down this Maxim be a Greek or Latin one, it is all
one to us, if we take it in its utmost Extent, it tends only to Establish
Tyranny in the World. Would it be better to endure all the extravagancies and
Bloody cruelties of a Caligula and Nero, than to take Arms to Resist such
abominable Monsters? If any say that these two never had their like, I will
grant it. But they that follow too near the Politics of Philip II. of Spain,
and Charles IX. of France, will find some there like them. Is it not lawful to
defend one's Life and Liberty against such Tyrants? I confess it is often better
to bear the inconvenience of a bad Prince, to a certain degree than to raise a
Civil War. A good Prince is a great Rarity. The World would never be in Peace,
if it were lawful to take Arms, as soon as a Prince ceases in all Instances
perfectly to do his Duty. But that a King who loads his Subjects with heavy
Taxes to Indulge a boundless Luxury and Ambition, who Sacrifices without
Remorse, the lives of a million of Men to his Vast and Unrighteous designs, who
Ruins at pleasure the Nobles of his Country, who overthrow's the Privileges of
Princes and Great Noblemen, who Orders that his Edicts, how contrary soever to
the public Good shall be Registered, before there can be any Remonstrances
made, who shuts up the mouths of Parliaments, who Banishes and Imprisons
without any legal Process, those who testify their dislike of his Usurpations
upon his Subjects and his Neighbors, who abolishes without all Reason the most
sacred and inviolable Laws, who thinks it meritorious to make a million of Men
miserable, because they will not renounce a Religion, which, I may say, they have
had the liberty to be Born and Bred up in, who does his utmost to enslave a
Nation which has been always Free; that such a Prince as I describe, is better
than a Civil War, undertaken and carried on with wisdom and discretion, so that
one might hope for some redress of those miseries, which would be but increased
by patiently enduring of them; this is the thing the Cardinal du Perron will
never persuade Men of Sense to believe, with all his Skill and Rhetoric.

Answer of Mary de Medicis to the Prince of Conde. Mercure Francoise. 1614.
Mary de Medicis returned a large Answer to the Prince de Conde, in Form
likewise of a Manifesto, to clear her self from his Imputations, and to show
the irregularity of his Conduct, who accused her. If her Majesty does not make
the best Defense with respect to some Articles, yet with respect to others, she
gives good Answers enough. The greatest number of those Disorders which the
Prince Complains of, began before the Regency. The Avarice of Conde himself,
and of the Lords, put her under a necessity of wasting the Treasure, which had
been heaped up by the late King. They increased the number of Malcontents,
formed Cabals, threatened to Rise: So that she was obliged continually to give
them Money, to appease some, to retain others. To what purpose did the Prince
begin to Complain now in the Fourth Year of a Regence, which was now expiring?
Had he not done much better, to have employed that Reputation and Authority,
which the Quality of first Prince of the Blood gave him, in endeavoring to
Establish a good Council, and to regulate the Administration of Affairs. But
instead of applying himself to that, which was of absolute necessity, he spent
his time in Intrigues, to remove one, or prefer another. His irresolution and
mildness of Temper, made him a Cully to all the Factions that were on Foot at
Court, during the Minority of Lewis the XIII. Nevertheless Mary de Medicis
fearing lest the Prince should strengthen his Party by reason of the general
Discontent of Men of all Ranks, through the Kingdom, Judged that the surest way
to allay the begun Heats and Animosities, was to promise in her Answer to the
Prince of Conde, an Assembly of the States of the Kingdom, in order to redress
every thing which they Complained of. This experiment succeeded well. The
Faction of the Prince was weakened, and her Majesty took Care that the Assembly
of the States, should not entirely answer their Expecttations.

But she did not so far rely on the way of Negotiation resolved on in Council,
nor upon the assurances of the Marshall de Bovillon, that she had no thoughts
of having an Army ready to Fight the Prince of Conde, Mary de Medicis raises
Six thousand Swisses.
in case they refused the advantageous accommodation which was proposed to them
by the President of Thou, whom the Queen sent for that purpose into Champagne.
This Magistrate, whose integrity and ability, the Princes and great Lords had a
Respect for, had a Conference, with them at Soisson, in which he endeavored to
adjust the matters in dispute between them and the Queen. To secure herself
against the Fears of the Malcontents, it was resolved to send away the Colonel
Galatis into Switzerland, to raise Six thousand Men of his own Nation. But the
Duke of Rohan, who was made Colonel General of the Swisses by the late K. was
suspected by the Queen. She did not dare to trust him with a Body of Troops, in
which the chief strength of the King's Army was to consist. Mary de Medicis,
she thought convenient, to make another Colonel General of the Swisses, in the
Room of the Duke of Rohan, and to give him a Sum of Money in requital. Rohan,
whose great Design was to be Head of those of his own Religion, whom he was
willing to Defend, and to maintain the Reputation which he had gotten by his
Zeal, and Probity in Poitou, in Guienne, and Languedoc, where he had very well
Supported the Interest of the Reformed Party, against the Connestable Governor
of the Province; Rohan I say, was not concerned to keep his Post near the King.
A Sum of Money was very welcome to him in the present posture of Affairs.

Bassompierre is made Colonel General of the Swisses, in the Room of the Duke
of Rohan.
The business was to get a Man devoted to the Queen, and agreeable to the
Swisses. She proposed Bassompierre in the Council. But Villeroy, who favored
the Duke of Longueville, whose Family he was a great Friend to, told her
Majesty, that the Place of Colonel General of the Swisses had always been
filled by a Prince, and that the late King promised to give it to no Person,
but one of that Rank, when he renewed his Ancient Alliance with the Thirteen
Cantons. The Duke of Rohan, said Villeroy, was afterward chosen as a Prince of
the Blood of Navarre and Scotland. Several of the Ancestors of the Duke of
Longueville have Commanded the Swisses. The offering him this Post of his
Forefathers, will be a likely way to draw him off from the Party of the
Malcontents. Mary did not approve of trusting a young Lord, who declared
against her, and who had often quarrelled with the Marshall d' Ancre, about
the Execution of their Offices. Longueville was Governor of Picardy, and
Conchini of the City and Castle of Amiens. Because Bassompierre was excluded by
the Treaty with the Swisses, Mary de Medicis proposed the Chevalier du Guise,
who unhappily died a little after. Villeroy interposed a Second time, by saying
that this would open the mouths of the Malcontents more than ever, who
complained of the too high preferments, of the House of Guise.

'Twas happy for Bassompierre, that they did not come to a resolution then.
After he understood from the Queen her self, that he was excluded from the
Office of Colonel General of the Swisses, because he was not one of the
Princes, he used all his endeavors to take away this obstacle. One of the
Montmorenci's having had this Employ with the consent of the Helvetick Nation,
Galatis a Friend of Bassompierre's, undertook after all to obtain for him the
consent of the Cantons. He acquainted the Queen with this, who gave him Three
Weeks, to try what might be done. Galatis went directly to Switzerland, where
he obtained leave to raise Six thousand Men, and the Consent of the Thirteen
Cantons in favor of Bassompierre. And thus this Lorain Gentleman became a
Colonel General of the Swisses. The sooner to bring this advantageous business
to an Issue, he paid out of his own Estate the Money promised to the Duke of
Rohan. But her Majesty afterward re-embursed him. Bassompierre was afraid that
if the Duke of Rohan was not paid presently, he might have some contrivance to
prevent him from an Employ that was likely to be a Step to higher preferment.

The Conduct of the Reformed in France, in the Affair of the prince of Conde.
The better to Engage the Prince of Conde and his Party to Rise against the
Government, the Marshall de Bovillon flattered them with hopes, that the
Reformed Churches, would declare for them. He had taken care to discover this
Project to the most intimate Friends of the Duke of Rohan, Memoires of the Duke
of Rohan.
whether it were that the cunning Marshall had a mind to make the Prince
believe that Rohan would readily join him, or whether he had a mind to raise
yet greater suspicions in the Court against a Person, whom he had a mind to
Ruin, and make himself more necessary to the Regent, Conde seemed so well
persuaded of the favorable Inclinations of the Huguenot Party, that he wrote
to the Deputy Generals of the Reformed Churches to let them know the
Obligations he had laid upon them, in not forgetting the Interests of the
Protestants in the Manifesto, which he had Addressed to the Queen: But the Wise
du Plessis-Mornai, had the precaution to prevent the Deputy Generals from
interesting themselves in this Affair, and to prescribe to them the Conduct
which they were to observe in this Conjuncture. After having reflected upon the
Steps of the Prince, and the measures which he had taken with the
Male-contented Lords, du Plessis said very aptly, that they which Halt at the
Threshold, are not like to go far. And when he had read the Prince of Conde's
Letter to the Queen, he said Judiciously to the Ambassador of the States
General of the United Provinces to the Queen, that he could not imagine what
was the Principle of that Charity, which the Prince of Conde and his Party
pretended to the Reformed Churches. These Gentlemen, added he, are no less at
the Devotion of the Pope than the Queen her self, of whom they Complain. The
Court of Rome will interpose to reconcile them, and his Emissaries will not
fail to make us more odious, if we imprudently Side with those who hate us in
reality, and solicit us, only with hopes thereby to obtain better Terms for
themselves.

The wisdom of du Plessis Mornai.
Villarnoux came to visit du Plessis, his Father-in-Law, upon the first report
of the Rising of the Prince of Conde. He sent him immediately back to Paris,
with Orders, to admonish the Deputy-Generals, that they should take Care, not
to draw the Reproach upon themselves, of Rising upon any other account, but the
obtaining of the liberty of their Conscience. That would be to wrong their good
Cause, to mix with it Interests purely Civil, and that those of the Religion,
as they were Reformed Christians, ought not to meddle with the Reformation of
the State. Although, added he, we should think it our Duty to join witih them as
Frenchmen, who desire it of us; the Opportunity is not Inviting, the design of
the Prince according to all appearance will not succeed. His Retreat will be
looked upon as an effect of his Discontent, or as a desire to Embroil the
State. The Queen will easily break all their Measures by promising to assemble
the States of the Kingdom, and to defer the Marriage of the King. To what
purpose do they think to meet together in a Corner of France? Those People
which the King can Attack without making any great diversion of his Forces,
will not continue long before they are reduced to beg his Mercy. The Event
justified this right Guess of this able Old Man. Conde could not have drawn
himself out of the Intrigue so safely, if the Marshall de Ancre had not
apprehended that the Duke de Guise would have been too powerful, if he should
have had the Command of the Royal Army.

When the Marshall de Bovillon had joined the Prince of Conde in Champagne,
The prince of Conde solicites the Reformed.
he advised him to send some of his Domestics to the Heads of the Huguenot
Party, to exhort them to take Arms. Conde and Bovillon had each their
particular Designs in this Step. The first hoped to make a more advantageous
Treaty with the Regent, if the Reformed Declared in his Favor. The other
thought to make himself doubly necessary, to reclaim the Prince, and the
Discontented Lords, and to Travers the Designs of the Duke de Rohan amongst the
Reformed. Des Marais Lieutenant of the Princes Guards was of the Religion, he
seemed a fit Man to Negotiate with the Duke of Rohan, they sent him therefore
to St. Jean d'Angeli, with Orders to pass first through Saumur, and to sound
his old Friend du Plessis Mornai. They did not doubt, if Rohan and du Plessis
would listen to the proposals of the Prince, but that the Credit and Reputation
of these Two Men, would draw after them all the Protestant Party in France.

Mary de Medicis did likewise manage the chief Men amongst the Reformed, The
wise answer of du Plessis Mornai, to the Regent and the prince of Conde. Hist.
du Connetable de Lesdiguieres. Live. VIII. Chap. 6. Memoires de Duc de Rohan.
she sent immediately to the Marshall de Lesdiguieres to Treat at the same
time with those of the Religion, and the Prince of Conde and the discontented
Lords to hinder the one from being drawn over, and to persuade the other to an
accommodation. The Duke of Rohan was likewise solicited by her Majesty; he
answered, that his Design was always to adhere to the Reformed, and that the
readiest and surest way to reduce the Party of the Prince of Conde was to give
Satisfaction to the reformed Churches, who are able to weigh down the Scales to
that Side which they should be of. As for du Plessis Mornai, the President
Jeannin and the Queen her self writ obliging Letters to him. They knew that
this Gentleman, who was very honest and zealous for the welfare of his
Religion, and his Country, might be gained, by showing themselves willing to
maintain the Edicts which were granted by the late King to his Reformed
Subjects. They gave therefore du Plessis the highest hopes in the World, in
this respect. Jeannin assured him that the Regent had not Concluded the double
Marriage with Spain, with a design to Effect the Ruin of the Protestants in
Conjunction with the House of Austria. The Marriage which is at present
Negociated with England, said this cunning and dissembling Minister, is a
convincing Proof of the Contrary. This business is in such forwardness, that in
my Opinion nothing can hinder it. In the mean time, they had no desire to
Conclude it. This was but a Trick to amuse the Protestants, whom the double
Marriage Alarmed through all Europe.

Du Plessis gave the Ministers and the Regent, all possible assurance of his
Fidelity and Devotedness to the Service of their Majesty's. He took this
occasion to represent to the Court, how important it was for the Peace of the
Kingdom, exactly to observe the Edicts, which had been granted to the Reformed,
who were better Subjects than the Catholics, when they were left to the free
Exercise of their Religion. The Answer which du Plessis gave the Prince of
Conde, is yet more worthy of his great Wisdom. We have seen several Princes,
says he, Vie de Mr. du Plessis. Live. III. 1614.
use the specious Pretenses of the public Good, only to carry on their own
particular Interest. I would believe the Designs of his Highness are upright
and sincere, but that is not sufficient, we must use lawful means to obtain a
good End; all the World knows that there are Disorders in the State, they are
greater than Men imagine: But prudence will not admit that Mr. le Prince should
apply Remedies worse than the Disease. The well meaning Towns of the Kingdom
are so afraid of a Civil War, that they will never Declare for Mr. le Prince.
He has a mind to Correct some Abuses, which it is for the Interest of the Towns
to suffer; those which tell him that the Reformed will Rise, don't know us, or
at least they have a mind to impose upon his Highness. They offer him People,
which are not at their disposal. It Is true, we Complain of some Grievances, but
we will remain peaceable as long as the Edicts are observed. The Allies of the
Crown will not approve of this Enterprise of Mr. le Prince. France is the only
Counterpoise which can oppose the greatness of the Spanish Monarchy. If a Civil
War should arise in the Kingdom, who can resist the ambitious Designs of the
House of Austria.

The Agent of the Prince de Conde had better encouragement at St* Jean d'
Angeli, than at Saumur. He invited the Duke of Rohan to take Arms, in Favor of
his Highness, The Duke of Rohan seems to listen to the proposals of the prince
of Conde. Memoires du Duc de Rohan. Vie de Mr. du Plessis. Live. III. 1614.
promising that his Highness would not come to an Agreement with the Court,
without his Consent. The Duke did not seem very backward to join the Party: But
the distrust, which he had of the Marshall de Bovillon, whose artifices and
ill will to him, he was aware of, made him more reserved. Before he would
Engage himself, he sent one of his Confidents to the Prince, to discover the
real Designs of his Highness, and the discontented Lords. When du Plessis
Mornai understood that the Duke of Rohan was inclined to join with the Prince;
Mr. de Rohan said he, does not think to appease the Troubles by Interesting
himself. The Queen will be more inclined to satisfy the Prince, and the
Marshall de Bovillon, jealous of Mr. de Rohan, will take care to conclude a
Peace as soon as possible. No body could have better foretold what would come
to pass. The Envoy of the Duke was kindly received by the Prince; the Party
gave out, that Rohan offered a Thousand Horse, and Eight thousand Foot. The
Treaty with the Court, that was already far advanced, was immediately
concluded, and the Prince obtained that, which otherwise would never have been
granted. As for the Marshall de Lesdigui^res he only exhorted Conde to the
Peace, and offered him his good Offices for that purpose.

Caesar Duke of Vendome, Hist. du Connetable de Lesdiguieres. Live. VIII. Chap.
6. The escape of the D. of de Vendome, he retires into Bretagne.
that was seized at the Louvre, and kept Prisoner in his Chamber, made his
escape, Eight days after, he took the Road to Bretagne, but when he came to
Ancenis, he found that the Regent had given such good Orders on that Side, that
the Duke de Montbason, who was sent to Command in his Place, and the Comte de
Vertus in Conjunction with the Parliament de Rennes, took care to have the
Gates of the best Cities in the Province, shut against him. Nevertheless Condi
Duc de Rets joined Vendome, they gathered together some Troops, and set about
Fortifying B^avet, of which they had made themselves Masters, as also of some
other Places of the Duchy of Ponthievre, which belonged to the House of
Mercoeur, whose Heiress Coesar had married. He writ to the King to Complain of
the unjust Treatment that he found. Instead of Answering this Duke, who was
never feared nor valued, they sent Orders to the Comte de Vertus and to the
Parliament of Britagne, to hinder him from Levying or Assembling any Troops,
not excepting his Company of Guards, unless he showed express Orders from her
Majesty. Caesar wrote a Second Letter to the King, he Complains there of the
Affront which was offered him, in degrading him from his Government, and
justifies himself as well as he can with respect to the Fortifications of
Blavet. The Court as little regarded this Letter as the First. Being more
concerned about her Negociations in Champagne, the Regent slighted the Duke of
Vendome, and Concluded a Treaty with the Prince of Conde.

The death of the Connetable de Mont morenci.
Henry Duc de Montmorenci, Pair and Connetable of France, died in his
Government of Languedoc during these Troubles. The late King had invested him
with the First military Dignity, which had not been filled since the death of
Anne de Montmorenci his Father. History gives us no great Character of this
Connetable, he was a Man of moderate Merits. The judicious President de Thou,
is far from giving us so fine a Description of him as of his Eldest Brother,
the Marshall de Montmorenci. Henry his Son had married some time ago the
Daughter of the Duke de Bracciano, of the Family of the Vrsins in Italy. He
left Three Daughters, Two by a First Wife, one of which married the Duke de
Ventadour, and the other, the Comte d'Auvergne, afterward Duke d'Angouleme.
The Third, by his Second Wife, was married to the Prince of Conde.

Whilst the Duke de Ventadour, the President of Thou, and Jeannin Boissise and
Bullion Counselors of State, were in a Conference at Soissons, for Mary de
Medicis with the Prince de Conde, and the Lords of his Party, the Marquess de
Coeuvres, Ambassador Extraordinary from France, in Italy, was there finishing
his Negotiation concerning the Affair of Mantua. The Duke of Savoy, The D. of
Savoy avoids meeting the Marquess de Coeuvres the Fr. Ambassador in Italy.
Memoires de lo Regence de Marie de Medicis. Siri Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p.
109. 191.
who was not Ignorant that this New Minister of France was to join with the
Ambassador who was sent from Spain, at the same time to press his Highness to
Disarm, and to Conclude the marriage of his Daughter, the Widow of Duke Francis
of Mantua, with the Cardinal Ferdinand de Gonzagua, his Brother and Successor;
Charles Emanuel I say, went out of Turin, as soon as he heard of the Arrival of
Coeuvres, under a pretense of going to settle some Disorders which had happened
in his County of Nice in Provence.

He could not digest the loftiness of the Court of Spain toward him. Two of
his Sons were Hostages as it were, Victor Amadaeus, Prince of Piedmont, the
Eldest, which his Father had sent into Spain very imprudently, upon the
occasion of his Quarrel with the House of Mantua, and Philibert, whom the
Spaniards had the precaution to hold in Custody, ever since Charles Emanuel had
sent him, to make Satisfaction to his Catholic Majesty, as we said before.
Indeed they had given Prince Philibert the Command of the Spanish Galleys, but
this Important Charge, was properly speaking, but an Honorable prison. The
Guards and Officers, which were about his Person, had an Eye upon all his Steps
and Actions. Although Two Hostages so Dear to their Father, might have Secured the
King of Spain, that Charles Emanuel had no ill Design upon the Country of
Milan, yet his Majesty Ordered him to Disarm presently, and Acting upon this
occasion in Concert with the Regent of France, his Orders were the more
positive and pressing.

The Jealousy of the Princes of Italy, by reason of the Correspondence between
the two Crowns, with relation to the Affairs of Italy.
The Republic of Venice and the Secular Princes of Italy, saw with excreme
Concern that the Alliance made between the Two Crowns, by the Treaty of the
Double Marriage, tended only to Enslave Italy, and that they must be contented
for the future, with whatsoever Spain should resolve upon, in Conjunction with
the Regent of France, who willingly sacrificed the Interest and Authority of
her Son, to a prejudice which she had taken up, that the surest way to be
absolute in France, was to hold a good Correspondence with the Court of Madrid.
The Cardinal Duke of Mantua, whom the Two Crowns pretended to Protect,
Complained that the Catholic King endeavored to marry him to a Woman he did
not care for, and to take away the young Princess his Neice from him. Charles
Emanuel made a greater noise because they would have the absolute disposal of
his Daughter, and compel him to lie at the Discretion of the Spaniards, when
he was Disarmed. What now? said he to the Ministers of the Princes of Italy
which were about him; Are we become the Subjects of the King of Spain? Where we
shall do the least thing that displeases him, must we humbly beg his Majesty's
Pardon, and undergo the penance that he shall impose upon us? Shall we bear the
Caprices and the Haughtiness of his Ministers and Governors, who upon any
pretense will wage War against us, and we be not in a Condition to oppose them?

Although several Princes of Italy were not sorry to see the Duke of Savoy
humbled, yet they murmured: Every one was afraid that upon the first occasion,
the Court of Madrid would Treat them in the same Imperious manner. The Prince
of Piedmont gave his Father notice that the Duke of Lerma, an Enemy to their
Family, threatened to humble the Pride of the Duke of Savoy, and to punish him
for his Attempts. We must submit, said Victor Amadeus, or prepare to feel the
Effects of an angry and imperious Favorite against us. All these Remonstrances
did not shake the Duke of Savoy, being resolved to do nothing unworthy of his
Quality. He protested he would rather abandon his Two Sons to the Discretion of
the Spaniards, and die with his Sword in his Hand, than be another Slave. And
this is the reason why he left Turin, when he understood that the Ambassadors
of France and Spain were come to speak with him. He would not stay to have
Terms imposed upon him by these Two Ministers, who had before agreed together
to make the same Proposals. Charles Emanuel had yet some hopes that the Face of
Affairs in France, would be changed by the motions of the Prince of Conde, and
that he should then find some way of coming off with Honor.

The Spaniards privately traverses the Negociations of the Marquess de Coeuvres.
In the mean time, he took care that the Ambassadors of the Two Crowns should be
received with all Respect. He writ very Civil and Obliging Letters to the
Marquess de Coeuvres, sometimes to desire him to come to Nice, sometimes to
tell him that within a few days he would return to Turin. Memoires de la
Regence de Marie de Medicis.
The French Ambassador easily understood what he meant. He informed the Court
of France of all this management. They thought there that it was not agreeable
to the Dignity of the King, Nani Historia Veneta. Lib. 1. 1614.
to let the Duke of Savoy any longer play upon an Ambassador Extraordinary,
which his Majesty had sent to him. Coeuvres was Ordered to go to Mantua, and to
take Milan in his way, that he might there take some Measures with the
Ministers of the King of Spain. The Marquess d'Inojosa, received the Ambassador
with a great deal of Civility. And they took care to give him the Pleasures and
Diversions of the Carnaval. But when they began to speak about the Affair of
Mantua, the Spanish Ministers who could not bear that the Court of France
should have any hand in this Accommodation, told the Marquess de Coeuvres, that
that Affair would henceforward be negociated at Madrid, whither the Cardinal
Duke had sent one of his Principal Ministers.

The French Ambassador then understood that the Jealousy of the Spaniards
would underhand give him a great deal of Trouble. He set out for Mantua. The
Governor of Milan dispatched immediately a Franciscan Friar, with Orders to
Treat privately with the Cardinal Duke, to hinder him from accepting with the
Mediation of France, and to give him hopes of better Terms, by the single
Mediation of the Catholic King, who was provoked by the delays and resistance
of Charles Emanuel. The Prince de Castiglione, the Emperor's Commissioner in
Italy, went himself to Mantua. He lay Incognito in one of the Duke's Houses,
near the City, This Journey was undertaken by Agreement with the Marquess
Inojosa, who designed to Corroborate, by sending the Prince de Castiglione all
that the Franciscan should say, or at least to interpose the Name and Authority
of the Emperor, as a new Obstacle to the Interposition of France, in the Affair
of Mantua. Castiglione represented to the Cardinal Duke, that the Dispute
between him and the Duke of Savoy, being about a Feif of the Empire, his
Imperial Majesty took it ill that their dispute was referred to the Arbitration
of another Power.

The Cardinal Duke of Mantua accepts the Conditons proposed by the Marquis de
Coeuvres
In spite of all these Intreagues of the Spaniards, the Cardinal Ferdinand took
the Advice of the Republic of Venice, to accept the Terms proposed by France,
and to Consent to what was Demanded of them, provided he should have the
liberty of keeping the Princess Mary at Mantua. Ferdinand made some Objections
against the Amnesty which they desired of him, in favor of those of Monferrat,
who had declared for the Duke of Savoy: But he consented at last. The Marquess
de Coeuvres having therefore obtained the Consent of the Cardinal Duke to marry
the Duchess Margarita, the Widow of his Brother Francis, to choose before the
Consummation of the marriage, Arbiters to Examine the pretensions of the Duke
of Savoy to Monferrat, to Pardon all those Rebels which Charles Emanuel
protected; lastly, to require no Reparation for the War, which had been made
against him. Ferdinand dispatched a Courier in^o France, to give the Queen
Regent notice of what had been done. He desired her to persuade the Catholic
King to approve of this Agreement. The Court of Madrid did not seem to wait
till it was solicited. Affecting to be as it were the sole Agent on this
occasion, and to give Laws to the Two Parties, the Catholic King sent Express
Orders that he should come to an Agreement upon these Terms. The Republic of
Venice thought that this Expedient would avert this War, with which Italy was
threatened, if the Quarrel was not quickly ended, and the Cardinal Duke by this
Submission, would gain the Favor of the Two Crowns, in case the Duke of Savoy
refused to accept the Terms which they jointly proposed.

The Marquess de Coeuvres went to Venice to divert him self, The D. of Savoy
pretends to consent likewise
expecting Orders to return to France. Mary de Medicis sent them to him. She
was well pleased to have made a certain show of her Authority in Italy, at a
time when the Spaniards spoke so big there. Coeuvres was Commanded to return by
Turin, and there to Treat with the Duke of Savoy, to persuade him to accept of
the Terms which the Cardinal Duke of Mantua had agreed to. The Court of France
was not much concerned that Charles Emanuel should so soon come to an
Accommodation with Ferdinand. Being persuaded that the Spaniards would
sufficiently mortify him, they were heartily glad that this bold and turbulent
Man had his hands so full in Italy, that he could not Succor the Prince of
Conde. The Marquess d' Vrfe was lately come to Turin, to Treat with the Duke of
Savoy, Siri Memoire recondite To. III. p. 222.223.
in the Name of the Malcontents of France. Coeuvres received a thousand
Caresses at the Court of Charles Emanuel. They there seemed well disposed to
the Accommodation: But under a pretense that the Spaniards had ill Designs
against him, the Duke of Savoy Levied New Troops, and strengthened himself more
than ever.

New Troops levied at Turin.
The account which the Prince of Piedmont upon his return from Madrid, gave of
the Coldness and Haughtiness with which he was Received there, Nani Historia
Veneta. Lib. I. 1614.
and of the aversion which the Duke of Lerma had for the House of Savoy, made
Charles Emanuel almost mad. Not content to make continual Invectives against
the Attempts of the King of Spain, upon the Liberty of the Princes of Italy, he
endeavored to put himself in a Condition to Resist any that should Attack him.
Hereupon he Negociates with Maurice, Prince of Orange. John Comte de Nassaw
comes into his Service, Invited by a great Pension. He raises new Regiments of
Swisses, and offers Commissions to several French Officers; in short, he
intrigues with all Nations that were Enemies to, or jealous of the Monarchy of
Spain. What an unhappy thing is it for poor Subjects to be at the Direction of
a Restless, Ambitious and Revengeful Prince. They are ruined to day for the
carrying on a chimerical Design; to morrow, to satisfy the desires of an
unreasonable Ambition; or else for the revenging of an injury which a Wise and
Judicious Prince, would out of Prudence overlook. But such was the Fate of
Piedmont and Savoy as long as Charles Emanuel lived.

The Negotiation of the D. of Ventadour and other Commissioners of the K. with
the P. de Conde and those of his Party.
The Marquess de Coeuvres was informed before his departure from Italy. that the
Prince of Conde and the Regent were upon the point of Agreement. This News
unravelled the Designs of the Duke of Savoy: He flatterr'd himself, he should
have time to make good his pretensions to Monferrat, in spite of the King of
Spain, whilst his Catholic Majesty should be busied in Supporting the
Authority of Mary de Medicis, shaken by a Civil War, raised by the Prince of
Conde in France. The Treaty which the Regent was about to Conclude at St.
Meneboud in Champagne, Memoires de la Regence de Marie de Medicis.
with the Malcontents, was not so Binding, but that the Prince de Conde held
still a great Correspondence with Savoy, Mercure Francois. 1614.
and there was still great Confusions in France. These Considerations gave
Charles Emanuel some hopes of being in a Condition to make the Governor of
Milan know, that his Catholic Majesty was not powerful enough to be absolute
Master of all the Affairs in Italy. Before we relate this new Quarrel which the
Duke of Savoy had with the Marquess of Inojosa, or rather with the Court of
Madrid; it is necessary to look back on the Course of the Affairs in France,
and to give an account of the Negotiation of the Duke of Ventadour and the
other Commissioners of the King of France, with the Prince of Conde and the
Lords of his Party, at the Conference of Soissons. The latter came thither,
attended by Six or Seven hundred Horse, and Four thousand Foot. The Duke de
Mayenne, Governor of the Isle of France, had put a strong Garrison into
Soissons, for the Security of the Prince and the Lords that came with him.

The 14th, April. they assembled in the Castle of Soissons. After the Prince of
Conde and the Malecontented Lords, had protested that they had no other Design,
but to Serve his Majesty, and to secure the Peace of France, they desired Three
things of the Regent; that the States of the Kingdom should be Convened as soon
as possible, that the double Marriage with Spain should be Superseded, and that
both Sides should lay down their Arms. Hitherto things went very smoothly, they
pretended to design nothing but the public Good. But they reserved a Power to
Treat, not only concerning the Liberty and Security of the Assembly of the
States of the Kingdom, but also concerning the particular Interests of each of
the Lords. The Convocation of the States were granted, without any difficulty.
The Regent had offered, that in her Answer to the Prince de Conde's Manifesto.
There was a dispute about the Second Article. They demanded a Suspention of the
double Marriage, till the End of the Assembly of the States. The Commissioners
of the Court had only Orders to grant it till the Majority of the King. And to
save the Authority of the Regent in an Affair which she had Negociated, and
solemnly Concluded with Spain, the Court would not allow that this Article
should be inserted in the public Treaty. They offered a particular Letter of
the Regent to the Prince, in which her Majesty would engage her self to defer
the double Marriage, till the Majority of the King. The thing was accepted of,
with this modification. There was only a formality wanting. The day appointed
for the opening of the Assembly of the States, falling out before the Majority,
the double Marriage could not be Celebrated before the end thereof.

The Prince de Conde retires from Soissons and goes into Champagne.
The proposals which the Prince de Conde and the Lords of his Party made with
Relation to their particular Interests, raised great disputes in the Council of
Mary de Medicis, under a pretense of providing for their own Security. The
Prince and the other Malcontents, demanded, that they would put some important
Place into their Hands, and grant them several things for their own
convenience. 'Twas necessary to send Couriers to Court, Memoirs de
Bassompierre. Mercure Francois. 1614.
and to receive Instructions concerning these Affairs. Thus the King's Army
gained time to reinforce it self considerably. Galati brought Six thousand
Swisses, which he had Commission to Levy. Memoires de la Regence de Marie de
Medicis.
Bassompierre, their New Colonel General went to receive them at Troies in
Champagne; from thence he Conducted them to Vitri, where Praslain was gathering
together the King's Army. These motions made the Prince de Conde Jealous, who
immediately left Soissons. He had written to the Queen before, to thank her for
the Three Articles which she had consented too, and to Advertise her Majesty,
that the Duke de Maierne and the Marshall de Bovillon remained at Soissons,
with full power to Treat of those other Conditions which his Highness and the
Lords of the Party had demanded. Conde had a mind to seize Vitri with his
little Army, which he led toward Sedan: But the Kings Troops prevented him. He
made amends for this, by assisting the Duke of Nevers to make himself Master of
St. Menehoud.

When the particular Demands of the Prince and the Malecontented Lords were
proposed in the Queen's Council, their Opinions were divided. The Dukes de
Guise, d' Epernon, de Bellegarde, The Regents Council divided about the demands
which the P. of Conde and the Malcontents make with relation to their
particular Interests.
the Cardinal de Joieuse and Villeroi Secretary of State, cried out upon them,
as unworthy Conditions, which the Queen could not grant with Honor, and
without parting with too much of her Authority. Guise and Epernon, said boldly,
that if the Regent granted Places of Security to their Enemies, they likewise
would demand the same, and that they would look for Assistance out of the
Kingdom. This was plainly to threaten, Siri Meme. recondite. Tom. III. p. 238,
239 etc.
that they would join themselves with the Crown of Spain. This appeared so much
the more a contrived Design, because the Ministers of Philip declared, that the
King their Master would not send the Infanta, his Daughter into France, as long
as the Enemies of the House of Austria were there the Strongest. Mary de
Medicis began to be shaken by their Reasons, who were of Opinion that she
should suppress the Prince of Conde by Force. The Parliaments, the greater part
of the military Officers, in a word almost the whole Kingdom were at her
Majesty's disposal. The Hugonots did not Rise, only the Duke of Rohan was
perhaps tempted to join with the Prince of Conde: But Rohan did not ear to
embark himself, without having a prospect what was like to be the Success.
However, 'twas easy to stop him, by giving some Satisfaction to the Reformed
Churches, concerning the Edicts of Pacification, and above all, in not
accepting the assistance which the King of Spain offered, and of which the
Regent had no need: Her Majesty did not want Money, she had a good Army, Conde
and the Lords of his Party, lying in the extreme parts of the Kingdom, without
hope of Foreign Succor, were not furnished with any necessaries to maintain a
War.

The Intrigue of the Marschal de Ancre to dissuade the Regent from going to War
with the P. de Conde.
Mary de Medicis would have followed this Advice, the most advantageous to her
Reputation and her Authority, if the Marshall d' Ancre and the Chancellor de
Silleri had not dissuaded her. Not content to allege their Reasons in the
Council, that it was the best way to grant the Prince of Conde and those of his
Party, Siri Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 241.
almost all their Pretensions, they Intrigued in the Parliament, they excited
the People of Paris earnestly to demand the conclusion of the Peace. They
engage likewise the Deputies General of the reformed Churches to say, That if
the Regent gave the Command of the Army to the avowed Enemies of their
Religion, they should think they had very good reason to take care of their own
preservation, by uniting with the Prince of Conde. The Marshall de
Lesdiguieres represented that the War would be looked upon as a revival of the
Ancient Quarrels between the Guises and the Bourbons. In this diversity of
Opinions, the Queen thought, that to save her self from the Reproaches which
might be hereafter thrown upon her, 'twas necessary to assemble an
extraordinary Council, and to Summon thither the Presidents of the Parliament
and the chief Magistrates of Paris. All these Gentlemen of the Robe, being
prepossessed by the Chancellor, favored a Peace.

The Cardinal de Joieuse seeing that their Advice would not carry it, went out
of the Assembly. Guise, Epernon, Villeroy, and some others who had spoke for
the War, were afraid to oppose the Torrent, therefore they approved the
continuation of the Treaty begun at Soissons. Viguier was dispatched by the
Regent to the Prince of Conde, who was retired to St. Menehoud. This new Agent
had. Orders to persuade his Highness to agree that the Duke de Maienne and the
Marshall de Bovillon should conclude the Treaty with the King's Commissioners,
who remained at Soissons, notwithstanding the Retreat of the Prince with some
other Lords. Conde having answered by Viguier that things would sooner come to
an Issue, if the Duke de Ventadour and his Colleagues would advance as far as
Rhetel to Treat with himself; her Majesty, sent an express Commission to her
Deputies to make an end of the Negotiation. The Regent sent likewise a
particular Letter to the Prince. She there promised a Suspension of the double
Marriage, till the Majority of the King her Son.

The reasons of the Pope's Nuncio about the resolution taken to make a Peace
with the P. of Conde.
The Pope's Nuncio was troubled at the Resolutions which Mary de Medicis had
taken to come to an agreement with the Prince of Conde, upon Terms so
disadvantageous to her Royal Authority, he was afraid that this Treaty would
make the First Prince of the Blood too powerful, and put him into a capacity of
pushing his attempts much farther. Conde, said this Minister of the Pope, has
a design to break the double Marriage. How must he Effect it? It Is necessary
then that he Support the Hugonot Party, that he favor the continual
Usurpations of the Parliaments upon the Jurisdiction of the Church, that he
make Creatures in the Sorbonne, by fomenting the Richeriste Party, who
endeavor to Ruin the Authority of the Holy See in France, and if the Pope
has not Power to dispense with Canons as he thinks fit, how can the Divorce of
the late King from Marguerite his first Wise stand good? This Prince of Conde
has but one Step more to make, to Ascend the Throne. The Italian Politicians,
Siri Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 241.
oftentimes carry their Reasonings beyond all Bounds. The Author which relates
these Speculations of the Nuncio adds, that the fear of this Minister would
have been very well grounded in any other Country besides France. The Genius of
the Nation is so changeable, they take different measures every day, The
examination of a politic reflection of a Venetian Author, concerning the
Treaty with the Prince of Conde.
so contrary one to the other, that one can moke no certain Conjectures about
the several Commotions there. The Reflection is not amiss, and indeed we must
agree with him: But this Author should have added, that Conde was a Man of so
faint a Temper, so little capable of any Resolution, that he would never have
done the Regent much mischief, tho she had granted him Conditions yet more
advantageous.

A Noble Venetian speaking of the same Affair in the History of his own
Republic, says that France did Recompense those Actions, Nani Historia Veneta.
Lib. I. 1614.
which elsewhere they Punish by the hands of the Hangman. I approve no more
than he, that which has often happenned in France, in these Leagues which the
Princes and great Lords have often made under the Honorable pretense of the
public good, they more designed their own Interest than those of the People.
But why does this Senator affirm so boldly, that the Prince of Conde and the
Lords of his Party ought to have their heads cut off for this Enterprise? This
is done in other Places. I grant it in those Countries where the Government is
Tyrannical. One would be surprised to hear a Republican speak at this rate, if
we did not know that the Government of Venice is rather an absolute Domination
of a small number of Noblemen, than a free Administration of public Affairs,
by a well-compos'd Senate. This Decemvirate which is always standing, is as
good an Invention to maintain Tyranny as ever was. It keeps both the People and
Nobility equally in awe. They study and pursue the Maxims of Matchiavel in
Venice, as much as in any part of Italy. The undertaking of the Prince of Conde
was neither Honest nor Prudent enough: But in what was it so Criminal?

This Man must be well seasoned in the Tyrannical principles of his Matchiavel,
to maintain that a first Prince of the Blood, and the Lords of the first Rank
in a Kingdom, who Demand the Re-establishment of good Laws, the general
Assembly of the States of the Kingdom, the Suspension of a marriage concluded
during the Minority of the King, against the true Interest of his Crown; to
maintain, I say, that these who only make use of that Privilege which their
Birth and Dignity gives them, and which desire some Security for their Persons,
against a Regent and suspected Ministers, deserve to die upon a Scaffold. The
Prince of Conde is not to be blamed for Combining with some other Lords, to
Demand those things of which he speaks in his Manifesto: But he did not take
the Right way to do any good. His Designs did not appear Sincere, nor
Disinterested. The Parliament and the Magistrates of Paris were very Wise in
advising a Peace. A Civil War might have been fatal to France; and in making a
Peace, they were sure of a speedy Convention of the States. The well-meaning
Men would have endeavored at a Reformation of the Government, if they had been
better Seconded, and the Prince of Conde had had more Wisdom and Sincerity.

A Treaty concluded at St. Menehoud between the Regent and the Prince of Conde.
He concluded at last his Treaty with the Regent at St. Menehoud, in Champagne,
the 15th of May. The Duke de Ventadour and his Colleagues were there. I will
not recite all the Articles. The Castle of Amboise was to be put into the
Prince's hands, until the meeting of the States. The Duke de Nevers had St.
Menehoud, Mercure Francoise. 1614. Memoires de Duc de Rohan and de la Regence
de Marie de Medicis.
say some Authors, tho it is not mentioned in the Treaty. These gave him
besides a Sum of Money to satisfy him for pulling down his House, to make way
for the Fortifications of Mezieres, which were part of them to be demolished.
Blavet and the other Places that were Fortified a little before in Bretagne by
the Duke de Vendome being Dismantled. He was restored to his Government and all
his Places. This was all that was agreed upon for Vendom. He highly complained
that the Prince o^ Conde had abandoned him in this Negotiation. As for the
Marshall de Bovillon, it was easy to satisfy him. The Money which the Regent
Ordered to be paid him, was thought by him a sufficient Recompense. See, said
the Duke of Rohan, who had more Integrity in him than all the rest that made
such a noise, see, says he, how Men's private Interest make them forget the
public welfare of the Kingdom. The Prince de Conde, the Dukes de Nevers, de
Longueville, de Maienne, and the Marshall de Bovillon, who signed the Treaty,
very readily performed their Conditions. Mary de Medicis was not less punctual
of her Side.

The Dukes de Longueville and de Maienne were the first that returned to Court.
Conde retired to his House of Vallery, where Descures Governor of Amboise, went
to resign that Place into his hands. His Highness came sometime after to pay
his Devoirs to their Majesty's. That Restless Temper that was Natural to him,
would not suffer him to stay long at Court. Being vexed that his late Design had
lessened the Respect due to his high Quality, instead of increasing it, as he
had flattered himself it would. This Prince was again tempted to raise new
Troubles before the meeting of the States: But having taken no better Measures
than he did before, he was forced to let the Regent alone, who was endeavoring
to reduce the Duke de Vendom, who refused to agree to the Treaty of St.
Menehoud.

The Decree of the Parliament of Paris against a Book of Suarez the Jesuit.
Mercure Francoise. 1614.
It is a great while since we have had occasion to speak of the Jesuits. But we
shall now see them appear again upon the Stage upon the account of a Book
published by Suarez, a famous Divine of that Society in Spain. The Book is
Entitled, The Defense of the Catholic and Apostolic Faith against the Errors
of the English Heretics. There are always a certain sort of Men at Paris, who
narrowly observe all the Actions of these Good Fathers, and will not
forgive-them if they do amiss. This new Book of Suarez being come to France,
Abstracts of it were presently made, and brought to the King's Officers in the
Parliament of Paris. The Solicitor General looked upon it as a Book so
dangerous, that he thought it his Duty to desire the Condemnation of it. The
Parliament met upon the 26th of June, and Condemned the Book to be burnt by the
Hands of the Common Hangman, as containing Seditious Principles, tending to the
Subversion of Kingdoms, and to persuade the Subjects of Kings and Princes to
attempt their Sacred Persons. They ordered besides. That certain former Decrees
of the Faculty of Paris, which condemned the Doctrine of Suarez, should be Read
every year on the 4th day of June, not only in the Schools of Sorbonne, but
also in those in the College of Clermont, and of the Mendicant Friars.

The greatest mortification to the Society was this, that the Parliament Decreed
that the Fathers Armand, the Rector of the Society, Cotton the late King's
Confessor, Fronton le Duc and Sirmond, two Persons very famous for their
Learning, should appear the next day before the Parliament. When they came
thither, the first President told them in the Name of the Court, that the Book
of Suarez their Brother Jesuit, was contrary to a Declaration they had made,
and to a Decree of their General in the Year 1610. They commanded them
afterward to write to Rome, for a Revival and Publication of that Decree, and
to get from thence an Order in Six Months to prevent the Members of that
Society from writing any more in their Books, such damnable and pernicious
Doctrine, and to Command them to Preach to the People Doctrines contrary to
those of Suarez, or else the Parliament would proceed against such Offenders, as
Guilty of High Treason, and disturbers of the public Peace.

Paul V. complains of the proceedings of the parliament against Suarez his Book.
The Court of France foresaw very well that the Proceedings of the Parliament of
Paris against the Book of Suarez, would make a great noise at Rome; for indeed
the Book was writ by Order of the Pope: But the Regent, to whom the Parliament
had been very Serviceable in the Affair of the Prince of Conde, would not
oppose their Zeal, which they expressed against these pernicious Opinions. Siri
Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 256, 257. and 270.
Her Majesty had more need than ever, to keep fair with the Parliament, by
reason of the approaching Assembly of the States. As soon as Paul V. had notice
of the Decree of the Parliament, against Suarez his Book, he sent the Bishop of
Foligni to the Marquess of Trenel, who succeeded Breves in his Embassy at Rome.
This Prelate had Orders to complain in the Name of the Pope, of the proceedings
of the Magistrates of Paris, by which they Encroached on the Rights of the Holy
See. His Holiness, said he to the Ambassador, is the more surpised, because
he expected nothing less than a grateful acknowledgement of his kindness to the
Queen of France. Her Majesty cannot be Ignorant of that Affection that he has
always showed to her, and the King her Son. All the World is witness of that
Zeal, which his Holiness has discovered for the prosperity of France. It Is not
long since he offered his good Offices to the Queen, to appease the Troubles of
the Kingdom. And they are no sooner ended, but the Parliament of Paris makes a
Decree injurious to the Holy See. If Suarezs Book contains any Positions
contrary to the Sovereignty of the most Christian King, her Majesty might have
complained to the Pope. He would have censured the Doctrine of the Author, and
punished him severely; he would have made him left out what was of ill tendency
in the Book. Since the death of Henry IV. many French Authors have published
several satirical Libels, against the Holy See, and the Person of the Pope.
They have endeavored to Ruin his Authority at that time, when he employed it
for the Interest of the King, and for the Prosperity of France. The Bishop of
Foligni charged the Ambassador to inform the Regent, that the Pope complained
of the violent Proceedings of the Parliament, and to desire her Majesty to get
the Decree revoked.

The Discourse between the Pope and the F. Ambassador about the Parlements
Decree.
The Marquess de Trenel having an Audience of the Pope, sometime after he
represented to his Holiness, how impossible it was to obtain what he desired of
the Queen, who in the present juncture of Affairs, could not fall out with the
Parliament of Paris. Her Majesty, said the Ambassador to the Pope, will always
retain a remembrance of those kindnesses which you have done her, but she will
be concerned, to understand that your Holiness gives protection to a Book, the
Author of which is so far from encouraging Subjects to Obey their Sovereigns,
as be is obliged by his Profession to do, that he lays down Maxims to stir
them up to Rebellion, and make an attempt on the Lives of their Princes. France
still bewails the Bloody death of Henry IV. Her Parlements will never fail to
oppose those Authors, whose pernicious Doctrine Struck the Knife in the Breast
of so good a King. The Magistrates will never cease to employ their utmost Care
for the preservation of the Person of his Son, without being defective in that
Respect that they owe to your Holiness, and the Apostolic See. Accordingly the
Parliament of Paris has taken all possible Care, that their Decree might not
violate the Lawful Authority of the Successors of St. Peter. These
Remonstrances did not at all affect a proud and angry Pope. If the King of
France, replied he, will not revoke the Decree of Parliament as to those Points
which concern the Rights of the Holy See, I will follow the light and dictates
of my Conscience. You must not imagine that the fear of a Rupture, will be any
restraint upon me in this matter. In case Her Majesty refuses to give me the
satisfaction that I desire, I Will endeavor to do my self justice, and follow
the examples of my Predecessors. Must I maintain ^a Nuncio at Paris, to be
there the Spectator of the outrages that are done me, and the Indignity with
which they there trample under their Feet the Authority of the Holy See? Is it
so hard a matter to stop the proceedings of the Parliament? I know the
Chancellor well enough: Maxims of Politics are more pleasing to him, than
truths of Religion.

The Ambassador was not at all dismayed. He desired the Pope to reflect upon
the reasons which the Parliament had to Condemn Suarez his Book: I have heard
say, added he like a Gentleman, that Divinity is a holy Science. It is
therefore inconsistent with an Opinion which allows the murder of Kings. The
Parlemen^ is indispensably obliged to take care of the preservation of good
Divinity in the Kingdom, of the Authority and Person of the King. They have a
Book brought before them which maintains that in some cases a particular Person
may attempt with a safe Conscience, the Life of his Prince. Ca^ any one desire
that the Magistrate should be Silent, when Two Kings have been successively
murdered by Fanatics, who have imbibe^ this damnable Divinity. Paul replied
that the matter in dispute was not about the killing of declared Tyrants. I
have forbid my self, said he, the teaching such Doctrines, and I do not know
but that I have complied too much in that matter. Many approved Authors in the
Church are of the Opinion. But I complain of the Condemnation of certain
passages, recited in th^^ Decree, which speak only of the Prerogative^^ of the
Holy See. And what were these* They were those, where Suarez affirms that the
Pope may depose Princes, when they become Tyrants. That which Paul V^^
acknowledges, deserves to be remark^ He pretends to be very favorable to
Kings, in forbidding any to teach that i^ was lawful to kill them with a safe
Conscience in any Case what ever. But with a moderation altogether worthy of
the Successor of St. Peter, he reserves to himself the Right of Deposing them,
when ever he should judge that their Government is degenerated into Tyranny.
Trenel replied very aptly, that Princes were not so much obliged to him, and
that it was his Holiness's own Interest, that such a Doctrine should be
banished all Christian Communions. For, says he, the Protestants hold that the
Popes are Heretics, Tyrants, and Antichrist, and if the Opinion which allows
the attempting the Lives of Tyrants, be once Established among Christians, It
is not impossible, but a Fanatic Hugonot may take a fancy to do a brave
Action, and kill the Pope.

Paul V. was enraged instead of being pacified. He said again with a threatening
and angry Air, that nothing should hinder him from defending the Rights of the
Holy See, if the King would not revoke the Decree of Parliament. I wish your
Holiness, replied the Ambassador in a submissive manner, would have the
goodness to offer some Expedient, that you would write to your Nuntio, and
would send Orders ^o the Cardinals which are in France, to consult with him
about some means of accommodation; the Queen will agree to any thing that she
can do with Honor. As for Revoking of the Decree, it is not a thing possible
to be done at present. Trenel's design was only to hold him in play, that so
the hot and haughty Old Gentleman might have time to grow cool, and reflect
upon the Consequences of his Threatenings. After some farther discourse, he took
a resolution to write to the Nuncio, and to send to the Cardinals de Joieuse,
du Perron, and de la Rochefoucault, to enjoin them to confer with the Nuncio,
about the Satisfaction which his Holiness should Demand, in the present posture
of affairs in France. In reciting these particulars, Two things seem equally
Surprising to me: The arrogance of the pretended Vicar of Jesus Christ, who
will not endure that Crowned Heads should make use of their Authority to
support their Sovereign and Independent Power, or to preserve their Lives from
Assasins. They must humbly desire of the Pope the Condemnation of a Jesnit, who
allows attempts upon their Lives: They must be content with his publishing
throughout their Dominions, that the Pope has a Right to examine their
Conduct, and to Depose them, when he thinks they Tyrancically abuse their
Power. The other thing which does not less amaz^ me, is the mean and
low-spirited Superstition of the Princes of the popish Communion. What good
Reason did he allege, to oblige them blindly to submit to the arrogance and
pride of the Bishop of Rome, which grosily abuses a Religion, the principles of
which, reduce him to the simple Quality of a preacher of the Gospel, and an
Overseer of a particular Church.

The Methods used by the Court of F. to content the Pope.
The Regent of France and her Ministers, were pleased with the Marquess of
Trenel, for having engaged the Pope to take the way of Negotiation, for his
obtaining Satisfaction, concerning the Decree of the Parliament, of which he so
bitterly complained. Siri Memo recondite. Tom. III. p. 269. 270. etc.
'Twas not that the Court of France were afraid of the Menaces of the good Man.
His Quarrel with the Republic of Venice* had taught the World, that though his
anger might make him take a violent Resolution, yet he soon repented of it, and
became more mild when when he was steadily Opposed. No one could imagine that a
Man of his Age and Experience, would have ever been so Imprudent as to break
with France. This Step would have done the Pope and the Roman Religion more
mischief than it would those whom he threatened with his Thunders and Anathemas.
This would have been matter of Triumph to the Protestants. They would have
certainly have yet more insulted over the arrogance of Paul V. on whom they had
already bestowed many sharp and ingenious Raileries. He would thus have exposed
himself to the Indignation of all Wise and Judicious Catholics, who would have
highly blamed him for an Effort so contrary to good Sense and the true
Interests of those of their Communion. The Court of France resolved therefore
not to meddle with the Decree of Parliament. They had good reason to disgrace
Suarez his Book: And at this Juncture 'twas not convenient to put the Chief
Magistrates of the Kingdom out of humor. They applied themselves only to find
means to content the Pope, and to quit themselves of this Affair with Honor.
When Vbaldini the Nuncio, presented the Brief which the Pope had written with
his own hand, to the Queen, she answered him very handsomely: Her Majesty
intimated that she should be very glad that the Nuntio should agree with the
French Cardinals upon an Expedient, which might please his Holiness.

The Jesuits bestir themselves at Rome for to have the Decree of tae Parliament
burnt there.
The Jesuits at Rome were more enraged against the Decree of the Pralement, than
the Pope and his Ministers. If we will believe their Founder, that Society is
to do every thing for the great Glory of God. But did not he secretly Inspire
this Principle into his Disciples, that the Honor of their Society ought to be
dearer to them than the Glory of God, and the welfare of his Church. This has
been the Temper of the Jesuits ever since they have been taken notice of in the
World. They don't care what Scandals and Divisions they cause in the Church of
Rome, so that that they can preserve and increase the pretended honor of their
Society. This they have plainly enough discovered in the business which I am
speaking of. If Paul V. had been carried away with the first motions of his
Anger, he might have lost France, as Clement VII. did England. The Jesuits were
not concerned to prevent the Pope from exposing himself to the same
Inconvenience. They used their utmost endeavors, that the Holy Office might
avenge the honor of Suarez, by Condemning the Decree of the Parliament of
Paris, as Heretical, and ordering it to be burnt by the hand of the Common
Hangman, in the Field of Flore. To stop this impetuous Zeal, the Marquess of
Trenel was forced to admonish them, that they run the risque of being a Second
time driven out of France. The Court injoined also, the chief Jesuits at Paris
to write to Rome, and to declare to their enraged Brethren, that if the Pope
took any violent Resolution, her Majesty would impute it to the Suggestions of
that Society, and that she knew how to punish them sufficiently.

The Declaration of the K. in his Council upon the Decree of Parliament.
One of the first things the young King did, who was become of Age the end of
the Month September, was to give the Pope Satisfaction. His Majesty having had
the Decree of Parliament read to him in full Council, Ordered an Act to be drawn
up, in which, after having expressed his Zeal for the Honor of the Apostolic
See, and the desire he had of satisfying the Pope, Lewis XIII. declared that
his Intention in Executing of the Decree, Siri Memo. Recondite. Tom. III. p.
303.
is not to do any prejudice to the Pope's lawful Authority, nor to the
privileges of the Sea, which his Predecessors had always acknowledged. When
the Declaration was read to the Nuncio Vbaldini, he thought fit to object
against that part which supposed that the Temporal Power of Kings is Supreme
and Independent. This was, in the Opinion of the Italian Minister, very
unreasonably to reject the pretensions of the Court of Rome, who would have,
that Crowned Heads should at least be subject to the Authority of the Pope in
some particular Cases; but they did not much concern themselves about the long
reasonings of the Nuncio.

The Pope is not content with the Ks. Declaration.
His Master was no better pleased than he with the Declaration of the King. Paul
V. said plainly, that that would not remedy the Disgrace, which they had thrown
upon the propositions of Suarez, with relation to the Authority which Jesus
Christ had given to St. Peter and his Successors. Siri Memo. Recondite. Tom.
III. p. 298, 299. etc.
This Author, said the Pope, like a Divine well versed in the Holy Scriptures,
and the Ecclesiastical Antiquity, had good reason to maintain, that I have
Power to Excommunicate Heretic Princes, and even to Depose them when they
continue obstinate in their ill Opinions, and endeavor to eompel their
Subjects to embrace them. If Jesus Christ had not given this Power to St. Peter
and and his Successors, they would have wanted a Power requisite for the
preservation of his Church. God forbid that I should be guilty of a base
prevarication, by ceasing to defend the Right of the Chair of St. Peter, to
which God has advanced me. Thus the Popes are pleased to form a Plan suitable
to their Ambition, according to which Jesus Christ in their Opinion ought to
Govern the Church. Who told them that the Savior of the World would not have
Established a good Order in his Religion, if he had not followed the fine
System they give us? Should God have called them to his Councils? The Ancient
Popes, who Deposed neither Constantius nor Valens, nor Julian the Apostate,
were then either downright Fools, or base Prevaricators. Is it credible that
they did not know the Power which Jesus Christ had given them, for the welfare
of his Church? And if they did know it, why did they not employ it against
those Emperors, who endeavored to re establish Idolatry, or to force their
Subjects to embrace one of the most pernicious Heresies that ever was?

Upon this Ridiculous Foundation, Paul V. would never be satisfied with the
Declaration of the King, he always demanded with Arrog^nce and Threats, that
the Decree should be legally Revoked. The K. is at length obliged to suspend
the Execution of the Decree of Parliament.
They were forced to use humble entreaties, that the Execution of the Decree
should be suspended. Poor Mary de Medicis had in all her Son's consent, to give
this satisfaction to Paul V. There was no necessity of such a base compliance
with the Pope, whose Threatenings were but mere Rhodomontadoes. What could he
have done, if the Court had resisted him? The general Assembly of the States
were Sitting. They zealously demanded that the Doctrines of Swarez and such
like, should be declared heretical and pernicious. If the fierce Borghese had
thought fit to throw out his thundering Anathemas, they would have been as much
despised in France, as they were sometime before in Venice. All the Kingdom,
except a few Monks and Eccle iasticks, would have opposed him. But it is not
only now that France makes a great noise against the arrogant pretensions of
the Pope, and at last basely comply. Lewis XIV. in the height of his Power,
has made a more shameful Submission than his Father did, when he but just
entered into his Majority. He published Declarations to maintain his Sovereign
Power; The Archbishops spoke more boldly than ever; The Ambassadors and
Ministers of France insulted the Pope, even in the Vatican. To what did these
appeals to a Council and the other proceedings of the Parliament, against the
Court of Rome, come to? To sacrifie to the Pope the honor of the Clergy, who
did nothing without the express Order of his Majesty.

Divisions at the Court of France.
Mary de Medicis had more troublesome affairs to settle, than that of Rome,
occasioned by the Condemnation of Suarez's Book by the Parliament of Paris. The
Marshall d'Ancre, and the Ministers of State, were always Quarrelling with one
another. There had been endeavors used the Year before to reconcile them. The
Marquess de Coeuvres did all he could to effect it. One would have thought,
that the marriage between the Marquess de Villeroi, the Secretary of State's
Grandson, and Conchini's Daughter, might have produced an Agreement, which had
been endeavored with so much Care. But whether it were, that he being advanced
to one of the first Dignities of the Kingdom, imagined that an Alliance with
Villeroi was not sufficient for him, who reached at all; or whether Dole the
Marescal's Confident, and Villeroi's secret Enemy, (who accused him of having,
broken his word in not getting him some preferment which he had promised him)
did continually create Jealousies between them; or in fine, whether there were
some other secret Cause, which we are not acquainted with, the Marshall d'
Ancre, and Villeroy, were greater Enemies than ever. And besides, the
Chancellor de Silleri and the Secretary of State, professed an open hatred one
to another. There seemed to be a necessity, that either the one or the other
should leave the Court. Silleri had the advantage of him, because he was
supported by Conchini. All these Divisions were hindrances to the Affairs of
the Regent. Her Ministers and her Favorites, had each their Friends and
Enemies at Court, and in the Prince of Conde's Party, which they would favor,
or otherwise, according as they thought it tended most to the Establishment of
their own Fortune.

The Duke of Vendome refuses to consent to the Treaty of St. Menehoud.
There was yet another thing, which was vexatious to the Regent. Caesar Duke of
Vendome was very unquiet in his Government of Britagne. Taking it ill, that the
Prince of Conde had too much neglected him in the Treaty of St. Menehoud, he
refused to stand to their Agreements, with relation to himself. But Caesar was
not strong enough to maintain the War alone in Britagne. The principal Towns
and the Parliament declared for the Court. Not knowing how to render himself
more formidable, and to obtain better Conditions of the Queen, be thought it
his best Course to try the Duke of Rohan. La Roch-Gifart, a Gentleman of
Britagne, and of the Reformed Religion, undertook to go to St. Jean d'Angeli,
and in Caesar's Name, to make the greatest promises imaginable, in favor of
the Reformed, upon Condition he would join with the Duke of Vendome. Rohan
answered, that he was very sorry that Caesar's Interest had been no better
provided for in the Treaty of St. Menehoud; but that in the present
Conjuncture, the Duke of Vendome ought not to discover his concern, but that
'twas his best way to come to a speedy Agreement with the Queen. He is not in a
Condition to resist, added Rohan, what will he do, if the Court undertakes to
reduce him by Force? Thus he will be Ruined without Remedy.

The Duke of Rohan himself, had not Interest enough in the Huguenot Party to
make them Rise, as the Duke of Vendome imagined. Rohan had made an Essay, to
call a general Convocation of those of the Religion at Tonneins in Gascogne,
where they were to hold at the same time a National Synod. I cant tell whether
the Duke intended to take any Resolution there in favor of the Prince of
Conde, and the discontented Lords: The wisdom of du Plessis Nornai.
But du Plessis Mornai, who had no mind that the Reformed should engage
themselves. in an ill contrived Civil War, prevented it. The Convocation which
the Council of the Reformed of the lower Guienne had called at the
solicitation of the Duke of Rohan, was judged unlawful, and the National
Synod, by the advice of the Wise and Religious du Plessis refused to have any
hand in Politic affairs. The King of England always inclined to interest
himself in Disputes of Divinity, and to neglect his great Duty, had writ to
this Assembly upon occasion of a difference between du Moulin and Tilenus, both
Professors at Sedan, concerning the Hypostatical Union. The Synod judged that
'twas the best way to let fall a Controversy between Two Divines, that
disputed only for want of understanding one another. They desired du Plessis to
reconcile them. He accepted the Commission, and succeeded. Let one turn over
never so much both Ancient and Modern History, I question whether one should
find his equal. Being alike versed in Learning and the Affairs of the World, he
defends by Religion, he discusses the most difficult Points of Divinity,
supports the Reformed Churches by his Prudence, Negociates the most troublesome
Affairs, gives good Advice to Ministers of State, Princes and Kings themselves,
who heard him with pleasure.

Marie de Medicis. saends the Marquess de Coeuvres to move him to an
accommodation.
The Regent being resolved to avoid War as much as possible, sent into Britagne
the Marquess de Coeuvres, lately arrived from his Embassy in Italy, to reclaim
the Duke de Vendome. Coeuvres would willingly have excused himself: but he was
forced to obey. He was afraid that his Enemies procured him this troublesome
Commission, that so he might fall out with the Queen, and the Duke, Memoires de
Mary de Medicis
whose near Kinsman he was by the Side of the famous Gabriel d' Etrees. The
Marquess at first made no Impression on him, only brought some Complaints of
the Dukes de Vendome and Retz, who thought that the Treaty of St. Menehoud was
injurious to him. Mary de Medicis ordered him to Return, and to tell the Duke
de Vendome that her Majesty would not Demolish the new Fortifications of
Blevet, provided he would let the Garrison March out, and suffer Swisses to be
sent in their Room. Mercure Francois. 1614.
Vendome Subscribed this, and some other Conditions which were offered him. The
King and the Queen his Mother, advanced toward Orleans, with a design to pass
the Loire, and to go into Poitou and Bretagne. The Marquess de Coeuvres made a
Third Journey into Britagne. He Garrisoned Blevet with the Swisse: And the Duke
de Vendome having laid down his Arms, was re-established in his Government by
Letters Patents from her Majesty, dated at O leans the 14th July.

New Discontents of the Prince of Conde.
The Prince of Conde was come to take Possession of his new Government of
Amboise. He there observed that the Court had not granted him any thing
considerable, and that he should reap no great advantage from that Place of
Security, which he had Demanded with so much Earnestness. Discontent seizes
him, he seeks for new Occasions for falling out, Vie de Mr. du Plessis. Live III.
he endeavors to render himself formidable to the Regent. Accordingly he goes
to find out du Plessis Mornay at Saumur, and has a meeting with the Duke of
Rohan, at Roche des Aubiers in Anjou. He thought if he could have at his
Devotion those Two Men, who had the greatest Reputation in the Reformed
Churches in France, that all the Huguenot Party would Declare for him, upon the
first opportunity. The Prince affected to discover a great Confidence in du
Plessis Mornai. He endeavored to justify his Retreat from Court, and his
Enterprise against the Regent; he told him his pretended Designs in desiring a
Convocation of the States of the Kingdom; and how it was the likeliest way to
promote the Reformation of Abuses; he desired du Plessis Mornai to give him his
Advice freely.

This experinc'd Gentleman knew very well what Conde was able to do. He
exhorted him only in general Terms, to preserve the Peace of the Kingdom, to
take those measures which were most agreeable to the welfare thereof, (whose
present Condition could not bear violent Remedies,) to manage Affairs in
concert with the Queen, lest a misunderstanding between them, should hinder
that good success of the next Assembly of the States, lastly, to listen to the
Advice of the most wise and understanding Persons, with relation to the
rectifying such Abuses, which the present posture of Affairs would admit of.
When Conde saw that du Plessis was not so easily to be persuaded, he pretended
to take in good part the Counsels which he gave him. He desired du Plessis to
prepare a Memorial of those things which were necessary to be done in the
Assembly of the States. But his Highness who did not care for such wise
Remonstrances, and so contrary to his Inclinations, went immediately to la
Roche des Aubiers, where Rohan and Soubize expected him.

The Prince made great Complaints of the Marshall de Bovillon It Is he, The
Interview of the P. de Conde and D. de Rohan.
said he, who has drawn off the principal Men from my Party. He has
endeavored to make his advantage of every thing. If the ^est had testified as
good an Affection for me as the Duke de Nevers, I should not have been forced
to so sudden an Accommodation with the Court. I know very well that you have
the same reason to Complain, that I would have Engaged you in the Treaty when
it was almost Concluded, 'twas none of my design to be so hasty. But how could
I help it? The Marshall de Bovillon deceived me. Thanks be to God, there is
yet some Remedy left us. I shall have a powerful and numerous Party in the
Assembly of the States. The great Men of the Kingdom in Conjunction with my
self, will be able to oblige the Queen to change her Conduct. It will be easy
to set Bounds to her Authority, and to make Considerable Alterations in the
Administration of Affairs. If the Queen absolutely refuses to grant our
desires, we shall have a fair pretense to Arms. We are never without
Malcontents in France. There is a great number of Gentlemen and Soldiers ready
to Declare themselves.

Although the Duke de Rohan had other Principles than du Plessis Mornai, and his
displeasure against the Court inclined him to a violent Resolution, yet he had
the Prudence not to Engage himself with the Prince de Conde. He only
remonstrated to his Highness, that he ought not to depend so much on the States
of the Kingdom. The Queen will have more Authority there than you, added he.
Those which you reckon upon at present will leave you, instead of Supporting
you. Fear and Hope, are the Two great Springs which move the Members of these
Assemblies: You are not in a Condition to promise them great matters, nor to
fright them by Menaces. The Queen has Preferments and Places to dispose of, she
can do a great deal of mischief to those that oppose her Will. Who is there
that will Declare openly for you, against her Majesty. Believe it Sir, the
States General will oppose your Designs. Conde seeing that this Interview did
not at all encourage his new Projects, he was afraid that his Discourses with
the Duke of Rohan should raise some Jealousy in the Regent. He writ
immediately to the President Jeannin, to tell him that his Discourse with the
Duke of Rohan, only tended to hinder him from joining with the Duke de Vendome.
What meanness, what shameful Artifices are these, for Men of high Birth? Was it
necessary that Conde, to excuse himself to the Court, should render the Duke of
Rohan suspected, that he held Intelligence with the Duke of Vendome? The Prince
knew that Rohan had advised Vendome to consent to the Treaty at St. Menehoud
Rohan told Conde this, who appeared very well pleased, that he had given this
Advice to a young Man, who was like to Ruin himself.

The Prince of Conde designs to make himself Master of Poitiers.
The Prince de Conde had yet another Design in his head. He thought to make
himself Master of Poitiers. The Duke de Roannez, Governor of the City, favored
his Design, and the Marquess de Bonnivet was to assemble the Gentlemen to serve
this purpose. The time for choosing the Mayor was at hand, there were a great
many Factions in the Town. Roannez and some other Friends of Conde had made
one, to put into this important Office, a Man in their Interest. Chataigner
Bishop of the Place, informed the Regent of their several Practices, and gave
her Majesty reason to suspect a secret Design of the Prince of Conde. The Court
was higly pleased with the Prelate. They ordered him to have a watchful Eye
upon their Contrivances, and to oppose as much as he could the Intrigues of the
Governor and Conde's Friends, Chataigner, who was skilled in something else,
besides his Breviary, gains the greatest part of the Inhabitants, doubles the
Guards every where, and rendered himself more powerful than the Duke de Roannez
in the City. His precaution disappointed the Party of the Prince de Conde. He
expected with Impatience at Anjou, the news of the Success of the Intrigue
which had been formed for him at Poitiers. He sent Latrie, a Gentleman, to
exhort his Friends not to desist from their Enterprise. But great Men often
spoil the Success of their Affairs, by carrying themseves too high. Conde Being
offended that the Bishop did not only openly thwart him, but had spoken
disrespectfully of him, writ to Chataigner a sharp and provoking Letter, which
Latrie was to deliver to him. The Prelate was confirmed in his Opinion, that
the Prince had some secret and great Design upon the Town; he resolves to be
Revenged of Conde, and to prevent, what ever it cost him the Execution of his
Design.

Chataigner having conferred with some of his Relations and Friends, thought it
his best way to rid himself of the Prince de Conde's Emissary. A great Tumult
at Po^tiers.
A certain Person suborned for that purpose attackt Latrie, and wounded him in
several Places. The Bishop caused a Cry to be made in the To^n, Mercure
Francoise. 1614.
that there was a Design to deliver it up to the King's Enemies, the People
Rose, shut the Gate, put up the Chain, Barricadoed themselves in several
Places. The Bishop Arms himself with his Pike in his hand, he encourages the
Inhabitants to Stand upon their Guard. The Duke de Roannez, the Governor of
Poitiers, runs immediately thither from his House, which was hard by; And
Commands them to demolish the Barricadoes, and goes to the Bishop's Palace to
ask of him the reason of this extraordinary Tumult. But the People being yet
more heated by the noise of the arrival of the Prince de Conde near the City,
fell upon the Governor, and slightly wounded him in the Face. The Bishop, at
whose Instigation all this was done, pretends to receive Roannez into his
Palace, to defend him from the fury of the People. Under this pretense, they
secure the Person of the Duke, and Chataigner by virtue of a Commission from
the Queen, gives all necessary Orders for the safety of the Town. What a fine
thing it was to see a Bishop turned Soldier and a Captain? With his Sword by
his Side, he Marches round the City every Night, he encouraged the Soldiers,
and gave them Money out of his own pocket. The contrary Party reproached him in
the highest manner: But the good Prelate was not concerned about it. He caused
an Apology to be published, the Author of which proved, that it is Lawful for
Ecclesiastiks to take Arms in case of necessity. The Duke de Roannez took it
for a favor, that he might have Liberty to go home. Some of the Magistrates,
and the principal Inhabitants of the Party of the Prince, and Governor left the
Town. Latrie who was not very dangerously wounded, likewise made his escape,
and found the Prince of Conde, who was come in great haste to Poitiers with a
Resolution to stand by those of his Party. But the good Prince had not laid his
Designs right.

The Gates of Poitiers are shut agaenst the Prince of Conde.
When du Plessis Mornai understood by an Express from his Highness, that he was
gone to Poitiers, with a design to revenge the outrage that was done him in the
Person of Latrie. He sent a Gentleman immediately to the Prince, to beseech him
not to expose himself upon this occasion, and content himself with writing to
his Majesty, and demand Justice. Vie de Mr. du Plessis. Mornai.
A Person of your Rank said du Plessis in a Letter, is in danger of being
Mortified, when you Expose your self to an enraged Populacy, who have no reason
to be afraid of you. The Inhabitants of Poitiers have formerly refused to open
their Gates to King Henry III. They may well keep them shut now against the
first Prince of the Blood. In the Name of God don't proceed to Action, don't
call the Neighboring Nobility to your assistance. The Queen will think this to
be a Consequence of your Interview with Mr. de Rohan, and that you have a
design to raise new Troubles. A Prince ought not to take one Step from which he
may be forced to retire, whether he will or no. Conde, who was neither wise,
nor cool enough to receive this good Advice, pursues his March toward
Poitiers, accompanied with a very small number of Men, but soon saw reason to
acknowledge that du Plessis had guest right; they shut the Gates of the City
against his Highness, the Inhabitants take Arms, and Fire upon his Men. Enraged
with this Affront, he retires to Chateleraut with those Gentlemen that had
joined him, and discharged his Anger upon the Country House of the Bishop of
Poitiers, which lay in his way. From Chateleraut he writ to the Regent,
complaining of the Inhabitants of Poitiers, and to demand Justice of her
Majesty, who laughed heartily at the Mortification, which he had brought
imprudently on himself.

These new Motions, the Consequences whereof were to be feared, obliged the
Regent to go into Poitou and Bretagne with the King her Son, and to make the
Troops March at the same time. The K. and the Q. his Mother, set out for Poitou
and Bretagne.
They had spread abroad a Report, that young Lewis was so ill, that he could
not Live very long. The safest way to confute this Report, to Reduce the Duke
of Vendome, who was always aiming on some ill design in Britagne, and to
appease the discontented Prince de Conde, was to carry the King well Guarded
into Poitou and Bretagne, and show him to the People in those Provinces. In the
mean time, Mary de Medicis sent Monpezat to the Prince de Conde, to amuse him
with good Words. Mazurier, Master of the Requests had Orders to go to Poitiers.
He had either a real or pretended Commission, to enquire who they were that
acted against the Prince of Conde. Monpezat pressed him to retire from Poitou.
The Queen, said they to him, designs to do you Justice. Mazurier comes to this
end to Poitiers. But the Prince being reinforced by the Nobility, and the
Soldiers which the Marquess de Bonnivet had brought him, refused to go till
they had given him Satisfaction. The Confusion of the P. de Conde, he retires
to Chateauroux in Berry.


He was extremly troubled, when he understood that their Majesty's were at
Orleans, and that the Troops were on their March. Uncertain which way to take,
he sometimes made a show of going to the Duke de Rohan at St. Jean d' Angeli.
But what Assistance could he expect from the Huguenots. They were never
disposed to stir in the favor of a wavering Prince, that was imprudent in all
his Steps. I don't see, says du Plessis Mornai, of what advantage the Prince's
Journey to St. Jean d' Angeli will be to him. If he goes there with a few Men,
he will be despised; if with a great many, it will be troublesome to Mr. de
Rohan to Entertain them; can one imagine that the People of St. Jean d' Angeli
will Expose themselves to the danger of having all the King's Forces upon their
backs, by giving Reception to a Prince, who has no Inclination for a Religion
which his Ancestors have Defended, and is not capable of doing any great
Service to our Churches. Conde was very sensible, he would never have
Reputation enough to draw after him the Huguenot Party, as long as du Plessis
Mornai persisted to persuade the Reformed, from having any hand in their
Commotions. The Prince wrote therefore to du Plessis, to ask Advice of him. But
his real Design was to make the Reformed afraid of their Majesty's March. This
Journey said he in his Letter, was not undertaken, but for one of these Three
Reasons. Is there not a Design to take away from those of your Religion, that
which the late King has granted them? Some think that they are going to
receive the Infanta, and to accomplish the King's Marriage. For my own part, I
believe they come to Ruin me here! Pray tell me, added Conde, what is in your
Opinion, best for me to do in this Juncture.

Du Plessis easily perceived, that under a pretense of asking Advice, he
solicited him to appear for him. He answered the Prince, that the King's
Journey did not at all allarm the Reformed Churches. We are persuaded, said he,
that the Queen is very sensible, she would put the whole Kingdom into a Flame,
if she should suffer those of our Religion to be injured. I confess some People
have given it out, that the Queen is going to Receive the Infanta. But should a
Prince take his Measures from common Rumor. Are there any Vessels ready in the
Ports of Spain? Are there any Gallys fitted out at Barcelona? The Infanta cannot
come any other way than by Sea. The Spaniards are too Proud. Don't think they will
ever send their King's Eldest Daughter to us Incognito. She will never come
away before the Court of Madrid is sure that she will be received as Queen,
before ever she sets Foot in France. I doubt not but her Majesty is either
coming into Bretagne against Mr. de Vendome, who has not consented to the
Treaty of St. Menehoud; or at lest to Poitiers. Her presence seems absolutely
necessary there. For this reason, your Highness cannot do better, than make an
handsome Retreat from Poitiers. It concerns your Hignesse's Reputation not to
stay, till you are forced to it. The Duke of Maienne was at that time at
Chateleraut. He went there with the Consent of the Court, and urged Conde
forthwith to Submit to her Majesty. The Prince had no other Course to take.
From this last foolish Design, he got nothing but the shame of being forced to
hide himself in Chateauroux in Berri. He did not dare to Return to his New
Government of Amboise. Those which Commanded for him in that Place of Security,
which he had so earnestly desired, had so little Respect for him, that they
Presented the Keys to the New Queen, when she came there a little while after.
Her Majesty seemed to despise the vain Efforts of the Prince, in letting him
have a Place which she could recover at pleasure, without any Resistance.

The Remonstrances of du Plessis Mornai, to the Queen Regent.
The Regent used her endeavors to take away the Suspicions which the Prince of
Conde and his Emissaries had ^nspired the Reformed Churches with, concerning
their Majesty's Journey. As ^oon as the Court was arrived at Orleans, Mary de
Medicis dispatched a Gentleman ^o Saumur with Credential Letters. Vie de M. du
Plessis Mornai. Live. III.
He was to assure du Plessis, that the King's Army should not Advance into
those ^rovinces, which lie on the other side of ^he River Loire; Lettres and
memoires du Meme. 1614.
That the Queen had no ^^oughts of Concluding the double Marriage with Spain,
before the Meeting of the States of the Kingdom, and that they only designed to
Reduce the Duke of Vendome, who every day raised new difficulties against the
Treaty of St. Menehoud, although the Marquess de Coeuvres had already made two
Journeys into Bretagne, to persuade him to comply. The Court moved from Orleans
to Tours. Her Majesty invited du Plessis to come thither. They gave it out, the
King and Queen his Mother would not pass by Saumur in their Journey to Bretagne.
They don't care, said some, to be at the discretion of the most Zealous Hugonot
in France. These Discourses troubled du Plessis. He resolved to complain of
them to the Queen. Madam, said this Gen^leman, whose Virtue exceeded even that
of Cato and Aristides, I don't give any credit to what I hear: But if it should
be proposed in your Majesty's Council, that the King's Person would not be safe
at Saumur, I should look upon it as the greatest Injury that could be done me.
The Government of Saumur was committed to me, as a Reward of the Treaty which I
had managed, between the late King and hi^ Predecessor. That Negotiation, which
(...) brought to a happy Conclusion, made way for the late King to sit upon the
Throne o^ his Ancestors. God forbid that that Plac^ which he entrusted me with,
should ever b^ suspected by the King his Son. This generosity pleased the
Queen. She looke^ upon it as a handsome Invitation to go to Saumur.

Du Plessis had several private Audiences of Mary de Medicis during her stay at
Tours. Her Majesty discoursed very freely to him concerning the present
Condition of the Affairs of the Kingdom. He, on his Side, undertook frequently
to inculcate upon the Regent the necessity of avoiding a Civil War. Nothing,
said he, does more weaken the Authority of a Prince. I have heard it several
times said to the late King, That he never was really King, till the end of the
Civil. Wars. Whatsoever they may say to your Majesty against those of our
Religion, believe Madam, that you have no such faithful Subjects as those, who
obey from a Principle of Conscience. We have at least this Advantage above our
Adversarys, that we acknowledge no power under God, Superior to his Majesty.
The fundamental Maxims of our Religion, will not allow us to hold any Commerce
with Foreigners, who would Encroach upon the Kingdom or the King's Authority.
Suffer me to represent to you further, Madam, that they put you to needless
Expenses, to gain certain Persons of our Religion. We know who those mercenary
Souls are. They deceive your Majesty, who tell you, that they can he
Serviceable to you. I can tell you a far less Chargeable way to have all the
Reformed at your Devotion: That is, to give Orders, that all Promises made to
us, be performed, our Gri^vances be redressed, some ambiguous Expressions in
the Edicts be more favorably Interpreted, and some things be granted us, which
may secure the Peace of our Churches, and do no great Injury to the Roman
Catholics. The ardent and sincere Zeal, which I have for your Majesty, makes
me speak against my self. Pursue the Method which I take the liberty to
propose, you may take away when you please our Offices and Pensions. Our
Churches, living peaceably under his Majesty's Protection, will never concern
themselves in my favor, or for any of the Lords of the Kingdom.

This Advice was generous and worthy of a truly Christian Gentleman. It might
have had some good Effect upon such as had no other design, but to preserve
Peace in the Kingdom, by doing Justice and perhaps some small gratification to
the Reformed. But they were resolved to Ruin them, and to effect a design long
since contrived and pursued. For almost an Age together, the Court could not
take more convenient Measures than the corrupting of those who had any Credit
or Authority in the Reformed Church. The ambition and avarice of the Lords, and
a great number of Hugonot Gentlemen, has done more mischief to the Religion,
than the ha^red of the Pope and his Clergy, or the Zeal of the blind and
superstitious Kings and Queens of France. If the Dukes and Peers, the
Mareschals of France, the Lords and Gentlemen of Note, had had as much Religion
and Probity as du Plessis Mornai, I question whether the Son of him whose
History I write, would ever have ventured to attempt the overthrow of the
Reformed Churches of his Kingdom. The Posterity of a corrupted Gentry, who had
no great Concern for their Religion, does at this day bewail the fatal
Consequences of the Baseness of their Ancestors.

The Regent received at Tours, The K. and Q. his Mother go to Poitiers.
Letters from the Duke of Maienne. He informed her that the Prince de Conde was
retired to Chateauroux, and that he defired at the present no Reparation of the
Injury, Mercure Francois. 1614.
which he had complained had been done him at Poitiers. It was wisely done, to
seem to neglect an Offense, for which the Court would never have granted him
the Satisfaction which he expected. The Bishop was too much favored by the
Queen. He went boldly to Tours, with Two hundred of the Inhabitants, to pray
their Majesty's to come to Poitiers. That day when Chataigner made appear that
he understood the Office of a Captain better than that of a Bishop, was in his
Opinion the day of the preservation of Poitiers. Their Majesty's went thither.
They were Received with all imaginable Expressions of Joy. They Elected a
Mayor; Mazurier had Orders to remain there as Intendant. Rochfort, Lieutenant
General for the King in that Province, a-little after resigned his Office. The
Count de la Rochefoucaut, of the Party of the Guises, succeeded him. They had a
mind to have Poitou in their Power, that they might go and Receive the Infanta
of Spain, when the time should come. Memoires de Duc de Rohan.
The Duke de Rohan, being admonished by Velleroi, that the Queen was surprised
that he did not appear at Court, since she was so near to St. Jean d' Angeli,
came to pay his Respect to their Majesty's. They received him kindly; and the
Regent, taking all oportunities to get him near her self, made him promise to
be present at the meeting of the States of Bretagne, which was to be held at
Nantes, their Majestys being present, and to go afterward to the States
General, which were already appointed to Meet.

Mary de Medicis, The Q. goes to hold a meeting of the States of Bretagne at
Nantes. Vie de M. du Plessis Mornai. Live. III.
pleased that every thing went according to her mind, took the Road of Angers,
to go to Nantes. Her Majesty had a mind to give a Proof of her Confidence in du
Plessis Mornai, as she passed through Saumur. He went to meet the King, being
followed by an Hundred Gentlemen. As soon as the Young Lewis had entered the
Castle, du Plessis Offered to make the Garrison march out. But his Majesty
would not permit him. It is not against our Kings, said the Governor, that we
have strong Places in our Possession, they have been willing to grant them us,
that we may be secured against the hatred of our sworn Enemies. If at any time
his Majesty does the Honor to be present there, Mercure Francoise. 1614.
we desire no other Security but his Presence. The Duke de Vendome, seeing
their Majesty's came in good Earnest toward him, submitted himself. They gave
him New Letters of Reestablishment, Memoires de Bassompierre.
which were Registered in the Parliament of Rennes. But he had the Mortification
of see that in the meeting of the States of the Province of which he was
Governor, they made Invectives against him, and took Resolutions, injurious to
his Person, and utterly contrary to his Interest. So bad a Beginning, was no
good Omen for the rest of the Life of Coesar de Vendome. He could never after,
recover his Reputation or Respect. Henry IV. his Father, had Married him to the
Heiress of the House of Mercoeur, and one of the greatest Fortunes of a Subject
in Europe. He wasted the great Estate which she brought him.

The death of the Prince de Conti.
Ma^y de M^dicis Returned triumphantly to Paris. She found there a Court,
deprived of a Prince of the Blood. The loss was not very great. Francis de
Bourbon, Prince de Conti, who died the 13th of August made no great Figure in
the World. His Widow was soon Comforted after the loss of a weak Husband. She
was desperately in Love with Bassompierre. There had passed between them that
which they call Marriage before God. Entragues, the famous Marchioness de
Vernueil's, Sister, and Daughter to Mary Touchet, Charles IX. his Mistress, had
commenced a Suit against Bassompierre, upon the account of a Promise of
Marriage which he had made her. This happy Spark had Two Wives at the same
time: The First out of a Family more Renowned for the fine Ladies which were
Married into the Family, or were of it, than for any of its Military Exploits;
the Second being the Daughter of the Duke of Guise, and the Widow of a Prince
of the Blood, might have done Bassompierre great Honor: But by an odd
Accident, Bassompierre would never own the one for his Lawful Wife, the other
never dared to make her Marraige Public.

New Contests between the Princes of Brandenbourg and Vewbourg, about the
Government of Cleves and Juliers.
Whilst the Regent was making present Reflections upon the good Success of her
Journey into Poitou and Bretagne, the Spaniards wifely made their Advantage of
the private Agreement which they had made with Mary de Medicis, to Assist her
to maintain her Authority in France, on Condition she would not Support, or at
least not openly oppose their Designs in Germany and Italy. These false
Politics of a Regent, who was Ridiculously persuaded, that the Support of the
Pope and the King of Spain, was necessary for the maintaining her Authority,
has already made her take a great many false Steps, contrary to the true
Interest of her Son: Interests of Princes, by Mr. de Rohan. part. II. Disco. V.
And we shall take notice of Two more. She should never have suffered the
Archdukes of the Catholic Low Countries, to send the Marquess de Spinola with
a powerful Army to Execute the Proclamation which the Emperor had Published
against Aix, Mercure Francois. 1614.
and under this pretense, to seize many Important Towns in the Countries of
Cleves and Juliers.

Since the Marriage of the Prince of Newbourg with Madeleine of Bavaria, there
was a more open difference than ever, between him and the Duke of Brandenbourg.
They were Employed in strengthening themselves one against the other, both
abroad and at home. Two Passions, very blind, but extremely active in the heart
of a young Prince, Ambition, and resentment of an Affront offered him in the
face of the World, had inclined Newbourg to join with the Emperor, the King of
Spain and the Archdukes of the Catholic Low Countries. He hoped that the
House of Austria and the Catholic League of Germany, of which, the Duke of
Bavaria was the head would assist him to recover those Countries which were in
Dispute, as soon as he should Embrace the Communion of the Pope. This way of
Revenging, which the Elector of Brandenburg had given him, seemed to Newbourg
the most Advantageous and Glorious. He declared himself a Roman Catholic the
15th of May at Dusseldorp. There is reason to think, that the Prince deferred
his public Abjuration of the Confession of Augsbourg, in hopes that passing
some time longer under the Name of a Protestant, he should the more easily
effect his Design of making himself sole Master of some of the Principal Towns
in Dispute. 'Twas not without Design, that being in Juliers in the Month of
March, he desired Pitham, the Governor of the Castle, to give him and his
Retinue Entrance. The Officer, being a greater Friend to the House of
Brandenbourg, than to that of Newbourg, refufed to admit him, although he would
enter alone. Pitham relied upon an Article of the Transaction which passed
between the Two Houses, that the Governors of Castles and Fortified Places,
should not give Entrance to one of the Princes in Possession, unless the other
were present. The Governor remaining firm to his Resolution, Newbourg went
toward Liege. He went to make a visit to the Elector of Cologne, his New Ally.
The Prince of Brandenburg attempted a little while after to surprise
Dusseldorp, but he likewise mist his aim, as well as the other.

The States of the United Provinces, the Electors and Princes of the Empire, as
they were Friends to both Houses, Exhorted them to a Peace, but in vain. The
Jealousy of each other encreast every day, especially after Newbourg had
changed his Religion. The States of the United Provinces Sided at that time
with the Prince of Brandenbourg. 'Twas for their Interest to hinder, that the
whole Succession of Cleves and Juliers should not fall to a Prince devoted to
the House of Austria, and Engaged in the Catholic League of Germany.
Brandenbourg agreed to them, that they should be Possessed of the City and Castle
of Juliers, which they should hold by way of Sequestration. This undertaking
had its Success by means of Pitham, who was gained over. He suffered the
Soldiers to enter therein, with the Officers which the Prince of Orange had
sent. Newbourg on his Side had the Policy to make himself Master of Dusseldorp,
where he Fortified himself, the best he could. These Enterprises of
Brandenbourg and Newbourg seemed to be the Preliminaries of an open War, which
began quickly after. There was talk of an Accommodation at a Conference held at
Wesel, but the Prince of Newbourg not being willing to dismiss the Troops he
had raised, unless the City and Castle of Juliers were put into the same
Condition they were before the Holland Garrison entered; they separated without
coming to any Conclusion. Each one thought of nothing more than maintaining
taining his Right by open Violence, and the Succors of his Allies. The Affair
hapen'd otherwise than the Two Princes imagined. The Spaniards and the States
of the United Provinces, these under the pretense of Relieving the House of
Newbourg, the other, that of Brandenbourg, divided betwixt them almost all the
Succession, which was in Controversy.

The Emperor Rodolph had put the City of Aix-la-Chapelle under Interdiction of
the Empire, by reason of the Change the Protestant Party had made in the
Magistracy, The City of Aix. la-Chapelle under Interdiction.
in the Year 1611. But being dead before that the Archduke Albert, his Brother,
and Ernest of Bavaria, then Elector of Cologne, dared to execute the Commission
his Imperial Majesty had directed to them, for the reducing the Inhabitants of
Aix; the Duke of Deux-Ponts, Administrator of the Electorate Palatine, and
Vicar of the Empire, during the Interregnum, made all the procedures void, and
what ever Rodolph Ordained against the City of Aix-la-Chapelle. After Matthias
his Brother had succeeded him, Complaint was made to the Imperial Court, of the
Duke of Deux-Ponts's Undertaking; and the Catholics pressed forward the
Execution of the Ban, published by the deceased Emperor. His Majesty easily
granted what the Pope and the Spaniards maintained in his Council. However, it
appeared to him, That the D. of Deux Ponts had gone beyond his Authority, and
Enchrocht upon the Emperor, by annulling what Rodolph had in his life time
Ordered. Wherefore the City of Aix-la-Chapelle was again put under the Ban of
the Empire the 20th of February in this Year. The Archduke Albert, and
Ferdinand of Bavaria, Successor to Ernest in the Electorate of Cologne, had
Commission to put the new Order in Execution.

Albert, straight after raised great Forces in the Low Countries under his
Dominions. The States of the United Provinces, watchful of the Spaniards
motions, so near to them, put themselves on their Side in Arms and posture of
Desence. Good Policy required no less than that they should stand upon their
Guards, and oppose what the House of Austria should attempt against the States
of Cleves and Juliers, which they found to lie conveniently for them: 'Twas not
necessary to raise such great Forces to bring the City of Aix-la-Chapelle into
Submission; for every one well knew that the Spaniard kept close another Design
which was more Important. Both the Armies lay for some time without moving; yet
each of 'em was fearful of being charged with the reproach of having broke the
Truce made betwixt the Archdukes and the States General of the
United Provinces. France and England ought naturally to put in for to heal
these Differences, and hinder the House of Austria from coming into the
Controverted Succession. But Philip had his Pensioners in the Councils of
France and England too. Being assured that James and Mary de Medicis would
stand Neuters, he resolved that Spinola, General of his Troops in the Low
Countries should, under pretense of the Ban published against the City of
Aix-la-Chapelle, March as soon as might be; and coming back, Seize on the best
Places of the States of Cleves and Juliers: And this was the means of disposing
afterward as he pleased of so fair a Succession. What the United Provinces
undertook upon the City and Castle of Juliers, seemed to the House of Austria a
sufficient Warrant to justify what they intended to do a long time before.

Spinola Reduces Aixla-Chapelle makes himself Master of many places in Cleves
and Juliers.
And now Spinola is in the Field with an Army of about Thirty thousand Men. He
passes the Maes to Mastricht, and from thence goes and Invests
Aix-la-Chapelle. The Inhabitants, too weak to make any opposition, ask for
Pardon the Second day, and submit themselves to his Imperial Majesty. Spin^^a,
now Master of the City, Restores the ancient Catholic Magistrates and Removes
the Protestants. Some of these were Imprisoned, who had any hand in the
Alteration made in the Year 1611. and others saved themselves as they could,
leaping over the Walls of the City. After, according to his fancy, he had
Regulated all things in Aix-la-Chapelle, this Spinola Marches toward the
States of Cleves. Duren opens the Gates to him, and from thence he goes to
Mulheim; there he demolisheth the Fortifications, fills up the Trenches,
Consequential to some Imperial Demands which Cologne had obtained, which was
always opposite to the Raising of a New City, which the Princes of Brandenbourg
and Newbourg had began there some Years ago. At length the Spanish General,
strengthened by the joint Troops which Newbourg had brought him, besig'd Wesel,
took it; seized on Duisbourg and many other Places.

Maurice Prince of Orange, Maurice P. of Orange takes many places on his Side
in the same Country.
who was then at Schenk Fort at the head of Eighteen thousand Men, on his Side
likewise put himself upon taking of Places. He got to be Master of Emerick,
Rees, and some other Towns, in a little time. A particular passage was then
seen: Two Armies, at Enmity one with the other, Interests des princes par Mr.
de Rohan. II. Party. Discourse V.
seized on the Succession of Cleves and Juliers without breaking the Truce
which was betwixt them, without setting one upon the other, and without drawing
their Swords. The most speedy of the Two Generals made the greater Progress.
When one had taken one Place, the other retired without laying any pretense to
it. It Is said that Prince Maurice only sent to Spinola to know in what Prince's
time he entered in an Hostile manner into the Country; and Spinola answered, in
returning the same Question to him. Spinola dared not to attack Maurice, who
had a Braver and more Experienced Army. And Maurice would not hazard his
Troops, which were the main strength of the United Provinces. He believed that
the States General would have glory and advantage enough in Sharing, without
running any Risque of the Succession of Cleves and Juliers, with the King of
Spain. The Two Generals continued their Expedition without disturbing one the
other in any thing, but making all possible have. Spinola made an end in making
a detatchment of his Army over toward Juliers, where he had taken some Places.
Maurice sent Prince Frederick Henry his Brother into the Duchy of Mark to do
the like. A new way of Warring one with the other, by being but outwardly on
both Sides good Friends!

Conference at Santheim upon the Succession of Cleves and Juliers.
It is not less surprising, that the King of England, the Queen Regent of
France, and the Protestant Princes of Germany, should stand as idle Spectators
of all these motions, in an Affair wherein at first they all seemed to be so
much concerned. But why? Mary de Medicis devoted to the Court of Rome, was
contented to give Words and send Embassies to propose an Accommodation. King
James, whose Council as well as France's was bought by the Spaniard, did not
believe that he ought to be more hotly concerned than the Regent. The Princes
of Germany, forsaken by both these Crowns, and divided through Affection and
Interest, what could they do in the Case? Nevertheless, upon this occasion some
hopes of life were to be given; The Succession of Cleves and Juliers seemed to
be Exposed to him who could first Grasp it: France, England, Denmark, the
Confederate Princes, the Count Palatine, the Elector of Cologne, and some other
Princes of Germany, sent at last their Agents to Santheim for to Confer there
about the means of stopping these Stirs, and ending this long Contest.
Brandenbourg and Newbourg, having both of them given in their Demands and
Reasons in Writing, a Trasaction was drawn up, which the Two were in the mean
time to observe, whilst the Difference w^^ adjudged by Law: But when it came to
the Point, to get Spain and the United Provinces to agree to these Articles,
there was so much difficulty to compass this as 'twas not possible to come to
any end. The States threw the blame upon Spinola, and the Spaniard upon Prince
Maurice. May speak the truth, neither one or the other cared for any
accommodation. Each one thought of an Advantage from what he had taken. The
Duke of Savoy falls out with Spain more than ever.


The good success of the Spaniards Arms toward Germany seemed to Flush and
render more Proud than they were before the Catholic King's Agents in Italy.
But Inojola, Governor of Milan, had neither the Wit nor Bravery of Spinola. The
Duke of Savoy openly ridiculed the Threats made him, as from the King of Spain.
Assure me, Nani Historia Veneta. Lib. I. 1614. Siri Memo. recondite. Tom. III.
p. 242.243. etc. Mercure Francois. 161.4
says he, that the King of France will not Attack me; I know well enough h^w to
defend my self against the Catholic King. Don't we know well enough what the
Spaniard at this time is able to do? He is far from being so formidable as he
was in Charles I. Reign, and in the former Years of his Son's. The Duke of
Savoy is not the most Puissant Neighbor Philip has; but perhaps he fears him
less than any one else. And thus resolved to maintain his Dignity against all
Persons who talked domineeringly to him, Charles Emanuel prepares himself for an
open Breach with his Catholic Majesty. The Marquess of Coeuvres had scarce
left Italy, but the Spaniards, satisfied to see themselves after this the sole
Arbitrators of the difference between the Two Houses of Savoy and Mantua,
summoned again Charles Emanuel to conclude the Marriage of his Daughter, the
Widow of Duke Francis, with Cardinal Ferdinand, Duke of Mantua, and to Disband
his Army forthwith. Immediately after this was done, they promised to endeavor
an accommodation of his differences with the said Cardinal. Charles Emanuel
made this indifferent answer, That he could not break up his Troops so long as
France was in Arms on all Sides. As for the Marriage of my Daughter with his
Brother-in-Law, he continued, that my Council is of Opinion, that I ought first
to have Justice done me, and be Endemnified for the Pretensions I have to
Montferrat and the House of Mantua. The Ambassador desired, he might have his
Answer in Writing, to the end he might send it to Madrid. The Duke made no
stand at this; and, to give notice to the Spaniards that he would not obey them
as their Subject, Orders new Levies, Casts new Cannon, Stores his Magazines in
presence of his Catholic Majesty's Ambassador.

This Resolution made the Spanish Agent fear, lest Charles Emanuel, repulst
after an Imperious way, as Inofosa had used him, should run out into more
desperate Attempts; wherefore in milder Language he proposed to his Highness,
the sending of Lawyers to Milan, with a power to Negotiate with them who should
come from the Cardinal Duke, upon the mutual pretensions of both Houses. The
Governor of Milan and the Prince of Castiglione were to be the Mediators of
this new Negotiation, in behalf of the Emperor and King of Spain. Charles
Emanuel could not reject the proposal. He nominated Three of his most able
Lawyers. Both Parties met, and diverse Expedients were proposed to bring the Two
Princes to an Accommodation. The first Demands of Savoy's Agents appeared
Extravagant; but in the end were much slackened. The Prince of Castiglione
might by chance have ended this Affair upon Terms reasonable enough, by a
double Marriage betwixt the Two Houses, and yielding up some dependence of
Montferrat, which was near to Piedmont, and lay fit for the Dukes of Savoy; if
the Governor of Milan, less Patient than Castiglione, had not spoilt all
through his too high Demands: For he imperiously caused it to be signified,
that the Duke should disarm in Six days time, being vexed that Charles Emanuel
made so much difficulty to accept of the Conditions which the Spaniards had
offered him. He, before he had commanded thus after so absolute a way, should
have put himself into a Condition of making himself to have been speedily
Obeyed, in case of a refusal. To send these precise Orders as coming from the
King of Spain, and not to have his Troops in any readiness for making an
Irruption into Piedmont, was not this to Expose out of Season a Powerful King
in an Engagement with an Inferior Prince, who had sufficiently made it known,
that he would never yield, but at the last Extremity?

As soon as a Monarchy believes it self to be Superior, it grows Imperious, and
instead of Treating upon Affairs, imposes Laws. The Spaniards had got this
haughtiness of Mind in the Reign of Philip II. and were willing to preserve it
after his death. Would not one have done better, to have called to mind, that
Spain had already given some certain signs of her declining Condition? What
Spain would have Effected in those days, France is endeavoring to imitate in
ours. We have seen him talk extreme haughtily to Charles Emanuel's Grandchild:
He has been proudly threatened to be Invaded by the Arms of France. And what
was the upshot of this? The Duke of Savoy, as Courageous and Prudent as his
Grandfather, was, like him, weary to see himself dealt with as a Subject. He Is
in Confederacy with a great Number of the Enemies which France has brought upon
it self: And he has quickly seen those who had taken Cities, and won Battles
come to him, and speak as Supplicant. Too fortunate for to buy shamefully a
Peace from a Prince whom they had slighted! In Three Months time, said a Proud
and Brutish Minister of France, There shall be no mention longer made of the
Duke of Savoy. The History of our times will speak quite another thing, than
this Man ever thought for. Posterity will read there with astonishment and
pleasure, that so proud a King has been glad that Savoy should acquiesce, to
let him quit all his Conquests toward Italy, in his present and Predecessors
Reign.

The Duke of Savoy endeavors to gain the Venetians to his Side.
As discontented as the Venetians were with the restless and troublesome Humor
of Charles Emmanuel, who strove to disturb the quiet of Italy to satisfy his
Ambition, yet they were not sorry to see, that a Prince so unequal in Power to
Spain, Nani Historia Veneta. Lib. I. 1614.
should be alone capable to Hector and Perplex People who had a mind to make
the whole World tremble at them. The undaunted Courage of the Duke of Savoy,
which he showed in maintaining his Dignity of a Sovereign Prince, so well
pleased the Senate, as they were the better disposed to hearken to the
proposals which Charles Emmanuel had to offer to this Republic. Siri Memo.
recondito. Tom. III. p. 241.
The Duke of Savoy persuaded, that the Senators, who did not want Courage, were
angry at the pride and haughtiness of Spain, and that they would be glad to see
an imperious plotting Nation far removed from their Frontiers, sought to fathom
the Inclinations of the Senate, by making an Overture to them of a League
Offensive and Defensive, for the Conservation, or rather Recovery, of the
Liberties of the Sovereigns of Italy. But yet he did not know how to enter into
a Negotiation with them, who had openly Complained against him, for sending
back their Ambassador after an unworthy manner. Cardinal Aldobrandin, his
Friend, had tried to make up the business for him with the Senate; but they
would not give Ear to him. James I. King of Great Britain, sought to be a
Mediator in the Affairs of Italy, and gain some Authority and Reputation in
those Parts. He labored after the Amity of the Venetians for a long time, and
the Duke of Savoy had laid many of his Intrigues in England; wherefore Charles
Emmanuel resolved to apply himself to Carleton, James's Ambassador at Venice,
and desire him to get leave for Piscina's Audience, a Man of great Ingenuity
and Eloquence, whom he had sent to the Senate. Carleton had not much trouble to
obtain this. The Seignory consented to receive Savoy's Envoy, having a better
Opinion of Charles Emmanuel since the Spaniards had molested him.

Piscina set forth all his Eloquence in a Speech to the Senate. He Complained
in it of the King of Spain's Attempts, Protested that the Duke his Master had
rather die, than endure the Indignities the Spaniards showed him, he lamented
the unfortunate Servitude of the Princes of Italy, Argued upon the Consequences
of the great Power the Court of Madrid usurpt to themselves, Entreated the
Senate to reflect seriously upon all the Steps his Catholic Majesty's
Ministers had proceeded. At last this long Harangue tended to Declare that
Charles Emmanuel, who gloried to be the Eldest Son of the Republic, threw
himself into the Arms of the Senate, a Protector of Oppressed Princes, whom his
Highness did earnestly Entreat to assist him with their Advices, and stand by
him as a Father. As the Venetians had some cause to Complain of the Duke's
Irruption into Montferrat, spite of their Remonstrances, so his Envoy had
Orders to appease 'em, by offering to make them Arbitrators of the Duke's
Difference with the House of Mantua.

The Venetian Writers Embellish with all the Art they are able these Actions in
their History. One would say, that they were going to Insinuate into us, that
Sovereigns have the same Respect for their Senate, the same Honor, which
mighty Kings had heretofore for the Senate of Old Rome. I grant to the Senate
of Venice all that is their due; but I find them far beneath the Senate of
Rome, after she had extended her Dominions into Africa, Spain, Greece, and
Asia. The Romans besides, Scofft at those Kings, who basely Crept to them: And
I don't know if the Quality of being Eldest Son of St. Mark, which Charles
Emmanuel took upon him, be not as unworthy of the Duke of Savoy, as to be a
free Citizen of Rome is unworthy of a Sovereign Possessed of a fair Kingdom. A
Prince who intends to make himself distinguished through all Europe, by upholding
so bravely his Dignity against the King of Spain, does it become him to Creep
after this manner to the Nobles of Venice, whose Original is not very
Illustrious, nor their Independence so Ancient? The Ambassador, whom the King
of Spain had at that time at Venice, will know at some time or other how to
prove this to them. He was the famous Marquess of Bedmar, whose Name will be
odious to the Venetians for more than one reason.

When this Minister, as jealous as any other would be of the Glory of his
Prince, had understood what Piscina had said to the Senate from the Duke of
Savoy, he Demanded to be heard in his Turn. The Spaniard spoke briskly of
Philip's good Intentions for the Conservation of the repose of Italy, of the
Money he had disburst, and of the pains he had taken every day to this purpose.
The King my Master, said Bedmar, was in the right to make use of the most
efficacious and rigorous means he could for bringing the Duke of Savoy to the
reasonable Conditions, which have been so often offered him. The fear which his
Majesty has of creating too great a Jealousy in the Princes of Italy, has
been the only means of keeping him back in this Occasion. We have had all the
Patience imaginable. All Expedients have been set on Foot that were judged the
most proper to end the difference that has lasted so long a time, betwixt the
Houses of Savoy and Mantua. If the sweet Temper and Clemency of my Master are
of no other Service than to render the Duke of Savoy more Proud and Daring, can
any one think it strange, that his Majesty should threaten him, to use at this
time the Power God has put into his Hands, and that he should Protect with the
force of his Arms the Duke of Mantua, who is Attackt with great Injustice? The
Proceedings of the Duke of Savoy are sufficiently known in the World, and now
he sees himself brought to that pass, as that he must be contented with the
equitable Conditions granted him, and break up his Troops, which his
Restlesness and Ambition had raised to his vast Expenses, he lays Intrigues,
endeavors to Surprise unawares the Princes of Italy, with a design to stave
off the Composition offered him, and avoid the shame of disarming after so
great a Bustle. The Senate has insight and pries narrowly into Affairs. They
know from a long Experience, the Humor and Dissimulation of the Duke of Savoy:
And this is sufficient to prevent their being blinded by the Artificial
Discourse of his New Envoy.

Tho the Venetians were more favorable to Charles Emmanuel, than to the King
of Spain's Ministers, the Senate avoided the making of any Engagement with the
Duke of Savoy. They excused themselves from meddling with the Affair of
Montferrat, and the reciprocal Pretensions of the Houses of Savoy and Mantua;
the Arbitration of these things being referred to the Emperor and King of
Spain. His Highness was Exhorted to make an Agreement with the Cardinal Duke,
to give Some satisfaction to the Catholic King, to yield to the strongest, as
far as the Quality of a Sovereign Prince would permit him. At length the Senate
endeavored to comfort him with their promise of doing him all the good Turns
they could upon this Occurrency, and not to suffer him to be Oppressed. The
Spaniards took it ill, that Savoy's Envoy had so favorable an Audience at
Venice. The Governor of Milan, who had conceived Anger against the Republic,
loudly Complained of it. Mistrust increased on both Sides, insomuch as the
Senate ordered New Levies, and kept themselves on their Guard, in Case there
should happen an open Rupture betwixt Spain and Savoy. The Venetians however
affected to show outwardly a perfect Neutrality: They discoursed like common
Friends, who strive rather to be Mediators, than embrace one Party before
another. Yet what ever care they took to hide and dissemble their true
Sentiments, the Court of Spain would not trust them. 'Twas well enough
perceived that they would never suffer the Duke of Lerma to bring about his
Designs, which he had contrived for the Duke of Savoy's Ruin, and to put the
Princes of Italy into an entire dependence on the Catholic King's will. The
Spaniards Jealousies and Suspicions were hereupon more awakened. Charles
Emmanuel had sent his Chief Minister's, Son to Venice, in Quality of Ordinary
Ambassador, and the Senate nominated Renier Zeno to be Resident with the Duke
of Savoy, whilst his Highness openly maintains a War against Spain.

The Marquess of Rambovillet is nominated Ambassador Extraordinary from France
into Italy.
Charles Emmanuel relied upon the Officers and French Soldiers, who would never
fail to Run into his Service, as soon as the Governor of Milan should make a
show of being willing to attack Piedmont. His Highness kept a strickt
Correspondence with the Marshall Lesdiguieres, who was Governor in Dauphiny,
and the Spaniards did not question, but this Old Friend of the Duke of Savoy,
Siri Memo. Recondite. Tom. III. p. 263. 264.
would willingly give him Succors. These Considerations Engaged Inigo de
Cardenas, the Spanish Ambassador in France, to go for Nantes, where the Regent
was at that time. He had received Orders to Complain to her Majesty of the Duke
of Savoy's obstinacy, and to secure France, Memoires de la Regence de Marie de
Medicis.
in case the Catholic King should find himself in a necessity to protect with
open Force the Cardinal Duke of Mantua, and punish the Pride and Rashness of
Charles Emmanuel. The Affair having been debated in the Queen's Council, the
necessity of an Accommodation of the Difference, as soon as possible, was
thoroughly perceived; the Consequences of which might go a great way farther.
This was not so much a Contest between the Houses of Savoy and Mantua. There
was behind-hand a fear lest the Spaniards should Invade Piedmont. The Marquess
de Rambovillet was nominated her Majesty's Ambassador Extraordinary into Italy,
for to go and Negotiate an Accord joint with Julius Savelli, the Pope's Nuncio
Extraordinary. France and Spain had solicited Paul V. to interpose his
Authority with the Duke of Savoy, but the good Man did not care to meddle with
Savoy's Affairs. Charles Emmanuel professed he had no great regard of his
Holiness, and the Pope said, History de Connestable de Lesdiguieres. Live.
VIII. Chap. 7.
he did not care to Treat with a Prince, whose Word he could not trust to. The
Instance of Spain came in Season to hinder the Duke of Savoy from taking any
Officers and French Soldiers into his Service. The Marshall de Lesdiguieres
sent to ask of her Majesty leave to raise in Dauphiny Two thousand Foot, and
some Horse for the Duke of Savoy. The Regent would not grant this; she forbids
likewise all the French to go into Charles Emmanuel's Service. In spite of all
these positive and severe Orders of the Queen, Lesdiguieres found out a way to
pass some Thousands into Piedmont, who wonderfully reinforced Savoy's Army.

Open War betwixt Spain and Savoy.
Charles Emmanuel was constant in his Resolution not to Disband his Troops,
unless the Governor of Milan would do the same likewise, or give assurances
that he would do it, as soon as the Duke of Savoy had first began this, in
Honor to his Royal Majesty. Inojosa would not flinch back a jot from his
Pretensions, that the King his Master had Right to give the word of Command,
Nani Historia Veneta. Lib. I. 1614.
and that it did not belong to a Duke of Savoy to Treat with the Crown of
Spain, as an Equal does with an Equal, or a Sovereign with a Sovereign. Siri
Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 226, 227. etc.
There was then a necessity of coming to an open War. The Spanish Ambassador at
Turin having greatly reproach't Charles Emmanuel, told him down right, that his
Catholic Majesty, provoked, through so long a Resistance, was going at last to
do himself Justice. Charles listn'd to this without being moved at it; but
plucking the Collar of the Golden-fleece from off his Neck, Mercure Francoise.
1614.
which had been heretofore presented him, returned it disdainfully to the
Ambassador, saying, God forbid, that I should ever wear the Order of a Prince,
who intends to deal with me as if I were his Subject, The Governor of Milan had
his Troops in readiness to march; and he further expected a reinforcement,
which was to come to him from Naples and Sicily. And now see Inojosa advanced
near to Verceil with the thoughts that the Duke would humbly submit himself, as
soon as the Spanish Army should enter his Country. 'Twas believed this was not
done without some Design; that the King of Spain had ordered Prince Philibert,
Son of Charles Emmanuel, whom his Catholic Majesty had made General of his
Forces at Sea, should Conduct himself to Genua the Troops designed against
Savoy. Was not this to insult over the Duke, by making him see, that his Son
carried, (if I may so say,) to the Governor of Milan, Rods, wherewith Philip,
or rather the Duke of Lerma, intended to whip a poor Prince, who dared to
resist a Potent King.

These Bravades did not at all astonish Charles Emmanuel. He on his Side
entered into the Milanese Country, where his Troops did more harm, than the
Spanish had done in his. His Highness got both Glory and Reputation: For at
last the Marquess Inojosa appeared to be a Novice in the Art of War. The
Spanish Army failed of the fair opportunity of beating the Savoyards, who were
inferior to them in Number. The bad Conduct of this Expedition, had rendered
the Governor of Milan despicable in Italy. They were glad to see the Pride of
Spain humbled. Inojosa, for to be avenged in some manner, and at the same time
curry favor with the Duke of Lerma, who Protected him, undertook to raise a
Fort near enough to Verceil, upon the King of Spain's Lands. It Is called the
Fort of Sandoval, from the Name of the Duke of Lerma's Family. The Governor's
design was to bridle Verceil, cover the Milanois, and close up an Entry to
Foreigners, who might easily this way make an Irruption into it. The Spaniards
had for a long time thought on this Enterprise, but for fear that such a
Novelty might allarm the Neighboring Princes, the Court of Madrid let alone
their Design. They expected some favorable Conjuncture. Inojosa thought that
the opportunity of the Breach with the Duke of Savoy, was a fit time to do it.
The important Service which he pretended to do his Master, did not secure him
from the Reproaches of the understanding Men of his own Nation. They Complained
that the Governor had lost time in building of the Fort of Sandoval. They
loudly said, that 'twas easy to Reduce the Duke of Savoy by Entering a good
way into Piedmont, with an Army much stronger than his. The whole Court of
Madrid took the liberty of talking sharply against Inojosa and Charles
Emmanuel. They accused the First of his Slowness, Fear, Ignorance and perhaps
Infidelity. As for the Duke of Savoy, his Name was abhorred amongst them, and
detestable. Philip's Chief Agent did not threaten Charles Emmanuel with less
than irrecoverable Ruin.

Reciprocal Writings from the K. of Spain Duke of Savoy.
The Spaniards were laughed at when they resolved to Fight with the Pen against
the Duke of Savoy. The Captain General of Justice in the State caused a Placaet
to be put up, wherein he Declared, That the County of Ast and all other
Seigniories, Mercure Francoise. 1614.
which the Duke of Savoy, as they said, held in Fief of the Dukes of Milan,
were Confiscated to his Catholic Majesty, by reason of Charles Emmanuel, his
Vassal's Treason. The Prince of Castiglione, the Emperor's Commissioner in
Italy, caused it likewise to be signified to the Duke, That there was a
Mandate, wherein he was Ordered in the Emperor's Name, to Disband his Army
presently, and refrain from all Acts of Hostility in Montferrat, and upon the
Lands of the Cardinal Duke of Mantua, under Penalty of being put under the Ban
of the Empire. Charles Emmanuel on the contrary defended himself with his Pen
very vigcurously. His Exchequer Chamber Declared by a public Act, that the
County of Ast was immediately held of the Empire, and as for the other Lands
specified by his Catholic Majesty's Officer, they had never been Fiefs of the
Duchy of Milan. The Emperor was much more respectfully dealt withal. Charles
Emmanuel writ to him a long Letter by way of Apology and Manifesto. The Duke
gives therein the reason of his Conduct, Complains mightily of the Haughtiness
and Enterprises of the Spanish King and his Ministers in Italy, and accuses
the Prince of Castiglione of being devoted to the Humor of the Spaniards,
against the true Interest of his Imperial Majesty. 'Twas said, that the
Spaniards, were not over-satisfied with Castiglione's proceedings. They would
have had the Principality of Piedmont put under the Ban of the Empire, and the
execution of this committed to the Governor of Milan. The Imperial Court did
not think it convenient to go with so much precipitation. They were not so
blind, but they could perceive that the Spaniards were too powerful in Italy.

The Pope's Nuncio and the Ambassador of F. endeavor an accommodation betwixt
Spain and Savoy.
Whilst the Spaniards and the Savoyards Fight one the other, sometimes with
their Swords, and at other times with their Pens, the Marquess of Rambovillet
and the Nuncio Savolli proposed different Projects for an Accommodation of the
Duke of Savoy, with the Governor of Milan. The Regent of France, who otherwise
was not well pleased with the Duke of Savoy, Nani Hist. Veneta. Lib. I. 1614.
and would deal tenderly with the Court of Spain, had given Orders to her
Ambassador, to endeavor for the Peace of Italy, without much troubling her
self to satisfy the nice Pride of Charles Emmanuel, who aspired to Treat with
Crowned Heads as if they were his equals. Therefore Rambovillet, Siri Memo.
Recondite. Tom. III. p. 287, 288, 289. etc.
pressed the Duke of Savoy to Disband his Army the first, upon the Governor of
Milan's word, which he should give, as coming from his Master, to the Pope and
King of France, that neither Piedmont, nor any other of the States belonging to
the House of Savoy, should be attackt, Mercure Francois. 1614.
and that his Catholic Majesty should Disband his Troops, Fifteen or Twenty
days after. The Pope and the King of France offered to be Guarrantees of the
Treaty, and Rambovillet protested to Charles Emmanuel, that the Marshall
Lesdiguieres should come to his Succor, with all the Forces of France, in case
Spain should break the Treaty. The Duke was a long time shuffling hereupon. He
did not believe that he ought to put too great a Confidence in the words of
France, at a time, when France had greater Engagements with the Crown of Spain
than ever. Besides, he considered that the Governor of Milan, not disbanding
till after him, he should lie at the discretion of the Spaniards, who might
chase him out of Piedmont, before the Succors of France could get over the
Alps: But on the other Side reflecting, that if he provoked the Pope and
France, in refusing with too much stubbornness, the Conditions which their
Agents offered him, he should be forsaken of all the World, Charles Emmanuel
found himself in so great a perplexity, as he did not know what Resolution to
take.

A League with the Republic of Venice was his only Remedy, he solicited the
Senate as much as he was able, to join with him, to drive away the Spaniards
from the Milanese. Spain, said he, to Zeno the Venetian Ambassador, is nothing
like what it was heretofore. The Country of Milan lies on all Sides open, and
may be overrun in the space of one or two Campaigns. If France does not
Declare for us, she will not be against us. Her best Officers and Soldiers, who
are most Experienced, will come over to us, and take our part, even by the
King's consent. The Princes of Italy who are mostly depending upon Spain, will
make an Insurrection against her, as soon as they see her Power shaken in our
Principality. Every one will be glad to share a Part in the Spoil. The Duke had
to no purpose exhausted all his Eloquence and Policy upon the Senate. This
prudent Assembly was not disposed to follow the impetuous and revengful Humor
of Charles Emmanuel. A too long Experience had taught them, that his Highness
sought for nothing but to Embroil Italy, and set it all in Fire, in hopes of
making himself Great, or at least be talked of. His Remonstrances and Proposals
were not better hearkened to in England, nor by the States General of the
United Provinces, nor the Protestant Princes of Germany. He proposed Leagues in
all the Courts that were Jealous of the Grandeur of Spain, and he could not
find so much as one of these, who would be drawn into his vast and Chimerical
Projects. Only the King of England did him some kindness with the Venetians.
But the Issue of this was, to let the Senate see, that it was not convenient to
suffer Spain to oppress the Duke of Savoy, and that a way ought to be found
out, of making an Agreement, which might be Honest, Firm, and as Advantageous
as possibly might be, to a Prince, who held so considerable a Rank in Italy.

The D. of Savoy accepts of the Conditions proposed, and Spain refuses them.
Charles Emmanuel after he had seriously reflected on the Posture of his
Affairs, took such a Resolution as he had been observed to take upon the like
Occurrences; and this was to accept of the Conditions which the Nuncio and the
Ambassador of France had proposed to him. The fear of having all the World upon
his back, and the hopes of getting the Mediators to be on his Side, in case the
Spaniards should make any difficulty of consenting to the Project of an
Accommodation, contributed much to the sudden alteration, which appeared to be
in the Duke of Savoy's mind. Savelli upon this, and Rambovillet, prepared at
Verceil, a provisional Treaty, till such time as a difinitive Judgment was
passed upon the Difference raised betwixt the Houses of Savoy and Mantua.
Charles Emmanuel fairly offered to Sign it. The Marquess Inojosa would not do
the like. As he had at that time been for the Interests of the Cardinal Duke of
Mantua, with as much zeal as he at first had favored the Duke of Savoy, so he
rejected the Article, which contained in it, that a certain dependence of
Montferrat, called Canavese, should remain in Sequestration, till the
Controversy upon the Duke of Savoy's Pretensions against the House of Mantua
was determined by Arbitrators chosen on both Sides. The Mediators prepared in
the City of Ast another Project of a Treaty, in presence of Charles Emmanuel.
The Article touching Canavese in this was left out, and they put into the Room
of it, That the Cardinal Duke should pay the Dowry, give up the Jewels of
Maragarite of Savoy. his Sister-in-Law, at a certain prefixed time, and besides
this, should pay in Two years space the Portion of Blanch of Montferrat, for
which the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua had Contested so long a time. The other
Articles Decreed, That the Prisoners and Places taken on both Sides, should be
Restored, and that each of the Two Princes should make an Act of Oblivion, for
all those of their Subjects who had served against them.

Charles Emmanuel signed this willingly, being exceedingly contented, Siri
Memo. recondite. Tom. III. p. 293. 294. etc.
that he was to give no satisfaction to the King of Spain, or to ask his
Pardon; but the Marquess of Rombovillet was blamed for having been too hasty in
his Negotiation. The Spaniards accused him for suffering himself to be lead by
the Duke of Savoy. Nani Hist. Veneta. Lib. 1.1614.
Others reported that he was too impatient of his Return to the Court of
France. Mercure Francoise. 1614.
The Cardinal Duke of Mantua was in all appearance to better himself in this
Treaty; for how could he dispense with the payment of a Dowry, and give up the
Jewels of his Brother's Widow? As for Blanche's Portion of Montferrat, he
pretended that the House of Mantua had been acquitted of it. Ferdinand then,
when they Demanded it, might have answered, That his Predecessors had already
satisfied the Debt: But he was so devoted to the Spaniards, for obtaining their
Protection, as he did not dare to accept of any thing without their
Approbation. The Duke therefore seeing that they had rejected haughtily the
Treaty of Aste, tho the Pope and States of Venice judged it reasonable,
Protested he had rather die than sign it. The Emperor wondered he was not so
much as mentioned in an Accommodation, which touched a considerable Fief o^ the
Empire in Italy. But there was not much care taken of his Complaints. The King
of Spain, his Relation, had less regard than any one else to the Rights of the
Empire in Italy. As to the Court of France, the Opinions there of the Treaty of
Ast, were divided. Mary de Medicis, who favored the King of Spain, and had a
thousand reasons to be angry with the Duke of Savoy, was not very well
contented with what Rambovillet had Negociated. She would have been in the mind
to have given Charles Emmanuel the Mortification of humbling himself before the
King of Spain, as he had done some years before. But the Duke had his reserve
of Friends in France. A great many People there cried out against the Pride and
Haughtiness of the Spaniards, who would not have Charles Emmanuel acquitted for
Disbanding his Army Fifteen or Twenty days before the Governor of Milan. They
pretended, that this Sovereign Prince, whom the Duke of Lerma hated mortally,
ought to be obliged to Submit to the King of Spain, and his Favorites
discretion, and beg Pardon of his Majesty, for that he had not obeyed the
Orders of the Court of Madrid, without making any Reply. Did ever any one
behold the like Arrogance?

Inojosa carelessly answered them who brought him the Treaty of Ast to Sign,
That the King his Master had but newly forbid him to make any Peace with the
Duke of Savoy. The Mediators surprised at this sudden refusal, desired of him
however a Suspension of Arms for Forty days, till they could have an answer
from Madrid. The Governor of Milan denied this, and gave them to understand,
that Winter season was already begun, and the bad Weather did oblige him enough
to grant them what they Demanded. The Marquess of Bedmar, the Spanish
Ambassador at Venice, made a great noise there, saying to the Senate, That
'twas loud Injustice, that the Duke of Savoy was not punished for his Attempts
against the Repose of Italy. Ought not all the Potentates, who are Interested
to preserve its quiet, unite with the King my Master, and Chastise this
Rashness of the Duke of Savoy? Carleton, the English Ambassador, kept to
another sort of Language. He solicited with all his might, the Senate to
declare, that the Treaty of Ast was reasonable, and that all the disinterested
Princes believed his Catholic Majesty ought to be contented with it. Beamar
maintained against Carleton, That this was not the King of Griat-Britains
Opinion, and that he had explained himself in this matter to the Spanish
Ambassador at London. The Venetians saw, that this Treaty gave the Catholic
King all that he could reasonably demand. In the mean time, because they would
not further provoke the Spaniards, who minded to do them much mischief, they
observed all possible discretion in their Answers to the Marquess of bedmar. We
are very sorry, said they, that the Conduct of the Duke of Savoy has
constrained the Catholic King to come to so great Extremities: But we hope
that God will inspire him with milder Sentiments, and that his Majesty will
Sacrifice a part of his Resentment, and rest contented with the Justification,
which the Duke of Savoy will never be far from giving him. These Civil dealings
and Compliments nettled the Spaniards, who perceived, that they were not
disposed to let them take the liberty of Revenge upon the Duke of Savoy,
according to their own will and fancy, nor humble him as much as they pleased.

Give me leave here to make some Reflections upon these particulars. What is
the ground of this Controversy between Savoy and Mantua, which makes for Two
whole years so great a noise? 'Twas well nigh putting Italy, and perhaps Europe
in a Flame. Almost all Potentates did concern themselves in it. The dispute in
the bottom, is but some small Sum of Money, or at most some Castles which the
Dukes of Savoy pretended to, against the House of Mantua. Here Is the Reason why
Charles Emmanuel takes up Arms, overburdens his Subjucts, carries desolation
into Montferrat, which becomes the Theater of War. The Cardinal Duke of Mantua,
represented to us as a Person of no very strong Headpiece, and guided by
Interested Ministers, had nevertheless the cunning Ingenuity to bring Spain on
his Side, though at first they were against him; whether this was an Action of
his ability and parts, or an effect of Fortune, his Affair became the Catholic
King's business. But upon what grounds did Philip, or rather his Agents, reject
the Treaty of Ast, and believe themselves in the right, for to kindle a War and
destroy Piedmont? Upon a Trifle, upon I do not know what punctilio of Honor.
Is It then for this, that Princes imagine they are dispensed with, from
observing the chief Rules of Humanity, and keeping the most express
Commandments of Jesus Christ? Sad unhappy Condition of Men, if they must
suffer, that they who are set over them to study the Welfare and Preservation
of others, should lay wast Provinces, ruin their Subjects and Neighbors, and
cause the Lives of an infinite number to be lost, in satisfaction to their
Vanity, and for the pleasure of their capricious Humors?

All the King of Spain's Agents in Italy bustled after a strange manner, in
order to engage the Governor of Milan to make a new Irruption into Piedmont.
They flattered themselves that this Effort would render the Duke of Savoy more
Submissive and tractable. Inojosa pressed forward through the Reproaches of his
Countrymen on all Sides, prepared for some motion, but this was so slowly, as
Prince Thomas, Son of Charles Emmanuel, had time to prevent the Spaniards, and
enter himself into the Milanese Country. The City of Candia was taken at this
time, and put to Fire and Sword. The Savoyard's Army returned loaded with
considerable Booty. The Mediators complained of this Action. But the Duke of
Savoy disclaimed his Son's proceedings: 'Twas endeavored to excuse him by
saying, that the Prince knew nothing of what was done. The Spaniards afterward
repaired their loss, by taking some small Places in Piedmont. Charles Emmanuel,
a little time after, intercepted a Letter from the King of Spain, to the
Governor of Milan. 'Twas there seen, that some certain Persons had done some
ill Offices to Inojosa with his Majesty: He seemed much dissatisfied with
Inojosa's Conduct. He was ordered to cause his Army to take their Winter
Quarters in Piedmont, and not to agree to any accommodation with the Duke of
Savoy, unless he did before hand submit to every thing his Majesty had
prescribed before his last motions. Charles Emmanuel did not fail to make this
Letter public: And he found thereby a double convenience, one in mortifying
Inojosa's Arrogance, whom this Letter had strongly censured; the other, in
making it appear to the Princes, who interceded for a Peace, that Philip
intended as absolute a Command over the Princes of Italy, as he had over his
Grandees of Spain.

Lewis XIII. his Majority.
In the time that the Marquess of Rambovillet began his Negotiation in Italy,
Lewis XIII. entered into the Fourteenth year of his Age. Mercure Francois. 1614.
Here then you may see him in his Majority Conformable to the Edict of Charles
V. made at Vincennes, in the Year 1374. and Registered in the Parliament at Paris
with great Solemnity the following Year. One might think it strange, that he,
of all the Kings of France, who was Surnamed the Wise, Recherches de Paschier
Lib. II. Chap. 18.
should judge that a Prince could be capable to Govern of himself so young.
Historians relate, that Charles believed, it was very important for the
Minority of Kings to be as short as possibly could be, Mezerai dans la Vie de
Charles V.
for fear the Regent of the Realm, should grow so powerful as to Dethrone his
Pupil, or at least carry away from him a great part of his Estate and
Authority. The good King thought more of his Family upon this occasion, than
any else: He had not his health so well, and his Two Sons in all appearance
would be left Minors: Of Three Brothers, whom Charles had, Two of them did not
want for Boldness or Ambition. Having now a Power to declare sooner, For to
secure the Crown to his Children, it behooved the King, to forward their
Majority. The Uncles had less time to undertake any thing against the young
King, sooner than he would Govern of himself: Of the Princes who might be
mistrusted, that Person might be turned aside from governing Affairs, by other,
who were better minded, under the plausible pretension of the King's being at
Age. That which is singular in this new Law is, that he, in favor of whom the
Father made it, had need of a Tutor and Regent the greatest part of his Life.
He was out of his Wits, became crack-brain'd and infirm in Body. And this sad
Accident caused in France all the great Evils which Charles V. had a design to
prevent.

This very Edict proves to us, that it is a long time since the Council of
France set themselves on work, to set out piteous Prefaces at the beginning of
their most solemn Ordinances. Charles V. says in his, That the Sons of France
have such excellent Masters, so good Governors to inform them, as they become
capable of managing themselves, and administering Affairs, much sooner than
other Children. We have seen Two Princes under Age in the Two last Reigns. Have
the Regents had the care to give their Sons any extraodinary Education? Was
France so unprovided of Men of Merit, that Souvre and Villeroy should be judged
the most capable of instructing the young King? Charles V. besides, brought
another Reason, which is no better than this. God, said he, who gives Sovereign
Power to Kings, never fails to enrich them the soonest as may be with necessary
Qualities to make use of it. Alas! Let Us behold now, how God does Miracles to
enlighten young Princes Understandings, and make them more Prudent than other
Children? These Gentlemen seduced early by Flattery, hurried away by their
Passions, which find no great stop in their way, usually begin later than
others, to become reasonable, and oftentimes by a just Judgment of God upon a
People whom he punishes, a King never knows the First Principles of Reason and
good Sense.

According to Charles the Fifth's Edict, a King ought not to be Inaugurated and
Crowned till after the time of his Minority. But this Formality was past over
in favor of his Son, who had published this Law. Charles VI. was a Minor when
his Father died, and his Uncles contended amongst themselves for the Regency.
Lewis, Duke of Anjou, pretended to it, as being the Eldest of the Brothers to
the deceased King. The Dukes of Berry and Bourgundy would have a share in it.
The Duke of Bourbon, Uncle to young Charles by the Mother's Side, maintained
for his part, that he ought to be called to the Administration of the
Government, as well as the Paternal Uncles. Some Lords chosen for one Party and
the other, were Arbitrators of the Difference. 'Twas determined, That Charles VI.
notwithstanding his Father's Law, might be Inaugurated and Crowned, Affairs
dispatched in his Name, and under his Seal; the Dukes of Berry, Bourgundy and
Bourbon might take care of the King's Education, and of Lewis Duke of Orleans,
his Brother; the Duke of Anjon might have the Name and Honors of Regent, but
should do nothing, but in Concert with the Three other Princes. From that time
it has been a Custom to Crown Kings during their Minority, and dispatch
Affairs in their Names and under their Seals.

The first Act in the King's Majority.
The First thing they made young Lewis Enact in his Majority, appeared to be an
Act of Religion and Justice. I don't know whether Policy and Dissimulation were
not the secret Motives to this Performance. They were willing to impose upon
the People, Mercure Francoise. 1614.
who easily believe what they wish for with all Fervency. His Majesty held a
Council the First day of October. The Declaration, which he would have to be
Registered next day, was there dispatched and Sealed. Lewis at first promised to
study every thing that was Expedient for a most Christian King, who was Zealous
of God's Glory, a lover of Peace and the Tranquillity of his Subjects, to watch
the Execution of the good Laws published by his Predecessors, and make new ones,
as he should be advised in the approaching Assembly of the States General of
the Realm. The Edict of Nantes was afterward Confirmed in all its Articles, in
the Orders and Acts which were made; and lastly, in every thing that was since
agreed to, either in the Interpretation of it, or in its Execution; which they
would, as 'twas said, inviolably keep and observe. After having forbid his
Subjects to enter into any Leagues, contrary to the Well-being of the State,
with foreign Princes, and to receive any secret Pensions from 'em, the King
confirmed his Father's Edicts against Duels, and the Ordinances of his
Predecessors against Swearing and Blasphemy. I should not refuse to give so
pious and just a Declaration in all appearance, its just Praises, if the Son of
him who made it, had not declared Solemnly, that neither his Father or his
Grandfather had ever any Intention to continue such an Edict, which they had
promised so many times to maintain as a Perpetual and Irrevocable Law. How
then? Were these Two Kings, who had the magnificent Sirnames conferred upon
them of Great and Just, by the Confession of their Son, Men without Conscience
and Probity? Will Posterity ever believe a thing of this Nature? As for my
self, I shall always preserve a better Opinion of Henry IV. and Lewis XIII. I
cannot be persuaded that they were so bad as Lewis XIV. represents them to us.

The K. takes his Seat of Justice in the Parliament at Paris.
The next Morning, being the Second day of October, the King went to take his
Seat of Justice in the Parliament at Paris; as he was going, and in his Seat, he
was accompanied with all imaginable Pomp and Splendor. Mary de Medicis made a
short Discourse there, Mercure Francois. 1614.
in which her Majesty declared, That she put the Administration of Affairs into
her Son's hands, who for some days had been in his Majority. Lewis greatly
thank't his Mother, and ended in declaring, that he was willing that his Mother
should always continue to take Care of him, and Govern the State, and this is
what the good Princess had discreetly brought about, with a great deal of
diligence. She preserved her Authority, without making her self Responsible for
what should be done hereafter. Too happy! If the Favorite, who began already
to insinuate himself into the young King, had not banished her from the Court,
and the Chief Minister of State, whom she her self had Established in the place
of the deceased Favorite, had not drove her away out of the Kingdom.

Sileri Chancellor, and Verdun Chief President, made Speeches upon the
Majority of the Kings of France. Servin the Advocate General's Discourse was
more remarkable, for the prudent and Religious Remonstrances he made to the
young King. There Is only this one thing I have to find fault with, that so
grave a Magistrate was himself ensnared with this base flattery, which was
introduced then into the Parliament, and is since established there so
shamefully. Servin heaped up upon Mary de Medicis excessive Praises for her
Administration of the Government. Amongst the good Counsels he gave Lewis, with
a Christian and French liberty, ought he to have inserted, that he should
behave himself as his Mother should Advise, who rather aimed at the maintaining
of her Authority, and the Advancement of her Creatures and Favorites, than at
the Instruction of her Son in Religion and Virtue, and the making of his People
happy and satisfied in her Administration of the Government? The Ceremony ended
with reading and registring a Declaration despatcht the day before.

Searching as carefully as 'twas possible for me, what regarded the History of
Lewis XIII. in his Minority, I oftentimes wondered to find so little matter
touching the young King's Education. His Father had made Gilles de Souvre his
Governor. But it seems that upon this occasion, Henry IV. less thought of
choosing a Gentleman who had the Qualities, which this important Employment
required, than of Recompensing the faithfulness of an old Servant. I can find
out that Souvre bestirred himself to settle his Family, and procure his Son,
the Marquess of Courtenvaux a considerable Office: But I could never learn what
he did to give Lewis a Royal Education. Souvre's Family, which this Prince has
made Illustrious, did not continue long after his death. The Heiress carried
all the Means away into another Person's House, who was a Minister of State,
and whose Father, of an obscure Birth, was advanced to the chief Dignity of the
long Robe.

Memoires de la Regence de Married Medicis. Melanges d'Histoire and de
Litte-rature par Vigneul-Marville.
Vanquelin des Ivetaux was the King's first Tutour. A Person of Quality, whose
Memoires we have, says that Vanquelin, was a Man of great Merit, and very
capable to Instruct a Prince: But the Character which a Modern Author gives us
of the ex^^vagant and romantic Amors, and of the Epicurean Life and Death of
this Man, is a certain proof that Henry IV. did not well distinguish Men of
Worth. The Cardinal Perron used many Intrigues to get his Brother into the
place of being his Tutour. He offered himself to take the care and directions
of the Dauphin's Studies. Yet Henry IV. of his own Inclination chose Vanquelin.
He did not long continue in the Employment. The envy and jealousy of some,
caused him to be removed from it in a years time after the death of Henry IV.
Nicholas le Fevre succeeded him. This was a Person noted for his Knowledge and
Piety. The late King had sent him to the Prince of Conde, who was willing to
Recompense le Fevre in being a means to procure Vanquelin's place, in which he
behaved himself with much approbation. Le Fevre died the year after, and
Fleurance Rivant, an able Mathematician, as it is said, rose from the Office of
being Sub-Tutour, to be Tutour in Chief. A Youth who passes through so many
different hands, does not usually become a Man of Abilities.

Bernard History de Louis XIII. Live. 1.
Lewis XIII. learnt very little Latin. Falconry, and the exercise of Hunting,
pleased him more than Study; he looked very well after Hawks, and became in
Hunting, the greatest Rider in his Kingdom. His Majesty, says an Historian,
called to his Dogs in Perfection. Had it not been much more to the purpose, to
have taught him, how to speak to Men? 'Twas likewise observed, that Lewis was
no bad Gunner, and that he very well understood Fortification. These
Qualifications, which might be of some use to a younger Brother of the
Nobility, who is to seek and make out his own Fortune, are not in any wise fit
for a King, if you except from hence, understanding and knowledge in
Fortifications. He may for his diversion Hunt and fly his Hawks; but he ought
to Employ his time in something that is better, than to be expert in Falcons and
Hounds. I should have nothing to say against Lewis's having some knowledge in
Artillery, which is necessary for a King, who ought to make himself capable of
Commanding his Armies, when the publick-good requires it. But is not this
ridiculous, that he is suffered to burden his Memory with the names and use of
the smallest things in Artillery? They ought to have been constantly instilling
into his Head Precepts useful and important to one who intends to Govern well.
In a Pack of Hounds, he could call every one of them by their Names: But it is a
business more worthy of a Prince, to learn the knowledge of Men, to distinguish
from others those who are more capable of Places of greatest Dignitiy in the
State, and to Reward those, who are of good Use and Service to the Public.
Lewis XIII. had always good Inclinations and Principles in him of Virtue and
Equity: Courtiers dared not speak any thing of obscenity or Swear in his
Presence. He feared God, loved Justice, and was willing to do good to his
People. If Souvre and others had been diligent to Instruct and Cultivate what
God had given him of Judgment and Integrity; they might have done considerable
Service to their Prince and Country. Lewis then might not have been in the
unhappy necessity of leaving all to a Favorite, or Minister of State, who did
not think of any thing, but the better Establishment of their Credit and
Fortunes, in raising to day a Civil War, and to morrow a Foreign one.

The End of the First Tome.
Books Printed for, and Sold by T. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultry.
ANnotations on the Holy Bible, by Matthew Pool, in Two Volumes, Folio.

The Works of the Reverend and Learned Divine, Stephen Charnock, B. D. in Two
Volumes in Folio.

Historical Collections, by John Rushworth Esquire the Third Part, in Two Volumes
in Folio.

Sermons Preached on several occasions, by John Conant D. D. in Three Volumes
in Octavo.

A Discourse against customary Swearing, by the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire

Geography Anatomized, or the Complete Geographical Grammar, being a short and
exact Analysis of the whole Body of Modern Geography, after a new and curious
Method, by Patrick Gordon, M. A. and Fellow of the Royal Society.

The private Christian's Witness for Christianity, in Octavo.

A Preservative against Deism, by N. Tailor, in Octavo.

Memoirs of the Countess of Dunois, Author of the Ladies Travels into Spain,
written by her self, before her Retirement, in Octavo.

Essays on several Projects, in Octavo.

A Practical Discourse of God's Sovereignty, with other material Points
deriving thence, by Elisha Cole, in Octavo.

English Exercise for Schoolboys to Translate into Latin, by J. Garretson, in
Duodecimo.

An Exposition on the Assemblies Catechism, by J. Flavel.

Tales of the Fairies, by the Author of the Ladies Travels into Spain, in
Duodecimo.

The Reasonableness of a Personal Reformation, by John Flavel.

History of England, by James Tyrril Esquire in the Press, and will shortly be
Published, in Folio.

Geography Rectified, by Robert Modern, in Quarto.

Devotions for every Day in the Week, by Dr. Dumoulin.


