A LETTER TO THE Authors of the Answers to the Case of the Allegiance due to
Sovereign Princes, stated and resolved.
By Dr. WILLIAM SHERLOCK.
By a Gentleman of the Communion of the Church of England.
Gentlemen,
I Have with a little commotion of mind (as who is able to exercise a Stoical
Apathie in great Provocations) observed all your motions for the two last
Years; And although I did not expect any great degrees of temper from such Men
when they had got the Reins loose and the Bit between the Teeth; yet I thought
at last the mere shame of saying the same things so often over and over again,
would have put a stop to your Career. But, alas, nothing will satisfy some Men
who having been a long time restrained from venting their beloved Principles,
think they can never take liberty enough when they once have it.

The Principles of the Church of England, or those of the Professors of that
Religion which is by Law established, have ever been thought so advantageous to
Government in general, and to our Monarchy in particular, that the late King,
when he disclaimed her Communion, gave that for his reason why he would Protect
and Defend her and her Children; and it had been well for him if he had not
been put upon other Methods by designing Men.

Their present Majesty's have however made the same Profession, and that not
only verbally, but in their Coronation Oath have given us the most Sacred
Assurances, that they will preserve that Protestant Religion which is by Law
Established. Others are indeed by Law tolerated, but still that is the Religion
that is Sworn to be preserved, protected, and defended, whilst all the rest are
only allowed a bare Indemnity.

Why then must every one that has sooner or later submitted to their Majesty's,
and have heartily and sincerely taken the Oaths of Allegiance to them, be
pelted by a parcel of Pamphleteers, only for Assigning such Reasons for it as
are consistent with the Doctrines of the Church of England, and the Practice of
the Primitive Church in the like Circumstances? There has scarce appeared one
Piece that was written by those of our Communion for the satisfaction of the
Non-swearers, but there has presently been published a swarm of virulent and
malicious Pamphlets against it, written no doubt by Their Majesty's special
Friends, for they all pretend to be zealous Williamites, great promoters of the
late Revolution, the first that were in Arms against the late King. Ay, and it
may be if the truth were examined, and they would but vouchsafe to set their
Names to their Books, we might find them as busily Plotting against Charles the
First, and Charles the Second, as James the Second; and against him too in the
Monmouth Invasion, as well as in the late Revolution.

Well, but the late good Service has attoned for all their former Crimes, and
they have not only merited a Pardon for all that is past, but a Reward too, and
much good may it do them, I neither envy their good Fortunes, nor would
purchase the best of them at the same Price, and with the same Hazards; so that
they need never fear I will be their Rival.

But what need is there of all this? Is the late Revolution here in England of
that nature, that those that have complied with it may justify their so doing
upon the Principles of the Church of England, or is it not? If we can justify
it upon our own Principles, why are they offended? If we cannot, what harm have
we done them? Is any Man discontented that the number of his Friends and
Assistants are increased by Men of various Interests and Principles, who have
the same great design to carry on that he had? Are not all the Princes in
Christendom at this time united against France, notwithstanding their different
Principles and Interests in other things?

But then if it is not justifiable upon the Principles of the Church of
England, but we must renounce our Principles before we can become the Loyal
Subjects of King William and Queen Mary, which the Nonswearers pretend, and
these Williamites back them in; then is the late Revolution condemned not only
by the Non-swearers, but by the Williamites also; For if it is innocent it may
be justified by our Principles, and if it is not, their Principles will no more
justify it than ours will. And I am sure it is not for their Majesty's
Interest to have the World think they have done that which cannot be justified
upon the Principles of that Church which they have sworn to defend, and of
which they profess themselves to be. And which is more, of that Church which is
the greatest part of the Nation, and of which the far greatest part of the
Nobility, Gentry, Swordmen, and Crown-men of the Nation profess themselves
Members; all which are by these Men declared Rebels and Traitors by their own
Principles, if what they say is true.

Here is a Mystery at the bottom of all this, and it is not impossible to set
it in so good a Light that no Man will wonder at it, though perhaps it will not
be my good fortune to do it, but however I will try if I can; and if I offend
them by it, the care is beforehand taken, and I am resolved not to be
overmuch concerned, though I expect a swarm of venomous Insects about my Ears
for it.

When this Revolution was began in Holland, it was the great care of these
Gentlemen to win over the Church of England men by all the Arts of Wheedle and
Courtship that was possible, and the Advice then was instead of remembering or
upbraiding them with the opposition and rancour which they expressed against
our Persons, Principles, and Ways, let there be no Language heard from us but
what may declare the Joy we have in our selves for their Conversion, and the
entire Trust and Confidence we put in them. And a little after; It were the
height of Wickedness, as well as the most prodigious Folly, to imagine that the
Conformists have abandoned all Fidelity to God, and cast off all care of
themselves, and their Country, upon a mistaken judgment of being Loyal and
Obedient to the King. They know as well as any, that the giving to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, lays them under no Obligation of surrendering unto him
the things that are Gods; nor of sacrificing unto the Will of the Sovereign the
Privileges reserved unto the People, by the Fundamental Rules of the
Constitution, and by the Statutes of the Realm. And they understand as well as
others, that the Laws of the Land are the only Measures of the Princes
Authority, and of the Subjects Fealty; and where they give him no right to
Command, they lay them under no tie to Obey. The ill effects of Animosities
amongst Protestants, page 16. Thus sweetly the Sirens allured us then; And
because what they said was true, we had reason to believe it was sincere, if we
had not known the nature of the Animals.

But so soon as ever the Work was done, and the late King was shipped for
France, all this Courtship was out of Doors: these Church of England Men, these
Conformists, were the Men of Arbitrary Principles, the Men that had endangered
the Liberties of England, and the Protestant Religion, by their Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, or Non-resistance; and all that they had said before was now
forgot: and though the Papists were pardoned, and the old Parliament Rebels
rewarded, there was no quarter to be allowed to the Surrenders of Charters, the
Opposers of the Bill of Exclusion, the Defeaters of the Monmouth Invasion.

In Scotland the Episcopal Party sat still and would have no hand in the
Revolution, and we see what followed, and though they have since made dreadful
Complaints, and expressed a great resentment of their Folly in suffering this
Blessing to be stolen from them, yet they have not yet been able to obtain a
place for Repentance, though they have sought it with Tears. In England it was
otherwise, we were in expectation of a Parliament before the Revolution began,
and the Members in all places were fixed, and it was not possible of a sudden
to change them; and this case would admit of no delay, so that most of the
Members were Church of England Men, and there was no helping it. This was a
great Obstacle to the Designs of these Men, and have embittered all their Joys,
and made them so uneasy and dissatisfied that they can hardly relish what they
have got, because they had not all they expected.

They were very zealous to have got the Act for taking the Oaths to Their
Majesty's limited to a very short time, that Men having but a little time to
bethink them, might more generally have refused them, as they did in Scotland;
but the six Months that was allowed (much against their wills) was so well
employed, that the Number of the Non-swearers was very small in comparison, and
if these very Men had not made it their business to traduce all that took the
Oaths as Apostates, time-servers, and perjured Men; perhaps it would have been
much less than it was.

And whereas the great Objection against taking the Oaths was raised from the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, or Non resistance, whoever endeavored the
Reconciling the taking of the Oaths with that Doctrine, was sure to have all
these zealous Williamites (as they called themselves) on his Neck, as well as
the Non-swearers, and there was nothing in the World they desired so much as to
have it thought that whoever took the Oath to their Majesty's, did ipso facto
renounce that Doctrine, as Impious and Heretical.

There were some few that did not take the Oaths till the six Months were
almost expired; others did not take them till the next six Months were almost
out; and some few have taken them since, as they were able to satisfy
themselves. Now all these have been affronted to the utmost degree by all the
Party; and every Man that takes the Oath raises a new Clamor; so that it is
apparent to all the World, some Men fear nothing more than that there should be
no Non-swearers. That is, they are afraid that all the Nation should unite in
Their Majesty's Interest.

There were some few that took the Oaths before they were satisfied, to keep
their Places, and have since scandalously disputed against the rest, as far as
they durst; and this they took up as another opportunity to defame all the
rest. And if any Man appeared against them, presently he was a swearing
Jacobite; nay, we are made believe, all the Church of England Men that have
taken the Oaths are in their Hearts Jacobites, which is now the scoulding term
for the title of Papist in Masquerade, is now superanuated and grown out of
Fashion.

The Atheist, the Hobbists, the Commonwealth-men are all joined in one cry
against the Innocent Doctrine of Non-resistance, for very different ends I
confess, but with equal noise and boldness; and Men value themselves very much
if they have had the good fortune never to have been tainted with this
dangerous Doctrine, especially if they were such as have ever lived in the
Communion of the Church of England. Nay, he that was a Trimmer in the times of
Charles the Second, concerned in the Whig Plot, or the Monmouth Invasion, the
Act of Exclusion, or the 41 Rebellion, thinks it is a matter of great
Reputation, or good Qualification, to recommend him to the esteem of all sober
Men; whilst he that was true to the Princes that have Reigned over us, durst
not once mention his Loyalty upon pain of being thought unworthy of all Trust
or Regard.

Now what is the meaning of all this? why all this pains to run down a Doctrine
that never did nor can do any harm, but when it is abused by ill Men to ill
purposes? And yet it never did them any service neither that most pretended to
use it, to our damage. Are they afraid our present King or Queen will make use
of it to the Ruin of those Liberties they have so lately Established by Act of
Parliament? No, this is certainly none of their fears; but these Men have
something else in Prospect. The Monarchy, the Government, both in Church and
State, are not yet in the condition and state they would bring them: they well
foresee that if Their Majesty's should be once settled in the same degree of
Power and Majesty with their Predecessors, and that be backed by the whole
Church of England, supported and confirmed by the old Loyal Doctrine, and bound
upon the Consciences of Men as it was before; when ever they shall have
occasion to repeat their old Contrivances for the Undermining or Unsettling it,
here will be a powerful and a numerous Party ready formed to oppose them, and
therefore now whilst the Crown is engaged in a Dangerous and Expensive War,
they are to make use of the opportunity at home to make a strong Party to deal
with it so soon as the times will permit them.

I suppose there is no Man that is in his right Wits, but must see that it is
Their Majesty's Interest that all their Protestant Subjects should Unite as one
Man in their Interest and Service. This was made the great reason of the
Tolerating the Dissenters, and this has ever been the Aim and Design of all
wise Princes and States; and our Enemies have shown us how much they fear it,
by their restless endeavors to Divide and Disunite us at home, which they seem
to depend more upon than upon any Forces they can send against us; and the
Prospect of this was the thing that finally prevailed upon James the Second to
leave the Nation, viz. that we might fall into Confusion; so that upon the
matter, all the World has declared that Disunion and Division at home is
beneficial to our Enemies, and destructive to us.

Well, then if it be so necessary we should Unite, upon what terms shall we do
it? Renounce the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, the Title of
King James both before and after his Desertion, and all the Merits of your
Church of England Loyalty in standing by the Crown of England in the worst of
times, and then we shall Unite. Your humble Servant Gentlemen; Will nothing
less do? Are these terms to be imposed by a tolerated Party, on that which
blessed be God is yet by Law Established? I hope we may Unite upon much easier
terms than these; if we may not, some body is to blame, and in due time will
wish they had been wiser.

For my part, I believe our now most Gracious Sovereigns King William and Queen
Mary are both de jure and de facto, as Lawful King and Queen of England, by an
Hereditary Right which commenced from the time the late King James left the
Throne, though it was not declared till the Twelfth of February following, as
ever sat upon the Throne. But then I neither can nor ever will renounce the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience or Non-resistance rightly understood, nor can I
yield that King James did forfeit his Crown, or that I was absolved from my
Allegiance before he wilfully threw it up and deserted the Nation; but I
believe I am not equally bound to stand by a Prince that Governed at the rate
he did, as I should have been to stand by one that Governed according to his
Laws and his Coronation Oath. So that no Man in the Nation is or possibly can
be better satisfied in Their Majesty's Title and Government than I am; no Man
was sooner satisfied than I was, no Man has more Heartily served them than I
have done, nor more disinteressedly, for I have got nothing by the change, but
I have lost much.

But then, after all my Principles are the same they were, my Allegiance has
descended in the same manner to King William and Queen Mary as it did to
Charles the Second and James the Second, not altered in the least in the degree
or reason of it. They were in their times the Ministers of God, and the lawful
and undoubted Sovereigns of the English Nation, and so are these: The same God
that set up Charles the Second, and James the Second, when so great a part of
the Nation did what they could to have the first of them Abjured, and the
second Excluded; the same God, I say, has by his Providence set King William
and Queen Mary upon the Throne; and by his Grace I will bear the same Faith and
Allegiance to them as I did to the former; and for the same cause.

Now if some Men are not so well satisfied as I am, but think they are still
bound to persist in their Allegiance to the late King, because he is not dead,
nor has yet made a formal surrender of his Crown to Their now Majesty's, what
is this to me? must I renounce my Principles because others that have embraced
the same Principles are not of the same Mind that I am? Or shall we of the
Church of England, that have heartily and sincerely sworn Allegiance to King
William and Queen Mary, and defended them with our Lives and Fortunes; shall
we, I say, be Rejected, Traduced, Libelled in Print, only because we persisted
in our Allegiance to King James; not only as long as he used us well, but as
long as he would stay? Surely they that gave such Testimony of their Loyalty to
one Prince, will deserve a little Regard and Protection from another who
succeeds in the same Right. Their now Majesty's are of our own Religion, they
were our Deliverers out of a most uncomfortable state, the hopes we had that
they should one day be so was our greatest Comfort in all our Distresses; and
they have accordingly delivered us sooner than we did expect, or perhaps durst
wish. And now after all this, what reason is there that any body should
suspect, that we that were ever Loyal to all their Predecessors, should after
all the Assurances that one Man can possibly give another, be still false
dissembling Hypocrites, and Traitors to God and them: And in the mean time,
others that have been Disloyal to all their Predecessors, that have been
Plotting and Contriving the Ruin of the English Monarchy for above Fifty Years
together, should engross all the Loyalty from us!

Gentlemen, If you are offended with this plain dealing, you can thank no body
but your selves; you have endeavored to satisfy your Party by your Arguments,
such as they are, and although I could not approve of them, yet I never set Pen
to Paper against them, because they seemed to be well meant for Their Majesty's
Service, and if they did not satisfy me, yet they might please some others;
and provided Men were brought over to Their Majesty's Service, I was contented.
But, on the other side, when I produced my Arguments, I had presently a parcel
of your snarling Vermin at my Heels, which I despised. And when the learned Dr.
Sherlock came forth upon the same Charitable Design, you treated him ten times
worse than you did me; and because I perceive he has not thought fit to give
you any Answer, I have sent this short Letter to let you know, that if the
Coast is clear, and I may have the liberty of the Press as well as you, I will,
one after another, send every one of you my Remarks and Objections against what
you have written against that great good Man. And in the mean time I am,

Your, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1691.


