Plain, and short RULES For POINTING PERIODS, AND READING SENTENCES
Grammatically, with the great Use of them.
By M. LEWIS of Tottenham.
THE foundation of the Syntactical part of Grammar consists in these two
things: To divide a Period into Sentences; And To read those Sentences
Grammatically. The Master builds upon the Sands without a basis; and the
Scholar learns by roat without reason, who does not bottom here. I shall offer
a few short Rules to both these necessary things.

Rules for pointing a PERIOD.
EVery Subject, called the Nominative Case, and Finite Verb (expressed, or
understood) with their Dependents, must have a Point, or distinction: because
the Verb expresses, the state, motion, or action of the Subject, and must be
stopped, or else we move in infinitum, and cannot begin a new motion. Let this
Paragraph be an example.

Except. 1. any word, or clause (having the import of a Sentence) wherein a
Verb is virtually contained, may have a stop. Such are,

1. Interjections. As, Alas, that is, it is a sad case, woe is me.

2. Participles of the present, and preter-tense. As, God, creating the World,
made man. Man, created by God, was placed in Paradise.

3. One Substantive after another by apposition, having the import of a
Sentence. As, Man, the image of God, was placed in Paradise; otherwise not. As,
M.T.C.

4. An Infinitive mood, having the import of a Sentence, may be distinguished
from the preceding Verb. As, God created man in his image, to be lord of the
Creatures, that is, that he might be lord of the Creatures. But, when the
Infinitive mood, has the nature of a Substantive, and depends upon the former
Verb, as if it was an oblique Case, it ought not to be distinguished. As, I
desire to learn, that is, I desire learning.

2. Except the Vocative case with the dependents, which is an extra^entential
phrase, and a preparation to a motion. As, Son, come hither.

3. Except, when a Word, or Phrase, as in Zeugma, relates to several things, it
may be distinguished from the thing, immediately depending upon it, to show its
relation to be indifferent, to that, and to the things, it affects more
remotely. As, God has given a law, to the fire, air, water, earth.

4. When a Sentence is parted by any intercepting Clause, the former part of
the Sentence is distinguished from the Clause, and the Clause from the latter
part of the Sentence. As, God, creating the world, gave man dominion over the
Creatures.

5. The same Sentence sometimes has a Point in it, when it is in-grammatically
placed, to show its disorder. As, By an almighty power, God created the world.

I do not intend, a Point must be made in all these cases. I only say, a Point
may be, and de facto many times is, upon these grounds. Exact Pointing is best.
But if we do miscarry, it is better to under point, then over point.

These things are obvious to ordinary capacities, and do fully answer my end:
to prepare English to be rendered into Latin; and Latin to be Analyzed, and
rendered into English: and therein are useful to Children.

But as a Point in general is absolutely necessary to rational instructing in
the plain Syntactical part of Grammar: so to understand the kinds of Points,
when, and where they shall be used, is as necessary to some parts of Rhetoric.
No man can pronounce, and act Artificially out of judgment; or compose
Oratorically by a Rule, who does not understand the various constitutions, and
contextures of Periods from whence the kinds of Points do arise.

As therefore a Point in general arises from a Verb in general, or something
analogous to it: so the species of Points arise from the Verbs in a Period as
they do more intimately; or more remotely relate to one another. Where the
dependence is greater, the stay between them is less; (giving liberty for a
lower tone and lesser action) where the dependence is less, the stay is
greater, the tone higher, and the action more.

The Points, distinguishing a plain Sentence, are a Period, a Colon, a
Sub-colon, a Comma, which may be compared to those stops in Music, a Minim, a
Crochet, a Quaver, a Semi-quaver.

To the Rules following I premise. A Proposition, Theme, or Matter treated of
is either Simple; (As God created the World. Man is lord of the Creatures) or
it is Compounded, in which there is a principal Verb, expressed, or suppressed,
and another Verb, or Verbs depending upon it, to explain, enlarge, restrain,
divide, or confirm the principal Proposition laid down, to which these
depending Verbs are united by some Conjunction, expressed, or understood. Let
this Paragraph be an example. The principal Sentence suppressed is,
Propositions are twofold. All, that follows, relates to this.

The principal Verb in a Period is that, which is the motion of the principal
subject; or does affect the principal Object, spoken of. This Verb (if it be
expressed) is the first Verb in the Natural, and Grammatical order. But it is
often suppressed, as in the former Paragraph, proposed for an example.

The principal Theme, or Matter is threefold: 1. Of a Discourse, or an Oration;
2. Of a Paragraph, usually noted by a Break; 3 Of a Period strictly taken.


A Discourse may contain several Paragraphs. A Paragraph may contain several
Periods. Every one of these Periods have a principal Verb, that is, such a
Verb, that does not immediately depend upon another Verb, o^ totum. Put it may
depend upon the Theme of the Discourse, or Paragraph.

This all must grant, a great member, or totum in a Period is distinguished
from lesser members, or parts by a greater rest, then lesser members are
distinguished from one another, or from their subdividing members, and
exegetical expressions. I mean: a totum is distinguished from its parts by a
Colon; the parts are distinguished from one another by a Sub-colon; Exegetical
expressions to these, are distinguished by Comma's.

Rules for a PERIOD.
A Period terminates Sense, that is absolute, full, and perfect.

And so it terminates: either one Sentence, or categorical Proposition; (As,
God created the World, Man is lord of the Creatures.) Or it terminates more
Sentences, distinguished by lesser Points: for the principal motion ought to
have a greater test, than the less principal. Any Paragraph in this discourse
is an Example.

Rules for a COLON.
A Colon distinguishes Sentences, that are a protasis, and an apod^sis; a
Proposition, and the reason; a similitude, and the application; a totum, and
its members. As, God alone could create the World: because he is Omnipotent. As
God has created the World: so he pre^erves it. Having Creatures are of two
sorts: Men; and Brutes.

A Colon is likewise used, when Sentences seem absolute (but are not): because
the totum is, either remote, or suppressed. As, The Flint strikes fire: the
Load stone draws Iron: the Touch stone tries Mettah: the Purnice-stone smooths
rough things. The totum suppressed, is this, Stones serve for diverse uses. If
this totum was expressed, it should be distinguished from the parts by a colon,
and these Sentences, or parts from one another by a sub-colon.

The Rule of a Sub-COLON.
A Sub-colon is used to distinguish membra dividentra in a large sense, which
are opposites, or at least disparates. At, Angels are good; or bad.

This totum is often suppressed, and many times deferred to the close of the
Period.

Rules for a COMMA.
A Comma is used to distinguish Sentences, that have a nearer relation one to
another, and a greater dependencie one upon another, then membra dividentia
have. Such are: 1. Membra subdividentia; Sentences united by any Conjunction,
that do not come under any of the three former Rules; the Vocative Case; and
Interjections.

2. Exegetical expressions; Substantives by apposition; the Infinitive mood;
transposed, or intercepting Clauses, and such like. These, if we would be
accurate, ought to be distinguished by a lesser note then a Comma, if we had
any such: because these have a nearer relation one to another, then those under
the former head. This whole discourse may be an Example.

Enumerations are many times so Oratorically digested by pairs, that they seem
to be membra dividentia, but are not. As, I am persuaded, that neither life,
nor death, nor princepalities, nor powers, nor things present nor things to
come, etc.

If the Case be so nice, that you cannot determine, whether there is only an
enumeration; or the Clauses are membra dividentia, use such a distinction, as
will make the sense most plain, with respect to the points above, and below.

These are all the ordinary Points Grammarians have assigned, but are too few,
as appears by the Rules for a Comma, and may be further illustrated by this
example following, where there is the totum distinguished from its members by a
Colon; the principal membra dividentia by a sub-Colon; the membra subdividentia
by a Comma; lastly you have exegetical expressions, distinguished by
sub-Comma's, if there was such a Point. I presume to add it, and assign it this
Character (^). As, God created the world: first the Heavens, where there is the
Sun, the fountain of light, the Moon, borrowing her light from the Sun, the
Stars, varying their magnitudes; the earth, containing the Sea, the confluence
of water, the dry land, supporting living Creatures. Here you see we are
necessitated to use a sub-Comma, or to use a Comma promiseuously: Therefore in
all cases, that you may be distinct, begin with as great a Point, as the
compass of your Period will bear. In some cases it is tolerable to set the
Point a note, or two too high, though besides the Rule: because the
sub-divisions (being numerous) are more subject to confusion, and the end of
Points is, to make the Period distinct in its parts; and intelligible in its
sense. As, God created this great, and wide abyss, which we call the World, and
all the parts of it* and first the Heavens, where we have the highest, or third
heaven, the blessed abode of Saints, and Angels: then the heaven, or firmament:
in which we behold the Sun, the fountain of light, and heat; the Moon, the
governess of moist things, borrowing her light from the Sun; the Stars, and
Planets, differing in magnitude, light, and influence from each other* Then
secondly this terraqueous Orb, we call the Earth* where is the Sea, the
confluence of waters, and habitation of Fishes: and dry land, the house and
nurse of men, and beasts* Lastly, there is the Airy region* in which the birds
do play, and sport themselves, and without which no breathing Animal can live.
In this discourse you have three sorts of Period: he first is periodus pendens,
set above the line; the two next are periodi media, set in the line; the last
is periodus supina set below the line. You have also Comma's and sub-Comma's,
and all little enough. Such a case as this is, seldom occurs. The greater
members are distinguished from the lesser, the lesser from the least by
proportionable stops.

Doubtless a sub-Comma would be of great use in such Periods, as this, and to
distinguish Sentences that are under the second head for a Comma. I could
heartily wish some persons, of authority in the world, would assert it.

As a key to this whole discourse, I only beg some point to be certain (I do
not much matter which) from which all the other Points may take their compass.
As in Ringing four Bells, the second is usually made (and therefore called) the
certain, according to the motion of which, the little Bell below, and the
greater Bells above, do rise, fall, or keep their pitch: So I would choose a
sub-Colon certain, and to be used only to distinguish membra dividentia in
ordinary cases, i.e. Clauses that are opposite, or disparate. What ever
Sentences (as in the Rules for a Comma) are below this, shall be Comma'd; what
ever are above it, shall be Colon'd. Absolute Sentence: shall terminate in a
Full point ordinarily. In extraordinary cases, extraordinary courses must be
taken, as in the last Example.

I purposely omit to say any thing of other Points: because many Grammarians
have spoken plainly enough to them.

I offer these Rules only as an Essay, submitting them to better Judgments. I
hope, by an accurate observation of all contextures, they may be made more
perfect.

I proceed to Rules directing to read Grammatically: because neither Sentences:
nor Periods can be rightly distinguished, unless the Natural, and Grammatical
order of them be first apprehended.

Rules for reading Grammatically.
R. 1. EVery Sentence consists of a Substantive, called the Nominative Case,
and a Verb (expressed, or understood) with their Dependents. The Dependents of
the Verb are those words, which it affects with its motion mediately; or
immediately.

Except a Vocative Case, and any word, or clause, having the import of a
Sentence, where the Verb is virtually. These are sometimes Conjunctions,
Inter^ections, Participles of the present, and pretertense, one Substantive
after another by apposition, the Infinitive Mood, etc with their Dependents.
You have Examples for these in the general Rules for Pointing.

R. 2. The Nominative Case begins the Sentence, with which the Verb agrees.

Except, a Conjunction, the oblique Cases of Relatives, Interrogatives, or
Partitives do begin the Sentence. As, What book do thou read? Thou did meet
with my brother, whom thou did salute, he will direct, what Book I shall read.

R. 3. The Nominative case stands before the Verb.

Except, it stands after the Verb to distinguish Demanding, and Commanding from
Showing. As, Love thou? do thou love? let a man love. Love thou.

Except, Nor, neither, or there do go before the Verb. As, Neither can I learn,
how there came a man into my house.

R. 4. The Nominative case stands immediately before the Verb.

Except, a Genitive case, or a Gerund in D^, analogous to a Genitive case, do
come between. As, The lord of the Creatures was made after God's image.

An Adjective, governing a Case, a Participle, a Relative, a Conjunction with
their Dependents, may part the Nominative case and Verb. As, A man does labor,
may be thus parted. A man desirous of honor, desiring honor, which does
desire honor, if he does desire honor, does labor.

These Clau^es may be placed after the Verb. As, A man does labor, if he does
desire honor.

R. 5. Every Adjective may have a Substantive after it, with which it does
agree.

Except, Participles, and Adjectives, governing Cases, have their Substantives
before them. As, God creating man, etc. A man desirous of honor.

R. 6. Every Verb may have a sign of a Mood, or Tense.

Except the Verb is a sign of a Mood, or Tense; or do follow a Verb, that is
the sign of a Mood, or Tense. As, God alone can create.

R. 7. Every Substantive may have a sign of a Case, by which it is governed.

Except. 1. Pronoun Substantives in the Accusative case. As, Me, us, thee you
him, her, it, them, which will not admit a general Sign.

2. Except, 1. The Substantive coming after Dignus, indignus opus, and usus
signifying need. 2. After Verbal, in Bilis, and Passive Participles. 3. After
Verbs of Comparing, being angry with, to meet with. 4. The word coming after
Verbs of Esteeming. 5. Proper names of Lesser places, and Humi, domi, militiae,
bells. 6. The word coming after Satago, misereor misereseo. 7. After Interest
and resert. 8. After Verbs of wanting, and potior. 9. After Fungor, fruor,
utor. 10. After certain Verbs signifying profit, disprofit, etc. where TO is
employed. 11. Apposition. 12. The Ablative Case absolute. 13. The word of Price.

These Rules for Pointing, and Reading, primarily intended for the English
Tongue, are applicable to other Languages with a little alloy.

When we understand these Rules, and can decline Nouns, and form Verbs, there
remains only the Propria quae maribus, As in praesenti, and the Syntax, which
are made thus short, and plain.

First, The Propria qua maribus is reduced to five special Rules thus: 1. All
Nouns of the first, and fith Declension are of the Feminine Gender. 2. All
Nouns of the second, and fourth Declension are of the Masculine Gender. 3 All
Nouns of the third Declension ending in An, in, on, o er, or, os, are
Masculine. 4. All Nouns of the third Declension in x and s, are the Feminine.
5. All Nouns of the third Declension in us, etc. are Neuter.


A few Exceptions will perfect these Rules.

Secondly, The As in praesenti is reduced to three Rules.

1. All Verbs in O impute are of the first Conjugation, and do make Avi in the
Preterperfect tense, and Atum in the Supine. 2. All Verbs in Eo are of the
second Conjugation, and do make ui, and itum. 3. All Verbs in Io are of the
fourth Conjugation, and make Ivi, and itum.
All Verbs of the third Conjugation are enumerated. All Irregular Verbs of the
first, second, and fourth Conjugation are also enumerated, and ought to be
learnt by Beginners, as a Vocabulary: because they are generally Primatives,
and words of most frequent use.

Thirdly, The Syntax is reduced to three Rules, according to the number of
words declined, and are all contained in the Rules for reading Grammatically.

1. Every Verb has Number, and Person by the Nominative Case, which is a
Substantive placed before it: because the Verb is not determined in these. 2.
Every Adjective has Number, Case, and Gender by the Substantive following.
This comprehends the Antecedent and Relative. The Adjective is not determined.
3. Every other Substantive is governed of the word before it, on which it
depends, according to the Sign of the Case.
These Signs are Of to, for, with, from, by, then, in, at, a, the, which two
last are only general Signs.

The stress of the Syntax lies in these Rules for the government of the
Substantive. How easy it is by the Signs of Cases in comparison of Lilly's
Rules, founded upon the signification, or enumerations of the preceding Word
(being in number Fifteen score) will appear by the following comparison.

LILLIES Rules. R. by the signs of Cases. 1. Qaum duo Substantiva. 2.
Adjectivum in Neutro genere. 3. Laus and vituperium rei. A Genitive is true
Latin, An Ablative more elegant.
4. Adjectiva quae ad copiam. A Genitive is true Latin, An Ablative more
elegant.
5. Adjectiva quae desiderium. 6. Adjectiva verbalia in Ax. 7. Nomina
Partitiva. 8. Comparativa and Superlativa. 9. Sum Genitivum postulat. 10. Verba
accusandi. 11. His impersonalibus poenitet. 12. Participiorum voces. 13. Quadam
adverbia loci.
Of after a Substantive or Adjective is a sign of the Genitive Case. As, The
love of Money.

Desirous of Money,

1. Pas^ivis additur Ablativus. 2. Quadam accipiendi. 3. Moercor cum Adverb^s.
4. Diversa verbis implendi, and onerandi. 5. Verbum impersonale passiva vocis.
6. Vapulo, veneo, liceo.
Of after a Verb is made by a Preposition. He is praised of the Mr.

1. Adjectiva quibus commodum. 2. Huc referuntur nomina. 3. Opus adjective pro
ne^essarius. 4. Numeralia in alio sensis. 5. Nomina diversitatis. 6. Exosus and
perosus. 7. Omnia verba acquisitive. 8. Verba significantia Commodum. 9. Verba
Comparandi. 10. Verba dandi. 11. Verba promittendi. 12. Verba fidendi. 13.
Verba imperandi, and nuntiandi 14. Verba obsequendi. 15. Verba minandi. 16. Sum
cum compositis. 17. Verba composita cum prae, ad. This is an uncertain Rule.
Mutant Dativum aliquoties in alium casum. It is according to the Sign usually,
when that sails, Authority is the best Rule. 18. Est pro habeo. 19. Huic
confine est supperit. 20. Sum eum compositis. 21. In dativum ^er^^tur hac. 22.
Quadam adverbia. 23. Est etiam ubi in Dativum.
To before a Substantive, and For, are signs of a Dative.

For is sometimes made by a Preposition, Hard to be determined by a Beginner.

For, the Cause, is always the Ablative.

Do tibi, pignori [pro pignore], causa honoris.

1. His vero attinet, pertinet, etc. 2. Ex his quadam efferuntur. 3. Quaedam
variam habent constructionem. 4. Nomina appellativa. 5. Verbis significantibus
motum ad locum. 6. Ad hunc modum utimur Rus.
After attinet, pertinet, spectat, loquor, hortor, invito provoco, addo, voco,
and words of Motion, To is made by Ad. Ambulo ad templum.

To before a Verb is a sign of the Infinitive Mood Active. Cupio amare. 1.
Except after Substantives and Adjectives governing a Genitive Case, To is made
by a Gerund in Di. Tempus amandi. 2. After aptus, paratus, tardus, and Verbs of
Exhorting, exciting, and prevailing, a Gerund in Dum. Aptus ad amandum. 3.
About To is the Future in Rus. Amaturus. 4. After words of Motion, the first
Supine. Venit amatum.


To ^e is the Infinitive Mood Passive. Cupit amari. Except. 1. After Verbs
Substantives, and Noun Substantives, the Future in Dus. Est homo amandus. 2.
After certain Adjectives, easy, hard, worthy, unworthy, etc. The latter Supine,
facilis amatu.


There are not Rules found in Lilly's Syntax to answer these, except those two,
prius Supinum, and posterius Supinum.

1. Adjectiva regunt allativum. 2. Forma vel modus rei. 3. Praeditus contentus.
4. Verba abundandi. 5. Quedvis verbum, etc. 6. Adverbia diversitatis. 7. Tanto,
quanto.
With, and by the Cause, or Manner, and after Comparatives and Superl. is a
sign of the All.

1. Nomina diversitatis. 2. Numeralia in alio sensis. 3. Natus, prognatus. 4.
Diversa verbis implendi. 5. Verbis significantibus motum a loco. 6. Ad cundem
modum usurpatur.
From is made by a Preposition, expressed, or understood.

1. Nomina appellativa. 2. Quibuslibet verbis subjicitur. 3. Qua significant
partem. 4. Ve^um si proprium nomen loci.
In, or At, a Preposition.

1. Verba transitiva. 2. Quin etiam verba intransitiva. 3. Hac impersonalia
accusandi. 4. His impersonalibus subjicitur. 5. Quae autem durationem. 6.
Magnitudinis mensura. 7. Ex his quaedam efferuntur. 8. Quaedam variam habent
constructionem. The variety is according to the Sign. 9. Spatium loci, etc. 10.
Adverbia accusandi casum admittunt. 11. En, ecce, and cedo govern an Accusative
Case, and are not Adverbs, but defective Verbs.
A, or The, which are not particular signs, or no signs at all, shall be the
Accusative. Do vestem. Deus amat hominem.



Hanc Accusativum ^utant authors, etc.

Ingens praterea adjectivorum turba nullis obstri^^a regulis, etc.

These mutations are determined by the signs of Cases, commonly.

A Participle of the Present tense, having a sign of a Genitive Case, is a
Gerund in D^. Time of loving. Tempus amandi.

A Participle of the Present tense, having a sign of an Ablative Case, is a
Gerund in Do. Hindered in loving. Impeditus amando.

Consider how obscure Lilly's Rules are for Gerunds.

I have on purpose omitted the Exceptions: because they just balance one
another, and are enumerated in the Rules for reading Grammatically, with which
you may compa^e Lillies Grammar.

If the Scholar should be instructed only in the Rules for Signs of Cases and
never be troubled with more then three Exceptions, he might be easily perfected
in all the rest by Examples, it may be, better then by Rules.

By this Grammar, one, that has lost his Latin Tongue, may in a few days,
after many years discontinuance, recover the Grammar of it, though he never had
any perfection in it. This I have often tried, and am ready again to
demonstrate.

1. Consider, If you peruse Lillies Grammar, Whether all the fundamental Rules,
necessary for a Beginner to learn, are not comprehended under these few Rules
by the Signs of Cases? The Rules for Elegancy are of a second consideration,
and many variations from the Signs of Cases are Grecisms, and so will aptly
fall in with the Greek Tongue, the Syntax of which is accommodated to this
method.

2. Consider, Whether by this Syntax it is not easy to begin to Make Latin,
before we begin to Perse, as Lilly directs in his Preface to his Grammar? There
being no more in the government of Substantives to be considered, then what
sign the Substantive has: If it has no particular sign, it must be the
Accusative Case; or if it have a sign, it is made according to that sign.

3. Consider, Whether the impossibility of using Lillies Syntax is not the
reason, why all neglect Lillies Directions, to Make Latin, before they begin to
Perse?

4 Consider, Whether those, that learn Lillies Syntax, do not get the Tongue
merely by habit, burdened with a huge fardle of useless Rules; or at the best,
they make their Latin at first by signs of Cases (not allowed for Rules) till
they have got the habit?

5. Consider, Whether this is not the reason, that all men do forget their
Grammar, as soon as they have got the Tongue: because the Grammar, as to the
Syntax, being of no use in getting the Lingua, is of no use in keeping it,
neither can it be of any use in recovering it, when once lost: because we do no
learn the Tongue by the Rule, but by a frequent application of numerous
Examples to the Rules, we come to understand them, and that principally by the
Signs.

6. Consider, Whether Lillies Rules understood exclusively (as most apprehend
them) are not false? Most words do govern other Cases, then those the Rules
assign, and yet direction is seldom given (such as a Child can understand)
when they have those other Cases.

7. Consider, If the Rules be understood inclusively (as Lilly intends) Eidem
verbo diversi casus diversa ratione apponi possunt. Whether the Rules are not
then impracticable; because to understand this diversa ratio, it is necessary
to have three hundred words enumerated, and Rules so perfect, as to see them,
as it were, at one look, which is impossible for one of ordinary parts to do,
and then the whole Syntax falls to the ground.

Those that think this may be done, let them make a trial themselves upon that
Rule in the Greek Grammar, Verba incipiendi, desinendi, appetendi, amandi, etc.
where there are but twenty heads enumerated. If Verbs named cannot be reduced
readily and judiciously by a man to these twenty, how shall a Child do with
fifteen times so many?

Thus the Rules of Grammar (so much contended about) are made plain, and short.
A little Grammar will serve the turn, where the Tongue learnt, is constantly
spoken, and exercised diligently.

Comenius has prescribed a Method for the gaining the Copia Verborum, beyond
what I have seen.

His Vestibulum, and Orbis pictus contain the primitive words.

His Lexicon Januale teaches to Decline Derivatives from their Primitives,

His Janua comprehends Primitives, and Derivatives in their proper
signification,

His Atrium teaches the Elegancy, and Idiom of the Tongue.

The advantage, a Scholar shall have from this Method, will be this:

1. From the Janua, perfectly learnt in Latin, and Greek, any other Languages
may be quickly attained;

2. Things may be learnt with Words by showing the things themselves from
Repositories, by using Maps, and Globes, and Pictures, where the things
themselves cannot be had; or the things may be described (as the Learner is
capable). This will make Learning pleasant.

Doubtless one thus Instructed in the knowledge of things, and initiated in all
Acts, and Sciences (especially in Arithmetic, and Geometry) is like to make a
better progress, when he is advanced to the University; or probably will be a
wiser man, when he is otherways disposed of in the world, then another, who
learns only Appellatives, and a little History, but knows nothing of things:
seeing he has said the Foundation of real Knowledge; and will improve it by
his daily converse in the World.

The School may be made Ludus literarius, by a prudent use of School-mony:
Those, that are diligent, will have most Money; Those, that have most money,
shall have most Honor; The most honorable, shall have most liberty for Play.
This is certain, If Children can be made diligent, they will imprint things in
their memories as fast as men. These ways proposed (without any severity,
unless in cases of contempt) will certainly effect it.

They may be also diverted by Bodily exercises, as, Dancing, Fencing,
Vaulting, Riding, which give a graceful garb, and increase bodily strength.

They may be encouraged, as their Genius shall lead them. In Painting, Limning,
Etching, Turning, and such like Devices.

Those, that desire to see more of this Subject, may consult a Grammar, and an
Apology, composed by M. Lewis, and sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside, and by M. Million at the Bible in Fleet Street; or
they may be further satisfied by the Author, upon any Thursday at three of the
Clock in the Afternoon, at the Tun and Bolt in Fleet Street. Who undertakes to
perfect any Person, that will attend him there, in a few days, in the plain
part of Grammar; and in a few hours, in the exact skill of Pointing.

At Tottenham High-Cross there is a GYMNASIUM Erecting, where any Person Young
or Old, as their Quality is, may be perfected in Grammar according to this
Method, and in the Tongues by constant conversation, and may also be instructed
in Experimental Philosophy by Visibles, in History, Rhetoric, Music, Bodily
exercises, Painting, The Mathematics, As Astronomy, Geography, Geometry,
Arithmetic, Fair Writing, in a short and compendious Method, as may further
appear by the Grammar and Apology, before spoken of.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Should have spoken more distinctly to a principal Verb: upon which the whole
process depends. A principal verb is twofold: absolutely principal; or
comparatively. A verb absolutely principal exprestes the state, or motion of a
Subject; or affects an Object not treated of in a former Period, its Clause
shall begin with a Great Letter, and shall have a Periodus Supina before it,
as, God created the World. Man rules over the Creatures. The Sun shines in the
Firmament. A verb comparatively principal expresses the state, or motion of a
Subject; or affects an Object immediately spoken of before, i.e. relates to the
same manner, as the former Period does, yet it is a principal verb: because it
is no member of a Period; neither is it tacked on by a Conjunction to a former
Clause, it does indeed relate to a former Period: for Periods may have the same
respect to Periods, as Clauses have to Clauses, neither is it absolutely
principal: because it will easily resolve into a depending verb. This Period
shall begin with a small Letter, and shall have a Periodus pendens before it:
because the sense yet hangs. As that of Salust. Man's excellency consists in his
Soul, and Body. The Soul commands, the Body obeys. In this we are like to God,
in that to Beasts. It resolves thus. Our excellency consists, either in our
Souls, by which we command like God; or Bodies, with which we work like Bruits.

Take a Scheme for POINTING thus.
So many finite Verbs there are in any discourse, so many stops must be made,
and no ^re, unless by accident. So many principal Verbs, so many principal
Points or Periods. So many depending Verbs, so many depending Points. As, a
protasis, and apodosis are distinguished by a Colon, membra dividentia by a
sub-Colon. Sentences united by a Conjunction, which are not membra dividentia,
are distinguished by a Comma, Exegetical expressions, the Infinitive Mood,
intercepting Clauses, occasion a sub-Comma, if such a distinction might be
granted, and may be marked by a straight line, thus (^). Let this Postscript be
a praxis.


